



Routledge Studies in Contemporary Philosophy
106 New Directions in the Philosophy of MemoryEdited by Kourken Michaelian, Dorothea Debus, and Denis Perrin
107 A Pragmatic Approach to Libertarian Free WillJohn Lemos
108 Consciousness and PhysicalismA Defense of a Research ProgramAndreas Elpidorou and Guy Dove
109 The Value and Limits of Academic SpeechPhilosophical, Political, and Legal PerspectivesEdited by Donald Alexander Downs and Chris W. Surprenant
110 The Significance of InterdeterminacyPerspectives from Asian and Continental PhilosophyEdited by Robert H. Scott and Gregory S. Moss
111 Questions of Practice in Philosophy and Social TheoryEdited by Anders Buch and Theodore R. Schatzki
112 The Phenomenology of Real and Virtual PlacesEdited by Erik Malcolm Champion
113 Context, Truth, and ObjectivityEssays on Radical ContextualismEdited by Eduardo Marchesan and David Zapero
114 Good ThinkingA Knowledge First Virtue EpistemologyChristoph Kelp
For a full list of titles in this series, please visit www.routledge.com.









Good Thinking
A Knowledge First Virtue Epistemology
Christoph Kelp










First published 2019
by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
and by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2019 Taylor & Francis
The right of Christoph Kelp to be identified as author of this work has been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Kelp, Christoph, author.
Title: Good thinking: a knowledge first virtue epistemology /by Christoph Kelp.
Description: 1 [edition]. | New York: Taylor & Francis, 2018. |Series: Routledge studies in contemporary philosophy; 114 |Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018031821
Subjects: LCSH: Virtue epistemology. | Knowledge, Theory of.Classification: LCC BD176 .K45 2018 | DDC 121—dc23LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018031821
ISBN: 978-1-138-31769-7 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-45506-3 (ebk)
Typeset in Sabonby codeMantra









To my parents









Contents
Preface
Introduction
1 Process Reliabilism
2 Virtue Reliabilism: Justified Belief
3 Virtue Reliabilism: Knowledge
4 Knowledge First Virtue Reliabilism
5 The Competition
Appendix: The Safety Dilemma
Appendix: Lottery Cases
Bibliography
Index









Preface
I have been attracted to the virtue reliabilist account of knowledge— according to which knowledge is an achievement, a success because of competence—ever since I first came into contact with them during my PhD. While I thought the view carries a considerable amount of promise, I was struck by the fact that it seemed to struggle with fake barn cases and wasn't satisfied with extant attempt to solve it. All of them took for granted that the success at issue in knowledge is truth and ventured to fiddle either with the competence condition or with the because relation in order to get these cases right. At some point in the late 2000s, it occurred to me that the right way to go might just be to abandon truth as the relevant success and go for something stronger. My first attempt at this was in a paper entitled 'In defence of virtue epistemology' which argues that, at least for perceptual knowledge, the success at issue in knowledge is discrimination. However, I ultimately remained unsatisfied with the proposal mainly because it didn't seem to generalise beyond perceptual knowledge in the right way. I then toyed with the idea that the success might be safety instead but also abandoned the idea pretty quickly. This was in part because it had its own difficulties but mostly because I found the idea of exploring a knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism very attractive. I started thinking about this in the early 10s and first presented a paper that developed this kind of view in Bologna in 2012. A year later, I was awarded two generous research grants for a project on the issue which helped tremendously in giving me the opportunity to work out the view in more detail. Even so, it took what appeared to me to be a long time and an entire series of lengthy and sometimes frustrating reviewing processes before the first paper on the topic actually appeared in print in 2016. But by then the spell appeared to have been broken and a number of pieces appeared in fairly quick succession. While the material from these papers provides the backbone of this book, I also draw on earlier work at various junctures. More specifically, Chapter 2 is based on 'How to Be a Reliabilist,' forthcoming in Philosophy and Phenomenological Research (DOI: 10.1111/phpr.12438). Chapters 3-5 draw on material from 'Justified belief: knowledge first-style,' Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 93: 79-100 (2016), 'Knowledge first virtue epistemology,' in Carter, A., Gordon, E. and Jarvis, B., editors. Knowledge First. Approaches to Epistemology and Mind, Oxford: OUP (2017), 'Lotteries and justification,' Synthese 195: 1233-44 (2017), and, to a lesser extent, on 'Two for the knowledge goal of inquiry' American Philosophical Quarterly 51: 227-32 (2014) and 'Unreflective epistemology' Episteme 11: 411-22. (Note, however, that there is no one-toone correspondence between the contents of book chapters and papers. Sometimes chapters expand on papers or develop relevant ideas further. At the same time, in some cases, papers go beyond what is covered by the book.) Furthermore, Appendix 'The Safety Dilemma' is based on 'Epistemic Frankfurt cases revisited,' American Philosophical Quarterly 53: 27-37 (2016). I thank the relevant publishing houses and editors for granting me permission to use this material.
I have no doubt in my mind that this book would not have seen the light of day without the input and support from colleagues, friends and family. In this regard, I'd like to especially thank Harmen Ghijsen and Mona Simion for offering not only extensive comments on the entire manuscript as well as on the papers on which it is based, but also for their unabated enthusiasm in discussing this book's topics. Duncan Pritchard and Ernest Sosa have influenced my philosophical mind more than anyone. I have benefitted from their input profoundly and in numerous ways, including via discussion of the topics covered in this book and comments on specific work, and more indirectly in their role as my mentors. Thanks for invaluable input also to Kristoffer Ahlstrom-Vij, Matt Benton, Sven Bernecker, Michael Blome-Tillman, Cameron Boult, Elke Brendel, Fernando Broncano-Berrocal, Adam Carter, Annalisa Coliva, Juan Comesaña, Igor Douven, Philip Ebert, Pascal Engel, Markus Eronen, Mikkel Gerken, Sandy Goldberg, Peter Graham, Martin Grajner, Patrick Greenough, John Greco, Thomas Grundmann, Frank Hofmann, Jepser Kallestrup, Klemens Kappel, Dirk Kindermann, Clayton Littlejohn, Jack Lyons, Conor McHugh, Alan Millar, Lisa Miracchi, Anne Meylan, Erik Olsson, Nikolaj Jang Lee Linding Pederson, Wayne Riggs, Blake Roeber, Pedro Schmechtig, Martin Smith, Matthias Steup, Kurt Sylvan and Tim Williamson. (I am sure that I have missed people who deserve to be acknowledged by name and hope they will accept my apologies.) Elements of this book have been presented on a number of occasions, including: 2012 European Epistemology Network Meeting, Universities of Bologna and Modena; First Conference on Contemporary Philosophy in East Asia, Academia Sinica Taipei 2012; Epistemology Workshop, University of Groningen 2013; EPSA 2013, University of Helsinki; Epistemic Justification and Reasons Conference, University of Luxembourg 2013; Bled Philosophical Conferences, Bled 2013 and 2015; Saving Safety? Problems and Prospects of Safety-Based Accounts of Knowledge, University of Bonn 2013; The Virtue Turn: Virtue Ethics, Virtue Epistemology and Chinese Philosophy, Soochow University Taipei 2014; Yonsei Summer Philosophy Conference, Yonsei University Seoul 2014; BELUX2: Perceptual Normative Reasons, University of Luxembourg 2014; Philosophy Seminar Series, Lingnan University Hong Kong 2014; 5th International Meeting on Scepticism: The Value of Understanding, Federal University of Bahia; BELUX4: The Norm of Belief, University of Luxembourg 2015; Virtue Epistemology Conference, KU Leuven 2015; Departmental Colloquium, University of Groningen 2016; Departmental Colloquium, Institut Jean-Nicod 2016. Thanks to the audiences for their very helpful comments on the material in this book. Finally, I'd like to thank my family for their continuous support across all walks of life.
