








Introduction
Try for a moment to stop thinking; try, in particular, to stop forming beliefs. This is hard. For instance, you very likely can't help but form the belief that I just asked you to stop forming beliefs. And even if we give you some time before starting to count your attempt, as it were, you very likely can't help but form the belief that this book is still in your hand, that the screen is still in front of you and so on. You might try to close your eyes. But now you form the belief that your eyes are now closed and you may still form beliefs about things you hear and smell. You might try to put your fingers in your ears and nostrils. But even if you manage to pull this off, you will likely form the belief that you must be making quite an appearance. And if you are not that attuned to facts about your looks to take note of this, you will, at the very least, form the belief that your fingers are in your ears and nostrils. Perhaps you seek out a sensory deprivation tank. But now you might form beliefs about how curious it is to not experience anything. You might also form beliefs about the contents of your stream of consciousness. Perhaps you are singing a song in your head or perhaps you are just feeling a panic attack coming on and form the corresponding beliefs. I could go on for at least a bit more. But I do hope that you will now be convinced that no longer forming beliefs is a tall order indeed.
Say that you actually do manage to no longer form beliefs. Try next to stop having beliefs altogether. In comparison, not forming them will look easy. Once you have a belief, you are pretty much stuck with it. Don't get me wrong. I don't mean to suggest that it's impossible to lose a belief once you have it. You might figure out that what you believed was not true after all or that, contrary to how things appeared at the time, you don't have good reason for thinking it to be true. All I am saying is that there is nothing in the order of what closing your eyes will do to forming visual perceptual beliefs that will allow you to get rid of beliefs that you already have. Perhaps therapy will do the job for at least some beliefs. But even that is an arduous process by comparison.
There is good thinking and bad thinking. Since believing is a way of thinking, it is unsurprising that there is also good believing and bad believing. It matters to have good beliefs. Given that we are believing at all, we might as well believe well rather than badly. Or so some might think. But having good beliefs matters even to those who are not driven to perform well in all walks of life. After all, we act on our beliefs, and our actions will be more likely to be successful if the beliefs on which they are based are good and less likely if they are bad. Suppose, for instance, that you hold the bad belief that Paris is the capital of Scotland. Suppose furthermore that you have recently moved to Scotland and want to register with your consulate in the capital. If you now arrange for transportation to Paris to do this, you will not only fail in your project of registering with the consulate but you will also waste a lot of time and money. In this way, believing well is of direct practical importance to us. And one key philosophical question that immediately arises is what exactly believing well amounts to.
It is just this question that will take centre stage in this book. To be perfectly clear, despite the fact that this book is entitled Good Thinking I do not aim to offer a full account of what it is to think well. In fact, I do not even aim to offer a full account of what it is to believe well. Rather, I will rest content with making progress on these questions. More specifically, I will here focus on two widely recognised forms that believing well may take, to wit, knowing and believing justifiably. My goal is to develop novel accounts of both knowledge and justified belief as well as the relation between the two.
Aiming to make progress towards answering an important question may sound modest. It is not, at least not in this particular case. The reason for this is that knowledge and justified belief are not only two widely recognised forms of believing well, they are arguably widely recognised as the two most central forms of believing well. It will come as no surprise, then, that the questions of what knowledge and justified belief are have been at the very heart of epistemological theorising throughout its history. Any self-respecting epistemologist will have to address them sooner or later. In view of just how important the issue of believing well is to us and in view of just how central the questions about the nature of knowledge and justified belief are to the epistemological enterprise, it will be very hard indeed to underestimate just how ambitious the project is and just how significant its results promise to be.
Before getting down to the nitty-gritty, I'd first like to survey the state of play, clarify some key allegiances, flag some core assumptions and sketch a game plan for the remainder of the book.
Knowledge
Whatever else may be true of knowledge, it is overwhelmingly plausible that knowledge entails true belief. However, it is also widely agreed that true belief alone is not sufficient for knowledge. Additionally, true belief needs to be "tethered", to put it in Plato's words. For the longest time it was taken for granted that the tether that knowledge requires is justification. That is to say that knowledge requires justified true belief. And conversely, it was also taken for granted that if one believes not only truly but also justifiably then one knows what one believes. Knowledge, then, is justified true belief. Let us call this 'the received view'. The received view had long been taken to be the answer to the question as to what knowledge is.
Enter Edmund Gettier. In a short 1963 paper, Gettier provided an argument that showed, to the satisfaction of nearly all researchers in the field, that the received view is false. To be more precise, he offered a couple of examples that are widely taken to show that the conditions of the received view are not sufficient for knowledge. Here is one prominent such example, albeit not one from Gettier's original paper:

Stopped Clock. You take a reading from a clock and form a belief about the time, say that it is 8:22. You know that the clock has been working reliably in the past and have no reason to believe that it is currently inaccurate or not working properly. Finally, you have the ability to tell the time by taking readings from this kind of clock. Your belief that it is 8:22 is clearly justified here. Now suppose that, unbeknownst to you, the clock has stopped. Luckily, however, it stopped exactly twelve hours earlier with the result that the reading is actually accurate: it actually is 8:22.1

Your belief is not only justified but also true. However, it is also clear that your belief does not qualify as knowledge. Hence, contrary to the received view, justified true belief is not sufficient for knowledge.
Gettier's paper was the source of a major upheaval in the theory of knowledge. Once it was clear that the received view is false, epistemologists have tried to find out what knowledge consists of instead. The task that epistemologists set for themselves was no less ambitious than to provide a reductive analysis of knowledge in terms of belief, that is, a non-circular set of individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions for knowledge involving belief. This task turned out to be rather difficult to accomplish. While a set of conditions that would deal with Gettier's original examples was not hard to come by, it has proved surprisingly hard to find a set of conditions that would deal with the phenomenon in general. Evidence for this claim can be gleaned from the way in which the debate over the analysis of knowledge has developed since 1963: In the run for the correct analysis of knowledge, a huge number of proposals have been advanced. However, these proposals have tended to fall prey to Gettier-style counterexamples, that is, cases in which the agent satisfies the proposed set of individually necessary and jointly sufficient conditions but does not know (henceforth 'Gettier cases'). It is fair to say that over 50 years of research have not produced an account of knowledge that is even widely agreed among researchers in the field.
In fact, as a result of this development, some philosophers have become suspicious of the very prospects for the project of providing a reductive analysis of knowledge. Most notably, Timothy Williamson (2000) takes the upshot of the post-Gettier debate on the nature of knowledge to be that the search for a reductive analysis is irredeemably flawed and has proposed to scrap this point from the epistemological agenda. Instead, he has offered an alternative 'knowledge first' approach to epistemology. According to knowledge first epistemology, knowledge is epistemologically fundamental in the sense that it does not admit of reductive analysis in terms of belief. Instead, knowledge first epistemology aims to explain various core phenomena in epistemology in terms of knowledge.
I'd like to take the opportunity to flag that, in this book, I will join Williamson in opting for a knowledge first approach to epistemology.
Justified Belief
Gettier's paper did not only initiate the quest for a condition that would deal with Gettier cases. It also spurred a debate over the nature of the justification condition that played the role of the tether in the received view. Perhaps the most widely discussed issue here is the inter-nalism/externalism divide. Internalism is the thesis that whether a belief is justified supervenes only on factors that are, in some sense to be specified, internal to the agent. Externalism is simply the denial of internalism. That is to say, according to externalist theories of justification, whether a belief is justified supervenes at least in part on external factors.
It is fair to say that internalism was the predominant view throughout the history of philosophy before Gettier. The classical version of internalism offers an epistemic account of the internal. A factor is internal to an agent if and only if the agent is in a position to know that it obtains by reflection alone. This version of internalism is known as accessibilism.2 Accessibilism can be motivated by appealing to a plausible idea about the nature of justification in general. On the face of it, justification has to do with the ability to justify. In order to justify something, one needs to be able to offer some reason in support of it. And, of course, one cannot offer anything as a reason unless one is in a position to identify it as such. What's more, in order to have justification for something at a certain time, one must be able to justify it at that time. In that case, however, it simply won't do if one still needs to launch an investigation into the supporting reasons. Rather, one must be in a position to know the relevant reasons at the time at which one is to offer the justification. What one is in a position to know at that time, it would seem, is limited to what one is in a position to know by reflection alone. Given that justification has to do with the ability to justify, then, it would seem that justification will feature exactly the kind of epistemic condition accessibilism countenances.
In contrast, externalism has made its breakthrough in epistemology only fairly recently, with a paper by Alvin Goldman in 1979. Goldman defends an account of justified belief entitled process reliabilism. Roughly, process reliabilism claims that a belief is justified if and only if it is produced by a cognitive process that is reliable in the sense that it tends to produce beliefs with a favourable truth to falsity ratio. Externalism has been on the rise in epistemology ever since and by now there is a considerable variety of different externalist accounts of justification on the epistemological market.
One of the strongest motivations for externalist accounts of justification is that they can make sense of the idea that justification is, by its very nature, connected to truth. Goldman offers one way of fleshing out this connection to truth. Justified beliefs are beliefs that are produced by processes that are connected to the truth in the sense that they tend to produce true rather than false beliefs. It may also be worth noting that internalist accounts of justification will struggle to accommodate the truth connection. After all, as cases of radical deception indicate, internal factors are not by their very nature connected to truth. Any connection between internal factors and truth is at best contingent.
While the debate between internalism and externalism is ongoing, I would like to flag that I will not provide any detailed critical discussion of internalism in this book. What I will do is take a closer look at a range of what I take to be familiar motivations for the kind of externalism I favour (in Chapter 1). I believe that these considerations in support of externalism make a sufficiently strong case in support of the view. Other than that, I do not have much to add to the case against internalism. So, in what follows, I will set internalism to one side.3
The Relation between Knowledge and Justified Belief
Gettier's paper has drawn attention to the relation between knowledge and justified belief. According to the received view, knowledge entails justified belief. However, some, including some internalists, have since rejected the idea that knowledge entails justified belief.4
That said, that knowledge entails justified belief is still the dominant view in epistemology. What's more, for externalists, there appears to be little reason to reject the idea that knowledge entails justified belief. Consider, once more, process reliabilism: why should someone who maintains that believing justifiably has to do with believing via reliable processes give up on the idea that knowledge entails justified belief? After all, it seems equally plausible that knowledge requires believing via reliable processes. For the purposes of this book, I will side with those who agree that knowledge entails justified belief.
Another question one may ask is why knowledge should entail justified belief. Or, more generally speaking, why knowledge should feature some specific combination of epistemic conditions rather than some other. Consider, for instance, someone championing an account of knowledge featuring a reliabilist justification condition and a causal anti-Gettier condition. Why, one might ask, should knowledge feature precisely these conditions? One answer, of course, might be that it gets the cases right. But even so, one might wonder whether there isn't a deeper theoretical explanation of why knowledge is the combination of just these two epistemic conditions. This question is somewhat less frequently addressed.
One account that does offer an answer to this question is virtue reliabilism which is arguably the most prominent alternative to process reliabilism in the reliabilist camp.5 According to one version of virtue reliabilism, perhaps the most widely discussed one, epistemic normativity is but an instance of a more general kind of normativity, to wit, performance normativity. Performances with an aim, we are told, can be assessed along three dimensions: success, competence and achievement, where a performance qualifies as an achievement if and only if it is successful because competent. Belief is then viewed as one kind performance with an aim, to wit, a kind of cognitive performance that aims at truth. Given that this is so, the account of performance normativity can be applied to the case of belief. This means that beliefs can be assessed as successful (i.e. true), competent and as qualifying as achievements (i.e. true because competent). Virtue reliabilism identifies knowledge with belief that qualifies as achievement and justified belief with competent belief. Since achievements entail competent performances, it follows that knowledge entails justified belief. In this way, virtue reliabilism can offer exactly the kind of explanation of why knowledge entails justified belief that we were looking for. Moreover, the specific combination of epistemic conditions on knowledge, competence and the instantiation of the because relation between truth and competence, also receives the sought after theoretical motivation. It will not come as a great surprise, then, that the accounts of knowledge and justified belief virtue reliabilism offers are among the most popular in recent literature.
The accounts of knowledge and justified belief that this book will develop are also virtue reliabilist. However, they differ from its most prominent cousins in the literature in that they are developed within a knowledge first approach to epistemology. In this way, the main aim of the book is to develop a knowledge first virtue reliabilism.
Game Plan
The remainder of this book is divided into five chapters. Chapter 1 introduces the most widely discussed version of reliabilism, process reliabilism, and looks at some of the motivations and problems for the view, including the infamous new evil demon problem, clairvoyant cases and the generality problem. By the same token, the chapter indicates some places where there is opportunity for alternative forms of reliabilism to improve on their process reliabilist rival. Chapter 2 takes a closer look at virtue reliabilist accounts of justified belief. The standard virtue reliabilist framework is introduced and found wanting. An improved version of this framework is then developed and it is argued that it serves to solve a number of the problems that beset process reliabilism, including the new evil demon problem, the problem of clairvoyant cases and the generality problem. Crucially, all of this can be done without abandoning the traditionalist view in favour of a knowledge first alternative. Chapter 3 turns to virtue reliabilist accounts of knowledge. It is argued that a certain class of Gettier cases and lottery cases continue to constitute a stumbling stone for the view. Chapter 4 develops my preferred knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism. Virtue reliabilist accounts of knowledge and justified belief as, respectively, apt and competent belief, are offered. Crucially, however, aptness and competence are unpacked in terms of knowledge and so the account falls squarely within the knowledge first programme. It is shown that there are two sources of support for knowledge first virtue reliabilism over its traditionalist rival. The first is direct. Roughly, it is argued that the knowledge first thesis that knowledge is success in inquiry is preferable to the traditionalist alternative, according to which it is true belief. The second is indirect. Here, the strategy is to show that knowledge first virtue reliabilism can avoid the problems Chapter 3 outlined for its traditional virtue reliabilist rival. Finally, Chapter 5 looks at alternative knowledge first versions of virtue reliabilism that can be found in the literature and argues that my account compares favourably with them.
Notes
1 Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, it dates back even further than Gettier's paper, to Russell's 1948 book Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. Crucially, Russell did not use the example to target the received view.
2 Roderick Chisholm (1977) and Laurence BonJour (1985, 2003) are perhaps the most prominent champions of accessibilism in the 20th century. However, the view has a number of further supporters including Robert Audi (2001), Carl Ginet (1975), Matthias Steup (1999) and Declan Smithies (2012). Another popular stripe of internalism is mentalism, which offers a metaphysical account of the internal. According to mentalism, internal factors are mental factors. The most prominent champions of mentalism are Earl Conee and Richard Feldman (e.g. 2001, 2004).
3 This is not to say, however, that this book is of no interest at all to internalists as it will offer responses to a number of objections that have been levelled against externalism from the internalist camp.
4 The justification condition on knowledge has been rejected, e.g. in Alston (1988), Audi (2001), Foley (2012) on the internalist side and e.g. in Plantinga (1993), Sartwell (1991) on the externalist side.
5 The most prominent champions of this kind of view are Ernest Sosa (e.g. 1980, 1991, 2007, 2011, 2015), John Greco (e.g. 1999, 2000, 2003b, 2007, 2010, 2012) and Duncan Pritchard (e.g. Pritchard et al. 2010, Pritchard 2012a, 2015). Versions of the view have also been defended by Wayne Riggs (e.g. 2002, 2007, 2009), John Turri (e.g. 2011, 2016) and Adam Carter (e.g. 2015, 2015). I have also defended versions of virtue reliabilism e.g. in (Kelp 2011a, 2013).









1   Process Reliabilism
This chapter's main focus will be on process reliabilism (henceforth 'PR'). In the reliabilist camp, PR is arguably the most prominent competitor of virtue reliabilism ('VR'), the kind of view I favour. More specifically, I will first introduce the view and then look at some of the ups and downs of PR. The ups promise to also constitute motivations for VR. The downs are points at which VR has the opportunity to prove its superiority over PR.
Process Reliabilism in Outline
The core idea of PR is that justified beliefs are beliefs that are produced by processes that tend to produce beliefs with a favourable truth to falsity ratio. In other words, justified beliefs are beliefs produced by processes that reliably produce true beliefs (henceforth also 'reliable processes').1
With the core idea in play, let's turn to some important qualifications. Note that not all belief-forming processes are created equal. Some belief-forming processes, most notably perception, do not have beliefs among their inputs. For instance, your perceptual belief that you are looking at a book has no beliefs among its inputs. It is not as if you believe that you are looking at a book based on a prior belief that you have an experience as of looking at a book. Rather, the only inputs to the process are non-doxastic. They may comprise an experience as of a book, certain retinal stimuli or perhaps something entirely different. Other belief-forming processes do have beliefs among their inputs. The most prominent example here is inference. When you form a belief that q by inference from a belief that p and a belief that if p, then q, the inferential process that outputs your belief that q has your belief that p and your belief that if p, then q among its inputs. Following Goldman, I will call the former kinds of process 'belief-independent' and the latter 'belief-dependent'.
While it makes sense to require belief-independent processes to be reliable in the sense that in order to deliver justification they must produce beliefs with a favourable truth to falsity ratio, the same does not hold for belief-dependent processes. To see this notice that belief-dependent processes need not be expected to produce beliefs with a favourable truth to falsity ratio when the input beliefs happen to be false. Moreover, they need not be expected to ensure that the input beliefs be true. Process reliabilists will do well, then, to weaken the reliability condition on belief-dependent processes. Rather than requiring that they produce beliefs with a favourable truth to falsity ratio unconditionally, these processes need only be conditionally reliable in the sense that they must produce belief with a favourable truth to falsity ratio given that the input beliefs are true.2
Finally since conditionally reliable processes can only transmit justification but not generate it, belief-dependent processes will produce justified beliefs only if the input beliefs are themselves justified. This gives us PR in Goldman's classic formulation:

Process Reliabilist Justification (PRJ). S's belief that p is justified if and only if (i) it "results ('immediately') from a belief-independent process that is (unconditionally) reliable" or (ii) it "results ('immediately') from a belief-dependent process that is (at least) conditionally reliable, and . . . the beliefs (if any) on which this process operates in producing S's belief that p . . . are themselves justified."
(Goldman 1979: 13-14)

Even this cannot be the whole story. After all, compatibly with a given belief's being formed reliably, the justification of the belief can be defeated. For instance, you may have a reliably produced visual perceptual belief that the painting you are looking at is red. According to PRJ, your belief is justified. However, when you are told that you have been given a drug that makes green objects appear red to you, your perceptual belief will no longer be justified. The justification for your belief is defeated.
Goldman proposes a PR-friendly account of defeat along the following lines:

Process Reliabilist Defeat (PRD). S's belief in p is defeated if and only if "there is an alternative reliable or conditionally reliable process available to S which, had it been used by S in addition to the process actually used, would have resulted in S's not believing p . . . "
(Goldman 1979: 20)


Whether a belief is genuinely justified depends on whether it is justified in the sense of PRJ and not defeated in the sense specified in PRD. While defeat is an important phenomenon in epistemology, for the purposes of this book, I would like to set it aside, unless otherwise noted. Accordingly, in what follows, I will use 'PR' to refer to process reliabilism's account of justification minus its account of defeat, i.e. PRJ.
Motivations
Properties of Justified Belief
One initial benefit of PR is that justified belief turns out to have a number of properties it is widely believed to have. To begin with, PR allows for the non-factivity of justified belief. That is to say, it is possible to have justified false beliefs. To see how PR can achieve this, note that a process can be reliable—and thus satisfy PR's demands—without being perfectly reliable. In fact, nearly all, if not all, of our belief-forming processes are not perfectly reliable. They are fallible. When their fallibility manifests itself, they produce false beliefs. However, since they are nonetheless reliable, according to PR, these false beliefs will turn out justified.
While justified belief is not factive, it is widely agreed that it is not entirely unconnected to truth. On the contrary, it is widely believed that justified belief is truth conducive in the sense that a justified belief is, in some sense to be specified, more likely to be true than not. One crucial advantage of PR is that it can make sense of the truth conduciveness of justified belief while holding on to non-factivity. To see this, note that beliefs produced by reliable processes are more likely true than beliefs that aren't produced by reliable processes. More specifically, the conditional probability of the belief that p's being true given that it has been produced by a reliable process is higher than the probability of the belief that p's being true alone. In this way, PR does establish the desired connection between justification and truth.
Paradigm Cases
PR also makes correct predictions about paradigm cases of justified and unjustified beliefs. Consider paradigm cases of justified beliefs: they include beliefs produced by standard perceptual processes, introspection, memory and good reasoning. Now contrast this with paradigm cases of unjustified beliefs: they include beliefs produced by confused reasoning, guesswork and wishful thinking. What distinguishes beliefs in the first camp from beliefs in the second camp is that the processes producing the former are all reliable or conditionally reliable, while the ones producing the latter are all unreliable or conditionally unreliable. Given that, according to PR, a belief is justified if and only if it is produced by a reliable or, in the case of non-basic beliefs, conditionally reliable process, PR makes the right predictions for both paradigm cases of justified beliefs and of unjustified beliefs (Goldman 1979: 9-10).
Agrippa's Trilemma
Another noteworthy benefit of PR is that the view promises to offer attractive solutions to a number of key problems in epistemology, including the problem of basic beliefs, the related regress problem and the problem of scepticism. Let's look at the regress problem and basic beliefs first.
Agrippa's trilemma famously describes three accounts of the structure of justification: (i) there is an infinite chain of justified beliefs (infinitism), (ii) the chain of justified beliefs circles back to the original belief (coherentism) or (iii) the chain of belief ends with basic beliefs that are not themselves justified by other beliefs (foundationalism).
While infinitism and coherentism have their adherents in the literature, it is fair to say that foundationalism is the most popular view.3 In fact, many take the trilemma to constitute an argument for foundationalism. Even if we agree that the trilemma makes a strong case for foundationalism, foundationalists still encounter a difficult problem. To see how it arises, note that not all basic beliefs are justified. Consider, for instance, an expert and a novice doctor who are currently inspecting an X-ray image. The expert can tell from the picture that the patient has a torn ligament, whereas the novice can't. Suppose both expert and novice arrive at a true basic belief about the patient's ailment. Say that the novice did so based on mere guesswork. In this case, the expert's belief is justified, while the novice's belief isn't. While some basic beliefs are justified, other's aren't.
Given that this is so, it is incumbent on foundationalists to offer an account of when exactly a basic belief is justified and when it is unjustified. This account should enable us to explain why, in the above case, the expert's belief is justified, whereas the novice's isn't. Reliabilism can offer an attractive answer here. Basic beliefs are justified if they are produced by (unconditionally) reliable processes and unjustified otherwise. The expert's belief about the torn ligament is justified because it is produced by a reliable belief-forming process, the novice's is unjustified because the belief-forming process that produced it is not reliable. In this way, PR offers an appealing account of basic justification and an attractive foundationalist solution to the regress problem (Kornblith 1980; Goldman 2008).
Scepticism
Let's move on to the problem of scepticism, which is one of epistemology's most venerable problems. A particularly virulent and perhaps the most unsettling version of the problem threatens to show that it is simply impossible for us to have much in the way of justified belief at all. Here is the argument:

SK1. We cannot justifiably believe the denials of various sceptical hypotheses. For instance, you cannot justifiably believe that you are not the victim of a mad scientist who has taken your brain out of your skull, placed it in a vat with nutrients and hooked it up to a supercomputer that stimulates it in such a way as to produce deceptive experiences as if you were a normal human being with hands.
SK2. If we cannot justifiably believe the denials of various sceptical hypotheses, then we cannot justifiably believe many ordinary empirical propositions. For instance, if you cannot justifiably believe that you are not a handless brain in a vat that is deceived into believing it has hands, then you cannot justifiably believe that you have hands.
SK3. Hence, we cannot justifiably believe many ordinary empirical propositions. For instance, you cannot justifiably believe that you have hands.

PR allows for an attractive solution to this problem. According to PR, what matters to whether or not a given belief is justified is whether it is reliably produced. And whether or not our beliefs, including beliefs about whether we are radically deceived, are actually produced by reliable processes, it is surely possible that they are. In this way, reliabilists have excellent cause for resisting the key premise in the above sceptical argument, to wit, SK1, as well as its conclusion, SK3. In this way, PR can resist one prominent sceptical argument (Pritchard 2005).
Even if PR escapes the above sceptical argument, it might be thought that it does not serve to solve the sceptical problem fully adequately. After all, to establish an unsettling sceptical conclusion, the sceptic need not make so strong a claim as to say that it is impossible for us to have justified beliefs. Rather, it will be bad enough if he can show that, whether possible or not, we simply do not have much in the way of justified beliefs. And all that is needed for this is the weaker premise that we do not justifiably believe the denials of various sceptical hypotheses.
One issue the sceptic now faces is that, once he has conceded that, on PR, it is possible to justifiably believe both the denials of sceptical hypotheses and ordinary empirical propositions, then the weaker premise that we do not justifiably believe the denials of various sceptical hypotheses affords separate support. To make a plausible case for this, however, sceptics will now have to convince us that the world we inhabit is not one of the possible worlds in which the possibility of justified belief in denials of sceptical hypotheses and ordinary empirical propositions, which PR opens up, is actualised. In order to achieve this, they have to argue that the processes that lead us to beliefs in the denials of sceptical hypotheses are not reliable in the sense at issue in PR. However, sceptics have done precious little to achieve this. (In a way, this is unsurprising because the issue of whether the relevant belief-forming processes are reliable is just the kind of empirical matter that sceptics think we cannot know or have justified beliefs about.) So, while the weaker sceptical argument is in principle still available to sceptics, it comes to light that one of its key premises remains unsupported. As a result, the weaker argument will not be cogent against champions of PR.
These are some of the main considerations that move champions of PR to adopt their view. If PR can be made to work, it offers an attractive and powerful account of justified belief. That said, PR also faces a number of well-known problems. One major aim of this book is to offer an account of justified belief that retains the benefits of PR, while avoiding these problems. In what follows, then, I will outline these problems.
Problems
The New Evil Demon Problem
First, consider once more cases of radical deception. Here is one famous example:

