Envatted. You have become the victim of a mad scientist who has turned you into a brain in a vat (henceforth also 'BIV' for short) that is being fed deceptive experiences as if everything were normal. For instance, just now you appear to be waking up in your bed in the morning, appear to see that your alarm clock reads 7:45 and form the corresponding false beliefs.

The beliefs you form based on your experiences in this case are justified. Or, at any rate, they are no less justified than they were before you were turned into a BIV. The problem for PR is that since you are subject to radical deception, the processes that produce your beliefs are highly unreliable. You are a disembodied BIV. You are not lying and surely not in your bed. Your belief about the time is mistaken also. Moreover, it is not as if your beliefs about your bodily orientation and the time are false only on this occasion. No, whenever you form such beliefs, they are going to be false (or so we may assume). What's worse, the problem is not restricted to beliefs about bodily orientation and time. Rather, your perceptual beliefs in general will be affected. As a result, the processes that produce these beliefs will do so with a highly unfavourable truth to falsity ratio. PR predicts, mistakenly, that the beliefs you form are not justified.4
Clairvoyance Cases
PR meets with a similar fate when it comes to cases like the following.

Clairvoyant. As a result of exposure to radiation, you come to be gifted with a 'clairvoyance' belief-forming process that produces true beliefs about distant events with a high degree of reliability. You do not know that you are gifted with such a process. In fact, you have no evidence that there exists a process of this kind or that it should be so much as possible for it to exist. On the other hand, you also do not have evidence that such a process does not exist/is not possible. From your point of view, you spontaneously form beliefs about distant places. Just now, while being on vacation in a faraway country, your clairvoyance process has produced a belief that your house is on fire.

In this case, your belief is not justified. At the same time, the process that produced it is highly reliable and so PR predicts, again mistakenly, that your belief is justified.5
These two problems are especially worrisome for PR in tandem. Cases like Envatted provide reason to believe that process reliability is not necessary for justified belief, while cases like Clairvoyant suggest that it is not sufficient either. If process reliability is neither necessary nor sufficient for justified belief, it looks as though PR is heading down the wrong epistemological track entirely.
The Generality Problem
And this is not even the end of the difficulties PR encounters. There are a couple of further formidable problems that I would like to briefly outline. The first one is the infamous generality problem.
The core idea of PR is that a belief is justified if and only if it is produced by a reliable process. To be more precise, the core idea here is that a belief is justified if and only if it is produced by a token of a reliable process type. Individual beliefs are produced by token processes. Token processes are particulars, which, among other things, are not repeatable. As a result, it's not clear that the notion of reliability even applies to token processes which is why champions of PR typically take justified belief to require production via a reliable process type.6
To see the difficulty for PR, notice that every token process instantiates indefinitely many types. The process that produced my belief that I am sitting at my desk, for instance, instantiates all of the following types: cognitive process, belief-forming process, perceptual belief-forming process, and visual belief-forming process, to name but a few. Each process type has a different degree of reliability. Of course, unless it is specified which process types exactly are the ones at issue in PR, PR simply does not make determinate predictions about whether or not individual beliefs are justified. For instance, before PR can make a determinate prediction on whether my belief that I am sitting at my desk is justified, we need a specification of which of the various process types that the token process instantiates is the one at issue in PR. In order to work as an account of justified belief at all, PR must be supplemented with an account that specifies the relevant type of process at issue in PR. The problem of specifying the relevant type of process has become known as the generality problem for PR.7
World-Bound Reliability
We still haven't reached the end of the difficulties PR faces. Notice that, according to PR, process reliability is evaluated relative to worlds. That is to say, whether a given process type is reliable depends on the ratio of true to false beliefs it attains at a set of worlds.8
But now consider a process type, T, that takes a certain look of a certain mushroom as input and outputs a classification of the mushroom as edible. Suppose T is a highly unreliable process type because, at the set of worlds at which it is evaluated for reliability, both edible chanterelles and poisonous jack-o'-lantern mushrooms have this look and throughout this set of worlds nearly everywhere where there are chanterelles, there are also jack-o'-lanterns. But now suppose, compatibly with this, that throughout this set of worlds there also exists a remote island with only a handful inhabitants where there are no jack-o'-lanterns. None of the inhabitants have ever left the island and they never will. Suppose you are an inhabitant of this island and form a belief of the mushroom before you that it is edible via a token of T. Your belief qualifies as knowledge and so is justified. Since T is highly unreliable due to its tendency to produce too many false beliefs at the set of worlds at which it is evaluated for reliability, however, PR predicts, incorrectly, that your belief is unjustified.
Consider also the converse situation in which T is highly reliable partly because, throughout the set of worlds at which it is evaluated for reliability, nearly only chanterelles have the look in question. Jack-o'-lanterns are nowhere to be found, with the exception of the remote island you inhabit where they grow as abundantly as chanterelles. When you form the belief of the mushroom before you that it is edible via T, your belief is very plausibly not justified. Since T is highly reliable as it tends to produce true beliefs at the set of worlds at which it is evaluated for reliability, PR makes yet another incorrect prediction, this time of the presence of justified belief.
Solutions
There is no shortage of proposed solutions for the classical problems PR faces. In what follows, I will briefly survey some of the main avenues that have been pursued by champions of PR and flag some issues that arise here.
It may be worth noting that I am not trying to mount a conclusive case that PR can't solve these problems. Rather, my main ambition here is to generate a feel for how champions of PR have ventured to deal especially with the new evil demon problem and the problem posed by clairvoyant cases. In particular, what the discussion below will bring to light is that although process reliabilists have been very creative in tweaking their view to deal with these problems, it remains unclear exactly why the proposed conditions that do the tweaking should hold in the first place. In this way, process reliabilist solutions to the classical problems face a motivational problem, even if they can get the cases right. And the reason I am interested in developing this motivational problem, in turn, is that it lays the groundwork for giving the view I will develop in the next chapter a chance to shine as it compares favourably with PR. As will become clear in due course, my view offers a rationale for the conditions that do the relevant work in the sense that these conditions drop out of an independently motivated general normative framework. If so, my view can improve on process reliabilism in that it steers clear of the motivational problem and offers a more unified and elegant solution to these problems.
In addition, the process reliabilist proposals I am about to look into run into some difficulties when it comes to the fine details. Since my view can avoid these difficulties, there is reason to think that it compares favourably with these proposals on yet another count. However, to repeat, my main interest lies with the motivational problem. After all, this problem remains even if the process reliabilist proposals can be modified further to get the fine details right.
With these preliminary points in play, let's get down to business. I'll go through the classical problems for process reliabilism in turn, starting once again with the new evil demon problem.
The New Evil Demon Problem
When dealing with the new evil demon problem, process reliabilists have to make a choice between two options: they can either go steadfast and/or concessive. Steadfast approaches hold that radically deceived agents do not satisfy the reliability condition on justified belief and, as a result, do not have justified beliefs. Instead, they venture to explain the appearance of justification away. In contrast, concessive approaches grant that radically deceived agents have justified beliefs and venture to modify the view to accommodate this claim. Since my own view falls squarely in the concessive camp and since going steadfast always threatens to leave a lingering worry that the solution isn't fully satisfactory after all, I will focus here on concessive approaches. That said, some of the theoretical tools that process reliabilists have developed here can be put to use for a steadfast approach also. I'll indicate how as I go along.
One important type of solution that process reliabilists have developed is to index the notion of reliability required for justified belief to a set of privileged worlds. For instance, Goldman himself has defended views called 'actual worlds reliabilism' (1979) and 'normal worlds reliabilism' (1986) at various stages of his career. Actual world reliabilism takes the privileged world to be the actual world: whether a belief is justified depends on whether it is produced by a process that is reliable at the actual world. Normal worlds reliabilism takes the privileged worlds to be the set of normal worlds. Normal worlds are worlds consistent with our general beliefs about the sorts of objects, events and changes that occur in the actual world.
It is easy to see that both actual and normal worlds reliabilism promise to solve the new evil demon problem. After all, the perceptual processes that agents in radical sceptical scenarios use to arrive at perceptual beliefs are reliable at both at the actual world and at normal worlds.
One key problem with this kind of approach is that it leads to trouble elsewhere, as Goldman also acknowledges at a later point. Here is a case of an alien cognisers that causes trouble for both actual and normal world reliabilism:

Consider a possible non-normal world W, significantly different from ours. In W people commonly form beliefs by a process that has a very high truth ratio in W, but would not have a high truth ratio in normal worlds. Couldn't the beliefs formed by the process in W count as justified? To be concrete, let the process be that of forming beliefs in accord with feelings of clairvoyance. Such a process presumably does not have a high truth ratio in the actual world; nor would it have a high truth ratio in normal worlds. But suppose W contains clairvoyance waves analogous to sound or light waves. By means of clairvoyance waves people in W accurately detect features of their environments just as we detect features of our environment by light and sound. Surely, the clairvoyance belief-forming processes of people in W can yield justified beliefs.
(Goldman 1988: 62)

The problem is, of course, that the clairvoyance process is justification conferring at W, even though it is reliable neither at the actual world nor at normal worlds. Even if actual and normal worlds reliabilism can get cases of radically deceived agents right, it falters on other cases, including the one of the alien cognisers. By the same token, there is reason to think that these approaches can't be correct after all.
A different kind of approach starts by giving an account of justification attributions. According to the perhaps most prominent incarnation of the approach (Goldman 1993), we generate 'approved lists' of processes that are justification conferring in accordance with whether we believe them to be reliable. Crucially, this list is then deployed in attributions about justification. To deal with the new evil demon cases, process reliabilists favouring this line may offer a contextualist or relativist semantics for attributions of justified belief according to which an attribution of a justified belief is true if and only if the belief is produced by a process that's on the attributor's/assessor's list.
Once again, this proposal promises to solve the new evil demon problem. After all, the justified beliefs of radically deceived agents are formed in just the same way as our justified belief. Since the processes that produce our justified beliefs are on the approved list, so are the processes that produce justified beliefs in radically deceived agents.
At the same time, it is not hard to see that problems are again looming. First, suppose that a process like wishful thinking or hasty generalisation somehow makes it on someone's list. The proposed view predicts that attributions of justified belief by this person will come out true for beliefs that are formed by wishful thinking. However, that doesn't seem to be correct. Second, there is reason to think that, for one and the same process type, we can be brought to think that it is justification conferring and that it isn't. To see this, note that in the above case of alien cognition, we judge clairvoyance to be a justification conferring process, while in standard clairvoyant cases, we judge it not to be justification conferring. On the present proposal, however, it is hard to see how this could be the case. After all, either clairvoyance is on the approved list or it isn't.9
Clairvoyants
As with the new evil demon problem earlier, process reliabilists have to choose between going steadfast or concessive on clairvoyant cases. Again, I will here focus on concessive approaches, for the reasons I already mentioned.
First, one might venture to extend at least some of the solutions to the new evil demon problem to handle clairvoyant cases as well. Since I have already raised a number of issues for these approaches, I will not explore these routes in any more detail here.
One distinctive approach to clairvoyant cases is in terms of an anti-defeat condition. In a nutshell, the thought is that one has reason to believe that beliefs that simply pop up in one's head, as it were, are unreliably formed. But if one has reason to believe that a given belief is unreliably formed, then one has a defeater for one's belief. In this way, clairvoyants have defeaters for their clairvoyant beliefs. Since a belief is justified only if one doesn't have defeaters for it, clairvoyant beliefs are correctly classified as not justified.
Even if this line works as envisaged, one obvious problem is that it is not clear that it is available to process reliabilists. After all, what they need to do, ultimately, is unpack the notion of defeat in process reliabilist terms. And while we have seen that Goldman himself has made a proposal in this direction, his account has faced severe criticism (Kvanvig 2007; Beddor 2015). In fact, whether the notion of defeat can adequately cashed out in process reliabilist terms remains an open question. As a result, the present approach to clairvoyant cases is not safe home.
What's worse, there is reason to think that the defeat approach remains unsatisfactory in any case. If the idea of having reason to think that clairvoyant beliefs are unreliably formed can be cashed out in process reliabilist terms at all, it will have to be in terms of higher-order processes by means of which we think about our first-order processes. However, it looks as though the relevant clairvoyant agents may be cognitively too unsophisticated to have such higher-order processes. For instance, it may be that the clairvoyant is a small child who hasn't developed the relevant capacity for higher-order thought yet (Graham 2012). It is hard to deny that the anti-defeat approach carries little promise when it comes to cases like this one. By the same token, there is reason to believe that it does not succeed at the end of the day.
Another line that process reliabilists have pursued to deal with clairvoyant cases is to place further conditions on the relevant belief-forming processes. In this vein, Jack Lyons has argued that non-inferentially justified beliefs must be produced by what he calls a primal system, which is inferentially opaque and developed as a result of learning and/or innate conditions (Lyons 2009: 166). The reason why, in standard clairvoyant cases, beliefs produced by clairvoyant cases are not justified is that the systems that produce them are not primal. After all, while they are inferentially opaque, they are the result of neither learning nor innate conditions. Rather, the relevant clairvoyants simply stumble into them.
Unfortunately, there are problems even for Lyons's account. Consider the following case, which is due to Harmen Ghijsen:

Norbert is the son of a mother and father who both have reliable clairvoyant abilities and have been able to reproduce because of the benefit these clairvoyant abilities have provided for them. However, there are not (yet) many people who have these clairvoyant abilities, and their existence is kept secret. The abilities are due to specialized internal organs that pick up on special energy waves in the environment, and then output brief visual images which represent that such-and-so is currently the case at some distant place. Furthermore, the abilities usually become active quite suddenly some time after puberty. Norbert's parents have decided not to tell him about the existence of his clairvoyant abilities, and Norbert has no evidence for or against their existence in general or his own having them. Some time after puberty, Norbert suddenly experiences a brief visual image of the President being in New York City and on that basis believes that the president is in New York City.
(Ghijsen 2016: 121)

Ghijsen points out that Norbert's belief is unjustified, just as the original clairvoyant's belief. At the same time, the system that produced this belief qualifies as a primal system in Lyons's sense as it is developed as a result of innate conditions.
What comes to light is that none of the process reliabilist attempts to deal with new evil demon and clairvoyant cases I have surveyed here are fully satisfactory. But perhaps this shortcoming can be remedied, either by tweaking some of the above proposals further or by a opting for different approach altogether. Even so, recall that the main purpose of my discussion was not to mount a conclusive case against PR, but rather to convey a feel for how process reliabilists have ventured to deal with these problems. In particular, the motivational problem I mentioned at the start of the section should by now have come into clear view. Suppose some combination of the above proposals can be made to work; say some version of a normal worlds reliabilism in combination with a Lyons-style approach to clairvoyant cases can effectively make the right predictions across all cases. The question remains why we should think that justification features these conditions in the first place.
Now, I don't mean to suggest that getting the cases right can't be enough to motivate the relevant version of PR. All I am saying is any such version of PR will be at a disadvantage when compared to a view that not only gets the cases right but can also address the motivational issue. Since the view I will develop in the next chapter does just this, it compares favourably with PR, whether or not its champions can successfully tweak their view to get the cases right.
The Generality Problem
It will come as no surprise that process reliabilists have also worked hard to come up with a solution to the generality problem. Again, there are at least two prominent general strategies. The first tackles the generality problem head-on and attempts to specify a way of identifying the type of process at issue in process reliabilist accounts of justified belief. Prominent instances of this kind of approach construe the relevant process types as natural kinds (Alston 1995), as information-processing algorithms (Beebe 2004), or as determined by context (Heller 1995), among others. The other proposal tries to defuse the problem by arguing that it is a problem that every account of justified belief faces. For instance, Juan Comesaña (2006) shows that any adequate account of the basing relation will run into a version of the generality problem. And since every workable account of justified belief needs an adequate account of the basing relation, every workable account of justified belief will face a version of the generality problem. In a similar vein, Michael Bishop (2010) argues that any epistemological theory that wants to allow for a certain form of justification, i.e. reflective justification, will encounter the generality problem. Since every respectable epistemology will make room for reflective justification, once again, the generality problem is a problem that we all have to deal with.
As will become clear in the next chapter, a version of the generality problem arises for my own version of virtue reliabilism as well. I will defend a defusing line, arguing that the generality problem is not only a problem that any account of justified belief encounters but also one that every account of competent performance encounters. In this way, the virtue epistemological approach of seeing justified belief as an instance of a general theory of the normativity of performances offers a distinctive and attractive way of dealing with the generality problem, or so I will argue. This approach is not only compatible with but can also strengthen the case made by extant attempts to defuse the generality problem. For that reason, I will not discuss the ups and downs of the relevant proposals in any further detail here.
My view is also compatible with a head-on approach to the issue, at least in principle. And while, as a result, the question as to whether a head-on approach can be made to work at all and if so how remains an open question, I will not get into it here. One reason for this is that if the approach I develop in the next chapter is correct, it may also serve to problematise the more head-on approaches to the generality problem, at least potentially. After all, if the generality problem generalises beyond the epistemic case to performances in general, then we may expect the right solution to the generality problem to generalise likewise. The potential trouble that extant head-on solutions to the generality problem encounter is that it is just not clear that these proposals generalise beyond the epistemic case in the way they would need to. Since settling these issues here would take me to far afield, I will set them aside for the time being.
Conclusion
It comes to light, then, that PR's account of justified belief has a number of virtues. It accommodates some key properties of justified belief, issues correct predictions in paradigm cases of justified and unjustified belief, and offers promising solutions to some of the most difficult problems in epistemology such as the regress problem and the problem of scepticism.
At the same time, it also encounters a number of serious problems, including problematic cases, the generality problem, and the problem arising from assessing reliability of processes relative to worlds. Champions of PR have offered a number of ways to solve these problems, some of which are quite promising. Even so, I hope my discussion of the process reliabilist proposals has also made clear that there remains room for improvement: the view continues to struggle with the fine details, and it remains unclear exactly why we should think that the conditions that do the work should hold. Fortunately, the next chapter will develop a view that can deliver just these improvements.
Notes
1 PR has been defended extensively by Alvin Goldman (e.g. 1979, 1986, 2012). Other champions include Hilary Kornblith (e.g. 2002, 2004, 2009) and Jack Lyons (e.g. 2009).
2 It may be worth noting that the usefulness of the distinction between belief-dependent and belief-independent processes does not go undisputed. For instance, Lyons (2009) argues that the key distinction for process reliabilists is the distinction between basic and non-basic beliefs. While it might be thought that the distinction between belief-dependent and belief-independent processes unpacks just this distinction in process reliabilist terms, there is excellent reason to think that this cannot be the case after all. For instance, the resulting account will categorise introspective beliefs about other beliefs as non-basic, whereas they should come out as basic. Another way in which the distinction may be problematic is if the processes that produce perceptual beliefs turn out to have perceptual experiences with propositional contents as input. In this case, an argument parallel to the above argument should provide reason to think that the reliability condition for perceptual processes should be weakened also. Since perceptual experiences are not beliefs, Goldman's distinction is problematic on yet another count. While these are important problems for process reliabilism, I will not take issue with them within the confines of this chapter. Rather, I will rest content with simply following Goldman's exposition here.
3 Infinitism has been defended by Peter Klein (e.g. 1999, 2012, 2014), Scott Aikin (2005, 2008, 2011) and Jeanne Peijnenburg (e.g. 2007). See BonJour (1985) and Lehrer (1974, 1990) for prominent defences of coherentism.
4 This problem, which is also known as the new evil demon problem, was first stated in (Lehrer and Cohen 1983 and Cohen 1984) as a problem for reliabilist accounts of justified belief. Wedgwood (2002) argues that it generalises to all externalist accounts of justified belief.
5 Clairvoyant cases were first adduced by BonJour (1980, 1985) to argue against reliabilist accounts of justified belief. The related case of Mr. Truetemp is due to Lehrer (1990).
6 Conee and Feldman (1998: 2). It may be worth noting that if 'tendency' is given a propensity (rather than frequentist) interpretation, then it will be possible for token processes to be reliable and unreliable. Note, however, that 'token versions' of process reliabilism will face analogues of all the classical problems for 'type versions'. To see this, note first that tokens of the wildest belief-forming processes can be reliable, e.g. when one has a helper in the wings who has the power to make the belief true and is determined (in a modally robust manner) to do so. Suppose, for instance, that I believe that I will be the world's richest man based on wishful thinking. My belief is not justified. However, with a powerful and committed helper in the wings who is ready to (modally robustly) see to it that I become the world's richest man, the token process that produced this belief may well be reliable. On the other hand, even tokens of normally excellent belief-forming processes can be unreliable, e.g. when one is up against an opponent who has the power to make the belief come out false and is determined (in a modally robust manner) to do so. Suppose, for instance, that I believe that I am looking at an apple based on normally highly reliable visual perceptual processes. My belief is justified. However, when up against a powerful and committed opponent, who on this particular occasion (modally robustly) made me look at an indistinguishable fake, the token process that produced this belief is unreliable. Finally, as Comesaña (2006) convincingly argues, token versions of process reliabilism also encounter a version of the generality problem. So, not much will be gained by abandoning the classical type version of process reliabilism in any case.
7 The generality problem was already noted in Goldman's original 1979 paper. It was developed into a serious challenge for process reliabilism by Conee and Feldman (1998).
8 This is clear especially from various responses to problems that sceptical cases pose for PR. Goldman himself considers 'actual world' and 'normal worlds' versions of PR according to which whether a belief is justified according to PR depends on whether the relevant process type is reliable at the actual world or at normal worlds (for more on this, see the Section entitled 'Solutions' below). Both of these solutions presuppose that the domain of evaluation are worlds of some denomination.
9 Note that this kind of approach can also be put to use is within the steadfast framework. Here, the idea is that we can use this account about justification attributions to explain how our intuitions go awry. While agents in sceptical scenarios really don't have justified beliefs, we mistakenly think that they do. This is because the relevant perceptual processes that produce their beliefs are on the approved list, and as a result, we are misled into judging that these beliefs are justified. That said, at least the second problem outlined above arises for this kind of approach also.









2   Virtue Reliabilism
Justified Belief
The Standard Framework
The following two chapters will focus on virtue reliabilism's (VR's) accounts of justified belief and knowledge and whether they can make progress with respect to the problems of PR that we looked at in the last chapter. First things first, however, I will first introduce the standard virtue reliabilist framework, including the account of performance normativity its champions have appealed to and a number of ways of interpreting its core terms.
Performance Normativity
Recent statements of VR start from a general account of performance normativity. The core idea is that performances with a goal can be assessed along the following three dimensions:

Success. Does the performance reach its goal? In other words, is it successful?
Competence. Does the agent perform competently? In other words, is the performance produced by an ability to attain the performance's success?
Achievement. Does the performance qualify as an achievement? In other words, is it successful because competent? That is to say, besides being successful and competent, does the right kind of (explanatory) relation obtain between competence and success?

By way of illustration, consider a simple version of target archery in which shots are taken at a disc-shaped target with no further structure, call it ARCH.1 The goal of ARCH is to hit the target. Now suppose you are an archer who takes a shot in ARCH. When you do, you produce a performance that has the goal of hitting the target. Once a performance's goal is specified, we can easily see what it takes for the performance to be successful: the performance must attain its goal. In our toy case, your shot will be successful if and only if the arrow fired hits the target.
What matters to whether a performance is competent is whether it is the product of an exercise of an ability to produce the performance's success. Agents may or may not have the ability to produce successful performances of a certain kind. For instance, you may or may not possess the ability to hit the target in ARCH. Moreover, a certain performance may or may not be produced by an exercise of that ability. For instance, you may or may not exercise your ability to hit the target when taking a shot. True, in many cases you will. However, you may be distracted, drunk or simply choose to miss. To perform competently, your performance must have been produced by an exercise of an ability to produce the performance's success. In the case in which you are practicing ARCH, a competent performance is a shot that is produced by an ability to hit the target in ARCH.
Achievements require success and ability to be related in the right way. The success must be attained because of the exercise of ability. Suppose you take a shot in ARCH. You are at peak concentration and in good practice, the orientation of bow and arrow are just right as are the conditions in which the shot is taken. You release the arrow, which goes on to hit the target right in the centre. In this case, your shot qualifies as an achievement: it is successful because competent. (I will henceforth also use Sosa's expression 'is apt' as a shorthand for 'qualifies as an achievement'.)
In contrast, consider a case that is very much like the one just described with the exception that, unbeknownst to you, there is a magnet in the area that will cause shots that would normally hit the target to miss. At the same time, you are lucky enough to have me as a helper in the wings: I am operating a wind machine that counterbalances the influence of the magnet with the result that, when you take a shot, it hits the target just as it does in the first case. While, in this case, your shot is successful, it is not successful because competent. Rather, it is successful because I lent you a helping hand. Unlike in the first case, your shot is thus not apt. In consequence, while achievement entails both success and ability, the converse does not hold.
Note also that performances can be successful without being competent and competent without being successful. To see the former, suppose you take a shot while severely intoxicated and blindfolded that, thanks to an incredible stroke of luck, hits the target nonetheless. Your shot will be successful without being competent. Concerning the latter, suppose you take a shot that would have hit the target, had your arrow not hit a bird that was flying by. In this case, the shot is competent but unsuccessful.
Beliefs as Epistemic Performances
In addition, VR assumes that beliefs are a type of performance with a goal. More specifically, they are a type of epistemic performance. This means that the general account of performance normativity can be applied to the special case of belief, delivering an account of the normativity of belief.
A key question then concerns the nature of the goal of belief understood as a kind of epistemic performance. According to traditionalist versions of VR, the goal of belief is truth. Given that this is so, we get the following:

Successful Belief. A belief is successful if and only if true.
Competent Belief. A belief is competent if and only if it is produced by an exercise of an ability to form true beliefs.
Apt Belief. A belief is apt if and only if it is true because competent.
