
Crucially, champions of VR identify knowledge and justified belief with different normative properties of beliefs as epistemic performances. In particular, according to VR:

VR-JB. One justifiably believes that p if and only if one competently believes that p.
VR-K. One knows that p if and only if one aptly believes that p.

Note that the resulting virtue reliabilism has a number of highly attractive features. First, it offers an attractive account of the normativity of belief. Second, it can offer a theoretical motivation for its accounts of justified belief and knowledge. After all, the accounts are backed by a general framework for the normativity of performances. Knowledge and justified belief are instances of familiar normative categories, to wit, that of apt and competent performance. Third, a number of plausible theses about knowledge and justified belief and their relations drop right out of the account. First, according to VR, knowledge is a kind of achievement. Second, since achievements entail both success and competence, knowledge entails both true belief and justified belief. In contrast, third, since success and competence do not entail aptness, justified true belief does not entail knowledge. Fourth, since success does not entail competence and vice versa, justified belief and true belief turn out to be logically independent. We can have true but unjustified beliefs and justified false beliefs.
Of course, in order to give precise accounts of competent and apt belief, we need a more detailed account of the relevant abilities and of what it takes for a belief to be true because competent. Virtue reliabilists venture to derive the specific accounts of ability to form true belief and of a belief's being true because competent from general accounts of ability to attain success and of a performance's being successful because competent. Given that this is so and given that the main focus of this chapter are virtue reliabilist accounts of justified belief, in what follows I will take a closer look at what virtue reliabilists have said about the nature of abilities, leaving the discussion of the because relation for the next chapter.
Abilities
It is widely agreed among champions of VR that abilities are agent dispositions.2 More specifically, they are agent dispositions to produce successful performances. For instance, in order to have the ability to hit the target in target archery, you must have the disposition to hit the target.
Since abilities are dispositions, a closer look at dispositions may help illuminate the nature of abilities. First, it is plausible that dispositions are relative to conditions. Take the disposition of water to boil when heated to 100°C. While water has this disposition in certain conditions, i.e. at sea level, it does not have this disposition in other conditions. For instance, it doesn't have it at altitudes below sea level.
Second, dispositions have trigger conditions (T) and manifestation conditions (M). In the case of water's disposition to boil when heated to 100°C, the trigger condition is heating to 100°C and the manifestation condition is boiling.
Third, dispositions correspond to trigger-manifestation conditionals. To say that something, x, has the disposition to M when T is to say that were T to obtain in C, x would (likely enough) exhibit M. For instance, to say that water has the disposition to boil when heated to 100°C at sea level is to say that were water heated to 100°C at sea level, it would (likely enough) boil.
If abilities are dispositions and dispositions have these properties, we may expect that abilities have these properties as well. And this is exactly what we find.
First, abilities are relative to conditions. Your ability to hit the target in ARCH is relative to conditions. You do not have it when drunk beyond comprehension, when strong winds are blowing, etc. Why not? Because you don't have the disposition to hit the target in those conditions.
Second, abilities have trigger and manifestation conditions. According to Sosa, for instance, the trigger conditions for abilities are tryings and the manifestation conditions successes (Sosa 2015: 96). In the case of your ability to hit the target, the trigger conditions is trying to hit the target and the manifestation condition is hitting the target.
Third, abilities correspond to trigger-manifestation conditionals. Your ability to hit the target in conditions C (sufficiently sober, not too strong winds, etc.) corresponds to the conditional: if you were to try to hit the target in C, you would (likely enough) succeed.3
It may be worth noting that the trigger-manifestation conditionals effectively impose a reliability condition on abilities. Abilities are, by nature, reliably connected to the relevant successes in the sense at is specified by the trigger-manifestation conditional.
Improvements on PR
Besides the fact that VR can rationalise PR's key reliability condition on justified belief, the view can improve on PR in the sense that it avoids some of the problems PR encounters. In particular, as I am about to argue, there is reason to believe that it can avoid the problem of world-bound reliability and solve the new evil demon problem.
The Problem of World-Bound Reliability Revisited
To see how VR can solve the problem of world-bound reliability, note that what matters to justification according to VR is not the reliability of a process type at a set of worlds, but the reliability of an agent in a particular set of conditions. In the case in which you are one of a few inhabitants of a remote island on which there are no jack-o'-lanterns, your belief that the mushroom you are holding is edible will be justified according to VR. After all, you have a highly reliable disposition to form true beliefs about edible mushrooms in your conditions. Were you to form a belief that a mushroom with a certain look is edible in your conditions, your belief would very likely be true. In the converse case in which jack-o'lanterns exist nowhere except on the island you inhabit, your belief is unjustified. After all, you do not have a reliable disposition to produce true beliefs about edible mushrooms in your conditions. It is not the case that were you to form a belief that a mushroom with a certain look is edible in your conditions, your belief would very likely be true. Agent and condition relativity appear to give VR an important advantage here. We thus have some reason to believe that VR is on the right track.
The New Evil Demon Problem
Another front on which VR may hope to make progress is the new evil demon problem. At the very least it can do so given the additional assumption that one can exercise an ability even when one is not in suitable conditions. Fortunately, this assumption is independently plausible. Suppose you take a shot in ARCH. While on its way to the target, an earthquake strikes and your shot remains unsuccessful. Here you are not in conditions suitable for your ability to hit the target. Even so, it would seem that you did exercise your ability to hit the target and that you produced a competent shot. Given that this is so, champions of VR are well positioned to offer a promising solution to the new evil demon problem. What happens when you fall in the hands of the mad scientist is that you are moved to unsuitable conditions for your epistemic abilities. Just as it is plausible that moving you to unsuitable conditions does not prevent you from exercising your ability to hit the target in the archery case, here too it is plausible that this move does not prevent you from exercising your epistemic abilities. If so, you continue forming beliefs via the same epistemic abilities as before. In this way, your beliefs continue to be competent. The new evil demon problem can be solved.
Remaining Problems
Clairvoyants and the Generality Problem
When I first introduced PR, I mentioned four problems the view encounters. We have now seen that VR compares favourably with PR in that it promises to avoid at least two of these problems. What about the other ones? Here it is much less clear that VR can do the trick. Concerning the problem clairvoyant cases pose for PR, it is easy to see that it arises for VR just as well. After all, in Clairvoyant, once you have been exposed to radiation, you not only acquire a belief-forming process that delivers true beliefs about distant places reliably, but you also acquire a very reliable agent disposition to form such true beliefs. As a result, there is reason to believe that VR, just like PR before, also predicts that the beliefs of agents in Clairvoyant and similar cases come out justified. The problem still stands.
The same goes for the generality problem. Recall that PR must tell a story as to which of the indefinite number of process types instantiated by token processes are the ones at issue in PR. For instance, the token process that produced your belief that you are currently reading this book instantiates a variety of different process types, including cognitive process, belief-forming process, perceptual belief-forming process, visual belief-forming process, etc. Now, it might be thought that since VR abandons process types in favour of agent abilities, the generality problem does not arise for VR. On second thought, however, this is too quick. After all, agent abilities are taken to be agent dispositions and dispositions are relative to conditions. But now notice that there are indefinitely many ways of individuating the conditions to which a given disposition is relative. For instance, in the case of your belief that you are reading this book, the conditions may or may not include that it is a Thursday, that the object seen is obstructed by a solid object, etc. It is easy to see that whether or not you have the disposition to form true beliefs about whether you are reading a book will vary depending on how these conditions are individuated. Unless it is specified how the conditions to which VR's key dispositions are relative are individuated, it would seem that VR simply does not make determinate predictions about whether or not individual beliefs are competent and hence justified. In order to work as an account of justified belief at all, VR must be supplemented with an account that specifies how these conditions are to be individuated. In this way, a version of generality problem also arises for VR.
Abilities without Agent Dispositions
The clairvoyant and generality problems arise equally for both PR and VR. As a result, while these are genuine problems for VR, the view does at least not lose ground compared to PR. Unfortunately, there is at least one problem for VR that does not equally endanger PR. To see how it arises, notice that an agent may have different ways of producing performances at his disposal. To keep things simple, let's say he has two such ways. For instance, you may produce shots in ARCH with your left hand or with your right hand. Now, it may well be that a given agent who has two ways of producing performances of a certain kind at his disposal is disposed to perform successfully when producing performances of that kind in a certain set of conditions in one way but not the other. Call the former 'the good way' and the latter 'the bad way'. You may be disposed to hit the target when shooting with your right hand, but not when shooting with your left hand. Suppose, finally, that the agent is disposed to produce performances of said kind in the bad way. His dominant way of producing performances is the bad way. You took a sacred vow never to shoot with your right again. However, you still love practising archery. That's why you have taken to shooting with your left hand.
In this situation, there is a clear sense in which the agent is not disposed to perform successfully. According to the standard virtue reliabilist account of abilities, the agent does not have the relevant ability. For instance, you do not have the ability to hit the target in ARCH. After all, since you sacredly vowed never to shoot with your right again, if you were to produce a shot, you would produce a shot with your left. Since there are no conditions relative to which producing a shot with your left makes success highly likely, the trigger-manifestation conditional that corresponds to the ability to hit the target is false of you no matter what conditions you may be in. As a result, you do not have the ability to hit the target.
Crucially, this appears to be the wrong result. The mere fact that an agent is disposed to produce performances of a certain kind in a bad way does not entail that the agent no longer has the ability to produce successful performances of that kind, at least not so long as he still has the good way at his disposal. A vow never to shoot with your right again does not make your ability to hit the target when shooting with your right disappear. Given that this is so, it may look as though something is amiss with the standard virtue reliabilist account of abilities as agent dispositions.4
A New Framework
According to VR, justified belief is competent belief, where the notion of competent belief is unpacked in terms of the notion of the exercise of an epistemic ability, that is, an ability to form true beliefs. We have seen that VR compares favourably with its main reliabilist competitor, PR, in a number of respects. VR embeds the reliabilist account of belief in a general theory of performance normativity, thereby rationalising the key reliabilist idea. It also avoids a couple of important problems that PR encounters, to wit, the problem of world bound reliability and the new evil demon problem. At the same time, we also saw that a couple of PR's problems could not be immediately resolved by opting for VR and that VR scores worse than PR on at least one count.
In what follows, I will develop a novel version of VR that improves both on PR and on extant versions of VR. More specifically, I will develop a detailed account of a kind of competent performance that takes on board insights from both sides. I will then apply this general account to the case of belief and derive a detailed virtue reliabilist account of justified belief. Finally, I will argue that this account can either solve or defuse the remaining problems of process reliabilism I introduced in the last chapter.5
Simple Goal-Directed Practices
Let's start with a framework for simple goal-directed practices (henceforth 'SGPs'). For a practice to be goal-directed is for it to have a success condition, a condition under which the practice's goal is attained.
One very simple kind of goal-directed practice involves two types of particular, targets and moves, and a designated property. The success condition of this kind of practice can be defined as obtaining if and only if a move has the designated property. In ARCH, for instance, the target is a disc with a set surface area, moves are shots taken from a set distance, and the designated property is the property of hitting the target. A success in ARCH is a shot that hits the target.
Practitioners of SGPs are move-producers. They may attain success in a given SGP. They do so if and only if they produce a move that has the designated property. Practitioners of ARCH are shot-producers. A practitioner of ARCH attains a success in ARCH if and only if he produces a shot that hits the target.
Abilities
Practitioners of SGPs may have the ability to attain success in a given SGP. You, the reigning world champion in ARCH, have the ability to hit the target, while I, a blind man, don't. Let's take a closer look at these abilities (henceforth 'SGP abilities').
I agree with the general account of abilities offered by extant versions of VR that abilities, including SGP abilities, involve dispositions and that, as a result, they are relative to conditions, have trigger and manifestation conditions, and correspond to trigger-manifestation conditionals.
Crucially, I want to suggest that what the problem of abilities without agent dispositions from the last section shows is that the general account of abilities that champions of VR have offered is too coarsegrained. What we need is something more fine-grained. My proposal is to relativise abilities to ways of producing performances, or, for SGP abilities, to ways of move production. In this way, my account of abilities differs from the ones provided by other champions of VR.
Once we relativise SGP abilities in this way, we can allow that some ways of producing performances constitute abilities to succeed, while others don't. As a result, agents may have abilities to attain a certain kind of success, while not being disposed to exercise them. In fact, they may be disposed to use ways of move production that do not qualify as abilities. In that case, agents will not be disposed to attain the relevant kind of success, even though they do have the ability to do so. In the toy case I used to illustrate the problem, this is exactly the situation you find yourself in after you have taken the vow never to shoot with your right again. Here you have the ability to hit the target: you have a way of producing shots, i.e. with your right, that disposes you to produce successful shots at least in suitable conditions. As a result, this way of shooting constitutes an ability to hit the target. However, thanks to your vow, you are no longer disposed to exercise this ability. Since you still love practising archery, you have taken to shooting with your left. Unfortunately, you are a terrible shot with your left: the way in which you now produce shots does not dispose you to hit the target, no matter what conditions you may find yourself in. You are in a situation in which you have the ability to hit the target, i.e. when shooting with your right. At the same time, thanks to your vow and love of archery, you are no longer disposed to hit the target when trying.6
Since SGP abilities are relative to ways of move production, so are the dispositions at issue in them. And, of course, the same applies to the conditions to which the dispositions are relative. Accordingly, my suggestion is that a practitioner's way of move production, W, qualifies as an ability to attain success in a given SGP, S, relative to conditions C only if he is disposed to attain S's success when using W in C. A given way of shooting you may have will qualify as an ability to hit the target in ARCH relative to C only if you are disposed to hit the target when using it in C.
Not every way of move production that disposes one to attain success in a certain SGP and in certain conditions qualifies as an SGP ability. Suppose I am an extravagant archer. The only occasions on which I take a shot at all is when I see a sculpture by my favourite sculptor. When I do, I fire it right up in the air. As it so happens, the only remaining sculpture is located at a shooting range that is manipulated by an army of clandestine helpers who will see to it that all and only shots fired right up in the air hit the target. Currently, I am at this very shooting range. I have noticed the sculpture and have fired arrows straight up into the air. I don't stay in order to verify whether my shots actually hit the target. Why should I? There is no reason for this. However, my shots do hit the target. In fact, in this case I am strongly disposed to hit the target when using my way of shooting in the conditions that obtain at the range where I take these shots.
Does my way of shooting qualify as an SGP ability, if only relative to those conditions? I take it to be clear that the answer to this question is no. Following Ruth Millikan (2000: 61) I would like to suggest that there is a distinction between mere dispositions and genuine abilities. Not all dispositions to attain success qualify as abilities. My disposition to hit the target in the above case is a case in point. As a result, the above picture of SGP abilities as ways of move production that dispose agents to attain success in certain conditions needs refinement.
What makes the difference between a genuine ability and a mere disposition? This question has rarely if ever been taken up by champions of VR. In order to supply this gap, I'd like to take another leaf from Millikan (2000: ch. 4): it is etiology that matters. Here is Millikan's proposal:

In general, the conditions under which any ability will manifest itself are the conditions under which it was historically designed as an ability. These are conditions in which it was learned . . . They are conditions necessary to completing the mechanisms by which past successes were reached by the systems or programs responsible for the abilities.
(Millikan 2000: 61)

Here is a natural way of connecting Millikan's proposal with the picture of SGP abilities sketched above: to qualify as an SGP ability, a way of move production must have led one to successful SGP moves in the conditions in which it was acquired by learning/selected for. If so, since my extravagant way of shooting arrows up in the air did not lead me to hits in the conditions in which I acquired it, it does not qualify as an ability.
Unfortunately, however, this way of connecting Millikan's proposal with the above picture of SGP abilities encounters a problem. As Millikan also acknowledges, abilities can be acquired by coming to know that a way of producing moves works, i.e. by coming to know that a way of move production leads to success in certain conditions (Millikan 2000: 64). The problem is that when one acquires an ability in this way, one need not acquire a new way of move production. Rather, one may simply learn something about an existing way of move production. For instance, suppose that, in the above case, I am told that, at the relevant shooting range, I will hit the target if and only if I fire my shots straight up in the air. I now possess the ability to hit the target at that shooting range. At the same time, I have not acquired a new way of move production. Rather, I learned something about an existing way of move production. The problem is that the way of move production at issue in my SGP ability never led me to success in the conditions in which it was acquired by learning.
Here is a way of addressing this problem. In certain cases, agents acquire an SGP ability by acquiring a new way of move production. In the learning process, the way of move production gets its shape. The process involves interaction with the environment during which the way of move production becomes "tuned" (Millikan 2000: 63) to producing successful SGP moves in the conditions that obtain during the learning process. This is what happened during your training period, after you had first taken up archery. You practised shooting, adjusting your way of performing in the light of past successes, tips from your coach and so on. You underwent a learning process that shaped your way of shooting with the result that using this way of shooting now disposes you to produce hits in the conditions of learning. In this way, the learning process tuned your way of shooting to certain conditions. As a result, you now have the ability to hit targets in ARCH in those conditions. Let us say that, in this kind of case, the agent's way of move production is 'metaphysically grounded'.
In contrast, in the case in which I am told that shooting arrows up in the air will lead to success at the relevant shooting range, I do not acquire a new way of shooting. Rather, I learn something about an existing way of shooting. That said, there is a clear sense in which my new knowledge has the same effect here as your training does. It also tunes my way of move production to producing successful SGP moves in certain conditions. Crucially, the tuning is of a rather different kind. In contrast with the metaphysical kind of tuning we find in your case, here the tuning is epistemic in nature. Accordingly, let us say that, in this kind of case, the agent's way of move production is 'epistemically grounded'.
I want to suggest that in order to qualify as an SGP ability, a way of move production must have been tuned to some conditions, thereby grounding the way of move production, be it metaphysically or epistemically. This grounding condition on abilities enables my account to distinguish between genuine abilities and mere behavioural dispositions.7
I also want to allow that grounded ways of move production can qualify as SGP abilities for SGPs and conditions to which they have not been tuned. Suppose ARCH is practised only in strongly controlled conditions: indoors, under very specific artificial lighting conditions, while completely sober, etc. (henceforth C). Suppose you, the reigning world-champion of ARCH, are trained in C with the result that your way of shooting is tuned to C. Even so, it is hard to deny that you may have the ability to hit targets in ARCH in different conditions (e.g. outdoors, under different lighting conditions, after a beer = C′), at least so long as your way of shooting continues to dispose you to hit targets in ARCH in those conditions. Similarly, even if your ability is tuned specifically to ARCH, there can be no question that you may have the ability to hit targets in certain other SGPs (e.g. in ARCH′ which is just like ARCH except that the target is a square rather than a disc), at least so long as your way of shooting continues to dispose you to hit targets in those SGPs. SGP abilities are thus relative to a range of SGPs and conditions that may differ from the SGP and conditions to which the underlying way of move production had been tuned. What matters is that the way of move production continues to dispose the agent to produce successful moves in the relevant SGPs and/or conditions.
Finally, the SGPs and conditions to which an ability is tuned and the SGPs and conditions relative to which an agent may have an SGP ability may vary from one way of move production to another. One of your ways of move production—shooting with your left hand (W1)—may be tuned to ARCH′, slight intoxication and natural light, while another—shooting with your right (W2)—is tuned to ARCH, sobriety and artificial light. It may also be that W2 disposes you to produce successful moves not only in ARCH but also in ARCH′, not only in artificial light but also in natural light but only when entirely sober. In contrast, W1 may work only for ARCH′ and only in natural light, no matter whether slightly intoxicated or entirely sober. Further extensions and other combinations are of course possible.
With these points in play, I would like to propose the following general account of SGP abilities:

SGP Ability, General. One has an ability to attain success in a range, RS, of SGPs and relative to a range, RC, of conditions if and only if one has a grounded way of move production, W, such that, for any S ∈ RS, there is some C ∈ RC such that using W in C disposes one to attain success in S, and for any C ∈ RC, there is some S ∈ RS such that using W in C disposes one to attain success in S.8

While this offers a fully general account of SGP abilities, it has the disadvantage of being rather complex. At the same time, for present purposes, I rarely need the account in its full generality. For that reason, I will be working with the following slightly simplified version of the account:

SGP Ability. One has an ability to attain success in a range, R, of SGPs and relative to conditions, C, if and only if one has a grounded way of move production, W, such that, for any S ∈ R, using W in C disposes one to attain success in S.

Exercises of Abilities
What does it take to exercise an ability? While virtue reliabilists have developed detailed accounts of ability, they have rarely stopped to consider this question. I would like to supply this lack. In particular, I want to suggest that exercises of SGP abilities are uses of ways of move production involved in SGP abilities. Or, more precisely,

SGP Exercise. One exercises an ability, A, to attain success for a range, R, of SGPs and relative to conditions, C, if and only if one has A and produces a move via the way of move production at issue in A.

It is important to note that placing the agent in conditions relative to which he does not have an SGP ability can have different effects on an agent's performances. Some such conditions will result in preventing an agent from using his way of move production. For instance, being too drunk, distracted, nervous, shoved while releasing the arrow and so on will prevent you from using the way of shooting that qualifies as an SGP ability relative to some (albeit different) conditions. I will henceforth refer to conditions that, when not satisfied, prevent the agent from using his way of move production as conditions of shape (SH). According to SGP Exercise, then, exercising an SGP ability requires that SH be satisfied.
In contrast, other such conditions do not prevent the agent from using his way of move production when not satisfied and so allow him to exercise his ability anyway. Suppose, for instance, that you fire a shot that would have hit the target had it not been for a jokester who destroys the target when the arrow is about to hit it. Even though your shot misses the target, you do get to produce a move via the way of shooting that qualifies as an SGP ability relative to some (albeit different) conditions. I will henceforth refer to conditions that, when not satisfied, do not prevent the agent from using his way of move production as situational conditions (SI). According to SGP Exercise exercising an SGP ability does not require that SI be satisfied.9
Competent Moves
Competent moves in an SGP require the exercise of an SGP ability. When producing a shot in ARCH, your shot will be competent only if it is produced by an ability to hit the target.
To the best of my knowledge, extant versions of VR don't offer further conditions on competent performance, besides being produced by an ability to attain the relevant success. On reflection, there is reason to think that further conditions should be countenanced. A competent move requires more than the exercise of an SGP ability. To see this, let's return to the case in which you are the reigning world champion of ARCH. Suppose that you are currently engaging in ARCHX in which the target changes its position discontinuously, randomly, and rapidly. Let's assume, as is plausible anyway, that you do not have the ability to hit the target in ARCHX. You have no grounded way of shooting that disposes you to produce successful moves in ARCHX, no matter what conditions we may place you in. Suppose you take a shot using a grounded way of move production that disposes you to hit the target in a range R of SGPs and relative to conditions C. Here you exercise your SGP ability to hit the targets in range R and relative to C. However, that does not make your shot competent. The ability you exercise is the wrong ability for the SGP you are engaging in. For a move to be competent, it must be a move in an SGP, S, that is within the range R for which your way of move production qualifies as an ability.10 Contrast the situation described above with one in which you engage in an SGP that, we may assume, is within the range, R, of your SGP ability, but in which a jokester prevents the shot from being successful. Here you not only exercise an ability to hit the target, your shot is also competent.
There is thus reason to believe that, in order to produce a competent move in a given SGP, the SGP must be within the range (of SGPs) of the SGP ability exercised. The above considerations thus motivate the following account of competent moves:

Competent SGP Moves. A move in a given SGP, S, is competent if and only if it is produced by an exercise of an SGP ability to attain success in a range, R, of SGPs and relative to conditions, C, such that S ∈ R.

A Different Virtue Reliabilism
The View
With the general account of competent moves in SGPs in play, I will now move on to the application to the case of belief. To begin with, I would like to suggest that a relevant fragment of a key epistemic practice—viz. inquiry into specific whether questions (henceforth simply 'inquiry')—can be understood as an SGP. Or, to be more precise, it can be understood as a collection of SGPs, one for each question.
More specifically, my suggestion is that the targets of inquiry are true answers. For instance, the target of an inquiry into whether p is the true member of the set including the proposition that p and the proposition that not-p. Moves in inquiry are beliefs. For instance, believing p constitutes a move in an inquiry into whether p, as does believing not-p. The designated property in inquiry is truth.11 For instance, a belief that p has the designated property if and only if p is true. It is easy to see that this gives us the standard virtue reliabilist account of successful belief according to which a belief is successful if and only if true.
With the account of successful belief in play, we can now apply the above accounts of SGP abilities, their exercises and competent moves to the case of belief. This gives us:

Epistemic Ability. One has an ability to form true beliefs about propositions in a range, R, and relative to conditions, C, if and only if one has a grounded way of belief formation, W, such that, for any p ∈ R, using W in C disposes one to form true beliefs that p.
Exercises of Epistemic Abilities. One exercises an ability, A, to form true beliefs about propositions in range R and relative to conditions C if and only if one has A and forms a belief via the way of belief formation at issue in A.
Competent Belief. One competently believes that p if and only if one's belief that p is formed by an exercise of an ability to form true beliefs about propositions in range R and relative to conditions C such that p ∈ R.

Recall that, according to extant virtue reliabilist accounts of justified belief, a belief is justified if and only if competent. I would like to adopt this account of justified belief as competent belief. In conjunction with Competent Belief, it entails the following detailed account of justified belief:

VR-JB*. One justifiably believes that p if and only if competently believes that p.

It is important to keep in mind that, while VR-JB* does not explicitly feature a reliable process condition, it is implicitly present in it. After all, the notions of ability and their exercise at issue in the right-hand side of VR-JB* are analysed in terms of Exercise of Epistemic Ability and Epistemic Ability. And, according to Epistemic Ability, epistemic abilities require reliable ways of belief formation. Since VR-JB* does feature a reliable process condition on justified belief, the question as to whether VR-JB* succumbs to the classical problems of PR remains. This question will be taken up in the remainder of this chapter.
The Problems for Process Reliabilism Revisited
Recall that PR encounters at least four problems: the new evil demon problem, the problem of clairvoyant cases, the generality problem and the problem of world-bound reliability. I have already shown how virtue reliabilism can avoid the problem of world-bound reliability and the new evil demon problem. Since the present version of virtue reliabilism has little to add on this front, I will not return to these problems. Rather, I will restrict my focus on the remaining two problems for PR, starting with the problem of clairvoyant cases.
Clairvoyant Cases
Let's move on to clairvoyant cases. Recall that, in our toy case, Clairvoyant, you come to be gifted with a 'clairvoyance' belief-forming process that produces true beliefs about distant events with a high degree of reliability. Even so, the beliefs you go on to form via this clairvoyance process are intuitively not justified.
