The key to VR-JB*'s account of clairvoyant cases is the grounding condition on abilities. In particular, I want to suggest that even though your clairvoyant process produces true beliefs with a high degree of reliability, it is not grounded. After all, it is not the case that you underwent a learning process involving interaction with the environment during which your clairvoyant process was tuned to producing true belief in the conditions that obtained during the learning process. This means that your clairvoyant process is not metaphysically grounded. Moreover, you also do not have any evidence that your clairvoyant process works and so it is not epistemically grounded either. Since your clairvoyant process is neither metaphysically nor epistemically grounded, it does not satisfy the grounding requirement on abilities. In consequence, it does not qualify as an ability to form true beliefs about any range of propositions. Since you cannot exercise an ability you do not have, you do not form your clairvoyance beliefs via the exercise of an ability to form true beliefs. By VR-JB*, your clairvoyance beliefs are not justified.12
The Generality Problem
Recall that the generality problem for PR arises from the fact that every token process instantiates indefinitely many types. Many of these process types have different degrees of reliability, some differ rather dramatically in the degree of reliability they achieve. Unless it is specified which process types exactly are the ones at issue in PR, PR simply does not make determinate predictions about whether or not individual beliefs are justified.
I'd like to flag that I do not mean to offer a head-on solution to the generality problem here. Rather, my strategy will be to try and defuse it.
A large step in the direction of defusing the generality problem has already been made in Comesaña (2006) and Bishop (2010). Comesaña and Bishop both argue, convincingly to my mind, that the generality problem is a problem that affects not just process reliabilism but all theories of justified belief. If so, the generality problem is a general epistemological problem, rather than a problem for process reliabilism in particular.
In addition, I will now argue that the generality problem is a problem in the general theory of performance normativity as it is a problem that arises for competent SGP moves in general. This is good news especially for VR-JB*. After all, if the generality problem arises already in the general theory of performance normativity, it will not be a specifically epistemological problem. As far as VR-JB* is concerned, then, the generality problem is not only a problem that every theory of justified belief encounters but also a problem that finds its proper home in the general theory of performance normativity. What's more, I will provide reason to believe that, as a problem in the general theory of performance normativity, it is not particularly worrisome in the first place.
To begin with, let's take a look at how the generality problem arises for VR-JB*'s account of justified belief as competent belief: According to VR-JB* competent beliefs require exercises of abilities to form true beliefs and exercises of abilities to form true beliefs require uses of ways of belief formation. More specifically, they require uses of tokens of types of ways of belief formation. But, of course, each such token instantiates indefinitely many types. For instance, my belief that I am sitting at my desk is produced by a token way of belief formation that instantiates the types cognitive process, belief-forming process, etc. To make determinate predictions about whether a given belief is competent, we need a specification of which of these types is the one at issue in VR-JB*'s account of competent belief. This is the generality problem as it arises for VR-JB*.
It is now fairly easy to see that the generality problem arises for competent SGP moves in general. To see this notice that competent SGP moves in general require exercises of abilities and exercises of abilities require uses of ways of move production. More specifically, they require uses of tokens of types of ways of move production. But, of course, each such token instantiates indefinitely many types. Consider, once more, a case in which you take a shot at a target in ARCH. Your token way of shooting instantiates all of the following types: shooting, shooting with a bow, shooting with arrows of make M, etc. To make determinate predictions about whether a given shot is competent, then, we need a specification of which of these types is the one at issue in the general account of competent performance.
In this way, it comes to light that the generality problem arises for competent performances in general. The generality problem, insofar as it arises for VR-JB*, is a problem in the general theory of performance normativity rather than a problem that affects VR-JB*'s account of justified belief in particular.
Finally, the generality problem as it arises for competent performances in general is not particularly worrisome. To see this, notice first that we typically have no special difficulties in discerning agents who have certain abilities and agents who do not have them. For instance, it's not difficult to distinguish agents who have the ability to hit the target in ARCH from those who don't. The same goes, once again, for the epistemic case. It is not too difficult to find out who has the ability to recognise apples, BMWs or Picassos and who doesn't. Crucially, we can do so without being able to offer a precise account of how the process at issue in the ability is typed. For instance, we can discover that you have the ability to hit the target in ARCH without being able to pinpoint the exact process type at issue in your ability. And the same goes for your ability to recognise apples.
As a result, VR-JB* can defuse the generality problem. According to VR-JB, justified belief does require reliable belief-forming processes of sorts. However, it does so because justified beliefs are beliefs produced by epistemic abilities and epistemic abilities involve reliable belief-forming processes. Since we can identify abilities, including epistemic ones, without being able offer a general account of how the process at issue in the ability is typed, we do not need a solution to the generality problem in order to have a workable version of VR-JB.
Conclusion
This chapter has taken a closer look at virtue reliabilist accounts of justified belief. VR derives its accounts of both justified belief and knowledge from an application of a general account of the normativity of performances with an aim. According to this account, any performance with an aim can be evaluated in terms of success, competence and achievement. Champions of VR argue that beliefs are performances with an aim. More specifically, beliefs are performances that aim at truth. VR identifies justified belief with competent belief.
Standard versions of virtue reliabilism take abilities to be reliable agent dispositions. As a result, VR's account of justified belief can be seen as a close rival to process reliabilism. Unsurprisingly, VR can retain the benefits of process reliabilism. At the same time, I also argued that already standard versions of VR improve on PR in a number of ways. Some central problems that process reliabilism encounters can be solved by VR, including the new evil demon problem and the problem that arises from evaluating reliability of processes relative to worlds.
However, not all problems that process reliabilism encounters could be addressed in this way. In particular, we saw that the problem posed by clairvoyant cases and the generality problem remain unsolved. Moreover, standard versions of VR have some problems of their own: agent dispositions appear to be too coarse-grained for a workable account of abilities. In view of this, this chapter has introduced a novel version of VR. This version makes significant concessions in the direction of its process reliabilist competitor in that it grants that abilities in general are relative to ways of performing. As a result, the kinds of epistemic ability required for justified belief are relative to ways of belief formation. In addition, the account improves on standard versions of VR in that it offers detailed accounts not only of abilities but also of the exercise of ability and of competent performance. Moreover, I have argued for a grounding condition on abilities, which eventually serves to resolve the problem of clairvoyant cases, and have shown that this version of VR can defuse the generality problem.
In this way, this chapter has developed a virtue reliabilist account of justified belief that carries considerable promise. The next chapter will move on to virtue reliabilist accounts of knowledge.
Notes
1 I take this example from Sosa (e.g. 2007, 2015).
2 See e.g. Sosa (2010), Greco (2010), Kelp (2011b, 2013), Pritchard (2012a), and Turri (2016).
3 My presentation of VR's account of abilities follows (Sosa 2015). Other champions of VR have offered slightly different accounts. Greco, for instance, holds that to have an ability to attain S in certain conditions, C, one must be such that one attains S with a high-rate success across nearby possible worlds at which C obtain (Greco 2010: 77). However, these differences are of little consequence for present purposes.
4 Could a champion of VR maintain that the disposition is simply masked by the vow here? Perhaps. That said, there is reason to think that masking will not solve all the problems for VR. For instance, it looks as though it is possible to have two abilities to attain a certain kind of success. For instance, you may have the ability to hit the target with your left and with your right. At the same time, it would seem that one ability may be stronger than the other. Even though you have the ability to hit the target with your left and with your right, you are a better shot with your right. Now, strength of ability very plausibly supervenes on the strength of the trigger-manifestation conditional associated with them, at least provided that all else is equal. In the archery case, all else equal, your ability to hit the target with your right is stronger if the probability of hitting the target conditional on taking a shot with your right is higher than with your left. It is not clear how this could be if abilities were agent dispositions such that trigger conditions are tryings. After all, you will be trying whether you are taking a shot with your right or with your left. On the standard virtue reliabilist picture, then, you can have at most one ability with one degree of strength. How strong the ability will be will depend at least in part on how you are disposed to try. For instance, in the aforementioned case, you have only one ability to hit the target and how strong it is will depend on whether you are disposed to take shots with your left and your right. Again, this seems to be the wrong result. What is going on here is that you have two abilities to hit the target, one with your left and another with your right, such that one is stronger than the other. That's how you differ from a less skilled archer who only has one ability—with his left, say—but is as likely to hit the target upon trying as you are once your dispositions to take shots with, respectively, your left and your right are factored in.
5 I'd like to emphasise that I am indebted to extant work on VR in the literature. In particular, the account I am about to develop builds very much on Sosa's work on the issue. That said, my account also departs from and adds further detail to other virtue reliabilist views in the literature, including Sosa's.
6 We can also allow that one agent has two abilities to attain a certain kind of success in virtue of having two ways of producing performances that dispose them to do so. Moreover, one of these abilities may well be stronger than the other for instance, in virtue of the associated trigger-manifestation conditional being stronger. Again, this is exactly the situation you find yourself in when, even though you are disposed to hit the target no matter whether you take a shot with your left or your right, you are more likely to hit it when taking a shot with your right than with your left (see en.18 above).
7 It may be worth pointing out that, contrary to what Millikan suggests, these conditions need not be the condition in which the ability was acquired by learning. To see this, suppose I, the extravagant archer, am not at the shooting range when I am told that shooting arrows up in the air will produce successful shots there. I have now acquired the ability to hit the target at that range. Evidently, in this case, the way of move production does not dispose me to produce successful moves in the conditions in which it was acquired (i.e. my present conditions). However, my way of move production disposes me to produce successful moves in the conditions for which it was acquired (i.e. the relevant shooting range).
8 One might wonder whether it is really the case that all abilities must be grounded in this way. After all, couldn't there be innate abilities that are genuine abilities even though they don't have a history of success? There are a number of responses available to champions of this view. First, what is on offer here is an account of a specific type of ability, to wit, SGP ability. Accordingly, it is compatible with this view that some abilities are not grounded. Second, those who think that the grounding requirement on abilities generalises and that, as a result, there are no innate abilities can use the distinction between dispositions to succeed and abilities to explain how we might be misled to believe that there are innate abilities. What does exist are innate dispositions to succeed. Those who think that there are innate abilities mistake innate dispositions to succeed for innate abilities.
9 The distinction between conditions of shape and situation can also be found in Sosa's work and Greco countenances a similar distinction. However, both Sosa and Greco introduce the distinction by paradigmatic examples rather than offering a more explicit characterisation like the one above.
10 An even clearer example may be the following: suppose you have a grounded way W of producing layups in basketball that qualifies as an ability to score relative to some C. Currently, you are standing at the midcourt line and have two seconds to score a basket to win the game. Suppose you produce a shot via W, which, of course, doesn't even get close to the basket. By the relevant instance of SGP Exercise, you exercise an ability to score. However, your shot is not competent. The shot you are taking is not within the range of the ability you exercise.
11 Alternatively, we could take the designated property to be knowledge. I will explore the prospects of this alternative and the corresponding knowledge first version of VR in Chapter 4.
12 I'd like to add two quick points. First, it is easy to see that the grounding condition will also deal with the cases of the alien cogniser and of Norbert, which caused trouble for variations of PR in the previous chapter. While I will leave it to the reader to work out the details, the key here is that the alien cogniser's process is plausibly grounded and so may qualify as an epistemic ability, whereas Norbert's process isn't grounded. Second, note that a knowledge first version of VR will have an even better explanation of clairvoyant cases. Even if one is tempted to say that, in the above case, you do have an ability to form true beliefs about distant events, it is hard to deny that you don't have an ability to know things about distant events. After all, while your way of belief formation does dispose you to acquire true beliefs here, it does not dispose you to acquire knowledge. Without a disposition to acquire knowledge, however, you simply cannot have an ability to know. Given that, on a knowledge first version of VR, a belief is justified only if it is produced by an ability to know, clairvoyant beliefs will not be justified. In this way, adopting a knowledge first version of VR may serve to strengthen the argument here.









3   Virtue Reliabilism
Knowledge
The Because Relation
With the virtue reliabilist account of justified belief in play, let's move on to the account of knowledge. We already know that beliefs are taken to be performances with an aim. As a result, the general framework for performance normativity can be applied to the case of belief. Beliefs can be assessed as successful, competent and apt. Given that beliefs aim at truth, they are successful if and only if true. In addition, the previous chapter has provided a detailed account of a type of competent performance as well as of competent belief in particular. I also followed virtue reliabilists in identifying justified belief with competent belief, thus offering a detailed account of justified belief.
This leaves aptness. A belief is apt if and only if it is successful because competent. Virtue reliabilists identify apt belief with knowledge. In other words,

VR-K. One knows that p if and only if one aptly believes that p.

Gettier cases, that is, cases of justified true beliefs that fall short of knowledge, constitute one of the most pressing problems for any account of knowledge such as VR-K. As a first observation, note that it is possible for a belief to be successful and competent without being apt. Given VR's identification of true belief with successful belief, justified belief with competent belief and knowledge with apt belief, this means that it is possible for a belief to be true and justified without qualifying as knowledge. VR thus leaves room for Gettier cases.
Of course, to provide a solution to the Gettier problem will require champions of VR to show not only that there is room for Gettier cases but also that Gettier cases are indeed a subset of cases of successful and competent but inapt belief. Moreover, a fully-fledged such solution will also be borne out by detailed accounts of the key notions of successful, competent, and apt belief. Since the last chapter has provided detailed accounts of successful and competent belief, in order to provide the kind of solution to the Gettier problem we are after, what remains to be done is to unpack the because relation at issue in apt belief. There are two leading proposals in the literature. One, most prominently championed Greco, analyses the because relation in terms of explanatory salience, the other, most prominently associated with Sosa, in terms of the manifestation of an ability. In what follows, I will look at them in turn and outline how they venture to deal with the Gettier problem, starting with Greco's account.
Explanatory Salience VR
Greco's core idea is that achievements are successes that are explained by the exercise of ability. For instance, your hit in ARCH is apt if and only if the exercise of your arching ability explains why your shot hit the target. In order to develop the core idea in more detail, Greco appeals to an account of the pragmatics of causal explanations. Greco points out that, typically at least, in causal explanations we only give part of the full causal explanation of a given fact. For instance, we may explain the fact that you hit the target in terms of your ability. However, a complete causal explanation will include further facts—such as facts about the quality of the bow and arrow, the winds, etc. According to Greco, causal explanations cite "important or salient parts of the causal story" (Greco 2010: 74). Whether part of a causal explanation is important or salient depends at least in part on the interests and purposes of those who offer the causal explanation. In fact, what is salient may vary with interests and purposes of those giving the causal explanation. For instance, while in the context of a discussion among fans, your arching abilities will typically be salient, in the context of a discussion among equipment developers, the salience may lie with the superior quality of your equipment. Most importantly for present purposes, whether part of a causal explanation is important or salient depends also, again at least in part, on what is normal. More specifically, when something abnormal happens in the causal chain leading from exercise of ability to success, it tends to become important and salient. Abnormalities are salience magnets, as it were.
To see how Greco's account deals with Gettier cases, consider first a non-epistemic analogue of a Gettier case. You take a shot in ARCH, which is first brought off its trajectory by a gust of wind and then brought back on target through my helpful intervention with a wind machine. Crucially, something abnormal happens in the causal chain from exercise of arching ability to successful shot. An abnormal gust of wind interferes and success is only obtained because of another abnormal event: my helpful intervention. This abnormality functions as a salience magnet, with the result that your success is to be explained in terms of the gust of wind rather than your arching ability. Your shot, even if successful and competent, turns out not to be apt.
The story for Gettier cases is in essence the same. You attain a true belief and do so via the exercise of an ability to form true beliefs such that the target belief is in the range of the ability. In Stopped Clock, for instance, you acquire a true belief that it is 8:22 and do so through the exercise of an ability to form true beliefs about the time. Crucially, however, something abnormal happens in the causal chain from exercise of ability to true belief. In the case under consideration, the abnormal element is the fact that the clock that you are taking a reading from is stopped and that you are lucky enough to end up with a true belief because it had stopped exactly 12 hours earlier. Accordingly, in Gettier cases, too, the abnormal element functions as a salience magnet. The stopped clock is what's salient in the explanation of why you arrive at a true belief, not your ability to form true beliefs about the time. As a result, your belief, even if successful and competent, is not apt. In this way, Greco's account can explain the absence of knowledge in Gettier cases like Stopped Clock.
The Creditworthiness Dilemma
One prominent problem for VR is the so-called creditworthiness dilemma, which has been developed in some detail by both Jennifer Lackey (2007, 2009) and Duncan Pritchard (2010, 2012a). The core idea here is that VR will manage to successfully predict the absence of knowledge in Gettier cases only on pain of predicting the absence of knowledge in cases where it shouldn't, most prominently in cases of testimonial knowledge. And on the other hand, if the view is unpacked in such a way as to get cases of testimonial knowledge right, it will no longer solve the Gettier problem. Either way, then, VR is bound to get at least one case wrong. The view thus faces a dilemma.
Let's look at this problem in a bit more detail. Consider first the following case:

Landmark. You arrive at the train station in an unfamiliar city and ask the first passer-by how to get to a famous landmark. Your interlocutor is a knowledgeable resident of the city who provides you with impeccable directions and you form the corresponding true beliefs.

Note that, in this case, the testimonial beliefs you acquire qualify as knowledge. Can champions of Greco's explanatory salience account accommodate this datum? There is reason to think that the answer to this question is no. After all, what is salient in the explanation of why you arrive at true beliefs about the location of the landmark are not your abilities. If anything, it is the abilities of your informant that enjoy salience in the explanation of why you get it right about the directions. When we want to explain why you get it right about the location of the landmark, we will appeal to the fact that you talked to a very knowledgeable resident of the city, not to your own abilities. But if your abilities are not salient in the explanation of epistemic success here, by Greco's lights, your belief is not apt and thus falls short of knowledge.
These considerations suggest that if the explanatory salience account can successfully account for the absence of knowledge in Gettier cases, it threatens to make incorrect predictions elsewhere. In particular, it incorrectly predicts the absence of knowledge in standard cases of testimonial belief. Why? The plausible answer is that while abnormalities constitute a kind of salience magnet, other things can constitute such salience magnets as well. In particular, the contribution of the abilities of other agents to a given success can do the job. The problem is that other kinds of salience magnets are entirely compatible with the agent's acquiring knowledge. If so, any account of knowledge that requires the absence of any salience magnet will fail. After all, it is bound to predict absence of knowledge in cases in which a 'knowledge-friendly' salience magnet is present.
But couldn't champions of the explanatory salience account avoid this kind of problem by modifying their account? Recall, for instance, that Greco maintained that a success will be because of ability when ability plays an "important or salient part" in the causal story. So, couldn't salience in causal explanation just be dropped in favour of importance?
To see that this type of response carries some promise, notice that in Landmark, you do exercise some abilities in acquiring your testimonial belief. For instance, you approach a person with your request, not a nonhuman animal or an inanimate object. In addition, you do not ask someone whom you have excellent reason to believe to be unreliable on the matter, such as a small child or a person with severe mental disabilities. You are also sensitive to a range of defeaters. If the testimony had been obviously false or if the testifier had displayed obvious signs of unreliability, you would not have formed the belief (Pritchard 2010: 41). It looks as though these abilities are of some importance in the causal explanation of why your testimonial belief is true. After all, had you not exercised these abilities, it is much less likely that you would have ended up with a true belief. To see this, compare yourself to an agent, me say, who does not discriminate at all between the quality of informants. While I happen to approach an adult human, I would have approached a small child and would have accepted its testimony at face value just the same. The probability of ending up with a true belief is significantly higher for you than it is for me. By the same token, then, the abilities you exercised in the landmark case make some contribution to your arriving at a true testimonial belief.
Given that you exercise some epistemic abilities in the reception of testimony and given that the exercise of these abilities contributes to increasing the probability of success, it might be thought that the explanatory salience account can be rescued by replacing the requirement of salience by a requirement of importance in causal explanation. In order to count as knowing, then, one's abilities must make an important enough contribution to the causal explanation of why one believes truly. In cases of testimony this is the case, even though one's abilities are not salient in the explanation of epistemic success.
Of course, the move from salience to importance will work only if the resulting account continues to predict the absence of knowledge in Get-tier cases. The problem now is that it is far from clear that it will do so. After all, in Gettier cases, too, the agent exercises relevant epistemic abilities, including abilities parallel to those exercised in cases of testimonial knowledge. In Stopped Clock, for instance, you take a reading from a clock, not from a dog or a rock. In addition, you don't take a reading from an obviously unreliable time-measuring device, such as a sun clock in the dark. Moreover, you are sensitive to a range of defeaters. If the clock had displayed a time that is obviously false (e.g. '88:88') or if it had been labelled as being out of order, you would not have formed a belief about the time. What's more, these abilities contribute to the causal explanation of why you get it right in much the same way as in the landmark case. Here, too, the probability of arriving at a true belief is increased by the exercise of ability.
The problem that the explanatory salience account faces, then, is the following: the level of epistemic ability you exercise in the stopped clock case parallels the level of epistemic ability you exercise in the landmark case. Furthermore, the contribution to the causal explanation of why you succeed in the stopped clock case also parallels the contribution in the landmark case. As a result, if, in the landmark case, the contribution is important enough for your epistemic success to count as being because of ability, it is also important enough for your success to count as being because of ability in the stopped clock case. The explanatory salience account, then, secures the right verdicts in the former, but makes the wrong predictions in the latter. On the other hand, if, in the stopped clock case, the contribution is not important enough for your epistemic success to count as being because of ability, it is also not important enough for your success to count as being because of ability in the landmark case. In that case, the explanatory salience account secures the right verdicts in the former, but makes the wrong predictions in the latter. While the explanatory salience account can handle either case, it cannot get both cases right. It thus succumbs to the creditworthiness dilemma.
A General Problem?
A number of critics of VR take the creditworthiness dilemma to constitute a general problem for the view. As I am about to argue, this is a mistake. Not only is there perfectly general reason to think that VR can escape the dilemma, but there is also a version of the view that does successfully do so.
In order to see why VR may be expected to avoid the dilemma, consider first the following widely accepted diagnosis of Gettier cases. The reason why agents in Gettier cases fall short of knowledge is that it is a matter of luck that their beliefs are true (G1). Moreover, as Linda Zagzebski (1994) has pointed out, Gettier cases follow a pattern of two strokes of luck that cancel out each other's effects (G2). In Stopped Clock, for instance, when you acquire a true belief that it is 8:22 by looking at a clock that stopped exactly 12 hours earlier, it is a matter of luck that your belief is true (G1). Moreover, your taking a reading from a clock that is in fact stopped constitutes a stroke of bad luck. In contrast, the clock's displaying the correct time anyway (since it had stopped exactly 12 hours earlier) constitutes a stroke of good luck (G2).
Crucially, while these properties are characteristic of Gettier cases, they are not instantiated by cases of testimonial knowledge. For instance, in Landmark, it is not a matter of luck that you end up with true beliefs about the way to the landmark. Nor does the case follow a pattern of two strokes of luck that cancel out each other's effects. In our toy case, it is not as if you ask someone who is out to deceive you or mistakes the landmark you are inquiring about for a different one and then gives you mistaken directions that lead you straight to your desired destination.
Suppose that VR can identify a property of beliefs that are successful and competent but inapt that serves to predict G1 and G2 but is not also present in cases of testimonial knowledge. In that case, there is reason for optimism that VR will be able to avoid the creditworthiness dilemma. After all, VR can identify a structural difference between these cases. If so, there is reason to be hopeful that a proper unpacking of the because relation will bear out this difference with the result that the beliefs of agents in cases of testimonial knowledge come out as apt and the ones of agents in Gettier cases as inapt.
In what circumstances can a belief be successful and competent but still fall short of aptness? Before answering this question, let's ask the more general question in what circumstances a performance can be successful and competent without being apt. For instance, in what circumstances will your shot in ARCH be successful and yet be inapt? One plausible answer is that something must happen that tarnishes the performance. In the archery case, your shot may be deflected, the target may be moved and so on. Performances that are successful and competent but not apt, then, are tarnished performances. But, of course, when the agent's performance is tarnished, the agent suffers a stroke of bad luck. When your shot is deflected by a gust of wind, you are suffering from bad luck. And, naturally, if the agent has bad luck only, the performance will end up unsuccessful. To ensure that the performance turns out to be successful after all, something else must happen that counteracts the bad luck the agent suffered. In this sense, the agent must also enjoy some good luck. In the archery case, your shot must be brought back on target, the target must be moved once more and so on. Cases of performances that are successful and competent without being apt, then, are cases in which the agent is afflicted by two strokes of luck: one is bad and tarnishes the performance, the other one is good and ensures that the performance is successful after all. Moreover, these considerations suggest that successful and competent but inapt performances are performances that are successful despite being tarnished. Since to succeed despite tarnished performance is to succeed by luck, in cases of successful and competent but inapt performance, the agent will be lucky that the performance ends up being successful.
Applied to the epistemic case, cases of successful and competent but inapt performances are cases of beliefs that are successful (true) and competent (justified) without being apt (knowledge). Here, too, the agent's performance will be tarnished. In Stopped Clock, your belief is tarnished by the fact that it was acquired by a reading taken from a stopped clock. When this happens, you suffer a stroke of bad luck. Moreover, to ensure that your belief ends up true after all, the effect of the stroke of bad luck must be cancelled out by a stroke of good luck. In the stopped clock case, the clock's reading is still accurate since the clock had stopped exactly 12 hours earlier. This gives us G2. What's more, given that to succeed despite tarnished performance is to succeed by luck, to end up with a belief that is true despite tarnished is to end up with a belief that is luckily true. In the stopped clock case, you are lucky to arrive at a true belief about the time despite taking a reading from a stopped clock. This gives us G1. In this way, VR can predict the two properties that are widely believed to be characteristic of Gettier cases.
More importantly yet, there is also reason to believe that VR will not thereby get into trouble with standard testimony cases. The reason for this is that the agents' beliefs in these cases are not tarnished. For instance, in Landmark, there is no tarnishing of your belief about the directions to the landmark. True, you rely heavily on your interlocutor for getting it right, but that's not the same as having a tarnished belief. In the case of forming beliefs about the time by taking readings from clocks, you rely heavily on the clock. But that is not to say that your beliefs are ipso facto tarnished. For tarnishing to occur, something else must happen. For instance, taking a reading from a stopped clock will tarnish your belief. The same goes for cases of testimonial cases. The mere fact that you rely heavily on your interlocutor is not enough for tarnishing. Something else must happen, say that your interlocutor lies to you or that he mistakes the landmark you are inquiring after. Crucially, however, nothing of the sort happens in standard cases of testimonial knowledge. By the same token, there is reason to believe that the agents' beliefs in these cases are not tarnished.
What comes to light is that there is a property of successful and competent but inapt beliefs that is present in Gettier cases but not present in standard cases of testimonial knowledge. Moreover, this property serves to predict two features that are widely believed to be essential to Gettier cases, viz. G1 and G2. Given that this is so, the present argument provides reason to think that VR's approach to Gettier cases carries promise independently of any particular account of the because relation. That, of course, is good news. In addition, there is some hope that VR will be able to escape the creditworthiness dilemma. What needs to be done, it would seem, is to offer an account of the because relation that captures the relevant property of successful and competent but inapt beliefs. Fortunately, there exists such an account. It is the ability manifestation account.
Ability Manifestation
According to Sosa, apt performances are successes that manifest the agent's ability. Here is Sosa: "A performance is apt," Sosa tells us, "if and only if its success manifests a complete [ability]."1
'Complete ability' is a technical term here. To see what it means, note first that Sosa distinguishes among the three components of abilities: seat (SE), shape (SH) and situation (SI). The seat is a set of properties of the agent in which the ability resides. Shape and situation correspond roughly to the homonymous conditions in the account of abilities from the previous chapter. Now, Sosa also distinguishes among three corresponding levels of competence: innermost, inner and complete. The innermost ability consists of the seat component of the agent's disposition (SE). The inner ability combines the seat component with the shape component (SE and SH). Finally, the complete ability includes the situational component, besides the seat and the shape components (SE, SH and SI) (Sosa 2015: 95-6).
Since aptness requires the manifestation of a complete ability, a performance will be apt only if the ability's SE, SH and SI are in place. Consider once more your ability to hit the target in ARCH. You have this ability in virtue of having a way of shooting such that when awake, sober, etc. and there is enough light, winds are normal, etc., using this way of shooting would make it likely that you to hit the target. In that case, any shot you fire using the way of shooting will be apt only if you are in fact awake, sober, etc. and there is in fact enough light, winds are normal, etc. When you fire a shot in this way that is deflected by the pull of a magnet, the ability's SI are not in place. As a result, you do not rise to the level of complete ability. Your shot will not qualify as apt, not even if it is successful after all, say because I, the helper with the wind machine, bring it back on target.2 And the same holds, mutatis mutandis, in the epistemic case. Here, too, a belief will be apt only if you rise to the level of complete epistemic ability, that is, only if the relevant ability's SE, SH and SI are in place. To return to our toy case, consider your ability to form true beliefs about the time. You have this ability in virtue of having a way of belief formation such that when awake, sufficiently sober, etc. and there is enough light, the instrument you are using is functioning normally, etc., using this way of belief formation would make it likely that you to form a true belief about the time. Any belief you will form will be apt only if you are in fact awake, sufficiently sober, etc. and there is in fact enough light, the clock you are taking a reading from is in fact functioning normally, etc. When the SE or some SH/SI is not satisfied, you do not rise to the level of complete ability. What's more, your belief will not be apt even if it turns out to be true after all.
But how do we determine whether one's rises to the level of complete ability in a particular case? I want to suggest that the answer is: by investigation trigger-manifestation conditionals. If the relevant trigger-manifestation conditional is true of the agent in the SE, SH and SI that obtain in a particular case, the agent rises to the level of complete ability in that case. When in a particular case, your shot is deflected by a magnet, for instance, the trigger-manifestation conditional for your relevant arching ability is not satisfied. Hence, you do not rise to the level of complete ability in this case. Again, the story is just the same in the epistemic case. In order to determine whether an agent rises to the level of complete epistemic ability in a particular case, we investigate the relevant trigger-manifestation conditional. If the relevant trigger-manifestation conditional is true of the agent in the SE, SH and SI that obtain in a particular case, the agent rises to the level of complete ability in that case.
Now how does this apply to Gettier cases and standard cases of testimonial knowledge? Let's first look at Gettier cases and, in particular, let's return to Stopped Clock, our toy case. When you are taking a reading from a stopped clock, the trigger-manifestation conditional for your ability to form true beliefs about the time is not satisfied. After all, it is not the case that were you to form a belief about the time by taking a reading from a clock in this case, you would likely end up with a true belief. As a result, you do not rise to the level of complete ability here. The ability manifestation account thus delivers the right result for Gettier cases like Stopped Clock.
What about Landmark, then? Here the relevant trigger-manifestation conditional is true of you in the SE, SH and SI that obtain in this case. That is to say, in those SE, SH and SI, if you were to form a belief about the location of the landmark, your belief would likely be true. After all, you are in a normal case of testimony. You are not drunk, confused, etc. and your interlocutor is not out to deceive you, etc. As a result, your true belief plausibly rises to the level of complete ability and so may well qualify as knowledge.3
Note also that the ability manifestation account tallies nicely with the above argument that VR can avoid the creditworthiness dilemma. Recall that we saw that in Gettier cases but not in standard cases of testimonial knowledge the agent's performance is tarnished. At the same time, according to the ability manifestation account, the SI of the relevant ability are satisfied in standard cases of testimonial knowledge but not in Gettier cases with the result that only in the former cases do the agents rise to the level of complete ability. What's going on in Gettier cases, then, is that unfavourable SI compromise the agent's ability. No surprise, then, that the performance produced turns out tarnished.
It comes to light that the ability manifestation account of the because relation does not succumb to the creditworthiness dilemma. By the same token, this problem for VR can be solved.
Ability Manifestation Precisified
I believe that the ability manifestation account of the because relation carries promise. Unsurprisingly, then, I'd like to incorporate a version of it into the framework for SGPs from the previous chapter.
Unfortunately, there is at least one obstacle that needs to be removed first. Recall that, according to Sosa, "A performance is apt if and only if its success manifests a complete [ability]." Moreover, a complete ability requires the presence of the ability's SE, SH and SI conditions. Now, consider a case in which an agent attains a success and rises to the level of complete ability. Is his performance apt? Answering this question is actually a bit tricky. The reason for this is that it is not clear that cases in which performances are both successful and manifest a complete competence are by the same token cases of performances in which the success manifests a complete competence.
The question remains, then, whether more is needed for apt performance than successful performance via complete ability. To answer it, notice that it is quite hard to see how cases of successful performance that manifest a complete ability could still fail to be cases in which the performance is apt. Think, for instance, of an archery case once more. Suppose you are taking a shot in perfect conditions (peak concentration, no winds, etc.) that hits the target. What reason could there possibly be to deny that your shot is apt? I, for one, can't think of any. For that reason, I will take it that cases of performances that are successful and manifest complete abilities are also cases of apt performances.
More specifically, my suggestion is to add the following precise account of aptness, and apt belief, to the normative framework for SGPs I developed in the previous chapter:

SGP Achievement. A move in a given SGP is apt if and only if it is (i) successful, (ii) competent and (iii) the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied.
Apt Belief. One aptly believes that p if and only if one's belief that p is true, competent and the SI of the epistemic ability exercised are satisfied.

It is easy to see that the remainder of the above solution to the creditworthiness dilemma can be adopted by champions of this account of aptness. According to Apt Belief, then, your belief in Landmark is apt because the SI of the epistemic ability exercised are satisfied. In line with the account of SGP abilities from the previous chapter, I want to say that this is because you retain the relevant disposition to form true beliefs in the SI that obtain in this case. And, in line with the above discussion of Sosa, this, in turn, is evidenced by the fact that the trigger-manifestation conditional comes out true in those SI. In contrast, in Stopped Clock, your belief is not apt because the SI are not in place. Again, this is due to the fact that you do not retain the relevant disposition, which, again, is evidenced by the fact that relevant trigger-manifestation conditional doesn't hold in your SI in which you are taking a reading from a stopped clock.
Fake Barn Cases and the Safety Dilemma
Recall that, according to a widely held diagnosis, Gettier cases are cases in which the agent acquires a belief that is luckily true. Moreover, Gettier cases follow a pattern of two strokes of luck cancelling out each other's effects. One reason why VR's account of knowledge looks so promising is that it predicts these properties of Gettier cases.
Let's also briefly recap how VR manages to predict these properties of Gettier cases. Moves that are successful and competent but inapt are tarnished moves. Since the tarnishing constitutes a stroke of bad luck, for the move to end up successful a stroke of good luck is required that counteracts the effects of the stroke of bad luck. That's how VR predicts one characteristic feature of Gettier cases, to wit, the pattern of two strokes of luck cancelling out each other's effects. Moreover, since moves that are successful despite being tarnished are moves that are luckily successful, and since VR takes Gettier cases to be the epistemic incarnation of such moves, VR can predict the other characteristic feature of Gettier cases, to wit, that gettiered beliefs are luckily true.
Fake Barn Cases
Moves that are successful and competent but inapt are tarnished moves. If Gettier cases are the epistemic incarnation of such moves, then Get-tier cases are cases of tarnished moves in inquiry. But is that correct? In particular, are all Gettier cases of tarnished moves in inquiry?
To answer this question, consider first the following cases:

