If we adopt this strategy, the key task will consist in countenancing a type of defeater such that the justification for all and only lottery propositions comes out as defeated. The good news is that, if this strategy turns out to be successful, it will be available to champions of VR as well, at least given that their theory of justified belief is compatible with the relevant account of defeat.
Unfortunately, this strategy has suffered a significant setback. As Douven and Williamson (2006) have recently argued, the prospects of countenancing a defeater of the required type are dim. For an important class of proposals for such a defeater the strategy is bound to fail. More specifically, they have shown that no structural property can make for a defeater of the kind sought after. Roughly, a property of propositions is structural if supervenes only on its truth-functional and probabilistic properties or, in other words, if it can be defined in strictly logical and mathematical terms only. Roughly, the reason why structural properties don't make for the right kind of defeater is that, for any proposition p with probability < 1 and structural property, P, we can run a lottery on p, as it were, by making it a member of a set, Δ, of equiprobable propositions which are jointly inconsistent. Given that CC and NC continue to hold, we can still generate the paradox. If so, the assumption that p has P does precious little to block the lottery paradox. Thus, structural accounts of the defeat property at issue in ST′ are bound to fail.13
What comes to light, then, is that the prospects of getting virtue reliabilism to provide the right kind account, one that explains why lottery propositions aren't even justifiably believable, are dim. This, of course, is not exactly good news for VR.14
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have looked into a number of potential problems for VR. While we saw that the version of the view I proposed in the previous chapter can steer clear of perhaps the most prominent problem for VR in the literature—the creditworthiness dilemma—it does not do equally well with respect to two other problems.
In particular, the view runs into what I labelled the safety dilemma. While there is nothing wrong with VR's treatment of standard Gettier cases, there is another kind of Gettier case that means trouble for VR. This kind of case is most famously exemplified by Fake Barns. In fact, champions of VR themselves acknowledge that their solution to standard Gettier cases does not carry over to fake barns cases. In order to deal with the problem, they incorporate a safety or safety-like condition into their views. Crucially, even though this does indeed enable them to handle fake barn cases, it only gets them into trouble elsewhere. In particular, I have argued that VR will now be too strong. It will mistakenly predict absence of knowledge in a range of cases, including in Frankfurt cases. In this way, champions of VR merely trade one problem for another.
What's more, VR also struggles to offer a satisfactory account of the absence of knowledge in lottery cases. After all, on the face of it, on VR beliefs in lottery propositions come out as apt. While one might try to embrace this result, it turned out that this approach remains unconvincing. Maintaining that beliefs in lottery propositions are successful and competent but not apt fared no better. After all, the lottery paradox calls for a solution according to which lottery propositions are not even justifiably believable for us. If so, any such account is at best redundant. The right thing to say about lottery propositions is that we cannot even justifiably believe them. The difficulty for VR is to secure this result. After all, it is even harder to make a convincing case that beliefs in lottery propositions aren't even competent (harder, that is, than to argue that they are not apt). Moreover, the obvious alternative of exploiting the anti-defeat condition on justification has suffered a significant setback. Champions of VR are thus facing a tough uphill struggle here.
Notes
1 Sosa (2010: 470). While this quote is from an earlier paper, there is every reason to believe that Sosa still subscribes to this view. To see this, note that Sosa still takes aptness to be "success that manifests [ability]" (Sosa 2015: 19). Moreover, he still distinguishes between three levels of ability: innermost, inner and complete (see below). Finally, it is clear from his discussion of cases that the level of ability required for aptness is complete ability. By way of evidence, consider how he analyses the case of the helper (see below): your shot "does not really manifest [ability]. And the reason for this, I suggest, is that the archer does not shoot when in appropriate shape, in an appropriate situation" (Sosa 2015: 103).
2 Sosa (2015: 102-3). The ability manifestation account of the because relation is also accepted by Turri (2011, 2016) and myself (2011a, 2013).
3 It may be worth noting that this solution to the creditworthiness dilemma is not the one Sosa himself has offered.
4 Recent experimental philosophy suggests that folk do not have the intuition of knowledge in Fake Barns (Colaço et al. 2014, see also Turri et al. 2015 which tests different cases with supposedly the same structure (though see en.34 below) and obtains similar results). This is thought to put pressure on philosopher's judgements that the agents in these cases do not know.
Even if these studies are methodologically relevant (pace e.g. Cappelen 2012; Deutsch 2015), I am not convinced that they will serve to rescue traditionalist virtue epistemology. Here are some of the reasons. First, all that is needed to refute traditional virtue epistemology is one counterexample. For all the studies have shown, Fake Diamonds, Visiting Twin or some other case may do the trick even if Fake Barns does not. Second, even if we ran enough empirical studies on such cases to make a good inductive case that, in all of these cases, folk are willing to attribute knowledge, I am unsure that this should move us philosophers to revise our verdicts on these cases. The reason for this is that it is not clear to me why we should prioritise laypeople's judgements on these cases over expert judgements. On the contrary, I am attracted to side with (Devitt 2006, 2011, Hales 2006, Ludwig 2007, Williamson 2007, Grund-mann 2010, Hofmann 2010, Horvath 2010, Kipper 2010, Wright 2010, Jackson 2011, Williamson 2011) that expert judgements should take precedence over laypeople's. After all, this is standard practice in other domains as well. For instance, we'd accord much more weight to the judgements of expert physicists such as Einstein or Feynman on issues physical than to those of laypeople such as my neighbour, the local baker or even Feynman's undergraduate physics students (Hales 2006: 172). In fact, we have little inclination to accord much weight at all to laypeople's judgements in other domains. It is just not clear to me that philosophy should make an exception to this rule.
Suppose I am mistaken about all this. In particular, suppose epistemologists have been mistaken about fake barn cases: agents in those cases do have knowledge. It may be worth noting that even if this turned out to be the case, this is at least not bad news for the kind of knowledge first epistemological version of virtue epistemology I will develop in the next chapter. After all, that view is entirely compatible with there being knowledge in fake barn cases. In fact, nothing about the structure of the view will have to be changed in order to accommodate the existence of knowledge in fake barn cases. In contrast, it is not clear the same goes for traditional versions of virtue epistemology that predict absence of knowledge in fake barn cases. Given that these views do feature a safety or safety-like condition and the beliefs of agents in fake barn cases do not satisfy this condition (see below), it would seem that they need to make structural revisions to their view (i.e. drop the safety or safety-like condition) to accommodate the presence of knowledge in these cases.
Finally, suppose traditionalists can revise their views such that they accommodate the knowledge verdict in fake barn cases. Even so, my view does not stand without motivation. After all, the problem of lottery cases for traditionalist virtue epistemology (see below) and the direct reasons to favour the knowledge first version of virtue epistemology over its traditionalist rivals (Chapter 4) remain.
5 For alternative accounts of this difference see Hetherington (1999) and Pritchard (2008).
6 Or, to be more precise, any case will serve provided that it is successful as a counterexample to safety, a question I will not take up here.
7 Appendix 'The Safety Dilemma' takes a more detailed look at how this dilemma affects the views of perhaps the most prominent champions of VR in the literature, to wit, Sosa, Greco and Pritchard.
8 Recall that in en. 30, I mentioned a study by John Turri et al. which tests further cases with supposedly the same structure as Fake Barns in which folk also have the intuition that the relevant agents know. One issue with this study is that the case tested actually shares the same structure with Frankfurt Clock in that the relevant error possibility is not realised in the environment. This means that there is a structural difference between the case tested in this study and the original fake barns case. As a result, it is not clear whether the study serves to put pressure on the hypothesis that agents in fake barn cases lack knowledge.
9 It is well-known that NMP is popular with knowledge first epistemologists. Crucially, one doesn't need to be a knowledge firster in order to subscribe to NMP. In fact, NMP has received a perfectly compelling independent defence in Douven (2009). Here is a snapshot version of the argument. (Note that Douven himself states the argument in terms of rational belief. However, since the crucial assumptions, (i)-(iv) below, are no less plausible for justified belief than for rational belief, so my adaptation should be unexceptional.)
Douven first offers and motivates a small number of very plausible assumptions about justified belief. Here they are ('JBS(p)' stands for 'S justifiably believes p', 'KS(p)' for 'S knows p', '!' denotes the entailment relation, and CrS is S's degree-of-belief function):

  (i) JBS(p&q) → JBS(p)
 (ii) JBS(p) → CrS(p) > CrS(¬p)
(iii) JBS(p) → CrS(KS(p)) ≥ CrS(¬KS(p))
(iv) "A person [justifiably believes p] only if it does not readily follow strictly on the basis of the assumption of her [justifiably believing p] plus principles (i)-(iii) that her degrees of belief are not probabilities." (2009: 369)

Douven then offers the following argument to show that, given these assumptions, Moorean propositions cannot be justifiably believed:

(1) JBS(p&¬Ks(p)) [Assumption for RAA]
(2) JBS(¬KS(p)) [(1), (i)]
(3) CrS(¬KS(p)) > 0.5 [(2), (ii)]
(4) JBS(p) [(1), (i)]
(5) CrS(KS(p)) ≥ 0.5 [(4), (iii)]

It is easy to see, however, that (3) and (5) jointly entail that S's degrees of belief are not probabilities. It thus follows strictly on the basis of (1) and (i)-(iii) that S's degrees of belief are not probabilities, thus contradicting (iv). (1) is thus inconsistent with (i)-(iv). Since (i)-(iv) are very plausible, (1) must be false. Hence, Moorean propositions cannot be justifiably believed.
10 In fairness to deniers of NC, it should be noted that this argument might turn out dialectically ineffective against those who reject NC. After all, if you are willing to reject NC, you will likely not be too attached to NMP either. At the same time, for the many who do not want to give up NC, it does provide an additional reason for not so doing: they would have to give up a further plausible principle governing justified believability. Thus, even if these considerations do not move foes of NC, I take them to provide some reason to think that NC is not the culprit of the paradox. Of course, if NC is not the culprit, it'll have to be either CC or ST.
11 Notice that, besides receiving support by the plausible MCH-J and NC, MCN is independently plausible. After all, it captures the epistemic force of reductio arguments (Kaplan 1981).
12 To recap, consider once more your belief in Lottery Loser. Your way of belief formation, which takes the probabilistic evidence as input and outputs belief about lottery outcomes, disposes you to form true beliefs about lottery outcomes across a wide range of conditions. Across a wide range of SH and SI, the trigger-manifestation conditional—were you use this way of belief formation to form a belief about the lottery outcome, you would likely enough form a true belief—holds. Moreover, we may assume that your way of belief formation has been shaped through interaction with the environment or else that you know that it is a highly reliable way of forming true beliefs about lottery outcomes. As a result it satisfies the grounding condition on abilities and so qualifies as an ability to form true beliefs about lottery outcomes. It is hard to see how virtue reliabilists could plausibly hope to establish that we do not have the epistemic abilities required for competent belief.
13 Douven and Williamson also argue that their result applies to the most prominent solutions to the lottery paradox that venture to replace ST by ST′, including the ones in Pollock (1995) and Ryan (1996) and Douven's own earlier proposal in Douven (2002).
14 See Appendix 'Lottery Cases' for a more detailed discussion of Sosa's, Greco's and Pritchard's approaches to lottery cases.









4   Knowledge First Virtue Reliabilism
In Chapter 2 I developed a normative framework for simple goal directed practices (SGPs), that is practices featuring a kind of target and kind of move and a designated property. A success in such an SGP is a move that has the designated property. A move is competent if and only if it is produced by an exercise of an ability to attain success and the SGP at issue is in the range of the ability exercised. It is apt if and only if it is successful, competent and the relevant ability's SI are in place.
I also proposed to view inquiry as a simple goal directed practice such that true answers to whether questions are the relevant kind of target, beliefs the relevant kind of moves, and the designated property is truth. A success in inquiry, then, is a true belief. A competent belief is a belief produced by an exercise of an ability to form true beliefs such that the target proposition is in the range of the ability. An apt belief is a belief that is true, competent, and the relevant ability's SI are in place. The standard virtue epistemological identifications of justified belief with competent belief and of knowledge with apt belief deliver substantive accounts of justified belief and knowledge. Importantly, both accounts fall squarely within the purview of traditional epistemology. Both can be viewed as offering reductive analyses in the sense that they provide sets of non-circular necessary and sufficient conditions for, respectively, justified belief and knowledge.
While this account was attractive in that it was able to improve on both process reliabilism and extant versions of virtue reliabilism on a number of counts, Chapter 3 argued that the view still encounters a couple of significant problems. It not only faces the safety dilemma but also runs into difficulties with lottery cases.
The main aim of this chapter is to develop a knowledge first alternative and to argue that it compares favourably with its traditional cousin in that it can avoid these problems. Before getting down to business, however, I'd first like to say a few words on just how I take my account to be knowledge first epistemological.
Knowledge First Epistemology
What is knowledge first epistemology? Its founder, Timothy Williamson, characterises the view in the following passage:

"Knowledge first" is a slogan for epistemology that takes the distinction between knowledge and ignorance as the starting point from which to explain other cognitive matters [W1]. It reverses the direction dominant in much twentieth-century epistemology, which treated belief as explanatorily prior to knowledge, attempting to analyse knowledge as belief that meets further conditions, such as truth and justification [W2]. By contrast, a knowledge first epistemologist might treat believing something as treating it as if one knew it [W3].
(Williamson 2010: 208)

This characterisation of knowledge first epistemology contains three claims, which I have labelled W1, W2 and W3, respectively. Williamson's characterisation already indicates just how ambitious his project is. In fact, it exceeds the boundaries of epistemology, at least as it is traditionally understood. By way of evidence, notice that W1 takes knowledge to be the starting point from which to explain other cognitive matters. Moreover, W3 anticipates one of Williamson's famous theses, to wit, that knowledge is a mental state in its own right and that belief is to be analysed in terms of knowledge. Since accounts of mental states are traditionally taken to fall within the domain of the philosophy of mind and perhaps philosophical psychology, Williamson anticipates that he will go beyond the boundaries of epistemology as it is traditionally understood.
I'd like to flag that I will not follow Williamson in his pursuit of this ambitious project. One reason for this is that I am interested developing a viable virtue reliabilism, one that is better than its traditionalist cousins. Since, for this purpose, the question as to whether knowledge is a state of mind in its own right is by-the-by, Williamson's thesis concerning the philosophy of mind can safely be put to one side.1
At this stage, one might naturally ask the following question: in what sense exactly is my account going to be knowledge first epistemological? The answer is that I do adopt the core epistemological claim of Williamson's characterisation of knowledge first epistemology, that is, the following version of W2:

Knowledge First Epistemology (KF). Knowledge first epistemology reverses the traditional direction of analysis in epistemology: rather than analysing knowledge in terms of justified belief, justified belief is analysed in terms of knowledge. In other words, rather than treating justified belief as explanatorily prior to knowledge, knowledge is taken to have explanatory priority over justified belief.

I submit that KF retains enough of the spirit of Williamson's project to qualify as a knowledge first view. Since it reverses the direction of analysis, it is incompatible at least with the traditional attempt to analyse knowledge in terms of justified belief.2 Since it takes knowledge to enjoy explanatory priority over justified belief, there is an important respect in which knowledge comes first. For that reason, any epistemology that satisfies KF can plausibly be regarded as a knowledge first epistemology.
Knowledge First Virtue Reliabilism
What exactly made the virtue reliabilism of Chapter 3 into a traditionalist version of the view? The answer, I submit, is its account of the designated property proposed for inquiry. Given that the property is truth, a success in inquiry is a true belief. Abilities to attain success are abilities to form true beliefs. Given the virtue reliabilist identification of justified belief with competent belief and knowledge with apt belief, both justified belief and knowledge are thus analysed in terms of abilities to form true beliefs. No surprise, then, that we end up with a traditionalist version of virtue reliabilism.
The first step in my endeavour to develop a knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism is to offer an alternative proposal for the designated property in inquiry. It will come as no great surprise that I want to suggest that the property is knowledge, rather than truth. What we get, then, is the following account of successful belief:

Successful Belief. A belief is successful if and only if it qualifies as knowledge.

What's more, we can apply the accounts of SGP abilities, their exercises, competent belief and apt belief from Chapter 2 to the epistemic case. This gives us first the following accounts of abilities to know and their exercises:

Ability to Know. One has an ability to know propositions in a range, R, and relative to conditions, C, if and only if one has a grounded way of belief formation, W, such that, for any p ∈ R, using W in C disposes one to form beliefs that p that qualify as knowledge (henceforth 'knowledgeable beliefs that p' for short).
Exercises of Abilities to Know. One exercises an ability, A, to know propositions in range R and relative to conditions C if and only if one has A and forms a belief via the way of belief formation at issue in A.
Competent Belief. One competently believes that p if and only if one's belief that p is formed by an exercise of an ability to know propositions in range R and relative to conditions C such that p ∈ R.
Apt Belief. A belief is apt if and only if it is (i) successful, (ii) competent and (iii) the SI of the ability to know exercised are satisfied.

Recall that traditional virtue reliabilism identifies justified belief and knowledge with different normative standings of beliefs as performances. In particular, they identify justified belief with competent belief and knowledge with apt belief. I would like to follow traditional virtue epistemologists on this front. That is to say, I would like to offer the following accounts of justified belief and knowledge:

KFVR-JB. One justifiably believes that p if and only if one competently believes that p.
KFVR-K. One knows that p if and only if one aptly believes that p.3

Let me say a few words to explain these accounts of justified belief and knowledge. They are superficially indistinguishable from their traditionalist rivals. At the same time, once they are properly unpacked, there are substantial differences between the two.
Starting with KFVR-JB, notice that, on my account, competent belief is analysed in terms of abilities to know. While the accounts of abilities to know and their exercises do not figure directly in KFVR-JB they are of crucial importance to it. After all, they contribute to making the core notions in terms of which justified belief is defined more precise. It is easy to see that the resulting version of virtue reliabilism will qualify as a knowledge first version of the view in the sense at issue in KF. After all, justified belief is analysed in terms of abilities to know. Thus, the direction of explanation is from knowledge to justified belief, which is all that KF requires for the view to qualify as a version of knowledge first epistemology.
Let's move on to KFVR-K, then. First, it is of crucial importance to keep in mind that, unlike its traditionalist cousin, KFVR-K does not (and actually could not) offer a reductive analysis of knowledge. The easiest way to appreciate this point is by taking note of the fact that apt belief requires successful belief and successful belief is knowledgeable belief. According to KFVR-K, then, one key condition a belief must satisfy in order to qualify as knowledge is that it qualifies as knowledge. KFVR-K is blatantly circular and thus unfit for the purposes of reductive analysis.
Second, notice that it follows from Successful Belief and KFVR-K that a belief is successful if and only if it is apt. After all, by Successful Belief, a belief is successful if and only if it qualifies as knowledge and, by KFVR-K, a belief qualifies as knowledge if and only if it is apt.
Now, it might be thought that this is a somewhat undesirable result. After all, recall that we noted earlier that aptness, competence and success can come apart in various ways. In particular, recall that a successful move in an SGP need not be competent. And moves that are both successful and competent can still fall short of aptness. Recall also that both of these points are nicely illustrated by the case of ARCH. When you take a shot in ARCH while completely drunk, your shot is not competent. Even so, it may be that, by an incredible stroke of luck, your shot hits the target anyway. Your shot is successful without being competent. Alternatively, when you take a shot at a shooting range that is sabotaged by a magnet, your shot even if competent will not be taken in hospitable SI and so will not be apt. This is so even when your shot is brought back on target by a helper with a wind machine and so ends up successful after all. Your move is both successful and competent and yet falls short of aptness. If it turns out that, in the case of inquiry, a move is successful if and only if it is apt, it may appear as though inquiry is a bit of an oddball among SGPs. And that, in turn, may make us suspicious that something is wrong with either Successful Belief or KFVR-K, which jointly deliver this result.
Fortunately, on reflection, there is little cause for concern after all. While it is true that there are SGPs such that aptness, success and competence come apart in this way, things are different for other SGPs. Consider the practice of joining consenting adults in lawful marriage (henceforth LM). LM can be understood as an SGP. Targets here are couples of consenting adults, moves are tokens of ceremonies of a certain type, call it c, and the designated property is the property of effecting the lawful marriage of the couple. A success in LM is a token of c that effects the lawful marriage of the target couple. (The definitions of LM ability, exercise thereof, competent move and apt move are as expected.)
Crucially, there is reason to believe that one joins partners in lawful marriage only if one competently conducts a token of c. To see this, suppose you, the master of ceremony, fail to competently conduct a token of c. This may be for two reasons. You may fail to conduct a token of c altogether, say because you are too drunk and so do not manage to say enough of the relevant words. Or else the SGP may not be in the range of c, say because one of the partners is under age and so a different kind of ceremony is needed. In either case, the couple will not end up lawfully married. Since joining the couple in lawful marriage is the success condition of LM, this means that the success of LM will not be attained. If so, there is reason to believe that a move in LM will be successful only if competent.
What's more, there is also reason to believe that one joins partners in lawful marriage only if the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied. To see this, suppose that the situational conditions are not satisfied. For instance, one key situational condition for the ability to join partners in lawful marriage is that any caveat lodged against the marriage has been discharged. So suppose that this SI is not in place. There remains an undischarged caveat against the marriage. If so, again, the couple will not end up lawfully married, even if you have competently conducted a token of c. Since joining the couple in lawful marriage is the success condition of LM, this means that the success of LM will not be attained. As a result, there is also reason to believe that a move in LM will be successful only if the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied.
These considerations motivate the following condition on success in LM:

LM Success. A move in LM is successful only if it is competent and the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied.4

LM Success is an informative condition on success in LM. After all, it does not hold for successes in other SGPs such as ARCH and so captures relevant information about success in LM. At the same time, LM Success is unfit to constitute part of a reductive analysis of success in LM/joining consenting couples in lawful marriage. After all, it features the notion of competence, which, in turn, is unpacked in terms of an ability to attain success in LM/joining consenting couples in lawful marriage.
Now, let Δ be any SGP such that a move in Δ is successful only if it is competent and the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied. Since, trivially, a move in Δ will be successful only if it is successful, it follows that a move in Δ is successful only if successful, competent and the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied. However, by the relevant instance of SGP Aptness, we get the result that a move in Δ is successful if and only if apt. Since, by LM Success, LM is an SGP that features the relevant condition on success, we get:
