
LM Aptness. A move in LM is successful if and only if it is apt.

It comes to light, then, that while there are SGPs in which aptness and success come apart in the sense that one can attain success while falling short of aptness, in others aptness not only entails success, but success also entails aptness.
What's more, on reflection, it is independently plausible that, in the case of inquiry, moves are successful if and only if apt. In fact, an argument parallel to the one that made this point for LM will do the trick here too. Here goes.
To begin with, there is reason to believe that knowledge requires competent belief. To see this, suppose you, an epistemic agent, form a belief that you are facing a barn, say, that falls short of being competent. This may be for two reasons. You may fail to exercise an ability to know, say because you form your belief on the basis of a coin toss. Or else the proposition may not be in the range of your ability, say because it has been produced by an ability to recognise colours. In either case, you end up not knowing that you are facing a barn. Since knowledge is success in inquiry, this means that success in inquiry will not be attained. If so, there is reason to believe that a move in inquiry will be successful only if competent.
What's more, there is also reason to believe that knowledge requires that the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied. To see this, suppose that the situational conditions are not satisfied: you are in fake barn county, are currently looking at a fake barn etc. If so, again, you end up not knowing that you are facing a barn. Since knowledge is the success condition of inquiry, this means that success in inquiry will not be attained. As a result, there is also reason to believe that a move in inquiry will be successful only if the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied.
Just as in the case of LM before, these considerations motivate the following condition on success in inquiry:

Inquiry Success. One's move in inquiry is successful only if it is competent and the SI of the ability exercised are satisfied.

But now recall that we just saw that, for any SGP such that this condition holds, it follows that a move in that SGP is successful if and only if apt. Since we have seen that there is independent reason to think that Inquiry Success is true, this means that it is independently plausible that a belief is successful if and only if it is apt.
It may also be worth noting that, just as in the case of LM Success, Inquiry Success is an informative condition on success in inquiry and yet is not suited to constitute part of a reductive analysis of success in inquiry/knowledge. It is informative because the parallel condition does not hold for successes in other SGPs such as ARCH and so captures relevant information about success in inquiry. It is unfit to constitute part of a reductive analysis of success in inquiry/knowledge because it features the notion of competence, which, in turn, is unpacked in terms of an ability to attain success in inquiry/knowledge.
Knowledge as Success in Inquiry
At this stage, there are two versions of virtue reliabilism on the table. One is traditionalist, in that it offers reductive analyses of knowledge and justified belief, the other is knowledge first epistemological, in the sense at issue in KF: it analyses justified belief in terms of knowledge. The crucial difference between the two proposals concerns their respective accounts of the designated property for inquiry. While traditionalists opt for truth, knowledge firsters go for knowledge.
Of course, we are free to propose whatever property we like as the designated property in inquiry. This leaves open the question which of the two proposals we have before us is preferable. One way to answer it is by assessing which of the resulting versions of virtue reliabilism is preferable by putting them next to each other and comparing how they fare with respect to solving various relevant problems. This is a strategy I will pursue in the next section. There I will return to the problems for traditional virtue reliabilism that I outlined in the last chapter and argue that the above knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism escapes them.
However, one might wonder whether isn't a more direct way of arguing in favour of one view over the other and if so, what this argument might look like. Interestingly enough, such a line of argument is available. In fact, in the remainder of this section, I will outline two ways of arguing that a knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism is preferable to its traditionalist competitor. Here goes.
Recall that both versions of virtue reliabilism are instantiations of a more general normative framework for simple goal directed practices. One key thesis of the general framework is that a move in an SGP is successful if and only if it has the relevant designated property. Given that both versions of virtue reliabilism take the relevant SGP to be inquiry and agree that moves in inquiry are beliefs, this means that one way to investigate which thesis concerning the designated property is preferable by asking which thesis about success in inquiry is preferable. The two relevant theses here are of course:

Knowledge is Success in Inquiry (KSI). One has attained success in inquiry into whether p at time t, if and only if, at t, one has a knowledgeable belief on whether p.
True Belief is Success in Inquiry (TSI). One has attained success in inquiry into whether p at time t, if and only if, at t, one has a true belief on whether p.

To argue that KSI is preferable to TSI, I will first need to motivate some further general theses about SGPs. To get there, note that practitioners of SGPs can be committed to attaining success in an SGP. There are a number of types of commitment one may have towards attaining success in an SGP. The nature of the commitment depends on how it arises. For instance, as a practitioner of ARCH, you may have an intention to hit the target out of a desire to do so. In this case, I will say that you have a practical commitment to attaining success in ARCH. You may also have promised someone to hit the target. In this case, you have a moral commitment to hitting the target. Or you may have been contracted to hit the target in which case your commitment will be contractual. Other forms of commitment are conceivable. What's more, an agent may simultaneously have various different kinds of commitment towards attaining success in an SGP. Besides having originally formed an intention to hit the target in ARCH out of a desire to do, you may now have promised and signed a contract that you would do so. In this case, you are practically, morally and contractually committed to hitting the target in ARCH.
One way in which an agent can be released from any commitment he has towards attaining success in an SGP is by accomplishing the feat, i.e. by attaining the relevant success. For instance, when you have hit the target in ARCH, you will be released from your practical, moral and contractual commitments to hit the target in ARCH. This gives us the relevant thesis:

Commitment Release (CR). If one has attained a given success in a given SGP at t, then, at t, one is released from all commitments towards attaining that success in that SGP.5

Now consider the following case.

Detective 1. You are a private detective. I have hired you for one month to find out (= attain success in the inquiry into) whether (<murder> =) someone in my family is the murderer of my wife. The first suspect you investigate is my uncle who, let us suppose, has a particularly strong motive for the deed. Fortunately for you, my uncle credibly admits to having committed the crime upon questioning and even signs a confession in writing. On the basis of this evidence, you come to believe that someone in my family has indeed murdered my wife, thereby making your move in the relevant inquiry. With your move made on the first day, you pack your bags, including the confession, get on the next flight to the Caribbean where you intend to take a holiday for the rest of the month. Meanwhile, it becomes widely known that my uncle's claim to have murdered my wife is false. In fact, he has a watertight alibi for the time of the deed. You are currently sipping cocktails in the sun and are entirely unaware of the news about my uncle's statement.

Notice that we may assume that <murder> is true: someone in my family did indeed murder my wife. It is just that it wasn't my uncle. That means that you have a true belief that <murder>.6 According to TSI, you have attained success in your inquiry into whether <murder>. By CR, you are released from all commitments towards finding out whether <murder>.
Now here is the 64,000 dollar question: Is this prediction correct? In particular, are you released from your contractual commitment to find out whether <murder>? The answer to this question is very plausibly no. You may have an excellent excuse for not working on the case. At the same time, as far as your contract is concerned, what you ought to be doing is work on the case rather than sit on the beach in the Caribbean. If this isn't immediately obvious, put yourself in my shoes (i.e. in the shoes of your employer) for a moment. Suppose I find out about your situation. While I might concede that you have an excuse for no longer working on the case, I could rightly insist that, as far as the contract is concerned, what you ought to be doing is work on the case rather than sip cocktails on some beach in the Caribbean. What's more, I may rightly take steps to get you back to work, to fulfil your contract. Notice that when I do this, there is no need to negotiate a new contract with you. All I need to do is remind you of the old contract, which is still binding. None of this would make any sense if you had been released from your contractual commitment.
Thus, TSI's prediction that you are released from all commitments towards finding out whether <murder> is mistaken. In contrast, KSI does not make a mistaken prediction here. After all, the case is a standard Gettier case and so your belief falls short of knowledge. According to KSI, then, you fall short of attaining success in the relevant inquiry and are therefore not released from your contractual commitment to finding out what you were employed to find out. Since TSI but not KSI makes mistaken predictions about this case, there is reason to think that KSI is favourable to TSI. As I pointed out above, this means that the thesis that knowledge is the designated property in inquiry is preferable to the thesis that it is truth. As a result, there is a first reason to favour the knowledge first construal of the designated property over its traditionalist rival.7
Here is a second argument. Again, let's start with a general thesis about SGPs. There can be varying degrees of progress towards success in SGPs. Progress here is a function of times and distances from success. One has made progress on an SGP between ti and tj if and only if, at tj, one is closer to success in that SGP than at ti. Suppose you are engaging in a version of ARCH, ARCH100, that requires you to hit the target 100 times. Now that you have hit the target 98 times already you have made progress on ARCH100 compared to when you had done so only 13 times. This is because now you are closer to success than you were before.
It is not hard to see that this account of progress supports the following thesis:

Progress. If, at tj, one has not attained success in a given SGP, S, and if between ti and tj one makes progress towards success in S, then one has not attained success in S at ti either.

Suppose you are engaging in ARCH100 and have currently, at t2, hit the target 96 times. At t2, you have not attained success in ARCH100. Suppose you have made progress between t1 and t2, say because at t1 you had hit the target only 34 times. In that case, you haven't attained success in ARCH100 at t1 either.
With this general thesis about SGPs in play, let's return to inquiry once more. In particular, consider the following case:

Detective 2. You are a private detective. I have hired you for one month to find out (= attain success in the inquiry into) whether <murder>. The first suspect you investigate is my uncle who, let us suppose, has a particularly strong motive for the deed. Fortunately for you, my uncle credibly admits to having committed the crime upon questioning and even signs a confession in writing. On the basis of this evidence, at t1, you come to believe that <murder>. At t2, however, you discover that my uncle's S's confession was false. In fact, he has a watertight alibi for the time of the crime and was trying to protect the perpetrator. Accordingly, at t2, you abandon your belief that <murder>.

Again, we may assume that <murder> is true: someone in my family did indeed murder my wife. It is just that it wasn't my uncle.
Now here is what I take to be an overwhelmingly plausible claim about Detective 2: you make progress on your inquiry into whether <murder> between t1 and t2 (henceforth also 'the crucial claim'). By way of support for the crucial claim notice, first, that, at t2, you have discovered that a certain piece of evidence that, at t1, appears to support <murder> is misleading. Second, at t2, you can tick one person off the list of suspects you were not able to tick off at t1.
The second reason why KSI is preferable to TSI is that only KSI is compatible with the crucial claim. Here is why: According to the crucial claim, you made progress on the inquiry into whether <murder> between t1 and t2. However, at t2 you don't even have a belief that <murder>. Since success in inquiry into whether <murder> requires a belief that <murder> (recall that <murder> is true), you have not attained success in inquiry at t2. By PROGRESS, it follows that at t1 you did not attain success in inquiry into whether <murder>. However, at t1 you have a true belief that <murder>. According to TSI, you did attain success in inquiry into whether <murder> at t1. TSI is thus unable to accommodate the crucial claim. In contrast, KSI encounters no difficulties here. After all, at t1, your belief that <murder> is gettiered and so does not qualify as knowledge. According to KSI, you do not attain success in inquiry into whether <murder> at t1. As a result, KSI is entirely compatible with the crucial claim. Given the plausibility of this claim, this means that there is a second reason to favour the knowledge first construal of the designated property over its traditionalist rival.8
The Problems for Traditional Virtue Epistemology
We have seen that there is reason to favour the knowledge first version of our virtue reliabilist accounts of knowledge and justified belief over its traditionalist competitor. The reason for this is that there is independent reason to think that the traditionalist thesis that true belief is success in inquiry is problematic. In contrast, the knowledge first competitor steers clear of these problems.
Another way in which knowledge firsters may venture to make headway vis-à-vis their traditionalist competitors is by arguing that their view offers a better treatment of various epistemological problems that we want such an account to address. Recall that the last chapter outlined a couple of relevant problems. I argued that traditionalists encounter difficulties with lottery propositions. In particular, the lottery paradox posed a significant obstacle for them. Moreover, we saw that extant traditionalist versions of virtue reliabilism face the safety dilemma. In what follows, I will argue that the knowledge first version of the view can steer clear of these problems. As a result, we will have even further reason to prefer KFVR over its traditionalist rival.
The Lottery Paradox
Recall that, according to Sufficiency Thesis (ST), if the probability of p on one's evidence is very high, then p is justifiably believable for one. Conjunction Closure (CC) has it that if p is justifiably believable for one and q is justifiably believable for one, then their conjunction, p and q, is justifiably believable for one. Finally, No Contradictions (NC), states that no proposition one knows to be a contradiction is justifiably believable for one. The lottery paradox shows that ST, CC and NC are jointly inconsistent.
In addition, the discussion in Chapter 3 indicated that the right solution to the lottery paradox is one that denies ST. However, the task of providing an adequate solution to the lottery paradox is made more difficult by Douven and Williamson's generalisation of the lottery paradox which showed that a large class of prospective solutions are bound to fail. In what follows, I will argue that KFVR serves to offer a solution to the lottery paradox that denies ST without succumbing to Douven and Williamson's generalisation of the paradox.
In order to achieve this, we first need a principle connecting KFVR-JB with the notion of justified believability. To begin with, I take it that a proposition is justifiably believable for one only if: if one has done what one is in a position to do to decide whether it is true and thereupon has come to believe it, then one's belief is justified (cf. Williamson 2000: 95). Given that justified believability is understood in this way, here is a natural way of connecting it with KFVR-JB:

KFVR-JBY. p is justifiably believable for one only if one is in a position to believe p via an exercise of an ability to know propositions within range R and relative to C such that p ∈ R.

To see how KFVR-JBY solves the lottery paradox, consider first arbitrary lottery proposition, say 'ticket 3 won't win the fair lottery I am about to hold' (henceforth '<ticket3>'). By KFVR-JBY, <ticket3> is justifiably believable for you only if you are in a position to believe that <ticket3> via an exercise of an ability to know propositions in range R and relative to conditions C such that <ticket3> ∈ R. This in turn requires you to be in possession of a grounded way of belief formation, W, such that using W disposes you to form a knowledgeable belief that <ticket3> in at least some C. Crucially, however, when the only evidence bearing on <ticket3> you have at your disposal is the probabilistic evidence concerning the low odds of winning, no grounded way of belief formation in your possession disposes you to form a knowledgeable belief in <ticket3>, no matter what conditions you may find yourself in. In consequence, <ticket3> is not in the range of any of your abilities to know. Since <ticket3> is an arbitrary lottery proposition, the result generalises to all propositions of the form 'ticket i won't win fair lottery l'.
It may also be worth noting that we cannot avoid this result by fiddling with your history and the learning process by means of which you acquired the relevant way of belief formation. The reason for this is that, when the only evidence you have at your disposal is probabilistic, it is not just a contingent matter of fact that your ways of belief formation do not dispose you to acquire knowledgeable beliefs about lottery propositions. Rather, it could not be otherwise: when the only relevant evidence you have is probabilistic, no way of belief formation could dispose you to acquire knowledgeable beliefs about lottery propositions. In this kind of evidential situation, no way of belief formation could qualify as an ability to know lottery propositions. In consequence, when the probabilistic evidence is the only evidence you have, you are not in a position to believe a given lottery proposition via an exercise an ability to know such that the lottery proposition is in the range of that ability. Hence, by KFVR-JBY, in such cases lottery propositions are not justifiably believable for you.9 On KFVR, ST fails for lottery propositions. The lottery paradox can be solved.
Finally, let's turn to the question as to whether this solution falls prey to Douven and Williamson's generalisation of the lottery paradox. Recall that the upshot of Douven and Williamson's argument is that solutions to the lottery paradox that venture to replace ST by the weaker principle ST′—if the probability of p on one's evidence is very high, then p is justifiably believable for one, unless one's justification for believing p is defeated—are bound to fail for any account of defeat according to which it is a structural property. Here's why KFVR's solution to the lottery paradox escapes Douven and Williamson's generalisation. The reason why, according to KFVR we don't have justification for believing lottery propositions is not that a defeater present. By the same token, KFVR is not committed to endorsing even ST′. On the contrary, by the lights of KFVR's solution, lottery propositions are never in the ballpark for justification to begin with. Champions of KFVR will thus want to reject ST′. Since Douven and Williamson's generalisation targets solutions that hold on to ST′ and KFVR's solution escapes the threat here.
With these points in play, it is easy to see that KFVR will also be able to offer a satisfactory account of why we do not know lottery propositions. Recall that in the last chapter, we also saw that since the lottery paradox requires a solution according to which lottery propositions are not justifiably believable for us, the correct explanation of why we don't know them to be true is in terms of the lack of justified believability also. Since, on KFVR's solution to the lottery paradox, lottery propositions turn out not to be justifiably believable, at least not when the only evidence available is probabilistic, it offers the right kind of explanation of why lottery propositions are not known. In this way, KFVR can avoid yet another problem its traditionalist rival encountered.10
The Safety Dilemma
In essence, the safety dilemma is the problem of offering an account of knowledge that predicts absence of knowledge in fake barn cases and presence of knowledge in Frankfurt cases. The former kind of case has driven many contributors in the literature, including the most prominent defenders of virtue reliabilism, to adopt a kind of safety condition on knowledge. The latter kind of case suggests that a safety condition that can successfully deal with fake barn cases will be too strong.
KFVR can easily avoid the safety dilemma. As a knowledge first epistemology, KFVR can allow that the difference between agents in fake barn cases and agents in Frankfurt cases is fundamentally epistemic and cannot be understood without making use of the concept of knowledge.
That said, KFVR can offer a slightly more detailed account of what is going on in these cases. Recall that, according to Inquiry Success, there is an informative competence condition on knowledge. More specifically knowledge requires (i) competent belief and (ii) that the SI of the relevant ability to know are satisfied. The reason why, in Frankfurt cases, you know, while, in fake barn cases, you don't is that you satisfy (ii) only in Frankfurt cases. Crucially, however, the range of the SI of an ability to know that must be satisfied cannot be understood without invoking the concept of knowledge. After all, whether your SI are within the range of an ability to know depends on whether the relevant way of belief formation continues to dispose one to acquire knowledgeable beliefs in those SI.
We thus need the concept of knowledge to understand the concept of range of ability to know, which, in turn, serves to explain the presence/absence of knowledge in Frankfurt/fake barn cases.
While KFVR can explain presence and absence of knowledge in these cases, the explanation is going to be circular. Since KFVR abandons the aspiration of offering a reductive analysis of knowledge, there is nothing amiss with the circularity in explanation here. In fact, we can find the same kind of circularity in analogous non-epistemic cases. Consider: in the archery case your shot missed the target because it was taken in conditions outside the range of your ability (say the winds were too strong). This appears to be a perfectly fine explanation of why the shot was unsuccessful. But here, too, we must not hope to offer an account of the notion of range of the ability without invoking the notion of a hit. After all, the range of your ability to hit the target is delineated by whether the relevant way of shooting continues to dispose you to produce hits. In much the same way as we needed the concept of knowledge to understand the concept of range of ability to know, we need the concept of hit to understand the concept of range of ability to hit the target. Compatibly with that, there is nothing amiss with explaining a particular miss in terms of the agent's being in conditions outside the range of his ability to hit the target, nor with explaining why a particular belief falls short of knowledge in terms of the agent's being in conditions outside the range of his ability to know.
It comes to light that KFVR can offer a promising solution to the safety dilemma. Crucially, unlike its traditional virtue reliabilist competitors, KFVR does not try to explain the presence and absence of knowledge in Frankfurt and fake barn cases in purely non-epistemic terms. Instead, it takes the difference between agents in the two types of cases to be a fundamentally epistemic one.
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have developed a knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism. Like its traditionalist cousin, this view identifies justified belief with competent belief and knowledge with apt belief. However, the two views differ in how the key notions of competent and (hence of apt) belief are unpacked. Ultimately, the differences between the two views are rooted in different construals of the designated property for inquiry. Whereas, on the traditionalist view, the designated property is truth, the knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism takes it to be knowledge. As a result, the two views yield different views of what a success in inquiry amounts to—true belief vs. knowledge—and what it means to have an ability to attain such a success—an ability to form true beliefs vs. an ability to know. Since competent and apt belief are analysed in terms of abilities to attain success in inquiry, it follows that we end up with different accounts of competent and apt belief. The traditionalist view, which opts for an account in terms of abilities to form true beliefs, is very much in line with the ambition of an offering reductive analysis of knowledge in terms of justified belief. In contrast, there is little hope that this can be made to work on the knowledge first alternative. The reason for this is of course that on the knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism, justified belief is analysed in terms of abilities to know. As a result, a reductive analysis of knowledge in terms of justified belief will no longer be an option. On the contrary, it is easy to see that this kind of virtue reliabilism reverses the traditional direction of analysis and so qualifies as a knowledge first version of the view.
In addition, I have offered two lines of argument supporting knowledge first virtue reliabilism over its traditionalist competitor. The first one was direct. Here I provided reason to believe that the knowledge first account of success in inquiry is preferable to the traditionalist alternative since only the knowledge first account can accommodate a number of plausible theses about simple goal directed practices, to wit, Commitment Release and Progress. In contrast, the second line was more indirect. I have made a case that KFVR compares favourably with its rival because KFVR can steer clear of the problems that I had earlier argued beset traditionalist versions of virtue reliabilism. In particular, KFVR can avoid the safety dilemma and can offer a satisfactory solution to the lottery paradox according to which lottery propositions turn out not to be justifiably believable. As a result, KFVR can also give the right kind of explanation of why we don't know lottery propositions to be true.
Finally, KFVR can of course also hold on to the motivations for its process reliabilist and traditional virtue epistemological ancestors. Just like its ancestors, KFVR can also allow for a connection between justified belief and truth without jeopardising the non-factivity of justified belief. It can accommodate paradigm cases of justified belief, including beliefs based on perception, memory and competent deduction. After all, the relevant processes qualify as abilities to know. It can accommodate paradigm cases of unjustified belief such as belief based on wishful thinking and guesswork. The relevant processes here do not qualify as abilities to know. Finally, champions of KFVR are free adopt process reliabilism's solutions to the regress problem and the problem of scepticism as well as traditionalist virtue reliabilism's solutions to the problems of world bound reliability, the new evil demon problem, the problem of clairvoyant cases and the generality problem.
Notes
1 At the same time, knowledge first virtue epistemology is compatible with Williamson's thesis that knowledge is a state of mind (henceforth also 'KSM') and the thesis that knowledge has explanatory priority of belief (henceforth 'KPB'). That said, my account neither entails KSM, or KPB for that matter, nor does either thesis play a key role in it. I take this to be a benefit of my account. After all, both theses remain a highly controversial in the philosophy of mind. For that reason, it will be of some interest if it is possible to reap at least some of the epistemological benefits of knowledge first epistemology, without taking on the heavyweight commitments in the philosophy of mind that KSM and KPB bring with it.
2 Note that KF is not strictly speaking incompatible with the traditional analytical project. After all, it does not rule out the possibility of an analysis of knowledge in terms other than justified belief. For instance, the view is entirely compatible with an analysis of knowledge in terms of safe and/or sensitive belief, where justification is not itself analysed along those lines. For what it's worth, I think that the safety dilemma indicates that prospects of an analysis in such terms are dim. Since this is very plausibly the most promising strategy for a reductive analysis of knowledge in terms that do not involve justification, I take the prospects for an analysis of knowledge in terms other than justified belief to be no brighter. Crucially, however, for present purposes, I do not need to take a stance on the issue. For that reason, rather than foreclosing the possibility of a successful reductive analysis of knowledge, I will rest content with highlighting my reservations about it.
3 On the present proposal, knowledge is both apt belief and successful belief. At the same time, success is necessary but not sufficient for aptness. While this may seem terribly confused at first glance, I'd like to ask you to bear with me. I'll explain how this can be possible momentarily.
4 Other plausible candidates for types of performances such that success entails a competence-in-SI condition are certain types of intentional action, such as winking, waving, applauding and reading as well as Zagzebski's (1996) acts of virtue.
5 Attaining success in an SGP is not the only way of being released from a commitment to doing so. In the case of ARCH, you may lose interest and as a result drop your desire and intention to hit the target. This will release you from your practical commitment. Of course, even when you have lost interest, you may still be bound by your promise or the contract you entered. In order to be released from the corresponding moral and contractual commitments, you may need the cooperation of, here, the person you made the promise to and the other party to the contract. In addition, one may have a moral commitment to fulfil other commitments, such as contractual ones, that one has taken on. In that case, one won't be released from one's moral commitment unless one has been released from one's contractual commitment. The same may hold for other types of commitments.
6 In addition, your belief is formed on the basis of excellent evidence, evidence that is strong enough to ensure that your belief is also justified.
7 Since your belief in Detective 1 is not only true but also justified (en. 46), the present argument serves to show that KSI is preferable not only to TSI but also to the theses (i) that justified belief is success in inquiry and (ii) that justified true belief is success in inquiry.
8 Again, in Detective 2, your belief at t1 is not only true but also justified (for the same reasons as your belief in Detective 1, see en. 46). As a result, this argument, too, serves to show that KSI is preferable not only to TSI, but also to the alternative theses that identify success in inquiry, respectively, with justified belief and justified true belief.
9 There may be cases in which you have other ways of forming beliefs about lottery propositions. For instance, you may have been told by a reliable informant that a certain ticket will lose the lottery because the lottery is rigged against it. Since, at least in certain conditions, believing lottery propositions on the basis of the informant's say-so disposes you to acquire knowledgeable beliefs about lottery propositions, in this situation you are in a position to believe the lottery proposition via an exercise of an ability to know. By KFVR-JBY, the lottery proposition is justifiably believable for you. I take this to be the right result.
10 It may be worth noting that KFVR also successfully handles variations of lottery cases in which the lottery is rigged. After all, so long as the agent's evidence is probabilistic, the lottery proposition still cannot be justifiably believed by her.









5   The Competition
The last chapter developed a novel version of virtue reliabilism. It contrasts with traditionalist versions of the view in that it takes knowledge not to be something that is built up from the relevant form of epistemic success and further conditions. Rather, knowledge itself is a form of epistemic success, success in inquiry. In combination with the virtue reliabilist framework from Chapter 2, this yielded accounts of competent and apt belief that are knowledge first epistemological in that these notions are now defined in terms of knowledge. The standard virtue reliabilist identification of justified belief with competent belief and knowledge with apt belief delivered my specific knowledge first version of the view.
That said, my view is not the only knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism on the market. Two notable alternatives have been defended in recent literature. One is due to Alan Millar, and the other is due to Lisa Miracchi. In this chapter, I will discuss their views and compare them to my own, i.e. KFVR. Unsurprisingly, my aim is to show that KFVR comes out on top once again.
Millar
The View
Let's start with Millar's version of knowledge first virtue reliabilism. One of Millar's main reasons for adopting this kind of view is that it best reflects the way in which the concept of knowledge is applied in our everyday practices. We do not seem to apply the complex conditions that have been proposed in analyses of knowledge when we judge that S knows p. What we do is different:

We happily count people as knowing that something is an F when they see an F, and they may be presumed to have what it takes to tell of something they see that it is an F from the way it looks. [ . . . ] The conceptual level at which we encounter the perceptual knowledge that we have, or that others have, is that of knowing that p through seeing or otherwise perceiving that p, by means of an ability to tell that such a thing is so from the look or other appearance of what is perceived.
