(Millar 2010: 133-4)

According to Millar, we should not try to give a reductive account of knowledge, but rather attempt to elucidate it by means of an investigation of the specific abilities exercises of which allow us to gain it, as it is precisely these abilities that we seem to latch on to when we ordinarily ascribe knowledge to someone.
For instance, in the case of perception, which I will focus on in what follows, the relevant abilities are perceptual-recognitional abilities, which are ways of telling that things are so from their appearances, where appearances are just the way things look, sound, smell, etc. For subjects to have these abilities, it is important that the presented appearances are distinctive of the recognised objects in the sense that "[w]hen an appearance of something is distinctive of Fs, not easily could something have this appearance and not be an F" (Millar 2010: 125). Perceptual-recognitional abilities are thus environment-dependent. This accords with the intuition that you cannot know that there is a barn in front of you when you are looking at one of the few real barns in fake barn county. In such a scenario, there are too many fake look-a-likes around that make the appearance of the real barn no longer distinctive of a real barn. Millar even goes as far as to claim that you, when in fake barn county, do not just fail to exercise the requisite perceptual-recognitional ability, but even lack this ability altogether (Millar 2010: 126).
In contrast, in a situation in which the environment is in fact favourable but one nevertheless does not recognise something for what it is, one fails to exercise a perceptual-recognitional ability that one does possess. This might happen when one is careless in ones judgement, or is just unlucky enough to encounter the only fake look-a-like in the entire environment. In any case, the important point is that, as Millar construes it, the notion of exercise of an ability is a success notion (Millar 2010: 125): one cannot exercise an ability to φ unless one that φs. Applied to the case of perceptual-recognitional abilities, this means that one cannot exercise a perceptual-recognitional ability without knowing that such-and-so is the case.
One thing that is interesting about Millar's view is that while he opts for a knowledge first virtue reliabilist account of knowledge, he does not venture to extend this view to justified belief as well. Rather, Millar opts for an accessibilist account of justified belief, albeit a knowledge first version of it. To get a first handle on what Millar is up to consider the following passage:

[E]pisodes in which I come to know that an animal I am looking at is a zebra are, barring rare, dire confusion, or rare and bizarre deception, episodes in which the fact that I see that the animal is a zebra is available to me as a reason to believe that it is a zebra and to continue to believe that it was thereafter. The intimate connection between perceptual knowledge and justified belief is accommodated by acknowledging that the fact that I see that the animal is a zebra can constitute a reason I have to take it to be one. But instead of explaining the knowledge as, so to speak, built up from justified belief, we treat the knowledge as what enables one to be justified in believing.
(Millar 2010: 139)

On Millar's account, justification has to do with being in possession of clinching reasons for belief, i.e. reasons that settle it that the belief is true. Possession of such reasons in turn implies that one "[stands] in some relation to a (distinct) consideration in view of which one is justified" (Millar 2010: 112). Thus, even though Millar does not think that knowledge must be built up from justified beliefs, he does take justification to consist in having accessible, clinching reasons for belief. In paradigmatic cases of visual perceptual knowledge, these reasons are constituted by the fact that S sees that p.
Gettier Strikes Back
With Millar's view on the table, let's ask how plausible it is. In particular, I'd like to focus on whether Millar did well in combining a virtue epistemological account of knowledge with an accessibilist account of justified belief. I aim to show that the answer to this question is no. In particular, there is reason to think that Millar's accessibilism runs into trouble with Gettier cases.
One might think that this is crazy. Once we abandon the traditional analytical project in favour of a knowledge first approach to epistemology, it is hard to see how Gettier cases could even begin to cause trouble for us. Of course, this is true in the sense that we will no longer need to search for a condition on knowledge that deals with Gettier cases, or, at the very least, not one that can be specified without invoking the concept of knowledge. But now note that, besides the familiar point that agents in Gettier cases lack knowledge, the beliefs of agents in Gettier cases are justified. For instance, while, in Fake Barns, you do not know that there is a barn before you, your belief that there is is justified. This should not come as much of a surprise. After all, Gettier cases were intended as counterexamples to the justified true belief account of knowledge. If it weren't plausible that the relevant agents' beliefs are justified, Get-tier cases wouldn't have made for convincing counterexamples to this view in the first place. And unlike the absence of knowledge, the presence of justified belief in Gettier cases is of interest at least to knowledge first epistemological accounts of justified belief. It is a datum such accounts need to accommodate. Accordingly, we have before us what I will henceforth refer to as 'the new Gettier problem', to wit, the problem of accommodating the presence of justified belief in Gettier cases.
To assess how Millar fares on this score, note first that, on Millar's view, justified belief entails knowledge. The reason Millar is committed to this is that, according to him, possession of the kinds of factive reasons required for justified belief are sufficient for knowing. For instance, in the case of the visual perceptual belief that p, justification requires that one sees that p. At the same time, seeing that p is said to be a way of knowing that p. In consequence, one will satisfy Millar's conditions for justified belief that p here only if one knows that p. Justified perceptual beliefs that fall short of knowledge turn out to be impossible. But, of course, this means that Millar's view does encounter the new Gettier problem.1
Couldn't Millar avoid the problem simply by weakening his account of factive reasons such that, whilst factive, they are not sufficient for knowledge? No. To see why not, note first that even if Millar can resist the entailment from justified belief to knowledge, he will still be committed to the idea that justified belief is factive. And, arguably, that's enough to cause trouble. Just consider the non-lucky counterparts of Gettiered agents who end up with false beliefs. (In what follows, I will also refer to these cases as 'Counterpart cases'.) For instance, consider a variation of Fake Barns in which you end up looking at a fake barn. When, in this case, you form the belief that you are looking at a barn, your belief will be false but still justified.
Millar is of course aware that his account runs into this problem. He ventures to address it in the following passage:

[T]he notion of justified belief that figures in traditional analysis and in descriptions of Gettier cases is [ . . . ] very weak. It has everything to do with a kind of reasonableness that renders one blameless in thinking that something is so, but little to do with the kind of well groundedness that settles that something is so and on that account entitles one to take it to be so.
(Millar 2010: 102)

I believe that this response remains unsatisfactory for two reasons. First, it collapses a normative difference worth marking in epistemology. Second, the intuition of justification is not the only reason to think that agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases have justified beliefs.
To see the first point, consider the following two cases:

Insanity. You have gone insane. As a result, you form your beliefs in all sorts of crazy manners. When hearing the wind blow you think your long lost love is speaking to you, when the sky is red at sunset, you think that doom is impending, and so on.
Benighted Isolation. You are part of an isolated and benighted community the members of which share a common belief that thunderstorms indicate that their 20-eared deity is about to scratch its largest left ear. Just now you are witnessing a thunderstorm and come to believe that the deity is about to scratch an ear.

In both of these cases you form a blameless belief. This is confirmed by the following two widely accepted theses concerning blamelessness: (B1) one is blameless for φ-ing if it is out of one's control that one φs; (B2) one is blameless for φ-ing if one φs in the light of good reason to believe that φ-ing is permissible (e.g. Zimmermann 1997; Haji 1998).2 Insanity is an instance of (B1). Here it is out of your control that you believe that doom is impending. You have gone insane. Benighted Isolation is instance of (B2). In this case, your belief about impending ear-scratching is formed in the light of good reason to believe that it is permissible. After all, you reasonably believe that thunderstorms indicate ear-scratching and that a thunderstorm has occurred. If so you have good reason to believe that it is permissible for you believe as you do. Moreover, since you base your belief on reasonable beliefs that provide you with good reason to believe that it is permissible, you believe in the light of this reason.
Crucially, there is a difference between agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases on the one hand, and agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation on the other. Agents in the Gettier and Counterpart cases form their beliefs in perfectly fine ways, ways that normally lead them toward epistemic goods such as true belief or knowledge. In contrast, agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation form their beliefs in highly problematic ways, ways that will normally not bring them on the path toward epistemic good. In this way, agents in the former cases are in a much stronger epistemic position than agents in the latter cases. Their beliefs have a connection with knowledge and truth that the beliefs of agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation lack altogether. To see this, compare, for example Fake Barns and Benighted Isolation. In Fake Barns, you are simply unlucky not to acquire knowledge on this occasion, whereas, in Benighted Isolation you fail to acquire knowledge because you are part of a community that is on the wrong epistemic track entirely.
This difference is a difference worth marking in epistemology. One reason for this is that marking this difference enables us to select the right course of action when working toward improvements of the agents' future epistemic performances. For agents in cases like Benighted Isolation and Insanity, we will need to get agents to change the ways in which they form their beliefs. For agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases, in contrast, this is not necessary. Accordingly, when aiming for future improvements, a different strategy would seem more appropriate. For instance, we might consider engineering a more hospitable epistemic environment.
In fact, the difference is a difference worth marking as a distinctively normative difference in epistemology. It makes sense to evaluate the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases positively and the beliefs of agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation negatively. To see that it makes sense to evaluate the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases positively, note that so doing will reinforce their ways of proceeding as epistemic agents, which is a good thing because agents will start to reap epistemic goods again as soon as they are back in epistemically more hospitable territories (cf. Bird 2007: 106). In contrast, it makes sense to evaluate the beliefs of agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation negatively because so doing will discourage agents from continuing in their ways of proceeding as epistemic agents, which is also good thing given that no epistemic goods are to be gained by their way of proceeding. (Of course, it also makes sense grant these agents an excuse for proceeding in the way they do, but this point is by-the-by here.)
With these points in play, it can be argued that Gettier and Counterpart cases pose a problem for Millar independently of the intuition that agents in these cases have justified beliefs. To see this notice first that it is hard to see how Millar's account of justified belief can accommodate the aforementioned normative difference between agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases and agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation, at least on the present strategy. If the only thing that the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases have going for themselves is that they are blameless, then they are on par with the beliefs of agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation. The normative difference between agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases on the one hand and agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation is going to be lost. Since this difference is a difference worth marking, this means Millar's account of justified belief collapses a difference worth marking.3
Let's move on, then, to the question of whether there is reason to think that beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart case are justified, other than the relevant intuition. I believe that the answer to this question is yes. The beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases have a couple of properties that are widely considered to be hallmark properties of justified belief, to wit, the property of enjoying a strong connection to truth and knowledge (P1), and the property of having positive normative status (P2). That the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart have P1 was argued above. And while I haven't strictly speaking shown that these beliefs also have P2, I believe that I have come pretty close. After all, I have effectively argued that it makes sense to accord positive normative status to these beliefs. But since it plausibly makes sense to accord positive normative status to these beliefs only if they do indeed have positive normative status, it is also plausible that the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases have P2. The fact that the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases have properties that are widely considered to be hallmark properties of justified belief confirms the hypothesis that these beliefs are indeed justified.4
The fact that the blamelessness response collapses a normative difference worth marking in epistemology suggests that this response remains unsatisfactory. This suggestion is reinforced by the fact that we have more reason to believe that the beliefs of agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases are justified than just the relevant intuition. In this way, there is not only evidence that the blamelessness response is unsuccessful, but also some positive reason to think that the beliefs of agents in Gettier cases are justified after all. If so, Millar's account does succumb to the new Gettier problem.
Miracchi
The View
According to Miracchi, knowledge is the manifestation of an epistemic competence. Two points are important here: first, an epistemic competence is taken to be a competence to know and, second, the is here is the is of identity. Miracchi's view contrasts with standard versions of virtue reliabilism on both counts. Traditionalists take knowledge to require the manifestation of an epistemic competence, alongside other conditions, rather than to be identical with it. And, of course, traditionalists do not construe the relevant epistemic competences as competences to know. Note also that this latter ingredient makes the view into a knowledge first version of virtue reliabilism.
Given this view of knowledge, won't Miracchi will also be committed to holding that justified belief is knowledge? After all, if she adopts the classical virtue epistemological view according to which justified belief is belief that manifests epistemic competence, and manifestations of epistemic competence are knowledge, doesn't it follow that any belief that is justified will also qualify as knowledge? Finally, if so, doesn't Miracchi also fall prey to the new Gettier problem in just the same way as Millar did before?
Fortunately, the answer to all of these questions is no. Miracchi's knowledge first virtue reliabilism does keep justified belief and knowledge apart. Her key move is to distinguish between manifestations and exercises of a competence to know such that one can exercise a competence to know without manifesting it and to identify justified belief with the exercise of a competence.
Let's look at how this works out in more detail, starting with Miracchi's account of the manifestation of a competence to know. First, Miracchi takes any competence to know to be associated with a way of knowing. For instance, the competence to visually recognise chanterelles is associated with a way of coming to know about the presence of chanterelles by vision. And what Miracchi calls the manifestation conditions of a competence to know, then, are the conditions that constitute knowing in a particular way. The manifestation conditions of a competence to visually recognise chanterelles are the conditions that constitute visually knowing about the presence of chanterelles. Miracchi takes these manifestations conditions to break down into subpersonal mechanisms and external conditions. In the case of a competence to visually recognise chanterelles, the manifestation conditions break down into certain visual processes and external conditions such as sufficient light, no obstruction from view, etc. Finally, for a competence to know to be manifested is for its manifestation conditions to obtain. For the competence to visually recognise chanterelles to be manifested is for the relevant visual processes to be run in the right external conditions.
Here is Miracchi's account of the manifestation of a competence to know in her own words:

Manifestation Condition. "The manifestation conditions of CK are whatever operations of subpersonal cognitive mechanisms and external conditions together (against a background of possession of CK) constitute a particular case of knowing that p in the way characteristic of the competence WCK. A competence to know is manifested just in case its manifestation conditions obtain." (Miracchi 2015a: 45-6)

Manifestation Condition offers a precise account of what's going on in cases in which knowledge is present. But now recall that Miracchi also wants to allow for cases of justified belief without knowledge. Moreover, recall that she wants to do so by distinguishing manifestations and exercises of competences and identifying justified belief with the exercise of competence. To see how she makes these rough ideas precise, let's first take a closer look at one further condition on competences Miracchi countenances:

Basis Condition. "The basis of CK is fully constituted by the subpersonal cognitive mechanisms of the subject S whose operations partially constitute S's knowing that p in way WCK." (Miracchi 2015a: 46)

Basis Condition isolates the subpersonal cognitive mechanism at issue in Manifestation Condition. For instance, in our toy case, the basis of a competence to visually recognise chanterelles will be the relevant visual processes.
To see Miracchi's next step towards making room for justified beliefs that fall short of knowledge, consider her definitions of the notions of a degenerate exercise of a competence to know and of an exercise of a competence to know:

Degenerate Exercise. "A competence to know is degenerately exercised just in case its basis is operative, but not all of the manifestation conditions obtain." (Miracchi 2015a: 48)
Exercise. "A competence to know is exercised just in case it is either manifested or degenerately exercised." (Miracchi 2015a: 48)

In conjunction, Degenerate Exercise and Exercise allow for cases in which a competence to know is exercised but the agent does not come to know. Consider a version of our toy case in which you run the visual processes that constitute the basis of your competence to visually recognise chanterelles. At the same time, suppose that not all the manifestation conditions of your competence are in play, say because you are looking at a hologram of a chanterelle. In this case, by Degenerate Exercise, you degenerately exercise your competence to visually recognise chanterelles. But, of course, by Exercise this is enough for exercising this competence. The result is that you exercise your competence to visually recognise chanterelles even though you don't come to know about the presence of a chanterelle by vision. In this way, for Miracchi manifestations of competences to know and their exercises come apart.
The account of justified belief is straightforward. Miracchi takes a belief to be justified if and only if it is an exercise of some competence to know (2015a: 48). It is now easy to see that, as a result, Miracchi allows for cases of beliefs that are justified and fall short of knowledge. In fact, all cases of degenerate exercises of competences to know will qualify.
Crucially for present purposes, this view allows Miracchi to accommodate the presence of justified belief in standard Gettier cases. To see this, consider once more the case in which you are looking at a hologram of a chanterelle. We have already seen that, in this case, you exercise your competence to visually recognise chanterelles. By Miracchi's account of justified belief, you arrive at a justified belief that there is a chanterelle before you. All we need to do to turn the case into a Gettier case is add that your belief is also true, say because the hologram happens to be projected onto a chanterelle. In this way, Miracchi can accommodate the presence of justified belief in Gettier cases.
While this much is good news, here is a wrinkle. Consider yet another case of a degenerate exercise of your competence to visually recognise chanterelles. But suppose in this case, the manifestation condition that is missing is slightly different: the light isn't good enough and as a result you are prone to mistake a range of things aren't chanterelles for chanterelles. The problem is that, unlike in the stopped clock case, here it is rather implausible that any belief about chanterelles you form will be justified (cf. "World-Bound Reliability" section). However, Miracchi's view seems to predict that it is and so runs into trouble.
Fortunately, this wrinkle can be ironed out. Miracchi countenances another condition on competences that will do the job. Here goes:

Proficiency Condition. "The proficiency condition of CK requires that the objective probability of the manifestation conditions obtaining conditional on the basis of the competence being operative be sufficiently high. I.e., Pr(M|OB) ≥ n, for some sufficiently high n ∈ (0; 1]." (Miracchi 2015a: 46)

Note that Proficiency Condition develops the sense in which competences must be reliable. For instance, for the competence to visually recognise chanterelles to qualify as a genuine competence to know, it must be the case that there is a high enough chance of coming to know about the presence of chanterelles by vision given that the visual processes that form its basis are operative.
Crucially, given Proficiency Condition, not all manifestation conditions of a competence to know are created equal. In particular, the absence of certain manifestation conditions of a competence to know compromise the competence altogether. That's what happens in the case of your competence to visually recognise chanterelles in too poor lighting conditions. Since the lighting conditions are sufficiently poor, the probability of coming to know about the presence of chanterelles given that the visual processes are run is insufficiently high. By Proficiency Condition, the result is that you don't have the competence to visually recognise chanterelles. And since you cannot exercise a competence that you do not possess, you do not exercise this competence either. In this way, Miracchi can secure the right result that your belief about the presence of a chanterelle is unjustified.
While your competence to visually recognise chanterelles is indeed compromised in the poor lighting case, the same does not hold for your competence visually recognise chanterelles when you are looking at a hologram of a chanterelle. After all, since there are many real chanterelles in your environment and you are just unlucky to look at the one hologram, the probability of coming to know about the presence of a chanterelle given that you are running the cognitive mechanisms underlying your competence to visually recognise chanterelles remains high. Proficiency Condition is satisfied. Your competence to visually recognise chanterelles is not compromised. You exercise it, albeit degenerately, and so arrive at a justified belief.5
Return of the Fake Barns
While Miracchi can accommodate the presence of justification in standard Gettier cases, she takes a turn that's at least initially surprising when it comes to fake barn cases. Here is Miracchi:

My view is that such subjects [i.e. subjects in fake barn cases] fail even to be justified because hostile environmental conditions deprive them of the relevant epistemic competences.
(Miracchi 2015a: 33, fn. 12)

Miracchi thus accepts that agents in fake barns cases don't have justified beliefs. As a result, Miracchi encounters the new Gettier problem.
Before moving on, I'd like to take a quick look at exactly why Miracchi claims that agents in fake barn cases aren't justified. Couldn't she say instead that they have the competence but that the manifestation conditions aren't satisfied? If so, agents in fake barn cases do come out as having justified beliefs and the new Gettier problem will be avoided. And wouldn't that be the better option?
Perhaps. Crucially, however, Miracchi argues that the option isn't available to her. To see why, note first that she agrees with Sosa that agents like the archer who is shooting at the only target that isn't sabotaged at the range can produce apt performances. Moreover, she thinks that once we agree on this, the only plausible thing to say about agents in fake barn cases is that they lack the relevant competence to know. Here is Miracchi:

[B]eing lucky to be in a good situation is not the kind of luck that precludes manifestation of competence. I think this view is plausible, and I do not see how one could retain it and still claim that the precariousness in [fake barn cases] prevents subjects from manifesting their competences. We must conclude that the only way such precariousness might affect whether a subject manifests a competence is by precluding possession of the competence in question. That is, the subjects not only might easily have gone wrong, but would have too easily have gone wrong for their performances to count as competent.
(Miracchi 2015b: 367)

It comes to light, then, that it is no accident that Miracchi holds that agents in fake barn cases don't have justified beliefs. By the same token, the new Gettier problem threatens to affect her with unmitigated force.
Miracchi does not explicitly address this problem. However, she does address a related issue and what she has to say here may serve as a basis for dealing with the new Gettier problem. Let's look at the related issue first, then. Miracchi considers the objection that agents in fake barn cases plausibly do possess the relevant competence, contrary to what she claims. In response, she ventures to explain the plausibility of this claim away. The key idea is to distinguish between competences and abilities. While these two concepts are often run together in ordinary parlance, it is important to keep them apart. In particular, according to Miracchi, they differ in at least one important respect: exercises of competence must make success likely, whereas exercises of ability need only make success possible. Those who find it plausible that agents in fake barn cases have the relevant competence might not be distinguishing between abilities and competences. However, once we are clear that there is a difference between abilities and competences and just how they differ, the claim that agents in fake barn cases have the competence is less and less plausible (Miracchi 2015b: 367-8).
It is not hard to see how we might try to develop this story into an error theory for those who judge that agents in fake barn cases believe justifiably. All that's needed are the following claims. First, agents who make these judgements mistake a belief from ability for a belief from competence. Second, competent belief entails justified belief. Third, belief from ability does not entail justified belief.
To see whether this error theory works, let's consider first the following non-epistemic case. You are a good runner who is currently about to start a race against a bunch of primary school kids. It is pretty clear that we would judge that you have the competence to win the race here. By way of evidence, note that were you to win the race and nothing out of the ordinary were to happen, we'd also judge that you would have won the race from competence. But now suppose that just before the race is about to begin, the kids are replaced by professional runners. In this case, we would no longer judge that you possess the competence to win the race, especially once we are clear on difference between competences and abilities. On the contrary, there can be little doubt that we would now judge that you don't have this competence, even if we grant that you have the ability. After all, now that you are up against a bunch of pros, it's just too unlikely that you will actually win the race. And were you to win the race—say because due to some incredible series of coincidences all the professional runners drop out due to injury and you are the only one who makes it across the finish line—we would judge that it was not from competence that you did so.
The key point that I'd like to bring into focus is that, in this case, we do not mistakenly attribute the competence to win the race to you. By the same token, even if you retain the ability to win the race here, and even we often mistake abilities for competences, we don't do so in this particular case.
Consider next the parallel epistemic case: You are a good barn spotter. You are about to come up to a barn on your right in a part of the world in which everything that looks like a barn is a barn. It is pretty clear that we would judge that you have the competence to recognise barns. By way of evidence, note that were you to form a belief about the presence of a barn and nothing out of the ordinary were to happen, we'd also judge that you would have formed this belief from competence. But now suppose that just before the barn you are about the reach comes into sight, all but one barn in the area are randomly replaced by indistinguishable fakes. In this case, we would no longer judge that you possess the competence to recognise barns, especially once we are clear on difference between competences and abilities. On the contrary, there can be little doubt that we would now judge that you don't have this competence, even if we grant that you have the ability. After all, now that you are surrounded by fakes that are indistinguishable from real barns, it's just too unlikely that you will actually recognise a barn. What's more, were you to end up looking at the one real barn in the area—say because that's the one that was randomly selected not to be replaced—we would judge that it was not from competence that you got it right about the barn.
Here's the trouble. First, what we have here is just a version of the fake barn case (in which the fakes have been placed very recently). As such it is no less plausible that the relevant agents have justified beliefs than in the original version of the case. At the same time, the case is also structurally analogous to the above running case. As a result, it is no less plausible that we would not mistakenly attribute the relevant competence here than in the running case. Likewise, it is no less plausible here than in the running case that even if you retain the relevant ability, and even we often mistake abilities for competences, we don't do so in this particular case. But of course this means that the error theory remains ultimately unsatisfactory.
Of course, Miracchi might venture to look elsewhere for a workable error theory. That said, it may also be worth recalling what the discussion of Millar's view brought to light, viz. (i) that the obvious candidate for an error theory, which appeals to a confusion between genuine justification and blamelessness, won't work; and (ii) that there is independent theoretical reason for thinking that agents in Gettier cases have justified beliefs, which applies equally to fake barn cases and to standard Gettier cases. As a result, fake barn cases continue to pose a problem for Miracchi.
Finally, even if Miracchi manages to deliver the needed goods, she'll still be in an awkward spot. She wants to offer an account of justified belief that allows for justified belief in Gettier cases and may well succeed, at least as far as standard Gettier cases are concerned. At the same time, already this success comes at a cost. On her account, justified belief turns out to be a disjunctive kind, with knowledge and justified belief as the relevant disjuncts (Miracchi 2015a: 48). At the very least, this isn't particularly elegant. What has come to light now is that, in addition, her account doesn't accommodate the presence of justified belief in fake barn cases. This means that she will have to offer a different treatment for fake barn cases, in terms of some error theory. As a result, she will be at a further disadvantage vis-à-vis my view, which not only doesn't take justified belief to be a disjunctive kind, but can also offer a uniform treatment of both kinds of Gettier cases (see "KFVR" section).
What's worse, we may also expect her to be at a disadvantage against other rival knowledge first accounts of justified belief. For instance, consider a variation of Miracchi's view, call it the simple view, according to which a belief is justified if and only if it is a manifestation of a competence to know and devises some error theory to explain away the appearance of justified belief in Gettier cases. Since we may expect that whatever error theory Miracchi may come up with for fake barn cases will work equally well for standard Gettier cases, the simple view will be no worse off than Miracchi's more complex alternative in terms of its account of the cases. At the same time, just as my own view, the simple view also has the advantages of securing the benefit of a uniform treatment of all Gettier cases and avoiding the costs of construing justified belief as a disjunctive kind.
In fact, note that Miracchi's view just is the simple view with some extra complexity (a distinction between a manifestation and an exercise of a competence, an account of degenerate exercises of competences, a disjunctive account of exercise of competence, an account of justified belief as a disjunctive kind, etc.), which is added to deal with cases like Gettier cases. Once it is clear that Miracchi's view doesn't even accommodate all of the relevant cases, one may well start to wonder whether it is really worth adding all of the proposed extra complexity in first place. My two cents is that it isn't.
Isn't this too quick? After all, Miracchi does offer some considerations that may just serve to provide a theoretical reason in support of her view. Here is Miracchi once more:

Exercises of a competence to know, then, whether cases of knowledge or cases of justified belief that fall short of knowledge, are qua exercises of competences to know likely to be cases of knowledge. Moreover, cases of knowledge and cases of merely justified belief that are exercises of the same competence to know will be equally likely to be cases of knowledge (qua exercises of that competence). Thus, insofar as reliability with respect to an epistemic good is itself an epistemic good, all justified beliefs share a common positive epistemic status, one that derives from its relation to knowledge—reliability with respect to knowledge.
(Miracchi 2015a: 49)

The key thought here is that, on her account, mere beliefs that are degenerate exercises of competences to know have positive epistemic status, which provides us with some reason for thinking that such beliefs are justified.
But, of course, there are many properties that give beliefs positive epistemic status. True, Miracchi's property of being identical with an exercise of a competence to know is one. But there are many others. Consider: (i) being identical with a manifestation of a competence to know (in Miracchi's sense), (ii) being competent in the sense at issue in my view, (iii) being equally likely to constitute knowledge in some other sense of probability, (iv) being reliably produced in Goldman's sense, (v) being defensible against challenges, and so on. The question remains as to why we should identify any one of these properties that give beliefs positive epistemic status with the property of being justified. To settle it, we will very plausibly have to look how the various proposals fare with respect to empirical adequacy and theoretical virtues such as simplicity, uniformity and elegance. And, as we have seen, there is reason to think that Miracchi's proposal simply doesn't fare as well as other views on these counts.
Finally, it may be objected that I have said nothing about Miracchi's positive argument for her view. If this argument works against rival views, such as my own view or the simple view, it may still be that Miracchi's view comes out on top in the end. After all, her argument may be powerful enough to make palatable the costs of both an inelegant account of justification and of having to offer separate treatments for standard Gettier cases and fake barn cases.
Miracchi's positive argument targets a certain kind of virtue epistemological account of knowledge. In essence, it is a development Zagzebski's recipe for generating Gettier cases that is said to apply not only to traditional versions of virtue reliabilism but also to knowledge first cousins that grant that competences to know can be exercised without yielding knowledge. I will here focus on the part of the argument that targets knowledge first versions of virtue reliabilism, for obvious reasons. Here goes:

This difficulty [posed by Zagzebski's argument] is not resolved if we suppose the success condition to be knowing, and maintain that the exercises of competences to know can obtain either in cases of knowledge or in cases that fall short of it. If this were true, then what it is to know would be specifiable independently of the particular competence in question, and there would have to be a general relation that holds between cases of knowledge and exercises of competences to know. However, it should be clear that the [i.e. Zagzebski's] procedure for generating systematic Gettier cases would be equally applicable to a proposal along these lines.
