(Miracchi 2015a: 41-2)

As a first observation, note that Miracchi's argument really is an argument against certain accounts of knowledge, including knowledge first virtue reliabilist ones. It is not an argument for her own account of justified belief. It will come as no surprise, then, that even if the argument is successful, her account of justified belief remains in trouble. After all, the simple view according to which a belief is justified if and only if it is a manifestation of a competence to know is entirely compatible with her account of knowledge, which, of course, she is firmly committed to taking to escape the argument.
Second, the argument will work only against accounts of knowledge that venture to offer informative sufficient conditions for knowledge. The reason for this is that, for any account that doesn't offer informative sufficient condition for knowledge, it simply won't be possible to construct a Gettier-style counterexample in the first place. Consider a view that countenances informative necessary conditions on knowledge but not (jointly) sufficient ones. Even if you can construct a case in which all of the account's informative conditions are met and the agent doesn't have knowledge, given that the informative conditions are only necessary but not (jointly) sufficient, the case will simply not be counterexample material for the account in question. It may be worth adding that it is not only possible to hold this kind of view, but actually very much in the spirit of knowledge first epistemology (Williamson 2000). In fact, my own account of knowledge is but one case in point. Hence, my view does not fall prey to Miracchi's argument. Miracchi's positive argument does not tip the balance in favour of her view either.
KFVR
Can my own view do better? To begin, here it is once more:

KFVR-JB. One justifiably believes that p if and only if one competently believes that p (alternatively: if and only if one's belief that p is formed by an exercise of an ability to know propositions in range R and relative to conditions C such that p ∈ R).

What does KFVR-JB have to say about Gettier cases of both the fake barns and the standard variety? To answer this question, let's first return to our toy version of a fake barns case, to wit Fake Barns. Recall that here you are in Fake Barn County, see what appears to be a barn and thereupon come to believe that you are facing a barn. In this case, you acquire your belief that you are looking at a barn in a way, W, that does not qualify as such an ability relative to your actual situational conditions, SIA. To see this, recall that whether or not a given set of conditions is within the range of a given SGP ability depends on whether using the way of move production at issue in it one continues to dispose its possessor to attain the SGP's success in those conditions. Crucially, in SIA, using your way of belief formation does not dispose you to acquire knowledgeable beliefs about the presence of barns. SIA are not within the range of your ability. In other words, you do not have the ability relative to SIA. That said, in more favourable situational conditions (SIF), using W does dispose you to form knowledgeable beliefs about the presence of barns. For instance, it does so in certain situational conditions such that everything that looks like a barn actually is a barn. In addition, since you are a normal human being, there is every reason to believe that your way of belief formation is grounded in the way required to qualify as an ability. After all, it is safe to assume that normal human beings acquire their ways of forming perceptual beliefs via exactly the kinds of learning processes that result in grounding. By Ability to Know, W qualifies as an ability to know propositions about the presence of barns relative to SIF. Since you form your belief via W, by Exercise of Ability to Know, you form your belief via the exercise of an ability to know propositions about the presence of barns relative to SIF. Moreover, the target proposition is within the range of this ability as it concerns the presence of a barn. Since you form your belief via the exercise of an ability to know such that the target proposition is within the range of this ability, by Competent Belief, your belief is competent and so, by KFVE-JB, it is justified. It comes to light that KFVR-JB makes the right predictions in Fake Barns.
It is easy to see that the story for standard Gettier cases is in essence the same. To this this, let's take another look at our toy case, Stopped Clock. The way in which you form your belief qualifies as an ability to know propositions about the time, for the same reasons as your way of belief formation in Fake Barns qualifies as an ability to know propositions about the presence of barns. If so, by Exercise of Ability to Know, your belief that it is 8:22 is the product of an exercise of an ability to know propositions about the time. Since the belief you form is a belief about the time, the target proposition is within the range of the ability to know that produced your belief. By Competent Belief, your belief that you are facing a barn is competent and so, by KFVE-JB, it is justified.
Conclusion
The last chapter introduced KFVR and argued that it compares favourably with its traditionalist virtue reliabilist competitors. This chapter has done the same for rivals in the knowledge first camp. More specifically, we have seen that knowledge first accounts of justified belief encounter the new Gettier problem. Even if they will not have to account for the absence of knowledge in these cases, they will have to account for the presence of justification.
What this chapter has argued is that alternative knowledge first versions of virtue reliabilism in the literature, that is, Millar's and Miracchi's, both succumb to the new Gettier problem. On Millar's view, justified belief entails knowledge. As a result, no Gettier case comes out as a case of justified belief. Miracchi's account of justified belief, in contrast, is slightly weaker. Even if this allows her to explain the presence of justified belief in standard Gettier cases, her account still rules out justification in other cases. In particular, I have argued that fake barn cases continue to constitute a problem for the view.
In contrast, I have argued that KFVR-JB can accommodate the presence of justified belief in Gettier cases of both the standard and the fake barns variety. One way of seeing why this works is that the external condition on knowledge is even weaker than Miracchi's. Justified belief does not require an objectively high probability of knowledge, it only requires sufficiently high probability in favourable conditions. Since conditions in Gettier cases aren't favourable, the fact that (in some of them at least) the objective probability of coming to know is very low constitutes no threat for the view.
All in all, I take myself to have provided a reasonable amount of support for KFVR, enough, I submit, to rest my case for the time being.
Notes
1 Note that Millar is not the only one who encounters this problem. There are other views in the knowledge first camp are equally in trouble, including all knowledge first accounts according to which justified belief entails knowledge such as Littlejohn's (2015, Forthcoming), Sutton's (2005, 2007) and Williamson's (2000, 2010), alongside Millar's. In this way, the problem is one that is not specific to Millar. What's more, the solution that Millar offers (see below), according to which the relevant agents are not justified but only blameless, is the standard response to this problem. All of the above have ventured to deal with this problem via some version of this move or other. By the same token, the argument (developed below) that the distinction between justification and blameless won't do the trick for Millar generalises also. The generalised version of this argument is developed in more detail in Kelp (2016) and Simion, Kelp & Ghijsen (2016).
2 See Kelp & Simion (Forthcoming) for a full account of blameless action that incorporates both (B1) and (B2). Could it be the case that one φs in the light of good reason to believe that one φs in the light of good reason to believe that φ-ing is permissible whilst one should have known that φ-ing is impermissible? Perhaps. However, for present purposes, this issue is of little importance. Accordingly, I will simply assume that one cannot φ in the light of good reason to believe that φ-ing is permissible when one should have known that it isn't.
3 Littlejohn (Forthcoming) draws a distinction among blameless agents between agents who get an excuse and agents who get an exemption. In the case of exemptions the rational capacities of the blameless agent are absent or compromised. In contrast, agents who are blameless but have intact rational capacities get excuses (Littlejohn Forthcoming: 10). Could Millar venture to accommodate the difference between agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases on the one hand and agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation on the other by means of the distinction between exemptions and excuses? It is easy to see that the answer to this question is no. While agents in cases like Insanity come out as getting an exemption on Littlejohn's view, agents in cases like Benighted Isolation will get an excuse. After all, their rational capacities are in perfect working order. Even with the proposed distinction in play, champions of Millar's account of justified belief will be unable to accommodate the difference between agents in Gettier and Counterpart cases on the one hand and agents in cases like Benighted Isolation on the other. What's more, it might be thought that even if the distinction did serve to get the cases right, it is still bound to be insufficient for understanding the normative status at issue in Gettier cases. After all, there is a clear normative difference between an excuse and a justification that this view threatens to collapse.
4 It is easy to see that the beliefs of agents in cases like Insanity and Benighted Isolation do not have all of these hallmark properties of justified belief. In particular, they do not have P1 and P2. If so, we have reason to think that the beliefs of agents in these cases are not justified.
5 It may be worth noting that this is not how Miracchi motivates Proficiency Condition. Rather, for her Proficiency Condition is a key element in her account of why she can avoid the Gettier problem (Miracchi 2015a: 47). That said, I did not mean to suggest that the above is the only way for Miracchi to motivate Proficiency Condition. After all, the two are certainly compatible. What's more, I cannot see why Miracchi wouldn't allow that cases like the above provide additional motivation for Proficiency Condition.









Appendix
The Safety Dilemma
In Chapter 3 I argued that traditionalist virtue reliabilist accounts of knowledge aim to account for fake barn cases by introducing a safety or safety-like condition on knowledge. I also argued that, as a result, they are facing a dilemma with fake barn cases on one horn and cases of unsafe knowledge on the other. In this appendix, I will take a look at a few of the most prominent virtue reliabilist accounts of knowledge and show how the dilemma affects them.
Sosa
In order to deal with fake barn cases, Sosa first introduces a distinction between animal knowledge, reflective knowledge, and knowledge full well. Animal knowledge is simple first-order apt belief. Reflective knowledge is reflectively apt belief. Knowledge full well is apt belief such that its aptness derives from its reflective aptness. Crucially, according to Sosa, reflectively apt performance requires safe success. To see this, note that a performance is reflectively apt if and only if one has aptly assessed the risks of inaptness. In particular, one must have formed an apt belief that the performance would be successful, if one were to produce it. Since apt belief is factive, one's performance is reflectively apt only if it would be successful, were one to produce it; alternatively, given a standard possible worlds semantics for counterfactual conditionals, one's performance is reflectively apt only if at close possible worlds at which one produces it, it is successful. Since fully apt performance entails reflectively apt performance, fully apt performance also requires safe success in this sense.
Second, knowledge full well is fully apt belief and so entails belief that is safe in the sense that one knows that p full well only if were one to believe that p, p would be true; alternatively, one knows that p full well only if at close possible worlds at which one believes that p, p is true.
Finally, third, Sosa understands "human knowledge as requiring knowledge full well" (Sosa 2015: 85). As a result, human knowledge features the aforementioned safety condition.
With these points in play, it is easy to see how Sosa can handle fake barns cases. Sosa agrees that, in the fake barn case, your belief that you are facing a barn qualifies as animal knowledge. You attain simple first-order aptness, just as the agents in the analogous practical cases (e.g. archery) do. However, since you are in an area in which indistinguishable fakes predominate, your belief is not safe. At very close possible worlds at which you form a belief that you are facing a barn, you are looking at a fake barn. At those worlds, your belief is false. In consequence, you do not rise to the higher levels of reflective knowledge and knowledge full well. Since human knowledge requires knowledge full well, it follows that you fall short of human knowledge. In this way, the absence of knowledge is duly explained.
It is not hard to see that if Sosa's story handles fake barn cases in a satisfactory manner, it is bound to get him into trouble with Frankfurt cases and other counterexamples to safety. Let's return to Frankfurt Clock. In this case, your belief that it is 8:22 is not safe. There are some very close worlds at which you come down the stairs a minute earlier or later. At those worlds, the demon manipulates the clock to read '8:22' anyway. You form a false belief that it is 8:22. Since your belief is unsafe, it falls short of reflective knowledge and knowledge full well. Since human knowledge requires knowledge full well, Sosa's account incorrectly predicts absence of (human) knowledge here.
Now, at some point, Sosa suggests to accommodate conflicting intuitions about certain cases in terms of their sensitivity to different levels of knowledge (Sosa 2015: 81). Couldn't he also use this strategy here? That is to say, couldn't he maintain the intuition of the absence of knowledge in the fake barn case picks up on the absence of knowledge full well, while the intuition of the presence of knowledge in Frankfurt Clock picks up on the presence of animal knowledge?
On reflection, there is reason to believe that the answer to these questions is no. As a first observation, Sosa claims that fully apt performance is "what really matters" and that "the fully desirable status for performances in general is full aptness" (Sosa 2015: 85). Applied to the epistemic case, this means that the state that's of genuine epistemic value is knowledge full well. If so, it is unclear why we should ever be interested in mere animal knowledge and, consequently, why the presence of animal knowledge should ever trigger an intuition of knowledge when the state of genuine value, knowledge full well, could have been attained but wasn't.
Perhaps more importantly, Sosa's explanation, if it works all, will do best in accounting for differences in intuitions across subjects. That is to say, it will work best in accounting for why some people are willing to grant that agents in fake barn cases know, while others aren't. Those who are interested in animal knowledge have the intuition, whereas those interested in knowledge full well don't. (It may also be worth noting that this is how Sosa envisages the explanation to work.)
What is less plausible is that this kind of explanation will serve to explain divergent intuitions about cases in a single subject. It is less plausible that it will successfully explain why one and the same person has an intuition of presence of knowledge in some cases and an intuition of absence of knowledge in other cases. After all, for the explanation to work, one and the same person would have to pick up on the presence of animal knowledge in one case and the absence of knowledge full well in the other. Why should that be? Why should I be picking up on the presence of your animal knowledge that it is 8:22 in Frankfurt Clock, and the absence of your knowledge full well that you are facing a barn in Fake Barns? Even if we bracket the issue of why we should ever be interested in anything other than human knowledge, the obvious answer in terms of a difference in interest carries little promise. Why should I be interested in animal knowledge in the former and knowledge full well in the latter?
Finally, to see just how difficult it will be to offer a satisfactory answer to these questions, note that the intuitions remain even when the cases are considered side-by-side and the judges are confident that what they are interested in and what they are assessing is the presence or absence of the state of genuine value, i.e. human knowledge. For instance, when considering Fake Barns and Frankfurt Clock side-by-side, I am inclined to say that you don't know that you are facing a barn, while you do know that it is 8:22. I am also very confident that what I am interested in and what I am assessing is the presence or absence of human knowledge. That is to say, I am inclined to say that you don't have human knowledge that you are facing a barn, while you have human knowledge that it is 8:22. For the envisaged explanation to do the trick here, it would have to be the case that, despite all this, I am picking up on animal knowledge in Frankfurt Clock and on knowledge full well in Fake Barns. Why should that be the case? I cannot see even a remotely plausible answer on the horizon.1 Without a satisfactory answer to this question, however, Sosa does not successfully escape the safety dilemma.
Greco
To see how Greco ventures to deal with fake barn cases, note that he maintains that attributions of abilities afford a contextualist semantics: context determines which ability to attain success, S, in conditions C is picked out by 'ability to S'. In the case of attributions of the epistemic abilities at issue in VR-K, the virtue epistemological account of knowledge, the story is even more complex: context first determines a practical reasoning context, which may be the agent's, the attributors' or some third party's. The relevant epistemic ability picked out by 'epistemic ability' is then fixed in accordance with what Greco takes to be a core function of the concept of knowledge, to wit, flagging actionable information and sources of information, where what is actionable is determined by the practical reasoning context fixed at the first step (Greco 2010: 78-9).
Greco's account of fake barn cases exploits the context sensitivity of attributions of ability. More specifically, Greco aims to show that in the context that obtained when we considered Fake Barns and in which we found it intuitive that you do not know that you are looking at a barn, the semantic value of 'ability to form true beliefs about the presence of barns' is something like ability to form true beliefs about the presence of barns while moving through an area featuring mostly indistinguishable fakes. The idea here is that the epistemic ability's C include the wider area in which you find yourself and in which fake barns predominate. Moreover, the ability's C are not restricted to circumstances in which you happen to look out of the window just when you pass a real barn, but also include circumstances in which you look out of the window a little bit earlier or later and end up looking at a fake barn. But now notice that, given that the C are thus understood, the majority of nearby worlds at which you are in these C and form a belief about the presence of a barn are worlds at which you end up looking at a fake barn. Since, at those worlds, you end up with a false belief that you are looking at a barn, it is not the case that you attain true beliefs about the presence of barns at a high rate across nearby worlds in these C. On Greco's account of abilities, then, you do not have the ability to form true beliefs about the presence of barns relative to these C. In consequence, in our context, the attribution of the relevant epistemic ability to you is false and the denial of knowledge is true.
But now notice that, on Greco's account, sentences of the form 'S knows that p' and 'S does not know that p' do not express propositions unless both of the following have been determined: (i) a practical reasoning context and (ii) what counts as actionable information in the context at issue. While Greco effectively endorses this consequence of his view (Greco 2010: 79-80), it does appear to generate some trouble for him.2 To see this, notice that the description of Fake Barns appears to leave both of these issues wide open. But given that this is so, the sentence 'You do not know that you are looking at a barn' doesn't express a proposition in the context that obtained when you first read Fake Barns. At the same time, you agreed (if only implicitly), with my assertion, that I took it to be agreed that you do not know that you are looking at a barn. Now, this is rather puzzling. If Greco is right and 'You do not know that you are looking at a barn' does not express a proposition in that context, we'd expect competent speakers of English like yourself to disagree with this assertion. After all, the object of agreement is a proposition. If 'You do not know that you are looking at a barn' doesn't express a proposition, there simply is no suitable object for agreement. We'd expect competent speakers of English to notice this and to refuse to accept my assertion. If this isn't immediately obvious, compare: You are standing in a room with fifty paintings by a variety of artists. I walk in and assert, 'I take it to be agreed that this is a Picasso' offering no indication of what 'this' is supposed to refer to. Given that you are a competent speaker of English, we would expect you to disagree with my assertion. If you decided to respond, we would not expect you to say, 'Yes, you are right.' Rather, we'd expect you, for instance, to point out that before you can agree you will have to know which painting I have in mind. In other words, we'd expect you to spot the problem and refuse to accept the assertion. For that reason, the fact that you agreed with my assertion about you suggests that 'You don't know that you are looking at a barn' did express a proposition when I asserted 'I take it to be agreed that you do not know that you are looking at a barn' in the context that obtained when you first read Fake Barns. Greco thus faces a difficulty.
I assume that Greco's response to this difficulty is that there is a default practical reasoning context and a default standard for actionable information, which are in play in contexts in which no explicit information about the practical reasoning context and what counts as actionable information is provided. If so, then it is the default practical reasoning context and standard for actionable information that are in play in the context that obtained when you agreed that you do not know that you are facing a barn upon reading Fake Barns. For Greco's account of the absence of knowledge in Fake Barns to work, the C at issue in the default practical reasoning context and given default standards for actionable information must be wide enough to include the wider area you find yourself in as well as circumstances in which you look out of the window a bit earlier or later and end up looking at a fake barn.
With these points in play, let's return to Frankfurt Clock. Notice that, here too, we have not been given explicit information about the practical reasoning context and the standards for actionable information. Yet, again we have no difficulties in agreeing that you know. We may thus assume that the default practical reasoning context and standard for actionable information obtain. Now, crucially, if, in Fake Barns, the C at issue in the default practical reasoning context and given default standards for actionable information are wide enough to include circumstances in which you look out of the window a bit earlier or later and end up looking at a fake barn, then, in Frankfurt Clock, the C that are in play by default will be wide enough to include circumstances in which you look at the clock a bit earlier or later. Of course, in those cases, the demon shows his hand and you end up with a false belief about the time. The difficulty for Greco is that the majority of nearby worlds are worlds at which one of these circumstances obtains. It is thus not the case that you attain true beliefs about the time at a high rate across nearby worlds in the relevant C. On Greco's account of abilities, then, you do not have the ability to form true beliefs about the time relative to these C. The attribution of the relevant epistemic ability to you is false in the context that obtained when you read Frankfurt Clock and, in consequence, the denial of knowledge is true in that context. Greco's account of the fake barn case, if successful, will lead him to make the wrong verdict in Frankfurt Clock. Greco thus does face the dilemma.
Pritchard
Finally, consider Pritchard's anti-luck virtue epistemology:

Anti-Luck Virtue Epistemology (ALVE). S knows that p if and only if S's safe true belief that p is the product of her relevant cognitive abilities (such that her safe cognitive success is to a significant degree creditable to her cognitive agency). (Pritchard 2012a: 273)

Here is how Pritchard unpacks safety:

Safe Belief. S's belief is safe if and only if in most near-by possible worlds in which S continues to form her belief about the target proposition in the same way as in the actual world, and in all very close nearby possible worlds in which S continues to form her belief about the target proposition in the same way as the actual world, her belief continues to be true.3

It is now easy to see that your belief in Fake Barns is unsafe. Given the predominance of fake barns in your environment, at the majority of nearby possible worlds at which you continue to form a belief about the presence of a barn in the same way as in the actual world, you will be looking at a fake barn and end up with a false belief. Since safety doesn't tolerate false belief at most nearby worlds, your belief turns out unsafe. It would seem, then, that ALVE can explain the absence of knowledge in fake barn cases.
What about counterexamples to safety such as Frankfurt Clock, then? It is easy to see that the beliefs of agents in cases of unsafe knowledge are just that: unsafe. For instance, in Frankfurt Clock, at the majority of nearby possible worlds, some of which are very close, you come down the stairs a minute or so earlier or later. At those worlds, the demon shows his hand with the result that you wind up with a false belief about whether it is 8:22. As a result, ALVE predicts, now incorrectly, that agents in these cases lack knowledge. ALVE also succumbs to the safety dilemma.
In a number of recent pieces, Pritchard has taken on the challenge of addressing this problem of cases of unsafe knowledge. I will here focus on his response to my Frankfurt case.4 Pritchard's general strategy is to mount a case that, in Frankfurt Clock, you don't know that it is 8:22. More specifically, he offers a couple of arguments in support of this claim and an account of how those who have the intuition could have become entrapped in error. Here is his first argument:

[You are] effectively finding out the time by looking at what is (for [you] anyway) a stopped clock, since whatever time [you come] downstairs the clock will say '8:22 am'. But one cannot gain knowledge about the time by consulting a stopped clock, even when one happens to form a true belief!
(Pritchard 2012b: 187)

I must confess that I don't find this argument particularly convincing. To begin with, notice that it is a crucial part of the case that the clock is functioning properly and is thus not stopped. The issue of whether the clock is stopped is no more agent-relative than the issue of whether the earth revolves around the sun. It is no more plausible that, in Frankfurt Clock, the clock is stopped for you, than it is plausible that the sun revolves around the earth for Ptolemy. Of course, Pritchard is free to define an agent-relative concept of stopped, but then he evidently cannot appeal to the plausible idea that one cannot acquire knowledge from a stopped clock in order to argue that an agent who satisfies this agent-relative concept does not know.
There is further reason to believe that Pritchard's argument will not do the trick for him. To see this, consider the following variation of the case:

Frankfurt Clock'. Your demon nemesis wants you to believe either that it is 8:22 or else that it is past 8:22. He has resolved that if you come down before 8:22 he will set the clock to 8:22 and if you come down at 8:22 or later, he will do nothing. You come down at 8:22, the demon remains inactive, and you acquire a true belief by taking a competent reading from a perfectly functioning clock.

Just as in Frankfurt Clock, you also know that it is 8:22 here. Moreover, your belief remains unsafe. After all, you might so easily have come down the stairs a minute earlier, in which case the demon would have manipulated the clock with the result that the reading would have been inaccurate. Finally, however, in the present version of the case, the clock is not stopped for you in the sense envisaged by Pritchard. To see this, note that it is not the case that whatever time you come downstairs, the clock will read '8:22'. You might very easily have come down a minute later, in which case the demon would also have remained inactive and the clock would have read '8:23'. If so, Pritchard's response is bound to fail anyway.
Let's move on to Pritchard's second argument that you do not know. Here the idea is that since Frankfurt Clock is structurally analogous to Fake Barns and since, in Fake Barns, you lack knowledge, we should accept that the same is true in Frankfurt Clock (Pritchard 2009: 40).
There are a number of problems with this argument. First and foremost, as I argued in Chapter 3, there is reason to believe that the two cases are actually not structurally analogous. But let's bracket this point for a moment. Even if the two cases are relevantly analogous, it is far from clear that the lesson to be learned is that, in Frankfurt Clock, you lack knowledge rather than that, in Fake Barns, you have knowledge. At the very least, this point affords argument. Unfortunately, Pritchard fails to deliver on this front.
That said, still assuming that the two cases are indeed analogous, Pritchard might be able to discharge at least part of the burden that he now finds himself settled with by offering a plausible error theory for the intuition that you know in Frankfurt Clock. In order to achieve this, Pritchard distinguishes between knowledge on the one hand and cognitive achievement on the other. A cognitive achievement is, roughly, a cognitive success that is primarily creditable to cognitive ability. Knowledge, in contrast, features both a weaker ability condition and the safety condition (see above). The idea then is that, while knowledge and cognitive achievement often go hand-in-hand, they can sometimes come apart. Cases like Frankfurt Clock constitute one type of case in which they do. Those who have the intuition that you have knowledge in this case mistake cognitive achievement for knowledge (Pritchard 2009: 40, 2012b: 183, 2013: 160).
There are two problems with Pritchard's error theory. To see the first, notice that what Pritchard owes us, at this stage, is an explanation of why our intuition leads us astray in Frankfurt Clock but not in Fake Barns. Pritchard's story does not achieve this. After all, Fake Barns, too, is a case of cognitive achievement without knowledge. If, in such cases, we are prone to mistake cognitive achievement for knowledge, the question remains why we don't do so in Fake Barns also. The issue that affords diagnosis—why intuition leads us astray in Frankfurt Clock but not in Fake Barns—thus remains unresolved.
Pritchard's diagnosis fails on yet another and more significant count: there are variations of Frankfurt Clock in which you do not secure a cognitive achievement, at least not by Pritchard's own lights. To see this, notice that, besides cases of cognitive achievement without knowledge, Pritchard also grants that there are cases of knowledge without cognitive achievement. Most importantly, cases of testimonial knowledge in which the greatest part of the cognitive work is done by the testifier and not the receiver of testimony fall under this heading (Pritchard 2008: 446 and Pritchard et al. 2010: 40-3). That means that if we can offer a (suitable) variation of Frankfurt Clock involving testimonial knowledge in which the bulk of the cognitive work is done by the testifier, Pritchard is committed to treating the case as one in which the agent does not secure a cognitive achievement. If so, his diagnosis of Frankfurt Clock in terms of mistaking cognitive achievement for knowledge is bound to fail.
This leaves us with the task of providing a suitable case. Here goes:

Frankfurt Clock". As you come down the stairs, your little cousin, who cannot yet read the clock, asks you what time it is. You look at the clock, see that it reads 8:22 and tell your cousin that it is 8:22. On that basis, your cousin acquires a true belief that it is 8:22. Unbeknownst to both of you, your cousin's demon nemesis was lurking in the background, prepared to set the clock to 8:22 had you not happened to look at it at just the right time, i.e. at precisely 8:22.

Your cousin's belief qualifies as knowledge. At the same time, this belief is not safe. At many nearby possible worlds, including very close ones, at which your cousin acquires the belief via testimony from you, you come down the stairs a minute earlier or later. Since, in that case, the demon shows his hand, at those worlds your cousin ends up with a false belief. Crucially, the bulk of the cognitive work is done by the testifier (here, you). After all, you are the one who has the crucial cognitive ability in this case. If so, by Pritchard's lights, the belief about the time your cousin forms does not qualify as a cognitive achievement. We thus have a case of unsafe knowledge without cognitive achievement. Pritchard's diagnosis of the intuition of knowledge in terms of mistaking cognitive achievement for knowledge fails on yet another count. Despite Pritchard's best efforts, ALVE does not manage to escape the safety dilemma.
Notes
1 I do not mean to say that it is impossible to imagine some such explanation. A contextualist semantics for 'human knowledge' according to which, when considering Frankfurt Clock, 'human knowledge' means animal knowledge and, when considering Fake Barns 'human knowledge' means knowledge full well, in conjunction with a good dose of semantic blindness ensuring that I am blissfully unaware of the context shift as I move from one case to the other might do the trick. However, I take this move to be so implausible that it can safely be set aside.
2 In fact, there is reason to believe that it is a vital feature of our concept of knowledge that it is applicable without information about the specificities of some practical reasoning context (Craig 1990).
3 Pritchard (2007: 292, 2009: 34). It may be worth noting that, in more recent work Pritchard has moved to a full-blown sliding scale account of the tolerance for error at nearby worlds. The idea is that at nearby worlds closest to actuality, safety tolerates no false beliefs and the further we move away from actuality the more false beliefs safety is compatible with. However, Pritchard has not given a precise statement of safety in recent work. Note also that, in recent references to "versions of the safety principle" in the literature, Pritchard (2012b: 170, fn.3, 2013: n.10) lists Safe Belief as the last version in his own work.
4 Note that, for present purposes, this should be perfectly fine. After all, if this response remains unsatisfactory, the safety dilemma remains unresolved.









Appendix
Lottery Cases
In Chapter 3 I sketched three ways of dealing with the apparent absence of knowledge in lottery cases such as Lottery Loser and No Winner. I provided theoretical reason for thinking that, according to the right approach to these cases, we do not even have justification for believing lottery propositions and that that's why we don't know them to be true either. In what follows, I will once more look at a number of the most prominent virtue reliabilist treatments of lottery cases.
