Sosa
Perhaps somewhat surprisingly, Sosa accepts that we do know in lottery cases. In order to make this response palatable—if only to those of us who, like me, find it entirely implausible—Sosa does two things. First, he produces some evidence that the likes of lottery propositions can be commonsensically asserted. Second, he offers an error theory for the intuition that we don't know lottery propositions.
Let's first look at the relevant linguistic evidence, which can be found in the following passage:

I have claimed that lottery propositions are knowable, which may provoke incredulous outrage. And yet, about someone's infidelity after twenty-five years of marriage, I might say: "You see, you never know!" This I might say commonsensically even if it would be wrong to add that no one ever knows that their spouse is faithful [E1]. And to someone in tears because their hopes were dashed when their ticket lost in a zillion-ticket lottery, we can say: "Why are you surprised? You should have known that you would lose. You knew the odds!" [E2] And to someone who trusted their shaman's prediction that their ticket would win, and is surprised when it loses, we can say: "Aw, come on, you should have known better." [E3] Finally, consider someone anxiously holding their ticket as they look expectantly at the screen where the winner is about to be announced. It seems perfectly appropriate to tell them, seriously and with no hint of jocularity: "Don't set yourself up for disappointment. Trust me. Your ticket has lost." [E4]
(Sosa 2015: 122)

As a first observation, note that what matters is not what we might commonsensically say. To see this, note that we might commonsensically say lots of false things. What matters is not what one might commonsensically say, but what one can correctly say. If we want to use what we might say as evidence for how things are, we had better at least consult our well-considered judgements on the relevant assertions and check whether the assertion is appropriate given our well-considered judgements.
With this point in play, let's take a closer look at Sosa's evidence. There are four pieces, which I have labelled [E1] - [E4]. I'd like to say straightaway that I just don't agree that with Sosa on [E2] and [E4]. In particular, given a well-considered judgement, "You should have known that you would lose" and "Your ticket has lost" cannot be appropriately asserted. [E2] and [E4] don't serve to support Sosa's case.
In the case of [E3], it is not even clear what the content of the assertion is. Of course, "You should have known better" might express the proposition that you should have known that your ticket will lose. However, it might also express the proposition that you should have known not to trust your shaman. If it is clear that the assertion expresses the former proposition, I am again unwilling to concede that it is a proposition that can be appropriately asserted, given a well-considered judgement. If it expresses the latter proposition, it is entirely appropriate, even after well-considered judgement. However, in that case it provides no support for Sosa's case.
Finally, [E1] does not do better either. At the very best, it serves to show that the mere fact that we say things like "You never know" in lottery cases does not provide evidence that people don't know that tickets won't lose. But that's of course not evidence for Sosa's view. In fact, on reflection, there is reason to think that the relevant linguistic evidence tells against Sosa. To see this, notice first that "You see you never know" has the form of a generic just like "Mosquitos transmit malaria." Some such sentences (call them 'mere generics') can be true even if some (perhaps many) of its instances are false. "Mosquitos transmit malaria" is true, even though "This mosquito transmits malaria" is false. Similarly, "You see you never know" in Sosa's case may be true even if "X doesn't know that his spouse has been faithful to him" is false. However, other sentences that have the form of generics express genuine universal generalisations. "Ravens are black" is one example. If so, the reason why "You never know" is true in lottery cases could be that it expresses a mere generic or a genuine universal generalisation. There is excellent reason to believe that it is the latter. Just as "This raven is black" is true of all ravens we have ever encountered, "X knows that this ticket won't win" is true of all agents we have ever encountered who only have the probabilistic evidence against winning at their disposal.
Let's move on, then, to the second part of Sosa's story on lottery propositions, to wit, his error theory. The key idea here is that in taking lottery propositions to be unknowable, we are confusing the true safety condition on knowledge with the false sensitivity condition. Recall that, according to safety, one knows that p only if were one to believe that p, p would be true (Bp □→ p). Sensitivity is the contrapositive of the counterfactual at issue in safety. According to sensitivity, then, one knows that p only if were p false, one would not believe that p (¬p □→ ¬Bp). Crucially, while material conditionals contrapose, counterfactual conditionals don't. Hence, safety does not entail sensitivity. As a result of missing this important fact about counterfactuals, we are "misled into accepting a sensitivity condition by confusing it with a safety condition." (Sosa 2015: 120). More specifically, Sosa wants to allow that lottery propositions satisfy safety. For instance, he grants that, in Lottery Loser, your belief that my ticket won't win is such that were you to believe it won't win, it would be the case that it won't win. However, beliefs in lottery propositions are not sensitive. To see this, consider, once more, your belief that my ticket won't win. If my ticket were to win, you would still believe that it won't. Hence, your belief is not sensitive. Even though you really know that my ticket won't win, we are confusing the true safety with the false sensitivity condition and so are led to the mistaken intuition that you do not know that my ticket won't win.
There are a number of problems with Sosa's account. First, as Frankfurt cases suggest, there is reason to believe that we don't even accept a safety condition on knowledge. If so, there is no basis for being misled into accepting the sensitivity condition on knowledge in terms of which Sosa wants to explain our error.
But even if we bracket this issue, Sosa's error theory gets him into trouble elsewhere. To see this, consider the following case:

[Take] a world where apple has grown so large that a million operators stand by constantly to provide answers to any simple apple question, and suppose technology randomizes in such a way that there are a million-minus-one operators no farther modally from me than the one I actually reach when I place my call. And suppose there is one bad apple in the lot, a liar who would give me an incorrect answer. But suppose further that apple's service continues to be great, so that all the other million-minus-one operators are infallibly reliable in their answers to such questions. Is that enough to preclude me from learning the answer to my question from the operator I actually reach?
(Sosa 2015: 119)

Crucially, as Sosa himself acknowledges, the answer to his last question is no. That is to say, the agent does have knowledge in this case. But now note that this case has exactly the same modal profile as the lottery case. Both cases are cases of safe but insensitive belief. If we are prone to confusing safety and sensitivity and if this leads us to mistakenly judge knowledge to be absent in the lottery case, we would expect to be led to a mistaken judgement that knowledge is absent in this case, too. However, this is not what we find. As I already said, we grant the agent knowledge in this case.
If successful in lottery cases, Sosa's error theory thus threatens to make mistaken predictions in other cases, including his own case of the bad apple. Of course, Sosa might want to say that in the latter case we simply do not fall prey to the confusion. But this simply raises the question why our tendency to confuse safety and sensitivity leads us to mistaken judgements in some cases (e.g. Lottery Loser) but not in others (e.g. the bad apple case). Until Sosa has provided a satisfactory answer to this question, his error theory for lottery cases remains unsatisfactory.
Greco
Recall that, according to Greco, a belief is apt just in case epistemic ability saliently explains why one believes truly. Crucially, according to Greco, salient luck may trump the salience of epistemic abilities. This is exactly what, according to Greco, happens in lottery cases. More specifically, Greco claims that "the very idea of a lottery has the idea of chance built right into it" (2003b: 124). For instance, in Lottery Loser, in conversational contexts in which your belief in <loser> is under discussion, luck becomes salient. It trumps the salience of epistemic ability so that what is salient in the explanation of why you truly believe <loser> is not your epistemic ability but the fact that you were lucky enough to believe in the way that happened to correspond with the facts (e.g. 2003b: § IV). Hence, Greco's view predicts that 'you know that my ticket won't win l′ is bound to express a falsehood, thus explaining the absence of knowledge in our toy case.1
Unfortunately, there is reason to think that Greco's account of lottery cases remains unsatisfactory. To see this, consider the following variation of the case:

Rigged Lottery. I have bought a ticket in a lottery with one million tickets and exactly one winner, l″. In view of the low chances of winning, you believe that my ticket won't win l″ (<loser′>). Unbeknownst to me and you, l″ has been rigged by X and Y. They have made arrangements that no ticket will win l″.

Just as in the original version of the case, you don't know <loser′>, even though your belief is true and based on excellent evidence. At the same time, there is excellent reason to think that Greco will struggle to explain the absence of knowledge in this version of the case. To see this, notice that l″ is evidently not a chancy event. After all, the outcome has been fixed in advance. No ticket is going to win. Greco's core claim that "the very idea of a lottery has the idea of chance built right into it" turns out to be incorrect.2 As a result, it should now be possible to construct conversational contexts in which luck is not salient. Here is one: X and Y are discussing whether anyone has got wind of their foul play. X knows that you believe <loser′> and worries that you might believe this because you know that l″ is fixed. However, Y is quick to appease X's worry: "They don't know that Kelp's ticket won't win. They believe that Kelp's ticket won't win because of the low chances of winning. They have no inkling that the lottery is rigged."
What is salient in this context, if anything, is the non-luckiness of my ticket not winning the lottery. What Y effectively points out is that your belief falls short of knowledge despite the fact that it is not a matter of luck that my ticket will lose. Luck is simply not salient in this context. As a result, Greco's explanation fails. Salient luck does not trump the salience of epistemic abilities here. In fact, his account predicts, mistakenly, that in the present context "you know that my ticket won't win" expresses a truth and Y's claim that you don't know turns out false.
Pritchard
To see why ALVE's account of these cases remains unsatisfactory, recall first Sosa's case of the bad apple. As Sosa (2015: 118-9) forcefully argues, this case forces ALVE into a dilemma. After all, we have seen that Sosa's case has the same modal profile as a lottery case. At the same time, unlike in lottery cases, the agent in Sosa's case knows what he is told. In consequence, ALVE faces the following dilemma: either the safety condition is construed as strong enough to ensure that, in Lottery Loser, you do not satisfy it. In that case, it can correctly explain the absence of knowledge. However, since the bad apple case has the same modal profile as Lottery Loser, the agent in the bad apple case is bound not to satisfy this strong safety condition either. That is to say, if ALVE construes safety as strong enough to correctly predict absence of knowledge in Lottery Loser, it is bound to make incorrect predictions in the bad apple case. Alternatively, Pritchard can construe the safety condition as weak enough to allow that the agent in the bad apple case satisfies it. However, since the lottery case has the same modal profile, it follows that the agent in the lottery case satisfies this weak safety condition also. That means that if ALVE construes safety as weak enough to allow for knowledge in Sosa's case, it is bound to be too weak to explain the absence of knowledge in Lottery Loser. Either way, then, ALVE is in trouble.
What's more, there is reason to believe that even on the strong construal of safety, safety is too weak to explain the absence of knowledge in lottery cases. To see this, consider again the case of a rigged lottery. In particular, note that a lottery, l‴ may be safely rigged, perhaps only in the sense that it is ensured that a particular person's ticket, mine say, would not win, no matter which ticket I might buy. If so, when you acquire a belief that my ticket won't win l‴, you will acquire a safe belief.3 However, when the belief is based only on the high odds against winning, it falls short of knowledge. Or consider a case in which you believe, again based on the high odds against winning, that the ticket I bought won't make me rich. Your belief falls short of knowledge. Compatibly with that, my ticket may have been destroyed since I bought it. So suppose it has been. If so, there will be no close possible worlds at which it will make me rich. Your belief once again ends up safe. It comes to light that the safety condition is too weak to explain the absence of knowledge in all lottery cases. ALVE thus does not manage to offer a satisfactory account of lottery cases.4
Notes
1 It is worth noting that Greco does not discuss beliefs about lottery losers in his 2010 book. However, he develops the account outlined above in a number of earlier papers (Greco 2003a,b, 2004). What's more, this account is still endorsed in Greco & Turri (2013: §6).
2 In fact, it is not hard to see exactly how Greco went wrong. While the idea of a fair lottery is by its nature the idea of a chancy event, the idea of an unfair or rigged lottery clearly isn't.
3 Note that Pritchard himself effectively acknowledges as much. By way of evidence, consider the following passage in which he describes a recipe of generating cases in which the agent has safe beliefs that fall short of knowledge:

Imagine an agent forming her beliefs about a certain subject matter on an epistemically problematic basis, and then stipulate some feature of the environment—a helpful demon, for example—whose overriding concern is to ensure that what the subject believes is true, to the extent that the evil demon changes the facts to ensure that what the subject believes is the case. Here we have the right kind of modal profile for the subject's true belief to be safe, in that this is a true belief that could not easily have been a false belief . . .
(Pritchard 2014: 158)

Your belief that my ticket won't win l‴ fits the description of Pritchard's recipe like a glove. As a result, we may expect Pritchard to have no qualms with the safety of his belief in this case.
4 Couldn't Pritchard venture to explain your lack of knowledge in this case in terms of the virtue condition on knowledge? No. To see why, notice that Pritchard endorses a weakened version of Greco's virtue condition on knowledge. However, as we have seen above, even Greco's version of this condition is too weak to do the trick in lottery cases. In fact, Pritchard himself acknowledges as much:

First off, notice how strong virtue epistemology struggles with the lottery case. After all, [your epistemic] success does seem to be explained by the exercise of her relevant [epistemic] abilities, doesn't it? Put another way, if it is not [your epistemic] ability that explains [your epistemic] success, then what does explain it? For note that the only plausible candidate here is the (epistemic) good fortune that [my] ticket is indeed a losing ticket. However, given the odds involved, it is hard to see how this eventuality could be considered a matter of fortune at all.
(Pritchard 2012a: 266-7)

As a result, the prospects of explaining the absence of knowledge in lottery cases in terms of the virtue condition are dim, to say the least. The fact that the safety condition is not up to the task either means that these cases do constitute a genuine obstacle for ALVE.









Bibliography
Aikin, S. 2005. Who is afraid of epistemology's regress problem. Philosophical Studies, 126, 191-217.
Aikin, S. 2008. Meta-epistemology and the varieties of epistemic infinitism. Synthese, 163, 175-85.
Aikin, S. 2011. Epistemology and the Regress Problem. London: Routledge.
Alston, W. 1988. Justification and knowledge. In: Epistemic Justification. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Alston, W. 1995. How to think about reliability. Philosophical Topics, 23, 1-29.
Audi, R. 2001. An internalist theory of normative grounds. Philosophical Topics, 23, 31-45.
Beddor, B. 2015. Process reliabilism's troubles with defeat. Philosophical Quarterly, 65, 145-59.
Beebe, J. 2004. The generality problem, statistical relevance and the tri-level hypothesis. Noûs, 38, 177-95.
Bird, A. 2007. Justified judging. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 74, 81-110.
Bishop, M. 2010. Why the generality problem is everybody's problem. Philosophical Studies, 151, 285-98.
Bogardus, T. 2013. Knowledge under threat. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 86, 289-313.
BonJour, L. 1980. Externalist theories of empirical knowledge. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 5, 53-73.
BonJour, L. 1985. The Structure of Empirical Justification. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
BonJour, L., & Sosa, E. 2003. Epistemic Justification: Internalism vs. Externalism, Foundations vs. Virtues. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Cappelen, H. 2012. Philosophy Without Intuitions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carter, A. 2016. Robust virtue epistemology as anti-luck epistemology: a new solution. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 97, 140-55.
Carter, A., Jarvis, B., & Rubin, K. 2015. Varieties of cognitive achievement. Philosophical Studies, 172, 1603-23.
Chisholm, R. 1977. Theory of Knowledge. 2nd edn. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Cohen, S. 1984. Justification and truth. Philosophical Studies, 46, 279-96.
Colaço, D., Buckwalter, W., Stich, S., & Machery, E. 2014. Epistemic intuitions in fake-barn thought experiments. Episteme, 11, 199-212.
Comesaña, J. 2005. Unsafe knowledge. Synthese, 146, 395-404.
Comesaña, J. 2006. A well-founded solution to the generality problem. Philosophical Studies, 129, 27-47.
Conee, E., & Feldman, R. 1998. The generality problem for reliabilism. Philosophical Studies, 89, 1-29.
Conee, E., & Feldman, R. 2001. Internalism defended. In: Kornblith, H. (ed), Epistemology: Internalism and Externalism. Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 231-60.
Conee, E., & Feldman, R. 2004. Evidentialism: Essays in Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Craig, E. 1990. Knowledge and the State of Nature. An Essay in Conceptual Synthesis. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Deutsch, M. 2015. The Myth of the Intuitive: Experimental Philosophy and Philosophical Method. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Devitt, M. 2006. Ignorance of Language. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Devitt, M. 2011. Experimental semantics. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 82, 418-35.
Douven, I. 2002. A new solution to the paradoxes of rational acceptability. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 53, 391-410.
Douven, I. 2009. Assertion, Moore and Bayes. Philosophical Studies, 144, 361-75.
Douven, I., & Williamson, T. 2006. Generalising the Lottery Paradox. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 57, 755-79.
Foley, R. 1979. Justified inconsistent beliefs. American Philosophical Quarterly, 16, 247-57.
Foley, R. 2012. When Is True Belief Knowledge? Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Frankfurt, H. 1969. Alternate possibilities and moral responsibility. The Journal of Philosophy, 66, 829-39.
Gettier, E. 1963. Is justified true belief knowledge? Analysis, 23, 121-3.
Ghijsen, H. 2016. The Puzzle of Perceptual Justification: Conscious Experience, Higher-Order Beliefs, and Reliable Processes. Dordrecht: Springer.
Ginet, C. 1975. Knowledge, Perception, and Memory. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Goldman, A. 1976. Discrimination and perceptual knowledge. Journal of Philosophy, 73, 771-91.
Goldman, A. 1979. What is justified belief? In: Pappas, G. (ed), Justification and Knowledge. Dordrecht: Reidel.
Goldman, A. 1986. Epistemology and Cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goldman, A. 1988. Strong and weak justification. Philosophical Perspectives, 2, 51-69.
Goldman, A. 1993. Epistemic folkways and scientific epistemology. Philosophical Issues, 3, 271-85.
Goldman, A. 2008. Immediate justification and process reliabilism. In: Smith, Q. (ed), Epistemology: New Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
