
HIERARCHY IN THE FOREST


Hierarchy in the Forest
The Evolution of 
Egalitarian Behavior
Christopher Boehm
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England

Copyright © 1999 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
Second printing, 2001
First Harvard University Press paperback edition, 2001
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Boehm, Christopher.
Hierarchy in the forest : the evolution of egalitarian behavior
Christopher Boehm.
p.    cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-674-39031-8 (cloth)
ISBN 0-674-00691-7 (pbk.)
1. Human evolution.  2. Social evolution.
3. Hunting and gathering societies.  4. Primates—Evolution.
5. Social evolution in animals.  6. Political anthropology.
I. Title.
GN281.4.B64  1999
599.938—dc21  99-24035

For my father, Dwight Handforth Boehm


Preface
To one who is living one's life as a democrat, egalitarianism is a topic that
affects not only the head, but the heart. My heart was in this book, not only
in the research that underlies it, but in its writing. For egalitarianism, as
opposed to actual equality, is intrinsic to the democracy that many people
on this planet enjoy and often take for granted. We democrats live in
societies that deﬁne us as political equals, and in spite of voter apathy and
predatory lobbies we continue to wield our votes: the collective voice of the
people continues to be, ultimately, powerful. It is this essential political
leverage in the political decision-making process that keeps alive human
freedom and human rights as we know them, and I shall argue that this
type of political stance is quite ancient.
We participate in this type of political leverage because we want to keep
a say in our own governance, but, more basically, we exert it because we are
suspicious of all governance and wish to limit the powers of those who lead
and may try therefore to rule. To a democrat the power of centralized
government, be it national or local, is a perpetual threat to the personal
autonomy of its citizens, and ultimately it is the potential for rebellion by
the rank and ﬁle that keeps our personal autonomies intact. We knowingly
make a sensible compromise between maximization of personal freedom
and the needs of a nation that must keep law and order and prevent civil
war. Having made this implicit compromise, we tend to be vigilant about
our rights—with good reason.
Our earliest precursor, in this respect, may well have been an African ape
living some 5 to 7 million years ago. This vanished ancestral hominoid was
likely to have formed political coalitions that enabled the rank and ﬁle,
those who otherwise would have been utterly subordinated, to whittle away
vii

at the powers of alpha individuals whose regular practice it was to bully
them. Our direct evolutionary precursor was a human physically just like
ourselves, who lived in the Late Paleolithic and possessed an egalitarian
ethos and an egalitarian political order similar to those of present-day
hunting bands who have remained nomadic.
While this book mainly looks to the evolutionary origins of egalitarian-
ism, and to its practice among extant foragers and the tribesmen who
succeeded them, I have also included, in the next to last chapter, a more
adventurous hypothesis about the natural selection of altruistic traits. This
hypothesis would hold only if egalitarian society and the moral communi-
ties that made it possible were ancient, and if my speculations about selec-
tion mechanisms were credible. With respect to the possible (I think prob-
able) evolution of genetic altruism in humans, I expect to raise
considerable controversy among those who are biologically inclined. I can
present no smoking gun, but rather a set of circumstances that could have
favored a combination of enhanced group selection and effective suppres-
sion of free-riders. With respect to the overall evolution and phenotypic
expression of political rebelliousness, I think I am on much ﬁrmer ground,
and I present those hypotheses with conﬁdence—even though I, like any-
one else who tackles the Paleolithic, will of necessity be operating by means
of triangulation when it comes to the social and political life of earlier
humans.
This book is not just about politics, then, but about the human capacity
for altruism and also about morality more generally, about the moral
communities in which humans lived prehistorically and especially about
the political side of morality. The idea of people living morally as political
equals is a beautiful one, but in an important sense it seems to go against
human nature—a nature that leads, quite naturally, to interpersonal domi-
nation and to the formation of social dominance hierarchies, with alpha
individuals presiding over them. My main hypothesis is that in holding
onto their personal autonomies, the collective weapon of the rank and ﬁle
has been their ability to deﬁne their own social life in moral terms, and to
back up their thoughts about political parity with pointed actions in the
form of collectivized social sanctioning. Egalitarian society would never
have appeared in the absence of moral communities, and it is possible that
prehistorically they emerged at the same time.
In a sense, I am writing about the roots of democracy, and at times I
shall depart from the historical-evolutionary context to comment on egali-
tarianism as it moved into larger societies: tribal republics, and both an-
viii
Preface

cient and modern democracies. With respect to intentions, at least, the
communist enterprises that have absorbed the world in this century are
considered as experiments that were based on a tragically faulty assessment
of human nature. But the main object of the book is to explain the political
dynamics that make egalitarian societies possible at all levels, and to tie
these dynamics to a human nature that deﬁnitely is in need of further
deﬁnition and explanation.
My intellectual debts are many, and profound. In 1978 at Northwestern
University, the late Donald T. Campbell suggested that he and I co-author a
speculative paper that would explore possible biological bases for politi-
cally democratic behavior. The idea seemed fascinating, yet, to a cultural
anthropologist, a bit far-fetched. Eventually I did pursue it, and increas-
ingly I was able to conceive of political egalitarianism in an evolutionary
context. That vision was strengthened when, in 1984, I began to study wild
chimpanzees in the ﬁeld. Without the chimpanzees, I would not have
written this book about hierarchy in the forest, so in that context I must
also thank Jane Goodall for permitting a cultural anthropologist to come to
Gombe, and for generously training me in ethological ﬁeld techniques and
concepts.
In the summer of 1981, a fellowship from the National Endowment for
the Humanities enabled me to spend some time thinking about why hu-
mans living in bands and tribes are so consistently egalitarian, and about
the evolutionary forces that might have contributed to this pattern. At that
time, I asked the Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation for assistance in
examining the vehement insistence of hunter-gatherers (and tribesmen)
everywhere that they must live as political equals, and it was Guggenheim
funding for a major ethnographic survey that enabled me, in 1982, to
seriously begin an enterprise that now has spanned almost two decades. I
thank the foundation, particularly Robin Fox and Lionel Tiger, who helped
to orient its funding strategies, for taking a chance on a project that of
necessity was to be based on slim ethnographic evidence. I also thank
Christoph Antweiler of the German Anthropological Society for inviting
me to a 1989 conference at which egalitarianism was an important part of
the subject matter, and also the Department of Anthropology at Emory
University for inviting me to its Mellon Foundation Symposium on Egali-
tarian Behavior, which took place in 1995 in Atlanta. Finally, the University
of Southern California provided a sabbatical in 1998 that assisted in writ-
ing this book.
Many colleagues have contributed to the development of my thinking
Preface
ix

about egalitarianism as it is expressed in the present work. First, I must
thank Michael Fisher at Harvard University Press for invaluable feedback
with respect to organization, scope, content, and style, and for his attentive
encouragement. Barbara Smuts and Larry Arnhart carefully read the
manuscript and provided suggestions that led to major transformations of
organization and content. I am grateful to others who have read drafts of
this book, or of other manuscripts of mine on the subject of egalitarianism,
whose comments, critical or supportive, have fed into the book: Michael
Boehm, Paul Bohannan, Donald E. Brown, Donald T. Campbell, Robin
Fox, Bruce Knauft, Steve Lansing, Alexander Moore, Martin Muller, Pete
Richerson, Gary Seaman, Craig Stanford, Frans de Waal, David Sloan Wil-
son, Edward O. Wilson, and Richard Wrangham. In addition, I should like
to thank those who wrote commentaries on a pair of Current Anthropology
articles I published (in 1993 and 1996) that were germane to egalitarian
politics, and whose critical or supportive comments have assisted my
thinking: Christoph Antweiler, Harold B. Barclay, Robert Knox Dentan,
Marie-Claude Dupré, Irenäus Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Jonathan D. Hill, Susan Kent,
Bruce M. Knauft, Steven Mithen, Keith Otterbein, Steve Rayner, Peter J.
Richerson, and David Sloan Wilson.
In preparing the manuscript for publication, I am grateful to Susan
Yewell and Deborah Boliver Boehm, and to editors Vivian Wheeler and
Kate Brick at Harvard University Press, for their good advice and expert
assistance. Finally, I have dedicated this book to my father, Dwight Hand-
forth Boehm, who himself was a consummate political egalitarian.
x
Preface

Contents
1
The Question of Egalitarian Society
1
2
Hierarchy and Equality
16
3
Putting Down Aggressors
43
4
Equality and Its Causes
64
5
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
90
6
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
125
7
Ancestral Politics
149
8
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
171
9
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
197
10
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
225
References
259
Index
281
xi


C H A P T E R
1
The Question of
Egalitarian Society
In the early 1800s Alexis de Tocqueville traveled extensively through the
United States of America, and some years later wrote the following: "Al-
though the capacities of men are different, as the Creator intended they
should be, the means that Americans ﬁnd for putting them to use are
equal . . . . The Anglo-Americans are the ﬁrst nation who . . . have been
happy enough to escape the dominion of absolute power. They have been
allowed by their circumstances, their origin, their intelligence, and espe-
cially by their morals to establish and maintain the sovereignty of the
people" (de Tocqueville [1835] 1994:52, 54). This astute Frenchman was
quick to point out that our American obsession with equalization of status
was pointedly political. What fascinated him was that social and economic
nonequals could build a "society of equals" when it came to the enjoyment
of individual autonomy, and that such a principle could dominate the
overall political trajectory of a nation.
I write about political egalitarianism of the type Tocqueville described,
speciﬁcally about its origins. But it was not Americans, two centuries ago,
who invented this interesting political way of life; nor was it the Athenians
of ancient Greece. The "democratic" origins I describe are not recent and
historical, but evolutionary and ancient. They date from well back in the
Paleolithic era, and were intimately involved with the development of hu-
man nature itself.
Are we by nature hierarchical or egalitarian? For humans this is a per-
plexing question. In considering other group-living primates, a ﬁeld
worker can easily determine ethologically whether they are essentially "des-
potic," as opposed to "egalitarian." For the species in question, one simply
assesses the relative presence or absence of social dominance behaviors,
1

then places that species on the continuum between these two political poles
(see Vehrencamp 1983).
These assessments depend on two main variables: ﬁrst, the degree of
competition in food acquisition or mating; second, the presence or absence
of social hierarchies with alpha individuals, male or female, and the degree
to which they exert domination. Such a typology readily applies to mon-
keys and apes, because these basic social and political behaviors tend to be
phylogenetically ﬁxed. Each species has its own rather ﬂexible "political
nature." Another useful indicator, heavily emphasized in this book, is the
presence or absence of political coalitions; these appear, optionally, only in
despotic species—species that are naturally given to hierarchy.
For humans, even this relatively simple kind of classiﬁcation leads to
controversy. Indeed, the recent positions of cultural anthropologists, evolu-
tionary biologists, ethologists, primatologists, and others concerned with
human social and political nature have varied almost as sharply as did
those of Locke, Rousseau, and Hobbes. Earlier contradictions can be found
by comparing the positions of Sahlins (1959), Lorenz (1963), Ardrey
(1966), Fried (1967), Alexander and Tinkle (1968), and Tiger and Fox
(1971). Sociobiology, with its discontents, brought new controversies about
human nature and politics (for example, E. O. Wilson 1978; de Waal 1982,
1989, 1996, 1997; Alexander 1987; Boehm 1989, 1993, 1997a; Masters
1989; Knauft 1991, 1994a; Erdal and Whiten 1994, 1996; Kelly 1995;
Wrangham and Peterson 1996; Sober and Wilson 1998), and also contro-
versies about the natural selection process itself (e.g., Alexander 1974 and
E. O. Wilson 1975 versus Wilson and Sober 1994 and Boehm 1997b). I will
be examining certain of these disagreements, but they exist not just because
academicians make a profession of disagreeing. At issue is the formidable
political ﬂexibility of our own species.
As members of bands or tribes, humans can be quite egalitarian—par-
ticularly with respect to males. Yet we also develop degrees of despotism
which, by mammalian standards, are truly staggering. This extreme range
of behaviors can be bewildering. For a dwindling contingent of scholars,
those who insist on unadulterated environmentalism, such disparities are
taken to mean that our political nature is simply nonexistent. For many
others, it remains a puzzle that must await the isolation of behavior genes
in the laboratory. For still another contingent (including many of those
mentioned above), it has been a subject of unresolved, philosophically
oriented debate that seems to polarize the protagonists into Hobbesian
hawks and Rousseauian doves.
2
Hierarchy in the Forest

As a contribution to this venerable and contentious tradition, my intent
is to set forth an "ambivalence model" of human nature (see Campbell
1965; Boehm 1989; Masters 1989) and apply it to our political nature. This
political ambivalence model is grounded in highly contradictory behav-
ioral tendencies, which we share with many other primates, and I trust that
that this focus on structural contradictions within human nature will lend
some much-needed precision to the explanation of our species' noteworthy
lability in the political and social ﬁelds.
One highly unusual expression of this ﬂexibility occurs in egalitarian
societies (Boehm 1993). There individuals who otherwise would be subor-
dinated are clever enough to form a large and united political coalition,
and they do so for the express purpose of keeping the strong from domi-
nating the weak. Because the united subordinates are constantly putting
down the more assertive alpha types in their midst, egalitarianism is in
effect a bizarre type of political hierarchy: the weak combine forces to
actively dominate the strong. My thesis is that they must continue such
domination if they are to remain autonomous and equal, and prehistori-
cally we shall see that they appear to have done so very predictably as long
as hunting bands remained mobile.
I also incorporate an important evolutionary twist. Rather than concen-
trating simply on the effects of human nature on political behavior, I also
explore the reverse: the long-term effects of human political behavior on
human nature. Along these lines I have proposed recently that the egalitar-
ian political lifestyle of Upper Paleolithic hunter-gatherers could have pro-
foundly affected our evolving social nature (Boehm 1997a, 1997b). By
amplifying this hypothesis, I hope to substantially clarify the place of altru-
ism in human nature and thereby make better sense of our current experi-
ence of moral life. To do so, I will need to develop a full behavioral portrait
of the Common Ancestor of the four African-based hominoids.
The three African great apes, with whom we share this rather recent
Common Ancestor, are notably hierarchical. Reproductively fortunate are
the high-ranking males or females, while those relegated to the bottom of
the hierarchy fare less well. The same can be said of most human political
societies in the world today, starting about ﬁve thousand years ago. At that
time, people were beginning to live increasingly in chiefdoms, societies
with highly privileged individuals who occupied hereditary positions of
political leadership and social paramountcy. From certain well-developed
chiefdoms came the six early civilizations, with their powerful and often
despotic leaders. But before twelve thousand years ago, humans basically
The Question of Egalitarian Society
3

were egalitarian (Knauft 1991). They lived in what might be called societies
of equals, with minimal political centralization and no social classes. Every-
one participated in group decisions, and outside the family there were no
dominators.
For more than ﬁve millennia now, the human trend has been toward
hierarchy rather than equality. But the past several centuries have witnessed
sporadic but highly successful attempts to reverse this trend—to reverse it
as much as is feasible in large nations that require considerable political
centralization. These efforts occurred in America and in Europe, and have
taken place more recently in certain other areas, notably India and Latin
America, as people emerged from colonialism. Marxian socialists as well
have made a variety of unsuccessful attempts to create truly classless and
coercion-free political societies at the national level.
It would appear, then, that some kind of fundamental tension exists
between forces that make for equality and democracy, and those that make
for hierarchy and coercive leadership. To a contemporary "democrat," the
upshot is not particularly comforting. Today, after a series of costly global
conﬂicts that were rationalized in terms of "keeping the world safe for
democracy," we still are surrounded by more nations that are "nonde-
mocratic" than otherwise. The ambivalence model I develop for human
nature will help to explain a tension that is evident, and potent, as nations
with major political differences continue to collide ideologically.
Let us return to the origin of "democracy." For scholars the favorite
historical reference point continues to be ancient Greece, and it is true that
certain males, Greeks who were full citizens, acted as equals. The fact that
institutionalized slavery existed on a widespread basis in Athens—and that
women were mere chattels—deterred historians very little from drawing
this parallel. Another historical reference point, one that directly and sig-
niﬁcantly inﬂuenced both the framers of the American Constitution and,
subsequently, American advocates of women's suffrage, was the Iroquois
Confederation (Weatherford 1988). In this matrilineally based tribal "na-
tion," women had quite a high status, sharing in the substantial degree of
political and economic equality that prevailed among adults (Morgan
1877).
Still another potential reference point is the egalitarian society of mobile
human hunter-gatherers who live in bands. Rather often the egalitarianism
of hunter-gatherers pertains more to males than to females, but the women
enjoy far more political potency than did the women of Athens, and these
4
Hierarchy in the Forest

mobile foragers keep no slaves. Their highly equalized version of political
life goes far back into prehistory and, following Knauft (1991), I make the
major assumption that humans were egalitarian for thousands of genera-
tions before hierarchical societies began to appear.
The Main Political Actors
My interest in writing this book was not in matters of gender. The subject
is power in groups—how it is allocated and, especially, how it is regulated.
The type of power I have in mind is straightforwardly conceived. In its raw
form it is like the power we see exhibited in groups of chimpanzees (e.g., de
Waal 1982; Goodall 1986). It is the dominant's power to intimidate and
take something away from someone, or to force another to do something.
It also is the power to control or lead through the subtler instrument of
authority as conceived by Weber (1947); by my deﬁnition it is also the
power to contribute to consensual decision-making processes in groups
that are not dominated by alpha individuals. The entire group can be a
locus of power and authority, and the group can use its power to regulate
the power of individuals.
Although human political life essentially starts with the nuclear family, it
comes into play chieﬂy at the level of bands, tribes, chiefdoms, and nations.
In virtually all of these political units, the preponderant power (as deﬁned
above) seems to be in the hands of males. The male advantage can be
extreme. For example, I lived for several years in a formerly tribal patril-
ineal Serbian community in southern Herzegovina and encountered there
a clan exogamy pattern; women normally move to the neighborhood of
their husband after marriage, sometimes into his father's house. When a
group of brothers and patrilateral cousins stays put and women marry in
from various other clans, it is not surprising that the position of the fe-
males is politically tenuous. In effect, they are merely "honorary" members
of an all-male clan, and it is only toward the end of their lives that they
begin to assume some authority.
When people live in tribes, this kind of extended brotherhood is a rather
frequent social arrangement. It ﬁts well with warfare, raiding, and feud-
ing, which almost always are male activities (Thoden van Velzen and van
Wetering 1960). The social ideology tends to be patrifocal, and this procliv-
ity is reﬂected in social reality (for a rather extreme ethnographic example,
see Boehm 1983).
The Question of Egalitarian Society
5

Imagine now a mirror-image society. Clan names and property are
transmitted matrilineally, and males must marry into exogamous clan
communities where women stay in place. The man resides in the house of
his wife's mother or nearby, and in effect he is marrying into a group of
closely bonded "sisters." The Hopi Indians (Eggan 1936) are one of many
examples: in a given clan the married males are basically "strangers," who
have no claim to property there and have a relatively weak role in economic
decision-making. So far, so good; but the mirror image is incomplete. Hopi
males who have "married out" still have continuing economic inﬂuence
back in their natal clan. This fact weakens the position of the women, even
though they stay put, for their brothers continue to have a major say. An
additional consideration is warfare: if present, it strengthens the political
hand of males, not females.
The groups here are tribes, but the rule of male political primacy applies
more generally (Brown 1991; Smuts 1995). There may be individual excep-
tions, but in tribes, chiefdoms, primitive kingdoms, early civilizations, and
nations of various types, the group leaders are generally males (Service
1975). Mobile hunter-gatherers do not necessarily have designated group
leaders, but even so, the people who step forward to help the band make its
decisions are usually males. The pattern of male political ascendancy in
determining the strategies of groups is widespread, to say the least.
Kelly (1995:297-302) surveys what is known about male-female rela-
tions in mobile, egalitarian hunter-gatherer societies, and he identiﬁes sev-
eral historical trends. Earlier reports tended to make women into chattels
and slaves, but several decades ago, after the Man the Hunter conference,
a strong interest arose in gender equality between man the hunter and
woman the gatherer. Kelly (1995:297) believes that claims of equality were
"more asserted than demonstrated through analysis." He cites the study
of Hayden et al. (1986), which demonstrates that women's statuses vary
greatly, along with Sanday's (1981) hypotheses about some of these differ-
ences. Kelly emphasizes the fuzziness of a concept such as status inequality
and concentrates instead on inequalities of authority and power that ﬁt well
with the present analysis. Male-female authority inequalities appear to vary
markedly in egalitarian bands, with small to large advantages usually going
to the males, but this remains difﬁcult to explain.
A substantial bias toward patrilocality does seem to exist (Ember 1978),
but basically descent favors bilateral patterns. Resource unpredictability
could be a factor favoring male power, while a near-male monopoly on
6
Hierarchy in the Forest

large-game hunting brings special reputational beneﬁts (Kelly 1995). Large
game is shared by the entire band, and the resulting prestige lends itself to
political ascendancy. I shall be dealing with human nature, so I must em-
phasize that these patterned differences of authority are not necessarily
"biological" in the sense that dimorphic behavior genes are helping to
shape them. It is well known, however, that certain male-female differences
in physiology are, in fact, set by genes. With respect to reproductive physi-
ology, the advanced stages of pregnancy seriously circumscribe physical
activity, and while in theory the care of infants could be culturally allocated
to males after very early weaning, human foragers tend to nurse their
infants for years. Another difference is sexual dimorphism in body size and
muscularity. Males also are stronger because cultural tradition makes them
the large-game hunters, and as such they experience special degrees of
"athletic training." These empirical patterns are subject to further consid-
eration, for their interpretation lends itself to projective testing in terms of
ethnographer bias. Nonetheless it appears that males have the advantage
when it comes to authority, which is far easier to evaluate than status.
Smuts (1995) has shown that in nonhuman primates females often are
able to neutralize male interest in control and coercion, whereas in humans
male interest usually predominates. Smuts emphasizes that human females
often move away from their own kin at marriage, and that females are less
prone to form political alliances than males. She also believes that language
brought gender ideologies into play, which reinforced tendencies to male
authority among hunter-gatherers. In her view, it is basically the male use
of physical force, often in order to control women's reproductive potential,
that leads to male dominance more generally.
These seem to be universal or extremely widespread features of forager
life. When it comes to male concerns about women as breeding partners,
Knauft (1991) has made it clear that competition for females is the leading
cause of hunter-gatherer homicide. It is no surprise that some of this male
competition is translated into direct control over females, and in this sense
Smuts (1994) is correct in suggesting that males may be better motivated to
control females than vice versa.
There is more to the gender and power story. When I surveyed hundreds
of band-level and tribal societies that were egalitarian (Boehm 1993) to see
what was done about upstarts who were hungry for power, the problem
personalities were males—group leaders, shamans, proﬁcient hunters,
homicidal psychotics, or other men with unusual powers or strong tenden-
The Question of Egalitarian Society
7

cies toward political ambition. This group included bullies intent on ag-
grandizing power—or on taking more than their share of women. It almost
always seems to be males who try to dominate their peers.
Were contemporary world ethnography more complete, it surely would
include some reports of female upstarts. If we knew the ethnography of all
hunter-gatherers for the past ﬁfty or one hundred millennia, we might even
ﬁnd a society in which women were the hunters and main politicians, and
men the caretakers of offspring who did most of the gathering. This is not
idle speculation. We are fortunate to have a thorough description of Agta
hunter-gatherers of the Philippines, who hunt wild boar with dogs and kill
their prey with arrows. The women go out in groups to take this dangerous
forest mammal, just as the men do. The fact that dogs are used in hunting
may well be what equalizes male and female economic roles in this respect.
What is interesting relative to the Agta is that women also have high
status in the society in general, and they have a major say in decision-mak-
ing (Peterson 1978; Barbosa 1985; Goodman 1985). This counterexample
is very important. It suggests that human reproductive physiology, in com-
bination with human nature, makes it possible for women to play a major
political role in the band—if ecological and cultural arrangements are
favorable. For hunter-gatherers in general, it also suggests that it may be
primarily the hunting of large game that helps to boost the power of males
beyond whatever they are gaining through sexual dimorphism and an
exceptional motivation to control females.
Thus, the reasons for male political preeminence appear to vary accord-
ing to whether we are speaking of the family or the band. Within the family,
differences of size, strength, and motivation to control seem to make for
male domination, along with dependency of females on males for meat. At
the band level, it appears to be mainly hunting—and "warfare," if present
in some form—that places men in a position to wield more inﬂuence in
decision-making.
In the analysis to come, I shall emphasize the political roles of women
whenever these are important to the questions bring explored. One area in
which women seem to enjoy a far more equal footing politically, is in
holding down the male upstarts of whom we have been speaking. My main
hypothesis is that egalitarian societies are created and maintained by moral
communities, and women participate quite fully in the moral life of their
community. Both sexes are quick to judge the doings of others, comparing
the behavior with idealized proﬁles of how people should behave. Both
8
Hierarchy in the Forest

sexes contribute to the process by which a group decides that an individual
is socially deviant and in need of sanctioning. Both sexes engage in ridicule
or other forms of direct social pressure—and in ostracism, for this work is
done by a well-catalyzed group that must be in broad agreement if it is to
act effectively. These are the sanctions that keep most potential upstarts in
their places. If ultimate sanctions are called for, it is almost always the
males who act as executioners—even though the women may contribute
equally to making such dire decisions. If the entire group executes a moral
offender, and this takes place infrequently, the women may take part along
with the men, as we shall see in Chapter 8.
Despite the differences I have detailed, when small groups are egalitar-
ian, the general notion that personal autonomy is important often tends to
be extended to females. I refer here to how people treat one another in the
band as a whole. Within the family, egalitarian principles are likely to
operate more weakly, and sometimes very weakly indeed. What is consis-
tent about egalitarian societies is that in the larger unit—the band or the
tribe—the adult males always treat one another as equals. It is this phe-
nomenon that I try to explain: I am interested in the political life of the
local group, not of the family.
The scope of my inquiry can be deﬁned quite precisely. In small local
groups that are egalitarian, such as bands, I am interested in the "main
political actors"—independently of gender. I deﬁne these as the individuals
who actively participate when the entire group must arrive at important
consensual decisions such as where to migrate, or decisions of war or peace
(see Boehm 1993). They also include those who assume positions of
inﬂuence or leadership. These are the people—usually adult heads of
households—who potentially can turn into upstarts and subvert the egali-
tarian order. The main political actors also constitute the political rank and
ﬁle who have the most to lose, politically, if one of their numbers begins to
dominate the rest. This category always encompasses the fully adult males
of a band, but only sometimes or partially the females—unless they are
equal as hunters.
The Question of Antihierarchy
If this book is about egalitarianism and its natural history, one might ask
about the title Hierarchy in the Forest. It suggests a work about domination,
not equality. My thesis, however, is that egalitarianism does not result from
The Question of Egalitarian Society
9

the mere absence of hierarchy, as is commonly assumed. Rather, egalitari-
anism involves a very special type of hierarchy, a curious type that is based
on antihierarchical feelings.
This political hypothesis was put forward six years ago in an article in
Current Anthropology (Boehm 1993). There I examined in detail the imme-
diate mechanisms of social control that produce egalitarianism in both
hunter-gatherers and tribesmen. The hypothesis, as stated earlier, was that
egalitarian societies amount to hierarchies in which the ﬂow of power
has reversed direction quite radically. This position was immediately chal-
lenged by Erdal and Whiten (1994, 1996), who see egalitarian society in
terms of hierarchy's merely being attenuated by counterdominant behav-
ior. They cite the existence of leadership roles as evidence that hierarchy
exists.
I believe that if a stable egalitarian hierarchy is to be achieved, the basic
ﬂow of power in society must be reversed deﬁnitively. I also believe that it
takes considerable effort to maintain that condition. Our political nature
favors the formation of orthodox hierarchies—hierarchies like those of
chimpanzees or gorillas, or humans living in chiefdoms or states. In such
societies a submissive but sometimes very resentful rank and ﬁle is control-
led by one or more high-ranking individuals who reign dominantly at the
top of the hierarchy. It is politically ambitious individuals, those with spe-
cial learned or innate propensities to dominate, who are likely to become
upstarts in egalitarian bands or tribes.
When the subordinates take charge to ﬁrmly suppress competition that
leads to domination, it takes some effort to keep the political tables turned.
For the most part, the mere threat of sanctions (including ostracism and
execution) keeps such power seekers in their place. When upstartism does
become active, so does the moral community: it unites against those who
would usurp the egalitarian order, and usually does so preemptively and
assertively. This domination by the rank and ﬁle is so strong that useful
leadership roles can develop without subverting the system. The rank and
ﬁle, watching leaders with special care, keep them from developing any
serious degree of authority.
Thus, egalitarianism does not just happen. Even when the habit of
equality and autonomy is well established, an egalitarian order meets with
periodic challenges from upstarts. These can quickly lead to a political
transformation, from the reversed hierarchy that is preferred originally to
an orthodox one that is dominated by a powerful male (or female), or by a
10
Hierarchy in the Forest

power coalition. This scenario is true not only of hunting bands and egali-
tarian tribes, but also of ancient and modern democracies in which anti-
authoritarian checks and balances become formally structured, and far
more readily discernible. Egalitarian societies are vulnerable to takeovers.
America's most recent serious upstart arose fully four decades ago in the
form of Senator Joseph McCarthy—a political bully who used his powers
of intimidation cannily until ﬁnally he was toppled by his own peers.
Richard Nixon lost his presidency through abuse of power, and the Reagan
administration had similar problems that were scrutinized very publicly.
Members of democratic societies are perennially suspicious in this area.
When Alexander Haig appropriately tried to reassure the American people
that someone, namely General Haig, was ﬁrmly in charge of the country
during a presidential emergency, the reaction was one of widespread suspi-
cion. Haig may have had no inclination to take over the American govern-
ment, but the alarmed public response demonstrated the sensitivity of sub-
ordinates to possible increases in personal authority at the political center.
Another example of upstartism came in the 1990s when the career of
conservative Congressman Newt Gingrich took off. As Gingrich began to
wield some serious power, he exuded a certain air of dominance and his
peers in Congress found ways to cut him down to size. At the same time,
they managed to retain him as a useful leader and spokesman for his party.
For Gingrich the reduction in power may have involved some déja vu. This
particular legislator was known to be fond of reading about the political
behavior of a captive group of chimpanzees (de Waal 1982), in which
subordinates were quite successful in curtailing the power of alpha males—
even as they made use of their "services."
The argument here is that egalitarian societies constitute a very special
type of hierarchy, one in which the rank and ﬁle avoid being subordinated
by vigilantly keeping alpha-type group members under their collective
thumbs. This "domination by the rank and ﬁle" hypothesis originally was
developed by placing the sanctioning of upstarts under an ethnographic
microscope (Boehm 1993). I demonstrated empirically that by acting as
uniﬁed moral communities, the main political actors in bands and tribes
were able to deal decisively with individuals who threatened their auton-
omy. The arguments were social and political, as opposed to biological and
evolutionary. In this book I develop the hypothesis further, by analyzing
the egalitarian political behavior of humans in a full natural-history con-
text.
The Question of Egalitarian Society
11

Ideologies are at the core of this analysis, for I believe that to deﬁnitively
"equalize" a political society it is necessary for the rank and ﬁle to form
a moral community, develop an egalitarian ethos, and deliberately take
charge of their own fate. An important hypothesis, then, is that egalitarian-
ism is the product of human intentionality. If tendencies to hierarchy are
to remain decisively reversed, both hunter-gatherers and people living in
modern democracies must consciously create, and carefully enforce, egali-
tarian plans or blueprints. We so-called moderns may formalize these blue-
prints via constitutions or bills of rights, while hunter-gatherers or tribes-
men operate much more informally; but in either case my theory is that
egalitarianism cannot last very long without insightful guidance and ma-
nipulation.
The Question of Human Nature
This book is about powerful forces that make for both hierarchy and
antihierarchy, and therefore its subject is our evolved human nature. Basic
aspects of our political nature (notably the tendency to form hierarchies)
were formed far back in primate evolution. However, I believe that more
recently our social nature received some very important ﬁnishing touches,
in the crucible of Late Paleolithic hunting and gathering life. At the end of
the book I explore the hypothesis that Paleolithic hunter-gatherers created
long-term political conditions that were favorable to the natural selection
of altruistic traits.
The capacity for genuine altruism in mammals has been denied on a
widespread, often vehement basis. Eminent sociobiologists and evolution-
ary psychologists have taken the lead in so doing, but I suggest that our
species (and our species alone) was given a unique chance to develop
altruistic traits—precisely because social dominance hierarchies were de-
ﬁnitively reversed for a long period of evolutionary time. The hypothesis is
a complicated one, having to do with radical changes in phenotypic vari-
ation at different levels of selection, and at present it is difﬁcult to corrobo-
rate. However, I believe it to be plausible—and worthy of further develop-
ment.
Aside from this relatively recent reﬁnement in favor of altruism, we will
see that human nature consists of a mixture of ancient mammalian traits,
general primate traits, and speciﬁc traits exhibited by hominoids—the
great apes and humans. The African great apes are particularly crucial for
reconstructing human social and political evolution.
12
Hierarchy in the Forest

In considering proxies for our ape ancestors I favor a chimpanzee model,
even though in theory bonobos could be of equal importance. I do so for
two reasons that are purely expedient. One is that the political behavior of
chimpanzees is far better studied. The other is that I personally know this
species and its political behavior; I have made six ﬁeld trips to Africa. But
there are other reasons as well. Like humans, chimpanzees are tool-using
"generalists" who adapted to cope with a rather wide variety of environ-
ments. Bonobos are not extreme generalists, and it seems quite possible
that they have diverged more from the Common Ancestor than have chim-
panzees (Wrangham and Peterson 1996; see also Stanford 1998b).
Scope of the Book
A simian political portrait begins Chapter 2, and vividly depicts the degree
of hierarchy that prevails today in many forests of central Africa, where
chimpanzees hold to their ancient way of life against rapidly increasing
odds of extinction. By proxy, the portrait also helps to provide some notion
of the degree of hierarchy that prevailed for the never-to-be-known ape
that was the ancestor of humans, bonobos, gorillas, and chimpanzees.
Having introduced the chimpanzee as a decidedly hierarchical political
animal, I turn to egalitarian humans and critique the diverse array of
theories that try to explain their very different, muted hierarchies.
In the third and fourth chapters I turn to the political life of extant
hunter-gatherers, who when they remain mobile are uniformly egalitarian.
Understanding their political way of life is crucial to the human-nature
arguments in this book, for such people can serve as rough proxies for the
foragers in whose groups our genes evolved. In Chapter 5 I turn to the
tribesmen who followed them. These people domesticated plants and ani-
mals and, most of them, remained egalitarian in a fashion similar to that of
their foraging predecessors. Many ethnographic accounts imply that tribes-
men are innately egalitarian, but I use world ethnography to show that
their egalitarianism, like that of hunters, is a product of constant vigilance
and sometimes very harsh sanctioning.
In Chapter 6, I place these egalitarians in the spectrum of hominoid
political behavior. Included are the three African great apes, whose societies
are decidedly hierarchical, and nonegalitarian humans, who live in simi-
larly hierarchical societies such as chiefdoms, primitive kingdoms, or
authoritarian modern states. I also include people who live in "compro-
mise polities" (big-man societies or modern or ancient democracies), in
The Question of Egalitarian Society
13

which egalitarian ideologies combine with noteworthy degrees of competi-
tion, hierarchy, and centralized authority. This brief excursion into political
taxonomy anticipates the two chapters that look to the evolutionary origins
of political egalitarianism.
In Chapter 7, the Common Ancestor of humans and the three African
great apes is portrayed, primarily on the basis of behaviors observed in the
wild. However, because our interest is in evolutionary preadaptations, the
behavioral potential that emerges in ecologically and socially bizarre cap-
tive settings (see de Waal 1994) is also included. The composite sketch
provides referential-modeling insights (see Tooby and DeVore 1987) into
the type of hierarchy that prevailed in that distant ancestor, and this four-
species cladistic model (see Wrangham 1987) will be taken as primary,
while the use of a chimpanzee-based referential model will be secondary—
but also very important. This behavioral reconstruction of the Common
Ancestor goes far beyond any previously proposed, and it lays out the basis
for the formation of both orthodox social dominance hierarchies and re-
verse dominance hierarchies.
In Chapter 8, I offer speciﬁc hypotheses about the invention of egalitari-
anism, which was made possible not only by the invention of lethal hunt-
ing weapons but also by the invention of unique moral communities of
humans. Paleolithic cultural diffusion possibilities for egalitarianism are
considered, taking into account unstable Pleistocene conditions that
pushed our direct ancestors to frequent migrations. These and other spe-
ciﬁc hypotheses are put to work to place the origins of political egalitarian-
ism in evolutionary time.
In Chapter 9, I discuss the impact of egalitarian political behavior on the
natural selection of social traits: egoism, nepotism, and altruism. The hy-
pothesis I offer is novel—and certain to generate controversy. I make the
case that there exists a robust evolutionary basis for genuine altruism in
our species, suggesting that when prehistoric hunter-gatherers became
egalitarian this condition substantially modiﬁed the "balance of power"
within natural selection. The result was an empowerment of selection tak-
ing place at the between-group level, a change that eventually had pro-
found effects on human nature.
This argument follows Sober and Wilson (1998) in challenging certain
basic tenets of evolutionary biology as practiced by sociobiologists (for
example, Williams 1966; Trivers 1971; Alexander 1974, 1987; E. O. Wilson
1975, 1978) and their now quite varied academic descendants in evolution-
14
Hierarchy in the Forest

ary psychology. For several decades these scholars have been committed to
a degree of methodological individualism that has made human nature
appear to be exclusively selﬁsh, or at best nepotistic. In effect, our tenden-
cies to be generous have been reduced to a combination of nepotism,
dissembled altruism that society forces on individuals, and selﬁshly ori-
ented reciprocation that is so exact as to be highly unlikely. The hypothesis
in Chapter 8 provides an alternative explanation, albeit one that applies
only to our own species.
In the ﬁnal chapter, human nature is described in its political and social
aspects. Given what has just been said about the divergent behaviors of
males and females of our species, it might actually make sense to discuss
their "natures" separately. Our physical dimorphism, as brieﬂy discussed
above, is considerable, and there is no good reason to believe that behavior
genes are not comparably dimorphic. Obviously, human nature is a com-
plicated topic, and I shall suggest that its study be made still more compli-
cated by looking at the interactions of genotypic dispositions as well as by
simply cataloging them. In experimenting with such an approach, I will
ﬁnd it easier to average any sex differences that may exist, and to treat
human nature as a single entity.
Here I depart sharply from the usual trait-by-trait type of analysis, to
portray human nature as being highly contradictory and likely to produce
speciﬁc types of ambivalence. The political ambivalences to be discussed
stem from the fact that while dominance and submission are basic, and
submitting sometimes has its own rewards, resentment also comes to the
fore when individuals have to play the submissive role. The social ambiva-
lences stem directly from the levels of selection that operated in the Paleo-
lithic, making for our well-known individual selﬁshness and nepotism, but
also for a long-denied altruistic component that is strongly reﬂected in
moral codes and helps to shape social life.
The Question of Egalitarian Society
15

C H A P T E R
2
Hierarchy and Equality
In 1984, under the tutelage of Dr. Jane Goodall, I traveled to the Gombe
Stream Research Center in Tanzania to examine the political behavior of
wild chimpanzees. As with the quasi-tribal Serbs I had lived with for sev-
eral years in the mid-1960s, the behavior that interested me most was
conﬂict resolution. To study such behavior one must ﬁrst study conﬂict,
and both Serbs and wild chimpanzees develop major "problems" because
of male status rivalry. Needless to say, in both "cultures" I tried to investi-
gate conﬂict essentially as an observer, rather than as a participant.
With the Serbs of Montenegro, once in a while (despite my best efforts)
I did become involved with local political competition and controversy
(Boehm 1986). In my ﬁrst year at Gombe, however, I discovered that an
uninvolved role was absolutely essential, for I could not rely on words to
negotiate my way out of political predicaments with chimpanzees. Even
with excellent advice, I had to learn the hard way that a frail human body is
ill suited for the bruising that attends daily life with this physically powerful
and frequently agonistic species.
One day, in a mood of experimentation, I inadvertently gave the alpha
male of the study group the impression that I was competing with him
politically. I painfully discovered that high-ranking male chimpanzees are
preoccupied with dominance, jealous of their prerogatives, and quick to
put down potential rivals. On other occasions I learned that their uses of
power are highly sensitive; indeed, in the wild they exhibit well-nuanced
strategies similar to those of the large captive group studied by de Waal
(1982) at Arnhem Zoo in the Netherlands.
An Intimate View of Chimpanzee Hierarchy
It was after I learned my initial political lessons that I experienced my most
interesting day in the ﬁeld. It convinced me of the essentially hierarchical
16

nature of male chimpanzee life, and made me aware of some of its impor-
tant variations. To preserve the immediacy of these observations, let me
keep the narrative in the present tense.
Climbing the mountain rift high above Lake Tanganyika, I am looking for
chimpanzees—the Kasakela study group that is followed daily by research
teams of the Gombe Stream Research Center. Unpredictably, the entire
community has made itself scarce for several days, and the best guess of
experienced African ﬁeld observers is that the animals are up on the side
of the rift somewhere, feeding on mbula—a mealy yellow fruit that looks
something like a plum but lacks a plum's sweetness when ripe. My mis-
sion is one of random search, for the study group's highland territory
extends across several well-wooded miles. As I proceed up the mountain,
the tropical forest begins to thin, but even so visibility continues to be
limited.
As a second-year novice at the research center, I know that I might
easily walk right past the apes if they are in a large group quietly feeding
just out of sight. I am lucky. From a steep wooded slope just above me
come the ﬁrst vocalizations I have heard in three days. I enter a stand of
scattered trees to see several females swollen in estrus with a large num-
ber of males attending. One female, Spray, is in a tree with a high-ranking
male nearby. I settle in to watch, and take notes using a professional
Walkman D-6C. Facing up the mountain, I duly note that a majority of
the 50-member study group is present, and that the higher-ranking males
seem to have primary access to the females even though there is no overt
conﬂict with the "lesser" males who seem to be hanging around at a
distance. There is little doubt that higher rank permits more frequent
matings in this basically promiscuous species.
Soon I hear a few distant but excited vocalizations, and the males
immediately stream down a steep slope to my right. As I hurry to follow,
a cacophony of calls erupts below me and out of sight. There are intense
screams, but also deeper barking calls and hoots that sound like the
vocalizations one hears when hostile patrols meet or when the chimpan-
zees are hunting. As I plunge through the scattered trees and down into a
steep, grassy clearing perhaps 40 yards across, to one side I see a mass of
chimpanzees—at least half a dozen—all vocalizing excitedly as they ap-
pear to be engaging in a concerted attack on a single individual.
Being a novice, I come to the rash conclusion that they have found an
intruder from another territorial community and are subjecting him to a
Hierarchy and Equality
17

lethal mauling. I stay at a careful distance, and shortly the vocalizations
become less intense and a male moves away in possession of what appears
to be a piece of raw meat. Another follows. I half expect to see a corpse,
but when the last "attacker" moves away, the chimpanzee who remains is
a large adult male, perfectly healthy but visibly upset. He is not a stranger
from another community but Jomeo—the largest adult male in the study
group and one of the lowest ranking. Bleating out a thin, continuous,
undulating scream and showing all his teeth in a fear-grimace, Jomeo
cradles in his arms a small brown carcass, bereft of head and extremities,
which I assume to be a baby bushpig. (I have never seen a bushpig
before.)
At that moment, two men approach wearing the khaki of Jane Good-
all's Tanzanian research crew. Specialists in following baboons, they tell
me quickly that their baboons have been hunting bushpig and that Jomeo
has pirated their kill. Then they hurry off so as not to lose their group.
The overall scenario is clear to me now, but I am puzzled. In other hunts
I have seen alpha male Goblin commandeer captured prey from adoles-
cent males, and I know that Jomeo ranks far below Goblin, who is pre-
sent. Goblin and other high-ranking males such as Evered were part of
the mob scene I had just witnessed, but in spite of being both outranked
and outnumbered, Jomeo has retained the bulk of the carcass. I am still
pondering this curious permutation of chimpanzee dominance behavior
when the displays begin: meat excitement displays that I have heard about
but never seen.
Suddenly all the big males except for Jomeo begin to race around on
the ground, holding small portions of raw pigmeat in their jaws. This
outburst adds to my perplexity, for normally it is alpha male Goblin who
displays while all the others respectfully race for trees to climb. I know
from my ongoing tutelage that normally the alpha male will not allow
other males to display when he does, for their displays are—in chim-
panzee political language—challenges to his high status. Jealous of this
authority, he carefully dominates everyday group scenes by rushing
around furiously while the display tendencies of others are heavily inhib-
ited by fear of an immediate attack from him.
This is different. The scene I watch is a wonderful, exuberant, theatrical
improvisation with Goblin, Evered, Mustard, Freud, and several males I
have not yet identiﬁed all "going ape," as it were, without any apparent
political inhibition. Mustard, normally a politically unremarkable male
18
Hierarchy in the Forest

who ranks very low in the adult male hierarchy, displays mightily across a
low tree limb right in front of me. When he comes to the end of the limb,
he surprises me by leaping forward and up, into a dense, deep tangle of
delicate hanging vines. He proceeds to "swim" through this tangle by
making lightning-fast, hand-over-hand climbing motions, tearing away
so hard at the thick lacework that he only gradually loses altitude and is
just able to reach the limb of another tree. I am astonished at the novelty
of this particular display, even though every display tends to be different
and combines a variety of elements such as running, stamping, slapping
the ground, swinging on vines, dragging branches, uprooting small trees,
and scooping stones and large rocks into the air—all accomplished with
an exaggerated display of aggressiveness. As Mustard swims through the
vines, Goblin displays on the ground below without directing his aggres-
sion at any other male; but this exuberant group exhibition of "improv
theater" suddenly develops ugly possibilities. When Mustard reaches his
second tree, he begins to display across a very long, thin branch about 10
or 15 feet above the ground. Suddenly, he loses his footing as he races
along the bough. He falls, arcing inexorably onto the back of Goblin, who
is on the ground beneath him, displaying at full speed in the same direc-
tion. The excited alpha male does not see Mustard just above him, writh-
ing and wriggling, knowing exactly where he is about to land. As I watch,
the dance that Mustard performs in thin air suggests a free-falling acrobat
trying to move his body sideways without any traction whatsoever—an
aerial pantomime that would have been comical but for the potential
consequences.
I brace myself mentally for the inevitable attack as Mustard, his face
now distorted in a very wide fear-grimace, lands right on his leader's
back. This could have been a surprise attack by a rival, but Goblin, after
an initial reaction of surprise and momentary hostility, seems to be tak-
ing it well; he does not direct a serious attack at Mustard, as I feared he
might. Mustard's big fear-grin and unaggressive evasive actions may be
helping, and in all probability once he is recognized, his very low domi-
nance status also is being taken into account. After a few seconds of
observing Goblin's reaction, I am relieved to see that Mustard is not to be
seriously punished—or even mildly attacked.
This unexpected visit from above does seem to rile Goblin, however,
for a moment later he races across the large clearing to catch the burly
late-adolescent Freud in the midst of his own terrestrial display. When
Hierarchy and Equality
19

Goblin singles him out, Freud's exuberance turns instantly to fear as his
bristling hair sleeks down and he screams and fear-grins while assuming
a cowed, submissive stance. Goblin attacks him for several long seconds,
with Freud screaming and allowing himself to be pummeled and, brieﬂy,
cartwheeled. Goblin drags and kicks him vigorously, but he does no
serious injury—except to Freud's enjoyment of the moment, and perhaps
to his aspiration to group leadership.
That year I made a friendly bet with my mentor that Freud, when he
reached adulthood, would take over the alpha position from Goblin. She
predicted that it would be Frodo, Freud's very aggressive younger brother,
with Freud backing him as their uncle, Faben, had backed his younger
brother, Figan (see Goodall 1986). Frodo was quite young in 1985, but a
burly late-adolescent Freud was already being treated by small-bodied
Goblin as a potential serious rival.
As I watch Goblin begin to "trash" Freud on the ground, I am fearfully
clutching a tree—a deliberate sign of submissiveness that I hope will keep
my presence from being interpreted as a possible political challenge.
Watching what is happening to Freud, I nervously check to see if the tree
is climbable. It is not, so I circle my arm tightly around the trunk—both
to show maximum respect and to anchor myself in case I might somehow
be incorporated into the wild scene before me. The emotion of fear is
part of human nature, of course, and I am experiencing it sharply every
time one of the big bristling males races in my direction looking almost
twice as large as life. Fortunately, they have something more important
on their minds, namely, hedonistic self-expression. The displays wind
down and meat-eating begins.
The ethologist's scientiﬁc term for the state of arousal I observed that
day would be "meat-eating excitement" (Goodall 1986). To me, the specta-
cle was a theatrical production full of political puzzles, some of which I
could ﬁgure out and some of which bafﬂed me. My own vicarious excite-
ment—and my nervousness about being assaulted like Freud—quickly
abated as the displays ended. Some of the males, not carrying any meat that
I could see, wandered down the hill and out of sight, while others settled
down to eat their portions of pigmeat. Everything seemed relatively peace-
ful now, but another impressive surprise was in store for the novice.
Several minutes later I hear some distant vocalizations that I cannot
identify, and the remaining males stream farther down the steep, open
20
Hierarchy in the Forest

slope and disappear into an area of dense brush that lies below. I follow
Goblin as best I can, wriggling on my belly through several dozen yards of
tangled vines and briars until I emerge in a very small clearing, no more
than 30 feet across, with a single very small tree, in the center. There I
stand, Professional Walkman in hand, to watch Goblin as he sits alone
peering into the thick brush and emits several low, staccato barks. I can
see nothing, but I suspect that Goblin is barking at the same baboons
who have been hunting bushpig. Perhaps they have made another cap-
ture, and it is time for some more piracy. As a political anthropologist I
am eager to observe it.
Presently Goblin disappears into the brush and starts a commotion,
with other chimpanzees vocalizing out of sight. As I continue my verbal
note-taking into the Walkman, Goblin emerges at full speed in my direc-
tion with something large and grayish no more than a foot behind him.
At ﬁrst I mistake it for a big male baboon, and stay in place taking notes
on the reasonable assumption that a problem between a habituated
chimpanzee and a habituated baboon should have no bearing on my
safety. Then, just as I recognize the emerging ﬁgure to be porcine and
much larger than a baboon, Goblin, who is leading it straight toward me,
veers to one side. The enraged pig now has me as its target. In an instant
I ﬁnd myself standing on the one low branch of the minuscule tree, just
high enough so that the pig, fortunately staying on all fours, bites several
times at my feet, too low by several inches, then hurries back into the
brush. Now, with my added height, I can see two other grayish hulks in
the brush and I realize that I am smack in the middle of a chimpanzee pig
hunt.
Goblin disappears into the brush again, and again there is a commo-
tion with several chimpanzees giving excited-sounding, staccato barking
calls. This time it appears that another chimpanzee has been the decoy,
for Goblin emerges with a baby bushpig wriggling furiously in his mouth.
He brings it over to where I remain treed, and directly under my slender
bough he bites it decisively in the neck, splattering small drops of blood
all around as I look down between my feet and take some pictures. The
wriggling stops. Goblin moves quickly through the brush, away from
where the pigs were, and climbs a large tree nearby to dismember his
prey. He is quickly joined by Evered, the number three male of Gombe's
Kasakela community.
As I marvel at my apparent equanimity, I balance myself on the tiny
branch and open my camera to change the ﬁlm. But I have opened the
Hierarchy and Equality
21

camera without rewinding! The ﬁlm, including the last three pictures of
Goblin directly below me dispatching the little bushpig, has been exposed
to the sun. As I realize what I have done, my mind returns to the powerful
jaws that recently snapped at me. I decide to remain above ground, in my
little tree, just in case. Then fear overtakes me retroactively, as I watch
Goblin begin to share his kill with high-ranking Evered, who approaches
him conﬁdently. Other males are climbing the tree now, but their ap-
proaches are far less conﬁdent and they keep their distance as these two
senior males begin to feast on pigmeat.
I have described this episode in detail because it is so instructive in
matters of hierarchy and power. The previous summer I had read Goodall's
Chimpanzees of Gombe in draft form, so I understood intellectually about
dominance and submission in the wild, and about the resulting hierarchi-
cal behavior among males. I knew, as well, that while males operate ambi-
tiously in political coalitions, the females are far less involved with status
rivalry and dominance behavior. Still, it took the events of that day to bring
home to me the fact that male chimpanzees are ultimate political animals.
They deal daily with potentially lethal power, and do so at very close
quarters. This fact is particularly apparent when they go hunting for bush-
pigs and work mere inches from such a dangerous animal as they practice
strategies of decoy and capture. They also have to deal with one another on
a daily basis in situations of serious political tension, and the males within
a community do sometimes kill one another (Goodall 1992).
One thing I had realized, as I watched the theatrical displays, was that the
dominance orders of chimpanzees are heavily improvised, and that even
phylogenetically predictable displays can have very different meanings de-
pending on the behavioral context. However, I remained puzzled by low-
ranking Jomeo's basic retention of the kill he had pirated from the ba-
boons. With subsequent counsel from a mentor who had been watching
chimpanzees for fully a quarter of a century, I came to understand that
dominance roles become reversed in certain situations—as when a low-
ranking adult male hunter possesses prey he himself has caught, or when a
male has taken a female on an extended consortship and a higher-ranking
male tries to intrude (Goodall 1986).
The events related above persuaded me that chimpanzees understand
one another's intentions. When a politically passive Mustard surprised
Goblin by landing right on top of him, the alpha male's arousal was dis-
22
Hierarchy in the Forest

cernible but politically unexpressed. This arousal was soon redirected,
however, at late-adolescent Freud, a youngster who deﬁnitely had ambi-
tions of his own. (Freud did eventually become the alpha male at Gombe,
and there is little doubt that Goblin was reading political intentions cor-
rectly when he all but ignored Mustard's gaffe and instead singled out
Freud for intimidation.)
What about my bet with Jane Goodall that Freud, rather than Frodo,
would succeed Goblin as alpha male? Neither of us won. An unlikely
contender named Wilkie, ﬁve years later, wrested the alpha position from
Goblin in a ﬁerce ﬁght over a female. Goblin, grievously wounded, fell to a
rank low in the adult male hierarchy. Freud did take over several years later,
from Wilkie, but we will never know whether Freud could have reversed his
position with Goblin. Wilkie may well have been an easier opponent for
Freud, because Goblin, in spite of his small body size, was a tenacious,
astute, and effective "chimpanzee politician" (Goodall 1986). At this writ-
ing Frodo has taken over from elder brother Freud, and I know enough not
to predict the identity of the next alpha male.
Completing the Portrait of a Despotic Society
I turn now from vivid anecdotes to a systematic political description that is
based on ﬁeld observation spanning tens of thousands of hours. This
ﬁeldwork was conducted by scholars such as Goodall and her Tanzanian
ﬁeld staff (Goodall 1986) and the Japanese primatologists at Mahale
(Nishida 1979). There is no doubt that chimpanzees are innately very
rivalrous. Their type of social system is based on sharp status rivalry and it
depends on speciﬁc dispositions for dominance and submission. Various
authors (Nishida 1979; de Waal 1982; Goodall 1986; Wrangham and Peter-
son 1996) have portrayed a species whose males seem intent on domina-
tion yet submit readily when it is necessary to do so. My most interesting
day provided an excellent illustration of such behaviors.
Freud's ambitions were not exceptional. Every young male, as he ap-
proaches or reaches adolescence, becomes driven by political aspirations.
First, he displays at low-ranking adult females until they begin to pant-
grunt submissively when they greet him. Then he moves on to the more
formidable females. Sometimes he suffers reverses along the way, particu-
larly if the females have allies to help them. Eventually he will dominate all
the females and begin to direct his displays at lower-ranking adult males
Hierarchy and Equality
23

(Goodall 1986, 1990). If he is successful in that pursuit, he keeps working
his way up the male hierarchy until he can go no further. At Gombe
Mustard and Jomeo never made it very far, but even they were dominant to
all the adult females.
A chimpanzee's basic political tools are threat and appeasement, and the
signals provided by nature are quite varied. To dominate, an individual
may stare, or bristle, or move toward another, or charge, or display, or
actually begin an attack. Soft-cough vocalizations and arm-threats serve as
moderately aggressive reminders to subordinates that they are provoking
ire. The tools of submission are still more varied: the pant-grunt greeting
can escalate to a pant-bark or a pant-scream; and a variety of submissive
bodily signals include crouching, bobbing, presenting one's rump, sleeking
the hair, and exhibiting a fear-grin. One may wonder why even a behavior-
ally ﬂexible species would develop such an apparent plethora of overlap-
ping or identical signals. However, it is important for the chimpanzee to
make it perfectly clear that he or she (as subordinate) is not challenging
anyone's status; a multiplicity of signals reduces the chances of misunder-
standing.
Keep in mind that the typical way of communicating a political chal-
lenge is simply to ignore the display of a superior, and in a situation of low
visibility a submissive crouching posture with sleeked hair may not be seen.
A simultaneously emitted pant-grunt or an excited, fearful pant-scream
will be heard, and therefore the political situation will not become ambigu-
ous. Such signals are essential in avoiding an attack. Often several are used
simultaneously, as when a subordinate greets the alpha male by crouching
submissively and exhibiting a fear-grin even as he pant-grunts.
At the core of any social dominance hierarchy are the basics of domina-
tion and submission by means of appeasement. Evasion also plays a part in
submissive behavior, but is costly in energy: it is far more efﬁcient to
exhibit a fear-grin and pant-grunt to appease a superior. Chimpanzee po-
litical behaviors go beyond dominance, submission, and ﬂight. For exam-
ple, a subordinate may request reassurance by proffering a hand, and a
dominant may respond by touching the nervous subordinate, or may do so
spontaneously (de Waal 1989). Grooming also plays a major role in politi-
cal relations, particularly in the pursuit of coalition partners (Goodall
1986).
Wild chimpanzee communities usually number 50 to 100 animals, and
the power structure can be rather complicated. Let us begin with the males.
Basically, the adults are aligned in a simple, linear dominance hierarchy
24
Hierarchy in the Forest

with the alpha outranking everyone, the number two outranking all but
the alpha, and so on down the line. But these same males regularly form
male-male coalitions in order to advance themselves politically, and some-
times alpha males must deal regularly with pairs of rivals who are serious
about challenging them. When an alpha is unseated, and often this feat is
accomplished by a coalition, the hierarchy rearranges itself. Some coali-
tions are long-lasting, but the male rivalry among chimpanzees is basically
individualistic and "ﬁckle" (see de Waal 1982). After an alpha is displaced,
one coalition partner becomes alpha, while the other either remains as his
ally or forms a new arrangement to unseat his former partner.
The Machiavellian behaviors of de Waal's large captive group are also
evident in the wild (see Nishida 1979; Goodall 1986)—except that the
females appear to participate far less in power plays. Males always team up
with other males; female coalitions are much rarer. This is no accident, for
in the wild females spend much less time together than do males.
At Gombe some females belong to a central clique, while others stay
in peripheral areas. Many transfer while young to adjacent communities
(Goodall 1986). The females do have a social dominance hierarchy (Good-
all 1986; see also Baker and Smuts 1994; Pusey, Williams, and Goodall
1997), but in the wild they tend not to have a single individual who is the
alpha. The structure of dominance relations is less linear, and the use of
appeasement in greeting is much less regular. Female dominance comes
into play in displacing subordinates at feeding sites, and sometimes, collec-
tively, in threatening stranger females who migrate into the community
(Goodall 1986). Females also may assume the control role to intervene in
adult conﬂicts (Boehm 1994a), but they do so rarely.
In spite of the constant tensions involved with male status rivalry, and in
spite of all the political alliances, life in chimpanzee communities is fairly
well routinized; every male knows his place and stays there regardless of his
ambitions. When an alpha male is well established, he can intimidate any
hostile coalition or, for that matter, the entire community (Goodall 1986).
He maintains this status by means of frequent displays, which are accom-
panied by a chorus of fearful screams and hostile waa-barks coming from
those he intimidates. In a stable dominance situation (which can go on for
years) these displays serve to reinforce the alpha male's position. They
rarely ﬂare up into actual conﬂicts. At times, however, protracted periods
of dominance instability occur, during which a subordinate male chal-
lenges a higher-ranking male and neither gives in.
Domination brings with it deﬁnite privileges in chimpanzee communi-
Hierarchy and Equality
25

ties—which are composed of constantly recombining parties of various
sizes that collectively defend a fairly precise piece of real estate. For both
sexes, a dominant position leads to better access to food resources, and for
the typically promiscuous males, high rank confers better mating opportu-
nities. Yet the seemingly tyrannical behavior of a strong chimpanzee alpha
male hardly approaches the despotism of a Hitler or a Saddam Hussein, or
even the far more limited political power of an American president who
can call in the National Guard. Goblin can take virtually anything he wants,
with only a few exceptions (as when Jomeo had personally acquired the
baby bushpig). He can attack other group members individually, if neces-
sary, to keep them intimidated. But there are few contexts in which he
actually controls the group, acting as its "governor." Every chimpanzee
decides autonomously where to forage, and whether or not to join in a
hunt or go on patrol.
In human terms, then, Goblin is far more a bully than a despotic ruler or
even a reasonably strong governor who possesses some decisive authority.
This is the case even though he sometimes regulates conﬂicts between
group members. Such ﬁghts are inevitable, for younger males are always
trying to move up the hierarchy and often engage in attacks on females,
while occasionally pairs of females also get into serious quarrels. Not infre-
quently at Gombe the alpha male assumes a "control role" (see Erhardt and
Bernstein 1994) to stop signiﬁcant ﬁghts that break out (Boehm 1994a).
Usually he displays at the protagonists and scatters them; then, sitting
down between them, he inhibits resumption of the quarrel. This peace-
making behavior surely has an innate basis, for in chimpanzee groups
high-ranking individuals regularly pacify the ﬁghts of others (Boehm 1992,
1994a). They do so in a variety of environments, including artiﬁcial ones
created by humans (de Waal 1982).
At Gombe almost all of the alpha-male conﬂict interventions result in
paciﬁcation, which makes for "good government." While this conﬂict reso-
lution may be innately based, it would appear also to involve ﬂexible deci-
sions about strategies and tactics (Boehm 1991a). During Goblin's tenure
his predominant pattern was to display straight at the protagonists to
disperse them—but his actions were always adjusted to logistical possibili-
ties. One videotaped sequence showed him feeding in a tree when two
nearby females began a serious ﬁght, grappling at close quarters. Goblin
swung across several branches and essentially propelled the females down
the tree. Their rapid descent obliged them to disengage in order to break
26
Hierarchy in the Forest

their falls, after which Goblin chased one of them back up the tree and
forced the other onto the ground away from the tree. A potentially severe
ﬁght was ended in just a few seconds with no damage to either female, both
of whom were unrelated to Goblin.
On what was probably my second most interesting day at Gombe Stream
Research Center, I watched two adolescent males begin a serious ﬁght and
observed yet another tactical variety of peacemaking intervention by a
dominant. Goblin was not with the subgroup in question, but the number
two male, Satan, was. He charged right at the protagonists, but they were so
involved in their conﬂict, grappling and trying to bite, that his approach
had no effect. Satan, an unusually large male, ﬁrst thrust late-juvenile
Frodo aside because he was standing nearby and might have entered the
conﬂict. Then he put his great arms between the bodies of the two combat-
ants and literally pried them apart, which took him a full four seconds.
When I asked Goodall and her ﬁeld assistants about this variation, they
said that it had never been observed over the quarter-century they had
been watching chimpanzees. However, de Waal (1982) reports the frequent
occurrence of such "prying-apart" behavior at the Arnhem colony (see also
Boehm 1994a).
When dyadic conﬂicts begin, it is obvious that the alpha can exert de-
ﬁnitive control over such behavior if he chooses to, and that his actions
amount to "governance" with authority. But when it comes to controlling
the behavior of larger groups, the alpha's possibilities are limited to merely
inﬂuencing the group decisions when indecision prevails. Thus, while high
rank involves some civic responsibilities as well as extensive bullying privi-
leges, the alpha can only impose his will on the entire group momentarily
and temporarily, by terrorizing its members with his displays. In human
terms, although he may be something of a tyrant, he is far from being a
dictator who ﬁrmly controls the destinies of others.
This is an important distinction. In human egalitarian society leaders are
not allowed to bully, and they can lead only very subtly, through inﬂuence.
Goblin similarly has little coercive power as group leader, but he can at
least help his community to make decisions in certain contexts. Two vide-
otaped sequences at Gombe show him appearing to manipulate emergency
situations involving external threats. In one he deﬁnitely inﬂuences a pa-
trol's decision. In the other, he reinforces his group's tendency to harass a
large python.
The latter sequence begins with Goblin and Evered hearing alarm calls
Hierarchy and Equality
27

several hundred yards away. The two senior males travel deliberately to-
ward a subgroup that has encountered and surrounded a python 5 yards
long, staying well out of reach of its head. Goblin moves slowly through
rustling leaves, stopping occasionally to listen. When he arrives at the scene,
he engages in a dramatic tree-drumming display that is not emulated by his
companion, Evered. The chimpanzees as a group continue to harass the
python, giving alarm calls every time it begins to move, and eventually
some of the males engage in dramatic "branching displays" up in trees.
Goblin assumes no noticeable role of leadership aside from his initial
intimidation display, but it is likely that his behavior emboldens the others.
Unable to hunt, the python eventually leaves the scene at a high rate of
speed.
In the patrol footage, Goblin's leadership is more apparent (Boehm
1991a). The patrol is a rather small one, and like others it involves cautious
silence, scanning, and some scouting, with the senior males taking turns in
leading. As the Kasakela patrol approaches the no-man's-land between
their community's territory and that of a large neighboring community to
the south, its members remain quite silent. They sit along a ridge, feeding
in desultory fashion. Apparently they are spotted ﬁrst by their neighbors,
who happen to be patrolling at the same time. Hostile vocalizations begin
in the distance, and the Kasakela males immediately become attentive.
Normally, when groups of equal size meet they vocalize menacingly at each
other for a time and then gradually withdraw into their respective territo-
ries, for chimpanzees attack strangers only when they outnumber them
decisively. In this case, Evered after a slight delay begins to return the
vocalization—but he quickly chokes it off, looking around behind him in
Goblin's direction.
As Goblin rushes forward to reconnoiter, Mustard approaches him with
a large fear-grin and tries to embrace him for reassurance. Goblin moves
forward quickly to a vantage spot to peer across the valley, and Mustard
now emulates him. As Goblin (alpha), Satan (number two), and Evered
(number three) scan the valley, they break off several times to look at one
another quickly. After nearly 60 seconds Goblin suddenly makes his deci-
sion, and begins to vocalize and display. The entire group, which includes
adolescents Freud and Beethoven, immediately follows suit, and the result
is the usual one: both groups vocalize and display ferociously, then slowly
retreat into their home ranges.
Although we cannot interview him about his motives and strategies,
28
Hierarchy in the Forest

Goblin's considerable inﬂuence in this decision process is not difﬁcult to
discern (Boehm 1991a). Still, had the other group members decided to
desert him when he began his display, he would have had no way of
making them return to the front, nor of punishing them for dereliction of
duty. His "army," like the war groups of egalitarian tribesmen who allow no
leader to dominate them, is made up of volunteers. His political role, as
bully and sometime governor, is merely inﬂuential when it comes to col-
laborative decisions of strategy.
Triangulating to Human Nature
Although my focus in this volume is on human political nature, I have
opened with a treatment of the politics of the well-studied chimpanzee.
Introducing some human standards into my evaluation, I have emphasized
the limitations on the despotic role. Members of chimpanzee communities
essentially move about on their own: they exert such freedom of action in
order to maximize their food intake in the face of dispersed resources, and
usually are able to cope individually with predators. For reasons of socia-
bility, community members do often travel together, but adults and adoles-
cents of both sexes come and go as they please, constantly joining new
subgroups whose size is adjusted to the food quest. While the rank and ﬁle
are regularly bullied and dominated, they are little governed—except when
they get into ﬁghts. And if the costs of being bullied become higher than
the rewards of sociability, individuals can seek refuge in peripheral areas
(which unfortunately are close to enemy territory) and thereby remain
undominated. In fact, a sexually available female can transfer to an adja-
cent community. A male really cannot do so, for he is apt to be killed on
sight (Nishida 1979; Goodall 1986).
Consider now the very different political life of human beings who live
in strong chiefdoms or modern nations. They are subject to control from
above in many spheres of their lives. Also in opposition to the chimpanzee,
a silverback mountain gorilla exerts far more control over his harem (see
Fried 1967), the members of which stay together all day because their food
is more concentrated than that of chimpanzees (see also Fossey 1983; Watts
1996). The gorilla not only protects his harem against predators, he also
determines the direction of travel and thereby dictates foraging strategies
for the entire group. He also defends his females against intruding males—
which curtails the females' freedom even though they sometimes manage
Hierarchy and Equality
29

to transfer. He also acts in a control role as an alpha chimpanzee does, to
stop conﬂicts. His power, as "ruler," is considerable.
It is not difﬁcult to rate gorillas, bonobos, and chimpanzees on Vehren-
camp's (1983) scale, for all can be placed well toward the despotic end of
the continuum. With humans, it is far more difﬁcult to locate our behav-
ioral dispositions with respect to "despotic" as opposed to "egalitarian." In
different circumstances we practice both types of political behavior. The
human animal can exhibit far more tyranny than any despotic African
great ape, but it also can be more egalitarian than even the bonobo, an
innately hierarchical ape whose males ﬁnd their power being strongly
counterbalanced by coalitions of females (Kano 1992).
The nature of human political dispositions remains in question. Are we
innately so ﬂexible that human behavior can be reshaped "at will" by
environmental forces, or do some serious problems exist with regard to our
deﬁnitions and the perceptions of our own political nature?
Prior to the next three chapters, in which I closely examine nonliterate
egalitarian society, I must introduce extant hunter-gatherers. Their small
foraging bands typify egalitarianism for most observers, and I will examine
the causal explanations that ethnographers have given for their strikingly
low levels of social and political hierarchy.
Anthropologists on Egalitarians
With the help of Morgan (1877), scientiﬁc anthropology emerged in the
nineteenth century as a robust but tiny discipline that faced the enormous
task of explaining nonliterate cultures and their natural history to a world
of urban literates. If the people in question were mobile nomadic fora-
gers—people who gathered and hunted—usually their groups were called
bands. This term continues to be useful today (see Kelly 1995). Yet most of
the people studied early on had domesticated plants and animals, and their
groups were called tribes—a term that continues to be used and is confus-
ing in spite of serious attempts to remedy the situation (see Sahlins 1961,
1968; Fried 1975; Service 1971).
Both bands and tribes elicited a predictable political reaction when they
were discovered by early explorers or ethnographers. These small local
groups had no leaders with any real authority; in contrast to the societies of
their discoverers, every individual seemed to come and go just as he or she
pleased. It became clear that when people live in small, locally autonomous
30
Hierarchy in the Forest

groups, they are almost always "equalitarian." Modern anthropology there-
fore faced a dilemma. Politically equalized bands and tribes had been
found on every continent, so this anomaly could not be explained as some
kind of local historical development. They were found in a bewildering
array of ecological niches, so environmental inﬂuences did not seem to be
a major determinant: egalitarians foraged, farmed, and herded animals.
They also used many different residence and descent rules and a variety of
kin terms.
There were also some constants. Their smallish groups had local political
autonomy. Strict equality was practiced with respect to political relations
among adult males. Leaders were weak and merely assisted a consensus-
seeking process when the group needed to make decisions (Knauft 1991). A
political regularity that prevails in the face of so much variation in environ-
ment, subsistence pattern, and social organization demands a single causal
explanation. The band, in particular, warranted explanation because of its
evolutionary importance.
Surveying the continent of Africa, the British social anthropologists
Fortes and Evans-Pritchard (1940) made an attempt. They identiﬁed three
types of political society, most of their African sample being politically
centralized chiefdoms or kingdoms having "governmental" institutions, or
else "stateless societies" that fell into the tribal category. A few African
hunter-gatherers did live in bands, "those very small societies . . . in which
even the largest political unit embraces a group of people all of whom are
united to one another by ties of kinship, so that political relations are
coterminous with kinship relations and the political structure and kinship
organization are completely fused" (pp. 6-7).
In effect, the band was depicted as no more than a human family writ
somewhat larger. Fortes and Evans-Pritchard had in mind the "bushmen"
of southern Africa (Middleton and Tait 1958:1), and their characterization
was accurate to a degree. Kalahari foragers and others living in bands do
appear to take a rather familial approach to social life, often calling nonre-
latives by kin terms, and bands share large-game meat just as families share
all foods. In terms of accurate taxonomizing, however, their position pre-
sents several problems. For one thing, typical hunting bands (including
those same Kalahari foragers) contain unrelated households. For another,
the nature of authority in the family differs signiﬁcantly from that in the
band as a whole.
The band level of political organization was mentioned only in passing
Hierarchy and Equality
31

by Fortes and Evans-Pritchard, but their errors reveal an important dis-
crepancy. All humans have nuclear families, and these minimal social units
are scarcely devoid of hierarchy or authority, for children are always con-
trolled decisively by parents, and women and younger adults may be con-
trolled by their elders (Service 1962). By contrast, at the band level the
main political actors behave as equals.
The same is true of tribes. In 1958 the British social anthropologists
Middleton and Tait (1958) focused squarely on egalitarian politics as they
labeled a series of small African groups "acephalous." The studies focused
speciﬁcally on political leadership, and the ethnographers took interest in
the apparent anomaly mentioned above, that no headmen or chiefs with
any real political authority seemed to exist in African tribes. The situation
held true even though clusters of local units could combine and act to-
gether politically against other coalitions of tribes. Although the studies in
the Middleton and Tait volume provided excellent political descriptions of
egalitarian tribes and their predictably weak leadership, little attempt was
made to explain this power vacuum at the top in terms of uniform causes,
let alone of natural history.
Anthropologists continued to face a behavioral aberration that raised
profound questions about human nature itself, and attempts to classify
egalitarian politics continued. For example, Sharp (1958) described a fora-
ger group as "people without politics," and Barclay (1970, 1993) went so
far as to suggest that such people were living in a state of anarchy. Others
took a more balanced approach. In the 1960s the cultural anthropologists
Service (1962, see also 1975) and Fried (1967) widened the focus beyond
subsistence, leadership, and governmental functions, to consider also mat-
ters of ranking and social stratiﬁcation. They repudiated the Rousseauian
claim that acephalous bands and tribes were totally lacking in hierarchy
or authority, for such societies frequently demonstrated competition, and
muted status differences tended to be present among the males. But in their
view egalitarian societies remained quite distinctive, in comparison with
hierarchical chiefdoms, primitive kingdoms, and civilizations.
Fried, in particular, tried very hard to ﬁnd a single causal explanation for
this widespread political anomaly. In my opinion, he faced a problem that
required evolutionary analysis, with a focus on determining the role of
innate dispositions. In spite of the broad training many of us receive in
graduate school, cultural anthropologists have been mysteriously hesitant
to engage with human nature. Even today the cultural branch of our disci-
32
Hierarchy in the Forest

pline is trying to recover from the powerful antievolutionary biases that
Boas inspired—even though a few earlier scholars such as Kroeber (1948)
and White (1959) explored "evolutionary" interests along the way, and
Count (1958) took on the problem of human nature directly, along with
Tiger and Fox (1971).
Fried and Service saw themselves as cultural evolutionists, and their
work focused mainly on clarifying processes that encourage political tran-
sitions from band to tribe to chiefdom and, in Service's case, to primitive
kingdoms and civilizations. At the lower end of this sequence, they iden-
tiﬁed an important type of political society that was given the name "egali-
tarian" (Service 1962:114, 141; Fried 1967). Placing it in a broad compara-
tive context, they attempted to identify the causal factors that either kept it
in place or eventually led to its transformation into a more hierarchical
type of society.
Service (1975:50-53) was particularly interested in the "self-effacing"
behavior of the headman, whose role invariably was that of facilitator as
opposed to governor or ruler. While headmen as informal leaders were
likely to possess admirable self-assertive skills in hunting or warfare, these
qualities were combined with "generosity, kindness, and freedom from bad
temper, such that the person becomes highly respected and his opinions
[carried] more weight than other, still older men." In effect, these leaders
were sharing their ideas with the group in the form of suggestions, without
asserting any authority.
In the above quotation, Service was referring to Radcliffe-Brown's
(1922) description of Andaman Island Negritos, and he also cites Thomas's
(1959) work on South African !Kung-speaking foragers—the same Kala-
hari hunter-gatherers that Fortes and Evans-Pritchard had tried to analyze.
Service (1975) made the point that a respected band leader would go out of
his way to avoid prominence, giving away virtually everything he came to
possess. He also emphasized the leader's ability to sense public opinion. His
conclusion (see also Service 1962) was that the foraging band's leader was a
mere primus inter pares, a ﬁrst among equals. These ideas may be consid-
ered seminal, as may Service's early and inﬂuential use of the term "egali-
tarian" with respect to tribesmen.
It was Fried, more than Service, who tried to pick apart egalitarian
society in its social, economic, and political workings, to give it a precise
deﬁnition, to examine it in relation to the societies of other primates, and
to ﬁnd a cause for this political phenomenon. He began by carefully dis-
Hierarchy and Equality
33

tancing himself from previous ethnographic reactions that overperceived
the social equality in egalitarian societies. Focusing on males as the more
obvious political actors, Fried pointed to signiﬁcant individual differences
of strength, skill, prestige, inﬂuence, and authority, and demonstrated eth-
nographically that up to a certain point such differences were appreciated
and accepted. What was absent, he insisted, was the cultural habit of sum-
ming these advantages in such a way as to "establish an order of dominance
and paramountcy" (Fried 1967:33).
Fried was interested in ﬁnding both immediate and ultimate expla-
nations for this interesting state of political affairs. From sociology he
brought in the notion of "leveling mechanisms" to explain on an immedi-
ate basis the lack of pronounced or formal hierarchy. For example, he
emphasized that among various hunter-gatherers certain social customs
arbitrarily spread around the credit for bringing meat into camp and
thereby kept the best hunters from lording it over others in the band.
Fried also tried to probe more deeply, to explore the underlying question
of human nature. He looked to ﬁeld descriptions of other primates, to see
if pronounced social hierarchy seemed to be integral to being a primate. In
focusing on great apes as the primates most closely related to humans,
Fried chose to challenge a generalization of the pioneer primatologist Car-
penter, that competition and dominance behavior were associated with all
monkeys and apes.
Carpenter (1942:191-192) deﬁned dominance in terms of priority of
access to food, mating, and position in the group while traveling, along
with superiority in aggressiveness or group control—a deﬁnition that
holds today. On the basis of data available in 1967, Fried found gorillas to
be behaviorally closer to this model than chimpanzees, our closest phyloge-
netic cousin. Goodall (1979) and Nishida (1979) had not yet published on
the dramatic territorial behaviors of chimpanzees, or established the fact
that chimpanzees had all but linear male dominance hierarchies. Fried was
on the wrong path. As we saw earlier, every adult (male or female) must
salute any higher-ranking adult male with a submissive greeting, while a
predictable dominance order provides top males with privileged access to
food, mating opportunities, and power. Actually, chimpanzees ﬁt Carpen-
ter's proﬁle quite nicely.
As a result of incomplete data and some erroneous conclusions based on
the available facts, Fried (1967) characterized leadership among other pri-
mates as primarily a matter of setting the direction of travel. He dismissed
anecdotal reports about group leaders intervening in conﬂicts, and explic-
34
Hierarchy in the Forest

itly denied the existence of anything like human dispute settlement. In that
I have studied the management of conﬂict in both humans and chimpan-
zees (Boehm 1986, 1994a) as well as in other primates (Boehm 1981), I
could assure Fried, were he living, that when dominant chimpanzees inter-
vene in conﬂicts and then watchfully stay nearby to intervene again if
necessary, they appear to know exactly what they are doing—just as human
leaders do when they implement their own techniques of intervention.
They are using whatever authority or power they possess, to govern the
behavior of those below them.
In spite of these difﬁculties in identifying ultimate causes, Fried set the
tone for the interpretation of egalitarian societies over the next several
decades. A thesis of this book is that he thereby seriously underestimated
one aspect of human political nature: the propensity to compete socially
and to engage in domination behavior. All the same, Fried's surface reading
of political dynamics was very close to the mark. In comparing humans to
other animals, he wrote:
Do conﬂicts break out in simple societies as a manifestation of a competi-
tive drive for power? The evidence is largely negative . . . Rather than
being structured hierarchically such societies have as many people of
paramount prestige as can display the qualities necessary. There is, how-
ever, one source of conﬂict in the way this kind of situation usually
develops. While men in these societies do not seem to display any drive
for universal dominance within their groups, they do display a consider-
able drive to achieve parity, or at least to establish a status that announces
"don't fool with me." Among other things, this attitude helps make un-
derstandable the violence that can develop over . . . adulterous situations.
(Fried 1967:79)
This characterization is accurate, and the implication that there could be
something like an innate drive to parity may be astute. But in terms of
social dynamics Fried fails to notice that if all the males in a group hold a
"don't fool with me" attitude, the result can be a far more powerful "don't
fool with us!"
"Environmental" Explanations of Egalitarianism
One of my immediate missions is to bring some cohesion and order to the
larger theoretical framework in which egalitarian politics are analyzed. A
distinctively egalitarian political style is highly predictable wherever people
Hierarchy and Equality
35

live in small, locally autonomous social and economic groups, and in my
opinion this situation is likely to have a single causal explanation. I am not
alone in this belief. Referring to Gardner's (1991) survey of the diverse
explanations of egalitarianism formulated by students of forager behavior,
Guenther (1991:563) says of these theorists: "Each one of them has—like
the proverbial cat around the hot porridge bowl—talked around the mat-
ter of hunter-gatherer individualism or personal autonomy, each from its
own theoretical and ethnographic perspective, sensing but leaving inchoate
an overall theoretical framework."
A near-absence of any reference to human nature is one factor that has
kept this overall theoretical framework vague, but another is the tendency
to look for mechanical variables as the causes of egalitarianism—instead of
scrutinizing the foragers themselves as political strategizers who may be
deliberately shaping their own social order.
In effect, Guenther is talking about the tendency of ethnographers who
study hunter-gatherers to explain egalitarian behavior, on a local basis. The
great majority of these environmental explanations are logical and empiri-
cally well founded, and I include not only theories that look to the natural
environment and subsistence pattern, but those that look to self-organizing
aspects of the band's social environment. Let me begin by critiquing this
social-environmental brand of explanation.
Sharp (1958:5-6) and also Tonkinson (1978:151) have suggested that in
effect several Australian Aboriginal groups block the emergence of hierar-
chy at the group level because they have complex, ego-based dominance-
submission networks. If every male is subordinate to one network of males
in his life but dominant to another, and each person's ego-centered net-
work is different, then there is no way that any one individual will be in a
position to dominate everyone in his band. This theory makes excellent
sense, but it is limited to just a few groups that set up their social life in this
interesting way.
Knauft (1987:466, 477) suggests that witchcraft-type killing among re-
cently sedentary Gebusi foragers in New Guinea acts as a sanction that
facilitates an equitable distribution of goods to females. The theory applies
nicely to foragers who indulge in witchcraft executions, but sorcery and
witchcraft are far from universal among hunter-gatherers.
Other suggestions have wider applicability. Turnbull (1965:228) suggests
for Mbuti Pygmies that a constantly changing composition of the band has
a negative effect on the development of authority and control. If this
36
Hierarchy in the Forest

demographic theory were powerful enough to explain egalitarianism, it
certainly would have wide applicability. I say this because, as social entities,
mobile hunter-gatherer bands are relatively unstable in their long-term
membership (Palmer, Fredrickson, and Tilley 1998; see also Brunton
1989).
Gluckman (1965:4-5) suggests that nonspecialized economic produc-
tion acts as a brake on the development of hierarchy. This theory too would
appear to have wide applicability because (setting aside gender differences)
nomadic foragers tend to be jacks of all trades. Again, the question is
whether this hypothesis is causally sufﬁcient to explain the absence of
strong group leadership as a widespread political phenomenon.
Taking a different tack, Fried (1967:33-34) and Woodburn (1982:440)
both emphasize uncentralized redistribution systems for large-game meat,
which certainly are a prominent and widespread aspect of mobile forager
life. The problem is to establish whether any of these social or socioeco-
nomic factors are fundamental causes of an egalitarian band's political
ways of operating, or are more apt to be an effect of such political tradi-
tions.
Let us turn to the physical environment and its effect on subsistence and
social life. For two geographically and culturally disparate groups, Slobodin
(1969:194) and Cashdan (1980:116) make the obvious argument that no-
madic subsistence limits material accumulation, and that this lifestyle is
likely to level people. This excellent point tends to hold universally, but
egalitarianism goes far beyond leveling differences of material accumula-
tion: egalitarianism levels the power of individuals to make decisions in a
number of spheres, and it also levels the ability of one person to physically
or psychologically dominate another.
Salzman (1979) points out that culturally prized "objects" can be men-
tal, as well as physical, as with individuals who are exceptional at remem-
bering myths. With respect to the environment, he brings in the effects of
scattered and unpredictable resources, while Layton (1986:24-28) dis-
cusses a highly dispersed food supply, along with territorial behavior. Yet
such conditions are quite variable among extant foragers (Kelly 1995), and
surely they were still more variable prehistorically. Foragers then often had
their pick of the world's environments under conditions of stability, and
they also suffered mass dislocations as their climates ﬂuctuated (Potts
1996).
We now have an impressive list of probable causes for egalitarian behav-
Hierarchy and Equality
37

ior in particular groups or particular ecological circumstances, and to these
might be added the analyses in Flanagan and Rayner (1988). Still, the few
hypotheses that have applicability to all foragers do not seem sufﬁcient to
explain the very mitigated kind of hierarchy that accompanies egalitarian-
ism. There is little doubt that demographic instability, nomadic restraints
on material accumulation, absence of economic specialization outside the
family, and uncentralized redistribution systems for meat are important,
for they are widespread or universal. They unquestionably contribute to an
egalitarian way of life, for they provide conditions friendly to the mainte-
nance of egalitarian polities. But as leveling mechanisms, even in combina-
tion, they do not explain the totally predictable egalitarian ways of these
mobile nomads—especially if we entertain the possibility that humans are
"naturally" hierarchical.
There is a further problem, a serious one. These forager-speciﬁc hy-
potheses do not help at all in explaining the fact that many other nonliter-
ates, people who live in permanent, settled groups that accumulate food
surpluses through agriculture, are quite similar politically. As will be seen
in Chapter 5, these tribesmen lack strong leadership and domination
among the adult males, they make their group decisions by consensus, and
they too exhibit an egalitarian ideology. This is the case even though (1)
they are not nomadic; (2) they do not necessarily share meat or other food
beyond the family; (3) they are in a favorable position to accumulate
material goods; (4) their group composition can be highly stable; and (5)
some exhibit a degree of economic specialization.
The fact that tribesmen are ecologically and socially quite different from
foragers, but remain similarly egalitarian, requires a more general type of
explanation. The question is one of ultimate causality: a single cause or set
of causes is needed to explain a widespread political phenomenon.
The Need for Leveling Mechanisms
Fried's special interest was in social ranking and in leveling mechanisms.
His great contribution was to point out that egalitarian societies did not
assign a single slot for "group leader," or "best hunter," or "head shaman";
rather, the group could accord high-status positions to as many people as
were qualiﬁed. In short, status rivalry was not culturally channeled into a
zero-sum game, the result of which was likely to be an alpha-male type of
group leader. Fried focused squarely on the disposition of power. Even
38
Hierarchy in the Forest

though we have seen that a universal drive to dominance was arbitrarily
ruled out, he did in passing suggest that there seemed to be a universal
drive to parity. This raises a compelling question. If human political nature
amounts to a blank slate, or if there exist human dispositions to parity but
not to dominance, why did Fried have to become so interested in leveling
mechanisms when he tried to ﬁnd a cause for egalitarianism?
The obvious and straightforward answer is that humans naturally form
hierarchies when they live in groups, and that leveling mechanisms are
needed to curtail such innate tendencies. We have seen that Fried rejected
this possibility out of hand, denying human nature any involvement with
dominance tendencies. His successors, equally intent on identifying level-
ing mechanisms, have been slow to address the fundamental problem of
why such explanations are needed at all. A few have explicitly denied the
existence of social dominance tendencies in humans, and presently I shall
be obliged to disagree with them.
Let us return to Fried and his problems with chimpanzees. Even at the
time he wrote, it was known that a chimpanzee raised alone would exhibit
bits and pieces of the dominance and submission behaviors that take place
in normal social interactions (Menzel 1964). These traits could come only
from "chimpanzee nature." We now know that dominance and submission,
along with ﬂight, are behaviors that come naturally to younger chimpan-
zees as they engage in play and learn how to live in groups (Goodall 1986).
As for adults, I have described in some detail the status rivalry and drive to
dominate among Gombe males, and I emphasize that the resulting political
portrait is quite consistent with Carpenter's earlier judgment—the one that
Fried rejected.
I suggested earlier in this chapter that the "authority" of top male chim-
panzees has everything to do with a greedy, bullying style of domination,
and much less to do with the centralized political authority we associate
with human governance. Weber (1947) deﬁnes such authority in terms of
an ability to control the behavior of others through threat or application of
coercive force, and we all know from dealing with the state highway patrol
and tax collectors that such authority is pervasive in modern nations. By
contrast, an individual adult chimpanzee is basically on its own, as is an
individual hunter in a human band.
In meaningful ways hunter-gatherers are strikingly similar to chimpan-
zees. Both species depend on foraging and live in ﬂexible local groupings,
with families or individuals moving about at will. In both species a leader
Hierarchy and Equality
39

cannot force a personally chosen strategy on the entire group, yet the rank
and ﬁle can be quite responsive to leadership in certain contexts. Both
species harbor a propensity to intervene in conﬂicts, even though hunter-
gatherers do so as a group, gently manipulating conﬂicts that are brewing,
whereas chimpanzees intervene decisively and dominantly as individuals.
In both species the males are somewhat larger than females and are in a
position to dominate them physically—a power that wild chimpanzees
exploit to an extreme.
In other ways chimpanzees and human hunter-gatherers are quite differ-
ent. Male foragers do not exhibit frequent competitive displays aimed at
decisive political domination of other males; they do not live in well-devel-
oped dominance hierarchies, as chimpanzees do; and access to females and
natural resources is not decided routinely on the basis of threats backed by
the possibility of attack. In pondering this lack of hierarchy, cultural an-
thropologists have remained perplexed. The possibility of species-speciﬁc
tendencies to status rivalry or dominance behavior has been raised from
time to time in a variety of contexts (see, for example, Sahlins 1959; Du-
mont 1970; Tiger and Fox 1971; Boehm 1982b, 1984a; Cohen 1985;
Mitchell 1988; Zvelebil 1991; Kelly 1995; Wiessner 1996), but so far the
question has remained unanswered—and mostly unexplored.
Not long ago I went on record with a formal hypothesis in this area,
one speciﬁc to the general problem of egalitarianism among foragers and
tribesmen. I proposed that leveling mechanisms may be necessary because,
as with chimpanzees, underlying dominance and submission tendencies
facilitate competition among individuals and constitute a powerful force
for hierarchy in group life (Boehm 1993, 1994b; see also Tiger and Fox
1971; Boehm 1982b, 1984a).
In his recent comprehensive work on forager behavior, Kelly (1995:330)
denies that humans possess any dominance tendencies—even though he
believes that human tendencies to "compete" exist in a Darwinian sense.
This rather mixed message is of sufﬁcient interest that I quote it verbatim:
"We are still far from an understanding of what conditions engender egali-
tarianism or hierarchy, but it is certain that though egalitarianism is not a
natural condition of humanity, neither is hierarchy. An evolutionary per-
spective sees inequality as arising from innate attributes of humans trying
to maximize ﬁtness, rather than innate attributes of dominance."
Thus, in humans Kelly seems to be ruling out dominance dispositions as
a cause of inequality. Elsewhere he is more explicit in setting aside the
40
Hierarchy in the Forest

entire issue of human nature (Kelly 1995:336; see Kent 1993 for a similar
opinion)—which he apparently believes can be separated from human
maximization of ﬁtness.
The problem with Kelly's reasoning is that when Darwinian competition
becomes direct and face to face, as it tends to be in highly social animals
such as humans, chimpanzees, wild dogs, or scores of other species, it is
precisely dispositions to dominance (producing threat and attack) and
submission (producing appeasement or ﬂight) that are retained by natural
selection as useful behavioral strategies. Like almost any other behavior
trait, these reproductively selﬁsh political dispositions are maintained
through individual maximization of inclusive ﬁtness. Their existence, how-
ever, results in direct social and political competition among individuals in
the same group, rather than in indirect genetic competition of the classical
Darwinian type. Accordingly, I claim that human political nature (includ-
ing propensities to dominate and submit interpersonally) is inextricably
involved with maximization of ﬁtness and cannot be set aside. Kelly had a
great deal more relevant information than Fried on which to base his
conclusion, and I believe Kelly's position to be untenable. Indeed, I shall
argue that both egalitarianism and hierarchy are "natural conditions of
humanity."
Within forager studies, so-called domination theory has been criticized
from another quarter as well. Sharp (1994) believes that theorists such as
Lorenz and Ardrey have overdrawn their portrayals of domination in hu-
man society, to the degree that females are excluded from the analysis. He is
correct that it is very often the males who have obvious access to coercive
power. In Sharp's essay, entitled "The Power of Weakness," he carefully
documents ways in which the vulnerability of Chippewa Indian women
redounds to their political beneﬁt and power. He pursues this argument as
an antidote to outside biases (academic and lay) that have tended to over-
portray male dominance in Chippewa culture, but he unwittingly makes
human nature itself the new victim. Ardrey's widely criticized "overpor-
trayals" are no justiﬁcation for throwing out a very healthy infant with the
bathwater.
Human Nature
In spite of the obvious importance to the human condition of both the
natural environment and human nature, many anthropologists continue to
Hierarchy and Equality
41

all but ignore the human-nature side of the equation when they try to
explain social organization or explore human ecology. Flagrant biases of
this type have not been uncommon in cultural anthropology. Decades ago
it was fashionable to neglect the natural environment as a key explanatory
variable—until cultural ecologists (for instance, Steward 1955) created an
environmentally oriented brand of "evolutionism" that most anthropolo-
gists could live with and develop further. I believe that human nature
deserves similar consideration, and there is no better arena for testing this
proposition than the ﬁeld of politics.
I acknowledge up front that the study of human nature poses serious
problems. Behavioral dispositions rightly strike anthropologists as being
difﬁcult to explain in comparison with the more readily measurable envi-
ronmental constraints that ecologically oriented anthropologists, and par-
ticularly human behavioral ecologists, address so successfully. However,
our potential for teasing out the effects of human nature has been increas-
ing over the past several decades, and much of the resistance comes from
long-standing, inadequately examined biases of cultural anthropologists.
In my view, these attitudes derive from a subtly (or not-so-subtly) politi-
cized tradition in many graduate training programs, a tradition that stems
from humanistic biases about "evolutionism." My position is that, as mem-
bers of a democracy, we should have the courage to explore our explana-
tory possibilities, whatever these may be. Ideas should have free play, both
in anthropology and in everyday life, and guilt by association should be
avoided. Humanism obviously ﬂourishes in democracies, and these same
democracies must be strong enough to allow for the exploration and devel-
opment of ideas about genes and heritability—in spite of past excesses and
future perils.
42
Hierarchy in the Forest

C H A P T E R
3
Putting Down Aggressors
On their list of serious moral transgressions, hunter-gatherers regularly
proscribe the enactment of behavior that is politically overbearing. They
are aiming at upstarts who threaten the autonomy of other group mem-
bers, and upstartism takes various forms. An upstart may act the bully
simply because he is disposed to dominate others, or he may become
selﬁshly greedy when it is time to share meat, or he may want to make off
with another man's wife by threat or use of force. He (or sometimes she)
may also be a respected leader who suddenly begins to issue direct orders,
or a shaman who selﬁshly uses supernatural connections to manipulate
and exploit others for material or sexual gain—or maliciously to cause
them serious damage. An upstart may simply take on airs of superiority, or
may aggressively put others down and thereby violate the group's idea of
how its main political actors should be treating one another. An upstart can
also be a recidivist murderer or a homicidal psychotic. In any of these
instances the upstart violates a set of values in which people believe deeply.
These values constitute what anthropologists call an egalitarian ethos
(Cashdan 1980; see also Gardner 1991), a set of focal values that guide
hunter-gatherers when they act on behalf of the band to keep its likely
political deviants from transgressing unduly. Bands are moral communities
that agree on their values and, as a latent but potent political coalition, are
always poised to manipulate or suppress individual deviants.
Control of Upstarts
From the moral community's perspective, it pays to engage in social con-
trol. From the deviant's perspective, the very predictability of sanctioning
tends to modify the antisocial behavior. Hunter-gatherers prone to upstar-
43

tism know what to expect from their peers, who in most instances will
quickly and assertively make it clear that they do not like being bullied, or
even bossed for their own good. The result, with most hunter-gatherers
most of the time, is a low-key personal approach to social relations in the
band. This is particularly true in situations that may lead to competition;
people are careful about extolling their own success.
When the group turns on a deviant to engage actively in what Trivers
(1971) calls moralistic aggression, the ethnographer has no difﬁculty track-
ing either social control or the deviance that provokes it. If an upstart is
ridiculed or directly criticized or ostracized, the anthropologist will pick up
on it. Because much of social control is preemptive and quite subtle, how-
ever, it can remain ethnographically obscure. Potential deviants gingerly
test group reactions, and groups are vigilant in watching for likely "domi-
nators," but much of the time these would-be aggressors conform to group
standards sufﬁciently to avoid overt sanctioning. The political portrait of
an acculturating Utku household head, delineated later in this chapter,
provides an excellent example.
In many forager groups, ethnographic reports suggest a fairly smooth
political equilibrium over a typical ﬁeld stay of one or two years. There
may be tensions about sharing, and a few interpersonal quarrels, but basi-
cally no one tries seriously to bully anyone else, nor does anyone try to
extend into manipulative power the respect and inﬂuence associated with
being a successful hunter. Yet such short-term reports can be misleading.
Over time, much forager conﬂict is between men, over women, resulting
in a high per-capita rate of homicides (see Knauft 1991). This is so even
though in studying a very small band an anthropologist often will not
actually see such behavior. The same is true of major instances of upstar-
tism. Several hundred forager ethnographies disclose only a few cases in
which an obvious group political crisis arises and the conﬂict is described
in detail. Lesser conﬂicts appear more frequently in the literature, but they
too may be missed. One must keep in mind that most anthropologists go
to the ﬁeld to study behavior other than politics, that their language skills
are usually limited, and that they will be recording only a small portion of
a group's total oral tradition—which includes past political crises. And
some earlier anthropologists wore rose-colored glasses: they may not have
asked the right questions.
Foraging bands are not all the same. With certain groups, such as the
Hadza of Tanzania, rather serious political tensions seem to manifest
44
Hierarchy in the Forest

themselves openly and routinely (Blurton-Jones 1984; see also Peterson
1993). Kalahari foragers such as the !Kung are an excellent example of a
people who make their political intentions so clear to one another, and do
it so frequently and so overtly, that it is relatively easy for a visiting ethnog-
rapher to discern the underlying tensions in their small bands. The !Kung
approach to curbing upstartism is assertively preemptive, even though to a
large extent their moralistic aggression is cloaked in humor.
Lee (1979:244-246) provides vivid details in the words of an informant:
Say that a man has been hunting. He must not come home and announce
like a braggart, "I have killed a big one in the bush!" He must ﬁrst sit
down in silence until I or someone else comes up to his ﬁre and asks,
"What did you see today?" He replies quietly, "Ah, I'm no good for
hunting. I saw nothing at all . . . maybe just a tiny one." Then I smile to
myself because I now know he has killed something big.
A proud hunter's heavy use of denial and euphemism demonstrates the
degree to which the group is able to intimidate its more prominent achiev-
ers. And even after his show of modesty, other band members preemptively
take pains to put down the hunter. When they go to carry in the kill they
express their "disappointment" boisterously.
You mean to say you have dragged us all the way out here to make us cart
home your pile of bones? Oh, if I had known it was this thin I wouldn't
have come. People, to think I gave up a nice day in the shade for this. At
home we may be hungry but at least we have nice cool water to drink.
The actual feelings of the critics, who simultaneously are joking and
deadly serious, is revealed in the words of a culture member:
When a young man kills much meat, he comes to think of himself as a
chief or a big man, and he thinks of the rest of us as his servants or
inferiors. We can't accept this. We refuse one who boasts, for someday his
pride will make him kill somebody. So we always speak of his meat as
worthless. In this way we cool his heart and make him gentle.
The speaker is a famous healer and, obviously, an eloquent indigenous
political philosopher. He is a student of human nature as well, and an
astute one. He seems to be saying that legitimate male accomplishments
may lead to inﬂated self-opinion and tendencies to dominate, and that
with these proclivities men are likely to engage in homicide. Let us take
Putting Down Aggressors
45

these principles as a working hypothesis for any group of humans whose
males are hunters.
As with other forager groups (see Kelly 1995), hunting prowess brings
great respect among the !Kung because large-game meat is shared by all
households within the band. As tabulated by Lee (1976:244), there is great
variability among men as to who is responsible for the kills. They use two
principal mechanisms to keep the best hunters from dominating the poli-
tics of the camp and monopolizing the women. We have seen that they
preemptively cut down those who might become arrogantly boastful. They
also share all large-game meat, helping those who are incapacitated or
down on their luck, and these customs are enhanced by some very practical
cultural rules.
Credit for the kill goes to the owner of the ﬁrst arrow to hit the game.
This man (who may not even have been present) has to distribute the meat
formally to all household heads in the band—a task associated with not
only prestige, but tension. Because the !Kung trade arrows often (Wiessner
1996), the responsibility of owning the meat while it is distributed is ran-
domized, thereby preventing the more successful hunters from presiding
over their own accomplishments. In effect, it is a way of removing the
temptation to dominate. The fact that the best hunters speak so modestly,
and frequently swap arrows to avoid envy, is a monument to the efﬁcacy of
ridicule as an instrument of social control. But as we shall see, if they are
faced with serious upstartism people like the !Kung will go far beyond
ridicule.
Lee's is one of the richest descriptions we have of how hunter-gatherers
preemptively put down potential upstarts in their midst. Such behavior is
not reported to be regularly directed at women, who forage for plant foods
that are often just for family use and capture only small animals that
normally are not shared with the entire band. With less prestige attached to
their daily work, the women are not in danger of trying to turn proﬁciency
at food production into political power. The same applies to men when
they gather plants or capture rodents.
Sharing of meat is by no means solely a political or social act. Kelly
(1995) has discussed the widespread practice of sharing large-game meat as
a means of reducing variation of protein intake at the family level, and it
appears that even the better hunters' intakes might be sporadic without this
practice. Precisely because this actuarially sophisticated system of sharing
could lead certain men to feel superior to others, a variety of practices and
46
Hierarchy in the Forest

customs has been created to "cool their hearts," in the words of the !Kung.
It is worth noting that hunter-gatherers on other continents have invented
similar practices to randomize the ownership of large-game kills (Wiessner
1996), surely from similar motives. A very successful hunter potentially
poses a political danger to the band, and the band takes steps to reduce
such problems even as cooperative sharing is facilitated.
In surveying a substantial portion of world ethnography in search of
reliable reports of social control directed at potential or active political
upstarts, I found extreme variability in the quality of these descriptions.
Sometimes the ethnographer merely sums up a pattern of behavior or cites
a single instance as an example. Truly rich descriptions like those of Lee are
rare; in most instances the details are sparse—as when it is simply reported
that Netsilik Eskimos once executed a shaman who began to dominate
them (Balikci 1970).
To prepare the reader for my survey, I begin with two unusually detailed
accounts in which the anthropologists themselves run afoul of egalitarian
moral communities by inadvertently behaving as pushy political deviants.
In the ﬁrst case, I was the anthropologist; my own ﬁeld notes and memory
provide details about my ethnographically suicidal deviance and the re-
sponse it engendered. The second case utilizes the painfully autobiographi-
cal ethnography of the anthropologist Jean Briggs (1970), who lived as an
adoptive daughter with one of the last truly nomadic Eskimo bands in
central Canada. To a signiﬁcant extent she was being treated as a member
of an Utku band at the time she transgressed, and her account of being
"morally aggressed," Utku style, is unique and vivid.
Anthropologist as Minor Upstart
In 1961, early in my graduate career, I spent a summer bouncing in a
pickup truck over rutted roads and arroyos in New Mexico and Arizona. I
was conducting ﬁeldwork on Navajo beliefs, with the help of an able inter-
preter who spoke ﬂuent English as well as his native Navajo. As part of a
large research project, I was receiving my introduction to the study of
nonliterate society, and the society in question was highly egalitarian. My
mission, for three short months, was to interview traditional medicine men
and obtain their views on the etiology of mental illness. A particular inter-
est was in "moth craziness," which was believed to be associated with
incest.
Putting Down Aggressors
47

Helping me to interview medicine men on these subjects was Howard
McKinley, Jr., a remarkable young man nineteen years of age. Junior
McKinley was the son of a member of the Navajo Tribal Council. He was
unusually well educated in the formal sense, having attended a prep school
on the East Coast. He also had spent considerable time as a child with his
maternal grandmother at her homestead, herding sheep like a traditional
Navajo.
Working closely together, Junior and I sought to interview medicine
men in the Lukachukai and Fort Deﬁance areas, and whenever possible we
worked through his maternal relatives, one of whom was his mother's
mother, Lillian Benally, a hand trembler or folk diagnostician who had
some limited knowledge about mental illness. With a trust seldom encoun-
tered on that reservation (because of my close association with Junior), I
was admitted quite abruptly into certain aspects of Navajo life.
I knew the Navajos had little reason to trust me. My culture had defeated
theirs militarily, subjected them to privation, taken away their best land,
and in 1878 had forbidden them their usual way of life, which was foraging
and raiding as aggressive, band-dwelling nomads whose victims included
the Hopi. Furthermore, we Anglos subsequently invaded their reservation
as missionaries intent on undermining or destroying the Navajo religion.
Today the Navajos are peaceful pastoralists who customarily move
around with their sheep, but who also grow gardens near the permanent
homesteads that serve as their base. Even though the core of their subsis-
tence has changed from foraging to chieﬂy pastoralism, they continue to
live in small, locally autonomous groups about the size of typical hunter-
gatherer bands, and they continue to be politically egalitarian: their leaders
keep a low political proﬁle, and in general aggressiveness is not condoned.
My behavior in the ﬁeld was steered by perhaps the ultimate cultural
coach. The younger McKinley was not only intelligent, he was shrewd
about people. (He aspired to be a writer.) Junior made it clear to me, up
front, that rural Navajos expected white people who sought them out on
their own turf to be either missionaries or spies. Because we were ap-
proaching back-country traditionalist informants without advance notice,
I was advised to keep a low proﬁle and let him manage the show. At the end
of several weeks Junior paid me a high compliment: his people were react-
ing favorably to my presence.
Whenever Junior took me to meet with a potential informant, I tried to
behave as he did. You never got down to business in a hurry; rather, you
48
Hierarchy in the Forest

were likely to squat on your heels for twenty minutes or half an hour while
a few pleasantries were exchanged. The interactions were taking place in
the Navajo language, of course, for many of the older people in the reserva-
tion outback spoke little or no English at that time. I seldom took part in
these preliminary interactions, so whatever I was doing successfully via
body language was largely unconscious on my part. I was emulating Jun-
ior's friendly reticence and easygoing postures as best I could, and I learned
to squat endlessly on my heels—a skill for which I had little use in my own
culture.
Junior McKinley's "Uncle Joe" was a respected traditional medicine man
who seemed prepared to share some of his lore with us that summer,
crucial lore that Junior thought might open an avenue of information
inaccessible through other medicine men. In Junior's opinion, mental ill-
ness seemed likely to be involved with witchcraft, and that would automat-
ically present a problem. To say that Navajos do not readily speak about
witchcraft is a profound understatement, for to have any knowledge of this
dangerous subject suggests that you may be a witch. As in the past (see
Kluckhohn 1944), the community's inclination is still to execute such peo-
ple. Seeking interviews about Navajo traditional curing, I did have one
advantage: the medicine men worried that younger men were no longer
attracted to their specialization, and that their knowledge would be lost
unless it was written down. But witchcraft was a perilous topic.
After our ﬁrst interview, Uncle Joe had agreed to a return visit when he
had more time, and informed Junior that he was going to tell us about
"Mountain Wise." We were elated, for Junior believed that Mountain Wise
would be directly connected with witchcraft. I was more than excited about
this impending breakthrough, for I had only a few months in which to
work on what was proving to be a daunting research assignment. In pre-
vious interviews with otherwise very cooperative medicine men (not rela-
tives of Junior's), an air of evasiveness about our topic had come through
even in translation.
As the date of our next meeting with Uncle Joe approached, I stopped in
Gallup and purchased, at Junior's suggestion, a ﬁne watermelon—an es-
teemed delicacy on the hot New Mexico desert. We arrived at Uncle Joe's
remote homestead and settled down to exchange the usual pleasantries.
About ten minutes later, I suddenly remembered the watermelon in my
pickup truck. I sprang up to get it and presented it to Uncle Joe with a little
speech that I thought was properly low key. Junior translated. The pleas-
Putting Down Aggressors
49

antries continued. But even with adjustments I had learned to make for the
slow pace of Navajo social intercourse, these informal exchanges seemed to
be continuing for much longer than usual. Then, to my consternation,
Junior announced that it was time for us to go. I had no idea what was
wrong.
As we rode away in the jolting pickup truck, my fatal mistake was ex-
plained. I had behaved very aggressively, as Navajos would see it, by prof-
fering the gift almost immediately when we arrived. In due time the water-
melon would have been greatly appreciated, but I had utterly botched it. I
asked if the damage was irreparable, and Junior told me it was serious. In
fact, we returned to Uncle Joe's homestead several times after that and
Uncle Joe was always away somewhere, with an indeterminate time of
return. I never learned the secret of Mountain Wise, for other medicine
men we interviewed professed to know nothing about it.
I recognized that my problem was a major one of etiquette: by Navajo
standards I had been far too aggressive. Today I would say that I had run
afoul of an egalitarian ethos, but in 1961 anthropologists had not yet given
it that name. When I returned from the reservation after this three-month
stint, my reaction to such extreme cultural differences was rather inchoate.
I did remain favorably impressed with the Navajo way of doing business
socially, and with the demeanor of the people—which was unobtrusive,
gentle, humorous, and sincere. At the same time I was mystiﬁed by the
severity of Uncle Joe's reaction. Service (1962) and especially Fried (1967)
were about to focus on and deﬁne egalitarian society, and certain aspects of
my experience would fall into place when I read Service's book.
Only ﬁve years later did I really begin to understand the political dynam-
ics in which I had been involved. In 1966 I had the good fortune to discuss
Navajo psychological ways with Jean Briggs, a colleague in graduate school
who had just returned from living with a group of nomadic Eskimos in
northern Canada, near Back River. Although they had recently been "mis-
sionized," the Utku were still living a fully nomadic life devoted to hunting
and gathering. Our conversations began just as Morton Fried was prepar-
ing to publish his 1967 book on political evolution. As I learned more
about the Utku and their all-but-obsessive intolerance for displays of anger,
aggression, or dominance, I began to comprehend more fully my experi-
ences with the Navajos and the wider implications of my faux pas.
My continuing mystiﬁcation about the low-key emotional style of social
interaction I had brieﬂy encountered resonated with Briggs's in-depth ex-
50
Hierarchy in the Forest

periences of a similar culture, in which she lived for about two years. To
provide further qualitative ﬂesh to this preliminary glimpse of egalitarian-
ism, I shall expound on one of her more difﬁcult experiences in consider-
able depth. I do not recount the experience as I remember it from our
conversations puzzling over similarities between Navajos and Eskimos;
rather, it is drawn from the sensitive and thorough ﬁnal treatment that
appears in her book Never in Anger (Briggs 1970; see also Briggs 1982).
Anthropologist as Serious Upstart
Briggs's liberal inclusion of her personal feelings and reactions in her pub-
lished ethnography was both radical methodologically and prescient in
terms of certain recent trends in ethnography. As I write, many cultural
anthropologists have created for themselves a much-discussed "identity
crisis," based in part on the assumption that before they came along, their
predecessors essentially were ignoring their own roles in the research equa-
tion. Over the past several decades a great deal of debate has taken place
about the validity of leaving out the ethnographer as a culturally biased
instrument of description. Yet from this debate have come only modest
substantive advances in the anthropological capacity to fulﬁll our most
basic obligation as a humanistic and scientiﬁc discipline. That mission is to
accurately record, and explain, the varieties of humanity and its natural
history.
Briggs, instead of mainly talking about this problem, went ahead and
resolved it quite brilliantly. Indeed, if one wishes to see a full, honest, and
relatively uncontrolled account of how an anthropologist interacts with
and reacts to a native culture while trying to describe it, hers is probably
the most candid and effective portrayal in the ethnographic literature. One
reason her book is so effective ethnographically is that it portrays Utku
political culture so well from the standpoint of political psychology.
Briggs lived continuously with a small Utku band near Back River for
long enough to know the language well, and in 1965 she came back to
Cambridge just as I was returning from doctoral ﬁeldwork with Montene-
grin Serbs in southern Herzegovina. The Utkuhikhalingmiut Eskimos live
above the Arctic Circle, and Jean studied a group of fewer than three dozen
nomadic hunters who had been Christianized several decades before her
arrival. Because of her formal adoption into an Eskimo family, her vantage
point as ethnographic observer was particularly intimate. Indeed, her inte-
Putting Down Aggressors
51

gration into the indigenous social life proceeded to a degree that few an-
thropologists experience.
Eventually, as adoptive daughter and band member, Briggs was literally
ostracized. For three long months she was obliged to live at the social
periphery of the band that had adopted her. The reason for her social
isolation is directly relevant to our exploration of antiauthoritarian sanc-
tioning. To understand what happened to Briggs, we must take up her
fascinating and ultimately painful story at the beginning (Briggs 1970:41).
I had been camped at the Rapids for a week when the caribou hunters
returned—ﬁrst Nilak's family, then, two days later, Inuttiaq's. And within
another day or two Inuttiaq had adopted me. Inuttiaq was to become the
most signiﬁcant ﬁgure, both personally and anthropologically, in my life
at Back River. When I think of him now, my feelings are a complex blend
of admiration, affectionate gratitude, and a helpless desire to compensate
him somehow for the difﬁculties that my un-Eskimo behavior created for
him and his family. At the time, however, my predominant feeling toward
him was, all too frequently, irritation. Inuttiaq was not a typical Utku: he
was more assertive than most, and from the outset I came into conﬂict
with this quality in him.
Anthropologists seldom reveal so much of their feelings, but Briggs
(1970:41-42) goes further, painting a miniature portrait of Eskimo atti-
tudes about the expression of emotion:
It was from Inuttiaq that I learned most about the ways in which the Utku
express their feelings toward one another. It was partly his very atypicality
that made it possible for me to learn from him what the proper patterns
are. Most other Utku were so well controlled that my untutored eye could
not detect their emotions. But Inuttiaq was, if I have read him correctly,
an unusually intense person. He, too, kept strict control of his feelings,
but in his case one was aware that something was being controlled. The
effort of his control was caught in the ﬂash of an eye, quickly subdued, in
the careful length of a pause, or the painstaking neutrality of a reply.
Occasionally, when he failed to stay within acceptable bounds of expres-
sion, I learned from the disapproval of others what behavior constitutes a
lapse and how disapproval is expressed. Living in Inuttiaq's own dwell-
ings, as I did for two winters, I watched him with others: as father and
husband, as host to his neighbors, and as religious leader of the commu-
52
Hierarchy in the Forest

nity. The turbulence of my own relationship with him also gave me many
opportunities to observe his efforts at control.
Briggs (1970:42-44) places these personal reactions in cultural perspective:
In a society in which people seem to blend harmoniously with the brown
tundra, Inuttiaq stood out. In a different society he might have been a
leader, but Utku society allows little scope for would-be leaders. The
Utku, like other Eskimo bands, have no formal leaders whose authority
transcends that of the separate householders. Moreover, cherishing inde-
pendence of thought and action as a natural prerogative, people tend to
look askance at anyone who seems to aspire to tell them what to do. . . .
There was nothing mild about him. Even in photographs his personality
is so vividly communicated that people who have never seen Eskimos
single him out of a group, asking who he is. . . . I thought him haughty
and hostile in appearance, very un-Eskimo in both feature and expres-
sion. He did not smile; he looked hard at me in the few moments before
we were introduced, making no move. He did smile as we shook hands,
but I could not read in the smile either the warm friendliness or the
gentle shyness that I had come to expect from unknown Eskimos.
Briggs (1970:46) says that Inuttiaq proved to be something of a clown,
but also a showoff who dramatized himself in ways that were politically
controversial in his own culture.
Nevertheless, Inuttiaq was considered a ﬁne person. It seemed to me
curious that it should be so in a society that places a high value on
mildness and gentleness. Perhaps it was partly that people enjoyed watch-
ing Inuttiaq play a role that they themselves would have liked to play. Very
important, too, I think, was the fact that control of temper is a cardinal
virtue among Eskimos, and Inuttiaq never lost his temper.
This forbearance applies to people, but not to the dogs on which Eski-
mos rely so strongly. They beat their dogs, and Inuttiaq did so with a fury
that was unusual. Even his fantasies were particularly violent, "full of stab-
bings, whippings, and murders." Briggs (1970:47-48) goes on to say:
Other people seemed to have a sense, similar to mine, of Inuttiaq's inner
intensity. They feared him for the very reason they admired him: because
he never lost his temper. They said that a man who never lost his temper
could kill if he ever did become angry; so, I was told, people took care not
Putting Down Aggressors
53

to cross him, and I had the impression that Allaq, his wife, ran more
quickly than other wives to do her husband's bidding.
Looking back, I wonder if Inuttiaq might have been partially aware of
people's fear of him. It occurs to me that a desire to reassure people, in
addition to the obvious desire to attract attention, might have been one
of the motives behind his joking. One day when he was teasing a four-
teen-year-old by grabbing for his penis—a favorite game of his, and his
alone—he said to me: "I'm joking; people joke a great deal. People who
joke are not frightening. . . ."
The feeling Inuttiaq was expressing is one that is very characteristic of
Eskimos: a fear of people who do not openly demonstrate their good-will
by happy behavior, by smiling, laughing, and joking. Unhappiness is
often equated with hostility in the Eskimo view. A moody person may be
planning to knife you in the back when you are out ﬁshing with him,
claiming on return that you drowned. In the old days he might have been
plotting to abscond with your wife—a common occurrence prior to the
introduction of Christ and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Even
without harboring speciﬁc evil designs an unhappy person may harm
one, merely by the power of his moody thoughts. It is believed that strong
thoughts (ihumaquqtuuq) can kill or cause illness; and people take great
pains to satisfy others' wishes so that resentment will not accumulate in
the mind. A happy person, on the other hand, is a safe person. I won-
dered whether Inuttiaq felt an exceptionally strong need to show himself
a happy person because he was not.
Briggs originally traveled to the Arctic to study Utku shamanism. She
was shocked to discover that in spite of their traditional pattern of no-
madic subsistence the Utku had been converted to Christianity and pro-
fessed no further interest in shamanism. While Inuttiaq was the religious
leader of his group, having occupied a vacancy left by a member of a
different family, he did not ﬁll the bill as a traditional band leader by dint
of exceptional hunting ability or knowledge of environmental conditions
relevant to subsistence. The traditional man of informal inﬂuence was one
with a "reputation for wisdom, for skill in hunting or in other matters." He
was "an ihumataaq (one who has wisdom) and his views may weigh more
than other men's, when plans are being made." Inuttiaq was merely average
in this respect (Briggs 1970:42-43).
Briggs (1970:55-58) tells us in detail how religious services were con-
54
Hierarchy in the Forest

ducted in iglus and how Inuttiaq (in the role of religious coordinator) tried
at certain points to get his tiny congregation to stand. The community
initially conformed, but then more and more people began to disregard his
orders until the majority were ignoring him. At that point, he simply
stopped trying to command them. Briggs likens this attempt of Inuttiaq to
introduce an item of etiquette, one that allowed him to manipulate his
fellows, to the machinations of traditional shamans who manipulated a
belief system to augment their own power. She also points out that the
Anglican ministers who trained lay leaders like Inuttiaq were prone to act
in the same way.
When we evaluate Inuttiaq's relations with others in a tiny band of fewer
than thirty, it is evident that he could not subtly manipulate the group as a
whole. The members would simply ignore him and thereby defeat his
culturally illegitimate aspirations through disobedience. Obviously, indi-
vidual fear of this man was not sufﬁcient to inhibit such expressions of
social control when the group was in a position to act as a unit, and as a
result he was unable to increase his power. I suggested earlier that much
egalitarian control is preemptive, and here we have an excellent example.
My assumption is that there was little actual threat in being commanded to
stand or sit during the church service; for members of the band, the issue
was where such boldness might lead. Keep in mind that Inuttiaq could
legitimately give orders to his wife and to younger male kinsmen—that was
none of the band's business.
Although Inuttiaq's treatment of his wife and dogs may have been un-
usually assertive, basically he walked a proper line in his little moral com-
munity. Briggs's psychological proﬁle makes it clear that although by dint
of personality he was prone to push his prerogatives, he also was aware of
probable group reactions. As a person the group recognized as a potential
upstart, he never came close to being ostracized, let alone being dealt with
physically. If he went too far in trying to regiment the group's church
services, Inuttiaq managed to hold onto his position of respect in the
community by not pressing the issue when his manipulations were ig-
nored. While others were subject to ostracism, Inuttiaq managed to steer a
safe course in spite of his personality.
At ﬁrst, Briggs's understanding of ostracism was secondhand via a so-
cially inept woman named Niqi. Her emotionally unruly family was kept at
a distance by the rest of the band even though the members were not
wholly excluded from group social life and sharing of food. Niqi herself
Putting Down Aggressors
55

was known for regularly becoming irritated in ways that adult Inuit nor-
mally manage to mask; in compensation she smiled much too broadly
(Briggs 1970:218). One problem, then, was that her personal style was too
volatile for a people who were averse to exhibitions of strong emotion, and
of anger in particular. In addition, Niqi's small family tended not to share
food as much as other families in the band, and stayed socially separate in
a number of ways.
Band members were resentful of her family as would-be free riders who
were deemed stingy and jealous, and also as people who did not keep their
emotions under control. Briggs (1970:214-223) details the quiet grum-
bling and factional hostility that developed out of these tensions, and notes
that very direct hints were made that Niqi should participate in the camp
women's tasks, such as cooking ﬁsh heads for everybody. At length, these
well-masked but hostile signals drew Niqi away from her own family's
subsistence activities, if only brieﬂy, to make a contribution to group sub-
sistence. But she quickly went back to her former ways, and the social
distancing of her family continued. The tensions rose and fell, and Niqi's
social status vacillated between grudging acceptance and semiostracism.
The rest of the group distanced Niqi's family mainly because of Niqi's bad
temper, stinginess, and failure to help, and the family tended to camp away
from the core group.
The problem with Niqi had little to do with her trying to control or
belittle other people or aggrandize herself, so basically antiauthoritarian
values were not involved. However, one of the features advocated by an
egalitarian ethos is sharing, and Niqi did not share very well. Furthermore,
she aroused the group's sensitivity to people who did not control angry
feelings, and this trait too is pertinent to egalitarian sanctioning. Any indi-
vidual who combines anger with a tendency to dominate becomes danger-
ous socially, and with the Utku all expressions of anger were troublesome.
As an American, Briggs was similarly unable to control what to her were
minor hostile feelings, or to hide her seriously upsetting disappointments
and frustrations. Because of what were to them culturally bizarre, volatile
emotional reactions, the Utku ﬁrst perceived Briggs as a curiosity, then as a
recalcitrant child, and ﬁnally as a serious irritant and a potential threat.
Jean was living far from home under primitive circumstances, a situation
that tended to make her touchy and prone to tears. She also had difﬁculty
being generous with prized trade goods she had brought along, in that
everyone competed for them. In addition, at times she showed an inappro-
56
Hierarchy in the Forest

priate willingness to come into conﬂict with her adoptive father. She later
learned that the Utku were actually afraid of her because she dealt with her
emotions in an open, "American" way.
Problems were inevitable for a person who had formally been adopted as
a family member yet constantly had to be transcribing ﬁeld notes, and
Briggs often failed to understand subtle Eskimo hints about how she might
ﬁt in better. She continued to be emotional and—in her hosts' eyes—ag-
gressively willful. Eventually, a pointed religious sermon (directed at the
entire group) expounded on the evils of getting angry. This she certainly
did understand.
The pressures of life in the Arctic made self-control difﬁcult, however.
Once when slush fell from the top of the iglu into her typewriter, Briggs in
a ﬁt of pique picked up a knife and threw it vigorously into a pile of ﬁsh on
the ﬂoor in front of company. The iglu emptied immediately. Another time
she made the mistake of conveying in strong terms her hatred of the frozen
ﬁsh that was a staple in her diet; she did so simply because she was hav-
ing difﬁculty removing the scales. What were temporary ﬂare-ups for the
American were, for the Utku, long-remembered signs of potential trouble.
Eskimos worry about even small expressions of anger because they see
all anger as deep, long-lasting, and dangerous (Briggs 1970:261), and any
lack of self-control as personally threatening. As time went on, Briggs as
"Kapluna Daughter" realized she was a social irritant—someone who
would never be able to maintain the equanimity of a proper Utku for very
long. She was not semiostracized like Niqi, but relations periodically be-
came rather strained. Then an episode took place that brought a far more
ominous reaction.
Several sportsmen who had ﬂown in by seaplane were borrowing the
Utku's two rather fragile, irreplaceable canoes for ﬁshing. The Utku ap-
proach to such exploitation, which they resented in spite of some trading
with the whites, was to acquiesce to every request. Having been told in
private about their resentment, Briggs made the mistake of actively inter-
vening after the whites ruined one of the Utku canoes and still wanted to
use the last one. She explained heatedly that the Utku depended on the
canoes, and the guide replied that if the canoe's owner did not choose to
lend the boat they would do without it. Inuttiaq, put on the spot by Briggs,
agreed to let the sportsmen use this last boat for ﬁshing. Briggs could not
hide her anger at both parties. She strode away from the scene to weep in
her tent, unaware that her behavior had been the last straw.
Putting Down Aggressors
57

Happening to read a letter in transit, she learned that the band was fed
up with her anger and scolding and wished she would leave. At ﬁrst, their
disenchantment was far from obvious. After the incident people continued
to behave cordially and generously toward their turbulent visitor when she
approached them—but she noticed that they were coming to visit her far
less often, and stayed only brieﬂy. Before long they began in subtle ways to
discourage her own visits. It became evident that she was being ostracized
like Niqi—but during the period of estrangement it also emerged that the
Utku were willing to let her rehabilitate herself. Indeed, whenever she was
able to control her feelings and avoid emotionalized negativity for a time,
they began to respond positively. The problem was that Briggs could not
maintain the ﬂawless equanimity that the situation seemed to demand. She
was being distanced, it hurt, and when she broke down and showed her
frustration, she was distanced even more.
The kind of overt hostility that had triggered the ostracism was scrupu-
lously avoided by the Utku in applying their sanction. Briggs was basically
left alone in her tent with very few callers, and even their visits became
perfunctory compared to her earlier rich social life. People were not out-
wardly impolite, they simply set up a great deal of social distance. By good
luck, after some months of this treatment a third party provided the Utku
with some insight into why Briggs had tried to deny the canoe to the
whites. Once they understood that her anger had been on their behalf and
against unscrupulous men who cared nothing for their welfare, they even-
tually relaxed the social barriers they had so carefully erected and main-
tained.
Briggs has developed the following psychodynamic interpretation of the
facts (and surely she is correct). This ostracism was atypical, because it
involved two cultures with very different standards of what is proper in
emotional self-expression (see Briggs 1970:274-307), and also because the
group's grievance was based in part on a substantive misunderstanding. It
was typical, though, in that a reduction in social interaction became a tool
of the community against someone whose inappropriate and frightening
aggressiveness was suggestive of upstartism. For more than a year the Utku,
willing to make concessions about cultural differences, had put up with
displays of anger and frustration from Briggs that they would not have
accepted from other Utku without engaging in moralistic aggression. But
ﬁnally their adoptive daughter went too far.
As a political anthropologist, I might add that it was when Briggs tried to
58
Hierarchy in the Forest

assert herself in the role of spokesman for the group (she thought she was
implementing the band's intentions, but they failed to understand this)
that the ostracism process began in earnest. In effect, the foreign visitor
arbitrarily tried to make a decision that involved the entire group. My reading
of the boat situation is more "political," whereas Briggs's is more "psycho-
logical"; but the two interpretations in no way conﬂict. Both her interfer-
ence in the decision process and the "un-Eskimo" emotions that came into
play had a severe negative impact. This political interpretation of mine is
borne out by one further fact (see Briggs 1970:302). After the social isola-
tion had ended and Briggs was once again a regular member of the society,
Inuttiaq once said to her out of the blue, "I think you're a leader in your
own country."
In the cross-cultural survey to follow shortly, we shall encounter a simi-
lar theme having to do with aggressive anger and its effect on self-control,
chieﬂy with respect to leaders. There we shall be focusing on reactions to
hunters who, as leaders or in other capacities, try to dominate or control
their peers—the other adult men (and women) in their groups. We shall
see that sanctions harsher than the social distancing Briggs experienced can
and do come into play, even though the more passive type of resistance that
Inuttiaq met with in the church service also is employed.
For Briggs, the consequences could have been worse. She could have
been severely ostracized by her adoptive group—shunned, instead of
merely becoming something of a nonperson. If a forager is seriously ostra-
cized (in the sense that no one will speak to him, literally, or cooperate with
him economically), his very means of livelihood may be threatened. A still
more grave form of social distancing is to expel him from the group, and of
course the ultimate distancing is execution. Unlike Inuttiaq, some indi-
viduals are so insensitive to the group's collective commitment to egalitari-
anism that they leave their peers no other recourse.
The "up" side of Briggs's desperate story is that she always had the
option of being reintegrated into her Eskimo band if only she could curb
her anger. Social control tends to be about more than mere elimination of
social threats by means of punishment: often it is about prosocially ori-
ented manipulation of deviants so that they can once more contribute
usefully to group life. Briggs managed to leave the Utku on reasonably
favorable terms: they were socializing almost as cordially as they had before
the ostracism incident by the time she returned to the comforts—and the
welcome psychological tolerance—of Harvard Square.
Putting Down Aggressors
59

Egalitarian Social Control
These ethnographic tales of woe provide an intimate qualitative glimpse of
egalitarianism at work. Intuitively, they help to support my position that
political dynamics are at least as important as environmental variables and
social structure, in terms of keeping social and political life leveled. They
also support the larger hypothesis that the immediate cause of egalitarian-
ism is conscious, and that deliberate social control is directed at preventing
the expression of hierarchical tendencies (Boehm 1993).
It is interesting that people living in egalitarian societies must work so
aggressively to keep their political order in place. Earlier ethnographic
tendencies "beautiﬁed" such societies by exaggerating their overall har-
mony. With more reliable reporting, it is evident that egalitarians regularly
have to cope with upstarts, and the willingness of such people to push their
own prerogatives against known resistance raises some interesting ques-
tions about human nature.
There appear to be two components of this kind of egalitarian social
control. One is a small moral community incorporating strong forces
for social conformity. Long ago, Maine (1861), Westermarck (1894), and
Durkheim (1933) recognized this universal feature of locally autonomous
groups of foragers and tribesmen. The other ingredient is the deliberate
use of social sanctioning to enforce political equality among fully adult
males (see Service 1962, 1975; Fried 1967; Lee 1979; Boehm 1982b; Wood-
burn 1982).
In the qualitative ethnographic survey that follows in Chapter 4, the
general hypothesis is that egalitarian bands amount to "intentional socie-
ties" (see Boehm 1993). Band members regularly create and maintain egali-
tarian blueprints for social behavior, "plans" that are implicit or (in part)
explicit in the ethos and well understood by the rank and ﬁle who imple-
ment them. The political notions and dynamics involved are not restricted
to mobile foragers, for tribesmen all over the world are similarly egalitar-
ian. Wilson and Sober (1994) have discussed the very similar egalitarian
arrangements of modern Mennonites, emphasizing their militant concern
for avoiding any development of individual authority or other individual
advantage within the group. Their antihierarchical political dynamics are
much like those experienced by Utku foragers, and by Navajos as tribal
pastoralists.
The dynamics of egalitarian politics are well described by Richard B. Lee,
60
Hierarchy in the Forest

whose accounts of proﬁcient hunters being ridiculed were quoted earlier.
Lee has spent a great deal of time with nomadic foragers in the Kalahari
Desert, and he explains these dynamics as follows:
Egalitarianism is not simply the absence of a headman and other author-
ity ﬁgures, but a positive insistence on the essential equality of all people
and a refusal to bow to the authority of others, a sentiment expressed in
the statement: "Of course we have headmen . . . each of us is headman
over himself." Leaders do exist, but their inﬂuence is subtle and indirect.
They never order or make demands of others, and their accumulation of
material goods is never more, and often much less, than the average
accumulation of the other households in their camp. (Lee 1979:457)
Lee makes it clear that it is fear of group opinion—and fear of active
group sanctions—that keeps the more accomplished men at this level of
humility. In effect, the group is dominating its would-be alphas, and
among these !Kung-speaking Kalahari foragers arrogance amounts to a
crime. Stinginess is also viewed as a serious form of deviance, but it is the
arrogant person who is potentially dangerous.
The political focus is on males, and the !Kung's own words are of inter-
est: "Each of us is headman over himself." This credo is a response to
interrogation by an anthropologist who (I assume) was curious about the
low levels of leadership visible among the !Kung. The informant's response
is not unique among egalitarian hunter-gatherers; they long ago began to
encounter outsiders who assumed that "power positions" were natural to
every human group.
In the nineteenth century, Europeans increasingly began to encounter
nonliterate people living in very small nomadic bands, people who exclu-
sively foraged for a living and changed their place of residence at least
several times a year. These hierarchical strangers usually wanted something
from the "natives," and for that reason regularly asked to speak with the
"chief." Given their own political backgrounds in nations where ﬁgures of
authority were abundant, it was perfectly natural to ask for the person in
charge. The absence of any individualized authority at the group level led
sometimes to practical frustration, and often to political wonder—or
amazement.
Accounts abound of explorers meeting egalitarians, but only rarely have
indigenous counterreactions to these so-called civilized reactions been
published. I provide one further illustration, to complement that offered
Putting Down Aggressors
61

by Lee and also to raise the issue of female equality in egalitarian bands.
This episode was recounted by an Englishman who worked in Tierra del
Fuego (at the southern extremity of South America) with nomadic Ona
foragers. Missionary Bridges (1948) writes:
The Ona had no hereditary or elected chiefs, but men of outstanding
ability almost always became the unacknowledged leaders of their groups.
Yet one man might seem leader today and another man tomorrow, ac-
cording to whoever was eager to embark upon some enterprise. Social
rank among the Ona was best deﬁned by the jovial Kankoat in later years.
A certain scientist visited our part of the world and, in answer to his
inquiries on this matter, I told him that the Ona had no chieftains, as we
understand the word. Seeing that he did not believe me, I summoned
Kankoat, who by that time spoke some Spanish. When the visitor re-
peated his question, Kankoat, too polite to answer in the negative, said:
"Yes, señor, we, the Ona, have many chiefs. The men are all captains and
all the women are sailors."
This answer echoes that of Lee's informant, and it offers more than an
interesting cross-cultural dialogue in which visiting scientist and accultur-
ated forager are trying to cope with mutually exotic political systems. The
old man's reply speciﬁes or implies two postulates that hold true generally
in nomadic foraging bands. One is that egalitarianism and the attendant
lack of authoritative leaders pertain to relations among the band's main
political actors, in this case male household heads, while within the family
the authority of one person over another is much more free to develop (see
Fried 1967). The other factor, discussed in Chapter 1, is the apparent
widespread tendency for male hunters to actively dominate their mates
within the domestic unit (see Lee 1982; Kelly 1995).
Kelly (1995:262-292) believes that because males almost always do the
large-game hunting and because such food is shared by the entire group,
they tend to gain political clout. I agree. Certainly it is the men who bring
in meat in the largest quantities, and forager groups regularly praise and
respect their proﬁcient hunters. Men also bring home more calories overall
than women (Ember 1978). This special productivity tends to give males
higher prestige than females, but the degree to which women are domi-
nated by their husbands seems to be quite variable when bands are com-
pared across continents.
Gender is important, obviously; but egalitarian social control is not
62
Hierarchy in the Forest

necessarily based on gender. It is merely a mobile hunting band's way of
keeping any one individual from gaining too much sway, and it is directed
at the group's main political actors, whoever they may be. Empirically,
social control does seem to be focused on the adult males of the band.
Males are physically stronger than females, it is they who account for
almost all the homicides, and because they hunt it is they who may try to
control the distribution of meat—unless the group divests them of this
prerogative. If a female were to pursue a power position, say by employing
special supernatural gifts, she would be equally a target of a group whose
households are jealous of their autonomy and wish to be intimidated by no
one. As Jean Briggs discovered, a hunting band will use social control
against any adult who begins to be assertive in an objectionable way.
Putting Down Aggressors
63

C H A P T E R
4
Equality and Its Causes
A few years after Lee chronicled his graphic illustrations and astute po-
litical interpretations, the argument about egalitarianism was broadened
(Boehm 1982b; Woodburn 1982). Woodburn focused on subsistence eco-
nomics in characterizing as "immediate-return" foragers those who did not
engage in signiﬁcant storage of food and instead shared their large-game
meat pervasively. He cited six societies, three of them African, and in
considering egalitarianism as a wider phenomenon, he explicitly reempha-
sized Lee's point that this kind of political order was intentional: because
foragers prized their individual autonomy, they went out of their way to
maintain the status quo.
My argument also followed Lee's insights, but in an evolutionary direc-
tion. The premise was that humans are innately disposed to form social
dominance hierarchies similar to those of the African great apes, but that
prehistoric hunter-gatherers, acting as moral communities, were largely
able to neutralize such tendencies—just as extant hunter-gatherers do. The
ethnographic basis for that hypothesis was that present-day foragers apply
techniques of social control in suppressing both dominant leadership and
undue competitiveness. In effect, Woodburn and I were working with simi-
lar general hypotheses about intentionality, a line of explanation that I have
continued to develop (Boehm 1984a, 1993, 1994b, 1997a, 1997b).
In 1981-82 I was engaged in a major research project at the Tozzer
Library of Harvard University surveying hundreds of egalitarian societies
of various types. The original stimulus was my ﬁeldwork with the Navajo
Indians plus the tantalizing comparative discussions with Jean Briggs about
the Utku. Lee's and then Woodburn's ﬁeld reports led me to feel I was on
the right track. The research project, funded by the H. F. Guggenheim
Foundation, was not limited to foragers, however. The hypothesis I had
64

submitted was that egalitarianism is the product of any small nonliterate
community's vigilant insistence on autonomy for its household heads, and
this hypothesis was directed at both hunter-gatherers and tribesmen such
as the Montenegrin Serbs I had studied from 1963 to 1966.
With respect to egalitarian society and its evolutionary status, a sig-
niﬁcant subsequent development was Knauft's (1991) lucid identiﬁcation
of a major puzzle in human evolution. He compared the quite hierarchical
nature of extant great apes with hunter-gatherers of the simpler type char-
acterized by Woodburn, suggesting that with respect to political hierarchy
human evolution had followed a U-shaped trajectory. The curve began
with strong degrees of despotism, as this term was deﬁned ethologically in
Chapter 1, then dipped to represent a protracted period of hunter-gatherer
egalitarianism. Not too long after the domestication of plants and animals,
the curve climbed steeply to encompass not only hierarchical chiefdoms,
but eventually civilizations and nations. In effect, Knauft was posing an
evolutionary riddle: how could a species apparently lose its innate tenden-
cies to hierarchy for possibly millions of years, then suddenly regain them
so forcefully?
The mystery pertained to the egalitarians in the middle, who exhibited a
noteworthy absence of hierarchy. In 1993 I published the principal results
of my continuing survey of forager and tribal egalitarians. With respect to
both the hunter-gatherers and the tribesmen in my sample, the hypothesis
was straightforward: such people are guided by a love of personal freedom.
For that reason they manage to make egalitarianism happen, and do so in
spite of human competitiveness—and in spite of innate human tendencies
to dominance and submission that easily lead to the formation of social
dominance hierarchies. People can arrest this process by reacting collec-
tively, often preemptively, to curb individuals who show signs of wanting to
dominate their fellows. Their reactions involve fear (of domination), angry
deﬁance, and a collective commitment to dominate, which is based on a
fear of being individually dominated. As potential subordinates, they are
able to express dominance because they ﬁnd collective security in a large,
group-wide political coalition. They choose this option rather than react-
ing individually to would-be dominators on the basis of fearful, submissive
impulses.
This hypothesis provided a curious answer to Knauft's riddle, for I was
arguing that the same quite deﬁnite and "hierarchical" human political
nature could have been supporting not only despotic societies of recent
Equality and Its Causes
65

humans and ancestral apes, but also the egalitarian societies of humans. In
despotic social dominance hierarchies the pyramid of power is pointed
upward, with one or a few individuals (usually male) at the top exerting
authority over a submissive rank and ﬁle. In egalitarian hierarchies the
pyramid of power is turned upside down, with a politically united rank
and ﬁle decisively dominating the alpha-male types.
I have mentioned already that Erdal and Whiten (1994) found my use of
the term "reverse dominance hierarchy" controversial (see also de Waal
1996:128). My 1993 article also provoked criticism in other areas (for
example, Barclay 1993; Kent 1993; Knauft 1993; Dentan 1993). I shall
address some of those comments, but ﬁrst it will be useful to see the results
of my survey of foragers and tribesmen. I examined a substantial portion
of the world ethnographic literature in search of instances of a rank and
ﬁle's attempt to use sanctions to prevent manipulation or outright domina-
tion from above. To keep myself honest, I also was watching for instances
of small-scale societies being dominated by individuals wielding substan-
tial authority. To state the mission less technically, I was interested in seeing
whether all small-scale societies were egalitarian, in seeing whether the
egalitarianism I found could be laid at the doorstep of social control, and
in seeing how effective such control was in the face of individual tendencies
to gain political ascendancy.
Because data on egalitarian behavior are relatively scarce, I did not un-
dertake a typical cross-cultural survey with careful reliance on sampling
techniques. Rather, I looked for any source that provided useful informa-
tion on the above topics. My 1993 paper gives the methodological details,
and also a tabulated summary of my ﬁndings on mobile foragers and
tribesmen. Many of the same data are presented in this chapter and the
next, in a more qualitative form, but here the sample has been expanded
somewhat.
Introducing the Egalitarian Ethos
A signiﬁcant goal of the survey was to collect information that helped to
describe the egalitarian ethos. An ethos (Kroeber 1948:292-295) is a con-
stellation of values that deﬁne what is important to a given people. Cash-
dan (1980) has aptly applied this notion to foragers, and there do seem to
be certain elements that all foraging nomads treasure when it comes to
deﬁning ethically how people should behave with one another socially and
politically (see also Gardner 1991).
66
Hierarchy in the Forest

The ethos is of critical importance if one is to understand egalitarian
societies as intentional groups. Foragers use social control to keep their
societies equalized rather than hierarchical, and they do so quite effectively.
But they could not accomplish this feat if they did not have an unambigu-
ous political objective. It is the values inherent in the egalitarian ethos that
focus people efﬁciently in this respect: certain attitudes and behaviors are
praised, while others are condemned and punished.
There was a time in the history of anthropology when "values" were not
taken very seriously as a theoretical variable. In looking at band-level soci-
ety as a true pioneer, Steward (1955) relegated values to a causally passive,
all-but-derivative category that he termed ideology. However, the egalitar-
ian ethos is far more than a reﬂection of other more basic environmental
and social forces in human life. For the indigenous moral community, it
provides a realistic focus for action as people try to regulate social life
within the group. Because such attempts tend to be successful, it is proper
to call the egalitarian ethos a guidance mechanism—an intentional one.
The agenda involves a speciﬁc behavioral strategy, and it has an inﬂuential
and sometimes highly determinative effect on behavior, as intended.
Prominent in this hunter-gatherer behavioral blueprint is an ethic of
sharing that selectively extends to the entire group the cooperation and
altruism found within the family. It does so rather successfully with respect
to meat sharing, and to the sharing of decision-making power at the band
level. This principle of sharing power applies to many aspects of band life,
for the personal autonomy of the band's main political actors is of para-
mount concern—unless their behavior threatens the autonomy of others and
thereby becomes deviant. A particularly disvalued form of deviancy arises
when one of the main political actors belittles, bullies, or otherwise tries to
control another (see Boehm 1993). This overall political orientation could
be called antiauthoritarian (Gardner 1991), but it goes further, to the point
that the ethos is, in certain contexts, highly anticompetitive. Lee's wise
informant made this point very clear.
Before we examine some speciﬁc manifestations of this ethos, I must
emphasize that foragers have no need of constitutional conventions in
order to deﬁne and institutionalize their mode of self-governance. A few
surviving foragers, after contact and assimilation, have been taught to util-
ize this formal mechanism (for instance, Tonkinson 1984; Conn 1985). But
the principles underlying a pristine egalitarian order tend to remain rather
intuitive—unless an anthropologist asks just the right questions of an
articulate subject, as Lee did.
Equality and Its Causes
67

An astute ethnographer listens as people express approval or disapproval
of different kinds of behavior, then from these conversations builds a com-
posite picture of the local ethos. Speaking on behalf of the Alaskan Eskimo
group he studied, Jenness (1922:93-94) tells us: "Every man in his eyes has
the same rights and the same privileges as every other man in the commu-
nity. One may be a better hunter, or a more skillful dancer, or have greater
control over the spiritual world, but this does not make him more than one
member of a group in which all are free and theoretically equal."
Implicit in this description is the primus inter pares political stance
discussed by Fried (1967). Foragers are not intent on true and absolute
equality, but on a kind of mutual respect that leaves individual autonomy
intact. There are various ways of expressing this theme, and they can be
fairly indirect. For example, foragers may say that a respected leader should
be generous and even-tempered, or they may express the same thing nega-
tively, saying that a respected leader is not stingy or prone to ﬁts of anger.
In either case, they mean that he should not use his inﬂuential position to
exploit others economically or to dominate them personally.
At stake is individual autonomy, and Gardner's (1991) survey demon-
strates that foragers are predictably concerned with their autonomy and
work to preserve it. As one example, the traditional Pintupi Aborigines in
Australia placed a high value on personal autonomy (Myers 1980:313) and
were able to express this position quite eloquently. In my opinion, nomadic
foragers are universally—and all but obsessively—concerned with being
free from the authority of others. That is the basic thrust of their political
ethos, which applies equally to all the main political actors.
An ethos is fascinating because it is not necessarily a statement about an
actual state of affairs, but a set of strongly held moralistic positions about
how life should be. Hunter-gatherers may speak abstractly about personal
freedom, but often they prefer to deal in speciﬁcs, as when they detail
desirable or undesirable traits in leaders. Their political blueprint is highly
practical, and the adverse political forces they face—forces that make for an
increase in hierarchy and a decrease in personal autonomy—can become
formidable. A potential bully always seems to be waiting in the wings, and
people are prepared by their ethos to deal with such a threat summarily.
Bullying—outside the family—is highly unethical.
Ethical values stem from a people's sense of the social problems they
habitually face: for example, if murder did not exist there would be no
"Thou shalt not kill." There appears to be a universal short list of values
68
Hierarchy in the Forest

that all cultures share: negative ones that proscribe killing, seriously decep-
tive lying, or theft within the group, and positive ones that call for altruism
and cooperation for the beneﬁt of the whole community (Campbell 1975).
However, the political values found in an egalitarian ethos are far from
being universal. In some larger societies, like chiefdoms, both hierarchy
and strong political authority are readily countenanced by public opinion,
and statements implying that "ﬁrsts" must also be "equals" are never heard.
A handful of sedentary foragers also lack the egalitarian ethos and support
a hierarchical order. Yet the primus inter pares approach to political life is
widespread. Indeed, this egalitarian approach appears to be universal for
foragers who live in small bands that remain nomadic, suggesting consider-
able antiquity for political egalitarianism.
Leadership as a Special Political Problem
A foraging band may have a formal leader who is referred to as the head-
man or some such title, or it may have an informal leader who steps
forward to help in decision-making as long as the band welcomes him in
doing so. Some bands merely have a series of functional leaders who come
forward when their particular expertise is needed. In every case, such a
person is respected, and the danger exists that he (or she) may try to take
advantage of this position and selﬁshly parlay it into something more.
While there are many types of potential upstarts, a leader is likely to be
watched quite vigilantly by his egalitarian peers—the other main political
actors whose personal autonomies will be at stake if he tries to become
bossy or otherwise aggrandize his prerogatives. He may be "ﬁrst," but
everyone else has to be "equal."
With respect to Kalahari foragers, Lee provides exceptional and welcome
details about !Kung leadership and the actual personalities who ﬁll this
role. Leaders are sometimes women but usually men, and they are helped
in reaching this position by being the oldest person in a large family, by
being the titular owner of local resources or being married to such a
person, or by having the right personal qualities—those deﬁned in the
ethos. Preferred qualities in leaders often are expressed negatively: an ab-
sence of arrogance, overbearingness, boastfulness, and personal aloofness.
Lee (1979:345) says: "In !Kung terms these traits absolutely disqualify a
person as a leader and may engender even stronger forms of ostracism."
Kent (1993) has commented similarly. At the same time, Lee demonstrates
Equality and Its Causes
69

that a wide variety of personality types can become leaders as long as they
avoid the negative criteria.
Speciﬁcs of the Forager Ethos
Lee emphasized the absence of overaggressive traits, but let me stress that
an ethos is composed of both proscriptions, which are aimed at curbing
antisocial behaviors, and prescriptions, which promote prosocial behavior.
For example, generosity is frequently mentioned as a positive trait, one that
is particularly desirable in band leaders, and this emphasis is hardly sur-
prising. Politically egalitarian foragers are also, to a signiﬁcant degree, mate-
rially egalitarian: those who have more are expected to share when scarcity
exists. Thus the issue of generosity is salient. In detailing the results of my
survey of hunter-gatherer ethoses, I shall italicize items that are concerned
speciﬁcally with stinginess or generosity.
Among the Coeur d'Alene, wisdom, generosity, and honesty were valued
(Teit 1930:152-153). A Mescalero Apache chief was good at talking and
thinking, generous, and respectful (Basehart 1970:99), while Godwin says
of the Apache that a chief should be capable as a warrior and hunter and
successful economically, but also generous, impartial, patient, and in con-
trol of his temper (see Basso 1971:14). Denig (1930:449) says of the Assini-
boin that parsimony, along with exceptional meanness, was criticized—and
in fact the chief tended to be the poorest man in camp. Arapaho leaders
were expected to be brave, trustworthy, willing to share food unselﬁshly, and
to have good sense and judgment (Hilger 1952:190). Jenness (1935:2) de-
lineates how an Ojibwa chief would provide for a needy family from his own
resources, or arrange contributions from other band members. For the
Australian Pintupi, Myers (1980) makes the case that a primary role of
chiefs and elders was to take care of other Aborigines. For the Kalahari
!Kung, Marshall (1967:38) says that headmanship is not much desired and
that the leader has to be generous and careful not to stand out. This last
characterization displays the close relation between material and political
criteria for successful leadership, as deﬁned in a local ethos.
Impartiality, being careful not to surpass one's peers, lack of hostile
feelings, and emotional self-control were mentioned, so obviously it takes
more than nurturant generosity for a person to qualify as a politically
nonthreatening headman or chief. Further mentions of emotional self-
control occur relative to other foragers (for instance, Flannery 1953; Basso
70
Hierarchy in the Forest

1971), but as a practical matter one must be capable of leading as well as
avoiding the pitfalls of overaggressiveness. Slobodin (1969:66) described
the ethos of Kutchin hunters of the American Northeast as follows: "The
Kutchin have clearly conceptualized the qualities requisite to leadership in
their society. A sine qua non for leadership is above-average competence in
economic pursuits. In addition, a proper balance of 'hard' and 'soft' quali-
ties is necessary. 'Hard' qualities may be designated as shrewdness, drive,
and a touch of ruthlessness; the 'soft' qualities are generosity and concern
for the common weal as deﬁned in Kutchin culture."
This description suggests that when foragers are looking for someone to
lead them in a particular enterprise—or as a long-term group leader—they
may ﬁnd themselves facing a dilemma. It makes sense to choose their
most successful, forceful personality to fulﬁll this role, precisely because
the entire group wishes to be successful like him. On the other hand, it
is politically less threatening to select someone who is reasonably wise
but not likely to become greedy—or to think about dominating others as
his inﬂuence grows. In this context, generosity may compensate for asser-
tiveness.
Few accounts of a forager political ethos came close to being ethnog-
raphically complete, but a sampling of the better normative descriptions
that are available reveals some common threads with respect to leadership.
A desirable leader is likely to be of high social standing, generous, wise,
experienced, successful in what he does, and self-assertive in general. It also
helps if he is fair-minded, tactful, reliable, morally upright, apt at resolving
disputes, and a competent speaker (Boehm 1993). One might expect fora-
gers to be enthusiastic about such a person, but their sensitivity to the
tendencies of others to grasp at authority is such that some of the stronger
qualities that make for effective leadership also create ambivalence.
Egalitarian leaders are widely reported to act with modesty and lack of
aggressiveness, traits that reﬂect the sensitivity of leaders themselves to the
ambivalence that is predictable whenever a person moves into a position to
build authority. Elkin (1940:251) reports that Arapaho mounted hunters in
North America expected their chiefs to be strong with respect to whites but
humble at home, whereas the chiefs hated their own unassuming role.
We now have some notion of how the leadership role tends to be deline-
ated in the ethos, but we must keep in mind that the average nomadic band
has only half a dozen or so adult hunters or people who are otherwise likely
to be chosen as leaders, and that human personalities vary signiﬁcantly.
Equality and Its Causes
71

Real-life choices surely are compromises much of the time, and individuals
who neatly fulﬁll all the local criteria are likely to be scarce. Still, every
member of the band is aware of the local ethos; a precise blueprint exists
for how to behave if one wishes to be chosen—and uncontroversially
retained—as leader.
Thus, the widespread reports of leaders acting in an unassuming way,
and of leaders being so generous that they themselves "had nothing," do
not necessarily mean that bands are choosing as leaders unaggressive indi-
viduals who just naturally tend to give away all of their resources. In this
type of small society, in which the ethos is shared so uniformly, politically
sensitive leaders know exactly how to comport themselves if they wish to
lead without creating tension. Appropriate ways to assuage the apprehen-
sions of watchful peers are to never give orders, to be generous to a fault,
and to remain emotionally tranquil, particularly with respect to anger as a
predictable component of dominance. Basically, one needs to avoid any
sign of assertive self-aggrandizement.
If otherwise capable individuals are irascible, arrogant, stingy, or mean-
spirited, and do not manage to control these tendencies, they have little
chance of gaining or maintaining the leadership role. Although ethno-
graphic reports focus on leaders, the same negative criteria apply to the
other main political actors in the group as well. Every forager is expected to
be cooperative, generous, unarrogant, and unbossy. Nonetheless, we shall
see that some individuals (including leaders) do fail to restrain themselves.
Antiauthoritarian Sanctions
Social control among foragers is often unobtrusive. Small bands of people,
a fair number of whom are closely related, usually manage to get along
rather well and basically accept social limits without testing them too often.
While bands normally contain families that are unrelated, there tends to be
a familial ideology in terms of everyone's helping everyone else—within
limits. Many reports tell of ready cooperation and pleasant social relations.
If aroused, however, a band becomes a formidable aggressive force for
social control. Morally outraged hunters are capable of taking dire meas-
ures against people to whom they are closely bonded—if they feel such
people have become seriously deviant.
For a moral nonconformist, living with other people in a band often is
quite literally the only way to stay alive. Most foragers have alternative
72
Hierarchy in the Forest

bands they can join, but the number is very limited. If the individual runs
out of bands, in some environments he and his family are likely to perish
without the cooperation and sharing that are advantageous in making a
living. In the Arctic, where solitary existence meant all but certain death,
fugitive deviants sometimes managed to establish colonies of outcasts—
murderers or men who had stolen other men's wives and had to ﬂee
(Freuchen 1961; see also Balikci 1970). Inuit speakers in these deviant
colonies survived by working together just as people in normal bands did.
Social control involves far more than an outraged group's suddenly de-
ciding to employ dramatic sanctions. In any small group anywhere, people
keep track of one another's behavior and try to read the underlying mo-
tives (e.g., Haviland 1977). Types of deviance that all human groups watch
for, gossip about, and react to, include murder within the group, heavily
self-interested verbal deception, theft, and stinginess or failure to cooperate
when this is appropriate. On the positive side, foragers talk about generos-
ity, cooperativeness, honesty, and other prosocial behaviors that involve
good will. In effect, the band keeps a dossier on every individual, noting
positive and negative points. Group members exercise the right to take
action if a deviant begins to intimidate other group members individu-
ally—or threatens the social equilibrium of the group or its very ability to
function. When people move from small private discussions to group con-
sensus and aggressive public action, the result is active social control.
Most social control involves implementing manipulative sanctions on a
highly deliberate basis. Gossiping, however, a stealthy activity by which
other people's moral dossiers are constantly reviewed, is not intended to be
manipulative. It amounts to a covert exercise in information processing—
as well as a satisfying and recurrent social activity. In spite of the secrecy,
everyone knows that gossiping is constantly taking place; anyone can be a
target. This knowledge serves as a deterrent, for most foragers worry about
the opinion of their peers and try to exert self-control accordingly. In some
cases they may be working against strong temptations, one of which is to
dominate one's fellow group members. In other cases they may be unusu-
ally thick-skinned, and not care what people are saying as long as they can
have their way.
When sanctioning becomes active, a cool manner of greeting can be an
ominous signal, one that can quickly lead to direct criticism or even ridi-
cule. Being made fun of by peers is particularly hurtful if one is bound to
live forever in a very small cluster of bands and is unable to escape one's
Equality and Its Causes
73

reputation. Some potential upstarts are easily put in their place by ridicule,
but others may be less sensitive—or more driven. The grievous or habitual
offender is likely to meet with harsher sanctions: he may be ostracized, as
we saw with the Utku—by silence or active shunning—or he may be ex-
pelled from the group (Gruter and Masters 1986). If an upstart becomes
dangerous to the life or liberty of others and is not susceptible to lesser
sanctions, we also shall see that fearful or morally outraged foragers go for
the ultimate form of social distancing: execution.
A cardinal act of political deviance is to attempt to set oneself above
another person in a way that is belittling, or, worse, to try to give direct
orders to one's peers. The available sanctions run from criticism to ridicule
to execution. When it is a leader who oversteps, special sanctions are avail-
able. These include pointed disobedience, desertion of the leader by mov-
ing to a different band, or formally deposing the person from the group-
leadership role (assuming that it exists).
To document such patterns of political control, I now survey the spe-
ciﬁcs of sanctioning on four continents: Australia, North America, Africa,
and Asia. In general, I shall discuss foragers who continue to live in fully
nomadic bands, although sometimes data were obtained after these people
settled around missions. I emphasize in advance that much egalitarian
sanctioning is relatively subtle and preemptive, and therefore seriously
underreported. But the tip of this iceberg sometimes becomes obvious, and
for that reason we do have some unambiguous reports of political crises in
which upstarts seriously challenge their peers and the latter react.
Public Opinion, Criticism, and Ridicule
An anecdote from Australia illustrates the relationship between gossiping,
public opinion, and the movement of foragers to criticize political upstarts
to their faces. For the recently settled Pintupi Aborigines, Myers (1986:224)
mentions that in the old days "putting oneself forward and taking respon-
sibility became traditionally important dimensions of an older man's iden-
tity," but at the same time he emphasizes that "the possibility of asserting
oneself too much is fraught with danger." He tells of a leader of one little
community who came to be perceived as thinking he was better than the
rest and who inappropriately made decisions on his own. First public
opinion went against him, then serious direct criticisms were made. When
he died in the middle of a ceremony, it was assumed that his untoward
74
Hierarchy in the Forest

behavior had invited sorcery. Myers ﬁnishes the anecdote by saying, "One
should assert one's autonomy only in ways that do not threaten the equal-
ity and autonomy of others."
When criticism becomes both public and very aggressive, a visitor can
readily observe aroused public opinion in action. On the Kalahari Desert
the foragers studied by Cashdan (1980:116) deliberately cut down brag-
garts, just as the !Kung do and the Mbuti Forest Pygmies do (Turnbull
1965:180) when a leading hunter becomes overassertive. Criticism is a
direct way of expressing displeasure and giving the deviant cues as to what
needs to be corrected.
Ridicule is a form of criticism that has a special sting. Its use is reported
for the Paliyans of India studied by Gardner (1969:157): when men trying
to exert leadership in a crisis were manipulatively invoking the gods, the
rank and ﬁle mocked both the leaders and the gods they invoked. Ridicule
also is applied to leading men among the Mbuti Pygmies (Turnbull
1965:180, 183), and it is reported for the acculturating Ngukurr Aborigines
in Australia (Bern 1987:218). Lee (1982:45) says that !Kung men who put
on airs may be called Big Chief just to take them down a peg. Among the
Hadza of Tanzania, Woodburn (1982) relates that when a would-be chief
tried to persuade other Hadza to work for him, they made it clear that his
efforts amused them. These examples illustrate general mechanisms of
social control that are predictably found in hunting bands. They are ap-
plied to anyone who begins to behave as an upstart, including leaders.
Disobeying Leaders Who Try to Command
Absolutely critical to the welfare or survival of people living in hunting
bands are the migration decisions they make, and these are arrived at by
forming a consensus (see Mithen 1990; Knauft 1991; Boehm 1996). Such
decisions may be needed half a dozen times a year or more, and many of
them are routine. Migration is logical when resources within easy range
of the current camp have been harvested or when predictable seasonal
changes shift the distribution of food resources, as with Eskimos who every
year move from sealing on the winter ice to inland lake ﬁshing to caribou
hunting. Even these routine decisions have to be adjusted every season for
microecological variations. Another reason to migrate is a drought or some
other major perturbation, including a political threat from another group.
The foragers' dilemma is to make use of the wisest heads available, yet
Equality and Its Causes
75

prevent these gifted people from gaining undue political inﬂuence or
power.
One preventive measure is to keep the authority to decide with the
group as a whole, and consensus-seeking does just that. Typically, all the
adults are free to participate, and in a protracted discussion various opin-
ions are weighed by the group. Silberbauer (1982) provides an astute as-
sessment of Kalahari G/wi hunters and their decision process. Unlike
tribes, whose members all tend to assemble for a decision meeting, the
G/wi discuss their alternatives in small subgroups, sometimes privately and
sometimes publicly, looking to arrive at a consensus. This type of political
process seems to be widespread (Knauft 1991). At the end—as group opin-
ion begins to emerge—strong social pressure can be exerted on those
holding a minority opinion to agree to the majority strategy (for well-
documented tribal examples, see Boehm 1996). The reason for such pres-
sure is obvious to foragers and anthropologists alike. A divided band will
ﬁssion, and the smaller social segments will proﬁt less from the coopera-
tion and sharing that reduces variance in food intake. The members also
will lose an aspect of social life they treasure.
Bands do divide temporarily, for hunter-gatherers have to be realists
(Kelly 1995). During a season when resources predictably become widely
dispersed, individual households or small clusters of households may
spread out. As soon as they can, they join again in a band of 30 to 50 or
more persons. If just their immediate area is suffering a serious drought,
the constituent households may atomize and move to different bands in
more favored locations where they have in-laws or relatives or trading
partners (for example, Wiessner 1982, 1996). Whenever they are able to do
so, however, foragers will migrate as an entire band.
Because these decision-making junctures can be crucial to reproductive
success, band members look to their most able personalities for guidance.
In this context individual tendencies to dominate or control can easily be
stimulated, particularly if the group has chosen to designate one of its
members as permanent band leader (as opposed to utilizing a series of
functional decision-leaders). In effect, inﬂuence can whet the appetite for
power, and the rank and ﬁle keep this in mind.
We have seen that ridicule can be one effective instrument of control, in
that it keeps a gifted leader's tendencies to gain authority in check at the
same time that his services continue to be exploited by the group. Another
check is simply to ignore any orders given by such a person—that is,
76
Hierarchy in the Forest

disobey him. We have seen already how the Utku in their acculturating
band used passive disobedience to put Inuttiaq in his place. In North
America the Arapaho, having lost respect for a leader, let him remain
titularly their chief but pointedly ignored him whenever he tried to assert
himself (Hilger 1952:189). Among the Bihor of India, members of a hunt-
ing party simply ignored the lead taken by an inﬂuential shaman who knew
little about hunting (Williams 1969:149). In South America, Holmberg
(1950:149) reports a chief's being ignored when he insisted on sharing a
number of small game brought in by men in his band.
Stronger Social Distancing
Criticism, ridicule, and disobedience, in conjunction with customs that
tend to equalize prestige from hunting, will not always do the job. Ostra-
cism (taken in a restricted sense as the silent treatment) is one way of
putting a deviant on notice, and at the same time of gaining enough
distance so that others can be insulated from the aberrant behaviors. We
have seen that mild ostracism can allow a political upstart to stay with the
group, hopefully to experience some behavioral modiﬁcations and gain
social reentry. Permanent expulsion from the group, or the group's quietly
moving away, carries the distancing still further and suggests that redemp-
tion possibilities have been set aside.
The fact that all the women and men in the group disapprove of an
individual is as devastating to that forager as it was to Jean Briggs. Unanim-
ity is what gives ostracism its sting: it really hurts when one's entire social
world is a few dozen people and they act in concert to ignore the trespasser.
Aside from Briggs's detailed description of the problems of Niqi and her
family, speciﬁc ostracism episodes are not chronicled frequently or in de-
tail—at least, in a political context. However, a case of ostracism within the
band is reported for the Mbuti Forest Pygmies (Turnbull 1965:228), and
not infrequently ostracism is listed as a moral sanction in forager ethnog-
raphies (e.g., Balikci 1970; Wiessner 1996). It is probably safe to say that
among foragers this type of social distancing is widespread, probably uni-
versal. A speciﬁcally political case reported for the Aranda in Australia by
Strehlow (1947:168) involved an older Aborigine who arrogantly tried to
usurp the ritual rights of others and was sent away from the group for
several weeks. Because the exile was temporary, I would classify this case as
a strong instance of ostracism rather than expulsion.
Equality and Its Causes
77

Silberbauer (1982) discusses G/wi ostracism, and while there is no ex-
ample of its being applied to a political upstart, it is worth noting that this
measure can be applied to any deviant who fails to mend his ways. Band
members will antagonize the miscreant by pretending not to hear him, by
supposedly misunderstanding what he says, or by frustrating him in other
ways. If protracted, such treatment can cause the deviant to join some
other band that will have him. Otherwise he may have to migrate several
times a year, from one band to another. Such ostracism goes well beyond
what Briggs reported for the Utku, which was relatively unaggressive. Eski-
mos do rather frequently execute deviants, though, and it seems likely that
they are capable of stronger types of ostracism that more closely approach
shunning.
A sanctioning measure that effects actual removal of a miscreant with a
minimum of confrontation is desertion. Rather than trying to expel a
possibly dangerous group member who is too strong as leader, the band
may ﬁnd it easier to move away. For example, when Geronimo's irrepress-
ible political policies became so heroic that they were all but suicidal, his
Apache followers simply refused to follow him any longer and went their
own way (Clastres 1977:178). In Malaysia, the Batek similarly moved away
from men who were too belligerent (Endicott 1988:122). Among the An-
daman Islanders in Asia, a disenchanted minority would go to a different
group if they disagreed with their leader (Man 1882:109). Among the
Apache, people also would join other bands if their chief was dishonest,
unreliable, or a liar (Basehart 1970:101), and the same is true of the South-
ern Ute at the level of dissatisﬁed families (Opler 1940:169).
Another measure, one that involves the group as a whole, is to allow an
undesirable leader to stay in the band but to depose him as leader and
choose another. In North America, this procedure was reported for the
Coeur d'Alene (Teit 1930:153); similarly, among the Assiniboin, notewor-
thy meanness or parsimony could result in overthrow (Denig 1930:449).
Among the California Yokuts, largely sedentary foragers who were rather
hierarchical but retained an egalitarian ethos, a weak "hereditary" chief
who made unfair decisions or was suspected of too much self-aggrandize-
ment was not formally deposed—but he was ignored in favor of another
chief (Gayton 1930:410-411). Obviously, not all deposing of leaders was
tied to arrogance, bossiness, or some other failure in honoring the egalitar-
ian ethos. Among the Alaskan Eskimos, the umiak leader, who coordinated
hunts for big sea mammals using a large boat, would be deposed if his
78
Hierarchy in the Forest

leadership made for a season without a kill (Riches 1982:139). But often
deposition involved egalitarian ire, rather than dissatisfaction with the stra-
tegic quality of leadership.
In egalitarian societies, the overstepping leader is basically vulnerable: he
does not personally control local natural resources, nor is he usually able to
physically coerce followers to retain him. He is disposable, desertable, and
generally dispensable, even though his strategic value to the group weighs
into the equation. If he becomes a serious political problem, it usually is
feasible to expel him from the group or desert him. If he is too intimidat-
ing, his peers may wish to pursue a different course.
Elimination of Upstarts
Regularly, but not frequently, critical domination episodes with feared in-
dividuals occur, in which hunters are too cowed to use criticism, ridicule,
disobedience, ostracism, deposition, desertion, or expulsion as a way of
resolving their political predicament. The tactical problem is obvious: who-
ever speaks up ﬁrst may be putting his life in danger. The danger may
involve a physical attack, or in bands that have shamans it may also incor-
porate sorcery.
When a severe domination episode is ongoing, the band's social domi-
nance hierarchy is tipped 180 degrees: it has assumed an orthodox, des-
potic form, with an alpha individual at the top of the power pyramid and
the formerly "in-control" rank and ﬁle at the bottom. If such domination
were to continue to the end of the dominator's lifetime, and if the same
power role were to be transmitted to a successor, with parallel adjustment
of the ethos, a reverse dominance hierarchy would have given way to an
orthodox hierarchy. Among mobile foragers we do have a number of re-
ports of temporary domination episodes on various continents. Nowhere
are these foragers hierarchical, as opposed to egalitarian. As long as they
remain nomadic rather than sedentary, hunter-gatherers have been able to
take care of political business, even when the threat to their egalitarian
order is dire—and personally threatening.
When a menacing personality enters the political scene, I have suggested
that people may not dare to exercise social control because they are too
intimidated. This is particularly true of recidivist murderers, or of very
powerful shamans who can "kill" through supernatural attacks. If lesser
sanctions do not come into play, the upstart may feel conﬁdent enough to
Equality and Its Causes
79

intimidate his entire band, just as an alpha male chimpanzee does. His
political tool is not vigorous domination displays, but a frightening reputa-
tion based on past aggressive attitudes and actions. Where a personality
given to dominance is allowed such latitude, it is likely that the dominance
will move in the direction of despotism. Execution is an obvious answer,
but there are attendant difﬁculties. A practical problem is the fear of setting
off a chain of killings, for an angry relative of the deviant may feel com-
pelled to exact revenge. Another practical problem is the potential killing of
the executioner as he attempts assassination. Furthermore, foragers basi-
cally codify any killing within the group as a serious act of deviance.
Before we examine some cases of execution of tyrants, it will be useful to
examine the role that homicide plays in forager life generally (see Knauft
1991). Even among the simpler kinds of foragers, who once were thought
to be peaceable, homicide is quite frequent. The threat looms in spite of the
fact that hunter-gatherers living in bands are strongly oriented toward
peaceful cooperation and resolution of conﬂict. Actually, resolution of
smoldering controversies can be quite efﬁcient; it is the heated conﬂicts
that foragers handle clumsily (Knauft 1991; see also von Fürer-Haimen-
dorf 1967). One reason is the absence of any formalized authority, such as
a strong chief or an egalitarian council of elders that is culturally empow-
ered to deal with serious deviancy. As a result, once a conﬂict heats up,
there is no truly effective means of intervention. In fact, would-be peace-
makers themselves have been killed (for instance, Lee 1979).
Four broad varieties of hunter-gatherer homicide seem to exist within
the band. One is based on a speciﬁc grievance, such as discovered adultery
that triggers a jealous rage. For the group, that problem is ephemeral: it
involves only two men, and usually the killer quickly leaves his band to
avoid being killed by his victim's relatives. The episode also seems to be
largely situational, in that a man who kills another in a jealous rage is not
necessarily a type who seeks to dominate his peers in other contexts.
A second type of killing takes place when a person's close relative has
been killed and he seeks to retaliate. Usually such killings are averted by the
original killer's moving to a different band. When they do take place, again
the revenge killer is simply caught in special circumstances; he is not neces-
sarily a bully or would-be tyrant.
The third type of internecine homicide involves a bullying recidivist
killer, possibly a psychotic, who in effect intimidates his group and is in a
position to continue the pattern. This type of homicide begets yet a fourth
80
Hierarchy in the Forest

type, which we may count as a version of capital punishment. While it is
sometimes referred to as assassination, the entire group decides on this
measure, often delegating to a relative of the deviant the role of executioner
and thereby obviating the possibility of subsequent revenge killing.
I should also mention homicide that takes place between bands (see
Daly and Wilson 1988). The majority of foragers engage in either feuding
(so-called internal warfare) or larger-scale ﬁghting between groups (Ember
1978), and of these well over half engage in ﬁghting at least once every two
years. Within the group, retaliation is a function of angry needs for revenge
and accessibility of opponents. Between groups, revenge killing becomes
more complicated. Intergroup political rivalry and political domination
are involved, with long-term political considerations that affect an entire
group. That is, to leave such a killing unavenged can invite further victimi-
zation (Balikci 1970; Daly and Wilson 1988).
It is killings within the band that concern us here. Such homicides are
headed off early if possible, and when they are imminent, feeble efforts
may be made to intervene. Once they have taken place, these intragroup
homicides, caused by situations of jealously or revenge, do not usually
trigger moralistic sanctioning by the entire group—even though killing is
strongly disapproved. The aggressor simply leaves his band. Such a step can
be perilous in terms of subsistence, but usually a nearby band will accept
him.
Another permutation is the singular deviant colonies mentioned earlier.
Peter Freuchen, an anthropologist who married an Eskimo, personally
knew some of the men in such a colony. It seems plausible that a colony of
refugee deviants would have more than its share of aggressors, and in a
modernizing context Freuchen (1961) relates how one such man acted
successfully as a despotic bully. First, he took away the wife of another
colonist and proceeded to taunt the man. Then he took a second man's wife
and forbade him even to speak with her. Eventually, the tyrant was assassi-
nated by one of these victims and another man.
In pre-contact times, lethal sanctions were applied to recidivist murder-
ers in Eskimo bands (Hoebel 1954:88-92). Carefully selected individuals
seem to have actually dispatched the offenders, usually male kinsmen of
the target, but it was the entire group that conspired to eliminate them.
The same is reported of others, like the Comanche (Hoebel 1940), and
the Copper Eskimo (Damas 1972). In Arnhem Land, Australian Aborigi-
nes traditionally eliminated aggressive men who tried to dominate them
Equality and Its Causes
81

(Berndt and Berndt 1964:289), whereas after European contact it seems
likely that such executions were inhibited because of colonial interference.
Woodburn (1982:436) points out that because Hadza men in Africa are
armed with lethal weapons used to hunt large game, they can easily assassi-
nate someone they fear—in the victim's sleep, or by ambush. A Hadza
hunter need only be sure that the surprise killing is executed efﬁciently, and
his risk is low. Lee (1979) tells about an intimidating !Kung recidivist killer
in the Kalahari who (on an impromptu basis) was executed so inefﬁciently
that others became casualties as well—and this took place in broad day-
light.
Draper (1978:80) states that the !Kung execute incorrigible offenders,
much as the Eskimo collectively kill recidivist murderers. Lee agrees with
this generalization (1982:47), saying that a !Kung community may execute
"extremely aggressive men" by agreement of the entire band. Any execution
of an overaggressive individual that is agreed on by the local moral com-
munity ﬁts the category of antiauthoritarian sanctioning and qualiﬁes in-
formally as legitimized capital punishment.
That executions by band members were collective is not always speciﬁed
in detail, but usually is strongly implied. It was explicit with Alaskan Eski-
mos (Weyer 1932), where communities put individuals to death for three
types of malfeasance (see also Rasmussen 1931:236). One was witchcraft, a
reputation for which could lead to intimidation and tyranny; another was a
brutal temperament, which led to bullying; the third was a penchant for
adultery, which probably had fewer political ramiﬁcations than the other
two.
Colonial interference (or the threat thereof) is a factor that may help to
account for the relatively few ethnographic accounts of domination epi-
sodes terminated by assassination. However, there are other pertinent re-
ports for Australia. Spencer and Gillen (1976:263) recount that the Iliaura
got rid of a man who was "very quarrelsome and strong in magic" by
handing him over to an Arunta vengeance party, an indirect type of capital
punishment that is paralleled at the tribal level (Boehm 1985). The idea is
to get rid of a troublemaker by making it clear to a different group, which
is seeking revenge against one's own group, that if it wreaks vengeance on
the individual in question no further retaliation will take place.
Thus, reports of execution of individuals who behave too aggressively
are available for Eskimos, North American Indians, Australian Aborigines,
and African foragers. Because there are relatively few behaviorally rich
82
Hierarchy in the Forest

ethnographic reports from Asia and South America, my suspicion is that
the pattern may be generalized to nomadic foragers in general. The fact
that men are hunters of large game, and often engage in some form of
warfare, makes them experts at killing. The typical domination episode
involves a male who seriously intimidates people at the level of lethal
threat, then is dispatched by his own male kinsman with the approval of
the group.
That shamans are able to violate the autonomy of others is richly illus-
trated by Balikci's (1970:233) account of the Netsilik Eskimos. In one
instance, when people were asking a shaman to stop a violent snowstorm,
he brought personal interests into his public practice, as it were. He said
that his tutelary spirit, through him, needed to have sexual intercourse with
two girls. The father of one girl agreed, but the husband of the second girl
refused, pointing out that tutelary spirits cannot copulate with mortals.
More generally, Balikci's informants agreed that a shaman who desired a
woman was likely to threaten her with illness, in order to take advantage of
her sexually. Shamans were expected to be healers and helpers of the com-
munity, so this approach clearly constituted an abuse of power.
Not all hunter-gatherer bands have shamans or sorcerers. But Eskimos
who became candidates for antiauthoritarian execution were often ﬁne
hunters and shamans, strong men who turned domineering. It was danger-
ous to cross such persons, because they could use sorcery on their oppo-
nents. From Greenland came short-term reports by early Scandinavian
explorers of men who committed murder in Eskimo bands and were not
sanctioned by their peers (see Mirsky 1937). One physically powerful sha-
man became a recidivist killer in his group, whose intimidated members
simply treated him with great "respect." In this well-reported domination
episode a man was seriously intimidating others in his band, yet execution
had not been used as an ultimate sanction. (This single example of unre-
solved abuse of power is of interest in considering the falsiﬁcation of the
hypotheses with which I am working, and I shall return to it later.)
In connection with Arctic sorcery, Balikci (1970) reports a case in central
Canada of an old woman believed to have engaged in sorcery to hurt a man
who had rejected her. When he died, she and her sons were assassinated for
having engaged in such practices. For the mainly foraging Gebusi of New
Guinea, Knauft (1987:475-476) reports executions of witches, who tend
to be individuals viewed as unusually aggressive. I hesitate to include this
type of assassination with those motivated by an egalitarian ethos, because
Equality and Its Causes
83

witchcraft executions are not usually rationalized in political terms
(Boehm 1993). In the other cases, when normal individuals tyrannize en-
tire groups and are executed, it is reasonable to assume that the assassina-
tion is due to a conscious dislike of being dominated.
With witchcraft it is necessary to deal with motives that are less than
conscious, a difﬁcult enough feat in one's own culture. All the same, it is
worth noting that in most cultures in which witchcraft executions take
place, the witches are apt to be people who are stingy or overly aggressive
(see Kluckhohn 1944). Both of these qualities clash strongly with an egali-
tarian ethos.
The Effect of Egalitarian Sanctions
Service (1975:48-49), discussing deviance and conﬂict, says that "in a small
primitive society, much of social life is smoothly regulated by these codes,
rules, expectations, habits, and customs that are related to etiquette, ethic,
and role. And because these are not explicit, nor revealed by frequent
breaches, the society might give the impression of freedom and lack of
conﬂict, as Rousseau would have it." It seems to be characteristic of forager
bands that most of the time social life proceeds harmoniously, even though
once in a while serious problems erupt (Knauft 1987, 1991).
I had to examine scores of forager ethnographies to ﬁnd a few dozen
usable reports of egalitarian sanctioning, and I believe that the sensitivity
of most hunter-gatherers to subtle social cues is a factor in this relatively
modest level of reported political conﬂict. With respect to deviance, bands
tend to be highly conformist societies—in spite of the heavy emphasis on
personal autonomy. Anthropologists visiting a culture for a year or two
therefore may be impressed by an apparent lack of competition and con-
ﬂict. But even as I worked with a small number of detailed cases, it became
apparent that political processes everywhere were similar, and that the
sanctioning methods I identiﬁed were likely to be widely distributed.
To summarize, the speciﬁc antiauthoritarian sanctions I encountered
followed a continuum from moderate (criticism, ridicule, or disobedience)
to strong (ostracism or expulsion, deposition or desertion) to ultimate
(execution). The number of reliable ethnographic citations is too small to
use a statistical sampling approach, too small to attempt a regional analysis,
and also too small to analyze various subtypes of foragers. My justiﬁcation
for drawing the conclusions I have is that this is the only evidence available
to investigate an extremely important question.
84
Hierarchy in the Forest

Had I employed cross-cultural sampling techniques, my results would
have been statistically invalid, woefully so. The alternative I followed was to
set aside sampling methods and search for at least a large handful of
ethnographic reports that contained rich or adequate data—wherever they
might be found. Although I like to work with qualitative analysis, I recog-
nize that generalizations based on such an approach raise special issues
with respect to "falsiﬁability" (Popper 1959).
One empirical generalization difﬁcult to deny is that in Africa, Asia,
Australia, South America, and North America are clear-cut instances of
upstarts being dealt with intentionally by their peers. It is more difﬁcult to
assert that the entire range of political sanctions can be found on every
continent where hunter-gatherers have been studied. However, execution is
reported on three, desertion on two. It is my belief that the overall pattern
I have described is universal, or certainly very widespread, among mobile
hunter-gatherers. Is this empirical conclusion testable?
If one moves from sanctioning of political upstarts to social sanctioning
in general (for incest, thievery, ritual violations, cheating, and so on), I
believe that most of the sanctions I have discussed could be found on the
same continents. A complete survey of the world ethnographic literature to
this end would be costly, but it would provide an indirect means of testing
the empirical claims I am making about political sanctioning. My assump-
tion is that if forager gossiping, ridicule, criticism, ostracism, expulsion
from the group, and execution could be shown to be universal, one might
assume that these same sanctions were applicable to acts of deviancy that
were speciﬁcally political.
My own survey has covered perhaps half of the ethnography available in
English or French, but it was expediently designed to favor the better
ethnographies. A superior methodology would be to survey not only the
available ethnographies but also the ﬁeld notes of hunter-gatherer ethnog-
raphers, and to query living scholars directly. It is possible that my basic
hypotheses would stand, albeit with regional or other variations. The claim
I make is that basically hunter-gatherers everywhere use the same means to
keep their bands equalized that they use to curb deviancy in general.
What about potential falsiﬁcation of the larger hypothesis that egalitari-
anism is caused by political intentions and political dynamics, rather than
by environmental constraints or social structure? I published this hypothe-
sis in 1993, and no one has attempted to demonstrate the existence of any
other single cause sufﬁcient to reverse human dominance hierarchies. Be-
cause ethnographers who study foragers usually provide abundant infor-
Equality and Its Causes
85

mation about social structure, subsistence activities, and the natural en-
vironment, the information necessary for falsiﬁcation of my universal hy-
pothesis, or for support of competing hypotheses, would seem to be avail-
able.
A more fundamental hypothesis (Boehm 1993, 1994b, 1997b) is that
human nature makes people prone to compete politically and dominate
one another. At least one ethnographer who has studied nomadic foragers
seems to agree (Wiessner 1996:185). While I shall develop this hypothesis
further in the pages that follow, it may be difﬁcult to falsify—particularly if
one insists on waiting to see the genes responsible. Criteria of relative
plausibility can, however, be applied.
A complementary hypothesis is that sanctioning which is antiauthori-
tarian (Gardner 1991) or counterdominant (Erdal and Whiten 1994) is
extremely effective in fulﬁlling the egalitarian ethos. This thesis could be
partially falsiﬁed if numerous instances were found of domination epi-
sodes that were successful in converting a reverse dominance hierarchy into
an orthodox one. The closest we have come is the physically powerful
Greenland Eskimo shaman who was a recidivist-murderer, for he had not
yet been executed when ethnographic observation ended. I know of no
Eskimo or other nomadic band in which such an intimidator ruled or
dominated for his entire lifetime, or passed such political power to a suc-
cessor. For that reason, I surmise that the man in question was eventually
dealt with—or that for some reason the Greenland Eskimos were excep-
tional.
It is conceivable that a total search of world ethnography would unearth
the kind of counterexample I describe, and I confess I would be happy to
see my own hypothesis about the total efﬁcacy of mobile egalitarian bands
falsiﬁed—at least, in its absolute form. A single instance of a band's perma-
nently succumbing to an upstart would provide a possible explanation for
how a handful of relatively sedentary foragers, people like the Kwakiutl of
America's Northwest Coast and the Calusa of Florida (see Kelly 1995),
became hierarchical as opposed to egalitarian.
Reverse Dominance Hierarchy
Hunter-gatherers in their bands may seem bereft of government as we
know it, particularly if one looks to political structure—to the existence of
ofﬁces or roles involving unambiguous lines of personal authority. Outside
86
Hierarchy in the Forest

the family, there is very little delegated, legitimate, effective authority—al-
though military activities may call for it temporarily in speciﬁc circum-
stances. Yet on a collective basis these people do manipulate and control
their social and political life to a substantial degree, by acting as a moral
community. One way they govern themselves is by imposing an egalitarian
blueprint on their social and political life; the main political actors are able
to do this cooperatively, behaving as one large and somewhat amorphous
political authority that makes its decisions by consensus.
The result is nothing like anarchy—a term overly evocative of romantic
(or pejorative) sentiment. Anarchy suggests an absence of power and con-
trol, but the band as a cohesive group of adults is in a position to speak
with collective authority—and to behave dominantly in governing the be-
havior of individual deviants. As Service indicated, this power usually re-
mains latent. But it is always there, assuming that the band remains in
agreement about its moral issues—and avoids serious political factions by
ﬁssioning. Bands are normally in a position to act as well-uniﬁed moral
communities.
As practical political philosophers, foragers perceive quite correctly that
self-aggrandizement and individual authority are threats to personal au-
tonomy. When upstarts try to make inroads against an egalitarian social
order, they will be quickly recognized and, in many cases, quickly curbed
on a preemptive basis. One reason for this sensitivity is that the oral tradi-
tion of a band (which includes knowledge from adjacent bands) will pre-
serve stories about serious domination episodes. There is little doubt that
many of the ethnographic reports of executions in my survey were based
on such traditions, as opposed to direct ethnographic observation.
An important additional factor is that authority tends to be present,
legitimate, and relatively unrestrained within the household. Dominant
control is directed at children, and often at wives, so acts of interpersonal
domination are witnessed constantly. Band members are kept aware of the
danger of letting individuals develop authority that extends beyond the
family. In many bands, men in particular must carefully shift gears when
they move from a family-head role, in which a strong, paternal authority
style may be socially acceptable, to a band-member role, in which it is not.
We saw that Inuttiaq did this kind of shifting very competently.
Hunter-gatherers understand human nature, as well as speciﬁc person-
alities. They seem to realize that if a little authority is permitted to develop,
then a normal human leader is likely to want more. He may want more
Equality and Its Causes
87

authority because he enjoys bossing people around, or he may simply wish
to make his job as leader less complicated. But as a political human being
capable of status rivalry and domination, he is not about to receive the
beneﬁt of the doubt from his peers.
Individual hunter-gatherers also comprehend that the safest way to neu-
tralize the growth of authority is to act preemptively. Lee's detailed account
of how the !Kung use ridicule made that obvious. When the other main
political actors are afraid to exert such pressure, as with a malevolent
shaman or a recidivist killer, they open themselves to stressful domination
episodes and eventually must resort to assassination if they are to reclaim
their individual autonomy.
Gardner (1991) and Erdal and Whiten (1994, 1996) have helped to
characterize the nature of this struggle, which if not resolved on a preemp-
tive basis can lead to bloody executions. It is primarily on the basis of
vigilance that hunter-gatherers have kept their societies egalitarian in spite
of individual tendencies that could lead to despotism. Over the long term,
the result is a reverse social dominance hierarchy (Boehm 1993) with the
subordinates ﬁrmly in charge.
The Evolutionary Position of Egalitarian Foragers
One of the great mysteries of social evolution is the transition from egali-
tarian society to hierarchical society. Extant foragers seem to be invariably
egalitarian, as long as they remain basically nomadic. As foragers become
sedentary and collect in larger groups that continue to depend on foraging,
a hierarchical lifestyle sometimes will arise, with leadership that is relatively
strong. With such change comes a major adjustment of the ethos: band
members begin to accept competition, social stratiﬁcation, and authority at
the group level. This shift took place among certain hunter-gatherer groups
in North America: people lived in year-round villages, stored food, had
social classes and leaders with real authority—and no egalitarian ethos was
reported (Kelly 1995; see also Rosman and Rubel 1986).
Thus, a hunting and gathering way of life in itself does not guarantee a
decisively egalitarian political orientation; nomadism and absence of food
storage (see Woodburn 1982) also seem to be needed. Nomadism in itself
does not guarantee egalitarianism either, for after domestication of animals
some pastoral nomads were egalitarian but others became hierarchical
(Salzman 1979; L'Equipe écologie 1979). Nor does becoming sedentary and
88
Hierarchy in the Forest

storing food spell the end of an egalitarian ethos and political way of life.
Neighbors of the Kwakiutl such as the Tolowa and Coastal Yurok also lived
in year-round villages with food storage (Gould 1982), but they kept their
leaders weak and were politically egalitarian.
We shall see in the next chapter that tribal egalitarianism is very similar
to that of the hunter-gatherers we have been discussing. Half a century ago
thousands of these tribal societies existed; so it is logical to conclude that as
they began to domesticate plants and animals, the vast majority of egalitar-
ian hunter-gatherers made a direct political transition to being egalitarian
tribesmen. Let us look now at tribesmen, with their similarly "equalizing"
approach to politics.
Equality and Its Causes
89

C H A P T E R
5
A Wider View
of Egalitarianism
Tribesmen (see Sahlins 1968) are different from foragers by ecological
deﬁnition: they do not exclusively hunt and gather for their livelihood.
They may be nomadic, for many tribesmen are pastoralists who move very
frequently and others are horticulturalists who may move from one garden
spot to another every several years. The difference from foragers is simply
that tribesmen have domesticated plants and animals. What is interesting
politically is that they have continued the political approach of hunter-
gatherers under radically different ecological circumstances.
It is also noteworthy that tribesmen have been able to stay egalitarian
even when their functioning political units became quite large. A forager
grouping may exceed a few hundred people when bands collect at certain
favorable junctures to hunt or engage in rituals (Kelly 1995); but when a
number of tribes combine forces, to go to war offensively or defensively,
the number on one side can reach several thousand warriors or higher.
Usually such confederations are ephemeral, but occasionally they stay to-
gether and a permanent egalitarian tribal confederation comes into being.
This outcome is unheard of with hunter-gatherers.
The political arrangements of foraging communities can be either egali-
tarian or nonegalitarian, but the mobile groups we call bands are always
egalitarian, ideologically speaking. They also are egalitarian in fact, except
when they are experiencing a domination episode. "Tribes" are seen by
Service (1962) and Fried (1967) as being egalitarian by deﬁnition; they are
taken to represent a stage of political evolution that is intermediate be-
tween egalitarian bands and hierarchical chiefdoms. In the interest of clari-
fying a term that has been assigned far too many meanings, it makes sense
here to specify what I mean by "tribe" and "tribesmen." Tribesmen, for my
90

purposes, are nonliterate people who have domesticated plants or animals;
have an egalitarian ethos; live in small, locally autonomous social groups;
and refuse to permit strong authority to develop in the context of everyday
group leadership. They are prone to raiding, feuding, and territorial war-
fare, and they often play "balance of power" games by forming intertribal
coalitions (Boehm 1994a). But in theory a tribe could be entirely peaceful.
Curiously, the radical subsistence changes that came with the Neolithic
era did not alter group political life very much. In spite of a major ecologi-
cal transition, reverse dominance hierarchies continued in force through
similar mechanisms of social control. However, with the advent of chief-
doms the political ethos became hierarchical: the ascendancy of leaders
and their extended families was acknowledged and made morally legiti-
mate (Service 1975).
It is safe to say that with the advent of the Neolithic era, most foragers
became tribesmen. However, by no means did tribal societies always turn
into chiefdoms. Indeed, the bulk of ethnographic descriptions on record
today are of tribal societies whose egalitarianism extends back to the acqui-
sition of domestication, and farther back into the Paleolithic era.
Tribal Segmentation
Like wild chimpanzees (see Goodall 1986), mobile hunter-gatherers live in
groups that often tend to act in a proprietary way about the resources they
use (see Kelly 1995). Furthermore, both types of society seem to refrain
from all-out, intensive warfare, in which all the males of two groups are
willing to have it out and mutually inﬂict massive casualties (see Manson
and Wrangham 1991; Boehm 1992). Further, both foragers and chimpan-
zees fail to temporarily combine their territorial groups in order to defend
against or attack other such "confederations" (Boehm 1992).
The vast majority of tribesmen do engage in intergroup hostilities, but
these activities often defy precise description. They may be divided roughly
into feuding, raiding, and intensive warfare (Boehm 1986). Their feuding is
reminiscent of the revenge killings discussed for foragers, while their raid-
ing is reminiscent of chimpanzee actions on patrol, which can include
cooption of females from a neighboring group, killing its males one or two
at a time, or moving brieﬂy into enemy territory to utilize natural resources
(Goodall 1986).
Intensive warfare is the distinct province of tribesmen, and warlike tribes
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
91

also form coalitions to balance power. In this context Durkheim (1933)
coined the term "segmental societies." He took care to specify that each
segment was egalitarian internally and that the segments also were equal
politically. Thus, when two or more tribes came together for the purpose of
uniting against a common enemy, one member of the coalition could not
dominate another. In my terminology, each local group can be considered
a corporate "main political actor," one that gives up none of its essential
political autonomy by agreeing to a cooperative endeavor.
On the basis of Durkheim's principles, Evans-Pritchard (1940) and Bo-
hannan (1954) have characterized the Nuer and Tiv societies in Africa as
being "segmentary." Hart (1976) has described the Berbers of Morocco
similarly, and Sahlins (1968) has discussed political segmentation more
generally (see also Sahlins 1961). Segmentary tribal societies range from
those like the Yanomamo, in which alliances between small groups are
constantly shifting, to the Iroquois, whose stable confederation of half a
dozen large tribes endured for centuries.
Yanomamo Warriors
The Yanomamo of Ecuador and Brazil are a large group of tribes that until
recently retained full local autonomy. Some of them, living in a relatively
well-populated core area, engage in frequent warfare (Chagnon 1988). The
Yanomamo are shifting cultivators who like to hunt, and their lives are
ﬁrmly governed by political considerations. In fact, they are ethnographi-
cally famous for their so-called warfare. Still, like many tribal peoples they
do not go forth as communities of warriors and systematically meet similar
communities on battleﬁelds, to ﬁght on a numerically equal basis as West-
ern nations have done so often. Usually the Yanomamo merely go raiding
in small parties, with the aim of killing one or two enemies without suffer-
ing any casualties themselves. Less frequently, they go out in force, with the
men of one or more villages participating. The aggressors try to take enemy
villages by surprise—with intentions that are genocidal toward the males
and sometimes also the children (Biocca 1970). The women they prefer to
capture, rape, and take as wives (Chagnon 1983; Biocca 1970). This behav-
ior is readily classiﬁed as intensive warfare, for the attacks are made in force
and often the enemy try to defend themselves in force.
The Yanomamo do not permit any man to gain much political authority
in his "village," which translates as "sovereign political unit" or "tribe."
Thus they are egalitarian. An effective warrior may have enormous prestige
92
Hierarchy in the Forest

and may be chosen as chief of his village, but he cannot boss another man.
This is well illustrated by Chagnon (1983), who tells of one village that was
to host another for a feast. Its chief, to ensure that the central area was tidy,
went out and began to rake it himself. Others saw him and began to follow
his example, at which point he retired to let them ﬁnish the job. He was
obliged to lead by example.
Yanomamo villages typically comprise perhaps a hundred persons. Al-
though they can approach two hundred, they are prone to ﬁssion for two
reasons. One is that the Yanomamo are organized into patriclans, and
within a village these clans tend to compete; the other is that there is no
strong central authority ﬁgure to step in and stop ﬁghts that lead to homi-
cide. When a male of one clan kills a male of another clan in the same
village, by Yanomamo ideology vengeance is necessary. Rather than engage
in what might escalate to intensive bilateral attacks at close quarters, the
Yanomamo have enough sense to go their separate ways. They may try for
revenge later, when it will not be so costly to both sides.
The village headman walks a difﬁcult political line, for he wants to act in
the best interest of the village. He must resolve conﬂicts and thereby keep
the village large so that it can better resist its enemies, and also intimidate
those enemies so that they will not raid frequently. He cannot control the
serious, village-splitting conﬂicts—homicidal conﬂicts between men of dif-
ferent clans—because he operates in an egalitarian society that does not
allow him the requisite authority.
Male authority certainly is not absent in this society. The Yanomamo
beat their wives severely, particularly when they suspect them of adultery.
Any man has this prerogative, for the egalitarian rules do not pertain to
intrafamilial use of authority. On one occasion, though, when a man was
beating his wife so brutally that he was likely to kill her, a chief did inter-
vene physically (Chagnon 1983). This narrowly averted homicide would
have set two large clans against each other, so he probably averted ﬁssion of
the village by moving close to the line and exerting some authority coupled
with physical force. Had the individuals ﬁghting been two men, in all
likelihood he could not have acted so dominantly.
Like foragers, the Yanomamo have ingenious ways of heading off most
conﬂicts before they become homicidal. Forms of "dueling" include side
slapping, chest thumping, ﬁghting with poles or axes, and even the use of
certain types of arrows when hostilities begin to escalate seriously. When
their more lethal arrows are brought out, containment of conﬂict is no
longer on their minds. These social devices are largely effective, but when a
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
93

village becomes very large the potential for homicidal conﬂict increases
and the factionalized village eventually divides.
Each Yanomamo village has a few speciﬁc allies and enemies, but accord-
ing to Chagnon the overall political situation tends to be quite unstable.
A given village will have a number of former enemies or nonallies whom
it is trying to turn into allies; at the same time its allies today may become
its enemies tomorrow. For example, if a village ﬁssions because of a homi-
cide, the aggrieved clan—now on its own as a separate village that is
much smaller and therefore more vulnerable—is likely to seek alliance
with a former enemy. This union will help in raiding the clan that inﬂicted
the homicide, which itself is now a separate village, looking for its own
allies.
The immediacies of operating in such a system of politically ﬁckle units
generate certain strategies. Villages try to stay as large as possible; they
intimidate enemy villages as much as possible, so that their women will not
be raided; and they work constantly to gain more allies than enemies. The
political game can be nearly zero-sum, reproductively speaking, for a vul-
nerable village can be seriously decimated and driven from its site, after
which it will be dependent on allies who are sure to take away most of its
women.
With the sedentary Yanomamo, the consequences of intergroup hostility
go far beyond what is usual for foragers—unless they are sedentary. Seden-
tary foragers do seem to ﬁght (Kelly 1995), not only for revenge but about
natural resources. The Yanomamo do not ﬁght over land used for horticul-
ture, and Chagnon (1983) has rejected suggestions that they may ﬁght
over hunting territory. Apparently what they are ﬁghting about is women,
whom they make scarce by practicing preferential female infanticide, and
about revenge. This pattern of raiding, vengeance, and warfare eliminates
about a quarter of the adult males (Chagnon 1988), causes frequent trans-
fers of females from one group to another, and sometimes involves killing
the children of enemy groups. The endemic violence has many ramiﬁca-
tions, but essentially the Yanomamo remain just as egalitarian as nomadic
hunter-gatherers.
Some General Questions about Warfare
Keeley (1996) has taken a hard look at the prehistoric evidence for inten-
sive genocidal conﬂict of this type, which is not uncommon among tribal
94
Hierarchy in the Forest

people. The really ﬁrst solid evidence for extensive "massacres" comes with
the Neolithic era, after the advent of tribes and sedentary foragers on our
planet. Extant hunter-gatherer nomads show no very noteworthy tendency
to exterminate competing groups, even though they may engage in strings
of revenge killings. Such strings sometimes mount up statistically (Lee
1979), and do so in ways that tend to be archaeologically unobvious, so
Keeley's negative assessment is far from conclusive (see also Daly and Wil-
son 1988). I believe that Service (1971) was correct in saying that hunter-
gatherers formerly expressed their intergroup hostility more freely. It is
plausible that during the Paleolithic era their conﬂicts periodically were
intensiﬁed when they became crowded and contested prime natural re-
sources or they were dislocated due to climatic changes discussed by Potts
(1996). Elsewhere (Boehm 1999b) I have discussed this problem at length.
But to date no archaeological sites before the Neolithic have been located,
at which ﬁrm evidence of large massacres can be found.
We can be far more deﬁnitive in evaluating the long-isolated sedentary
horticulturalist tribesmen of Highland New Guinea. This vast area was
opened to civilization only recently, and some of its tribes were studied
while traditional warfare was continuing or in the process of being sup-
pressed. Thus, informants were well aware of the overall pattern and many
pristine patterns of conﬂict were well recorded (as in Meggitt 1977). Soltis,
Boyd, and Richerson (1995) surveyed the reports and found rather high
rates of group extinction among these New Guinea tribesmen. Keeley's
(1996) ﬁndings suggest that, prehistorically, many tribesmen were compa-
rably warlike.
The transition to "warrior societies" raises a cogent question with re-
spect to egalitarianism. Hunter-gatherer egalitarianism involves extensive
and efﬁcient suppression of competition among males in general, particu-
larly in their role as successful hunters. At the same time, effective hunters
are richly rewarded by favorable social standing, for the group praises those
who provide it with fresh meat, and there may be other rewards as well (see
Kaplan and Hill 1985). A typical warfare society has to stimulate male
competition still more strongly, for warfare is far more dangerous than
hunting. From childhood a tribe socializes its males to go out and ﬁght for
the group, it gives them accolades as adults for performing well on the
battleﬁeld, and it tends to accept the fact that heroes will engage in some
disruptive status rivalry at home. People know that warriors are motivated
to take risks because they have learned to prize their personal honor, and
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
95

men who are concerned about honor readily come to blows with their
fellows (see Peristiany 1966). Egalitarian tribesmen stimulate male compe-
tition more than foragers do, which exacerbates problems of keeping all the
main political actors at parity.
How does egalitarianism hold out against such forces for competition
and domination? The answer seems to be, quite nicely—but not without
conﬂict. Brave warriors are likely to exchange insults that mutually impugn
honor, and they get into misunderstandings about women (Boehm 1986).
The cost of this system is that warriors are prone to homicide. But as Fried
(1967) pointed out, the status game within a tribe is not zero-sum. The
tribe has room for as many heroes as can perform heroically, and the more
the better. Furthermore, tribesmen have developed a special way of dealing
with internecine homicides.
The human tendency to lethal retaliation appears to be powerful. Even
among foragers who preach in favor of peace and engage in little warfare or
raiding, men are prone to retaliate lethally against killers of their relatives.
Such feuding is not elaborate, for often a single revenge killing is enough to
resolve the conﬂict. By contrast, tribal warriors with their heightened sense
of honor often feel they must strike back again after the ﬁrst revenge killing
(Thoden van Velzen and van Wetering 1960). Many tribal societies have
strict rules about feuding, which permit two clans within the same tribe to
enter into a protracted homicidal conﬂict without having to engage in
intensive warfare (Boehm 1986). There are likely to be rules that dictate
only one killing at a time; often there are rules that exempt women from
feuds; frequently there are rules for creating truces (so that the two clans
can ﬁght together if their tribe is attacked from outside). There also are
highly predictable rules for eventually settling feuds through material and
psychological compensation.
Tribal patterns of blood revenge are variable. Some tribes, such as the
Yanomamo, are extremely prone to vengeance after a homicide against a
kinsman (see Chagnon 1988)—yet they have not arrived at the highly
systematic rules for feuding and paciﬁcation that many other tribesmen
exhibit. That is why Yanomamo villages remain small, whereas in rule-
bound feuding societies the tribal units can grow larger (Evans-Pritchard
1940; Bohannan 1954; Boehm 1986) because they are able to exchange
homicides internally without having to ﬁssion.
In either case, egalitarianism ﬂourishes at the expense of authoritative
96
Hierarchy in the Forest

centralized control. The Yanomamo have no leaders with real authority,
and the same is true of tribal societies that feud according to well-deﬁned
rules. The latter may have panels of elders who attempt to resolve feuds
(Boehm 1986), but any such resolution is totally voluntary for the parties
concerned. There is no centralized coercive power to stop internecine con-
ﬂict, just as there is no centralized power to make decisions of war or peace.
With no one really in charge, an entire tribe makes its decisions by
consensus (Boehm 1996). Meggitt (1977) has given an excellent descrip-
tion of how tribesmen make such decisions before they go to war (see also
Sackschewsky et al. 1970). The Mae Enga of Highland New Guinea meet
and discuss their military options at length, with every man having a voice
if he wishes to contribute to the discussion. Meanwhile, the leaders who
preside over such meetings keep a low proﬁle. As group opinion sorts itself
out, the leaders can see where the consensus is heading, or if agreement is
likely. Only then will they exert the limited inﬂuence they are allowed and
try to catalyze the consensus. The process is time-consuming, but if a
consensus is reached, the group is primed to cooperate.
Because of its commitment to egalitarianism and consensus-seeking, any
tribe that engages in intensive warfare has a predictable problem on the
battleﬁeld. There decisive leadership by the most sagacious warrior would
be useful, for in the thick of combat it is difﬁcult for the entire group to talk
over its next move. When two or more tribal segments temporarily merge
to ﬁght a common enemy, the need for centralized authority becomes
greater still.
One might think that the consensus-seeking process that works effec-
tively for smaller tribal segments would prove unwieldy as the number of
warriors grew. However, the basic military strategies are readily determined
prior to the battle by having the allied tribal segments meet as one big tribe
(Boehm 1983). The fact that all the warriors come to a common strategic
agreement in advance helps to guarantee their collaboration in battle, and
makes it easier for a "supreme chieftain" with limited authority to coordi-
nate their efforts.
We have little knowledge of exactly how early tribal societies formed
the chiefdoms that sometimes became pristine civilizations (Service 1975;
Earle 1991). However, the Serbs of Montenegro do provide a well-docu-
mented historical example of secondary state formation (Djilas 1966), in-
cluding the transition from tribal confederation to chiefdom to kingdom.
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
97

Tribes that form political coalitions vary greatly in the degree and con-
stancy with which they combine to form larger segments. We have seen
that the Yanomamo form coalitions that are relatively ephemeral and sub-
ject to change, as they engage in internecine combat without having to deal
with external threats or opportunities. The Nuer (Evans-Pritchard 1940;
Kelly 1985) organize themselves to raid their neighbors the Dinka, and
succeed quite effectively by means of gradual conquest. Even though they
put thousands of warriors into the ﬁeld, the Nuer have nothing that resem-
bles permanent leadership at the level of larger political segments, and they
feud among themselves when they are not engaged in warfare with the
Dinka. The Nuer are adept at confederating ephemerally; but when their
war is over, whatever system of "command and control" they have devel-
oped for that purpose disappears until the advent of the next war. They do
not form anything resembling a permanent confederation.
Several "tribal republics" in North America (Moore 1992) did set up
permanent governments that remained egalitarian in spite of having cen-
tralized functions and even, in some cases, specialized "policemen." How-
ever, the ultimate in stable segmentary systems was the Iroquois Confed-
eration (Morgan 1877), which developed democratic types of checks and
balances and a rather elaborate governmental structure (see also Weather-
ford 1988). It accomplished this without ever relinquishing the egalitarian
ethos, and without allowing individuals to assume any great degree of
authority. The Iroquois constituted a tribal nation that endured for centu-
ries without being racked by internecine feuding, and because it was politi-
cally so well uniﬁed it could expand its territory at the expense of its
neighbors. Lying somewhere between the Nuer and the Iroquois were the
eighteenth-century tribal Serbs, with whose descendants I lived in southern
Herzegovina.
A Serbian Tribal Confederation
In the seventeenth century, a dozen or so egalitarian Serbian tribes in
Christian Montenegro were able to create large, effective armies numbering
in the thousands to resist external domination by a powerful civilized
Islamic empire (Boehm 1983). These Serbs had a geographic fortress to
help them, and they were adept in ﬁghting individualistically as guerrillas;
at the same time, they were able to coordinate their movements effectively
to compensate for severe numerical disadvantage. Against Ottoman armies
98
Hierarchy in the Forest

sent to pacify, tax, and sometimes annihilate them, they seem to have won
more often than they lost.
By the early eighteenth century, Montenegrin Serbs were able to put as
many as eight thousand warriors in the ﬁeld (Boehm 1983). However, their
unity was always fragile, for internal clan feuds could divide tribes, as could
feuds between tribes, which often numbered several thousand people or
more. Sometimes the feuding was so ruinous that only a few of the tribes
were in a position to collaborate. In such cases the Montenegrins had to
pay heavy tribute—but were able to keep their arms and their local politi-
cal autonomy because the Ottomans knew that any attempt to remove
them would quickly reunify the tribal system.
Unlike the Nuer and the Iroquois, who used warfare to defend and
expand their territory, the Montenegrins used warfare to avoid being in-
corporated into an Islamic empire that levied heavy taxes and controlled
people's lives in many other ways. In their remote and rugged mountains,
these Serbian tribes had initially remained passive after the Ottoman con-
quest of the Balkans in the 1500s. But by the seventeenth century the tribes
were beginning to combine forces under the leadership of their vladika, or
Orthodox bishop. Words can be confusing. These "bishops" were leading
warriors and were popularly elected. As warriors they headed the confed-
eration's army, while as ecclesiastics they worked tirelessly to pacify feuds.
Their goal was to keep the confederation of Christian tribes politically
viable, tribute free, and poised to create a wider Christian rebellion.
During this period the Montenegrins chose each vladika from a different
tribe, which guaranteed that no tribe would be in a position to establish
hegemony over the others. Election decisions were made by a central as-
sembly of all the tribesmen, which was called the opsti zbor—or "debate-
meeting of all the tribesmen." There they replicated the tribal consensus
process on a much larger scale. The zbor made decisions of war and peace
and speciﬁed military strategies before a battle. The vladika was merely
another main political actor at these decision meetings, although as a man
of God and a leader of men his social status was exceptional.
These canny egalitarians were wise to choose their leaders from different
tribes. At the turn of the eighteenth century, Vladika Danilo PetroviÇ led
the tribal army to signal victories in which many "Turkish" heads were
taken, and this very popular war leader was allowed to name his successor.
The leadership role suddenly became hereditary, and a chiefdom began to
replace the tribal republic. This was the case even though the egalitarian
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
99

ethos continued in force, and the opsti zbor continued to make the sig-
niﬁcant decisions. Eventually a draconic, well-centralized state was formed,
but the process took fully a century and a half. It was heavily inﬂuenced
by Russian foreign aid, which enabled Montenegro's last vladika to have
in his pay a corps of bodyguards. This retinue gave him some limited
coercive power, as he worked tirelessly to subvert the tribal egalitarian
tradition.
Egalitarian society does not easily coexist with hereditary leadership,
which concentrates political power in one family or clan and tends to
elevate that clan's social status in ways that egalitarians are not likely to
tolerate. Eventually, and particularly after 1830, the tribesmen themselves
became divided about what kind of political order they wanted (Djilas
1966). Some agreed with the claims of their ﬁnal vladika, that he should
have the power to tax and to punish "murderers"—men who enacted the
politically disruptive blood revenge killings that by tribal tradition were
honorable, right, and morally necessary. Others considered him to be
merely their equal, in spite of the small palace he had built himself with
Russian gold. They were proud of him, as New Guinea tribesman are
proud of their "Big Men," but they were not willing to be ruled. In the
1840s Bishop Rade PetroviÇ began to pay salaries to the tribal leaders; as a
result, the opsti zbor met less frequently. In the ﬁnal analysis, however, this
extremely inﬂuential bishop was unable to break the backbone of the tribal
system, with its commitment to local autonomy of tribes and personal
autonomy of warriors. Most still refused to pay his taxes.
In 1849, after a century and a half of PetroviÇ bishops, the egalitarian
tribes remained intransigent. In spite of his bodyguard, and in spite of his
practice of secret assassinations of those who opposed him, Bishop Rade
remained a respected and increasingly feared "chief"—but not really a
ruler. Attempts at taxation, which would have allowed him the coercive
force he needed in order to really rule, led to stubborn tax revolts. A poet
whose works were widely translated, this last military bishop inspired his
fellow tribesmen to revile their Muslim oppressors and resist political
domination, but he could not inspire the majority to give up their egalitar-
ian ways and become a nation with centralized authority (Djilas 1966).
Danilo PetroviÇ, Bishop Rade's nephew and successor, was a ruthless,
domination-prone individual. Intent on uniting the Montenegrins perma-
nently and suppressing the divisive tendencies to feud, he asked the opsti
zbor if he could be a secular leader because he wished to marry the daugh-
100
Hierarchy in the Forest

ter of a Venetian merchant. His request was granted, and within a year
"Duke" Danilo had broken the backbone of a still highly recalcitrant tribal
system. He accomplished this feat by getting several loyal tribes to serve as
his army, and by putting down a tax rebellion in the large and intransigent
Kuïi tribe. More than two hundred human heads were cut in a single day,
and from that time forward the dozen or so tribes of Old Montenegro
accepted centralized authority. A tiny despotic "tribal nation" came into
being almost overnight.
The principality (and later kingdom) of Montenegro deserves brief fur-
ther mention because of its place in history. The greater political unity that
was now possible led to the permanent incorporation of seven large Herze-
govinian tribes (including the one I studied) and resulted in more decisive
military aggression against the Ottomans. In 1875 Montenegro doubled its
territory. Then, as the Ottoman empire weakened, in 1911 Danilo's succes-
sor, King Nikola PetroviÇ, attacked Turkish Albania. This was the First
Balkan War, which led directly to several other wars and then to the assas-
sination at Sarajevo that started World War I.
The Montenegrins' situation relative to the Ottoman empire was un-
usual, insofar as most tribal peoples who meet with empires become subju-
gated and lose the local autonomy that enables them to carry on an egali-
tarian way of life. There have been a few other noteworthy "tribal
holdouts" of this type (Boehm 1983, 1984b), such as the Apache Indians of
the American Southwest and the Kurds, who as I write continue to cause
serious problems for at least two civilized nations. Surely the Afghanis have
been the most signiﬁcant segmentary society in modern world history, for
they helped to bring down the Soviet empire.
Basically, the tribal era of world political history is over. The great major-
ity of egalitarian foragers and tribesmen who survived into the twentieth
century have lost their local autonomy, one way or another. Yet a troubled
planet may hear again from its few remaining tribal refuges.
How Tribes Remain Egalitarian
I mentioned earlier that only a few of the ethnographers who study tribes
have directly addressed political egalitarianism as a research topic. I shall
showcase two of these treatments, as a way of determining whether tribal
egalitarianism should be considered different from the much-discussed
egalitarianism of hunter-gatherers.
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
101

Wape Egalitarianism in the Face of Cultural Contact
In assessing leveling mechanisms among the acculturating Wape of New
Guinea, Mitchell (1978:5-6) says:
Many egalitarian societies have been reported in Melanesia, but so thor-
oughgoing is the absence of theoretical interest in them that they are
rarely identiﬁed in general discussions of socio-political organization . . .
or even in similar discussions limited to Melanesia.
. . . The prototypical egalitarian society now established in the ethno-
logical literature is the nomadic hunting and gathering society. Egalitar-
ian horticultural societies are generally ignored.
Mitchell deﬁnes egalitarianism as involving status equivalency among the
decision-makers of a group, a deﬁnition that agrees with mine. He asserts
that in the western section of the Sepik River Basin are some extremely
egalitarian groups, including the Wape, who are sedentary horticulturists.
In the 1920s the isolated Wape came into contact with modern Australian
culture when they began to work as migrants far from home. The ﬁrst
missions were established later, in 1947.
The Wape have weak leaders and use consensus to reach group deci-
sions, just as nomadic foragers do. Precontact leveling mechanisms dis-
cerned by Mitchell include bridewealth donations that constantly redis-
tributed wealth, and curing festival exchanges organized so as to promote
male equality. The traditional exchange system was based on an egalitarian
ethos, so in the absence of Big Men the political picture is very similar to
that established for nomadic foragers. The egalitarian ethos serves as a
focus for antiauthoritarian feelings, which coalesce at the group level and
favor customs that level material differences—economic differences which
if not leveled might stimulate individuals to engage in political self-aggran-
dizement or become overbearing.
Mitchell documents what happened when men began to migrate as
laborers and accumulate individual wealth—an obvious threat to such a
system. The Wape, ﬁrmly retaining their egalitarian ethos, began to develop
new leveling mechanisms. One was the giving of gifts, which quickly
tended to redistribute the new wealth among a man's relatives. A more
general leveling mechanism was gambling—a true innovation, and a very
effective leveling mechanism which, as the Wape use it, tends to redistrib-
ute wealth randomly. In theory, gambling offers the possibility of big win-
102
Hierarchy in the Forest

ners, but Mitchell (1978:12) says that among the Wape "a man will not
tolerate a situation where a neighbor has more than he has. A man should
not possess either goods or power to the disadvantage of others." The Wape
regulate gambling by their own special rules: a big winner cannot leave a
satu (dice) game until it is over. He also is expected to play at the next
game. Basically, no one can quit a winner. It is the egalitarian ethos that
keeps this rule in place, and inspires the social pressure that enforces it.
Even though Wape migrants cope with hierarchical societies, at home
their egalitarianism continues strongly. One man became an accomplished
trader with outsiders and individualistically kept most of his wealth. This
trait stirred public resentment and eventually caused his removal from the
elective ofﬁce he held. In actuality, his behavior was similar to that of
culturally legitimated Big Men in many other New Guinea societies, which
manage to retain an egalitarian ethos but accept large status differences
because the trading achievements of certain individuals reﬂect favorably on
the entire group (Godelier 1986). The Wape, who never developed such a
system, were quick to cut down this particular upstart.
In the Wape we see an egalitarian society that is resisting, rather than
adapting to, an external hierarchical society with which it has considerable
contact. Mitchell (1978) tells of the impact of this egalitarian ideology and
lifestyle on his own work as ethnographer. The "rich anthropologist" ran
into difﬁculty hiring Wape people to take care of his house and run er-
rands, for the community insisted that every job be done in constant
rotation—rather than letting one person ﬁll the position and learn to do
the job well. This system was perfectly consistent with their careful regula-
tion of social and economic rewards, which was geared to suppress per-
sonal ascendancy.
It is interesting that, when Mitchell wishes to indicate how strongly
egalitarian the Wape are, he compares them not with other tribesmen but
with foragers living in nomadic bands. It is safe to say that forager egalitari-
anism has become a theoretical topic unto itself; for this reason, nomadic
bands provide a "gold standard" for judging the degree of egalitarianism in
other types of society.
Schneider's Theory of Pastoralist Egalitarianism
Schneider's (1979) explanation of egalitarianism among a large number of
East African groups pertains to pastoralist tribes whose behavior is unlikely
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
103

to have changed with recent culture contact—but whose egalitarianism
may have been intensiﬁed by the presence of hierarchical societies nearby
in the form of chiefdoms or kingdoms. Like Mitchell, Schneider is much
interested in the predictably egalitarian way of life of these pastoral no-
mads, who inhabit a very large area. He seeks to explain why they remained
egalitarian while engaged in such contact, and devotes an entire book to the
question of pastoralist leveling mechanisms.
Looking at East Africa as a whole, the economic anthropologist
Schneider (1979:209) sees a general correlation between political egalitari-
anism and dependence on cattle for subsistence. The "leveling mechanism"
he favors is ecologically based: it is the inherent instability of cattle herds.
For this reason, while Big Men with some political inﬂuence may arise,
none can establish himself as a hereditary chief. Power derives from the
number of cattle owned, not from birth position, and the number of cattle
ﬂuctuates radically. Today's Big Man may be tomorrow's poor man.
To tie his analysis to a theoretical model, Schneider turns to the econo-
mist Milton Friedman, who posits that where the distribution of wealth is
dynamically variable over time, structural inequalities have more trouble
establishing themselves than where the distribution is ﬁxed over time
(Schneider 1979:228). In applying this theory to East Africa, Schneider
ﬁnds that whereas pastoral nomads experience radical changes of herd size
owing to natural exigencies (including disease and localized drought), in
areas favorable to agriculture, socially stratiﬁed, strongly led chiefdoms
predictably arise because land ownership stabilizes material differences
among households. He suggests in effect that it is more difﬁcult to central-
ize cows than agriculture, and that a poor pastoralist has enough economic
opportunities that he need not submit to a rich man.
Whereas Mitchell portrays the social and political equalization that pre-
vailed among the Wape as resulting from vigilant application of the egali-
tarian ethos, Schneider's basic position is reminiscent of the various envi-
ronmental-ecological arguments used earlier to explain hunter-gatherer
egalitarianism: in effect, leveling is effected by natural conditions of subsis-
tence. The focus is on economics, but politics are not ignored. Schneider
points out that an egalitarian ethos does help to limit the amount of
hegemony a Big Man can establish—even if economics are on his side. He
also comes very close to dealing directly with human nature. Discussing
differences between hereditary, nonegalitarian chiefdoms and egalitarian
societies that tolerate big men, Schneider says (1979:210): "All men seek to
104
Hierarchy in the Forest

rule, but if they cannot rule they prefer to be equal. Those [big men] who
have wealth are unable to institutionalize it and legitimize their attempts to
control others, any attempts to do so resulting in scornful and sometimes
violent reaction by others against whom the wealthy are unable to retaliate
sufﬁciently to establish authority."
What I take to be the human-nature side of the picture is spelled out
nicely, if somewhat by implication. Even though individuals may be at-
tracted personally to a dominant role, they make a common pact which
says that each main political actor will give up his modest chances of
becoming alpha in order to be certain that no one will ever be alpha over
him. To repeat Schneider's words, "All men seek to rule, but if they cannot
rule they prefer to be equal." This adage parsimoniously explains the politi-
cal attitude that keeps an egalitarian ethos in place, be it forager or tribal.
Schneider devotes an entire chapter to "The Causes of Egalitarianism"
and, like Mitchell, feels he must justify singling out this topic. He points
out that while concern over hierarchy and egalitarianism is pervasive in the
social sciences, the focus usually is on explaining the origins of extremely
hierarchical states—whereas "egalitarian systems have been considered to
be somewhat primitive, an early, inferior condition of human develop-
ment" (Schneider 1979:212).
Schneider follows others who have tried to explain egalitarianism pri-
marily through environmental variables, and like many of them is well
aware of the egalitarian ethos and the social force it generates through
sanctioning. Identifying a negative attitude toward authority in East Afri-
can stateless societies, he brings in the noteworthy individualism of the
Masai and the Nuer, and extends this characterization to the entire Nilotic
pastoral area, quoting Butt (1952:41):
All who have come into contact with the Nilotes have remarked on the
proud, individualistic and truculent behavior which they display towards
each other and particularly towards foreigners. They consider their coun-
try the best in the world and everyone inferior to themselves. For this
reason they despise clothing, scorn European and Arab cultures, and are
contemptuous and reserved with foreigners, so that it is difﬁcult to get to
know them. Their attitude towards any authority that would coerce them
is one of touchiness, pride, and reckless disobedience. Each determines to
go his own way as much as possible, has a hatred of submission, and is
ready to defend himself and his property from the inroads of others.
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
105

They are thus self-reliant, brave ﬁghters, turbulent and aggressive, and are
extremely conservative in their aversion to innovation and interference.
This political portrait of northeastern African pastoralists jibes with
descriptions of tribal warrior societies elsewhere, including the Yanomamo
and the traditional Montenegrin Serbs. Even as an egalitarian ethos keys
such men to insist on equality within the group, it apparently also makes
them insist on equality when they are dealing with outsiders. Indeed, the
existence of hierarchical indigenous chiefdoms and kingdoms nearby,
combined with knowledge of Arab civilization and its trading empire, may
well have reinforced the very different model of political life held by these
pastoralists.
Schneider's analysis is logical and in accordance with the facts. But like
the students of forager egalitarianism surveyed in Chapter 3, basically he
focuses on a single ecologically based leveling mechanism to explain his
particular egalitarian society. He does so even though he fully recognizes
the existence of the egalitarian ethos and the immediate effects of egalitar-
ian sanctioning. At the level of ultimate causality, his economic-ecological
model is fairly persuasive.
Problems arise, however, with attempts to generalize the model. For
example, one must ask immediately why it is that so many other pastoral
nomads, whose cattle also are susceptible to disease and drought, are hier-
archical rather than egalitarian (see L'Equipe écologie 1979). I suggest that
the answer lies in political dynamics—even though environmental causa-
tion and ecology obviously play their part.
The Tribal Ethos
If we turn from single societies to tribesmen in general to examine avail-
able descriptions of the egalitarian ethos, a pattern becomes discernible.
We have explored the ideology of East African pastoralists, and I shall
continue with Africa (both pastoralists and horticulturalists) before turn-
ing to other continents. As with hunter-gatherers, I shall highlight refer-
ences to generosity.
Wagner (1940:230-236) examines the Kiavirondo Bantu speakers, who
have a weakly developed political authority, and he identiﬁes routes to
individual prominence that are useful in gaining leadership: one must have
means sufﬁcient to show warm hospitality, one must be proﬁcient at the
106
Hierarchy in the Forest

verbal skills needed to mediate disputes, one must have a solid warrior
reputation, and one must be possessed of moral virtues. According to
Wagner (1940:233-234), "He must be known for his kindness and honesty;
he must be past the age of sexual desire, and he must be someone 'who can
feed the people'; in short he must be a person . . . without any failures and
blemishes in the record of his past and present life" (italics added). He also
must be of mature age, which is accompanied by wisdom, gentleness, and
freedom from greed and jealousy, and also by a certain supernatural power
(through curses) that adds to his authority.
Such attributes made a person a leading elder, but this role also had
aspects pertaining to the life cycle. A man who was a leader in war while
young became a dispute mediator and performer of ritual sacriﬁces with
age; there was no institutionalized role of chieftain. Speciﬁcally egalitarian
are the themes of kindness, gentleness, and in particular generosity, com-
bined with freedom from greed and jealousy. These characteristics amount
to a lack of competitive aggressiveness, and a thematic similarity with
foragers is obvious.
In Zambia, Tuden (1966:276) reports that Ila leaders live in unassuming
social surroundings and that they must be generous in dispensing property,
skilled at mediation, and—again—lacking in jealousy and envy. As did
foragers, the group uses a consensus approach to making decisions and
settling conﬂicts, and the leader is far more a respected facilitator than an
authority ﬁgure. Similarly, Turner (1957:200) says of the Ndembu that to
become a headman one must show some aggressiveness in the form of
ambition, but it must be balanced by tact, generosity, and ability to serve as
a mediator of conﬂicts: basically, a headman should keep his behavior low
in proﬁle yet be ﬁrm as well, and be very ready to share his material posses-
sions.
To return to northeast Africa, Lewis (1961:205) refers to the Somali
pastoralist "sultans" as primus inter pares types of leaders, and points to
their vital function in mediating between rival lineages of their large clans.
He quotes a Somali adage: "Three things bring the downfall of Sultans;
biased judgment (in the settlement of disputes), dry-handedness (mean-
ness), and indecision." Meanness would seem to be associated with aggres-
siveness, which always is ruled out by egalitarians. Of course, biased judg-
ment and excess indecisiveness are qualities disliked in leaders universally,
including in hierarchical societies.
If we stop to consider this small but representative sampling from Africa,
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
107

it is apparent that the forager ethos has not changed a great deal in adapt-
ing to domestication and larger group size, along with (often) a clan-based
social structure and intensive warfare. Generosity and lack of envy are still
held up as attributes that contrast with aggressive status rivalry, while
personal equanimity and ability to work with people are present as well. In
cultures that practice raiding or warfare, the ability to lead military expedi-
tions is valued. Emphasized far more, however, is the ability to mediate
disputes. This preference may exist because domestication brings with it a
stronger connection to speciﬁc pieces of real estate, and therefore greater
dislocation if a dispute causes a group to ﬁssion. At the same time, dispute
resolution keeps local units larger, which is useful where a warfare pattern
prevails.
For Aboriginal North and South America, Lowie (1973) surveyed pat-
terns of leadership and found strong centralized authority to be rare (see
also Clastres 1977). Among the few foragers he found chieftainship, if
present, to be merely titular, and the same is true of many agricultural
groups: chiefs are without authority or power, but they do have meaning-
ful functions in dispute management or leadership in war. In Lowie's
(1949:286) words, "The typical American chief may enjoy social standing,
but he lacks sovereignty."
Lowie emphasizes that men whose aggressions are stirred by participa-
tion in warfare sometimes are deliberately avoided as chiefs, whereas if a
chief is allowed to fulﬁll both functions, his battleﬁeld authority disappears
immediately at home. Lowie points out that even the aforementioned Iro-
quois Confederation, which involved a long-lasting set of alliances among
half a dozen very large tribes and created special needs for centralized
governance, limited the powers of its supreme chiefs to a strictly nondicta-
torial role.
The typical egalitarian ethos for these tribes is implicit in the following
description, and the generosity theme continues:
Besides being a skillful peacemaker, the ideal chief was a paragon of
muniﬁcence. This may hold more often in North than in South America,
but . . . a Nambikuara headman constantly shares with his tribesmen
whatever surplus of goods he may have acquired: "Generosity is the
quality . . . which is expected of a new chief" . . . A third attribute of civil
leadership is the gift of oratory, normally to be exercised on behalf of
tribal harmony and the good old traditional ways. (Lowie 1973:287-288)
108
Hierarchy in the Forest

Lowie also mentions a limited authority role among the Apinaye of
South America, who appoint ofﬁcials to retaliate forcibly where people
break rules pertaining to harvesting. He points out that as mounted hunt-
ers, certain Plains Indians have "policemen," who use strong physical sanc-
tions to ensure that the entire group does not suffer from individualistic
hunting practices (see also Hoebel 1954). This egalitarian type of policing
developed too among certain woodland foragers, to prevent overhasty
gathering of vegetable foods.
As with warfare, a group activity critical to group interests here is being
regulated by means of strong authority, yet the chosen ofﬁcials are allowed
no other special powers. Egalitarians understand very well that it is human
to aggrandize authority, and that if power is delegated it must be carefully
circumscribed. In North America one of the most interesting leveling
mechanisms is the splitting of leadership functions between war chiefs and
peace chiefs (see Lowie 1973). Although it is difﬁcult to demonstrate that
this division of labor was a deliberate invention intended to accomplish
leveling, given the egalitarian penchant for creating detailed political blue-
prints this goal seems quite likely. The effect was to keep men given tempo-
ral authority on the battleﬁeld from extending such dominance to other
areas.
In this context, let us return to the Yanomamo. Chagnon (1983:136-
137) gives us a nice political portrait of Kaobawa, leader of a Yanomamo
village in Ecuador, whose behavior makes the ethos apparent. He is "unob-
trusive, calm, modest, and perceptive," and as headman he sometimes is
expected (on a temporary, situation-speciﬁc basis) to exert a certain au-
thority—as exempliﬁed by his intervening physically when wife-beating
was carried too far, or by his unforcibly manipulating a men's club-ﬁght so
that it did not escalate. We have seen that if he wishes to guide an activity,
he simply sets an example—which his people follow if (and only if) it
pleases them. Kaobawa's generosity is, typically, material (see Chagnon
1983:70). It also can be counted in terms of risk: it is he who does the
dangerous reconnoitering around the village if the presence of raiders is
suspected.
If we move to the Busama of New Guinea, Hogbin believes that men are
actually reluctant to step into a leadership role. The same is widely reported
for other culture areas. As inferred from the ethos, such reluctance is itself
a desirable trait: egalitarians are innately suspicious of power-hungry indi-
viduals. A respected Busama chief should also be generous and have an even
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
109

disposition and pleasant manners; men whose moods are unpredictable or
who ﬂy into rages should not be given such authority. According to Hogbin
(1951:153-154), "What is wanted is amiability—deference for elders, jovi-
ality for contemporaries, and ﬁrmness tempered with consideration for
juniors." He continues, "To these qualiﬁcations I would add courage, self-
assurance, organizing ability, tact in personal relations, a fair degree of
eloquence in public speaking, and perhaps a disinclination to commit
breaches of the moral code."
Hogbin (1951:145) tells of two headmen who behaved differently:
One or two . . . are said to have become ﬁlled with their own importance
and behaved as though they were masters of their people. Yomsa', for
example, committed adultery a number of times, was always demanding
pigs, and carried out sorcery against all who opposed him. A conspiracy
was ultimately formed against leaders of this sort, and they were re-
moved. The story goes that the family of Yomsa' enticed him to a lonely
part of the beach and there stabbed him in the throat. With such close
kinsmen involved, reprisals were out of the question, and the man who
had actually handled the knife lived in honour for many years. Matap, a
headman from Lae, was put out of the way in similar fashion, though this
time the whole village took part.
Tribesmen, like foragers, have to be careful about revenge killing when
they decide to eliminate an upstart. The man's own relative can do him in,
or the entire community can actively participate. In either case it is impos-
sible to target an individual for revenge.
We shall deal with the question of sanctions shortly, but with respect to
the ethos, the "higher crimes and misdemeanors" of Hogbin's upstart in-
clude competing with other men for their women's sexual favors, being
greedy rather than generous, and engaging in rivalrous behavior through
supernatural power. Whether an individual or the group accomplishes the
assassinations, the moral community unambiguously is of one opinion
with respect to cutting down arrogance that deﬁes the ethos.
To return to the Wape, Mitchell does not provide a succinct summary of
the ethos, but he does quote a Wape intellectual, a university student, who
says: "Everyone is on equal terms with each other. The idea of giving things
away freely to relatives and friends is to win a place in the society. Not
necessarily an important or prestigious place, but just to ﬁt in with every-
110
Hierarchy in the Forest

body else. It is just a general attitude seen here, where what is done by
everybody is good for everybody" (Mitchell 1978:15).
Read, who studied the Gahuku-Gama, outlines a range of male person-
alities. There is the very weak man, who is unwarlike and prefers the
company of women. Then there is the strongly assertive and aggressive
warrior who is quick to take offense, slow to defer to others, and likely to
act precipitately. The latter "expects obedience, is motivated by a desire to
dominate and cannot abide opposition. He is an individual who easily feels
threatened by the quality of 'strength' in others. Such a man may be ad-
mired for his abilities. He will 'earn a name,' even attract adherents; but he
is unlikely to achieve generalized authority or lasting inﬂuence" (Read
1959:430).
Read goes on to say that the man who achieves lasting inﬂuence is not
someone whose positive aggression stems from an inner compulsion, but
one who is sensitive about the issue of parity: people want the right kind of
strong man to lead them. In an interesting point with respect to qualities of
manly aggressiveness and leadership potential, Read says that groups are
delighted to have the aggressive man as a warrior, for he ﬁghts well and
commands well in battle. However:
the precipitate, compulsive individual may be a constant source of irrita-
tion or disruption in his own group, where the use of force or the threat
to use force is proscribed under the ideal of group consensus. In other
words, it seems that the character structure of the really "big" or "strong"
man is not ﬁtted for the subtleties of generalized authority. Among other
things, successful leadership requires a ﬁne feeling for the opinions of
others. I think we might also say that it necessitates some detachment, the
ability to see many different points of view at the same time, or, if you
like, a breadth of vision and a degree of self-control. (Read 1959:435)
This is an unusually nuanced explication of an egalitarian ethos as it gov-
erns leadership qualities.
Also in the New Guinea highlands, Pospisil (1963) studied the Kapauku
and noted that other Europeans claim that such tribesmen have no lead-
ers—only a tonowi (rich one) who is a primus inter pares. Pospisil suggests
that Westerners perceive leadership as involving compulsion, and formality
in announcing policy, but that the Kapauku have a different arrangement.
As with many foragers and most tribesmen, within the family or extended
family certain individuals are vested with formal authority—these tend to
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
111

be dominant males in the role of father or husband. Larger groups have
only a tonowi as a kind of informal authority. Such a person is distin-
guished by characteristics deﬁned in the ethos: wealth, generosity, elo-
quence and verbal courage, physical ﬁtness, bravery in war, and shaman-
ism. Only the ﬁrst three are basic and indispensable, and men possessing
these traits are not born into their positions. They gain them by being
successful pig breeders and traders; but wealth in itself is not enough.
Indeed, the Kapauku reprimand and ostracize wealthy men who show
failings in the area of generosity, and are known to execute them. Such
executions are not individual acts of jealous rivals, but capital punishment
decided by the entire group—with members of the individual's own clan
or family participating. If two or three men in the same group achieve the
appropriate status, the group can have multiple headmen. This concept ﬁts
perfectly with Fried's (1967) description of an egalitarian state of affairs:
status rivalry does not result in a zero-sum game.
As with foragers, and in spite of ethnographic reporting that lacks stand-
ardization, the egalitarian ethos seems to be quite similar when sampled on
four different continents that have numerous tribal societies. Because these
people are a mix of a few pastoralists and many farmers, in most cases
Schneider's economic hypothesis does not apply. Generosity continues to
be crucial as a trait that keeps the leader in a position of helping others and
at the same time levels the distribution of material items. Implicit is an
indigenous recognition that control of economic resources can lead to
political as well as material self-aggrandizement. We can see a similarity to
hunter-gatherers, and tribesmen also share the emphasis on emotional
equanimity, and absence of tendencies to act too dominantly while trying
to lead. However, military virtues are valued by tribesmen, and these corre-
late with a substantially higher average rate of feuding, raiding, and warfare
(see, for example, Soltis, Boyd, and Richerson 1995). I have already sug-
gested that success in warfare seems to breed male tendencies to self-asser-
tion and self-aggrandizement that can generate resentment. The groups we
are examining take preemptive steps to head off the growth of personal
domination and authority, and do so quite effectively.
Antiauthoritarian Sanctioning
We have seen that for foragers, while social sanctioning functioned power-
fully as a causal force for leveling, actual sanctioning episodes were re-
112
Hierarchy in the Forest

ported rather rarely. The same is true of tribesmen: people know the cul-
tural limits, and remember well the more dramatic sanctions that have
been applied. Usually tribesmen are guided by subtle cues an ethnographer
may miss, but once in a while someone miscalculates, or his tendencies to
self-aggrandizement become "compulsive." Then active and severe sanc-
tioning comes into play.
Tribal Public Opinion
Sanctioning depends on public opinion. As with foragers, such opinion is
shaped either by the gossip of small groups or by more public discussions
that involve an entire localized group. If the group moralistically arrives at
a negative judgment about someone's behavior, often in the person's ab-
sence, this constitutes a fearsome threat. Most individuals dread an adverse
opinion on the parts of their fellows, but also fear the active sanctioning
they know can grow out of negative judgment. Not all individuals are
socially sensitive, but for the majority who are, the mere existence of gos-
siping and public opinion serves as a major deterrent to misbehavior.
Clastres (1977:28) generalizes that throughout South America chiefs are
controlled by public opinion, and Lowie's survey indicates that among the
Cayapo and Canela "a common check . . . appears in the assembly of adult
men" (Lowie 1949:342). The typical tribal unit in the Americas and else-
where is a local group that meets to make decisions, with everyone (in
theory) having an equal say. These assemblies gather in one place because
the localized segments tend to be much larger than bands, which may
arrive at a consensus more informally (see Silberbauer 1982). Most tribes
have a chosen leader, generally a male, who formally presides over the
meeting. He keeps a low proﬁle at ﬁrst and begins to speak up only when a
consensus is emerging. This scenario is particularly well documented for
New Guinea (Sackschewsky, Gruenhagen, and Ingebritson 1970; Meggitt
1977), but a consensus-seeking style of public meeting seems to prevail
everywhere (for instance, Richards and Kuper 1971; Bloch 1975).
An exercised public opinion leads to decisions of various types. We have
seen that foragers make ecological decisions about where they will migrate
next, and that they also make social-control decisions, stimulated by indi-
vidual deviance, that can be as extreme as execution. Tribesmen are similar,
although subsistence-related decisions tend to be made on a household
basis if the tribesmen are sedentary. Ethnographically, the best-described
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
113

decisions are those involving councils of war (Boehm 1996). While the
more detailed accounts do not relate directly to moral sanctioning, they do
demonstrate how public opinion operates on a practical basis in a society
that is too egalitarian to delegate decision powers to a leader.
Consensus-seeking is an integral part of any egalitarian political ar-
rangement, and the rich ethnographic details of Meggitt's (1977) work in
New Guinea exemplify how it operates. Even small Mae Enga raiding par-
ties of ten or fewer men must make their decisions in concert with the rest
of their clan, for they need that backing. As egalitarian main political
actors, they are free in theory to do anything they please. But in actuality,
individual decision-making is largely overridden by group decisions,
through conscious manipulation of minorities by the majority.
Only the men meet, out of need for secrecy, and it is taken for granted
that all will participate. Pooling of information is important to develop-
ment of public opinion (Meggitt 1977:77-78):
The men who initiated the conference, or their spokesman, brieﬂy indi-
cate their view of the clan's position and the action they favor. Thus, they
may argue that now is the time to launch a full-scale attack on the
neighboring clan with the aim of occupying a speciﬁc section of its
territory. The major Big Man then solicits responses from the audience.
Ideally, everyone present has a voice and, being among his own clansmen,
can speak with complete freedom. Moreover, anyone who possesses per-
tinent information has a moral obligation to contribute so that the group
may reach the best possible decision in the circumstances. Most men . . .
are ready to make their points at length and with elaborate oratorical
ﬂourishes. Only young bachelors and some very old men are likely to
hold back and say little unless directly questioned. The task of the Big
Man at this stage is to ensure that all have a chance to offer their opinions
and facts in full, and . . . [to make] no attempt to cut off any but obvi-
ously irrelevant speeches.
Only in this way, it is believed, can each clansman truly ascertain the
thoughts of his fellows and the evidence behind them. So instructed, he
can cleave to or modify his own ideas, and his reactions in turn affect
those of others. Naturally, the Big Men and ﬁght leaders have their own
opinions of an appropriate outcome of the discussion; but none of them,
especially in the early sessions, reveals much of his hand or tries patently
to push for the acceptance of his suggestions. Not until hours of argu-
114
Hierarchy in the Forest

ment have clariﬁed the issues and carefully dissected the facts are these
men likely to signal unequivocally their own positions, and even then
those, including the major Big Man, who perceive that tide running
strongly against them may well go along with the emerging majority view.
Thus, step by step the slow process of constant feedback inches toward
the possibility of general agreement on a correct course of action. Then,
when the Big Man believes that consensus is close at hand and that
further talk will add nothing of value, he incisively summarizes the main
arguments, indicates which have been rejected, and ﬁnally announces the
decision reached by the clan.
Although these warfare decisions sometimes end in disagreement, the
emergency nature of the problems militates toward a consensus (p. 80):
I should emphasize that such deep and irreconcilable divisions of opin-
ion do not emerge often when clansmen assemble to determine whether
or not they should go to war. Given the crowding of the compact clan
territories along the narrow valleys, the men of any clan are usually quick
to agree that the actions of an expanding adjacent group are a serious
threat to their security. Only the few really obtuse men must have their
attention drawn by Big Men and ﬁght leaders to the growing danger; the
rest readily accept the need for a prompt defensive response, which may
also be deﬁned to include a preemptive attack on the potential aggressors.
Such decision meetings are by no means mere rituals, for vital strategies,
tactics, and timing are all at issue. Although individual decisions are largely
preempted by the group political process, the ideal of consensus is some-
times compromised because in any egalitarian society a subgroup is essen-
tially free to proceed on its own.
Also writing about the Enga of the New Guinea highlands, missionaries
Sackschewsky, Gruenhagen, and Ingebritson (1970:76-77) provide further
insights into how public opinion operates in clan meetings in a setting that
is more acculturated. They refer to the role of the kamongo, or Big Man:
So often the European has the image of a kamongo as a swaggering,
self-conceited braggart. This image is an insult to the Enga society. To
picture the kamongo as one who stands up in a cocky manner before his
brothers and tells them that he is boss and they have to do things his
way—such is an unrealistic picture. For a kamongo to assume such a
position would be to marshal all the other men of his clan against him,
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
115

and his attempt to assert himself would be futile. A kamongo is acting
within the acceptable code of conduct when he boasts of what he has
done, what he thinks, and what he plans to do. But he does this as an
individual seeking recognition from his fellow clansmen. It is at this
critical point that the group's response of praise or ridicule determines
whether the man will be elated or shamed.
Obviously, egalitarian rules tightly regulate the behavior of discussants
in such decision meetings. Individuals may vary in how sensitive they are
to simple disapproval, but few will wish to endure the active ridicule that
comes from being overly pushy. Reported decisions of these acculturating
Enga deal principally with issues of clan territory and ﬁghting, revenge,
events involving pigs, and an assortment of parish activities; but we may
assume that sanctioning of upstarts would follow the same consensual
route—so long as the meeting could be held without their being present.
An earmark of these egalitarian decision meetings is that arguments tend
to be euphemized so that differences of opinion do not engender personal
conﬂict (Sackschewsky, Gruenhagen, and Ingebritson 1970), and this ap-
proach applies to other culture areas (for instance, Africa or Asia; see Bloch
1975).
Public opinion deﬁnitely constrains Big Men where this role is tolerated
at all. Whereas with foragers, boasting was deemed reprehensible and nega-
tively sanctioned, a New Guinea Big Man can properly proclaim his own
powers to a certain degree—so long as he does not try to turn the resulting
appearance of authority into a means of seriously reducing the political
parity of others. Here we see an excellent example of the primus inter pares
philosophy at work: the inﬂuential achiever is allowed to be a rather ﬂam-
boyant primus, but his peers will quickly join together and dominate him if
he tries to encroach on their prerogative to make decisions for the group.
The locus of authority is carefully kept with the entire group, so a reverse
dominance hierarchy is in effect.
These public opinion processes can be generalized. When political, sub-
sistence, or social deviancy problems become so urgent that the group as a
whole feels it must meet, tribal councils all over the world use a remarkably
similar methodology to arrive at group opinions. As with hunter-gatherers,
private discussion helps to shape public opinion in advance, and in the
process factions may form. Once the group meets, consensus-seeking be-
comes salient and the tribe usually emerges in agreement.
116
Hierarchy in the Forest

In making decisions about serious upstarts who go against the egalitar-
ian ethos, a tribe may confer in small groups behind the back of the
menacing individual in question, and thereby develop public opinion
without alerting the deviant to a decision that could remove him from the
group. An alternative is to meet as a group when the intimidator is away. In
either case, public opinion can coalesce in the direction of actively sanc-
tioning even a dangerous and feared political upstart.
Criticism
When tribesmen begin to criticize one of their leaders, rather than merely
gossiping about him in private, such behavior is guided by the egalitarian
ethos. For example, in the Philippines when an Iban chief gets out of line
he may be charged with partiality, and if he is rash enough to give someone
a command he is sharply rebuffed (Freeman 1970:111, 113). In South
America, among the Shavante, people shout down a leading hunter who
becomes overassertive (Maybury-Lewis 1967:200), just as forager groups
do in Africa.
In Panama, the Cuna rebuke their chief for "wanting all the power for
himself" (Howe 1979:540), and it would appear that the Cuna chiefs regu-
larly try to push their own prerogatives a little, while followers regularly
push back to keep them in their place. This particular culture seems to have
a routinized tendency to push—and restrain. A similar situation prevails
among the northern Tairora of New Guinea, where Watson (1983:235)
reports that a "strong man" actually takes antagonism and popular am-
bivalence about him as proof of his political potency. Whereas in many
egalitarian societies political tensions are not readily discernible and up-
startism is regularly nipped in the bud, in others the tension between rank
and ﬁle and potential upstarts apparently can be active and continuously
expressed, through criticism. We have seen that the Hadza (Woodburn
1982; Blurton-Jones 1984) and the Kalahari foragers studied by Lee (1979)
seem to have arrived at similarly contentious political styles.
Ridicule and Ostracism
When the Enga use ridicule to keep a leader in line (Sackschewsky, Gruen-
hagen, and Ingebritson 1970:77), the disrespectful sting is hurtful. Simi-
larly, Schneider (1979:210) states that if a wealthy pastoralist in East Africa
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
117

tries to control others, scorn is manifested. Ridicule seems to be mentioned
much less frequently for tribesmen than for foragers, probably because of
the warrior ethic that coexists with egalitarian values. This warrior ethic
pertains directly to males, even though females nurture it by socializing
males in this direction.
We have seen that a warrior ethic poses an interesting problem for many
tribal egalitarians: their societies suppress many forms of competition at
the same time that they deliberately motivate males to compete in warfare.
As a result, warriors are given to taunting one another, and often their
honor demands that a severe taunt be paid back in blood. Thus, the use of
ridicule is riskier than among foragers, who are not likely to take their
macho roles so seriously. Indeed, Madhi (1986:300-301) suggests for Puk-
tun speakers of Pakistan and Afghanistan that the inclination of warriors to
take offense at insults, and to do so homicidally, serves as a deterrent to the
informal ridicule that might otherwise be expressed. I believe this pattern
to be widespread (see also Boehm 1986).
I have tended to portray sanctioning as though entire groups spontane-
ously begin to criticize or ridicule or ostracize overly assertive leaders or
other upstarts by acting in concert, almost as though a group mind is at
work. Not infrequently, anthropologists under the spell of Durkheim
(1933) use such theoretical rhetoric as a kind of shorthand. Full and com-
plete descriptions of sanctioning are scarce, but I suggest that, everywhere,
the process of arriving at a sanctioning decision is similar to an Enga clan's
war meeting. First, individuals begin to grope toward a group resolution of
the problem, initially by gossiping behind the deviant's back and carefully
watching the reactions of others. Once consensus seems predictable, some
individual still has to lead the sanctioning—unless several group members
do so in concert, which can be the case with ridicule. Once in a while a
deviant will simply be too intimidating—or too unpredictable—for any
one person or even a small coalition to risk taking the ﬁrst step. This kind
of impasse can lead to a domination episode, and eventually to stealthy
assassination.
While ridicule is an immediate social reaction, "ostracism" is the rather
imprecise name given to long-term social distancing of various types and
degrees. It occurs when all or most people deny deviants the respectful
social contacts that accompany a normal social life, or deny them any social
response whatsoever (as with shunning). This is a minimal deﬁnition, for
many scholars would also include expulsion from the group (see Gruter
118
Hierarchy in the Forest

and Masters 1986) or even capital punishment as variants of ostracism. All
may be seen as varieties of social distancing (Boehm 1985), and a shunning
form of ostracism appears to be rather widely distributed among tribes-
men. While many brief mentions appear in the literature (for instance,
Pospisil 1963; Dole 1966), seldom is there detailed discussion such as
Briggs gave us for the Utku.
Although ostracism is generally acknowledged to be part of a nonliterate
moral community's sanctioning repertoire (Edgerton 1975), the speciﬁc
tribal cases I have located involve mainly feuding societies, in which a clan
may wish to create a great deal of social distance between itself and one of
its members who is likely to get the entire clan into an unnecessary feud.
We have seen that Australian Aborigines actually handed over a culprit to
the opposing side.
Moore (1972) ﬁrst identiﬁed an African pattern, whereby feuding tribal
segments, to avoid a costly feud, declare one of their own to be no longer a
group member. These groups will readily stand up for a clan member in
good standing who has triggered a feud unintentionally or for reasons that
are consistent with clan honor. But in the case of a notorious trouble-
maker—usually a political upstart given to bullying and starting unneces-
sary quarrels—his clan brothers may explicitly disassociate themselves
from him. The result is that the troublemaker can be easily killed because
he no longer enjoys the backing of his group. Such extreme distancing is
reported for tribal Serbs (Boehm 1985, 1986:250; 1987). One Montenegrin
clan leader actually proffered a cartridge to a member of the enemy clan, so
that the opposing side could kill an upstart in his own clan with impunity.
Eliminating someone in this way would seem to be more like ostracism
than capital punishment, but elements of both are involved.
Disobedience, Deposition, and Desertion
These three sanctions are applied to leaders, or to those who try to exert
authority over others even if they have not been chosen as leaders. All three
are reported fairly frequently for tribesmen, who regularly exhibit a named
leadership role because of military need. A second need for authority
springs from the potentially destructive consequences of quarrels within
the group. When internecine conﬂicts cause ﬁssioning, they reduce the size
of groups, and in warfare the loss of ﬁghting power can be a major disad-
vantage (Chagnon 1983). Thus, for many tribesmen foreseeable forces in
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
119

political and social life intensify tendencies to allow limited authority in
leadership—both on the battleﬁeld and in handling quarrels.
To whatever degree such authority is granted, it increases the need for an
egalitarian rank and ﬁle to watch for potential upstarts and head them off.
Dickson (1949:117) reports on an acculturating Bedouin leader who tries
to impress visiting Europeans by extending his authority. His "subjects"
agree with him initially—tongue in cheek—and afterward they simply dis-
obey his orders. The Bedouin are perhaps not strictly tribal as deﬁned here,
but the example is illustrative. In the last chapter, we saw that when a Hadza
forager tried something similar, his peers made a point of ignoring him.
Blatant attempts to aggrandize authority are exhibited in classic tribal
settings as well. Freeman (1970:113) says of the Iban that no one listens to
a Philippine chief who issues a command, as opposed to a suggestion.
Writing about South American tribes in general, Clastres (1977:5) says that
the notion of personal obedience is foreign to indigenous cultures. Speak-
ing of Pokot and Nandi diviners who attain strong personal inﬂuence in
East Africa, Schneider (1979:192) says that "they cannot order people to do
anything."
Leaders are kept powerless by the anticipation of harsh sanctions. Merely
disobeying or ignoring a leader puts him in his place without his followers
having to dispense with his services (which may be useful to the group). A
more decisive tactic is to unseat the person and make him return to the role
of ordinary group member, where he can continue to contribute to group
decisions without trying to take over. For example, among the Bantu
(Gluckman 1939:148) a chief can be deposed by his own kinsmen; among
the Carib (Taylor 1956:181-182) a chief can be ousted for attempting gross
injustices; among the Panamanian Cuna (Howe 1979:541-552) people will
get rid of their chief if he fails to consult with them before making a
decision, or if he shows violent anger or behaves immorally; and among
Somali tribesmen (Lewis 1961) people once deposed their chief because
the man was mean and partial in his decisions. Elsewhere in Africa, the
Anuak (Mair 1962) discharge a headman who is stingy, while the Busama
in New Guinea depose a Big Man who behaves too masterfully (Hogbin
1951). If such mobility is feasible, a tribal chief also can be deserted by his
followers, a decisive type of social distancing that involves losing his serv-
ices altogether. The few examples of this technique include Africa (Gluck-
man 1939:148; 1965:153); North Africa (Briggs 1958:89-90); and South
America (Murphy and Quain 1955:56-57).
120
Hierarchy in the Forest

Assassination
Among nomadic foragers, even though many groups do not have named
leaders, we saw that disobedience, deposition, and desertion were used
sometimes when people in leadership positions or others tried to assume
too much authority or otherwise became problematic. We also saw a few
serious domination episodes, in which milder social controls such as ridi-
cule or disobedience could not be employed by fearful group members and
therefore assassination became necessary. In the extant cases for foragers
the deviant is (almost always) a man who has managed to intimidate his
group, who becomes in effect a despot.
Tribesmen too execute chosen leaders who get out of hand. Leeds
(1962:599) reports that in South America after contact a Yaruro chief was
killed for making his own deals with outsiders. In New Guinea, a Big Man
who seriously overstepped his prerogatives could be killed by the commu-
nity; the members would persuade his relatives to do him in, so as to avoid
lethal retaliation. This behavior is reported by Pospisil (1963:49) for the
Kapauku and, as we have seen, by Hogbin (1951:145) for the Busama. For
the Baruya, Godelier (1986:109-110) provides some detail about the devi-
ance involved: high status went to a man's head, and he began to appropri-
ate his neighbors' livestock and forced their wives into sexual relations. He
was killed by his own people. In these New Guinea groups the egalitarian
ethos continues strongly, even though people do approve of Big Man be-
havior in its proper context. If a Big Man oversteps, he can be assassinated.
Among foragers with their lower-key leadership, it seems to be shamans
or physically intimidating hunters, rather than the nominal headmen, who
somehow gain power sufﬁcient to change behavior. It probably is no acci-
dent that at the tribal level our reports of assassinations of intimidating
bullies are mainly from New Guinea. In other parts of the world, tribal
people were usually paciﬁed by colonial powers before they were studied,
and colonial powers regularly punished homicides. The use of assassina-
tion was thereby inhibited; if not abandoned, it surely was often hidden—
even from ethnographers. In highland New Guinea, many ethnographers
arrived soon after contact. But a special factor in New Guinea was that if a
bragging Big Man role was combined with an egalitarian ethos, problems
were found to arise with certain personalities. As this particular combina-
tion is found quite widely in New Guinea, it is not surprising that once in a
while a Big Man lets his considerable legitimate inﬂuence and authority go
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
121

to his head—in spite of the prevailing ethos and the sanctions that may
follow.
A Comparison of Tribesmen and Foragers
Let us compare the sanctioning of upstarts by our two types of egalitarians.
As with foragers, in tribal groups some of the attempts at domination come
from those appointed to lead the group, while others come from overly
assertive persons not in leadership roles. As with foragers, a range of esca-
lating sanctions is employed to put upstarts in their proper place—or else
eliminate them from the tribe's social life. And as with foragers, the more
basic tribal political values, social sanctions, and leadership functions re-
main remarkably similar across continents. Generosity and an even temper
are prominent in the egalitarian ethos of both foragers and tribesmen.
My limited survey of world ethnography (Boehm 1993:232) turned up
ﬁve instances of execution among hunter-gatherers on three continents,
and ﬁve instances among tribesmen on three continents. These were
strictly political executions of upstarts, and on this basis I suggest that
domination episodes and political assassinations are rare, yet widespread,
among egalitarian societies. This hypothesis might be tested further by
means of a total survey of the world ethnographic literature.
Lesser types of sanctioning also tend to be spottily—yet broadly—repre-
sented (Boehm 1993:232). Tribesmen used criticism or ridicule on four
continents, foragers did so on two. Disobedience, deposition, and exile
were employed by tribesmen on ﬁve continents, whereas foragers, with
their less developed leadership role, were limited to two. Again, with com-
plete ethnographic sampling I would expect the statistical patterns to be-
come better ﬂeshed out.
These data suggest a remarkable uniformity with respect to the egalitar-
ian ethos and its vigilant enforcement through acts of social sanctioning.
All humans have moral communities, and bands and tribes have moral
communities that are particularly vigilant in the political ﬁeld because they
share an egalitarian ethos. This is so even though bands and tribes exist in
a wide range of natural and political environments, with a wide variety of
subsistence patterns. My survey demonstrates, tentatively, that virtually the
same pattern is found in all smaller human groups, both before and after
domestication.
Given the fact that such societies universally use collective sanctioning in
122
Hierarchy in the Forest

order to remain egalitarian, and all seem to develop upstarts from time to
time, I believe the characterization "reverse dominance hierarchy" (Boehm
1993) is applicable. In effect, it is the rank and ﬁle who are on top, and the
would-be alphas who remain under their thumbs. The fact that the occa-
sional successful intimidator can rise to tyrannize these egalitarians for a
time does not negate the characterization, for the group's next move is to
dominate the dominator by removing him. If a domination episode ex-
tends beyond the life span of the original dominator, we could see one
quick route to a political centralization and hierarchization of society that
sometimes supersedes egalitarianism. I suspect that most chiefdoms, with
their orthodox hierarchies, come into being far less dramatically.
Given our sketchy diachronic data, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne, even in theory,
the transition point at which reverse dominance hierarchies begin to as-
sume an orthodox form (see Earle 1991). Big-Man societies are suggestive,
in that the ethos allows a primus to become unusually ascendant. But it
seems safe to say that once the egalitarian ethos has atrophied or disap-
peared, the necessary guidance mechanism is lacking. Without it an ortho-
dox hierarchy is likely to form quite readily.
Importance of the Ethos
The relative uniformity of egalitarian polities is ascribable to ideology as an
immediate cause: the ethos provides the blueprint, and the moral commu-
nity provides the necessary sanctions. Probably no single description of an
egalitarian ethos is fully explicit and complete, but the ethnographic re-
ports examined suggest that people living in nomadic bands and tribes are
concerned with similar practical political problems. A useful diagnostic is
that ideal and disliked qualities in their main political actors are deﬁned
quite similarly; they focus on generosity and moderate temperament as
antidotes to competitive tendencies to dominate politically and gain eco-
nomic advantage.
This egalitarian ethos amounts to an unusual political "game" that is
based on social agreement among the main political actors. The implicit
contract reads something like this:
There are individually variable human tendencies to outstrip or control
one's fellows, which can lead to domination by the strong. We determine
to solve the problem as follows. Rather than countenance modes of com-
A Wider View of Egalitarianism
123

petition that will permit one of us to dominate the others, we all agree to
give up our statistically small chance of becoming ascendant—in order to
avoid the very high probability that we will be subordinated. We agree to
settle merely for individual autonomy for all, rather than seeking ascen-
dancy or domination, and we implement this program by deﬁning our
"ﬁrsts" as mere "equals."
This contract is based on the seminal quote from Schneider, "All men seek
to rule, but if they cannot rule they prefer to remain equal."
Although all men may seek domination, some are much more likely to
try—whether from parental inﬂuence or accidents of personal history.
Conceivably, the tendency may be inﬂuenced by individual variability in
innate dominance. But upstartism tends to be a function of developed
personality, and of opportunity. A person who is thick-skinned with re-
spect to public opinion is especially likely to seek dominance in a group
that is sure to resent him; and if the group does not dare to criticize him, he
is likely to become a tyrant—and get himself killed.
As described, the egalitarian approach to political life seems all but
invincible. As long as people were foraging as mobile hunter-gatherers, it
appears that they managed to stay true to their egalitarian ethos—even
though on several continents they are reported as experiencing temporary
domination episodes, and even though some (but not all) sedentary fora-
gers may have converted to orthodox social hierarchy without any outside
inﬂuence. Tribesmen continued to carry the torch, but once in a while they
developed much larger chiefdoms.
124
Hierarchy in the Forest

C H A P T E R
6
The Hominoid
Political Spectrum
A human egalitarian system can be explained at a rather basic level in
terms of ethology. The "political" typology I use here was developed origi-
nally to understand the social ecology of birds (Vehrencamp 1983), but this
analytical scheme can measure any social animal's species-speciﬁc pattern
of hierarchy formation. It does so in terms of useful questions that interest
behavioral ecologists, and with respect to primates it has been applied to
understanding the degree of hierarchy displayed by several monkey species
(for instance, van Hoof and van Schaik 1992; Boinski 1994; Strier 1994; see
also de Waal 1996). It also has been applied to the problem of how humans
might move from egalitarianism to hierarchy (Boone 1992), and here I
shall broaden its use to make interspeciﬁc comparisons useful to the deter-
mination of human political nature. The typology will be applied to the
three African great apes to which humans are closely related molecularly,
and also to a wide variety of humans. My goal is to evaluate all these
hominoids as political animals, and to determine whether, and if so where,
our species can be reliably placed on a scale that extends from egalitarian-
ism to despotism.
Vehrencamp's Political Continuum
At Vehrencamp's despotic extreme are animal societies with individuals in
a position to exert strong dominance and monopolize reproductive re-
sources. Vehrencamp suggests that such a degree of individual dominance
can be selected more readily if the reproductively disadvantaged subordi-
nates have difﬁculty in leaving the group to seek better success elsewhere.
Group size can enter into the picture. From the perspective of the domi-
125

nant individual's reproductive success, the ability to cope collectively with
predators or with competing conspeciﬁc groups is improved if overdomi-
nated subordinates are not driven away. From the subordinate's reproduc-
tive perspective, it is better to live in larger groups—but not be dominated
so severely. These evolutionary dynamics help to ﬁx the degree of despot-
ism, which is measured phenotypically by the strength of the psychological
disposition to dominate and submit.
Now let us consider bird and animal societies that ﬁt Vehrencamp's
egalitarian classiﬁcation. The typical signs of a social dominance hierarchy
are muted, for competition for food and mates is absent or low key; dis-
plays of dominance or of submissive signaling occur rarely; and the ﬁght-
ing that attends a high degree of status rivalry is absent. In such situations
of noncompetition, subordinates have no reason to leave the group—and
all may gain from group responses that reduce predation.
In highly egalitarian species, individual dominance and submission be-
haviors can be all but absent, along with food and mating competition and
coalition behavior. For example, among squirrel monkeys studied by Boin-
ski (1994) group males sometimes cooperated in the sexual investigation of
females. They also joined in aggressive interactions against males of neigh-
boring troops, and in defense of infants and juveniles against predators. At
the same time, there was little male-male aggression within the troop. Such
animals have low levels of intragroup aggression because, it is hypothe-
sized, natural selection has favored reduced intragroup dominance at the
basic level of innate behavioral dispositions.
Along the continuum between the two political extremes, ethologists
make their typological decisions on the basis of phenotypic behavior. At
the same time, it is assumed that innate propensities are at work. An animal
species, even if it is subject to some "adaptive modiﬁcation" (Kummer
1971) in its patterns of social dominance hierarchy, will basically remain
true to political type. This is because behaviors such as dominance and
submission have such a strong innate basis in individuals, and these pro-
pensities—or their relative absence—have a direct impact on behavior at
the group level.
The basic despotism of our three African great apes is exempliﬁed by the
stereotypy and frequency of dominance displays, especially of males, and
also by a noteworthy presence of submissive behaviors in the form of
vocalizations, gestures, postures, or facial expressions. In effect, predictable
and uniform phenotypic patterns can be taken as indicators of the under-
126
Hierarchy in the Forest

lying genetic dispositions. However, if a species is extremely ﬂexible in its
political behavior, as humans can be, then a single phenotypic behavior in
a sample group may be neither a reliable indicator of genotype nor a
trustworthy basis for ethological classiﬁcation.
My intention here is to resolve this problem well enough to be able to
place the four extant African hominoids—including Homo sapiens—on
Vehrencamp's continuum. It will be beneﬁcial to do this before the Com-
mon Ancestor of humans and the three African great apes is reconstructed
with respect to its political behavior.
Difﬁculties Posed by Behavioral Flexibility
Primates other than humans can be impressively ﬂexible in their social
and political behavior. When Kummer (1971) coined the phrase "adaptive
modiﬁcation," his example was baboons living in two notably different
habitats, whose despotic social dominance hierarchies differed consider-
ably in accordance with the (assumed) adaptive requirements of the re-
spective niches. Yet even the desert-adapted hamadryas retains fundamen-
tal patterns of despotic male dominance that are found in environments
such as savannas and forests; it is just that out on the Ethiopian semidesert,
harems appear to work better for foraging than do the large, semiperma-
nent groups that inhabit forest environments. In this dry country, foraging
baboons must disperse widely and each male harem leader, with his bulky
body size and large canines, guards his females. Protection from predators
may be involved with this dimorphism, but the main threat to his females
is from other males.
These other males provide little overt competition, for every successful
adult male can create his own harem by recruiting young females, then will
watch over it constantly. The entire social system seems to reach equilib-
rium in this respect. The harem master is an aggressive tyrant who keeps
his evasive but submissive females subjugated, and with this task constantly
at hand he is not in a viable position to compete directly with other highly
possessive males. As a result, male hierarchy is little developed—even
though hamadryas sleep together in very large troops to avoid predators,
and even though they make common foraging decisions before they divide
into harems to forage (Kummer 1971; see also Boehm 1978).
By contrast, baboons who utilize richer environments can stay in much
larger groups, and in these groups (there are no harems) males develop a
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
127

social dominance hierarchy that allows higher-ranking males to partially
monopolize mating opportunities in a promiscuous breeding situation
(Kummer 1971). Male dominance is directed at competition among males
rather than at dominating and controlling females in harems, and while
foraging, the males engage diurnally in collective defense against predators.
Both systems work well in the quite different environments that stimulate
and constrain them, and both social systems can be rated as despotic.
With humans, adaptive modiﬁability goes far beyond these variations of
baboons. The Julian Steward school of cultural ecology demonstrated that
human social organization, similar to that of the hamadryas, tends to be
modiﬁed as environments and subsistence techniques change (Steward
1955). What is startling about this behavioral lability of humans is that
sociopolitical patterns—and even subsistence patterns—can vary drasti-
cally within the same environment. This ﬂexibility raises fundamental
questions about whether humans can even be classiﬁed as egalitarian or
despotic by Vehrencamp's ethological typology. At ﬁrst blush, our species
appears to be all over the political continuum, as Schneider's (1979) study
of East Africa suggested. Even though this behavioral ﬂexibility raises seri-
ous questions about humans as a political species, answers can be found.
It is my plan to try to resolve three fundamental questions as this book
proceeds. One is whether humans may be carrying around something like
a Lockeian "blank slate" with respect to their political behavior. If our
political nature were that ﬂexible, then our adaptive modiﬁability in mat-
ters of social and political self-expression would be all but inﬁnite—and
my next two questions would be irrelevant. A more speciﬁc question is
whether there is, in Fried's (1967) terminology, a universal human drive to
dominance. In designating human egalitarian societies as reverse domi-
nance hierarchies (Boehm 1993), I challenged Fried's position that no such
predispositions exist. My point was that egalitarian societies do exhibit
despotic-type behaviors, ethologically speaking, because the rank and ﬁle
are obliged to deliberately dominate their potential masters if they wish to
remain equal. Indeed, I chose the term "reverse dominance hierarchy"
precisely because I wanted to confront cultural anthropologists with the
need to consider human nature in dealing with political classiﬁcations. The
third question is whether there might be something like what Fried called
a universal drive to parity, an ultimate evolutionary question that Fried
merely mentioned in passing.
All three of these questions will be explored in future chapters. By way
of preview, I can say that the evidence will point in the direction of a
128
Hierarchy in the Forest

rather deﬁnite—if impressively ﬂexible—human political nature, rather
than some version of the political tabula rasa.
Human Nature
Human nature is of obvious importance to anthropology, for it is one
major locus of ultimate causality; another, obviously, is the environment.
At one time, anthropologists were so desperately enamored of the culture
concept that they tended to ignore both of these other "causes." They did
so even though humans always must cope with their environments, and
even though by nature we are at a minimum impelled to eat, drink, copu-
late, rest, seek creature comfort, form pair bonds, nurture our offspring,
socialize with one another, and engage in status rivalry. When Steward
(1955) did ﬁnally bring the environment into our anthropological purview,
unfortunately he was more interested in taxonomy than in process—in-
cluding even the long-term process of natural selection and the human
nature it has produced. A generation of cultural ecologists continued to
ignore the question of human nature as they developed Steward's approach
further, but they did begin to include decision models in their analyses in
order to study immediate processes involving subsistence strategy (for ex-
ample, Ortiz 1967).
As successors to these cultural ecologists, human-behavioral ecologists
today work with models from animal behavior that do make some as-
sumptions about behaviors being species speciﬁc. However, in dealing with
Homo sapiens they largely neglect human nature as they concentrate on the
environment and its direct effects on foraging strategies and social behav-
ior. These anthropological studies are very useful, but from a larger and
longer-term evolutionary perspective they remain limited.
Unfortunately, as proponents of the holistic study of their own species,
cultural anthropologists—and most biological anthropologists as well—
have not really engaged with human nature as a problem that demands
theoretical attention. Over the past several decades, in effect others have
begun to do the job for us (examples are E. O. Wilson 1975, 1978; Alexan-
der 1987; de Waal 1989, 1996; Wrangham and Peterson 1996; Betzig 1997;
Sober and Wilson 1998). Few ethnologists have wanted to take on the task,
even though human nature and human universals are crucial to their
discipline (see, for instance, Kluckhohn 1953; Boehm 1979; Brown 1991;
Sussman 1995).
In later chapters I shall have much more to say about human nature—
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
129

and about human social and political nature in particular. At this point my
suggestion is that we can learn a great deal about human cultural ﬂexibility,
and about the human nature that channels and constrains such ﬂexibility,
by comparing ourselves with closely related species that appear also to be
behaviorally quite labile.
African Great Apes
Chimpanzees as Candidates for Despotism
Wild chimpanzees, particularly the males, rather nicely fulﬁll Vehrencamp's
criteria for a despotic animal society. We have seen already that dominance
seems almost to be an end in itself for males of this species, and that alphas
and other high-ranking individuals gain reproductive beneﬁts via political
intimidation in mating and food competition. A male subordinate cannot
reduce his reproductive disadvantage by leaving the group or by trying to
change groups, for he will be killed on sight by members of neighboring
communities.
Dominance rankings play a signiﬁcant part in female reproductive suc-
cess as well (Baker and Smuts 1994; Pusey, Williams, and Goodall 1997).
Females compete for core foraging areas, but they seldom vie for mating
opportunities and they do not seem to be nearly as obsessed with status
rivalry as are males (Goodall 1986). A female can leave the group safely,
but only if she is reproductively "available." A large number of females
do transfer, and others remain peripheralized (Wrangham 1980; Goodall
1986), so chimpanzee communities are far from being closed. Basically the
males stay put for life, and it is they who engage in hierarchical behavior to
a degree that suggests very strong despotism.
The fact that subordinate males must stay put is to the advantage of the
alphas: numbers help when chimpanzees mob predators and when chim-
panzees engage in direct territorial competition at the intercommunity
level—a special type of coalition behavior (Boehm 1992). On record are
two instances in which small communities (habituated and provisioned
wild groups) were lethally raided by larger ones until the males of the
smaller groups were virtually eliminated (Nishida et al. 1985; Goodall
1986; see also Manson and Wrangham 1991). If subordinate males were
able to transfer to groups with less-dominant alphas, the more-dominant
alphas would lose out because their smaller groups would become vulner-
130
Hierarchy in the Forest

able territorially. On that basis, dominance behaviors would be less
strongly selected in this species; but this is not the case.
It is with this type of situation that Vehrencamp (1983) believes despot-
ism can ﬂourish, and in fact many behavioral correlates of strong despot-
ism are present. We saw in the second chapter that dominance and submis-
sion are prominent in chimpanzees, with a linear male hierarchy based on
competition for status and an alpha male in the control role. We saw also
that coalition behavior is prominent among males—and evident with fe-
males, who gang up against immigrant females. It bears mentioning that
the capacity of female chimpanzees to act in power coalitions can become
much greater in captive situations, where females are not so socially iso-
lated (de Waal 1982) and adaptive modiﬁcations occur. Given this suite of
behaviors, chimpanzees may be placed squarely on the despotic side of
Vehrencamp's continuum, even though the collective power of subordi-
nates can be decisive at times in reducing the power of alphas (de Waal
1996:131).
Having made that assessment, I need to say a word about a book by
Power (1991), which in its title and analysis characterizes chimpanzees as
being egalitarian. By any political or social typology, be it technical or
commonsensical, chimpanzees are unegalitarian because domination be-
havior is prominent and intrinsic to their social life, and because domina-
tion leads to reproductive rewards. Power's book has been severely criti-
cized on many grounds (for example, Stanford 1993). Whatever the merits
of her arguments about chimpanzees being free to come and go in their
ﬁssion-fusion communities, it is evident that wild chimpanzees—whether
they are baited or not, whether they are habituated to humans or not—are
given to status rivalry that leads to a high degree of political, social, and
reproductive inequality. In no important sense are they politically egali-
tarian, for they always have alpha males.
Silverback Gorillas as a Special Type of Despot
In politically rating the well-studied mountain gorilla, sexual dimorphism
tells a substantial part of the story. The much larger body size of males may
stem in part from the protection against predators silverbacks provide to
their harems, but the requisite data are not available. What we do know is
that harem leaders must defend their females against the many other males
who have no mates (Fossey 1983; Watts 1996). With sexual selection oper-
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
131

ating so strongly, their being almost twice the size of females comes as no
surprise. Despotic male gorillas are innately disposed to display and bluff,
but also to ﬁght and vanquish.
Within the harem a silverback easily dominates the adult females and
any other males who grow to maturity and fail to leave the group. He exerts
signiﬁcant control over the entire group of perhaps half a dozen adults.
Whenever the group travels, he sets its direction and manipulates it if
danger is apparent; if quarrels break out among those subordinate to him,
he suppresses them using a pig grunt or other means of intervention. His
position of domination is easily recognized (Fossey 1983).
In terms of subordinates leaving the harem, reproductive females (who
most decidedly are subordinate to silverbacks) do manage sometimes to
transfer (Fossey 1983). The situation is quite different for males. As the
silverback's sons or the sons of his predecessor reach maturity, they may
leave the harem because the silverback inhibits their chances of mating.
Then, as rogue males who travel alone or in packs, they must try to invade
other harems by defeating incumbent silverbacks. From this picture it is
obvious that dominance is closely related to reproductive success in male
mountain gorillas—even though dominated males can readily leave their
natal groups.
While mountain gorillas seem despotic, their political style is quite
different from that of chimpanzees. Social dominance is not manifested
continuously by means of male-male competition; instead, the contests
between males are infrequent but reproductively ultimate (Fossey 1983).
Infanticide plays a role sometimes, as a male may kill the progeny of a
genetic competitor and sire his own offspring with the same female
(Wrangham and Peterson 1996).
In formally applying Vehrencamp's criteria, we see that mountain goril-
las exhibit male domination strongly in mating contexts and that the con-
trolling silverback regulates whatever competition takes place among his
females. Males without harems sometimes travel in groups, but their at-
tempts to usurp established harems seem to be individual. Furthermore, if
younger males have stayed into adulthood with a harem, they may support
their leader against a male intruder, and females may act in what appear to
be political coalitions when two harems meet (Fossey 1983). We will inves-
tigate these patterns further in Chapter 7, but they too are evidence of
despotism.
132
Hierarchy in the Forest

Chimpanzees vs. Gorillas
If we compare mountain gorillas and chimpanzees to determine the rela-
tive degrees of despotism, decisive male domination over females is present
in both species, and success in dominating other males is relevant to mat-
ing success. Higher rank also affects access to food sources. To consider
the alternatives available to male subordinates, whose low political status
brings reproductive disadvantages, chimpanzee males are locked into the
same group for life whereas subordinated male gorillas can leave their natal
harem and seek to displace a silverback elsewhere. However, subordinate
chimpanzees can bully a female into going away on a consortship and
thereby gain signiﬁcant reproductive success (Goodall 1986). In effect,
chimpanzee subordinate males are able to subvert the dominance hierar-
chy without leaving the group.
In light of all of these diverse features, it is almost impossible to make a
precise decision about the relative positions of chimpanzees and mountain
gorillas. But if we compare them with squirrel monkeys, who have low
rates of agonism, little dominance behavior, and no group-internal politi-
cal coalitions (Boinski 1994), both deserve to be placed near the despotic
end of the Vehrencamp scale.
Semidespotic Bonobos
The bonobo is a somewhat more gracile version of the chimpanzee, about
the same size but a separate species with differing facial characteristics and
a different placement of the vagina that makes ventral-ventral copulation
much easier (de Waal 1996). Pan paniscus lives in a restricted African
environment in what formerly was known as the Congo, and shows both
similarities to and sharp differences from Pan troglodytes. Because the two
lines split only about two million years ago (Wolpoff 1996), the similarities
are not surprising. Both species live in ﬁssion-fusion communities that
have their own home ranges, both exhibit hostility when they meet another
group, and the males of both species essentially stay in their natal groups
whereas the females tend to emigrate (Wrangham and Peterson 1996).
Rating these two species on a despotism-egalitarianism scale is difﬁcult,
in part because we humans always have at the back of our minds the idea
of ﬁnding an "ancestor" who ﬁts with our (often wishful) conception of
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
133

ourselves as a human animal. It is easy to disagree with Power (1991) about
chimpanzees, because they are well studied in the wild and in captivity, and
in some cases they have been studied without baiting. Bonobos are not so
well studied, even though ﬁeld workers have observed this species at several
sites for as long as two decades (Kano 1992).
A great deal of my work in placing bonobos on Vehrencamp's political
continuum has been accomplished by Wrangham and Peterson (1996). In
a chapter entitled "The Gentle Ape," they comment (p. 205):
On the surface, bonobos have a social life very much like chimpanzees,
living in communities, sharing a range with eighty or more others, travel-
ing in various-size parties within the community range, living with their
male kin group, and defending their range against outsider males . . .
Among chimpanzees every adult male is dominant to every adult female,
and he enjoys his dominance. She must move out of his way, acknow-
ledge him with the appropriate call or gesture, bend to his whim—or risk
punishment . . . But among bonobos, the sexes are codominant. The top
female and the top male are equal. The bottom female and the bottom
male are equal. In between, your rank depends on who you are, not what
sex you are.
"Who you are" is not just a matter of competing individuals, for the
authors go on to discuss coalition behavior (Wrangham and Peterson
1996:205-206; see also Kano 1992). They use the example of a testoster-
one-driven male who, as a young adult, tried to challenge Ude, the second-
ranking male in his group. The younger male's mother was named Aki, and
she also ranked high in the group.
One day Aki's son charged aggressively at Ude, screaming and dragging
a branch, swerving away only at the last second. Ude, clearly agitated,
slapped his challenger before being calmed by an intervention from the
top-ranking male. But Aki's son charged again. This time Ude chased him
but Aki's son stood his ground. A ﬁght ensued, with some kicking and
hitting. The tide turned when Aki joined in. Carrying her screaming
baby on her belly, she chased Ude not once but a dozen times. Other
females joined in the fray with supportive calls. It wasn't long before Ude
ﬂed. Ten years after that single incident, Ude is still subordinate to Aki's
son: ﬂeeing, presenting, or taking little steps away whenever the two
meet.
134
Hierarchy in the Forest

Female bonobos are "physical" in providing political support to their
sons, and each female has female coalition partners who can back up such
support. So bonobo males depend on their mothers (and their mothers'
friends) for reinforcement, and they themselves do not form coalitions
with other males. With chimpanzees, whereas a male may receive noisy
support from his mother in the form of agonistic vocalizations, the coali-
tion partners who will join him actively in a ﬁght are other males.
In Wrangham and Peterson's (1996) view, this allocation of substantial
political power to bonobo females makes for signiﬁcant differences in
agonism levels, differences that might be used to argue that bonobos are
signiﬁcantly less despotic than chimpanzees. Behaviorally, the overall result
seems to be a lower level of ﬁghting and wounding, and deﬁnitely a far
lower level of competition among males for access to sexually receptive
females. However, male chimpanzees intensify their competitive mating
efforts around the time of ovulation because they are able visually to
determine it. Female bonobos apparently conceal their ovulation; therefore
the male bonobo has no way of maximizing his reproductive efﬁciency by
competing harder during special windows of opportunity (Wrangham and
Peterson 1996). However, male bonobo dominance does come into play
prominently in situations of feeding competition. De Waal (1996:244)
shows signiﬁcant differences between captive bonobos and captive chim-
panzees, with the bonobos engaging more in forced claims and theft and
the chimpanzees engaging more in cofeeding or sharing behavior.
In Demonic Males Wrangham and Peterson are exploring an area of
strong interest to educated readers who want to know whether a truly
despotic ape—or possibly a gentler version thereof—shares our immediate
phylogeny. They hypothesize that chimpanzees may be highly conservative
in terms of retaining ancestral features, whereas bonobos could be more of
an offshoot species that went its own way ecologically, sexually, and so-
cially. Bonobos do seem to be much less engaged in status rivalry and
competition for mates, and certainly are far less involved in male coalitions.
This difference tends to make wild bonobos less despotic—but far more
involved with coalitions of females. It is difﬁcult to say which species is
more despotic with respect to development of coalitions; but if the larger
coalitions of chimpanzee females in captivity are brought into the picture,
the edge probably goes to Pan troglodytes, not Pan paniscus.
Elsewhere (Boehm 1992) I have suggested extending "coalition theory"
(Harcourt and de Waal 1992) to include the macrocoalitions of chimpan-
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
135

zees that take the form of patrols or excursions (Goodall 1986), and also
the mobbing of predators (Byrne and Byrne 1988). Territorial behavior of
chimpanzees is reasonably well studied (see also Nishida 1979), and it
represents an extension of dominance behavior to a special collective
realm. With much less research expended on bonobos, the outlines of
social dominance behavior when two communities meet are only starting
to be understood.
Wrangham and Peterson (1996) report on bonobos in territorial en-
counters, some of which are directly inﬂuenced by provisioning, and be-
cause they have carefully summarized the long-term data of ethologists
such as Kano (1992), I shall rely on their discussion. When bonobo groups
meet, they "run to the border to chase away neighbors. Clashes can result,
sometimes leading to bloody wounds. But . . . no one has seen border
patrols, raiding, lethal aggression, or battering of strangers" (Wrangham
and Peterson 1996:215-216). Thus, the tentative conclusion is that
bonobos are less systematic about defending their resources and more
restrained, territorially speaking, than are chimpanzees with their regular
patrols and lethal stalking raids.
The contrived encounters of bonobos were as follows. At Wamba, the
Japanese primatologist Takayoshi Kano created what proved to be an unin-
tended experiment in nature, baiting bonobos from two different groups
with sugarcane right at the frontier of their ranging areas. By chance, the
two groups arrived at the same time. Instead of behaving like chimpanzees,
with males displaying ﬁercely and prolongedly before the two groups re-
treated, the groups approached each other. While the mature males on
both sides stayed aloof—a probable sign of male macrocoalition behav-
ior—the females crossed to the other group and copulated both with other
females and sometimes with the males.
Thus it appears that chimpanzee tendencies to dominance, expressed by
attacking as well as by blufﬁng, are far stronger in a territorial context than
those of bonobos (see also de Waal and Lanting 1997:88-89). To under-
stand this experiment better, it would be useful to know the political and
social histories of the two groups in depth, just as it would have been useful
to know the histories of the two groups at Gombe which for a time fed
together on provisioned bananas and later split and behaved as lethal
competitors (Goodall 1986).
These differences of territorial behavior should not weigh too heavily in
evaluating the two species on Vehrencamp's criteria. Wild bonobos have
136
Hierarchy in the Forest

both alpha males and alpha females, and potent female political coalitions.
Their low level of mating competition is at least partly explained by the
absence of signals of ovulation; bonobos may well be more competitive
over food than chimpanzees. Although bonobos probably should be rated
as less despotic than chimpanzees, they are despotic, nevertheless. All three
African great apes can be placed on the despotic side of the Vehrencamp
continuum.
The Human Spectrum
In considering signiﬁcant varieties of human political society, I will at-
tempt to deal in straightforward behavioral descriptions that parallel ac-
counts of the great apes. I go into considerable detail with respect to the
ﬁrst human category, hunting nomads, because I shall shortly explore the
political life of their precursors, the Paleolithic foragers who put the deﬁni-
tive touches on our political nature.
Nomadic Hunter-Gatherers
On a daily basis, we have seen that in bands there appears to be little
expression of interpersonal rivalry among the main political actors. This is
so even though there can be considerable male domination of females
within the household. Still, underlying tensions—especially among male
household heads—are far from absent. Serious disputes do arise, and in
cases of sexual jealousy they quickly reach the level of homicide. Females
too engage in disputes with both males and other females (for instance,
Shostak 1981).
In bands, one man's dominating or controlling another becomes a criti-
cal issue at the level of egalitarian ideology. As a practical matter, behaviors
in this direction can be harshly sanctioned by the group, which itself is a
form of domination. Bands also develop institutions designed to head off
serious male conﬂicts. The cultural speciﬁcs vary, from mutually vilifying
song contests, to physical competitions in which turns are taken in deliver-
ing blows by hand, to purported duels in which the aggrieved party is
expected to wound the perpetrator with a spear (Hoebel 1954). The pur-
pose is always to resolve the dispute sufﬁciently to eliminate the likelihood
of the group's being disturbed by a homicide.
Chapter 4 included examples of typical forager bands exhibiting serious
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
137

competitive tensions, usually associated with male status rivalry. Disputes
can be focused on speciﬁc "commodities," and the prime bone of conten-
tion is women, in the context of adultery—a point emphasized by both
Fried (1967) and Knauft (1987, 1991). Despite an ethic that strongly con-
demns homicide within the group, such disputes readily become lethal
because hunters are adept at killing large-bodied mammals. A homicide of
this sort can easily lead to lethal retaliation by armed kinsmen. Both the
original lethal attack and subsequent retaliation by kinsmen qualify as
forms of domination behavior. We must keep this in mind when evaluating
ethnographic reports citing an everyday absence of male competition.
Overt competition for food usually is not prominent. Sharing systems
are kept carefully in place with respect to foods that either come in large
packets (Cashdan 1990; Kelly 1995) or are in chronic short supply (Gould
1982). Here too, underlying tensions and outbreaks of conﬂict can occur.
Many ethnographers have remarked on the smoothness of routinized shar-
ing in bands, but a few have emphasized the competitive tensions that
accompany it (for example, Peterson 1993). The Hadza seem to be fre-
quently cantankerous as sharers (Blurton-Jones 1984), even though at the
level of ethos they believe in meat-sharing in the same way that all hunter-
gatherers seem to. The Siriono hunters of South America can be added to
the list of "nasty-sharers" (Edgerton 1992:13). They often hunt coopera-
tively and share on that basis, but overt conﬂict over food has been ex-
pressed straightforwardly.
One day Eantandu was angry with Mbiku, who had hunted coati and
given him none. Flushed with anger Eantandu picked up his bow and
arrows and departed for the hunt. When he returned about ﬁve hours
later with a couple of small monkeys his wrath had subsided consider-
ably. He told me that when men are angry they go hunting. If they shoot
any game their anger disappears; even if they do not kill anything they
return home too tired to be angry. (Holmberg 1950:157)
Holmberg's published accounts of Siriono behavior are unusually de-
tailed. Another Siriono disagreement over meat illustrates still better the
intimate connection between sharing and power politics.
Kwandu, a member of the band and extended family of Aciba-eoko, the
chief, was absent for several days with his younger brother on a hunting
expedition. On returning to camp, they brought with them about a dozen
tortoises of good size. These were tied up with lianas and hung on beams
138
Hierarchy in the Forest

in the house, one or two of them being butchered each day. Aciba-eoko,
desiring meat, ﬁrst made a direct request to Kwandu, but was brushed off
and given nothing. Following this he made public remarks without men-
tioning names that mbia (countrymen) were keeping all the meat to
themselves and not giving any to him, the chief. The owners of the
tortoises still paid no attention to him. Finally, after about three days,
Aciba-eoko, having received nothing, became so angry that he left for the
hunt with his family and stayed away for about a week. He returned with
considerable roast meat which he distributed to no one else but members
of his immediate family. (Holmberg 1950:149)
This second nonsharing incident deserves further attention. Undoubt-
edly contributing to situational ambiguity was the fact that, in toto, the
captured tortoises added up to a large amount of meat—but the meat
happened to be in small, living parcels that could be eaten, fresh, over a
considerable period. It is possible that the would-be sharer was counting
all the meat together and seeing it as part of a variance-reduction plan,
whereas the owner chose to see it as a collection of separate small parcels
that did not need to be shared. In any event, nepotistically selﬁsh behavior
prevailed and the chief's attempt to dominate was resisted.
The Siriono system of sharing apparently is not ﬁne-tuned at the cul-
tural level—by which I mean that effective customs and rituals have not
been set in place and reﬁned over time, in order to avert predictable misun-
derstandings that come from individuals overperceiving their prerogatives.
It is the potential for provocative, socially disruptive behavior of a competi-
tive nature that has led foragers on various continents to invent and reﬁne
the amazingly similar "randomization systems" that are designed to defuse
a sense of ownership where large amounts of meat are involved. The preva-
lence of these customs suggests that the underlying problem—competi-
tiveness over food—is widespread. Although foragers usually cooperate
quite well, they are competitive nonetheless.
This conclusion about food competition is worth noting when we think
about where to place human foragers on Vehrencamp's continuum. So is
the fact that male competition over women (and, to a lesser degree, female
competition over men) leads to tensions, quarrels, and homicides. So-
cietally inspired efforts do not eliminate such problems, even though the
moral community does its best to head off these conﬂicts. If the band
succeeds reasonably well, then an ethnographer visiting for one or two
years may well report low levels of conﬂict and competition. If the same
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
139

ethnographer gets to witness a forager community with a serious behavior
problem, two kinds of political coalitions may appear. One is the entire
moral community as it engages in serious sanctioning, actively dominating
the deviant in question. The other is a small male coalition of relatives that
can form to avenge a kinsman's death. It is for this reason that killers
predictably leave their band: they know that retaliation is both predictable
and difﬁcult to avert.
The most frequent type of power coalition in egalitarian bands consists
of the entire adult community coalescing against a deviant. In addition to
the proscription of bullying by upstarts, all foragers are opposed to incest,
murder within the group, and undue selﬁsh use of deception. Campbell
(1975) has shown that these prohibitions are present in all ancient civiliza-
tions, and probably in all moral codes everywhere. Let me emphasize that
among mobile foragers even moderately despotic behavior among the
main political actors is morally proscribed.
When one of these small nomadic, moral communities becomes
aroused, it is males and females together who act as a power coalition. This
behavior was emphasized in Chapter 1: all the adults line up against devi-
ants who threaten the group's quality of social life or the individual auton-
omy of its members (or even their very lives). Often the culprit realizes his
adverse position, submits, and is socially rehabilitated. If not, he (or she)
pays the price. This use of aggressive, dominant coalitions is universal, as is
the submission of most individuals who try to behave dominantly or oth-
erwise become deviant. Usually it is the rank and ﬁle who dominate, and
the would-be political upstart who submits. Once in a while the tables are
turned—temporarily.
Because human foragers exhibit male competition for females, high
homicide rates, and substantial overt competitiveness, and because they act
aggressively as large power coalitions when they behave as moral commu-
nities, I believe that they could be conservatively placed on Vehrencamp's
political continuum somewhere between bonobos and chimpanzees
(closer to chimpanzees). If one adds in the occasional domination episodes
that occur in bands, the placement would be still closer to the despotic pole.
Acephalous Tribes
We have seen that tribal societies have signiﬁcantly greater military require-
ments than hunter-gatherers, and that this characteristic is reﬂected in the
140
Hierarchy in the Forest

rearing of males. The result is a higher degree of overt male status rivalry,
plus some ephemeral delegation of authority to military commanders on
the battleﬁeld. Nonetheless, the political situation for males is the same as
for egalitarian hunter-gatherers. They are "equals" who are willing to toler-
ate some "ﬁrsts"—but only if such outstanding men do not try to take
away the autonomy of the average main political actor.
Premaritally, male competition for mating partners usually is not overt,
direct, and physical, as it is with chimpanzees or mountain gorillas. Paren-
tal manipulation or female choice is likely. After marriage, however, and in
spite of group disapproval of adultery, male-male competition over females
can become dramatic and lead to serious quarrels. This behavior is similar
to that of foragers, and we have seen that there is a propensity to feud
rather than rely on ﬂight and avoidance.
Conﬂict resolution is likely to be more effective with tribesmen, how-
ever. Within tribes, competition over food sources is no longer mediated by
pervasive sharing, for often tribesmen produce and eat their food as house-
hold units. To regulate natural resources, cultural rules pertain to property
rights, a political and economic assessment that holds across a wide variety
of tribal social organization types (Sahlins 1968; see also Service 1962;
Fried 1967). Most tribes compete directly as groups, whether through war-
fare or raiding. When they engage in conﬂict, very often their political
coalitions are patrilineally based and involve associations of males who
ideologically consider themselves to be "brothers" (Thoden van Veltzen
and van Wetering 1960). The result is a strong tendency to ﬁght together,
and to retaliate for homicides as a unit. Thus, while leadership remains
muted in tribal societies, coalitions of males are quite conspicuous; compe-
tition and domination are prominent at the intergroup level, just as they
are with chimpanzees.
The fact that small tribal segments can merge and function as much
larger political units does not really change this overall political charac-
terization. The same limitations on leadership and intermale domination
prevail when larger political segments are activated, for tribal segments
always have equivalent status; there may be an overall "chieftain," chosen to
lead a temporary confederation of segments, but he is carefully deﬁned as a
mere ﬁrst among equals. His role is not dominant.
If the only humans we knew were tribesmen rather than foragers, place-
ment on Vehrencamp's scale would move a bit toward the despotic pole,
perhaps quite close to the chimpanzee. But tribesmen suppress many kinds
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
141

of within-group competition, along with strong leadership, and therefore
they fail to develop anything like a linear dominance hierarchy in spite of
strong tendencies to compete and dominate.
Big-Man Societies
Big-man societies are basically egalitarian tribal societies that permit men
adept at trading to develop personal economic empires and throw their
political weight around a little (Godelier 1986). Apparently, their behavior
is tolerated because of the rivalry between groups; such men help their
entire group to compete with others at the level of prestige. Big Men tend
to be large-scale feast givers, and conspicuous consumption is the name of
the political game they are playing. They end up creating a caricature of the
humble generosity that leaders of bands and tribes everywhere are ex-
pected to demonstrate. In being hypergenerous, they lose much of their
humility.
Permitting this role to develop may lead to some ethnographically no-
ticeable political authority, but in practice these trading empires tend to be
very much a product of individual skills. They also tend to be unstable. Just
as Schneider (1979) suggested that livestock provide a statistically precari-
ous base for the growth of economic power, Big Men are subject to similar
vagaries. Their empires are built upon networks of debts and obligations,
and by their nature these seem not to stay in equilibrium forever. The more
stringent and predictable limit on development of authority is the egalitar-
ian ethos: we have cited assassinations of Big Men when they begin to be
too assertive (for example, by taking over other men's wives). Like tribal
societies and bands, Big-Man societies are kept intrinsically egalitarian (for
the males) by a power coalition composed of the entire rank and ﬁle, which
sets the limits on how much a Big Man can throw his weight around. The
limits on acting the bully may be more relaxed than in other tribal socie-
ties; still, the entire group remains ﬁrmly in control when it comes to
outright domination by a Big Man who has upstart tendencies. Big-Man
societies are a special instance of tribal society, one that by deﬁnition lacks
social stratiﬁcation and hereditary leadership, and has an egalitarian ethos.
Sedentary Foragers
I have referred in passing to sedentary foragers such as the Kwakiutl, who
are nonegalitarian. It is they and some of their northwest-coast neighbors,
142
Hierarchy in the Forest

and a few other people like the Calusa in Florida and the Ainu in Japan,
that Kelly (1995) refers to as nonegalitarian hunter-gatherers. The excep-
tions are important, for they show that hunting-and-gathering is not al-
ways associated with egalitarianism, and also because extant sedentary
foragers may help in interpreting the political effects of an increasingly
sedentary life on foraging adaptations in the Neolithic (Price and Brown
1985).
Woodburn (1982) has drawn a sharp distinction between foragers
whose economies are "immediate-return"—meaning that they do not en-
gage in long-term food storage and are politically egalitarian—and "de-
layed-return" systems with storage, competition, and considerable social
hierarchy. The Kwakiutl ﬁt this model well: they live in the midst of rich
resources and therefore can stay in a permanent village. Along with social
classes and slaves, they have intensive warfare and strong hereditary
chiefs, and they are anything but egalitarian in their outlook. Because vil-
lages own speciﬁc resources and go to war, it is not easy for low-ranking
commoners to leave. Slaves remain heavily exploited with little possibility
of exit.
In thinking about Woodburn's delayed-return subtype, I do ﬁnd a prob-
lem. In northern California are instances of sedentary, warlike, food-stor-
ing hunter-gatherers, such as the Tolowa and Coastal Yurok, who remain
politically egalitarian with weak leaders (Gould 1982). Aside from their
egalitarianism, these village communities are quite different from nomadic
bands. They neither hunt together nor share their large-game kills, but
tend to function economically as independent families. They also engage in
degrees of overt social competition that would be frowned on in nomadic
groups.
These sedentary foragers can remain politically egalitarian even though
they exhibit noteworthy levels of social competition and engage far less in
sharing (because individual families can depend on storage). Their natural
resources are usually abundant, as with the despotic Kwakiutl. By contrast,
Kwakiutl-type sedentary foragers seem to have gone well beyond the Big-
Man societal pattern. They have lost the egalitarian ethos and established
authoritative hereditary leadership.
These political variants do not seem to have been determined exclusively
by availability and type of natural resources or by storage of food. They do
suggest a general tendency for sedentary life, coupled with population
expansion, to spur an increase in competitive behavior and social hierarchy
that may or may not coexist with egalitarianism. If we consider only the
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
143

Kwakiutl type of sedentary forager, it is obvious that a few hunter-gatherers
come closer to the chimpanzee degree of despotism than tribesmen do. In
effect, these are "forager chiefdoms": leadership and high rank are heredi-
tary, and social classes exist.
Chiefdoms
Service (1975) describes chiefdoms in terms of voluntary patron-client
relationships, which keep the patrons in a position of economic and politi-
cal power. Chiefdoms are difﬁcult to delineate politically, for their forms
are manifold and the degree of authority residing in the leaders varies
considerably. Firth's (1936) classic study of the island of Tikopia examines
a chiefdom that is not overly centralized politically. Tikopian chiefs have
some authority, but it is far from being absolute or even very strong. Yet,
they are expected to live better than their fellows, and because they have
more wives their reproductive advantages can be substantial. Although
they receive submissive deference in public, politically these men are far
from being serious despots. They are susceptible to being deposed, and
they are kept in check by fonos—popular assemblies that arrive at major
decisions by consensus, even though they take into serious account the
opinions of their chief. Firth (1949) emphasizes that chiefs in Tikopia are
governed by public opinion, and must remain sensitive to it. Even in the
absence of an egalitarian ethos, the moral community tends to govern its
governors to a considerable extent.
A more developed chiefdom was that of the Trobriand Islanders of
Melanesia (Malinowski 1929). They had a paramount chief who ruled over
a number of satellite villages, each of which had its own chief. The egalitar-
ian ethos deﬁnitely was absent: as one example, commoners could not
tower over their chief, and when he sat outside, his chair was placed on a
raised platform so that people would not have to stoop as they passed. His
authority was greater than in Tikopia, but he too had to abide by tradition
or else face rebellious forces.
We have already met the eighteenth-century Montenegrin Serbs who,
while resisting an empire, moved from a strictly egalitarian segmentary
tribal system to hereditary leadership at the confederation level. Because
tribal opinion was divided, eventually a succession of hereditary para-
mount chiefs were able to gradually increase their power, and despotic
practices increasingly were tolerated. The result, after a coup by an exceed-
144
Hierarchy in the Forest

ingly strong leader, was a despotic kingdom in which the leader acquired
fearsome coercive power—far more than any alpha-male chimpanzee.
In some ways, a pristine chiefdom is similar to a chimpanzee commu-
nity. The leader has many advantages, and other heads of household also
are socially unequal, yet the leader cannot boss the entire community
unless he (or she) is in accord with group inclinations. The leader also has
signiﬁcant conﬂict-resolution duties and can exert some authority if inter-
vention is needed, though the use of force is not possible. Chiefdoms seem
to me to be on a par with chimpanzees on Vehrencamp's political scale.
Primitive Kingdoms
In delegating legitimized power to their rulers, people in primitive king-
doms go far beyond what takes place in chiefdoms (Service 1975). The
egalitarian ethos is long gone, having been replaced by a hierarchical
worldview by which people accept major differences that not only separate
commoners from the royal line, but may include an intermediate noble
class as well as slaves at the bottom. In terms of the popular will, such
societies are not supposed to be oppressively despotic. But when legitimate
rulers are given control of full-time military specialists like bodyguards or
standing armies, they have at their ﬁngertips an instrument of raw coercive
power. The fact that their lineages are exalted also helps them to push their
political prerogatives.
As with chiefdoms, one legitimate use of power in these kingdoms is to
resolve or forcibly suppress active competition between factions. Another is
to lead the society in directions that make sense to the leader, to a point
where people begin to react strongly to either poor decision-making or
abuse of power. While I must emphasize that nothing like an egalitarian
ethos prevails in such societies, it is possible that a coalition of all or most
of the rank and ﬁle may revolt and overthrow a seriously despotic king.
Beattie (1967) has shown that both chiefdoms and kingdoms in Africa have
checks on the abuse of power. Some are formal or institutionalized, such as
rendering kings unable to hold property; others are spontaneous, such as
engaging in popular revolts.
How do primitive kingdoms rate on the Vehrencamp scale? The leader
has far more power to manipulate his group's destiny than does a chim-
panzee alpha male, so that social dominance hierarchy is very strongly
expressed. The human potential for despotism is much in evidence.
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
145

Ancient Civilizations and Modern States
What has been said about primitive kingdoms holds also for ancient civili-
zations and states—which added writing, impressive bureaucracies, and a
high degree of economic specialization with social class distinctions (Serv-
ice 1975). In terms of a general political typology, modern nations are fairly
similar to primitive kingdoms. Both have strongly centralized polities with
abundant coercive force available to the rulers, and both can suppress most
factional strife—even though civil wars may arise. As with primitive king-
doms, both nondemocratic modern nations and despotic ancient civiliza-
tions vest enormous power in their leaders, and tend to provide few in-
stitutionalized means of controlling tendencies to tyranny. Ancient and
modern democracies may temper individual power with checks and bal-
ances, but centralized power still exists and is backed by the coercive force
supplied by professional policemen or soldiers. In Vehrencamp's sense,
both ancient civilizations and modern nations are highly despotic because
the leaders can govern strongly, with abundant coercive power. Although
this is somewhat less true of democracies, they too are more similar to
primitive kingdoms than to chiefdoms.
Rating the Hominoids
Chimpanzees appear to be quite despotic in all of the varied environments
in which the species is distributed. Mountain gorillas seem to be almost as
despotic as chimpanzees; but rating them against chimpanzees or bonobos
becomes rather subjective because we are comparing harem structures with
ﬁssion-fusion communities. Bonobos seemingly are notably less despotic
than chimpanzees, a species to which they are frequently compared in
terms of social organization. Among primates, they nevertheless appear to
be on the despotic side of the scale.
If we restrict ourselves to obvious political phenotype, humans appear to
be capable of extreme adaptive modiﬁcation. At one extreme are egalitar-
ian foragers; at the other, despotic kingdoms and modern dictatorships. If
we look below the surface, however, the fact that egalitarians are obliged to
strongly suppress both competition and social hierarchy means that the
range of modiﬁcations is not so broad. While I have placed foragers and
tribesmen somewhere between bonobos and chimpanzees, primitive king-
146
Hierarchy in the Forest

doms and tyrannical modern states are far more despotic than any ape.
Ethologically, humans are deﬁnitely a despotic species. But this discussion
leaves us with a question: Which are the real human political animals?
Is Human Nature Despotic?
If we change gears to speak of human nature, one of Fried's questions can
now be answered. There is, in fact, a "universal drive to dominance" in our
species, in the sense that we readily learn both domination and submission
behaviors and that such behaviors tend to emerge in situations of competi-
tion (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1979, 1989). "Drive to dominance" is, of course, old-
fashioned terminology. But whether it is called a "predilection" or a "ge-
netic preparation" (E. O. Wilson 1975), or simply "an innate disposition,"
we are talking about a behavior that, because of our genes, is more readily
learned in our particular species than it might be in another.
Particularly in the interactions of males with males and males with
females, humans are prone to dominate and prone to submit. Dominance
and submission are constants that run across all the societal types we have
discussed. Sometimes the subordinates dominantly hold down their
would-be alphas, who either submit to them or are executed. Sometimes a
tyrant gains absolute control of a very large human society and personally
dominates its members. Often, as in chiefdoms, some kind of compromise
is reached, by which power is shared more or less equally by leaders and
followers. In all such contexts, domination and subordination are promi-
nent underlying mechanisms, and often they become quite obvious when
conﬂicts arise between leaders and followers.
Human nature surely is despotic in Vehrencamp's terms, particularly if
we focus on the males; but the forms that our hierarchies take are quite
varied—precisely because sometimes the subordinates take ﬁrm charge of
the group, sometimes they share their power with fairly authoritative lead-
ers, and sometimes they are subjugated or enslaved. Our despotic human
nature is ﬂexible, and it leads to many permutations that may be inﬂuenced
by local environments but that also are part of local or regional history.
My last chapter will be devoted to human nature, with a focus on its
expression in males. This venture into political typology tells us already
that human nature is given to competition and that dominance and sub-
mission are natural tendencies of our species, even though most of the
The Hominoid Political Spectrum
147

domination is accomplished by males. So we come now to the second
human-nature question, the one that Fried posed but did not explore: Is
there anything like a universal drive to parity? In the next chapter I shall
make the case that the seeds of egalitarianism were in place millions of
years ago.
148
Hierarchy in the Forest

C H A P T E R
7
Ancestral Politics
Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau set the stage in the eighteenth
century for a protracted and polemicized debate about human political
nature. If we continue to look for simpliﬁed answers that lead strongly in
one direction, the discourse promises to be lively—but interminable. A
more sophisticated set of questions can be fashioned. However, to generate
them we must understand our complex and multifaceted human nature in
a relatively full evolutionary context, one that spans the last seven million
years.
I suggest that the views of Rousseau and Hobbes may reﬂect human
nature quite accurately—but only if we combine their contradictory view-
points, rather than allowing them to compete. Humans do seem to enjoy
autonomy and serenity. At the same time, they seem to have a competitive
penchant for domination that leads to conﬂict and creates a need for
governance. Natural selection is the agency responsible for both facets, so
we must look to the evolutionary basis of our political nature if we are to
understand these opposing tendencies.
Modeling Our Precursors
Let us begin by considering preadaptations that could have led to the
emergence of egalitarianism. To this end I shall create a comprehensive
political portrait of the Common Ancestor of humans and the three Afri-
can great apes. The four-species cladistic methodology I utilize is based on
conservative behavioral features that all four species share today (Wrang-
ham 1987). If we compare this kind of modeling to that done with just a
single species, the former is far more reliable; it is highly unlikely that four
149

different lineages would have accidentally converged on a behavioral fea-
ture lacking in the Common Ancestor.
The shared features I identify on the basis of extant behaviors will be
projected back about seven million years, as measured by "molecular time"
(Wolpoff 1996), to the Common Ancestor from which the four extant
hominid lineages are descended. At that juncture the gorilla lineage went
one way and the lineage ancestral to chimpanzees, bonobos, and humans
went another. Perhaps ﬁve million years ago another split took place, this
time with the Pan and human lineages diverging. Eventually, between one
and a half and three million years ago, bonobos and chimpanzees diverged
to become two separate species.
This four-species cladistic model has scientiﬁcally conservative proper-
ties that are highly desirable, in that any behavior determined to have been
present in the Common Ancestor surely will have been present in all spe-
cies within the human line—from hominids through to Anatomically
Modern Humans. Because I shall also use a narrower, chimpanzee-based
referential model, I must address the fact that referential models have been
criticized (see Tooby and DeVore 1987; Potts 1987; Stanford and Allen
1991; Moore 1996; Stanford 1998b), and that there are in fact two chim-
panzee models.
If we consider the two Pan species, it would appear that the chimpanzee
(Pan troglodytes) may have been rather conservative in its evolution
(Wrangham 1987; Wrangham and Peterson 1996) in comparison with the
bonobo (Pan paniscus). Thus, when the human and Pan lineages diverged,
their mutual ancestor could have been more similar to a chimpanzee than
to a bonobo. This assumption is based on the fact that bonobos exploit a
narrower range of environments than chimpanzees (Wrangham and Peter-
son 1996), and that such environments are likely to be different from those
of their mutual ancestor.
Chimpanzees may be considerably more "generalist" in their behavioral
ecology than bonobos, but if we compare chimpanzees with humans the
disparity is still greater. As the ultimate generalists (see Potts 1996), we
humans have developed huge brains, almost hairless bodies, and language
along with symbolic culture. We can exist in virtually any earthly environ-
ment as long as it is not too frozen, utterly desiccated, under water, or at
too high an altitude. Chimpanzees are lesser generalists: they continue to
adapt to a rather wide spectrum of tropical forest and savanna environ-
150
Hierarchy in the Forest

ments similar to those of their ancestors ﬁve million years ago (Wrangham
and Peterson 1996).
The Original Cladistic Model
In arriving at an innovative experimental model of the hominoid African
Common Ancestor as of seven million years ago, Wrangham (1987:55)
says:
The behavioral variables selected for analysis are those which theory
suggests are primary determinants of other aspects of social organization
. . . They are adult grouping patterns, relationships among mothers, rela-
tionships among breeding males, sexual relationships and intergroup re-
lationships. These are considered to be fundamental aspects of social
organization because they reﬂect rather directly the reproductive strate-
gies of breeding adults, which are themselves inﬂuenced strongly by eco-
logical variables.
With respect to groups, Wrangham determined that the ancestor of
gorillas, the two Pan species, and humans lived in semiclosed, stable social
networks with some lone males, and that relations between groups were
hostile. It was uncertain whether males formed political alliances within
the group, even though males stalked and attacked other males. Wrangham
judged that females usually left their natal group to breed and rarely en-
gaged in alliancing with their own kind. With respect to sexual relation-
ships, extant African apes and humans are so variable that nothing could
be assumed about promiscuity versus polygyny, or about the duration of
relationships. Intergroup relations were hostile on the part of males, but
territorial defense could not be deemed universal because gorilla harem
leaders seem not to defend the natural resources they exploit.
There is a fundamental question that Wrangham (1987) did not address,
even though it probably is just as basic to individual reproductive competi-
tion and behavioral ecology as the behaviors enumerated in the quotation
above. What about individual competition by means of dominance and
submission, and its effect on the internal structure of these semiclosed
groups?
In 1987 it would have been easy enough to determine that pronounced
social dominance hierarchies existed in gorillas, chimpanzees, and bono-
Ancestral Politics
151

bos. Humans, in contrast, posed something of a problem. In spite of inter-
pretations by Lee (1979), Woodburn (1982), and Boehm (1982b, 1984a,
1994b), many anthropologists were still tending to take hunter-gatherer
egalitarianism at face value. As we have seen, a few were implying that such
societies were "anarchic," while others seemed to feel that they were natu-
rally "without hierarchy." With humans in chiefdoms and nations being
characterized as hierarchical, but the foragers whose genes we inherited
being viewed as having insigniﬁcant hierarchy, the call was perhaps a
difﬁcult one. However, the ethologists Tiger and Fox (1971) had already
countered Fried (1967), taking the position that humans were by nature
hierarchical, and Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1974) had attacked the myth of peaceful,
nonhierarchical hunter-gatherers.
Another behavioral feature not on Wrangham's list, one I feel to be
potentially important from the standpoint of behavioral ecology, is group
leadership. Again, mixed messages were coming from the hunter-gatherer
literature. Some bands had named leaders, while others merely had an
array of individuals who served as functional leaders when the context was
appropriate.
Here, with somewhat different interests, I shall try to develop a Com-
mon Ancestral cladistic model more politically complete than previously.
The issues of social dominance hierarchy and group leadership will be
treated in some detail, along with the question of coalitions among both
males and females. This updated, politically oriented model will be based
on a better understanding of human egalitarianism, and also on informa-
tion about captive apes. Because my interest is in the Common Ancestor's
preadaptive potential, captive data are relevant. As we try to understand the
political evolution of a species as behaviorally labile as our own, large
groups of apes in zoos provide useful information about how labile the
Common Ancestor is likely to have been, and about its behavioral po-
tential.
A Political Portrait of the Common Ancestor
Defense of Reproductively Relevant Resources
A political behavior that Wrangham (1987) considered but deemed ques-
tionable in the Common Ancestor is territorial defense of natural re-
sources. He found this characteristic to be variable in humans and chim-
152
Hierarchy in the Forest

panzees, doubtful in bonobos, and absent in gorillas. He also suggested that
open-country chimpanzees might be utilizing ranges too large to defend,
but methodological difﬁculties have blocked identiﬁcation of patterns of
grouping and intergroup relations where this species inhabits arid lands
(McGrew, Baldwin, and Tutin 1981; Moore 1996).
Human territorial defense is variable because some peoples, particularly
the simpler foragers who are thought to best approximate our prehistoric
forebears (Woodburn 1982; Knauft 1991), appear sometimes to have very
little active intergroup conﬂict and less than highly proprietary attitudes
about the land they use (Kelly 1995). However, in view of extant behaviors
involving hostile social boundary defense and active perimeter defense as
deﬁned by Cashdan (1983) and discussed by Kelly with respect to foragers
on several continents, we do well to heed Service's warning that hunter-
gatherers probably had a greater degree of group conﬂict in the past.
With respect to bonobos, we have seen that the adult males do appear to
be antagonistic or at least hold aloof when groups meet, even as females
move between groups with friendly interactions. In this case, new informa-
tion has become available since 1987. Mountain gorillas remain a problem,
but their ranges overlap, as do those of lowland gorillas. We do have
reports of lowland gorilla groups engaging in aggressive encounters over
fruiting trees and stands of bamboo, and also over acquisition or defense of
females (Yamigawa et al. 1996:94; Tutin 1996:63-64), a behavior seen also
in mountain gorillas. There is some uncertainty about how distinct western
lowland gorillas are from mountain gorillas; but if one considers them
together, the Common Ancestor did defend natural resources. If one con-
siders them separately, mountain gorillas show no deﬁnitive evidence of
territorial behavior—even though the potential may be present.
This point merits further discussion. My interest here is more in politics
than in behavioral ecology per se. Wrangham's (1987) deﬁnition of territo-
rial defense was based on models of animal territoriality, which classically
involve highly predictable, active defense of precisely bounded pieces of
real estate. If we change the deﬁnition to "defense of any and all reproduc-
tively relevant resources in a group context," we have seen that mountain
gorilla silverbacks defend their harems vigorously against interlopers, and
they sometimes have their sons as allies in doing so (Fossey 1983).
On this basis, it can be said that the Common Ancestor had a deﬁnite
tendency to defend reproductively relevant resources in a way that involved
semiclosed groups. Giving further credence to a "defense of resources"
Ancestral Politics
153

assumption for the Common Ancestor is the fact that studies of great apes
and human foragers are usually made during times of relative plenty,
whereas times of serious scarcity are more likely to stimulate direct compe-
tition between groups.
The Critical Question of Hierarchy
Was the Common Ancestor hierarchical or not? The question hinges solely
on humans. We have just seen that if their egalitarianism is taken to indi-
cate a true lack of hierarchy, no determination can be made about the
Common Ancestor. The problem disappears if egalitarian society is seen as
involving a mere reversal in the direction of social dominance. I have
already mentioned the debate in Current Anthropology (Boehm 1993) and
the subsequent critiques of my reverse dominance hierarchy interpretation
(see especially Knauft 1993, 1994b; Erdal and Whiten 1994, 1996; Barclay
1993; Boehm 1994b, 1997a; de Waal 1996). A minority of researchers still
prefer to see hunter-gatherers as having very little hierarchy, rather than
emphasizing the dominance of the rank and ﬁle.
My own position can be summarized as follows: all humans are innately
prepared to engage in dominance-and-submission behavior (for example,
Blurton-Jones 1972), either in orthodox hierarchies or in reverse hierar-
chies that are operated decisively by the rank and ﬁle. If all humans live
hierarchically in one way or another, this pattern removes the only obstacle
with respect to determining the nature of ancestral social organization. The
exact nature of the Common Ancestor's hierarchy cannot be speciﬁed, but
in all probability it was of the orthodox variety that produces one or more
dominant individuals at the top. This top ancestral ape could have been
male or female; to judge from role assignments in our four extant species,
it was more likely to have been a male.
Leadership
Decisive individual leadership is prominent in gorillas, noteworthy among
chimpanzees, and at least present in moderate form in bonobos and egali-
tarian foragers. It is very prominent in some human societies. Thus, at least
a moderate degree of leadership must have been present in the Common
Ancestor. While leaders may inﬂuence the group in setting a direction for
154
Hierarchy in the Forest

travel, another important function (shared by all four species) is the paci-
ﬁcation of conﬂicts within the group.
From the standpoint of power and politics, this issue is important. Sil-
verback gorillas use pig grunts to stop ﬁghts (Harcourt 1979; Fossey 1983;
see also Watts 1996:22), and dominant chimpanzees routinely pacify the
quarrels of subordinates (Boehm 1994a; see also de Waal 1982; Goodall
1986). Bonobos are less well studied, but they have some of this behavior
as well (Kano 1992; Parish, personal communication), and extant humans
exhibit it strongly (Boehm 1986). Egalitarian foragers keep their leaders so
weak that their interventions tend to be ineffective, but they do try (see von
Fürer-Haimendorf 1967; Knauft 1991; Kelly 1995). The Common Ancestor
had group leaders, and they helped to pacify conﬂicts.
Small Political Coalitions
I have saved for last a type of political behavior that will ﬁgure prominently
in the interpretation of human political evolution. This is coalition be-
havior, by which individuals form short-term or longer-term alliances. I
shall treat political coalitions of entire groups separately from the smaller,
within-group coalitions discussed here.
In 1987 Wrangham judged female small alliances with other females to
be rare in gorillas, chimpanzees, and humans, and basically unknown in
bonobos. Similar male alliances were very rare in gorillas and bonobos, but
common in humans and chimpanzees. Wrangham (1987:59) rated the
Common Ancestor as having rare female alliancing and questionable male
alliancing. A decade later Wrangham and Peterson (1996), using new infor-
mation published by Kano (1992), suggested that female coalitions are
prominent in bonobos, whereas males do not form alliances to compete
within the group. These ﬁndings do not appear to have changed Wrang-
ham's original assessments for the Common Ancestor.
In chimpanzees and bonobos, we have seen that coalitions work strongly
to determine the rank positions of individuals. In bonobos, it is well-
bonded females who act together physically to advance their own political
fortunes and those of their sons. In chimpanzees, it is primarily the males
whose extreme status rivalry leads them to form political coalitions, al-
though wild females help one another to resist the domination attempts of
adolescent males and to combine forces in other contexts, and mothers at
least support their sons in contests with other males by vocalizing (Goodall
Ancestral Politics
155

1986). Female small coalitions mainly have to do with self-protection and
with defense of resources. Male small coalitions aim at increasing rank,
and, if possible, unseating the alpha.
With respect to female chimpanzees, Goodall's (1986) assessment that
female hierarchies are relatively muted has been augmented by Pusey, Wil-
liams, and Goodall's (1997) ﬁnding that female rank correlates with repro-
ductive success. That makes it less surprising that in captivity a group of
chimpanzees was dominated by an alpha female in the absence of any adult
males. In taking over the Arnhem Zoo group, this alpha female was helped
by a female coalition partner who also ranked high (de Waal 1982). At
Mahale, Nishida and Hosaka (1996) report that wild female chimpanzees
can act in pairs, or slightly larger units, to support favored males who
engage in contests with other males. In two reported instances the females
actively supported the alpha male against the same rival, and in one case
more than two females were involved (see also Nishida et al. 1995).
Thus, small coalitions play a meaningful role in the political lives of
chimpanzees and bonobos, even though the sexes engage in very different
ways in the wild. The linking of male bonobos with their mothers (and
their mothers' allies) provides them with highly stable coalitional backing.
By contrast, male chimpanzees' partnerships with other males tend to be
expedient and therefore less durable, while females have their own coali-
tions separately from males.
Gorillas present something of an empirical problem with respect to
small coalitions. Lowland gorillas are just coming under study, and their
ecology is somewhat different from that of mountain gorillas. Wild moun-
tain gorillas are well studied, though, and even if coalition behavior is rare
I can set out some relevant details.
We know that harems are dominated by enormous silverbacks, so female
coalitions have relatively little play. However, if resident blackbacks who are
sons of the silverback harem leader are not driven from the group, they
may act as allies of their father when the silverback's control is challenged
by an interloper. Fossey (1983:75-76) reported a son's receiving profuse
wounds while supporting his father against a usurper who tried to take
over the harem, and I judge this to be an important form of coalition
behavior. Fossey (1983:66-67) also reported a meeting of two harems dur-
ing which younger females from one wanted to play with females in the
other, their natal group. The more dominant male eventually moved into
the other male's group to retrieve his own females, and at one point several
156
Hierarchy in the Forest

females of that group rushed him, screaming, even though their intimi-
dated harem master stayed to one side. On this basis it can be said that
small male and female coalitions are found, if rarely, among wild mountain
gorillas.
Among lowland gorillas, Watts (1996:22) stated that males within a
group are prone to compete strongly for breeding privileges, with adoles-
cents often leaving their natal groups; but also silverbacks are more toler-
ant of very close kin than of other males growing up in their harems. This
tolerance provides them with allies in defending their harems against out-
siders. In this respect lowland gorillas seem similar to mountain gorillas:
small coalitions, usually fathers and sons, are operative for males.
Probably the most widespread type of small political coalition among
humans is the linkage between close male kinsmen. When one is killed, the
others often seek to retaliate, a type of behavior frequently found among
hunter-gatherers. It is prevalent as well among tribesmen, who sometimes
retaliate as entire clans. In addition, in most human groups families or
extended families act together in other political contexts, as when factions
form. Small coalitions are widespread.
Let us now triangulate to the Common Ancestor. It would seem that
small coalitions of some kind existed, but the question arises whether they
involved males or females. Small male political coalitions are formed by
humans, chimpanzees, and mountain and lowland gorillas, but not by
bonobos; small female political coalitions appear to occur very frequently
in bonobos, moderately in chimpanzees, weakly in humans, and rarely in
mountain gorillas. Furthermore, among bonobos coalitions are formed by
mothers and sons. What can be said conservatively about the Common
Ancestor is that small coalitions were present in one sex or the other. And it
seems likely that if one sex engaged in such behavior, the potential would
have existed for the other sex to do so as well.
Political Macrocoalitions
In the next chapter I trace the evolutionary development of egalitarianism.
By my deﬁnition, egalitarian society is the product of a large, well-united
coalition of subordinates who assertively deny political power to the
would-be alphas in their group. For this reason, we will be particularly
interested in the capacity of the Common Ancestor to act cooperatively in
large coalitions that unify the group—as opposed to small ones that basi-
Ancestral Politics
157

cally divide the group. Here I broaden the deﬁnition of political alliancing
to include what I have called macrocoalitions (Boehm 1992). These units
are formed in the course of intergroup hostilities or collective defense
against predators, but also when all or most of a group gangs up on a
persona non grata within the group.
Defense of Resources
We have seen that well-studied chimpanzee communities in predominantly
forested environments regularly patrol their perimeters, with all the males
acting as a single coalition much as humans do when conducting major
raids. At Gombe the chimpanzees also engage in "excursions" (Goodall
1986): essentially, to acquire food, an entire community moves into terri-
tory normally used by neighbors on an exclusive basis. In one such case, a
determined coalition of defending males (from the Mitumba community)
discovered a larger group of intruders who were not on their own turf, and
by blufﬁng furiously drove them away (Jane Goodall, personal communi-
cation).
Adult male bonobos stick together and appear to be antagonistic when
different groups meet—even though systematic patrolling and gang attacks
on individuals thus far have not been reported. This too can be taken as
macrocoalition behavior. Mountain and lowland gorillas exhibit individual
and sometimes coalitional defense of harems, with the few adult males all
participating, and lowland gorilla groups engage in contests over concen-
trated food sources. Humans show a variable but widespread pattern of
raiding, feuding, and warfare that often involves smaller groups of males,
but sometimes entails all the males of one group actively attacking another
group. Although gorillas may be a weak link in this particular argument
because their coalitions are so small and infrequent, at the very least the
Common Ancestor had some potential to form large coalitions against
conspeciﬁc interlopers. If harems were absent, these coalitions are likely to
have been large.
Defense against Predators
Certain birds engage in mobbing as a type of group blufﬁng, as do many
primates, and mobbing often involves actual physical contact. The basic
principle is that a determined group of "weaklings" can scare away or at
158
Hierarchy in the Forest

least seriously confuse a single predator who is far more powerful—and
also discourage it from stalking them because their predictable mobbing
behavior will spoil its hunting activities.
Pythons are not the only dangerous predators that chimpanzees dare to
mob. At Mahale, observers heard a group of chimpanzees vocalizing ag-
gressively, and when they arrived the chimpanzees had driven a female
leopard into a sheltered place. One of the chimpanzees entered her refuge
and emerged with a leopard cub, which was killed, eaten at, played with,
carried, and groomed (Byrne and Byrne 1988). Such mobbing behavior
serves to reduce the reproductive success of predators. In Tai Forest in West
Africa, chimpanzees were subject to serious predation by leopards, but
were able to defend themselves if they were not caught alone (Boesch
1991). In all these cases, coalition behavior enabled the prey species to cope
with an individually more powerful predator.
Human hunters often work in groups to hunt large game, just as chim-
panzees do, and we may assume that they also resist predation by staying in
groups. Bonobos do not seem to have many predators, and data are un-
available about possible mobbing even though such behavior seems possi-
ble. Gorillas appear to be a deﬁnite exception. Their best defense against
predation apparently is sexual dimorphism in body size, and it seems
possible that silverbacks protect their harems on a solo basis. The only
evidence is Schaller's (1963) report of ﬁnding a silverback gorilla and a
leopard both dead, apparently from mutually inﬂicted wounds. Given the
lack of data for bonobos and gorillas, mobbing of predators by the Com-
mon Ancestor must be deemed questionable.
Internal Macrocoalitions
Very large coalitions that direct their power against members of their own
group are particularly interesting as preadaptations for human egalitarian-
ism. Let us begin with hunter-gatherer moral communities. These may be
viewed as large subordinate coalitions formed to neutralize the power
of aggressive deviants. Deviance is culturally deﬁned, and outside of the
family for an individual "egalitarian" to seek or attain dominant political
power is always deviant. When serious inclinations in this direction be-
come evident, the entire group mobilizes into a large political coalition.
Had the band been unable to mobilize in this way, it seems highly unlikely
that our human type of egalitarianism could have arisen; instead, prehis-
Ancestral Politics
159

toric hunter-gatherers would have been dominated by alpha individuals in
a position to use coercive force and work their will on inferiors.
It is vital, at this point, to assess whether collective subordinate rebellion
is present in the other three African hominoids. Such a potential deﬁnitely
is present in chimpanzees. In the wild, just once in thirty-ﬁve years of
observation, the Gombe chimpanzees worked as a large coalition to pre-
vent a long-established alpha male from making a comeback—this, after
his displacement by a much younger male (Goodall 1992).
Wilkie's challenge to Goblin had taken place in the context of mating
competition. The female in question was Candy, and Goblin suffered se-
vere wounds to his abdomen and scrotum. Without intervention by a
veterinarian who was visiting the park, this defeated alpha male probably
would have died of the abscesses that developed. But Goblin recovered and,
being a political animal noted for his persistence (see Goodall 1986), he
attempted to stage a comeback. When Goblin tried to enter a large group
led by Wilkie, the younger males united to drive him away. He was peri-
pheralized for a time before he worked his way back into the hierarchy at a
much lower position. In effect, Goblin was ostracized until he gave up his
intention to regain the top position.
It would be anthropmorphizing to use the moralistic term "political
deviance" in this connection, but it is evident that as alpha candidate
Goblin had become a persona non grata. The parallel with human egali-
tarians is signiﬁcant, because most of the chimpanzee males united as a
single large coalition and collectively dominated their former leader when
his intention was to dominate them again. Normally, chimpanzees coalesce
into macrocoalitions only to patrol, to hunt, or to mob predators. But they
obviously have the potential to mob a member of their own group, and use
it occasionally.
A similar report comes from Mahale (Nishida and Hosaka 1996:130):
"In 1991, Kalunde, then alpha, chased Ntologi, who was roaming alone as
an exiled ex-alpha male. At that time some adult females, together with
some adult males, cooperated with Kalunde against Nitologe." This epi-
sode, further described in Nishida (1994), is quite similar to what hap-
pened at Gombe. It seems that if a wild chimpanzee group is followed for
several decades, eventually a group-internal macrocoalition will be ob-
served in action. Unfortunately, we do not yet have a comparable depth of
study in West Africa.
This natural behavior is paralleled by the Arnhem Zoo females, and also
160
Hierarchy in the Forest

by females at Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center in Atlanta. At Arn-
hem, after adult males were introduced to the group, females no longer
occupied the alpha position. But as a large coalition they actively selected
one alpha male and limited the functions of a successor (de Waal 1982). At
Yerkes, females in the large study group collectively wounded several adult
males who were introduced, and ﬁnally accepted Jimoh, a small male that
two of the females had known previously at another captive location (de
Waal 1996:91-92, 131). They also controlled Jimoh, subsequently their
alpha, when he attacked a lesser male (in an episode to be described later),
so their macrocoalition was powerful indeed. This behavior is directly
paralleled by captive lowland gorilla females who in effect voted for a
resident young blackback and rejected a new silverback. Bonobos show no
sign of forming very large coalitions within their groups, but wild females
regularly operate in coalitions larger than pairs, as they easily maintain
political parity with males who are larger and more muscular.
Because of bonobos' being less studied than chimpanzees, I can only
offer a "probable" opinion with respect to the likelihood of the Common
Ancestor's forming group-wide macrocoalitions aimed at dominating
otherwise dominant individuals within the group. However, in all four
species individuals who otherwise would be decisively subordinated com-
bine forces, in groups larger than two, to neutralize the power of their
superiors.
Political Effects of Subordinate Coalitions
By examining three types of large-coalition behavior, I have concluded that
seven million years ago in its groups the Common Ancestor had the poten-
tial to cope collectively with conspeciﬁc interlopers, and also to gang up on
powerful individuals within the group. By "gang up" I mean that there was
the potential to undermine alpha power by excluding certain politically
potent individuals from a dominant, alpha-type role. While today it is
human egalitarians who carry this pattern to an extreme (doing so moral-
istically as uniﬁed groups of both males and females), the preadaptive
potential for subordinate-coalition behavior would seem to have been con-
siderable in the Common Ancestor.
I believe it to have been greater still in the mutual ancestor of chimpan-
zees and humans—assuming that bonobos are more derived than chim-
panzees and can be set aside for purposes of reconstruction. If we move to
Ancestral Politics
161

ﬁve million years ago to consider this mutual ancestor, it is likely that all
the males of a group hunted together, mobbed predators together, and
protected natural resources together, and within the group very large coali-
tions of males and females had the potential to work effectively to control
power at the top.
The Psychology of Subordinate Intransigence
Simple Dominance-and-Submission Models
The mission of behavioral ecologists is to describe species-typical behav-
iors accurately, and then to understand their ecological and evolutionary
ramiﬁcations. My interest in this volume is in assessing the ancestral
preadaptive potential with respect to a rather unusual type of political
behavior, by which a rank and ﬁle's collective insubordination acts to sig-
niﬁcantly neutralize a social dominance hierarchy. Because I have been
dealing in behavioral potential, I have given far more weight to behaviors
taking place in captivity than would normally be the case. Another liberty I
now take is to consider the political motivations and intentions of subordi-
nates when they join forces to reduce the power of those above them.
Ever since the work of Tinbergen and Lorenz, it has been customary to
identify dispositions to "dominate" and "submit" as coevolved behavioral
building blocks that produce social dominance hierarchies in a wide vari-
ety of social species. In small-brained species such as birds (Schelderup-
Ebbe 1922; Tinbergen 1961), or ﬁsh (Lorenz 1963), analyses of their domi-
nance-submission interactions imply that they are behaving more or less
like automatons—even though they are quite efﬁcient as "learning ma-
chines." By this I mean that they appear to be equipped with on-off
switches that make them either dominate or submit on what amounts to a
binary basis. Once they have assessed an adversary's ﬁghting ability, in
effect the switch is thrown one way or the other. More recently, Pulliam and
Dunford (1980) and Lumsden and Wilson (1981) have emphasized the
ethological importance of thinking in terms of decision-making; decision
modeling has become rather popular in behavioral ecology, and in human
behavioral ecology in particular. I extend this approach, to consider moti-
vations and choices that attend political life within a primate social domi-
nance hierarchy.
162
Hierarchy in the Forest

An Ambivalence Model
If one discards this implicit on-off model, ambivalence becomes a promi-
nent element in decision behavior (Boehm 1989, 1996). I hypothesize that
in a hierarchically organized, socially labile species that exhibits a substan-
tial degree of status rivalry are both strong preferences to dominate in
situations of competition and inclinations to submit or ﬂee. In the absence
of a something like a binary switch, these two orientations work against
each other constantly as individuals make their political decisions. The
inclination to dominate is mitigated by fear of getting into the wrong ﬁght.
If fear overwhelms political ambition or desire for a speciﬁc prize, submis-
sion is the result. Such fear is useful to individual reproductive success, for
the loser of a ﬁght can be wounded or killed.
When we tease apart the act of submission, it appears to be composed of
several competing motivational elements. One is the underlying desire to
dominate, which is assumed to be continuing even as submission takes
place. Another is the aforementioned fear, which results in a posture or
gesture of appeasement, a submissive vocalization or facial expression, or
possibly ﬂight. Being subordinated also may be complicated by positive
orientations: for example, the submitter may anticipate becoming less
tense, for often appeasement signals lead to immediate cessation of the
threat or even to friendly intercourse. A useful long-term relationship may
be involved, one that involves protection against predators, help against
political rivals, sharing of food, or routinized and satisfying social contact.
The critical hypothesis here is that submitters often would prefer to
dominate, therefore they are likely to be ambivalent when they submit.
Negative feelings about being subordinated stem from the basic competi-
tive dispositions that make for status rivalry in the ﬁrst place: a would-be
winner hates to lose—or at least is ambivalent about losing, even though
submission has its obvious advantages. The primatological literature is
replete with accounts of ambitious subordinates who bide their time until
the situation is ripe for rank reversal or a takeover of the top position.
Frequently they engage in minor challenges along the way—even though
they are obliged to submit (for instance, de Waal 1982; Goodall 1986).
A striking example of this ambivalence is a protracted dominance insta-
bility, in which two individuals are competing for rank and cannot arrive at
the clear-cut dominance-and-submission arrangement that would both
Ancestral Politics
163

simplify their lives and eliminate the risk of being wounded. Such instabili-
ties are reported for many despotic primate species, but probably the best
data come from Arnhem Zoo. For this large group, with its ease of continu-
ous observation, de Waal (1982) has described pairs of males in the throes
of protracted instability. Their political ambivalence is obvious from body
language and facial expression, as each tries to bluff down the other. Both
are feeling aggressive and fearful at the same time, wanting to display or
attack but simultaneously exhibiting fear-grins. In one case in which two
males wanted to be dominant but were indecisive and exhibiting fear-grins,
one of them actually covered his mouth with his hand—apparently to
deprive his rival of information that could be of strategic use.
The Chimpanzee Waa as Ambivalent Vocalization
Humans have the gift of speech, a trait that makes it much easier to identify
political ambivalences. We have examined statements and philosophies of
egalitarians who obviously are ambivalent about status differences: they
praise and respect competent warriors and hunters, yet deny them power.
While chimpanzees do not have speech, they are a particularly expressive
species. Their behavioral repertoire is well suited for observers to make
inferences about politically-relevant emotions and intentions in the con-
text of dominance interactions. One chimpanzee vocalization in particular
lends itself nicely to the case for ambivalence—the waa-bark (Goodall
1986).
Let me detail a typical group-intimidation scene. When Goblin erects his
hair as he readies himself for a display, subordinates are already moving
toward trees or holding them in position to climb. When the display be-
gins, a chorus of submissive pant-grunts and pant-barks erupts, but also a
great deal of apparently terriﬁed screaming as trees are climbed rapidly, in
fear. Once the subordinates are well up in their trees, some of the scream-
ing vocalizations change in the direction of waa-barks. This acoustical
transition requires some explanation.
Chimpanzees have a graded call system (Marler 1969), which means that
certain calls can and do mutate into other calls along an acoustical contin-
uum. For example, a scream can grade, gradually or quickly, into a waa.
When a chimpanzee screams, air is expelled from the vocal cavity as the
animal's lips are drawn back to expose the teeth; this amounts to a fear-
grin, which is hard wired. The vocalization has a high, thin, bleating qual-
164
Hierarchy in the Forest

ity, which tends to be continuous except when air intake is necessary.
(Orthographically, this vocalic production can be roughly represented by
ee, as in "see.") By contrast, a waa involves expelling air while the lips are
pursed, and an "ah-like" vowel is voiced.
The waa vocalization has a variety of acoustical forms, none of which
really sounds like barking. Sometimes as the call begins, it sounds like the
English semivowel w. This is because the chimpanzee's pursed lips are
being gradually opened. As the vocalization continues, with a deﬁnite ah
quality to the vocalic production, the lips remain somewhat pursed,
rounded but more open. Like the scream, this classic waa can be prolonged
until it is interrupted by the need to breathe. A possible variant might be
called the wow, because the lips are moved toward a closed position again
at the end, to produce a terminal semivowel effect. Another variant that has
struck my ear (but may well have no special meaning to chimpanzees) is
the eeyow, which exhibits the semivowel effect only at the end of the call
and before that vocalically resembles our English ee sound more than our
ah. As will presently be seen, a similar variant has been noted in captivity
by de Waal (1996).
These are merely personal impressions of wild calls I have heard. I have
not used spectrographic analysis to categorize them, but rather an ear that
is attuned to human speech sounds and to what is known about articula-
tion of sounds in human language. That same ear also has been exposed to
thousands of chimpanzee vocalizations. In the course of sixteen months of
ﬁeldwork and many hours of examining videotaped vocalizations, I have
been able to ﬁnd no statistical correlation between the three phonetic
variations I seem to hear and the behavioral contexts in which they occur.
For this reason, I take the three waas to be in free variation. Until it can
be proved otherwise, there is only a single waa call; statistically, the pure
waa seems to be more frequent than the wow or the eeyow variant. When a
scream grades into a classic waa, my impression is that the quality of the
vowel-sound is what changes ﬁrst: the screaming ee sound moves, without
necessarily an abrupt transition, toward the ah sound of the classic waa.
Once the ah is established, when intake of air becomes necessary the semi-
vowel sound appears at the initial position and a waa results; the fear-grin
has been relaxing and the lips can now be pursed.
According to Goodall's (1986) behavioral analysis of chimpanzee calls,
what is taking place at the level of the emotions is a transition from fear to
hostile deﬁance. If we look at the typical behavioral context in which the
Ancestral Politics
165

waa is emitted, the facts support this inference: when the displaying alpha
male is at close range, screams of pure fear are emitted, and they tend to
continue as trees are being climbed. Once the threat is reduced by the high
predictability of the alpha male's staying on the ground to continue his
display, often the screams grade into waas.
Goodall (1986) has called the waa a vocalization of deﬁance, and de
Waal (1996) refers to it as "indignant." The social context suggests a hostile
resistance to power or authority, and this is consistent with the ambivalent
psychological state described a few pages back. However, the call is emitted
in other behavioral contexts as well. After examining several hundred
hours of videotape in the laboratory at the Jane Goodall Research Center at
the University of Southern California, I came to the conclusion that many
(probably most) waas at Gombe are given by subordinates expressing hos-
tility to their superiors from a safe distance. A less usual context occurred
when a mother vocally supported her late-adolescent son as he challenged
a male ranking above him. This too can be categorized as deﬁance by a
subordinate, for any female ranks lower than an adult male, and in this
anecdote the son was challenging an adult male. Waas may be given simul-
taneously by individuals whose rank is close and who are engaged in a
conﬂict of some type, a behavioral context that suggests mutual deﬁance.
In one videotaped incident, two mothers quickly retrieve their respective
offspring after the infants' rough play has resulted in screaming; then the
two of them issue waas at each other for a moment before things calm
down. The mothers were females of relatively high rank.
Waas also are used in a very different political context. In one videotaped
sequence, two juveniles are playing and the play becomes quite rough. The
smaller juvenile screams, disengages to solicit aid from nearby adults who
ignore him, goes back to play, again is hurt, and screams loudly. A large
adult female, Gigi, is resting ﬁve yards away. She issues a waa at that point
but does nothing more. It has the effect of temporarily damping the
agonistic behavior, but play resumes and again the larger juvenile hurts the
smaller. This time Gigi not only waas but erects her hair and gets to her
feet, taking a step toward the two. They completely disengage, and the play
session is terminated as Gigi lies down again. In this instance the waa was
used not in a subordinate capacity, but in a control role. Gigi was on the
verge of physically pacifying the conﬂict by use of her vastly superior
strength, but she accomplished the same purpose from a distance: the waa
166
Hierarchy in the Forest

was a warning by a dominant that the two subordinates were about to
experience an active intervention.
In another instance of waa use in a context of dominant control, rather
than insubordination, Goblin and Evered are eating some meat. Goblin's
little brother Gimble is begging so persistently that both of the adult males
repeatedly issue waas at him. As he waas, Evered advances toward Gimble
and directs arm threats at him.
Waas also are interspersed with other calls when chimpanzee communi-
ties are reacting to "foreign entities" of various types. They are mixed with
hunting barks when chimpanzees go after colobus monkeys or bushpigs.
Waas were directed at the python in the episode detailed earlier, along with
hostile, aggressive wraaas. When two patrols meet and begin to vocalize,
again waas are mixed with wraaas and also a variety of hoots (Goodall
1986). These are situations of contest, fraught with hostility and danger,
and the basic orientation appears to be both aggressive and defensive. The
defensive side is true even in hunting, where a similar mixture of calls is
heard. Bushpigs are formidable killing machines and colobus males bite at
the testicles of their larger simian predators (Stanford 1998a).
The vast majority of waas appear to be used by deﬁant subordinates, but
obviously their frequency is affected by the fact that alpha males put on
their intimidation displays on a daily basis. Clearly, this call (or set of calls)
is not dedicated just to the expression of subordinate deﬁance. What does
seem to hold constant, however, is that waas invariably express hostility—
and that if fear is involved, it is suborned to the hostility. When an alpha
male begins to display and a subordinate goes screaming up a tree, we may
interpret this as a submissive act of fear; but when that same subordinate
begins to waa as the display continues, it is an open, hostile expression of
insubordination. I believe that a similar emotional and behavioral orienta-
tion underlies the human moral community's labeling of domination be-
haviors by stronger individuals as deviant.
As suggested by de Waal (1996), chimpanzees too have some capacity to
"rule from below" in a way that is stable over time. For some years Frans de
Waal has been observing a large chimpanzee group in a spacious enclosure
at the Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center, and he provides fascinat-
ing observations of the use of the waa vocalization by females there. As at
Arnhem Zoo, the Yerkes females act as a power coalition and have been
able to ﬁercely reject a number of candidates for alpha male. After they
Ancestral Politics
167

accepted Jimoh, this small male eventually dominated even the alpha fe-
male. As alpha male he worked zealously on the community's behalf to
break up ﬁghts between other chimpanzees. In the following anecdote,
however, Jimoh is pursuing his own self-interest and it is the females
subordinate to him who collectively change the course of the conﬂict.
Jimoh . . . once detected a secret mating between Socko, an adolescent
male, and one of Jimoh's favorite females. Socko and the female had
wisely disappeared from view, but Jimoh had gone looking for them.
Normally, the old male would merely chase off the culprit, but for some
reason—perhaps because the female had repeatedly refused to mate with
Jimoh himself that day—he this time went full speed after Socko and did
not give up. He chased him all around the enclosure—Socko screaming
and defecating in fear, Jimoh intent on catching him.
Before he could accomplish his aim, several females close to the scene
began to "woaow" bark. This indignant sound is used in protest against
aggressors and intruders. At ﬁrst the callers looked around to see how the
rest of the group was reacting; but when others joined in, particularly the
top-ranking female, the intensity of their calls quickly increased until
literally everyone's voice was part of a deafening chorus. The scattered
beginning almost gave the impression that the group was taking a vote.
Once the protest had swelled to a chorus, Jimoh broke off his attack with
a nervous grin on his face; he got the message. Had he failed to respond,
there would no doubt have been concerted female action to end the
disturbance. (de Waal 1996:91-92)
This display of collectivized subordinate power can be compared with
two of the waa-behaviors cited above for wild chimpanzees. Individually,
the females were all subordinate to Jimoh, so their waas can be compared
with those of Fiﬁ at Gombe, who waaed in support of her adolescent son
Freud when he attacked the adult male Atlas to enter the male dominance
hierarchy. Atlas was dominant to Fiﬁ. However, the chorus of Yerkes waa
vocalizations can be taken as a collectively dominant warning that grew out
of scattered subordinate protests. Contextually, these manipulative waas
are directly comparable to those of Gigi, who had dominant power on her
side when she similarly stopped a conﬂict at a distance, without having to
intervene physically.
In a sense, the waa vocalizations of large chimpanzee groups can be
considered an expression of "public opinion," as we would put it in human
168
Hierarchy in the Forest

terms. Indeed, this description by de Waal of an emerging female consen-
sus can be compared with Silberbauer's description, cited earlier, of G/wi
foragers in the Kalahari as they gradually arrive at a decision of the entire
band about where to migrate next. Human decisions to sanction a bully are
likely to develop on a similar basis.
A handful of scattered subordinate protests up in trees can be ignored by
a superior as he displays, but an entire group waaing in a context that
suggests imminent physical intervention will get his attention. In this sense,
waa-barks provide a signal by which individuals in various roles can read
the political dynamics that are taking place in their group. The subordi-
nates, if they sense enough support, may be emboldened to rebel in deed,
rather than by voice alone. The dominant can react to such collectivized
threats and submit to the subordinate coalition, as Jimoh did, or he can try
for intimidation, as Goblin did against Wilkie, and ﬁnd himself in exile.
By deﬁnition, ambivalence involves mixed emotions. Indirect but per-
suasive evidence suggests that chimpanzees can experience serious and
protracted ambivalence in situations in which they must submit, or in
which they are not sure what to do. Offered as further evidence are the two
competitive contexts I earlier described, in which chimpanzee subordinate
males set aside their usual response (appeasement and submission or
ﬂight) to threaten or actively attack a superior. Both involved rivalry over
prized commodities. With meat and with mates, prior possession can em-
bolden a subordinate to act on the aggressive side of his ambivalence:
instead of merely resenting domination, the intransigent subordinate is
prepared to ﬁght in spite of his adversary's established dominance.
Egalitarian Ambivalence
What about political ambivalence in humans? In societies that are egalitar-
ian, subordinate intransigence is pervasive and results in vigilant suppres-
sion of alpha-type behaviors. In human societies that are hierarchical,
subordinates appear to buy into the notion of social and political hierarchy.
Nevertheless, they subject their dominators to a certain kind of cost-beneﬁt
accounting. If their leaders are fair-minded and attentive to the needs of
their people, subordinates remain appreciative—and docile. If they feel the
leaders are abusing their powers, however these may be deﬁned locally in
terms of political legitimacy, they become ambivalent, hostile, potentially
rebellious, and disposed to act forcefully.
Ancestral Politics
169

My suggestion is that any behaviorally ﬂexible animal that lands on the
despotic side of Vehrencamp's political scale will, in a subordinate role,
react with partial hostility when subjected to intimidation that breeds fear
and stress. Possible situations include those in which its freedom of action
is curtailed, or when it loses speciﬁc prizes in food or mating competition.
Such motivational ambivalence is most likely to be expressed when the
animal senses a possible opportunity to gain rank and is testing the resolve
of a superior. The assumption of political ambivalence would seem to
include our African Common Ancestor. Like any despotic primate, this ape
was prone to become ambivalent about being dominated whenever a sub-
ordinate role was necessary and some major prize was at issue. Presumably,
the mutual ancestor of humans and chimpanzees was the same, but was
more prone to act collectively in an "insubordinate" capacity.
In human nature terms, our discussion is relevant to Fried's (1967)
passing speculation that there may be a universal drive to parity. The
disposition in question is not one that orients us speciﬁcally to equality, but
one that makes us resentful of being unduly subordinated, however that
happens to be deﬁned individually—or culturally. Today's human egalitari-
ans deﬁne inappropriate domination culturally, and do so on a hair-trigger
basis. Their ingenious invention is to deﬁne the ideal society in a way such
that no main political actor gets to dominate another. Then they see to it, as
a group, that anyone who tries to infringe seriously on this rule is himself
dominated. In the next chapter I develop a scenario for how this curious
and wonderful state of political affairs originated.
170
Hierarchy in the Forest

C H A P T E R
8
The Evolution of
Egalitarian Society
Intentionality and morality are not needed to form a despotic hierarchy,
one in which strong dispositions to competitively dominate inevitably
push certain individuals to the top. The despotic social order of chickens,
for example, is basically mechanical, with the pyramid of power pointing
upward toward a few dominant individuals (Schelderup Ebbe 1922). Nor
are complicated intentions or a sense of ethics needed to form an egalitar-
ian society like that of squirrel monkeys (Boinski 1994), in which innate
dispositions to compete through dominance are so weak that much of the
time little sign of hierarchy is apparent. Their relaxed social order is equally
mechanical.
With chimpanzees something rather different is involved. Fundamen-
tally, there is a linear social order for males and a looser hierarchy for
females (Goodall 1982, 1986). In this sense chimpanzees are similar to
chickens: their intentions are individualistic and fairly immediate as they
compete for status, females, and food. When they join in dyadic coalitions
to enhance their competition for status, their intentions remain individual-
istic, and on that basis their community remains far from being an inten-
tional society. It is when a very large group combines to play kingmaker, or
routinely curb the power of the alpha male, that a similarity to humans is
visible. We have just seen that large coalitions of captive females exhibit
something similar to human public-opinion formation—in a context of
angry deﬁance, which leads to a consensus that interferes with the alpha's
dominant behavior. The Gombe males have acted quite similarly, and on a
smaller scale comparable behavior has been observed at Mahale. Including
Arnhem Zoo and Yerkes, collectively based kingmaker behavior has been
reported at four sites; it would be foolish to deny intentionality where
171

the goal is so unambiguous and the actors are obviously collaborating. It
would seem that both wild and captive chimpanzees are able to arrive at
essentially agreed-on political strategies, sometimes long-term ones, and
shape their societies on that basis. Thus, at least a modest element of
intentionality is incorporated into their group behavior (Boehm 1991a).
In its outward appearance, this rebellious manipulative behavior of large
groups, with attendant waa calls, has the earmarks of what Trivers (1971)
refers to as moralistic aggression. Is this behavior actually moral in some
sense? Like chickens, chimpanzees have no ethos. Therefore, their society
cannot be deemed an intentional one like the moral community of the
Hutterites. There the rank and ﬁle take over deﬁnitively as a group, deﬁne
their standards with a very strong sense of "ought," and all but eliminate
the group-leadership role (Wilson and Sober 1994). Chimpanzees do exert
signiﬁcant control from below, and more generally de Waal (1996) has
attributed to them the possibility of protomorality. What they do not do is
put their antiauthoritarian feelings to use in radically redesigning their
society on the basis of a morally based political vision. Human morality
makes possible such redesign, for once the egalitarian blueprint is in place,
a fully uniﬁed moral community can dominate or eliminate any individual,
no matter how strong, who tries to oppose this vision. Decisive domination
from below is not merely episodic, for in small-scale human societies sus-
tained rule by the entire rank and ﬁle is quite predictable.
If a small group's ethos changes in the direction of accepting hereditary
personal authority and marked social differences, the reversal of domi-
nance order will be lost: a socially accepted orthodox hierarchy asserts itself
instead, as with the Kwakiutl. Even if the ethos does not change, small
societies that are stalwartly egalitarian may suffer despotic episodes in
which a freedom-loving rank and ﬁle become intimidated to the point
that the only recourse is assassination. Egalitarian societies are durable,
yet at the same time they are vulnerable. In the face of predictable chal-
lenges, only a vigilant commitment to an egalitarian lifestyle keeps them
equalized.
Was There an Egalitarian Revolution?
How did prehistoric foragers begin intentionally to exchange their ortho-
dox hierarchies for deﬁnitively reversed ones? Whallon (1989) has sug-
gested (and I am inclined to agree) that symbolic culture permitted ortho-
172
Hierarchy in the Forest

dox hierarchies to be replaced by egalitarian hierarchies based on cultural
rules. Egalitarian society was a cultural invention, one that put a distinctly
competitive, ethologically despotic human nature to radically new political
uses.
Another question arises with respect to cultural provenance. Did egali-
tarianism arrive very quickly, on a revolutionary basis, or was it an instance
of very gradual cultural evolution? With the degree of political tension I
have documented in Chapters 3 to 5, and with the high predictability of
upstarts arising, the origin of such societies might not have been at all
gradual. Indeed, to eliminate the alpha role decisively, the rank and ﬁle may
have needed to use force to displace a speciﬁc alpha, and further force to
keep his would-be replacements sufﬁciently cowed to allow an egalitarian
situation to stabilize. This hypothesis is speculative, for one can also imag-
ine large, stable coalitions similar to those at Arnhem and Yerkes moving
gradually in the direction of increasing their power over the alpha types,
until ﬁnally they were in a position to eliminate the alpha role entirely.
With either scenario, the political tool used by rebellious subordinates
would have been the ability to operate in large coalitions that had speciﬁc
and sophisticated political objectives.
To understand how this type of political capacity managed to develop to
the point that stable egalitarian societies were formed by humans, we must
consider a series of hypotheses about likely preadaptations. In Vehren-
camp's terms, the purpose is to explain, at the level of phenotype, how a
species innately given to despotism could have changed its behavior from
despotic to egalitarian. Additional preadaptations to be considered are the
invention of hunting weapons, the advent of large-game hunting, and—
more basically—the development of a large brain and the linguistic, cogni-
tive, and cultural capacities that accompanied it. For each of these preadap-
tations, I shall try to specify the window of time during which it is likely to
have become available.
Political Preadaptations
Basic Political Dispositions
Let us review some basic characteristics of the political animal in ques-
tion. To reverse a social dominance hierarchy, "hierarchical tendencies"
are needed as a foundation: it is dispositions to dominance and submis-
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
173

sion that generate human hierarchies (Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1971, 1989; Masters
1989). Also needed is a shared motivation to rebel against the alpha-male
system (Boehm 1993), motivation that is provided by an innate aversion to
subordination (Boehm 1994b). This aversion can be considered a third
basic political disposition (Boehm 1997a), or as an important but little-ex-
amined side effect of the disposition to dominate.
These basic dispositions produced a species likely to engage in direct
competition based on dominance and submission. Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1971)
makes the point that most primate competition of this type is by bluff,
which is in the genetic self-interest of the principals. But he also says that
blufﬁng is coupled with ﬁghting ability, and that sometimes competition in
chimpanzees and humans comes down to a physical encounter. It took a
species given to competition, blufﬁng, and ﬁghting to manage to reverse its
own hierarchies.
Displacement of Displays by Weapons
In this context we must ask why it is that humans lost dangerous canine
teeth and their cloak of bodily hair, both of which were extremely useful to
ﬁghting and blufﬁng, and why sexual dimorphism in human body size has
been reduced over the past several million years. Dunbar (1996) points out
that in primates, pronounced dimorphism like that of Australopithecines is
associated with either harem arrangements or with open, promiscuous
mating competition by males, as opposed to permanent pair bonding. The
long-term shift suggests to Dunbar a movement from strongly polygamous
mating arrangements to mild polygamy. This type of hypothesis began
with Darwin, who judged sexual selection to be an extremely powerful
force in evolution. In The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex,
he posits that men are larger and stronger than women because men must
compete for women. He was correct, for we have seen that the one form of
dominance behavior that egalitarian hunter-gatherers cannot seem to sup-
press is the violence that accompanies male competition over females.
In The Origin of Species Darwin suggests that jaws, jaw muscles, and
teeth diminished in size after weapons were introduced into human life;
people no longer needed powerful natural tools to ﬁght each other or
dispatch animals they hunted, a theory also entertained by Washburn
(1960). Darwin also considers radical hair loss, which essentially took place
everywhere except on the head and where the extremities join the body. He
174
Hierarchy in the Forest

does not link hair loss to lack of intimidation displays, as I shall. While
mentioning climate as a possible cause, he favors the theory that the loss of
body hair was mainly a function of sexual selection (see also Pilbeam
1972): in effect, aesthetically inclined women were choosing as mates men
with less hair on their bodies. This hypothesis has obvious merit.
Wheeler (1985) has a different perspective. He sets aside gross factors of
climate, because African apes and many other quadrupedal species that are
adapted to tropical settings have retained their body hair. Instead, he pro-
poses that it could have been human bipedalism that led to elimination of
bodily hair. Because the human body largely shields itself from the sun
with upright posture, hair loss made cooling of the body more efﬁcient,
while retention of hair on the head afforded protection from the sun. This
environmental hypothesis also may have some merit.
One must keep in mind that such arguments need not compete: natural
selection can operate on a multidimensional basis. A politically based hy-
pothesis is possible as well. The arrival of lethal hunting weapons can
explain more than the reduction of dimorphism and canine size. Ances-
trally, exuberant intimidation displays genetically coevolved with long erec-
tile hair, which is found virtually over the entire bodies of the three African
great apes and vestigially with humans. As Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1971) demon-
strates, bristling displays were useful to reproductive success because they
enabled individuals to exhibit (and exaggerate) their power without having
to ﬁght at close range. In this way they could make expedient moves up the
social dominance hierarchy, yet usually avoid ﬁghts that might hurt their
reproductive success. Humans have departed far from African apes in this
respect. Except as vestiges, we have neither the innately well-prepared dis-
plays nor the profuse bristling bodily hair that accompanied those displays.
When lethal weapons were developed by humans, they could have had
profound effects not only on display behavior, but on the quantity of hair.
Weapons made possible not only killing at a distance, but far more effective
threat behavior; brandishing a projectile could turn into an instant lethal
attack with relatively little immediate risk to the attacker. This potent new
extrasomatic means of ﬁghting and threatening reduced the natural-selec-
tion pressures that for millions of years had been keeping in place apelike
canines, innately disposed intimidation displays, and long, erectile body
hair.
To consider the immediate effect of weapons, one need only compare
chimpanzee killings with human homicides in bands. A hunter can kill
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
175

another hunter with a weapon in relatively short order, even though weap-
ons are far from being totally efﬁcient (Lee 1979). By contrast, it is likely to
take an individual chimpanzee some time to kill another, and lethal out-
comes are rare in one-on-one combat. Indeed, it takes a group of several
male chimpanzees ten to twenty minutes of ferocious gang attack to do in
a stranger they catch while on patrol (Goodall 1986).
In Homo erectus and Anatomically Modern Humans, weapons are likely
to have been used in defending against predators, scavenging, hunting,
seeking dominance in one's own group, and threatening other groups;
preadaptations for such behavior deﬁnitely existed. Wrangham and Peter-
son (1996:180) tell about watching a chimpanzee displace a large male
baboon from a tree by hitting him from a distance with his ﬁst, which kept
the chimpanzee out of range of the baboon's very dangerous canine teeth.
They connect this behavior with the chimpanzee's adaptation to swinging
with powerful arms, and point out that chimpanzees thus are preadapted
for weapons use. They feel that use of wooden clubs is within the behav-
ioral possibilities of extant chimpanzees, and with respect to human evolu-
tion they make the case that sexual selection would favor increased upper-
body strength because it made males better able to ﬁght by boxing, or to
grasp and use weapons.
Wrangham and Peterson do not carry their analysis to the point of
emphasizing the importance of weapons invention for human dominance,
competition, and aggression more generally, but it does seem likely that the
mutual ancestor was well preadapted physically for weapons use. Eibl-
Eibesfeldt (1971), arguing similarly, demonstrates that chimpanzees engage
in a variety of behaviors involving found objects in their agonistic contests.
Behaviors range from throwing pieces of vegetation or stones into the air
while displaying, to aiming projectiles, and (under Kortlandt's ﬁlmed situ-
ation of contrivance) to clubbing a stuffed leopard as ﬂailing displays
turned into direct attacks. Calvin (1983) has emphasized throwing ability
as a factor in human evolution, but it is signiﬁcant that chimpanzees do
not use clubs or aimed projectiles in their ﬁghts within the group, or in
attacking strangers, or in hunting. Weapons of whatever variety do not
level differences of physical strength, gymnastic ability, and dentition when
chimpanzees ﬁght.
McGrew (1992) discusses weapons at some length, pointing out that
some "lithic technology" is present in nonhuman species. He cites the use
of stones as defensive weapons by baboons in three different regions, even
176
Hierarchy in the Forest

though these "instruments" are found, rather than fabricated, objects. At
four out of eight sites he surveyed (McGrew 1992:180), chimpanzees throw
missiles but they are used in conjunction with display and blufﬁng behav-
ior or at very early stages of attack, rather than as tools for disabling or
killing. Indeed, even to one who has carefully watched Kortlandt's remark-
able ﬁlm of the stuffed leopard experiment, the chimpanzees' aggressive
use of found objects (sticks) seems to be much more an extension of
blufﬁng behavior than a mode of serious physical attack. When Byrne and
Byrne (1988) observed Mahale chimpanzees who had cornered a leop-
ardess, they did not use weapons, even though a chimpanzee was able to
capture one of her cubs and kill it. Nor were objects used in my videotaped
python-mobbing episode at Gombe, aside from swaying branches high in
trees as an enhanced blufﬁng behavior.
Thus, a preadaptation for weapons use appears to have been present in
the mutual ancestor but was not highly developed. Nor were lethal weap-
ons necessarily present with early hominids. Ardrey (1966), stimulated by
Dart (1959), had Australopithecines going to war with weapons, but Mon-
tagu (1976) argued forcefully, with the help of Brain's (1972, 1981) inter-
pretations, that Australopithecine-fashioned stone tools were used for pur-
poses other than killing.
How do these insights affect egalitarianism? When killing becomes both
easy and rapid, the balance of power between two combatants becomes
more a matter of skill in tool use than a matter of canine size, jaw strength,
and body size and strength. As will be seen through some vivid ethno-
graphic examples, a strong element of chance is involved in who strikes the
ﬁrst lethal blow. Furthermore, while a larger individual may still have an
advantage over a smaller in wielding a weapon such as a spear, he also
presents a larger target when it comes to spearing, clubbing, or throwing a
projectile.
Woodburn (1982) has made the point that, with hunting weapons, it is
possible to take out one's adversary by ambush or during sleep. Thus, after
weapons arrived, the camp bully became far more vulnerable. Such politi-
cal equalization could have had meaning as a preadaptation for an egalitar-
ian cultural revolution, particularly if one considers the combined weap-
onry of a group of rebellious subordinates being directed at a single
too-aggressive alpha. The latter could be readily dispatched at a safe dis-
tance or driven from the group, with little immediate physical risk to the
rebels.
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
177

In exemplifying the effect of weapons on the political life of extant
foragers, we turn again to Lee's (1984:93-95) excellent ethnography. He
describes in detail a conﬂict among a number of Kalahari forager band
members, in which the basic issue is two males ﬁghting over a female one
of them intends to take as a second wife.
Two men, Debe and Bo, were ﬁghting for the hand of a woman, Tisa. This
is a composite account of two participants, Debe and Kashe, men now in
their ﬁfties. Debe reported:
Bo started it by refusing me a wife. I wanted to marry Tisa, and her
mother and father gave me permission, but Bo had already married
Tisa's older sister and he wanted to take her as a second wife, so he
refused me.
There was a big argument, and ﬁghting broke out. Bo yelled at my
younger sister, "What is your brother doing marrying my wife? I'm
going to kill you!" He shot an arrow at her and missed. Then Bo
came up to me to kill me, but my father came to my aid. Then
Samkau came to Bo's aid. Samkau shot at me but missed; my father
speared Samkau in the chest under the armpit. Samkau's father,
Gau, seeing his own son speared, came to his aid and ﬁred a poi-
soned arrow into my father's thigh. I was shooting at Bo but missed
him.
 The narrative continues with the account of Kashe, the brother of Tisa.
Then Debe's father, Hxome, stabbed at Gau with his spear. Gau put
up his hand to protect himself and the spear went right through it.
Samkau rushed at Hxome with his spear and tried to spear him in
the ribs. At ﬁrst the spear jammed, but then it went through.
In the meantime several side ﬁghts were going on. My older
brother dodged several arrows and then shot Debe's sister in the
shoulder blade (she lived). I dodged arrows by two men and then hit
one of them in the foot with a poisoned arrow.
After being hit with a poisoned arrow in the thigh and speared in
the ribs Hxome fell down, mortally wounded. Half-sitting, half-ly-
ing down, he called for allies. "I'm ﬁnished, my arms are stilled. At
least shoot one of them for me."
But no more shooting happened that day. We went away and
came back the next morning to see Hxome writhing in his death
178
Hierarchy in the Forest

throes. He had been given cuts to draw off the poison, but the
poison was in too deep, and he died. We left N/wama.
This account makes it clear that foragers do form political coalitions
(primarily male), and that their weapons make them lethal ﬁghters in spite
of all the times their arrows miss as others dodge them. Lee discusses a
number of strings of retaliatory killings that have taken place after !Kung
homicides, then returns to the quarrel we are examining. (Keep in mind
from here on that there are two men named Debe, who are allies.)
The !Kung do have one method of last resort, a trump card, for bringing
a string of homicides to an end. I listened with amazement to my inform-
ant Debe as he unfolded an incredible tale of passion and revenge. This is
a continuation of the case discussed above.
After my father's murder, Debe, a man who was my !kun!a [older
namesake] complained, "Now my namesake Debe has no father, but
Samkau still has a father. Why is this?"
I said, "You are right. I am going to kill Bo, who started it all."
"No," Debe said, "Bo is just a youngster, but Gau is a senior man,
a n!ore [waterhole] owner, and he is the one who has killed another
n!ore owner, Hxome. I am going to kill him so that n!ore owners
will be dead on both sides."
One evening Debe walked right into Gau's camp and without
saying a word shot three arrows into Gau, one in the left shoulder,
one in the forehead, and a third in the chest. Gau's people made no
move to protect him. After the three arrows were shot, Gau still sat
facing the attacker. Then Debe raised his spear as if to stab him. But
Gau said, "You have hit me three times. Isn't that enough to kill me,
that you want to stab me too?"
When Gau tried to dodge away from the spear, Gau's people
came forward to disarm Debe of his spear. Having been so badly
wounded, Gau died quickly, but made no further move to harm
Debe. However, fearing more trouble, some of our people brought
in the Tswana man Isak to mediate the dispute (Lee 1984:95-96).
Gau's group made no move to defend him, so what took place was
perhaps a socially sanctioned execution. In the absence of manufactured
weapons the outcome would have been far less certain, for Debe would
have been matching his ability to ﬁght tooth and nail or to pick up and use
objects like stones, against Gau's ability to do the same.
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
179

Gau's political history was sufﬁciently checkered that his group might
have been happy to get rid of him, for he was prone to conﬂict. He already
had started a lengthy feud by killing a man with a spear, then killed a man
in the group who attempted to retaliate. He killed a third man when his
enemies attacked again. Several others were also killed or wounded in these
ﬁghts (Lee 1984:94). Gau may well ﬁt the tribal proﬁle we saw earlier, of an
incorrigible aggressor who dominates his group sufﬁciently that they can-
not easily take care of the problem, and who essentially is given over to his
enemies because his own group wants to be rid of him.
Of three other !Kung instances of killers being executed, one is worth
citing for details of how hunter-gatherers as a group go about using weap-
ons to execute someone who is overaggressive.
In the most dramatic case on record, a man named /Twi had killed three
other people, when the community, in a rare move of unanimity, am-
bushed and fatally wounded him in full daylight. As he lay dying, all the
men ﬁred at him with poisoned arrows until, in the words of one inform-
ant, "he looked like a porcupine." Then, after he was dead, all the women
as well as the men approached his body and stabbed him with spears,
symbolically sharing the responsibility for his death. (Lee 1979:00)
This group execution involved the entire moral community that made
the decision, and active participation by each person obviated the possibil-
ity of precisely targeted revenge. It may seem puzzling that the females
participated, but remember that they were full members of the moral
community.
To summarize, weapons made men more dangerous to one another and
thereby mitigated differences of size or strength in ﬁghting. Blufﬁng behav-
ior as well was transformed. Brandishing a spear conveys an immediate
and lethal threat, one that can be carried out at a distance. By contrast,
jumping around on the ground and bristling one's hair merely telegraphs
an attack that often is avoidable through ﬂight. Weapons not only made the
outcomes of dyadic ﬁghts far less predictable; as we have seen, they also
made it much easier for a group to implement extreme sanctions against a
powerful or overaggressive deviant. If a deviant was truly intimidating (as
human serial killers are), capital punishment would be unlikely in the
absence of reasonably efﬁcient killing tools. It is for this reason that use of
efﬁcient hunting weapons was critical to the deﬁnitive reversing of hierar-
chies in prehistoric bands.
My hypothesis is that weapons appeared early enough to have affected
180
Hierarchy in the Forest

dentition, body size, hair loss on the body, and display loss, and that they
helped to ready humans for egalitarian society by making ﬁghts less pre-
dictable and by enabling groups collectively to intimidate or eliminate even
a dominating serial killer. When was this possible? Brace (1995), with a
particular interest in Neanderthals, points out that the hafted spear point
was present in the Middle Pleistocene epoch in Africa (see also Brooks
1988; Shea 1988), and he feels that the thrown hunting spear, as opposed to
spears used for jabbing, could have radically changed the natural-selection
forces that determined bodily robustness. This thesis accounts neatly for
the ﬁrst appearance of reduced robustness being in Africa, and it also
provides a conservative time frame for the appearance of hunting weapons
that could have helped to equalize human males, politically speaking.
(Brace does not mention the political consequences I have discussed above,
nor does he link the advent of projectile spears with formidable hafted
stone heads to loss of apelike body hair or displays.)
Thrown spears could have been present much earlier than the Middle
Pleistocene, for a wooden spear is light to carry yet heavy enough to do
serious damage. Such weapons are likely to have preceded large-game
hunting for two reasons. One is that humans on savannas may have needed
to carry weapons constantly to repel predators; this could have been a
factor in the development of advanced bipedality, with body size becoming
smaller as a useful trade-off. The other reason is that if humans scavenged
actively, they had to cope with competing scavengers. Wooden spears
would leave no trace in the archaeological record, but as readily carried
weapons, they could have changed the nature of ﬁghting and blufﬁng
within the group early in human evolution. A more conservative estimate
is that weapons were in a position to transform political behavior by
500,000 years ago, a ﬁgure that provides fully 20,000 generations for weap-
ons to affect the genetic selection of body size and build, display behav-
ior, canine size, distribution of hair on the body, and possibly bipedal
efﬁciency.
Cognitive Preadaptations
Political Intelligence
To reverse the direction of dominance deﬁnitively in a social hierarchy,
substantial cognitive ability is required. Otherwise humans could not
strategize politically in the context of alliance formation. Coalitions are
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
181

prominent among primates and other highly social species (Harcourt and
de Waal 1992); surely the Common Ancestor possessed an adequate ability
to strategize that evolved in the context of limited coalition behavior. The
mutual ancestor not only engaged in small, dyadic coalitions of females or
males, but also acted in larger coalitions. We have seen that the contexts
would have included not only territorial interactions, mobbing of preda-
tors, and hunting, but rejection of certain alpha-male candidates. Sufﬁcient
political intelligence was present, preadaptively, that large numbers of sub-
ordinates were able to engage in effectively rebellious activities that took
signiﬁcant power from those at the top of the hierarchy—an ability that
required a relatively large brain.
Dunbar (1996) has an interesting theory in this regard. He believes that
as neocortical size increases, more subtle social and political strategies, such
as tactical deception, come into play. As a result, lower-ranking individuals
are able to ﬁnd loopholes in the social dominance hierarchy. Their special
cognitive capacity enables them to improve their reproductive success in
spite of low rank. This thinking is directly in line with the Machiavellian
Intelligence hypothesis (Whiten and Byrne 1988, 1997), but let me stress
that the political invention of egalitarian society enabled subordinates to
forgo or supplement strategies of tactical deception. Instead of tricking
dominants into losing reproductive success, subordinates ganged up on
their superiors and advanced their reproductive interests by aggressively
blufﬁng, and by employing brute force if necessary.
Banding together in this way, on a long-term, stable basis, can be viewed
as a special product of political intelligence (Boehm 1997a). It leads to a
type of calculation that involves complicated assessments of power situ-
ations. Chimpanzees already have this ability, as de Waal (1982) and Goo-
dall (1986) have demonstrated, and bonobos too use power coalitions with
sophistication (Kano 1992). But when the mutual-ancestor type of political
intelligence is enhanced by a very large human brain, the result can be the
formation of huge, stable, purposeful coalitions that create new patterns of
group behavior.
Morality, egalitarianism, and warfare are three special products of this
political capacity. In humans, it seems safe to assume that the larger the
brain, the greater the degree of political intelligence and the higher the
probability that subordinate coalitions could deﬁnitively suppress alpha-
type behavior. Humans were ready to form moral communities and reverse
their dominance hierarchies 100,000 years ago, and probably considerably
182
Hierarchy in the Forest

earlier. The brain of later Homo erectus may well have provided such po-
tential.
Actuarial Intelligence
A different application of human brainpower also is relevant. For lack of an
established term, I refer to it as "actuarial intelligence" (see also Boehm
1999b). I mean the intuitive human capacity, seen abundantly in hunter-
gatherers, to think stochastically and to understand rather complex systems
on an intuitive but statistically valid, predictive basis. Regardless of what
drove human brains to be so large, one product was the generalized capac-
ity to understand and manipulate complex systems of various types.
An example is the natural environment. In dealing with human subsis-
tence behavior, behavioral ecologists work with models borrowed from the
analysis of other species, essentially considering humans as though they
were reacting instinctively to their environments. At the same time, they
know that extant hunter-gatherers are making conscious calculations about
their environments, discussing them and arriving at common migration
decisions as they make their often-precarious livings (Mithen 1990). Hu-
mans, with their complex ways of deciding how to shield themselves from
hunger, thirst, and predators, come very close to approximating the sub-
sistence strategies of other animals—innately well-prepared subsistence
strategies that have the beneﬁt of thousands of generations of natural
selection. My point is that hunter-gatherers' cognized strategies lead them
to behavior that is quite close to that predicted by behavioral ecology, but
that with humans the behavior is based on important (if limited) insight
into environments and subsistence possibilities.
A capacity for understanding complex systems also comes into play in
the socioeconomic sphere. It is ethnographically well established that meat
in large packets is always shared, and that this reduces family-level variance
in protein intake (Kelly 1995). Sharing meat does not always go smoothly,
but mobile hunter-gatherers do manage to share their large-game meat at
times when sharing is useful. It is reasonable to assume that band members
understand why meat sporadically acquired in large packets needs to be
shared, whereas plentiful small tubers should be consumed by households
individually.
 I am suggesting that intuitively these actors comprehend the overall,
long-term effects of sharing, even though many may be unable to articulate
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
183

their reasoning to an ethnographer. One need only consider the elaborate,
highly contrived Netsilik Eskimo system of sharing seal body parts (see Van
de Velde 1956) to realize that variance reduction is precisely what these
people were seeking when they created the system. These hunters shared
seal meat spontaneously within their nuclear and extended families; their
elaborately speciﬁed system of redistribution applied only to households
that were not connected by close kinship. They knew exactly what they
were doing when they created an extremely rule-bound system that effec-
tively equalized meat intake among unrelated families. The statistical effect
is that total meat and blubber intake was equalized for the entire multifa-
mily hunting camp.
Sharing selectively is widespread. Hawkes (1992:22) sums up some rele-
vant ﬁndings on Ache foragers, saying that Kaplan, Hill, and others have
noted the wide variation in the extent to which different kinds of food
resources are shared. They tested several hypotheses about this variation
on observations of the foraging Ache of Eastern Paraguay. The data show
the Ache to be notable sharers: on average three quarters of what anyone
eats was acquired by someone outside the consumer's nuclear family.
Some resources are more likely to go to close kin, but other kinds of
resources show no such kin-biased sharing. The extent of this sharing is
positively correlated with the average package size of resources and the
unpredictability of securing them. As Kaplan and associates noted, wide
sharing of large and unpredictable resources reduces the variance in daily
consumption, lessening the risk of a hungry day.
Hunter-gatherers use their actuarial intelligence to come up with other
"insurance programs" as well (Boehm 1999b). Within the family people
look out for one another in many ways, and kin selection helps them
ultimately to arrive at nepotistic strategies of sharing and caretaking. Simi-
lar practices apply at the level of the band as a whole, and they are heavily
based on actuarial sophistication. If I help an incapacitated nonkinsman to
move when migration is necessary, I know that socially this is not an
isolated act. Rather, it is a contribution to the long-range system of reci-
procity by which nonkinsmen in the band may someday assist me if I
become incapacitated. The implications are far-reaching, for this general-
ized helping behavior cannot be laid at the doorstep of something as
simple as reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971). The person I am helping may
not be living when my turn comes, or I may have moved to a different
band. Long-term, generalized reciprocity has been discussed by Alexander
184
Hierarchy in the Forest

(1987), and it is characteristic of hunting bands. Ultimately, such altruism
is difﬁcult to explain in terms of sociobiology, and in the next chapter I
shall demonstrate that political egalitarianism helped to change human
nature in this respect.
Whatever their ultimate basis, band-wide sharing and cooperative sys-
tems depend heavily on actuarial calculations. This statement may be dif-
ﬁcult to prove ethnographically, but I believe nonliterate people under-
stand full well that anyone can experience a crippling hunting accident, or
become seriously ill, or grow old—and that there is long-term individual
advantage in participating in such a security net. I have not used the term
"actuary" recklessly. These long-term safety nets are kept consistent with
resources: when they must, hunter-gatherers quickly abandon the incapaci-
tated (see, for example, Balikci 1970). As intuitive statisticians, they know
when the system they have created is becoming too costly, and they adjust
it accordingly. (Modern actuaries deal with similar problems in designing
health care plans.)
To keep such systems operative and efﬁcient requires a large brain, for
future effects of present actions must be calculated in complicated ways.
Similar modes of thinking take place in moral communities. People intui-
tively understand the social systems in which they are embedded, and they
create and uphold moral rules because they can predict the long-term
effects of the absence of such rules—that is, what would take place if they
were not enforced. This imaginativeness involves not only an appreciation
of small groups and their social and political dynamics, but an intuitive
understanding of human nature—of the types of impulses and drives that
are likely to cause trouble. Proscriptions against bullying and serious de-
ception are universal precisely because of the conﬂict they bring (Boehm
1982b).
At the same time, people try to manipulate their social systems in proso-
cial directions: they regularly preach in favor of cooperation, generosity,
and altruism, and they reward such behavior. I do not suggest that all
positive social functions are the result of planning, or that such planning
is anything like omnipotent. Obviously, rationality is bounded (Simon
1976). Also, humans may continue egregiously maladaptive behaviors even
when they appear to possess adequate diagnostic information (Edgerton
1992). But in many cases, complicated social, political, and ecological out-
comes are guided by our capacity to manipulate and plan (Boehm 1978,
1991a).
It is easy to overlook this unobvious and indigenous theorizing, precisely
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
185

because in our own culture we are used to having academics make virtu-
ally everything painfully explicit—including even the workings of the sub-
conscious mind! We devote substantial funds to studying our own sys-
tems formally, and we train actuaries for years before they begin to inform
our insurance programs. The comparable actuarial accomplishments of
hunter-gatherers may be difﬁcult to document ethnographically, but they
are extremely important to the way these people make a living and main-
tain social rules.
This actuarial capacity applies directly to egalitarian politics. I have sug-
gested already that hunter-gatherers develop intuitive political blueprints
as part of their group traditions. We have examined some of the product, in
the form of predictable behavioral preferences and aversions that reveal the
egalitarian ethos. It is because people are concerned with creating a special
kind of political equilibrium, one that enables them to enjoy great personal
autonomy, that we ﬁnd them regularly placing generosity and humility on
their list of desirable attributes. Because they want to keep in check domi-
nation tendencies that would impinge on their autonomy, they also pro-
scribe behaviors likely to lead to ugly domination episodes. Such episodes
are infrequent, yet the possibility of domination's getting out of hand
seems to be well understood even when an egalitarian political system is in
place.
When the !Kung insult not only the meat but (in effect) the hunting
prowess of skilled or fortunate hunters, they are not seeking merely an
immediate suppression of domination tendencies. They are thinking about
their group life as a whole, and about the possibility that if some stronger
individual emerges, he may eventually try to boss other men—or turn into
a menacing killer who is capable of despotism. We are fortunate that Lee is
so adept an ethnographer, and that he had an unusually articulate inform-
ant who could make this fear of homicide explicit. Kalahari foragers under-
stand the political dynamics of their bands all too well, and they shape
political and social life accordingly. The same is true elsewhere, as we have
witnessed in the case of the Utku.
Human degrees of political and actuarial intelligence are functions of an
outsized brain. Because the human brain was enlarging signiﬁcantly over a
period of more than a million years, we must assume, in the absence of
very speciﬁc information, that these two types of cognitive capacity also
were increasing along something like a continuum. They surely were be-
coming fully developed 100,000 years ago, and probably were already quite
186
Hierarchy in the Forest

highly developed 200,000 years ago. This preadaptation aided in the for-
mation of egalitarian communities, for these two closely related types of
intelligence made it possible for social dominance hierarchies to be deﬁni-
tively, and stably, reversed. To create such systems, humans had to under-
stand them systematically, and they also required morality.
Communication Capacity
Morality is inextricably entangled with language, a fact that has strong
relevance to the moralistic suppression of alpha types and other upstarts by
human egalitarian communities that deal with deviance. The proﬁles of
respectable versus deviant main political actors are readily communicated.
Furthermore, gossiping provides an information network that enables an
entire group to respond to transgressions on a well-informed and collective
basis. Foragers dealing with dispersed resources cannot stay together all
day, so the issue of speciﬁc and detailed communication is highly pertinent
to building a moral consensus. If a cunning dominator begins to act the
bully by picking on isolated group members one at a time, the entire band
quickly learns about such behavior and grasps the pattern.
At Arnhem Zoo and the Yerkes Research Center, female chimpanzees
managed as subordinates to undermine alpha-male power quite thor-
oughly. We have seen that their affectively expressive vocalizations helped
them to arrive at decisions to unite and collectively stop a bullying inci-
dent. This type of communication does not, however, permit the sharing of
detailed behavior proﬁles, or the exchange of speciﬁc information in track-
ing individuals and watching for incipient signs of deviance, or the discus-
sion of what constitutes a desirable political milieu.
A deﬁnitive reversal of the ﬂow of power in bands requires some kind of
vision of the kind of political society that is desired. Such a vision is based
on the sort of political and actuarial intelligence we have just discussed, but
also on a culturally based capacity to communicate in speciﬁcs. The very
ﬂuid, emotionally focused systems of communication in the great apes,
although effective, are limited to a rather immediate context. Yet I do not
underestimate these other hominoids. In chimpanzees, a substantial cul-
tural capacity makes possible group behavioral traditions (Goodall 1985,
1986; Nishida 1987; see also Wrangham et al. 1994), and collective prob-
lem-solving is a part of such traditions. The Yerkes females made an urgent
decision on the basis of increasingly consensual deﬁant vocalizations,
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
187

which emboldened them to act as a group and sanction their own leader.
When wide social disapproval of this type takes place in captivity or in the
wild, as it did at Gombe, with vocalizations playing an important part, is
this not close to what we see in small moral communities of our own
species?
Let us look again at the waa call. In the Yerkes incident (de Waal 1996), at
ﬁrst the scattered waas of a few females could be classiﬁed contextually as
deﬁant but subordinate. As the vocal consensus grew, contextually the
hostile deﬁance became dominant, assertive enough to make the alpha
male take notice. If we set aside the issue of ethics, this episode could be
considered an analogue to human deviance and social control. Collective
outrage over the bullying behavior is identiﬁable, and the collective aggres-
sion of the females was used strategically to manipulate the behavior of the
alpha male. Functionally, this behavior can be likened to the ostracism
directed at Briggs by the Utku. Her band used its own brand of moralistic
aggression to deal with a social transgression, but at the same time it was
willing to have her remain as a member of the group and even reinstate her
if her behavior changed. By contrast, the intervention of the Gombe males
on behalf of Wilkie to head off Goblin's comeback as alpha male is similar
to very strong ostracism in humans—that is, to temporary expulsion from
the group.
These functional analogies are suggestive. Still, one must ask whether the
chimpanzee sanctioning is merely immediate, as opposed to human opera-
tions in a morally based context that looks to the future. The well-de-
scribed female coalition at Arnhem Zoo can contribute here, for this fe-
male rebellion is highly routinized and stable. The Arnhem females may be
inferior to the males in ﬁghting power, just as members of a human band
are individually afraid of their more aggressive deviants. Yet these female
chimpanzees have enough conﬁdence in their coalition partners to control
certain aspects of alpha-male behavior, in a routinized pattern that has
been going on for years.
De Waal's (1982) analysis suggests that the Arnhem females are operat-
ing on an intentional basis, so they may be said to have goals—perhaps
even "values" insofar as the goals seem to be shared. They regularly cut
down the power of males and circumscribe their roles, a pattern reminis-
cent of egalitarian sanctioning and social control. However, their behav-
ioral preferences remain implicit in their behavior; in the absence of
spoken symbolic language, they can neither formalize their behavioral
188
Hierarchy in the Forest

preferences into a "moral code" nor exchange detailed information about
the deviant behavior of which they disapprove.
It seems, then, that a deﬁnitive step in the direction of moral behavior
cannot be taken in the absence of communication with displacement
(Hockett 1963). In this context, "displacement" means that a subordinate
who wants to combine forces with other subordinates to limit alpha power
can communicate about something that does not exist in the here and now.
For example, one can speak (pejoratively) about the past actions of a bully
when he caught someone off by himself. One can even look to the future
and discuss the likelihood of an individual's unchecked domination behav-
ior turning into despotism that will be unbearable to the group.
The capacity of wild chimpanzees to communicate with displacement
appears to be limited (Boehm 1991b; Clark and Wrangham 1993). Chim-
panzees are so competent at reading behavioral contexts that often this
deﬁciency is not important, but an anecdote from a videotaped episode at
Gombe illustrates the limits of chimpanzee communication. Alpha male
Goblin returns to a small subgroup of his community after an absence. An
adult female, recently bothered by a male, begins to scream, gesticulate, and
posture in a way that eloquently enlists the alpha's help and clearly indi-
cates her adversary by the direction in which she faces. With aggressive
gestures and agonistic vocalizations, she alternates her attention between
Goblin and the male chimpanzee, and it is not extreme to suggest that
Goblin is reading the context well enough to know that there has been
some kind of prior grievance. Obviously, such communication would be
more effective if the precise nature of the prior offense could be con-
veyed—and more effective still if it were verbally veriﬁed by a reliable third
party.
The period of gruesome intragroup cannibalism at Gombe is similarly
instructive (Goodall 1982, 1986). Adult female Passion with her adult
daughter Pom systematically hunted the infants of other mothers, eating
them as they would consume any prey, and perhaps took nearly a dozen
infants in this way. With a high-ranking male present, these two females
certainly could not have achieved their captures in the face of ﬁercely
resisting mothers; but because chimpanzee mothers so often forage alone,
plenty of opportunities arose. There were incidents in which victimized
females enlisted male support long after the fact, but the males behaved as
though they had no idea as to what was going on—and probably did not.
On the basis of these and other behaviors, Goodall (1982) judged "law" to
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
189

be absent in chimpanzee communities. In effect, she says, chimpanzees'
social order results from the fact that a social dominance hierarchy auto-
matically channels aggressive behavior, and does so quite efﬁciently.
What about human degrees of egalitarianism as a result of moralistic
social control? A semantically potent verbal language, combined with mo-
rality as we now know it, might not have been absolutely necessary to
suppress alpha-male domination on a continuing basis. However, a more
advanced medium of communication, with some degree of displacement,
would have greatly facilitated the task of inventing—and maintaining—
such an inherently precarious political arrangement. It is the verbally
elaborated egalitarian ethos that serves as a social "gyroscope" in this re-
spect, for the ethos provides a rather precise blueprint for group members
to follow.
When a band is preoccupied with keeping down dominance behavior on
a continuous basis, it is no surprise that the ethos reﬂects this concern. The
manifestations of the ethos we encountered in earlier chapters were merely
the tip of an elaborate cognitive and affective iceberg, a system of values
based on symbolic culture as humans know it. As a practical matter, com-
munication of speciﬁcs was vital in identifying behaviors that needed to be
suppressed or rewarded. Indeed, if we turn from the ethos to gossiping and
sanctioning behavior, displacement in communication is critical to these
processes—particularly in a ﬁssion-fusion group. We have seen that people
can report on factors removed from the here and now. Also, one group
member can tell another something that was merely told to him or her.
This is oral tradition, which informs the moral process. It incorporates past
crises with present solutions, including knowledge about political domina-
tion episodes and executions. The closer our ancestors moved from proto-
language to language as we know it, the better their ability to form richly
communicative moral communities, and to deﬁnitively reverse the ﬂow of
power in their bands so that individual autonomy could be maximized.
When was human language ﬁrst up to this task? Recent works by Lieber-
man and Dunbar may help us here. Lieberman (1998) believes that vocal
communication, rather than the gestural communication suggested by
Hewes (1973), was crucial as the precursor to human spoken language. He
has analyzed the attendant brain functions, particularly voluntary control
of the acoustical productions that make human speech articulation both
rapid and efﬁcient. What is needed is vowels that can be decoded with little
ambiguity, and a modern vocal tract that permits "stops" that form conso-
190
Hierarchy in the Forest

nants. His emphasis is on the emergence of fully developed language as we
know it, and his best date for its origin is about 100,000 years ago. The
people involved were Anatomically Modern Humans, whose vocal appara-
tus appears to have been as modern as the rest of their anatomy.
Assuming general agreement on this date, we still face the problem that
a staged series of increasingly potent "protolanguages" surely preceded
spoken language. If an advanced protolanguage could have facilitated the
permanent overthrow of alpha types, our window opens to a period of, say,
several hundred thousand years. Lieberman allows Neanderthals a rather
effective protolanguage and he suggests that Homo erectus, with its sizable
brain, was also likely to have used some kind of protolanguage
Lieberman (1998) links language ability and cognitive capacity as co-
evolved features, both being tied directly to cranial capacity. Dunbar's
(1996) book on gossiping and the evolution of language focuses on the
connection between language, social behavior, and the neocortex. He takes
gossiping to be the functional equivalent of primate grooming, receiving
positive selection pressure because the resulting social and political alli-
ances are individually beneﬁcial. Dunbar sees this as a force in language
evolution, and he may well be right, but gossiping has other functions as
well. In fact, it is curious that Dunbar wrote an entire book on the evolu-
tionary role of gossiping without more emphasis on its role in the trans-
mission of information about deviance in prehistoric human moral com-
munities. He alludes brieﬂy to the possibilities for controlling cheaters, but
leaves it at that.
My own assessment is that once language permitted the transmission of
detailed and speciﬁc information with displacement, a preadaptive readi-
ness was in place for the invention of moral communities that could sup-
port egalitarianism. Such communities required not only an advanced type
of communication, but the political intelligence needed to operate in large
coalitions and actuarial intelligence sufﬁcient to manipulate dominance
hierarchies in ways that were radical.
Sharing of Large-Game Meat
A more speciﬁc preadaptation that could have further enhanced the
chances of a band's deﬁnitively suppressing alpha-male domination behav-
ior is the vigilant sharing of meat (see Erdal and Whiten 1994, 1996). We
have seen that such behavior is widespread among extant foragers when
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
191

large or even medium-sized game is taken sporadically, and we have seen
that chimpanzees at Gombe also share large packets of meat—at the whim
of an adult male who controls it aggressively. In spite of bickering and
emotional ﬂare-ups among the "beggars," meat is distributed to various
adult chimpanzees, not necessarily to all of them at each event (Stanford
1998a; see also Teleki 1973). In the Tai Forest of West Africa, the chimpan-
zees appear to share meat more routinely, possibly because they are more
dependent on cooperation in hunting. However, a selﬁsh advantage still
goes to the actual hunter and to those of higher rank (Boesch 1994).
The human hunter-gatherer approach is different, for the amount of
large-game meat individuals receive is only moderately contingent on
hunting ability (Kelly 1995). Indeed, a conscious and watchful orientation
to equalization prevails, and a variety of cultural devices have been in-
vented to ensure that all the households in a band share fairly evenly.
One interpretation is that the less productive hunters are forcing the
more proﬁcient to "pay tribute" to them (Hand 1986; see also Blurton-
Jones 1984). Another explanation (which I favor) is that everyone realizes,
ﬁrst, that they must share to avoid feast or famine disadvantages and,
second, that whoever is temporarily the killer of meat is likely to want to
take a larger share because of selﬁsh motives. The group anticipates such
problems and sets up rules adequate to even out meat consumption. It
makes sense that the better hunters and their families would be more
ambivalent about this system than others; but during harder times, when
kills become extremely sporadic for even the best hunters, the need to
reduce intake variation over time becomes obvious indeed.
The meat-sharing habit of nomadic foragers is transformed by lan-
guage and morality so that deﬁnitive rules exist. Stigmatized roles such as
"cheater" or "selﬁsh bully" are labeled (and sanctioned) to make the system
work in spite of predictable conﬂicts. This moralistic approach works rea-
sonably well in curbing individual selﬁshness or tendencies to dominate,
precisely because the group knows how to become aggressive in dealing
with those it labels as deviants. An armed group can be exceedingly danger-
ous to any deviant—even the most powerful and aggressive hunter in the
group—and hunters are always armed.
If we think of large-game hunting as an activity that made bullies a
special problem as meat-sharing became important, then hunting (or scav-
enging) could actually have triggered the invention of social control. Dur-
ing glacial episodes it is safe to say that dependency on large game, as
192
Hierarchy in the Forest

opposed to small game and plant foods, became strong or possibly over-
whelming—just as it is at many times of year for most Eskimos. If we take
into account increasing brain size as a measure of actuarial ability, some
means of socially regulated variance-reduction behavior becomes possible
from the Middle Pleistocene on, and this capability could have been one
factor in humans' growing expertise in both political leveling (Erdal and
Whiten 1996) and moral sanctioning (Boehm 1997a).
Moral Communities and Moralistic Blueprints
Along the way I have discussed many aspects of morality as a human
development useful to (and probably necessary for) the rise of stable,
effective egalitarianism. Collectively creating and maintaining an egalitar-
ian society requires a high degree of political intelligence and a systematic
understanding of political dynamics and outcomes. It also requires a politi-
cal capacity to operate in large coalitions and a cognitive capacity to arrive
at a shared plan of action. Deciding to move vigorously against an aggres-
sive deviant can be a politically risky act, so it is necessary for the rank and
ﬁle to feel they are acting together, or at least for the leading "moralists" to
sense the potential force of their group solidly behind them. A preexisting
shared conception of group goals stimulates such solidarity, and that is
where cognitive "blueprints" ﬁt in.
I have chosen this term as a way of emphasizing that humans are able to
communicate in great detail, and that groups can develop precise notions
about the kind of society in which they wish to live. An extreme example
would be the small modern "intentional communities" we have examined,
while some Marxian socialist states have tried to implement egalitarian
blueprints on a very broad scale. These will be discussed further, but their
success has been limited when it comes to the state's withering away. By
contrast, a typical hunter-gatherer band succeeds extremely well in keeping
its egalitarian blueprint in effect: if some are "ﬁrsts," they must be ﬁrsts
among equals.
Mobile hunter-gatherers agree that individual tendencies to compete
and dominate must not only be countered where upstartism becomes
serious, but must be suppressed continuously—on a preemptive basis.
Certainly a shared goal is in place, for the emancipated subordinates who
collectively keep this program going want to enjoy a high degree of individ-
ual autonomy. The underlying plan has the advantage of being believed in
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
193

strongly. For one thing, at the level of human nature is the predictable
individual resentment of subordinates toward those who would dominate
them by taking more than they give. In this arena antiauthoritarian feel-
ings, when expressed collectively, create group political intransigence. Then
too, moral feelings of inappropriateness enhance these feelings even as they
focus them in the direction of social sanctioning. Bullying intimidation is
no longer a normal but resented aspect of daily life: it is singled out as a
type of heavily proscribed deviance—just like lying, theft, murder, or in-
cest. It is commitment to such a moralistically conceived blueprint that
enables a stable coalition of potential subordinates to dictate the tenor of
political life in the band, and thereby remain politically autonomous as
individuals.
Elsewhere I have offered competing scenarios about how this egalitarian
arrangement came into being. In the ﬁrst scenario, I saw morality as an
absolute prerequisite for the emergence of egalitarian bands (Boehm
1982b). The idea was that once groups of humans began to proscribe and
control behaviors like incest, rape, adultery, cheating, and murder, they
were in position to overthrow their alphas and permanently dispose of the
alpha role by classifying it as deviant. In the second scenario, excessive
domination was the very ﬁrst behavior to be proscribed and sanctioned as
early moral communities formed (Boehm 1997a), and this measure was
the result of trying to institutionalize a popular revolt that succeeded. Once
bands had coalesced to eliminate domination behavior, it was easy enough
to expand the scope of sanctioning and suppress other troublesome behav-
ior. There is no need to choose between these two scenarios, for either
accounts for the origination of egalitarian political orders.
How Quickly Did Egalitarianism Appear?
Let us consider cultural variables. My conservative guess is that egalitarian
society as we know it appeared, at the very latest with Anatomically Modern
Humans. The preadaptations were solidly in place 100,000 years ago, and
special stimulation from the physical environment may not have been
necessary. Subordinate resentment of domination, the ability to form large
coalitions, and the capacity of such coalitions to dominate or eliminate a
bully with their combined weaponry were sufﬁcient to momentarily elimi-
nate an alpha-type individual, and the advent of moral communities made
194
Hierarchy in the Forest

it possible to stabilize such episodes. In effect, egalitarianism could have
arisen simply because humans became culturally able to form moral com-
munities and were prone to rebel against dominant authority.
However, world environments were subject to dramatic climatic ﬂuctu-
ations between 128,000 years ago and 72,000 years ago, ﬂuctuations that
were unusually extreme and unusually frequent (Potts 1996). Two environ-
mental hypotheses are possible with respect to this instability. First, hunt-
ing or active or passive scavenging of large game would have periodically
caused meat to become dominant in the human diet, and second, popula-
tion displacements would have been very frequent in many parts of the
populated world, a topic I return to in the next chapter.
The hunting-dependency hypothesis is as follows. During a period when
people were coping with environmental cooling, periodic tundra-like con-
ditions may well have skewed the subsistence division of labor from a
mixed foraging strategy to periods of heavy dependency on large-game
hunting. At such times variance-reduction practices would have been par-
ticularly useful, and suppressing alpha-male behavior would have been a
means of effectively equalizing the redistribution of meat. Once such po-
litical inventions were in place, they could have had staying power during
milder climatic interludes as well. An invention stimulated by periods of
cold would have continued to be attractive during interglacial periods
when variation reduction was less critical, simply because subordinates had
learned to enjoy their political autonomy.
Once one band, somewhere, invented an egalitarian order, this radical
change in social ways of doing things would have become visible to its
neighbors. The advantages would have been evident wherever subordinates
were ambivalent about being dominated, particularly in bands with very
aggressive bullies. Furthermore, the advantages of well-equalized variance
reduction would have been obvious to members of despotic bands whose
alpha types could be counted on to monopolize meat just when it was
scarce. One would expect a gradual cultural diffusion to take place, with
attractive egalitarian traditions replacing despotic ones locally.
During periods of scarcity-driven migration, bands surely were mixed
around a great deal, as they followed their individual strategies in coping
with climatic changes—a situation we shall consider in more detail. The
statistical chances of a despotic band's coming into contact with an egali-
tarian band would have increased, and as a result the rate of cultural
The Evolution of Egalitarian Society
195

diffusion would have been accelerated. Over time, migration patterns over
longer distances could have fairly rapidly spread this political invention
from one continent to another.
To summarize, I have favored a cultural saltation theory here. The politi-
cal nature of the innovation we are discussing would appear to be "revolu-
tionary," in the sense that alpha types would not have readily given up their
power and privileges. However, it is possible that egalitarianism advanced
in stages, with subordinates gradually, over many millennia, gaining more
control until the alpha role was effectively suppressed. In either event, the
chances of cultural diffusion were maximized by the attractiveness of the
invention to the dominated rank and ﬁle of a nonegalitarian group nearby.
The process could have begun with Homo erectus, and conceivably even
earlier, depending on when the linguistic and cultural thresholds were
present for moral life to develop. But the highest state of behavioral and
cultural readiness was reached by Anatomically Modern Humans.
196
Hierarchy in the Forest

C H A P T E R
9
Paleolithic Politics and
Natural Selection
This chapter provides a novel evolutionary scenario, one that contradicts
several fundamental tenets of traditional social biology. For three decades a
general assumption has been that genotype and phenotype can be equated
for purposes of mathematical modeling. Another premise has been that
selection arising from competition between groups is so feeble that it does
not warrant serious consideration. For humans in the Late Paleolithic,
neither of these assumptions can be taken for granted.
The Genetic Paradox of Altruism
My general hypothesis is that the spread of Paleolithic egalitarianism had a
profound effect on basic mechanisms of natural selection. Speciﬁcally, se-
lection at the between-group level was empowered at the expense of selec-
tion at the within-group level, a shift that profoundly affected human
nature. This was the case because between-group selection supports the
altruistic traits that have been so vigorously denied for three decades. I
would not advocate this controversial hypothesis unless there was persua-
sive ethnographic evidence in its favor.
Like many evolutionary scenarios developed by paleoanthropologists,
this behavioral hypothesis is not susceptible to disconﬁrmation with pre-
sent archaeological evidence. But because it is critical to our understanding
of human nature, that standard of scientiﬁc accuracy can be replaced by
one of relative plausibility. The ﬁrst assumption to be tested against that
yardstick is fundamental. It concerns the availability of sufﬁcient time for
human nature to have been transformed under the aegis of egalitarianism.
197

We are speaking about evolutionary time, which must be measured in
generations.
It is extinction rates, along with variation, that determine the rate of
evolution of a species. E. O. Wilson (1978:91) has the following to say
about the rate of evolution for humans: "The theory of population genetics
and experiments on other organisms show that substantial changes can
occur in the span of less than 100 generations, which for man reaches back
only to the time of the Roman Empire. Two thousand generations, roughly
the time since typical Homo sapiens invaded Europe, is enough time to
create new species and to mold their anatomy and behavior in major
ways."
I have quoted Wilson to show that if something were to have changed
radically in the natural-selection scenario for humans, it certainly could
have had signiﬁcant effects in a thousand generations or so. A human
generation is a relatively lengthy twenty-ﬁve years, so a thousand genera-
tions places us at 25,000 years ago, and two thousand generations would
take us back 50,000 years.
Egalitarianism could be far more ancient than this (Knauft 1991). In-
deed, later Homo erectus and Neanderthal apparently lived in smallish
bands like those of extant mobile hunter-gatherers (Dunbar 1996; see also
Mithen 1990). By inference their brain sizes might have provided them
with the requisite political intelligence—and with the moral communities
that were needed—to reverse their dominance hierarchies. A more conser-
vative estimate (one that I prefer, given present evidence) is that about
100,000 years ago Anatomically Modern hunter-gatherers were fully egali-
tarian—or were about to become so. The assumption is that a fully modern
brain made them as capable of maintaining an egalitarian order as their
extant counterparts. An extremely conservative estimate would pair the
invention of egalitarianism with the cultural emergence of realistic cave art,
sculpture, and incised calendars, as described by Marshak (1989; see also
1992). Egalitarianism would still have had more than a thousand genera-
tions in which to do its work on human nature.
How such work was done is the subject of this chapter, and the selection
scenario I describe is far from simple. Indeed, it involves a variety of
hunter-gatherer behaviors and their combined effects on natural selection.
The overall hypothesis is straightforward: basically, the advent of egalitari-
anism shifted the balance of forces within natural selection so that within-
group selection was substantially debilitated and between-group selection
198
Hierarchy in the Forest

was ampliﬁed. At the same time, egalitarian moral communities found
themselves uniquely positioned to suppress free-riding (to be discussed
shortly) at the level of phenotype. With respect to the natural selection of
behavior genes, this mechanical formula clearly favors the retention of
altruistic traits.
An altruistic gene can be deﬁned simply and unambiguously: it is sup-
ported by between-group selection, and it is undercut by within-group
selection (E. O. Wilson 1975; Wilson and Sober 1994). However, as Knauft
(1989) points out, for well over twenty years evolutionary biologists, socio-
biologically inclined anthropologists, and evolutionary psychologists have
agreed—almost, but not quite unanimously—that natural selection can
support nepotistic helpfulness but not altruistic helpfulness.
A wide variety of scholars have gone to ingenious lengths to show that
for humans genetically altruistic behaviors—those that mitigate against
inclusive ﬁtness and appear to transfer reproductive resources to nonrela-
tives—somehow are bogus. It is held that such giveaways must be derived
from kin selection or social coercion (for example, Wilson 1978), or else
that they somehow are made possible by selﬁshly-motivated exchanges of
service that take place over time (for instance, Trivers 1971; see also Alex-
ander 1987). With humans, two problems arise with this approach. One is
simply that many members of the species in question do not like to see
themselves reduced to "total selﬁshness." This is a problem of the heart,
and I have done my best to set it aside. The second problem is one of
facts—and theories—that challenge a powerful paradigm long in vogue, a
paradigm which as I write is subject to serious scrutiny (Wilson and Sober
1994; Boehm 1996, 1997a, 1997b, 1999a, 1999b; Sober and Wilson 1998;
see also Wilson's 1997 edited American Naturalist supplement).
The factual problem is that extant hunter-gatherer nomads not only
cooperate, in very generalized ways, as groups, but to a signiﬁcant degree
they may take care of nonrelatives in their bands—as described in the
previous chapter and elsewhere (Kelly 1995; Wiessner 1996; see also
Boehm 1999b). They also preach steadfastly and strongly in favor of altru-
ism (Campbell 1972); while such preaching is of obvious importance, its
ultimate, natural-selection basis remains little explored.
In my opinion, traditional approaches in social biology have been seri-
ously out of touch with common sense when traits such as human coop-
erativeness and one-way helping behavior are explained wholly in terms of
selﬁsh desire for self-aggrandizement, innate nepotism, exact reciproca-
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
199

tion, or third-party coercion. Sober and Wilson (1998) propose that the
rejection of pre-1966 group-selection theories involved not only a set of
deep biases, but also some technical misunderstandings that have become
rigidly institutionalized. A number of evolutionary biologists have re-
sponded favorably to their earlier critical but constructive attack (see Wil-
son and Sober 1994), which called for a substantial paradigm shift, and the
campaign continues as I write.
Altruism has always posed a special puzzle for philosophers, a puzzle
that resonates strongly because we all know, introspectively, how powerful
the forces of selﬁshness must be. Yet for readers unacquainted with the
academic literature on altruism, the term as used by philosophers, biolo-
gists, and anthropologists can be ambiguous. A few general illustrations
will be helpful before I present detailed arguments at the level of biology
and culture.
With respect to reproductively self-sacriﬁcial helping behavior, Lorenz's
(1963) study of the behavior of turkey hens and how they protect their
offspring is highly instructive. These fowl viciously attack a dangerous
predator such as a fox that comes near their nest, and in normal English
usage this behavior could be called altruistic because the mother is risking
her life to protect her offspring. Technically, biologists would call the be-
havior nepotism and contrast it with altruism. Reproductive success is their
currency, and the hen's investment in her own offspring provides her with
net inclusive ﬁtness gains rather than losses. If the same turkey hen were to
defend another mother's chicks, a biologist would call this altruism be-
cause it would reduce her ability to advance her genes into the gene pool
and thereby damage her inclusive ﬁtness. In fact, she would be reducing her
relative ﬁtness quite signiﬁcantly, for this risky behavior would be advanc-
ing the inclusive ﬁtness of her genetic competitor at the very time that her
own ﬁtness was being reduced.
In such analysis, the sole criterion is reproductive success. A biologist's
version of altruism or nepotism does not necessarily entail the empathy or
selﬂess feelings of generosity that we think of when applying the term to
humans who are selﬂessly helpful in the motivational sense (Wilson 1978;
Boehm 1979; Sober and Wilson 1998). Lorenz discovered that turkey hens
were programmed so "stupidly" that their self-endangering maternal in-
stincts appear to be far from maternal concern as we see it in humans. The
ﬁrst clue came when a turkey hen that had been deafened immediately
destroyed her own chicks, attacking them just as she would a predator.
200
Hierarchy in the Forest

Lorenz formed a hypothesis. He wanted to know if turkey hens would
attack anything living that drew near to their nests, that is, anything that
failed to give the high-pitched vocalizations turkey chicks are programmed
to emit. He obtained a stuffed fox and brought it near the nest of a turkey
hen that was not deafened, and predictably the hen attacked viciously. The
second time, he hung a little machine around the fox's neck, a tape recorder
that emitted the cheeping sound of turkey chicks, and the mother ignored
the fox entirely. In effect, the hen was acting on a hard-wired compulsion.
We may never know her emotions and cognitive state, but this genetic
compulsion appears to be quite different from what we mean by altruism
when we refer to a socially sensitive psychological state—one that involves
empathy, feelings of generosity, and a decision to help.
Human social behavior is seldom driven by anything approaching so-
called blind instinct, even though, as Darwin himself noted in The Expres-
sion of Emotions in Animals and Man, a few of our facial expressions are
hard-wired (see also Masters 1989) and linked to speciﬁc emotions. These
surely include anger, grief, and fear, but not necessarily any emotions we
would associate with altruism. This makes it still easier for traditionalist
social biologists to deny innately-prepared altruism in humans, altruism
that at the level of psychological motives we would call genuine.
To identify such emotions in humans is difﬁcult because in any given
instance of altruistic-seeming behavior, the motivational waters are likely
to be muddied by other factors. A ﬁreman may undertake a rescue mission
because he was originally attracted by the pay, and now this is just his line
of work. He knows that he would endure both shame and damage to his
career if he failed to undertake a rescue where the risks were reasonable.
Another ﬁreman may wish to play the hero and receive accolades (or
professional advancement) because he takes unusual risks. His motives,
too, are patently selﬁsh. Another ﬁreman's original attraction to his career
may in fact have been based on genuinely wanting to help others, and an
unusual degree of genuine altruism may still gear him to take unusual
risks—above and beyond the call of duty. Still another ﬁreman may take
unusual risks partly because he likes the pay, partly because he selﬁshly
seeks the esteem of his community, and partly also because he is driven by
genuine altruism.
In some human instances of what appears to be self-sacriﬁcial helping
behavior, no altruistic feelings are likely; social pressure alone is responsi-
ble for the muniﬁcent action. For example, at work one grudgingly gives a
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
201

few dollars to the United Way because one's boss is known to be making a
list of donors—and one knows the list will be circulated through the ofﬁce.
The same unwilling donor may identify strongly with animals, and give
generously and anonymously to wildlife conservation. The difference is
between socially inﬂuenced altruism and motivationally genuine altruism.
In other cases direct coercion may play a role, as when totally unwilling
men submit to the draft. They may then ﬁght for their country in what
they consider to be unjust wars—simply because they do not want to invite
court-martial. These examples suggest that if genuine altruism does exist, it
can be mixed in countless ways with personal self-interest, and altruistic
performance can be largely if not entirely inﬂuenced or forced socially.
These motivational clouds have made it easy for many to claim that genu-
ine human altruism can be dismissed (Wilson 1978; Alexander 1987)—
that basically all altruistic-appearing behavior is reducible to individual
genetic self-interest as represented by inclusive ﬁtness.
If human altruism amounts to a deﬁnitional and motivational jumble,
social biologists have sorted out the problem in a bizarre—if unambigu-
ous—way. Guided by their own standard paradigm, they have arrived at
the conclusion that the only self-sacriﬁcial behaviors that can be supported
by natural selection involve assistance directed to offspring or closer rela-
tives. In terms of selection mechanisms, the name of this nepotistic game is
kin selection (Hamilton 1964). As explained by E. O. Wilson (1975), kin
selection derives from both the turkey-hen type of parental investment
(Trivers 1972) and from broader types of nepotism that involve helping
siblings, cousins, and the like.
As a major amendment, Wilson and Alexander also include long-term,
exactly reciprocated exchanges between individuals as another sustainable
type of genetically selﬁsh helping behavior. For three decades now, the
majority of evolutionary biologists have agreed that perfectly evened-out
sacriﬁces and beneﬁts, exchanged recurrently between a dyad over time,
can be sustained because the cooperators have greater reproductive success
than pairs of individuals who fail to cooperate. Such behavior has been
labeled reciprocal altruism (Trivers 1971), which is confusing. By deﬁni-
tion, there can be no net reproductive sacriﬁce—on either side.
That Darwinian selection is augmented by kin selection of various de-
grees is indisputable; inclusive ﬁtness is a powerful factor in human evolu-
tion. However, the reciprocal-altruism argument seems far less convincing,
given the fact that such exact reciprocation is required over time, with
202
Hierarchy in the Forest

many repeated interactions. While it is true that pairs of cooperators tend
to outclass noncooperators, it is in the reproductive interest of each coop-
erating partner to inconspicuously cheat, thereby gaining not only the
advantages of mutual cooperation but a further selﬁsh bonus as well.
This explanation is the best that sociobiology can do, and it does very
well indeed in explaining why people help their closer relatives. When it
comes to explaining helping behavior that extends beyond nepotism, a
serious empirical problem is encountered: extant foragers often cooperate
with nonkin spontaneously and with a spirit of generosity, rather than
meting out their donations very carefully, and such cooperation extends far
beyond the level of dyads. Even though certain individuals manage to do
some moderate freeloading, people in bands tend to cooperate intensively,
with apparent good will and with great beneﬁt to group members in gen-
eral. Or so it seems to me, as I read richly descriptive ethnographic reports
on hunting bands (for instance, Balikci 1970; Lee 1979).
It is true that while some bands seem to cooperate smoothly, others do
so only moderately effectively, with squabbling or cheating. I am referring
to the equitable distribution of large-game meat. In effect, the entire band
engages in this type of variance reduction, and it does so whenever sharing
makes sense. Sharing is accomplished in spite of this squabbling, and
even though an occasional social deviant may compromise the system
somewhat by cheating when others will not be too disturbed (Boehm
1999b).
Psychologically, there appears to be a genuinely altruistic component in
this cooperation. A precise "tit for tat" ideology is absent, and often sharing
proceeds smoothly even though typical bands contain unrelated families.
People seem to have readily internalized cooperative values they were
taught as children (Goody 1991). This innately disposed "readiness" re-
quires explanation at the level of human nature, for it certainly seems to
involve genetic altruism as we have deﬁned it.
Levels of Natural Selection
Cultural anthropologists may be only semiconversant with the nuances of
natural-selection theory as  promulgated by social biologists, and for that
reason I shall err in favor of detail. Explanatory strategies begin with the
fact that humans live in groups and that basically natural selection takes
place within the group. The individual (with his or her inclusive ﬁtness)
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
203

is the fundamental "container" or unit, the essential vehicle of selection
(Wilson and Sober 1994). Selection takes place either by individuals com-
peting genetically on an indirect basis, as Darwin postulated, or sometimes
by their competing on a direct basis, as when one hunter successfully steals
another's wife or is killed in the attempt. The expected behavioral result of
within-group selection is selﬁshness and nepotism, never altruism.
Another level at which natural selection operates is the between-group
level (E. O. Wilson 1975). In this case a group of individuals is the con-
tainer that determines the fate of a given set of genes. If such units are
subject to variation and extinction, they too can serve as (larger) vehicles
of natural selection. Such selection does not require rigidly demarcated
groups, or groups that remain in existence for a very long time, or outright
group extinctions (Sober and Wilson 1998). What is needed is a population
that somehow is structured into variable units that tend to replace one
another, and it helps if the units are not too large (Wade 1978).
For the time being we are dealing with genes rather than with psycho-
logical motives. I have deﬁned altruistic genes in terms of levels of selec-
tion. It is between-group selection that supports them, and it bears empha-
sizing that most biologists concede, in theory, that selection at this level
could support genuinely altruistic traits on a straightforward basis (E. O.
Wilson 1975). What they deny, often quite vehemently, is that natural
conditions could ever lead to between-group selection's approaching the
power of within-group selection.
Realistic possibilities for group selection were ﬁrst raised by Darwin.
Recent efforts, referred to above, have tried to rescue the group-selection
baby from the bathwater that was thrown out after 1966. As this book is
published, a very large community of evolutionary biologists, anthropolo-
gists, psychologists, and others will be deciding whether a major paradigm
adjustment is in order.
Selection Mechanisms and Altruism
The inclusive-ﬁtness/reciprocal-altruism paradigm of social biology has
profoundly inﬂuenced certain anthropologists (for example, see Chagnon
and Irons 1979), ethologists and behavioral ecologists (Wrangham and
Peterson 1996), psychologists (Campbell 1975; Tooby and Cosmides 1992),
philosophers (Sober and Wilson 1998), political scientists (Corning 1984;
Masters 1989; Arnhart 1998), and economists (Bergstrom and Stark 1993;
Bowles and Gintis 1998). A full list would include hundreds of names.
204
Hierarchy in the Forest

The vast majority of these scholars have rejected group selection as a
viable level of natural selection, and this decision automatically excludes
the evolution of altruistic genes in any orthodox mammalian species, in-
cluding our own. However, for more than two decades David Sloan Wilson
has been a "voice in the wilderness" within the community of evolutionary
biologists (D. S. Wilson 1975, 1977, 1980, 1983, 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992,
1997; Wilson and Sober 1994; Sober and Wilson 1998). His heretical and
increasingly persuasive campaign on behalf of multilevel selection promi-
nently features selection between groups, and it dates all the way back to
the publication of Edward O. Wilson's Sociobiology in 1975. It is an ap-
proach that applies to a wide variety of species, including humans.
For two decades I too have been pointing to mechanical possibilities for
group selection mainly in humans (Boehm 1978, 1981, 1982a, 1986, 1991a,
1996, 1997a, 1997b, 1999a, 1999b). Here I shall detail a speciﬁc hypothesis
involving between-group selection and effective free-rider suppression, a
hypothesis that could go far toward resolving the natural-selection paradox
of altruism for our own species. I shall accomplish this task by examining
further the behavior of egalitarian hunter-gatherers in whose bands our
genes were selected.
The relevant selection mechanics are as follows. Fundamentally, it is the
balance of power between within-group selection and between-group se-
lection that determines whether altruistic genes can reach equilibrium in a
gene pool. When people perform altruistic acts that are beneﬁcial to the
group but costly to individual reproductive success, by deﬁnition such
traits will be supported by between-group selection and opposed by
within-group selection. Any population structure with phenotypically vari-
able groupings that are positioned to replace one another is capable of
generating selection forces that operate at the between-group level (Wilson
and Sober 1994). Nevertheless, mathematical models show that between-
group selection must become powerful indeed to overcome the free-rider
problem deﬁned by Hamilton (1964).
This problem needs to be further deﬁned for humans, for free-riding
plays a crucial role in the hypotheses I am about to develop. An example
will help. Let us say that in sharing zebra kills I am genetically disposed to
assist unrelated members of my band, and that many band members are
not close kin of mine. In terms of selection at the within-group level, my
altruistic genes would be quickly eliminated because some group members,
lacking this gene, will take a free ride on my altruism by eating my zebra
meat but not sharing theirs. Thus, their nonaltruistic genes will be for-
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
205

warded into the gene pool at a higher rate than my altruistic ones. If born
free-riders regularly outcompete born altruists, in the long run altruism
cannot be supported unless group selection can somehow do the job.
If extremely robust selection is taking place between groups, the situation
will change for these altruistic genes. At the same time that within-group
selection is whittling away at a band's altruistic genes and free-riders are
taking their toll, between-group selection will be supporting such genes
because groups with many altruists can succeed better than groups with
few altruists. In theory, if the between-group level of selection becomes
much more robust than usual, or if the within-group level is sufﬁciently
debilitated, altruistic genes could stand a chance of reaching ﬁxation in
spite of free-riding.
There is one other way that altruistic genes could prevail. If, somehow,
free-riding behavior could be eliminated or heavily suppressed at the level
of phenotype, then the force of selection taking place between groups
would not need to rise to nearly so high a level for altruistic genes to be
supported.
What can we actually expect with humans? At ﬁrst glance, selection
taking place between individuals within the group should be operating very
powerfully indeed, because humans, like any other mammalian species,
exhibit a high rate of genetic variation. Furthermore, as individuals with
ﬁnite life cycles they "go extinct" very predictably, if at much longer inter-
vals than most mammals. By contrast, prehistoric bands did not tend to go
extinct every thirty-ﬁve years or so, unless intensive warfare, or recurrent
plagues, droughts, or epidemics, or radical changes in their environments
were cutting down entire bands on an extremely frequent basis. Although
the relevant facts are few, this scenario is at present considered unlikely.
Furthermore, groups are likely to be much less genetically variable than
individuals, for groups are composed of many individuals, and averaging
effects make variation between nearby groups much less than variation
among individuals within those groups.
For these reasons group selection has been rejected as a basis for altruis-
tic behaviors that involve signiﬁcant reproductive costs to the donors. Ac-
cording to advocates of the standard paradigm, even though Paleolithic
humans lived in smallish bands (Dunbar 1996) that in size were quite
appropriate as group vehicles of selection, the between-group effects were
simply too feeble to have had any signiﬁcant effect on human nature. This
supposition has been basic and widespread for all social mammals, but I
206
Hierarchy in the Forest

propose four solid reasons why humans should be exceptions to the rule.
All have to do with the fact that people in the Late Paleolithic lived in small
moral communities, nomadic bands that insisted on egalitarianism as a
social and political way of life.
Behaviors that Weaken Within-Group Selection
Elimination of Pronounced Dominance Hierarchies
When entire hunting bands began to form formidable, moralistically ag-
gressive coalitions to keep their alpha-male types from dominating group
life, individual variation was affected profoundly. In an orthodox primate
social dominance hierarchy, the individuals at the top gain the advantage in
accumulating reproductive beneﬁts (Ellis 1995), while subordinates regu-
larly are given short shrift. This direct competition heightens phenotypic
variation among individuals. When an egalitarian band eliminates this type
of power role and begins to share its large-game meat on a more or less
equalized basis (Kelly 1995; Erdal and Whiten 1996; Wiessner 1996), the
variation picture changes radically.
Keep in mind that Darwinian selection acts not on genotype, but on
phenotype. In the ﬁnal analysis, it is actual behavior that counts, not the
genetic dispositions that underlie it. For most animals the disparity be-
tween the two is not large, and in their use of mathematical models to
explain gene selection, social biologists properly simplify matters by as-
suming isomorphism. When the human moral community arose, however,
public opinion and active moral sanctioning acted together to make people
conform to social mores that often went against human nature (Campbell
1972, 1975; see also Boehm 1982a; Boyd and Richerson 1992).
Such conformity greatly reduced phenotypic variation among individu-
als, the same variation that drives natural selection taking place within
groups. The potential camp bullies—individuals unusually aggressive by
nature who let their hunting prowess go to their heads in a way that led
to self-aggrandizement—were obliged to behave very much like everyone
else. This leveling applied to acquiring spouses, to sharing meat, or to
actively taking away the resources of others; all are important to reproduc-
tive success.
I must take care to say that egalitarianism did not eliminate all individ-
ual reproductive advantages within bands (Kaplan and Hill 1985; see also
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
207

Fried 1967; Flanagan 1989). Far from it. But it did drive phenotypic vari-
ation to much lower levels. We can see this result if we try to imagine a
hunting band in the absence of egalitarians who are continually suppress-
ing the behavior of bullies. One need only compare the egalitarian !Kung
with the despotic Kwakiutl to get the point: the presence of nobles, com-
moners, and slaves creates a substantial amount of phenotype variation
that impacts on reproductive success. With certain literate societies, highly
despotic by Vehrencamp's ethological standard, the disparities become still
greater (Betzig 1982, 1992). Egalitarians nip these tendencies in the bud.
The prehistoric result was a signiﬁcant debilitation of within-group se-
lection, a process that automatically allowed more scope for whatever be-
tween-group selection was present to support altruistic traits. I must em-
phasize that in the analysis so far, the behaviors we are talking about are
not boosting the absolute power of between-group effects. The change is
merely relative: in what amounts to a "horsepower race," the strength of
the much more powerful within-group engine is being signiﬁcantly re-
duced, while the power of the between-group engine remains far, far
weaker.
This diminution of within-group variation may have been substantial,
but by itself it cannot explain the degrees of altruism and willing coopera-
tion exhibited by our species in its forager manifestations. For such traits
to evolve, some further reduction in the force of within-group selection
would seem to be necessary, and also some absolute boosting of between-
group effects. In addition, it would be extremely useful to have some dras-
tic reduction of free-riding at the level of phenotype, for this diminution
would all but neutralize the reproductive advantages of born cheaters as
they compete with born altruists. As will be seen, the morally based "egali-
tarian syndrome" of Paleolithic hunter-gatherers made all of this possible
(Boehm 1997b).
Consensual Decisions
Egalitarian foragers uniformly eschew strong, authoritative leadership. Yet
they do not give up on making decisions at the band level. Consensus-seek-
ing is a strong feature of all egalitarian societies (Boehm 1996) and of
forager societies in particular (Mithen 1990; Knauft 1991); and consensus-
seeking further reduces phenotypic variation within the group. In arriving
at a consensus, foragers do not necessarily all meet in one place for discus-
sion as tribesmen often do. They arrive at group decisions, nonetheless,
208
Hierarchy in the Forest

because nomadic bands normally move around as units. Every adult has
the right to contribute, as people in small or large groups discuss their
migration options. We have seen that as consensus builds the majority is
likely to pressure any dissenters to join with them.
There is nothing mandatory about forming a consensus; in an egalitarian
band every family is free to go its own way. But the challenges that stimu-
late such discussions affect the entire group. Everyone understands that if
they do not reach a consensus, they may no longer be able to function as a
group. Hunter-gatherers make their group decisions principally about ma-
jor migrations, a type of problem with which they cope up to a dozen times
in a single year (Tanaka 1980). They have valid reasons to stay together
when they move to a new camp. One is to share their large-game meat, and
thereby reduce family-level variation in high-quality protein intake, or to
share other foods that are subject to scarcity. Another may be to defend the
resources they are exploiting against other groups. Another is simply to
stay together because they are highly sociable and enjoy one another's
company.
From the standpoint of natural selection, the net effect of consensus-
seeking is that phenotypic variation among individuals (or families) is
reduced. Say that, as a household head, one hunter thinks it better to hunt
eland than giraffe, and eland and giraffe are located in opposite directions.
He goes along with the group's strategy, migrating to where giraffe possi-
bilities are maximized. Another hunter prefers buffalo, another zebra, but
they all agree on giraffe because giraffe is preferred by the majority. At any
given time, the habit of making migration decisions on a consensual basis
renders every family's basic subsistence strategy the same. This strategy can
shift, obviously, if the entire band changes its mind. But the basic strategy
remains uniform for a group that, if it atomized into families, would
become far more variable in its behavior.
As long as the strategies are chosen unanimously, individual variation
is being leveled drastically at the level of phenotype, a process that fur-
ther weakens within-group selection. As a result, the relative power of be-
tween-group selection is further enhanced, which increases the mechanical
possibility that altruistic genes can be maintained in the gene pool. This
hypothesis must be judged in terms of relative plausibility. I know of no
published data that permit a quantitative analysis of the degree to which
potentially varying family strategies are being made uniform because peo-
ple prefer to live and migrate as bands.
One major exception supports the rule. Several Australian desert groups,
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
209

discussed by Gould (1982), live in an environment so marginal and so
unpredictable that they cannot consistently stay in bands: to survive, each
family needs to be ready to move expediently wherever it must, following
its own basic subsistence strategy. Because these unusually harsh ecological
conditions are chronic, band consensus is seldom in a position to equalize
the subsistence strategies for these hard-pressed nomads. Such hunter-
gatherers are exceptional, but with them the family seems to be the largest
group on which natural selection is likely to operate.
I point out, parenthetically, that such families themselves are groups
susceptible to between-group selection (see Sober and Wilson 1998; Smuts
1999). However, when family members help one another unselﬁshly, this
generosity can be laid on the doorstep of nepotism, even though a group is
assisted. By contrast, the genetic paradox of altruism arises unambiguously
when groups contain people who are unrelated and group members help
one another on a nonprecise basis. This sort of help is exactly what takes
place in bands, rather than in families, so in probing the genetic-altruism
paradox we properly focus our attention on bands as a test case.
Behaviors that Amplify Between-Group Selection
Consensus-seeking at the band level does more than diminish variation
within groups; it also ampliﬁes variation between groups. For example, one
entire band may migrate to seek eland as its preferred prey, whereas its
neighbor may unanimously opt for giraffe and move off in a different
direction. In a given year, particularly in a difﬁcult year, these varying com-
mitments may lead to differential reproductive success for nearby groups
that belong to the same breeding population. Because such groups are in a
position to replace each other, between-group selection can operate.
Sometimes band decisions can be critical to reproductive success in a
very immediate way (Boehm 1996, 1997b). When bands in a given area are
suffering prolonged drought, they may waver, between staying to ride it out
versus investing what little energy they have in migrating to an area where
rainfall might be greater. Under some circumstances, they may survive
either way—or suffer disaster either way. Under others, if neighboring
bands make different decisions, one small group may survive while the
other suffers decimation or actually perishes (for example, Mirsky 1937).
Bands facing reduced resource levels or scattered resources do not always
stay together. Foragers who normally operate as groups may temporarily
210
Hierarchy in the Forest

ﬁssion into independently acting households and follow family rather than
band strategies (for example, Balikci 1970). They may be faced with sea-
sonal resource dispersion and routinely scatter until they can be together
again. Selection thereby is temporarily reduced at the between-band level.
When a major migration is in order, however, it is usually the entire band
that deals with where to go next. As long as nearby bands sometimes arrive
at varying strategies and then enact them as entire bands, variation be-
tween bands is ampliﬁed. Selection of altruistic traits at the between-band
level thus becomes far more robust than it would be if the families primar-
ily went their own way.
It has been argued that forager bands are so unstable that they might
almost be considered non-groups (Palmer et al. 1998). It is true that most
families can and do move back and forth between bands, particularly if a
married couple has in-laws in two different bands (Kelly 1995). It is also
true that published data are lacking to demonstrate how bands are replaced
and what kind of propagules (Wade 1978) might be operative. Let me
emphasize that the operation of between-group selection does not require
permanent, perfectly bounded groups (Wilson and Sober 1994; Sober and
Wilson 1998). The porous, far from permanent bands of nomadic hunter-
gatherers seem to provide effective vehicles for group selection, but I leave
to others the task of using mathematical modeling to evaluate group-selec-
tion possibilities on a more technical basis. My goal here is to provide a
general outline of the probable selection paths, with ethnographic data to
support it.
In the preceding arguments I have made the assumption that the envi-
ronments of most prehistoric foragers were usually rich enough not only
to permit bands to stay together, but to allow nearby bands to make their
living by following subsistence strategies that differed. Obviously, some
environments drastically constrain adaptive-strategic possibilities, as with
the famines endured by the Netsilik. Even in such instances it is possible
that crucial differences of strategic ﬁne-tuning (see Boehm 1978) will cause
differences in reproductive success at the between-band level. In more
favorable environments, the possibilities for strategic variation will obvi-
ously increase. We must keep in mind that in Paleolithic times the planet's
best environments were available to foragers whose social and adaptive
patterns varied across a very wide spectrum (Kelly 1995), and that often
there were a variety of adaptive strategies that might succeed in the same
rich environment.
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
211

Human Manipulation of the Free-Rider Problem
Surely the combined effects I have described are far from making selec-
tion at the between-group level as robust as selection that operates at the
within-group level. Were this the case, humans would be so altruistic that it
would stagger the imagination. However, these cultural inﬂuences on phe-
notypic variation do make the two competing engines more nearly even in
their ratings; therefore, the group-selection engine is in a far better position
to support altruistic traits. The remaining obstacle is the theoretically for-
midable problem of free-riders.
"Free-riders" may be deﬁned as individuals who were born with fewer
altruistic genes than other people or perhaps carry "opportunistic genes"
that help them actively to take advantage of altruists. Such individuals
were cited by Williams (1966) when, in effect, he blew the mathematically
ill-founded group-selection theory of Wynne-Edwards (1962) out of the
water. Free-riders obviously are important ﬁgments of mathematical mod-
eling, but for foragers living in bands, the problem of free-riders is a
real-life, social problem—as we saw in a mild form with the Utku studied
by Briggs. Hyperbolically, the question is, How can cheerful, altruistic co-
operators, people guided by generous feelings and positive expectations
about cooperation, avoid being exploited by lazy slackers and outright
cheaters, or by opportunistic bullies who take advantage of situations by
force? To whatever degree the cooperating altruists in a group can be
successful in circumventing such losses, it becomes far, far easier to explain
the natural selection of altruistic traits.
Social control (see Black 1984) has powerful effects on human behavior.
Wiessner provides an excellent description of sharing among hunter-gath-
erers, one that includes their negative response to free-riders:
Relationships that pool risk are ideally balanced over a lifetime, if con-
stantly controlled for cheating. For example, those who have things of
value but do not give are subject to social control through gossip, ridicule
or ostracism. Those who feel that they are being exploited may cease to
produce for a while and force others to do their share. However, it is
recognized that unpredictable events will make some people unable to
reciprocate adequately even in the best of times, and, accordingly, a wide
range of reciprocal ties are maintained so that people will win some
times, lose other times, and break even in most. (Wiessner 1996:186)
212
Hierarchy in the Forest

It is clear that a multiplicity of sanctions is being used for the same pur-
pose—to curb would-be free-riders whose motives are opportunistic.
By exercising their actuarial intelligence, foragers realize that an excess of
free-riding will make their generalized systems of sharing ineffective. One
way they can resolve this all-too-apparent social problem is by "legislating"
altruism. As moral communities, humans try to stimulate, reward, and in
some areas insist on altruistic behavior from group members (Campbell
1972). These actions facilitate the expression of whatever altruistic tenden-
cies are inherent in the species, but are present variably in individuals who
are basically egoistic. At the level of socialization, foragers prosocially ma-
nipulate children's ambivalent genetic potential for selﬁshness and altru-
ism, doing so in a direction that leads to helpfulness and cooperation
(Goody 1991). They also praise their best adult altruists in everyday life,
even as they frown at their worst free-riders. They can do more than praise
or frown, of course. If the stakes are high, they can apply stern sanctions
such as ostracism (Gruter and Masters 1986). Group members faced with
severe individual breaches of their altruistic ethic can turn to effective
punishment (Boyd and Richerson 1982, 1991, 1992). Surely it was hunter-
gatherers who did this ﬁrst as the inventors of morality. To this day they
continue to promote altruism—and condemn undue selﬁshness—in ways
that are similar on every continent.
Let me illustrate with a concrete area of behavior. We have seen that
foragers are famous for their sharing of large-game meat, and that they can
be quite inventive in making sure that accomplishment of a large kill is all
but meaningless when it comes to individual control over the meat (Lee
1979; Kelly 1996; Erdal and Whiten 1996; Wiessner 1996). As a result, the
best hunters cannot easily turn proprietary feelings into an excessive share
or total control, and thereby gain political power to dominate others or
monopolize women.
This situation amounts to socially enforced altruism, in that the hunter
is virtually obliged to relinquish his product and hand it over to the group.
Earlier, a kind of scientiﬁc mythology sprang up about nomadic hunters. It
saw the sharing of kills as a virtually automatic behavior accompanied by
beatiﬁc feelings of camaraderie. Sometimes it probably is that. For a fora-
ger-style system of cooperative sharing to work well, though, wholehearted
generosity is far from necessary. Peterson (1993) has surveyed a number of
foragers and ﬁnds that often group pressure is applied quite actively to
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
213

ensure that altruistic rather than selﬁsh impulses are acted on. Among the
Hazda, the process of sharing meat has even been interpreted as tolerated
theft, rather than socially facilitated giving away of resources (Blurton-
Jones 1984), but the analogy to chimpanzee meat-sharing may be inexact
(see de Waal 1996).
It has become evident that vigilant sharing (Erdal and Whiten 1994,
1996), rather than automatic, unambivalent, totally altruistic sharing, is at
the heart of the matter. This is the way people who carry the more altruistic
traits protect themselves from those who are more disposed to act as free-
riders. By manipulating behavior in the direction of conformity in matters
of sharing and cooperation, moralistically aggressive group members not
only reduce phenotypic variation at the within-group level, but do so
strategically when it comes to selection possibilities for altruistic genes.
They go out of their way to all but neutralize the potential advantage of
those who strike them as being opportunistically exploitative, people who
very likely carry free-riding genes.
I deﬁne such people broadly, to include camp bullies as well as free-
loaders and cheaters. Bullying free-riders are taken care of by egalitarian
sanctioning, as described in Chapter 4. Other free-riders take advantage of
altruists by being lazy, by feigning injury, by selﬁshly wolﬁng down meat
they have killed secretly, and so on. Such people are not necessarily bullies.
Members of the band are sensitive to these deceptive opportunists too, and
usually can deal with them quite effectively.
Very little reproductive effort is expended in so doing. Much of the
investment involves gossiping, and as a general phenomenon gossiping
brings individual reproductive beneﬁts through rewarding social interac-
tion (Dunbar 1994) and through exchange of information about subsis-
tence. In terms of physical risk, stress, extra energy expended, and time
subtracted from the subsistence quest, little further investment is required
if active sanctioning merely involves offering criticism, engaging in ridi-
cule, or establishing some social distance. Most social control is accom-
plished in this way, and the psychological stress is likely to be far greater for
the deviant than for those who exert the pressure.
Band members are in a position to pursue ﬂagrant free-riders effectively,
for when it comes to cheating on a band's cooperative system, relatively
little can be hidden in such a small group. If someone begins to emerge as
a serious repeat offender, people may move from covert gossiping to active
sanctioning, as noted by Wiessner, Balikci, and Briggs. We saw earlier, with
214
Hierarchy in the Forest

the socially distanced Utku family and its particularly controversial mem-
ber Niqi, that one approach is simply to keep such people at arm's length. A
certain aloofness that sets up some social or spatial distance can either
change the behavior of such a readily identiﬁed deviant, or at least keep
down the losses due to sharing with that person by reducing the degree of
social contact. In the case of more serious free-riders, it may be necessary
to escalate the sanctioning to criticism, ridicule, ostracism, even expulsion
from the group—or execution.
Of course, minor transgressions are rife in the ﬂow of hunter-gatherer
affairs and human affairs. Indigenously, they tend to be overlooked or,
more likely, set aside for future reference. But in important matters, forager
communities can be quick to unite in manipulating deviants or getting rid
of them—unless they are greatly feared. Whenever resources are scarce,
freeloading or cheating becomes a far more serious matter, which foragers
with their well-developed actuarial acumen thoroughly understand. Few
foragers have been carefully studied in situations of prolonged scarcity,
aside from Turnbull's (1972) ethnographically dubious work on the geo-
graphically and ecologically dislocated Ik. Yet the sanctions we encountered
in Chapter 4 are always available, whenever the group becomes aroused
enough to use them.
Foragers do tolerate some moderate free-riding, as with Niqi, but it is
safe to say that such behavior tends to be observed when food is relatively
abundant, and that should not be taken as the norm for hard times. Fur-
thermore, tolerance for free-riders presumably varies with the ratio of
active free-riders to altruists. Predictably, the cooperators will become less
responsive to questionable requests or demands to share food as the num-
ber of freeloaders in the band increases (Boehm 1999b).
I emphasize that foragers do not insist that all hunters perform
equally—not by any means. But they do expect every adult male to pro-
duce willingly according to his ability. To summarize, while the data are
mostly anecdotal, foragers seem to be quite astute when it comes to calcu-
lating the costs and beneﬁts of behaviors related to hunting and food-shar-
ing. We may assume, therefore, that they not only recognize free-riding
behavior, but are intellectually equipped to deal with it on a cost-beneﬁt
basis. If the costs become signiﬁcant, mere resentment will change to active
sanctioning.
Free-riders do have a powerful tool at their disposal. Among foragers
there is an ethic that one should always share according to the rules when it
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
215

comes to large-game kills, and also that one should accede helpfully to
direct requests of others to share food of any kind (Kelly 1995). That is why
the Utku for a time shared their plentiful ﬁsh heads with Niqi, even though
she habitually avoided doing her share in boiling them. An overall system
of this sort helps everyone over the long run, as long as not too many
people take free rides—and as long as free-riding can be dealt with deci-
sively if need be. In one instance, reported for the Netsilik by Balikci
(1970), when a man left home his food cache was destroyed by the children
of a family to whom he had failed to reciprocate in the past. Although we
may never have a great deal of data of this type, I suggest that the average
band's tolerance for lazy free-loading or outright cheating is low enough
that the reproductive burden created by these social parasites is not high.
What are the consequences for altruistic genes and their retention?
Negative sanctioning of free-riding, applied strongly just when the repro-
ductive losses of altruists would otherwise be high, powerfully enhances
the natural selection of altruistic traits because the advantages of free-rid-
ing largely disappear. Indeed, if a free-rider carries things too far and his
deviance leads to really serious action such as ostracism, exile, or execution,
he may experience a major reproductive loss in comparison with the altru-
ists who invested limited energy in punishing him.
As a result, much of the evolutionary biologist's free-rider problem is
resolved at the level of phenotype, on a deliberate basis, by a moral com-
munity that wants everyone to do their part. Foragers in bands are not
afraid to be unresponsive to ﬂagrantly unjustiﬁed requests for food when
serious scarcity looms, and they know how to punish outrageous cheaters
if they must, and punish them rather severely. By means of this actuarily
sophisticated group behavior, an enormous obstacle is removed when it
comes to the retention of altruistic genes by what is probably a moderate
degree of between-group selection.
All the same, in a forager band not everyone is equally altruistic to
everyone else all of the time. The same moral communities that are so
quick to suppress opportunistic free-riding do tolerate people taking legiti-
mate free rides (Boehm 1999b). There are always willing but far less tal-
ented hunters whose families receive virtually the same share of meat as
families of proﬁcient hunters. There are individuals who fall on hard times
because they are incapacitated and are helped by nonrelatives. There are
those who by bad luck have no family to support them in old age and are
216
Hierarchy in the Forest

cared for by nonrelatives. Such problems arise randomly with respect to
the behavior genes people carry, and therefore these asymmetrical dona-
tions do not affect the natural selection of altruistic or free-rider genes.
It is when people who are innately disposed to cheat or dissemble actu-
ally succeed in doing so, that within-group selection can operate decisively
against the retention of altruistic genes. At the level of phenotypic conse-
quences, hunter-gatherers seem quite adept at calculating most of the po-
tential losses and are in a position to drastically reduce them if necessary. In
doing so, they create a nearly level playing ﬁeld, on which born altruists
play with little genetic disadvantage relative to the born free-riders.
Adding Up the Effects
First, let us consider the division of labor between within-group and be-
tween-group selection. The former favors individualistic selﬁshness (ego-
ism) and helping of kin (nepotism), and I deem it likely that selection at
that level has remained by far the predominant mode of selection for
egalitarian bands. This is because the egalitarian syndrome has little effect
on the high extinction rates that prevail at the individual level. With vari-
ation, however, things are quite different. I judge that with egalitarians
variation between groups has approached—but surely not equaled—vari-
ation within groups. Remember that we are concerned with phenotypic
variation and that within-group competition has merely been debilitated,
not eliminated. Male hunters are still competing for females, as partners in
both marriage and adultery, and some will do better than others. Females
also compete for breeding partners (see Shostak 1981). Egalitarianism does
not wholly eliminate this type of competition, for occasional polygyny is
prevalent (Kelly 1995), but a single alpha-bully no longer has the chance to
monopolize many of the females.
On the matter of between-group selection, I have emphasized emer-
gency decisions as contexts in which bands arrive at varying subsistence
strategies, strategies that can quickly alter the relative sizes of nearby bands.
Routine decisions also play their part (Boehm 1996). At the level of relative
band size, group differences that emerge in the course of routinized migra-
tion patterns could add up substantially over time, but such differences are
not analyzed in the ethnographic reports of which I am aware. Wherever
environmental possibilities permit local variations in subsistence pattern,
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
217

hunter-gatherers can be expected to probe some of the possibilities; and
when their strategies vary, reproductive consequences can result. Even
where environmental constraints allow a relatively narrow range of alter-
natives, bands are free to experiment with alternative strategies at their own
peril, or to attempt migrations to different environments.
There is a further consideration. Emergency decisions that lead to more
rapid evolution probably were more frequent prehistorically than with
foragers we can observe today. Potentially, Pleistocene foragers were as
variable in their subsistence strategies as their extant nomadic counterparts
(Kelly 1995), but climatic ﬂuctuations surely increased their need to ex-
periment. People faced protracted and recurrent periods of stress (Potts
1996) when bands became desperate enough to improvise radically.
The general paleoanthropological view, based on precious little informa-
tion, is that major climatic perturbations stimulated so-called migrations.
One tends to think of large populations streaming more or less safely from
cool to warm environments, a view corrected by Potts (1996). What seems
more likely (Boehm 1999b) is that locally things became fraught with peril
and chaotic. Faced with scarcity, our foraging actuaries began to modify
their usual local migration patterns, moving in new directions that were
not necessarily adaptive. The trials would have been many, and some of the
errors fatal.
I suggest this scenario because the direction taken by slow-moving, gla-
cier-driven cold fronts probably was difﬁcult to discern most of the time,
except by following migrations of prey. As a result, many bands surely
perished or had to change their subsistence strategy radically because they
stayed in place or moved in the wrong direction; those who moved experi-
mentally in the right direction still had to compete with other bands that
were becoming similarly stressed.
What I envisage, then, instead of a stream of people methodically mov-
ing in one direction, is a gradually moving climatic broom that swept a
fortunate few before it and forced those left behind to experiment radically
as they either succeeded or perished. How did such recurrent long-term
periods of crisis affect interband variation? Certainly they led to greater
differences of strategy as bands faced unaccustomed adaptive challenges,
and therefore led to both higher variation and higher extinction rates.
Selection at the between-group level became especially robust at times of
extended emergency, as one band perished or was cut in half and had to
218
Hierarchy in the Forest

grow again while another band, shrewder or in any event pursuing a differ-
ent strategy, survived intact. The mechanical opportunities for selection at
the between-group level (Sober and Wilson 1998) apparently were abun-
dant at such times. Indeed, it could have been the more altruistic group
members, as superior cooperators, who best survived such decimations
and served as propagules to found new bands.
These are the conditions that prevailed during the Late Paleolithic. Ex-
treme ﬂuctuations of climate were quite frequent over the preceding mil-
lion years (Potts 1996), and the past 500,000 years have seen several major
oscillations between warmth and cold. The period from 128,000 to 78,000
years ago is generally considered an interglacial period, but from oxygen
isotope curves Potts identiﬁes ten radical climate reversals within that pe-
riod. These shifts lasted as much as ten thousand years, with the amplitude
of change being extreme, and Potts (1996:158) says, "I ﬁnd it interesting . . .
that the appearance of modern Homo sapiens and the oldest developments
of symbolic activity, which are the foundation of modern culture, occurred
during this span of high amplitude."
If we assume that the egalitarian syndrome arose at the latest with Ana-
tomically Modern Humans, there are convincing reasons to believe that
between-group selection was signiﬁcantly ampliﬁed during this highly un-
stable interglacial period. "Environmental change was expressed in differ-
ent ways in different regions of the world, and each ice age or meltdown
worked somewhat differently from the one before. Each major zig or zag in
the isotope proxy of global change is a signal of new topographies and
mosaics of vegetation never seen before. Each major shift in global climate
created unfamiliar rearrangements of water, food, and other resources"
(Potts 1996:159).
Rather than resulting in orderly migrations of entire populations, such
conditions, I have suggested, would have mixed people around and dis-
turbed existing territorial equilibria (Boehm 1999b). But one must resist
the idea that it was just advancing cold fronts that stimulated human
inventiveness and raised between-group variation. In windows of opportu-
nity during warming cycles, people also had to experiment in the face of
favorable new climates and biomes that were opening up as populations
expanded. The result was further ampliﬁcation of between-group selection
as the strategies of some bands succeeded better than the strategies of
others.
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
219

Other Possible Routes to Altruism
Pleiotropic Support of Helping Behaviors
I must mention brieﬂy the possibility that natural selection could be help-
ing to support altruistic behavior (that is, reproductive donations to non-
kin), even in the absence of altruistic genes (Boehm 1981, 1999b; see also
Simon 1990). This obviously is not a group-selection theory. The hypothe-
sis is that genes based on kin selection could in effect be subsidizing the
altruistic behavior by which nonkin are assisted. For example, an individu-
ally costly behavior that is extremely beneﬁcial to inclusive ﬁtness (such as
intervening in the ﬁghts of one's own offspring) is extended to nonkin with
whom similar social bonds exist—even though this approach contradicts
what is assumed sociobiologically about the operation of natural selection
(Boehm 1981).
This type of general hypothesis is far from new (Boehm 1999b). It began
with Aristotle and was mentioned by Darwin, while at the level of pheno-
type Eibl-Eibesfeldt (1989, 1996) and J. Q. Wilson (1993) have elaborated
at length the ways that a parental type of nurturance can be extended to
unrelated group members. The facts about behavior are indisputable; but a
theory is badly needed to explain how natural selection could permit such
an apparent misdirection of reproductive effort.
My thought is that normal methods of mathematical modeling in social
biology may be getting in the way of understanding this phenomenon:
speciﬁcally, consider the simplifying assumption that one gene prepares
only one behavior. I believe the possibility of pleiotropy must be enter-
tained, in the sense that a single gene can have multiple phenotypic effects.
Thus, the same gene that makes for parental investment and helping of
other very close kin has a second effect: it also allows nonkin, at least those
with whom strong social bonds exist, to be treated generously. The further
assumption is that the reproductive beneﬁts from frequently helping close
kin are so powerful that any moderate losses that may accrue from occa-
sionally helping nonkin can be readily sustained—even though they con-
stitute a drain on the reproductive success of the donors. I call this a
pleiotropic subsidy (Boehm 1999b).
We are used to thinking about natural selection as though its winnowing
capacity were all-powerful. In this instance, however, proximate mecha-
nisms of social bonding could be generating a problem that natural selec-
220
Hierarchy in the Forest

tion cannot solve. By this I mean that humans bond not speciﬁcally to kin,
but to individuals with whom they interact positively, for whatever reason
(see Fox 1989). In a small band, the closest bonding will take place between
nurturant parents and offspring, between siblings, and between other close
kin who stay in close proximity because of social ties. Lesser degrees of
bonding will also take place among nonkin who, because of their life
circumstances, have frequent social intercourse. In a small hunting band,
this applies to virtually everyone.
To summarize, the hypothesis is that natural selection cannot solve the
mechanical problem of eliminating moderate degrees of reproductive gen-
erosity that extend beyond nepotism. Precisely the same genes are support-
ing generosity toward close kin and generosity toward nonkin, and for
the individual donors these genes are producing a net reproductive beneﬁt
that is large. If this hypothesis has merit, the process involved can be seen
as being independent of the group-selection arguments made above
(Boehm 1999b), even though ultimately the two types of argument may be
combined.
A Warfare Hypothesis
This second hypothesis does look to group selection, and it is readily
combined with the previous hypotheses, based on the egalitarian syndrome
(Boehm 1999b). In theory, warfare could have made a straightforward
contribution to the retention of altruistic traits by upping the extinction
rates between groups (Alexander and Tinkle 1968; see also Alexander 1974;
E. O. Wilson 1975), and it could have done so independently of egalitarian-
ism. But for how many generations have humans been subject to warfare?
Keeley's (1996) careful search of the archaeological record reveals no
deﬁnitive evidence of massacres before the Neolithic (see also Daly and
Wilson 1988). Keeley does document pre-Mesolithic cemeteries, in which
over time many people died, apparently one at a time, of wounds inﬂicted
by weapons. The cause could have been improbably high levels of conﬂict
within the group, or gradual group attrition due to raiding or low-level
territorial conﬂict. Given the Wilson and Sober (1994) theory of multilevel
selection, absolute or near extinction of bands would not have been neces-
sary for lesser degrees of warfare such as small raids to raise extinction rates
at the between-group level. Occasional incremental decimations, compara-
ble to those inﬂicted by chimpanzees on neighboring communities
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
221

(Nishida 1979; Goodall 1986), could have had signiﬁcant cumulative ef-
fects. But we are left with too few data from the Late Paleolithic.
Extant hunter-gatherers do not often seem to pursue all-out, intensive
warfare, even though many exhibit perimeter defense or social boundary
defense (Cashdan 1983). Today hunter-gatherers frequently are socially
encapsulated, and their environments have been reasonably stable over the
brief time we have known them. Yet if we hark back to Potts's (1996)
description of an ever-changing Late Pleistocene environment that was
alternatively dangerous and full of opportunity, environmental stimulation
of territorial conﬂict could have been extensive if periodic.
Times of environmental stability may have created far more territorial
competition than we see in most foragers today, because Paleolithic fora-
gers had the pick of our planet's ﬁnest habitats. Eventually, population
growth was likely to have increased territorial tensions as bands were sub-
ject to crowding. During times of sharp climatic perturbation, some of
which were relatively immediate in reducing the resources available to
Paleolithic hunter-gatherers, the pervasive and prolonged dislocations dis-
cussed in the previous section (and also possibly straight-line migrations in
pursuit of prey) could have exacerbated intergroup competition as dis-
cussed by Kelly (1995). Thus, the issue of pre-Neolithic warfare may re-
quire further consideration (see Boehm 1999b).
The term "warfare" requires careful deﬁnition in this context, for inter-
group conﬂict varies substantially in its scale and intensity. Raiding tends to
be based on selﬁsh incentives: normally just a few raiders go out, and the
fact that they cautiously take some risks is compensated by the fact that
they personally enjoy the spoils. A species that is not innately altruistic
could easily engage in raiding as a reproductively selﬁsh cooperative enter-
prise. By contrast, intensive warfare calls for substantial altruistic sacriﬁces
from males, because in such warfare the men are ﬁghting for their groups:
indeed, they run a high risk of losing their lives in the process (Campbell
1975).
As the egalitarian syndrome helped to reshape human nature in the
direction of altruism over hundreds or thousands of generations, the prob-
ability of intensive warfare rose precisely because this risky activity is predi-
cated on a strong capacity for patriotic self-sacriﬁce—and therefore on
altruistic genes. Intensive warfare with genocide may not have been affect-
ing our species much during the early development of innate altruism, but
once altruistic genes had time to become well established in human gene
222
Hierarchy in the Forest

pools it was far more likely that intergroup conﬂict would rise to an inten-
sive level, with territorial displacements and massacres.
One way to explain the massacres that rather suddenly appeared in
the Mesolithic-Neolithic transition (Keeley 1996) would be to suggest that
the selection of altruistic patriotic genes, induced by the egalitarian syn-
drome, was reaching ﬁxation at about that time. A less precise hypothesis
would be that at some earlier point tendencies to patriotic altruism reached
a potential that could support intensive warfare, but it took changes in
environment, technology, population density, and degree of sedentary liv-
ing to strongly stimulate this behavioral potential.
Thus, the warfare hypothesis has two dimensions. First, it may have
been necessary for the egalitarian syndrome to work on human nature for
many generations to prepare the way for highly altruistic patriotic war-
fare. (Selﬁshly oriented raiding might have contributed to this preparatory
process by raising the extinction rates between groups.) Second, once in-
tensive warfare was in place, selection at the between-group level was in a
still better position to support all altruistic traits. In developing my main
arguments I have set the warfare question aside. Like pleiotropic subsidies,
it does deserve some consideration (Boehm 1999b) as a potentially inde-
pendent factor.
This chapter proposes, and elaborates, a new genetic theory of altruism in
human beings. Aside from some possible help from pleiotropic subsidies, it
is based squarely on mechanisms of natural selection as these have been
deﬁned by the majority of contemporary evolutionary biologists. On the
assumption that extant foragers may be used as reasonably accurate proxies
for their predecessors, the analysis applies directly to the Late Paleolithic
humans in whose bands many of our genes were evolved. In recreating
Paleolithic band life with its egalitarian syndrome, I have taken not only
extant central tendencies but certain rarer extant responses to special envi-
ronmental exigencies, and I have tried to adapt them to the extremely
varied conditions experienced by our predecessors in the Late Pleistocene.
My main theory of altruism does not apply wholesale to all social mam-
mals, for it depends on moral communities that manipulate behavior
according to complicated cognitive blueprints—normatively-based plans
that can radically restructure social organizations and patterns of personal
interaction. The selection-mechanics approach I have used may have wider
application where an animal species by some other means tends to equalize
Paleolithic Politics and Natural Selection
223

individual differences within groups, or to amplify differences between
groups, or somehow to police its free-riders.
In considering humans as a special case, I have focused mainly on phe-
notypic variation, as opposed to extinction rates. Such variation is equally
important in considering how strongly selection can operate at various
levels. Yet it has been little considered by evolutionary biologists, because
they prefer to model variation at the level of genes (Wilson and Kniffen
1999). I have all but eschewed mathematical modeling here, to focus on
ethnography as a key to the overall outline of phenotypic behavior as it
affects variation. This approach makes sense when dealing with a species
that, through morality, can radically manipulate its own behavior. As will
be seen in the next and ﬁnal chapter, the effects of the egalitarian syndrome
on phenotype, and ultimately on genotype, brought formidable changes to
human nature itself.
224
Hierarchy in the Forest

C H A P T E R
10
Ambivalence and Compromise
in Human Nature
Modern scholars have devoted much thought to the subject of human
nature, and there are many ways of deﬁning and dealing with this nebulous
entity. Some, following the lead of certain traditional philosophers (see
Masters 1989), continue to make tabula rasa assumptions that deny human
nature. Others conceive it as a series of powerful drives, needs, or disposi-
tions—behavioral tendencies that usually are considered piecemeal (for
example, Ruyle 1973). Still others try to explain how innate dispositions
such as selﬁshness and nepotism ﬁt with the entire web of social life. Three
prominent examples of this last approach are Edward O. Wilson's On
Human Nature (1978) and Richard D. Alexander's The Biology of Morals
(1987), both classics in sociobiology, and James Q. Wilson's The Moral
Sense (1993).
A few thinkers, beginning with William James, have considered human
nature as being inherently contradictory or "ambivalent" (James 1890; see
also Campbell 1965; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1971, 1989; Tiger and Fox 1971; Briggs
1982; Boehm 1984a, 1989, 1997b; Masters 1989; Erdal and Whiten 1994;
Knauft 1994a, 1994b; Sober and Wilson 1998), an approach that warrants
further development. Before we discuss some of the theories, however, a
philosophical digression is in order.
Rousseau, Hobbes, and the Endless Debate
Cross-cutting many of these approaches is a pair of well-known scholarly
biases. Hobbes and Rousseau, who basically appear to have advocated the
tabula rasa (see Masters 1989), nevertheless continue to inspire contradic-
tory philosophical folk traditions that color our speculations about human
225

nature. One tradition is hawkish and the other dovelike, and they lead
many scholars to view humans as either essentially nice or essentially nasty.
"Nice" includes social harmony in the group, freedom, cooperation, and
absence of warfare, whereas "nasty" encompasses dominant competitive-
ness, oppression, and prevalence of conﬂict and homicide both within the
group and vis-à-vis other groups.
Even anthropologists who have no avowed interest in human nature
become profoundly involved with these biases. Indeed, most of the better-
known ethnographic differences of opinion are polarized along these
philosophical dimensions (Heider 1988; Moody-Adams 1997). Redﬁeld
and Lewis's famous Mexican controversy was a nice-versus-nasty dispute.
Human groups in other culture areas have been subject to similar ethno-
graphic vagaries; for example, in the Paciﬁc, Mead and Fortune disagreed
about matters of cooperation versus conﬂict, while similar problems
cropped up in the American Southwest with the Zuni and the Hopi. Biases
that emerged in Africa indirectly colored our views of human evolution,
for earlier and later ethnographic interpretations of Kalahari hunting life
are quite disparate. Pointed examples are Elizabeth Marshall Thomas'
Harmless People (1959), followed by Irenaus Eibl-Eibesfeldt's "Myth of
Aggression-Free Hunter-Gatherer Society" (1974). The overall pattern
seems to be that an original description moves in a Rousseauian direction,
then a correction follows in favor of Hobbes.
Paleoanthropology has been infected with a similarly bifurcate political
virus, but in this case "nasty" preceded "nice" as early hominids moved
from the status of putative killer apes (Dart 1959) to being unwarlike
victims of predation (Brain 1981). On the other hand, archaeologists deal-
ing with Neolithic warfare possibilities have followed the usual ethno-
graphic progression from Rousseauian "denial" to Hobbesian "realism." In
this context, Keeley (1996) suggests that deﬁnitive evidence of Neolithic
defensive ramparts and genocidal slaughters was long ignored by a number
of his colleagues, including those who made the excavations.
Because hunter-gatherer societies are so germane to interpreting the
earlier archaeological record, differing interpretations such as those of
Thomas and Eibl-Eibesfeldt had far-reaching implications. After certain
early interpretations of extant hunter-gatherers went somewhat overboard
in the direction of peaceful cooperation (Thomas 1959) or "anarchy"
(Sharp 1958)—or otherwise went in the direction of underplaying compe-
tition, hierarchy, and violence—there came a whole series of realistic fac-
226
Hierarchy in the Forest

tual corrections (see Fried 1967; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1974, 1979; Lee 1979;
Boehm 1982a, 1993; Knauft 1987, 1989, 1991, 1993, 1994b; see also Daly
and Wilson 1988; Flanagan 1989; Knauft 1994a).
My "reverse dominance hierarchy" interpretations (Boehm 1982a,
1984a, 1993, 1997a, 1999a) are oriented to conﬂict, and many will take
them to be distinctly Hobbesian. Others will see them as realistic. Others
may even think that I am underplaying the conﬂict component. As an
admirer of both Hobbes and Rousseau, I hope that my approach has been
in accordance with the facts rather than overwhelmed by ideology.
On the "nasty" side of the equation, we have seen that hunter-gatherers
live in intentionally reversed dominance orders, and that these muted hier-
archies involve political tensions so strong that they sometimes require
capital punishment to maintain them. The assumption is that competition
and domination are learned very naturally by our species, and that if
competitive tendencies leading to individual dominance are to be routinely
suppressed, both vigilance and occasional harsh sanctioning are necessary.
There is a "nice" assumption, as well. I have suggested that the typical
societal blueprint of egalitarians, which calls for strict, punitive social con-
trols, is oriented also to the promotion of essentially willing cooperation.
Hunter-gatherers preach in favor of generalized cooperation and good will
toward nonrelatives in the group—whether this be a band (Service 1962)
or a small nexus (Heintz 1972) of friendly, cooperating bands. They also
are responsive to such preaching. So in a sense I have tried to straddle the
polarized debate, and Knauft (1991, 1994a) has done the same. As he
points out, foragers do have very high homicide rates, but they also exhibit
a relatively low level of lesser conﬂict, and are heavily preoccupied with the
maintenance of social harmony.
Theories of Human Nature
Probably no more difﬁcult area of inquiry exists than human nature (see
Sussman 1995), nor any more fascinating. In combination with the tenta-
tiveness of our methodologies, it is the multifaceted and structurally con-
tradictory composition of human nature that feeds the differences of opin-
ion referred to above. To engage brieﬂy in meta analysis, I believe that the
divergent scholarly views themselves reﬂect innately structured psychologi-
cal ambivalences harbored by each one of us. Potentially we are all both
doves and hawks, and the prudent course is to realize that our own contra-
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
227

dictory nature predisposes us to draw caricatures. The next step is to try
and be evenhanded, looking dispassionately for speciﬁc combinations of
nice and nasty in order to see how the two work together.
In the interest of developing methodology in productive directions, I
shall examine in some detail the innate forces—and counterforces—that
can be identiﬁed as underlying hierarchical political behavior and human
social life more generally. This base will assist in developing a preliminary
ambivalence-and-compromise approach, and in testing its potential. To
understand the possibilities and the obstacles, we must scrutinize the rele-
vant theories that prevail today, along with some of their antecedents.
Elsewhere I have reviewed a broad spectrum of recent approaches to
studying human nature (Boehm 1989). Even though many psychologists
are loosening their commitment to rampant environmentalism, tabula rasa
viewpoints of the type criticized by Campbell (1965) still prevail in many
quarters, as do a variety of essentially dismissive viewpoints that hold
human nature to be unknowable because we cannot study behavior genes
directly. Some evolutionary approaches emphasize behavioral lability as a
general-purpose, problem-solving device that is based on learning; Pulliam
and Dunford (1980) have outlined such a program (see also Lumsden and
Wilson 1981). A number of modular approaches isolate speciﬁc functional
domains such as language, mate choice, coalition behavior, or social ex-
change, and suggest that the human brain was evolved for specialized
problem-solving in these areas (Cosmides and Tooby 1992; see also
Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992). The result is a useful "evolutionary
map" of cognitive and emotional functioning in human beings, even
though the human brain, in its structure, may not be compartmentalized
as neatly as is implied (Mithen 1996; Lieberman 1998; see also Potts 1996).
Several ontogenetic models examine responses in human infants for
clues about adults. One such response is attachment (Wilson 1993); an-
other is babbling as a genetic preparation for language acquisition (Pinker
1994). There are also models of basic emotions, based on hard-wired facial
expressions and inspired by Darwin, that are well grounded in empirical
data (Ekman, Sorensen, and Friesen 1969; Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1989; Masters
1989; Brown 1991). Brain-reward models use evidence from psychophysi-
ology and brain chemistry to support arguments about various tendencies
that are likely to be genotypically based, a pioneer in this area being Konner
(1982; see also Hoebel 1983). More diffuse, satisfaction-quest models
(Malinowski 1939; Ruyle 1973) complement brain-reward approaches.
228
Hierarchy in the Forest

Many other models have been proposed, including one which suggests that
human political tendencies are derived from a genotypic "deep structure"
(Tiger and Fox 1971), and the potentially very useful "human universals"
approach pioneered by Kluckhohn (1953) and Brown (1991). Earlier "ag-
gression" models of human nature add to the list well-known names such
as Lorenz (1963), Ardrey (1966), and Morris (1967). Furthermore, a num-
ber of evolutionary psychologists, biocultural anthropologists, and sociobi-
ologists have tried to explain a wide variety of discrete behaviors that might
qualify for inclusion in "human nature" (Stent 1981; Daly and Wilson
1988; Barkow, Cosmides, and Tooby 1992; Betzig 1997).
The usual procedure has been a simplifying one. Scholars focus on one
area of behavior at a time, in an attempt to explain its selection by means of
inclusive ﬁtness theory. Recently, Sober and Wilson's (1998) multilevel
selection theory (see also Wilson and Sober 1994) has broadened the ex-
planatory possibilities because it makes the explanation of altruism me-
chanically more plausible. I applied this type of theory to Paleolithic hu-
mans in the previous chapter (see also Boehm 1997a, 1997b, 1999a,), and
also have suggested tentatively that pleiotropic subsidies may be entering
into the equation (Boehm 1999b).
A number of the proposals focus speciﬁcally on the moral aspect of
human nature. Darwin was the evolutionary pioneer in this respect, and
some scholars have followed up on his work or have introduced variant
evolutionary approaches (Westermarck 1894; Campbell 1965, 1972, 1975;
Eibl-Eibesfeldt 1971, 1989; E. O. Wilson 1975, 1978; Boehm 1979, 1982b,
1997b; Alexander 1987; Fox 1989; J. Q. Wilson 1993; Wright 1994; Wilson
and Sober 1994; Ridley 1996; Arnhart 1998; Sober and Wilson 1998). This
book continues that tradition.
The spectrum of "human natures" implicit in these and other ap-
proaches is broad, indeed. Human nature could be blank or relatively
speciﬁc. If speciﬁc, it could be nice or nasty. As Ruyle (1973) suggests,
human nature could be a primary determinant of culture. It also seems
to be a prime major target for decisive cultural manipulation (Campbell
1972, 1975; Boyd and Richerson 1992), insofar as our moral codes regu-
larly work to suppress the hedonistic or aggressive behavior tendencies that
generate social problems.
These behavior tendencies are becoming better deﬁned. Masters criti-
cizes the behaviorist psychologists who spoke of undifferentiated drives,
and instead credits Lorenz (1963) and his approach, by which "animal
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
229

behavior can be described in terms of a 'parliament of instincts' in which
conﬂicts between competing impulses are resolved" (Masters 1989, p. 31).
He also credits Tiger and Fox (1971) for thinking similarly when they
introduced the idea that humans have a generative "biogrammar." He
suggests that such approaches are highly preferable to the "animal-drive"
theories that were espoused by some of the ancients and by modern behav-
iorists as well.
Generally academicians today take care not to speak of "drives," as Fried
did in 1967. They do talk in terms of what might be called innate propen-
sities. These come in many semantic shades, and the terminology could be
confusing to cultural anthropologists and others who have not covered the
burgeoning literature of evolutionary biology. In the search for increasing
sophistication, the creation of technical-sounding nomenclatures abounds.
These terms, to sample a few that are in the public domain and are used
more or less synonymously, include predilection, disposition, predisposi-
tion, learning disposition, behavior tendency, behavior trait, behavioral
predisposition, genetic disposition, innate disposition, and innate ten-
dency. Sussman (1995) has pointed out difﬁculties that can arise when
such notions are incorporated into cultural analysis, but I believe we can
vastly improve our record in this respect.
E. O. Wilson (1975, 1978) has employed the term "genetic preparation"
to emphasize that what often was called an instinct merely amounts to a
genetic readiness that makes a behavior easy to learn in the type of envi-
ronment in which it evolved. Even small-brained turkey hens need learning
experiences to make their compulsive-seeming behaviors reproductively
effective, and with humans most of our genetic preparations are far less
speciﬁc. As a species with prolonged nurturance, our social development is
far more dependent on learning experiences—experiences that not only
shape our behaviors but are needed to stimulate them in the ﬁrst place.
However, we must not forget that our nature is reasonably deﬁnite, sufﬁ-
ciently so that genetic tendencies tend to constrain us at every turn.
In social biology heroic attempts have been made to describe human life
in terms of these innate behavior tendencies, and to do so in a way that
takes account of what is generally seen to be a selﬁsh yet cooperative
pattern of social intercourse (E. O. Wilson 1978; Alexander 1987; Daly and
Wilson 1988; Cosmides and Tooby 1992; J. Q. Wilson 1993; Wright 1994;
Ridley 1996). Nonetheless, as a matter of methodology these studies tend
230
Hierarchy in the Forest

to examine one trait or behavioral area at a time; for example, selﬁshness,
or nepotism, or attachment, or aggression, or cooperation, or everyone's
favorite—altruism. While what Sussman (1995) calls a laundry-list ap-
proach obviously is useful, it would be helpful to combine such elements
dynamically and thereby gain a more holistic perspective.
The Study of Innately Structured Ambivalences
Masters (1989:31), writing as a biologically oriented political scientist, says:
"The demonstration that human nature is a compound of contradictory
impulses has important theoretical consequences. Ethological studies of
social life show us that human societies and governments cannot be ade-
quately explained by supposedly invariant natural traits or instincts like
altruism or selﬁshness."
The key word here is "contradictory." In suggesting that it could be
useful to dissect psychological ambivalences that stem from human nature,
Campbell (1965) was inﬂuenced not only by William James but by Freud
(1930). Campbell's focus was on the tensions between egoism and altruism
(see also Sober and Wilson 1998), which are directly relevant to our discus-
sion in the previous chapter; here, in conclusion, I shall examine these
tensions further.
When I titled this ﬁnal chapter "Ambivalence and Compromise in Hu-
man Nature," I wanted to emphasize that structural contradictions in our
nature tend to produce profound ambivalences in humans, psychological
tugs of war that are reasonably predictable because they are anchored in
human nature (Boehm 1989, 1997b). Before I proceed further, let me
elaborate on the difference between structural contradictions in human
nature and psychological ambivalences that are experienced at the level of
phenotype.
With present knowledge, an innate structural contradiction cannot be
identiﬁed by analyzing the structure of the human genome; rather, one
must look at actual behavior and make appropriate inferences about prob-
able genes that work in opposition at the level of phenotype. For example,
when we observe another species whose typical behavior pattern includes
frequent acts of dominance and submission, we assume that these behav-
iorally opposed tendencies have coevolved genetically (Lorenz 1963), and
that in situations of competition individuals are genetically prepared to
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
231

choose one or the other as they learn their political repertoires. Such as-
sumptions underlay Vehrencamp's (1983) ethological assessment of egali-
tarianism and despotism as these relate to animals living in groups, and
they underlie the behavioral treatments of primatologists in general. As my
analyses in the previous chapters indicate, I believe that such an approach
is applicable to humans in the spheres of politics and sociality.
Let me brieﬂy illustrate a political application of ambivalence theory,
before I make some suggestions about its relevance to anthropology and
then proceed to a more detailed analysis of political ambivalences that
could illuminate ethnographic analysis. If an individual in a group is
caught psychologically in a two-way pull between his (or her) tendency to
submit or dominate, we can readily hypothesize a link between an innate
structural contradiction and the individual's immediate psychological
state. When caught in such an ambivalence, a man can decide on either a
strategy of domination or a strategy of appeasement or ﬂight; but if the
species is behaviorally labile, he also may blend the two responses. For
instance, he runs to an ally and simultaneously solicits support for a coun-
terattack.
This reaction bears some similarity to what human egalitarians are do-
ing when they arrive at a primus inter pares way of life, but the overall
blend of responses is more complicated. As members of a moral commu-
nity, egalitarians may submit individually to dangerous upstarts in their
midst, yet as a community they may become collectively and unambiva-
lently dominant over such individuals, and even kill them. The use of an
ambivalence approach does not end there. Because their society is inten-
tional, as contributors to it egalitarians are involved in a perpetual meta-
compromise: in effect, they are giving up on personal domination possi-
bilities, which human nature tends to make attractive—so as to avoid
having to submit to other individuals—which human nature tends to
make unattractive. It was this unique behavioral compromise that trans-
formed human political and social life.
An Ethologically Sophisticated Anthropology
For several reasons, I think a human-nature based "ambivalence" approach
could be useful to an anthropology which, as the century turns, may be
coming apart at the seams. One is the reduction of personal and theoretical
232
Hierarchy in the Forest

biases, something that all anthropologists espouse. Another is the develop-
ment of more nearly holistic approaches in ethnography and ethnology.
Finally, there is the need for clariﬁcation of the human behavioral lability
that we talk about so frequently, yet deal with so imprecisely.
Reduction of Bias
Anthropologists are prone to bias in interpreting cultures in terms of their
sociality and their aggressiveness. Some of us tend to beautify the people
we study, others prefer to be realistic, and still others may try to compen-
sate for previous beautiﬁcation—or for too much "realism." One has only
to read the nice-versus-nasty ethnographies discussed above to realize that
the web of biases is complicated and that the underlying feelings can be
powerful and inﬂuential.
One way to make the study of human behavior less biased is to split
some of these differences—not as an expedient compromise, but as a
matter of seeking better biocultural explanations of the human condition.
For example, I have analyzed blood revenge killings in the Balkans to
demonstrate that typical feuding behavior can involve far more than just
the strong human tendency to retaliate (Daly and Wilson 1988). Many
acts of tribal revenge involve men having to kill men who formerly were
friends, and there is evidence in the Balkans that these social bonds breed
an ambivalence so powerful that charms must be used to keep the killer
from losing consciousness (Boehm 1989).
As a more complicated empirical domain, hunter-gatherer egalitarian-
ism has involved many biases in its interpretation. These preferential ap-
proaches reﬂect implicit or unstated assumptions about human nature,
and they range from assumptions of anarchism or of spontaneously be-
nevolent cooperation, to theories based on endemic competitive power
plays or even tolerated theft. Some interpretations appear to see equality
everywhere, whereas others emphasize the existence of competition and
hierarchy. My suggestion is that we could proﬁt from carefully examining
the indigenous ambivalences that help to shape such multifaceted societies.
This would aid us in shedding some of our biases as we try to understand
behavior in its own right. It also would assist us in understanding the
underlying human political nature, and how it articulates with human
values and human behavior.
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
233

A More Holistic Ethnography
Ethnography is the cornerstone of anthropology, but many types of eth-
nography have been so static (as with most of the symbolic, structural, or
functional approaches) that it is difﬁcult to tie them to human nature.
Doing so is important, for human nature provides a special kind of anchor
that links cultural patterns with natural history. A better opening is pro-
vided by processual approaches, particularly dynamic ethnographic analy-
ses that take decisions into account. Decisions provide an arena in which
human nature affects cultural values, and values help ﬁrst to deﬁne deci-
sion alternatives and then to inform choices made among such alternatives.
Much of human behavior is determined by decisions, in which individuals
or groups deﬁne their dilemmas, consider their options, and then move to
a course of action.
Many anthropologists shy away from the direct study of decisions, for
often our informants are no better than we are at sorting out ex post facto
rationalizations from the "intuitions" (or consciously calculated reckon-
ings) that actually guide decision processes. Even if they are able to respond
to our queries about why they made a particular decision, they may not
choose to do so. However, the basis for individual decisions can emerge in
autobiographical accounts, while in collective decisions that are publicly
discussed values, alternatives, and sharp dilemmas become quite apparent
(Boehm 1996).
At the level of phenotype, the psychological ambivalences involved in
typical human decision dilemmas are structured by "values," as deﬁned by
Kluckhohn (1952). It is the possibility of tracing the often very close rela-
tionship between widespread cultural values and human nature (see Bid-
ney 1947) that offers a potentially fruitful focus for improving anthropo-
logical research and explanation.
Let us consider some speciﬁcs. In this book I have concentrated on the
political ethos, which in egalitarian societies is largely describable in terms
of social and political values that deﬁne leadership roles. Causally, I have
connected positive values, which espouse a combination of unaggressive-
ness, generosity, and friendly emotions in leaders, to a disposition to dislike
domination—an innate tendency that egalitarians express decisively as they
try to make everyday life conform to their largely implicit blueprint for a
society of equals. I also have connected the aggressive social control people
use collectively to reinforce their ethos with dispositions to dominance. To
234
Hierarchy in the Forest

complete the picture, I must emphasize something I have all but taken for
granted: it is the submissive dispositions in human nature that make most of
the would-be upstarts desist, before they have to be vigorously manipu-
lated (or eliminated) by their groups. A united moral community is a
fearsome adversary indeed.
These three innate propensities underlie the predictable psychological
ambivalences that are experienced by individual decision-makers in a vari-
ety of political contexts. When human societies take on a despotic form,
hierarchies become orthodox instead of reversed because the predictable
ambivalences of both subordinates and would-be dominators are resolved
in a different direction. It may be raw fear that swings the pendulum for
those who are less powerful individually, but the attractions of being cared
for, protected, and governed may also be salient, and all of these competing
dispositions can be linked to human nature.
To me, the most interesting aspect of human egalitarian societies is that
the main political actors—innately ambivalent individuals who know they
are likely to be subordinated by bullies—manage to conquer their fears and
move, collectively, in the direction of domination. It is the strong who must
submit, and their ambivalences also are predictable. The continuing incli-
nation to dominate is expressed in the fact that that these alpha types
sometimes try to turn the tables and engage strongly in upstartism, some-
thing that apparently takes place with all egalitarians, everywhere, given
enough time. That, too, is consistent with the contradictory human politi-
cal nature I have deﬁned.
Conceived more broadly, human nature includes a wide array of dispo-
sitions of which we can be reasonably certain. One must include even the
need for sleep and creature comfort, along with thirst, hunger, and sexual
appetite. Nepotistic and altruistic capacities for giving nurturance and pro-
tection are salient, as well as the capacity for attachment, and sociality more
generally. We are disposed to communicate, and we may well be disposed
to detect cheaters or form political coalitions. Our deﬁnition of human
nature should be inclusive, yet reasonably speciﬁc.
I have emphasized dominance, submission, and the resentment of
domination because of my topic. These underlying dispositions may work
in concert, but they are likely to clash. When they work against one an-
other, the phenotypic result is psychological ambivalence—and a type of
concrete decision dilemma that involves conﬂict of values as egalitarians
weigh their needs for personal security and their fears of being attacked
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
235

against their attraction to personal autonomy. This type of dilemma should
be special grist for our ethnological mill, as we try not only to understand
local patterns of behavior, but also to deﬁne the human condition in
general.
Behavioral Lability and Its Limits
The facultative ﬂexibility of humans is great (Sober and Wilson 1998),
and it requires far better explanation. Also called plasticity, human behav-
ioral lability is so extensive that if one moves beyond "needs" to eat or
copulate, and beyond genetically demarcated developmental windows
(during which, for example, language is very easy to learn), it is easy to
come to the conclusion that in many areas human nature is not very
speciﬁc at all. Cultural anthropologists note, pointedly, that cultural behav-
ior seems to be all over the map. Given our neglect of human nature, such
conclusions have seemed reasonable.
At ﬁrst blush, our political past gives precisely such an impression.
Knauft (1991) identiﬁed the problem in a groundbreaking discussion of
human political evolution, and I have discussed his "U-shaped curve" in an
earlier chapter. The problem was, ﬁrst, an enormous political discrepancy
between the despotic ancestors of our human lineage and the egalitarian
foragers in whose bands our genes were evolved, and, second, the equally
large discrepancy between those same egalitarians and the despotic human
societies that followed them after the Neolithic. Knauft ruled out the possi-
bility that modern despotism evolved very rapidly after the Paleolithic, for
there was inadequate time for such genetic change to take place. We were
left with a political nature apparently so labile as to be indecipherable.
Subsequently I proposed that egalitarian society was little more than a
highly unusual type of social dominance hierarchy, one taken over, in
effect, by rebellious subordinates (Boehm 1993). It came into being be-
cause the rank and ﬁle began to act on their antiauthoritarian tendencies,
rather than on competing submissive tendencies. If one accepts this am-
bivalence-based hypothesis, then Knauft's paradox is resolved. A perplex-
ingly indeﬁnite image of human political nature can be replaced by an
image that involves deﬁnite (but contradictory) innate dispositions that
can prepare radically different behavioral outcomes at the level of pheno-
type. That is, our polities can be either reasonably egalitarian or seriously
despotic.
We saw in Chapter 6 that the forms human hierarchies take are quite
236
Hierarchy in the Forest

varied. We also saw that all human societies involve some kind of political
hierarchy, whether reversed or orthodox, and that if leaders get seriously
out of line resolution of the ensuing political crisis can involve coercive
force—with either the rank and ﬁle or the despot in question winning out.
We are left with something far different from a political tabula rasa. While
humans may strike one as being unusually ﬂexible in their political behav-
ior when compared with other higher primates, our political nature never-
theless makes certain aspects of human political life quite predictable. We
always live with some type of hierarchy, which suggests that our behavior is
constrained by human nature. Contributing to the ﬂexibility are the psy-
chological ambivalences discussed above: we can combine our competing
innate tendencies in a number of ways.
The basic ambivalences involve tendencies to dominance, resentment of
domination, and submission, and in groups people sometimes resolve
them by going to extremes of either despotism or egalitarianism. They also
may arrive at compromises, as seen in egalitarian Big-Man societies and
egalitarian tribal republics, or in moderately despotic chiefdoms like the
Tikopia, where authoritative leaders are heavily constrained by public
opinion. Other noteworthy types of political-compromise societies include
ancient and modern democracies, for they maximize personal freedom yet
centralize power in ways that are compatible with governing very large
populations.
Analytically, it is difﬁcult to imagine the political societies we might
create if we had a substantially different nature, for human nature tends to
conﬁgure our very imagination. I suggest that our realistic possibilities are
simultaneously ﬂexible, as illustrated above, and constrained by a nature
that channels our political life along fairly speciﬁc tracks. Human imagina-
tion does sometimes try to outrun these constraints. Marxian communism
will be treated later, as an innovative and hopefully practical political
agenda that was formed with a ﬂawed understanding of human political
nature, and for that reason failed.
Ambivalence in Political Affairs
Chimpanzee Evidence
A major theme of this book has been that human political nature includes
not only dominance and submission dispositions, widely recognized in
primates, but also a disposition to resent being dominated. The resentment
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
237

in question could be construed to be merely an occasional side effect of
dominance tendencies. I have no quarrel with that theoretical stance, as
long as it is acknowledged that in the subordinate role chimpanzees and
humans often may be biding their time rather than submitting wholeheart-
edly. It is difﬁcult to document this third disposition, even in subhuman
species whose political patterns are simpler and more predictable than our
own. Submission often becomes so highly routinized that resentment of
domination is not apparent.
In the interest of clarifying the nature of subordinate intransigence I
shall brieﬂy reexamine all three basic dispositions, ﬁrst with chimpanzees
and then with humans. There is no doubt that Pan troglodytes is exception-
ally given to status rivalry (Nishida 1979; de Waal 1982; Goodall 1986), and
Wrangham and Peterson (1996) emphasize that this feature applies espe-
cially to the males. Nor is there any doubt that chimpanzees are genetically
well prepared for submissive behavior. We have detailed the rich array of
readily learned (and sometimes hard-wired) behaviors that help to make
them adept at playing a subordinate role. However, ﬁeld reports tend to
"streamline" the description of chimpanzee social behavior patterns, and
thereby portray dominance versus submission as something like a binary
choice.
This representation gives little structural emphasis to the resentment of
domination, a third component I have added on the basis of my own work
with wild chimpanzees and my reading of ﬁeld reports. In early chapters I
emphasized that chimpanzees, particularly the males, can be obsessively
persistent in their status rivalry. Indeed, in descriptively adequate ﬁeld
reports, sporadic but sometimes very protracted dominance instabilities
arise between contenders for rank (Goodall 1971, 1990, 1992; de Waal
1982; Uehara et al. 1994; Nishida and Hosaka 1996). It is subordinate
resentment of being dominated that creates such instabilities, and I pro-
pose that such resentment also is operative at times when ambitious subor-
dinates are submissively biding their time.
The collective power of resentful subordinates is at the base of human
egalitarian society, and we can see important traces of this group approach
in chimpanzee behavior. Witness de Waal's account of how the Yerkes
females intervened against their own alpha male when he was harassing a
lesser male who had dared to court a favored female. Even though we
cannot interview chimpanzees, we can speculate on the speciﬁc ambiva-
lences involved. The females were used to submitting to the alpha, but they
238
Hierarchy in the Forest

dared to protest individually (indeed, for chimpanzees everywhere the de-
ﬁant or indignant waa vocalization seems to be dedicated to such protest).
As new females added their voices, all became emboldened. The hostile
chorus signaled an impending physical intervention—an aggressive act of
collective dominance—and Jimoh desisted. I believe this to have been an
instance of shifting ambivalence on both sides.
This adventurous excursion into the chimpanzee mind is at least
grounded in realistic assessments of chimpanzees' behavioral tendencies,
emotions, and intentions, and I hope it does not seem far-fetched. In its
simplicity, this anecdote brings into relief the fact that, for humans, the
analysis of innately structured ambivalences could enhance our explana-
tions of political behavior. The advantage of studying ambivalences of
humans is that there can be a far more robust connection between behav-
ioral facts and our assumptions about psychological orientations that may
be operative. We the analysts have the advantage of also being human, and
once in a while our subjects can articulate to us their feelings and their
strategies.
Human Egalitarian Ambivalence
Perhaps the best ethnographic data on human ambivalence come from
public decision meetings, in which open debate brings out the ambiva-
lences felt by different individuals as the group struggles to ﬁnd a consen-
sus (Boehm 1996). A useful account was published by Turton (1977) on
East African pastoralists, who were deliberating whether or not to go to
war. The tension between fear and self-assertion was quite apparent as the
group worked toward a common policy. The enemy was external, of
course, not a dangerous internal upstart, but the emotions that underlay
the perceived dilemma were similar to those experienced by egalitarians
who want to resist a threatening dominator.
I am aware of no comparably detailed ethnographic account of a debate
in which an egalitarian rank and ﬁle are trying to decide what to do about
a dangerous upstart. A warfare debate can be public because the enemy is
absent; in deciding what to do about a group member of whom you are
seriously afraid, it is prudent to keep the discussion clandestine. This fact is
useful to the principals, but not to ethnographers. When the upstart is less
dangerous, however, people are likely to engage in spontaneous direct criti-
cism as a way of keeping him in line. At that point, the overall process
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
239

becomes similar to what we saw with the female chimpanzees at Yerkes.
Direct criticism portends decisive intervention by the group, and usually
the upstart desists.
In teasing apart the emotive and cognitive elements that are operative
when people deﬁne and try to resolve a dilemma that involves upstartism,
we do not actually need verbatim transcripts of the public decision meet-
ings or private gossip sessions that shape public opinion. Fortunately, other
kinds of ethnographic information enable us to triangulate to the underly-
ing emotions, values, and strategies. The ethos provides a general guide to
overall concerns, and when earlier we examined a series of ethnographic
summaries and anecdotes that revealed egalitarian values, the quite pre-
dictable lists of attributes for good and bad leaders provided ample clues to
what was going on politically.
There are other ways of enhancing one's understanding of the political
decision process. In the ﬁeld, one can ask for descriptions of past political
crises that are retained in memory, and one can elicit statements about
values in general and then ask for exempliﬁcation. One also can use hypo-
thetical situations as an eliciting device. All can be used inferentially, to
understand typical decision dilemmas and the ambivalences involved. One
also can get lucky, as it were, and be privy to a crisis in which an upstart is
put down. A number of such direct observations were discussed in earlier
chapters.
At the time a hunter-gatherer political domination episode is begin-
ning, it is likely that the main political actors are caught in a psychologi-
cal ambivalence rather similar to that experienced initially by the female
chimpanzees at Yerkes. At the same time, at the individual level fear of
taking action is deﬁnitely present because serious human upstarts and
alpha male chimpanzees are threatening. They may counterattack immedi-
ately or become vindictive later on. There are obvious differences in how
the collective responses are derived. With humans, subordinate resentment
is culturally catalyzed by an egalitarian ethos. Furthermore, we can con-
sult privately, and in great detail, as we seek agreement in assessing facts
and options. Yet the raw political dynamics are similar to those of chim-
panzees.
When assertive action is to be taken, the human and chimpanzee paths
diverge in political methodology. Essentially, the chimpanzee sanctioning
tool is blunt: having clearly signaled their disapproval, the Yerkes females
were poised to "mob" the culprit, and in doing so they could have moved
from blufﬁng to actual physical attack. Jimoh sensed this and desisted. The
240
Hierarchy in the Forest

human array of manipulative tools is far more varied. For one thing, we
can go beyond a generalized expression of disapproval, analogous to the
chimpanzee chorus of waa vocalizations, to add details about what is rous-
ing our ire. We can add the sting of ridicule as a special facet of our ability
to use symbols. Malevolent humor, used aggressively by the entire group, is
extremely hurtful. Chimpanzees have no analogous behavior. Humans can
inﬂict the social pain of ostracism, thereby taking a longer-term, collective
approach to social control and the manipulation of deviant behavior. Also,
humans bent on social distancing can expel someone from the group. The
Gombe chimpanzees did this once, when they ganged up on ex-alpha male
Goblin. (After he "reformed" and became submissive to the new reigning
alpha he was able to reenter the group.) Chimpanzees do not, however,
appear to collectively decide on assassination as the solution for an extreme
problem of despotism.
It is obvious that symbolic communication and possession of an ethos
make a very large difference for humans. Yet it would appear that the
underlying emotions and behavioral orientations are similar to those of
chimpanzees, as are group intimidation strategies that have the effect of
terminating resented behaviors of aggressors. I believe that an ethological
approach that looks to innate behavior dispositions enables the psycho-
logical ambivalences that underlie egalitarian society to be incorporated
into ethnographic analysis, and into ethnology more generally.
One key to identifying such ambivalences is the ethos, with its lists of
desirable and undesirable qualities and behaviors. Consider now the fact
that the egalitarian ethos of nomadic hunter-gatherers is very similar to
that of tribesmen, who gain their living very differently and dwell in larger
groups. An ambivalent (yet far from amorphous) human nature could
perhaps be structuring human political possibilities in a similar direction
for both types of relatively small societies.
We need not limit our analysis to egalitarians who live in bands or tribes,
for we have seen that a universal political dilemma is abuse of power.
Egalitarians may deﬁne it on a hair-trigger basis, whereas in a hierarchical
chiefdom people expect their leader to throw his weight around to a mod-
erate degree. Even in a highly despotic primitive kingdom, where the leader
rules by coercive force, the boundary between legitimate and illegitimate
use of power continues to be deﬁned by public opinion. There, however,
psychological ambivalences about abuse of power may remain perma-
nently unresolved: the rank and ﬁle may quietly complain about a tyrant's
behavior even as fear of his loyal soldiers keeps them from active rebellion.
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
241

Likewise, in a modern democracy the power of a Senator Joe McCarthy can
become so intimidating that the people's representatives, including their
president and the press, simply dare not speak out for a time. In spite of
having an egalitarian ethos they are cowed, just as hunter-gatherers may be
initially intimidated when a domination episode begins.
With President Richard Nixon's use of the Federal Bureau of Investiga-
tion and the Internal Revenue Service to gain unlawful political advantage,
the "fact-ﬁnding" was done not by all the main political actors gossiping, as
in a foraging band, but by a special committee of elected representatives
who served as decision leaders. These very special political actors were
ready to impeach Nixon when he resigned, and his removal from ofﬁce was
not that different from the deposition of a band leader or a tribal chieftain.
Humans are resentful of power abuse in a wide variety of political
circumstances, and this resentment stems rather directly from human na-
ture. But as human political groups become larger and more hierarchical,
the psychological ambivalences of individual actors become more compli-
cated. In addition to the triadic pull between dominance, resentment of
domination, and submission, other factors enter the picture: for example,
tendencies to resent control from above may be heavily tempered by appre-
ciation of what a benevolent dominating leader does for one, as in chief-
doms or primitive kingdoms or modern democracies where largesse is
redistributed from the political center. Or one may identify with a powerful
leader on a chauvinistic basis, as he (or she) tries to advance the political
advantage of one's nation. Or one may simply be captivated by a leader
with powerful charisma.
I have used some simpliﬁed examples here to point in the direction of a
more holistic approach to dynamic ethnographic analysis of political be-
havior. I do not restrict this ambivalence approach to politics: next, I dis-
cuss some of the dilemmas that derive from our social nature, which I also
construct as tripartite.
Ambivalence in Social Affairs
Political life and sociality are sometimes difﬁcult to disentangle. I have
argued that our social nature should reﬂect the levels of selection that acted
on human gene pools over the many millennia of egalitarian forager life
(Boehm 1997b), and in the previous chapter I suggested that in the Late
Paleolithic there was a solid basis for selection at the between-group level,
242
Hierarchy in the Forest

with the free-rider problem seriously curtailed. As a result, what I believe to
be moderately strong altruistic dispositions are pitted today against what
obviously are strong dispositions to nepotism and extremely powerful dis-
positions to egoism.
When Campbell (1965) suggested that an ambivalence approach might
be useful to evolutionary analysis, what he had in mind was explaining the
fundamental tension between egoism and altruism. It is logical to make the
ambivalence tripartite: at the level of human nature, egoism, nepotism, and
altruism are structured to work against one another. If we move from
genotype to phenotype to consider psychological motives, human interac-
tions in groups are likely to see individualistic prerogatives competing
directly with familial ones, while altruistic motives that favor unrelated
individuals or the entire multifamily group compete against both.
The interplay of these three dispositions can be exempliﬁed ethnog-
raphically. When Netsilik Eskimos must either undergo a long migration or
starve, the number of dogs they can feed limits what they can carry on their
sleds and how fast they can travel. If there are old people too inﬁrm to
carry their own weight, they cannot be put on a sled at the expense of
equipment that is necessary to a family's survival. Generous feelings based
on nepotism or altruism must be set aside; these unfortunates are sadly
allowed to freeze to death (Balikci 1970).
Despite strong ambivalence about abandoning these incapacitated peo-
ple, the "winner" (motivationally speaking) is the fear of individual or
familial starvation if the migration is not completed in a timely fashion.
Cost-beneﬁt analysis works against their survival and, if the incapacitated
have close relatives who must make such a decision, the ambivalence can be
rather complicated. Egoistic and nepotistic motives that favor the welfare
of healthy family members will oppose nepotistic motives that dispose
people to care for any close relative. If the incapacitated are dependent on a
group in which they have no close relatives, the ambivalence will pit gener-
ous tendencies based on altruistic genes against both nepotistic family
interests and personal interests. The only behavioral compromise allowed
is to make the victims as comfortable as possible, which in warmer envi-
ronments such as South America may include granting them a speedy
death to prevent molestation by natural predators (Kim Hill, personal
communication).
In the Arctic, the conﬂict between individual and familial prerogatives
can come into stark focus if families are undergoing a severe famine. Starv-
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
243

ing parents have been known regretfully to consume their own dead chil-
dren, and even to kill offspring in order to eat them (Mirsky 1937; Balikci
1970). Where offspring are actively dispatched, the interplay between hu-
man nature and human decision-making starkly pits egoism against nepo-
tism. The psychological ambivalence is bound to be devastating.
I have chosen to discuss dilemmas of triage because they highlight pow-
erful, raw ambivalences that stem from our structurally tripartite social
nature. These dilemmas, and others that are more routine, involve more
than human nature interacting on a one-time basis with a particular situ-
ational context. As highly cultural animals, humans tend to automatically
conform to prior decision patterns (see Boyd and Richerson 1985). We
tend also to make such conformity normative, and therefore in many
cases we think strategically about why conformity is needed (Boehm 1978,
1996). We set up rules that assist people in resolving their ambivalences in
a certain direction, whether the decision is highly routinized or an emer-
gency situation of triage. Such is the nature of morally based behavioral
traditions.
From the standpoint of biocultural evolutionary theory, this intersection
between human nature and cultural tradition is important. The two inter-
act in recurrent situational dilemmas, and underlying "natural contradic-
tions" structure the culturally deﬁned predicaments. These practical dilem-
mas provide a situational context in which ambivalent minds are made up,
and both speciﬁc group precedents and commonly held values help to
structure these recurrent social quandaries for us. Usually human nature,
in spite of its internally contradictory aspects, has a steadying effect on
cultural traditions. The range of dilemmas likely to arise in a given envi-
ronment is curtailed in part by the limited range of emotions and behav-
ioral dispositions that help to deﬁne them.
Darwin, in The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (1865),
took the lead in studying emotions in an evolutionary context. Some basic
emotions, like fear and anger, are linked to culturally invariant facial ex-
pressions. Submissive fear and angry domination play a large role in hu-
man social and political life. At the same time, cultural traditions have their
own strong effect. They are free to reinforce certain aspects of human
nature, and to suppress others. We have already noted that human groups
regularly favor innate behavioral tendencies such as generosity in sharing
food or cooperativeness that is useful to the group; at the same time, they
try to damp undue selﬁshness, indiscriminate lust, and group-disruptive
244
Hierarchy in the Forest

ﬁghting. We are used to thinking of culture mainly as a regulator of the bad
in human nature, a position emphasized in an evolutionary context by
Campbell (1975). I believe that culture also reinforces the innate tenden-
cies of humans to do good for others (Boehm 1999b)—which is fortunate,
for in all probability such tendencies are not all that powerful.
Value Systems That Favor Altruism
The negative, punitive side of moral behavior is easy enough to account for
on an ultimate basis. Egoism, nepotism, and the human capacity to become
aggressive readily explain the fact that everywhere hunter-gatherers arrive
at lists of self-defensive proscriptions—prohibitions which head off devi-
ant behaviors that could directly damage their personal interests or sully
their quality of social life with internecine conﬂict (see Boehm 1982b).
Their assertive willingness to punish deviants collectively prevents their
being personally victimized by cheaters, liars, rapists, and other individuals
who are prone to behave as bullies outside the family. The pattern of
punishment goes well beyond suppressing disruptive behaviors such as
rape and murder, however, for punishment also is aimed at securing coop-
eration (Boyd and Richerson 1992) and convincing people that generosity
toward other group members is desirable. Because punishment is such a
powerful all-purpose tool, we must ask, at the level of ultimate causality,
why moral reinforcement also appears to have a very strong positive com-
ponent (Boehm 1999b; see also Campbell 1972, 1975).
One place to look would be in Cooperation and Prosocial Behavior, a
book edited by Hinde and Groebel (1991) that examines group-beneﬁcial
behaviors from a wide range of disciplinary perspectives. The ultimate
provenance of human prosociality is not really addressed, but perhaps
acceptance of narrowly sociobiological assumptions about an exclusively
selﬁsh-nepotistic human nature was responsible. Ethnographers may be
partly responsible, as well. Unfortunately, in our descriptive reports the
positive side of moral reinforcement tends to be inadequately emphasized
because we borrow our approaches to deviance and social control from
sociology. Edgerton (1975) makes it clear that the dominant emphasis in
sociology has been on social control in its negative, punitive mode (for
example, Black 1984). It also appears that modern law, with its accent on
proscription and punishment, inﬂuences our perceptions in a negative di-
rection (Barnsley 1972). Furthermore, the negative side of social sanction-
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
245

ing is basically far more dramatic than the positive side. When it comes to
carrots and sticks, it is the sticks that arrest our attention when we are in
the ﬁeld, and deviance and negative types of social sanctioning also seem to
dominate the attention of natives. This is all too apparent when they are
"working over" their neighbors in a gossip session (see Haviland 1977).
Furthermore, when I listed sanctions that ethnographers identiﬁed, most
were negative.
In spite of this descriptive hiatus, when anthropologists sum up the
social life of small groups, often they do emphasize social harmony (see
Sober and Wilson 1998); Durkheim's (1933) inﬂuence is partly responsible.
Today it is widely held that this sociologist was too quick to take note of the
harmonious ideologies of small nonliterate groups. Despite some problems
with functional beautiﬁcation, I believe that Durkheim was accurate in
pointing to their signiﬁcance. Praise and desire for respect may be far less
obvious and dramatic than ostracism or execution, but they play a promi-
nent role in regulating the behavior of people living in small-scale egalitar-
ian societies (see Alexander 1987). For instance, every moral code has a
substantial positive side, with long lists of prescriptions that call for proso-
cial behaviors of various types. Every moral community deals heavily in
rewards as well as punishment, although the rewarding phase is far less
obvious. And even though a few individuals are likely to be seriously
deviant in any community, and will require decisive punitive manipulation,
desire for group esteem also is a powerful motivation for the majority, who
basically behave themselves. Personal reputations are a universal concern
of human beings.
That the positive side of moral manipulation is substantial is borne out
by the patterns that appeared when I surveyed desired and undesired lead-
ership qualities in the chapters on hunter-gatherers and tribesmen. We saw
that these egalitarians heavily emphasized positive role features, notably
generosity and even temper, and appeared to think of them at least as
frequently as negative features such as stinginess or overbearingness. It was
clear that, in a typical ethos, altruistic generosity oriented to the entire
group was an extremely important attribute.
If in theory we are preponderantly given to selﬁshness and nepotism,
why are we so predictably motivated to manipulate human behavior in the
direction of cooperative altruism, rather than merely protecting ourselves
from deviant aggression? Common sense would suggest that groups who
harbor some limited yet socially signiﬁcant altruistic tendencies are more
246
Hierarchy in the Forest

likely to come up with persuasive calls for altruism, and with positive types
of sanctions, than are the selﬁsh nepotists posited by sociobiology. In turn,
as individuals these partial altruists will be far more responsive personally
to prosocial messages. The hypothesis is that it takes a signiﬁcantly altruis-
tic species to come up with a strongly positive blueprint for group (as
opposed to family) social life, and to be responsive to such expectations.
This hypothesis needs more work, but it is consistent with the tripartite
human nature delineated in the last chapter.
Political and Social Universals
Anthropologists have always been concerned with universals of behavior,
for given the cultural variety to which we are exposed, they permit us to ask
a fascinating question: Could we create an effective theoretical link that
would directly couple cultural analysis to human nature, and ultimately to
natural selection? Unfortunately, for almost a century our discipline has
exhibited a schizophrenic combination of attitudes toward evolutionism.
Today one can detect a major undercurrent of fear and near-contempt with
respect to "biological considerations," even though the majority of us be-
lieve, in theory, that humans must be studied in a context of natural
history. Paradoxically, this rampant ambivalence has coexisted with the fact
that we have basically made our livings as hybrid scientist-humanists,
scholars whose mission it is to document and explain the natural history of
Homo sapiens.
Many anthropologists resolve such ambivalence unidirectionally. At the
one extreme are dedicated "culturologists" such as White (1959), Benedict
(1934), the earlier Mead (1928), Kroeber (1948), Herskovits (1952), and
Geertz (1965), who to varying degrees have proclaimed the autonomy of
culture from biology. Today's so-called postmodernist school (a movement
easy to label but difﬁcult to deﬁne) can be included here. In the middle are
a few leaders such as Boyd and Richerson (1985) and Durham (1991), who
provide us with formalized coevolutionary paradigms. At the other (bio-
logical) pole are many contemporary physical anthropologists, archaeolo-
gists, and paleontologists, along with anthropological sociobiologists, evo-
lutionary psychologists, and human behavioral ecologists—and also earlier
scholars who paid attention to human nature: for example, Wissler (1923),
Murdock (1945), Malinowski (1939, 1944), Kluckhohn (1953, 1959),
Greenberg, (1963, 1966, 1975), Tiger (1969), Tiger and Fox (1971), and
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
247

Ruyle (1973). These scholars have compiled lists of cultural behaviors, or
lists of societal or psychological functions, that they believe might be uni-
versal. Usually what they have on their minds is the possibility of an under-
lying biological impetus.
Universal People
To this last list must be added Donald Brown (1991), whose ambitious
Human Universals contains what might be called the master list. Brown is
aggressive in looking for human universals, and some of the risks of under-
taking such a comprehensive search are identiﬁed by Sussman (1995).
Many of the "regularities" Brown identiﬁes strike me as unexceptional,
others as dubious; but he does tackle head on the problem of political and
social universals. As an imaginative descriptive device, Brown creates a
Universal People (UP) and devotes ten pages to describing them.
In terms of social stratiﬁcation he speciﬁes that "prestige is differentially
distributed among the UP, and the members of UP society are not all
economically equal. They acknowledge inequalities of various sorts, but we
cannot specify whether they approve or disapprove" (Brown 1991:137).
Brown is speaking of all human groups, but I shall evaluate his generaliza-
tions only in terms of egalitarians, notably the nomadic hunter-gatherers
who have been my principal focus. The above description ﬁts them quite
well. We can specify further that egalitarians accept or even promote some
kinds of inequality, but in general they are disapproving of competition
that creates political domination outside the family or provokes conﬂict in
the group.
With respect to the relative powers of men and women, Brown says:
"Men and women and adults and children are seen by the UP as having
different natures. Their men are in fact on the average more physically
aggressive than women and are more likely to commit lethal violence than
women are." He adds: "In the public political sphere men form the domi-
nant element among the UP. Women and children are correspondingly
submissive or acquiescent" (Brown 1991:137). These statements seem to
jibe generally with what I have said about hunter-gatherers, and even more
with respect to tribesmen. However, Agta female hunters in the Philippines
appear to be a thought-provoking exception.
In the quoted passage Brown at least implies that males and females have
different political natures. Whereas males usually do appear to have the
248
Hierarchy in the Forest

dominant role, it is possible that this is accomplished through differences
of socialization combined with differences of reproductive function, body
size, and muscularity—and not actually by behavior genes. I sidestep this
question because the task of describing just a single human nature for both
males and females is sufﬁciently daunting. However, Smuts (1992, 1995)
and Wrangham and Peterson (1996) provide us with food for thought
about the possibility of there being two human natures.
Speaking of group political life, Brown says: "The UP have leaders,
though they may be ephemeral or situational. The UP admire, or profess to
admire, generosity, and this is particularly desired in a leader. No leader of
the UP ever has complete power lodged in himself alone. . . . Since the UP
never have complete democracy, and never have complete autocracy, they
always have a de facto oligarchy" (Brown 1991:138). Here Brown and I
seem to disagree—at least terminologically. One tends to think of oligar-
chies as involving either governance by a few or governance by a small
group exercising control in a way that is selﬁsh or even corrupt. Generally,
it would appear that in bands all the main political actors have an impor-
tant and basically equalized role in decision-making, even though perma-
nent or functional leaders may play the role of catalyst. Certain Australian
Aborigines may give the appearance of having gerontocracies that amount
to oligarchies, but an alternative way of viewing them is that their "geron-
tocracy" simply has to do with control of oral tradition and mythological
prerogatives.
In any event, the real political power in a hunter-gatherer band lies with
all of its adults as members of a moralistically aggressive social commu-
nity—a group that respects its responsible citizens and collectively ma-
nipulates, polices, or eliminates its deviants. This is the closest that these
people are likely to come to "government," and having a few older men
ﬁrmly in charge of mythology does not change this fundamental power
base, which may well be gender blind. I judge this signiﬁcant moral phase
of political decision making to be universally "democratic" among no-
madic hunter-gatherers, and fundamentally egalitarian with respect to
gender.
Brown's Universal People most deﬁnitely are moral:
The UP have law, at least in the sense of rules of membership in perpetual
social units and in the sense of rights and obligations attached to persons
or other statuses. Among the UP's laws are those that in certain situations
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
249

proscribe violence and rape. Their laws also proscribe murder—unjus-
tiﬁed taking of human life (though they may justify taking lives in some
contexts). They have sanctions for infractions, and these sanctions in-
clude removal of offenders from the social unit—whether by expulsion,
incarceration, ostracism, or execution. They punish (or otherwise cen-
sure or condemn) certain acts that threaten the group or are alleged to do
so. . . .
The UP distinguish right from wrong, and at least implicitly . . . recog-
nize responsibility and intentionality. They recognize and employ prom-
ises. Reciprocity, also mentioned earlier, is a key element in their morality.
So, too, is their ability to empathize. Envy is ubiquitous among the UP,
and they have symbolic means for coping with its unfortunate con-
sequences. . . . Etiquette and hospitality are among UP ideals. (Brown
1991:138-139)
Brown's characterization reﬂects the negative bias I discussed earlier, but
the description ﬁts foragers very well with respect to proscriptions and
sanctioning.
The Universal People cooperate:
In addition to their division of labor, whereby different kinds of people
do different things, the UP have customs of cooperative labor, in which
people jointly undertake essentially similar tasks. They use reciprocal
exchanges, whether of labor, or goods, or services, in a variety of settings.
Reciprocity—including its negative or retaliatory forms—is an important
element in the conduct of their lives. The UP also engage in trade, that is,
in nonreciprocal exchanges of goods and services (i.e., one kind of good
or service for another). Whether reciprocally or not, they give gifts to one
another too. In certain contexts they share food. (Brown 1991:137-138)
Again, the Universal People nicely subsume what is done in nomadic
bands, whose members might be called the Original Universal People. But
in describing the cooperative phase of human life, Brown concentrates
more on economics than on the normative forces that support coopera-
tion.
In effect, Brown has compiled yet another laundry list. His is compre-
hensive, however, a descriptive master list that focuses far more on pheno-
type than on genotype. He takes some risks as he includes features that
would be difﬁcult to establish empirically on a sound basis, such as phobias
250
Hierarchy in the Forest

against snakes (see Sussman 1995), but his list goes further than any other
in the direction of speciﬁcity. Brown realizes that it is not enough, saying,
"A fuller and truer account of the UP would in various ways show the
relationships between the universals" (Brown 1991:141). I obviously agree.
Brown also, discussing the universality of decisions, touches tangentially
on the ambivalence theme I have emphasized: "The UP have a concept of
the person in the psychological sense. They distinguish self from others,
and they can see the self both as subject and object. . . . They distinguish
actions that are under control from those that are not. They understand the
concept of intention. They know that people have a private inner life, have
memories, make plans, choose between alternatives, and otherwise make
decisions (not without ambivalent feeling sometimes)" (Brown 1991:141).
I have suggested that such ambivalences provide a key to making the
study of human nature more relevant to ethnographic analysis, and vice
versa. Situational dilemmas can be both moral and practical. The effect of
human intentions becomes obvious and direct when adults join together as
moral communities to socially condition other adults in favored directions,
or when entire groups arrive at strategic decisions in subsistence or politics.
I return to a theme emphasized earlier in this chapter: that one way to join
the study of human nature with ethnography is to examine the typical
dilemmas that human groups face and try to resolve, and to consider the
possible effects of human nature on the values that inform this process.
This approach provides a method by which ethnologists can bring human
nature into anthropological theory, and by which we can subject evolution-
ary theories to testing at the local level.
Political Domination as a Biocultural Universal
The innate tendency to dominate underlies a universal that Brown did not
identify, as does the innate tendency to resent being dominated. Every
human group arrives at a political ethos that legitimates whatever degree of
governance is deemed acceptable, and in doing so the group deﬁnes the
abuse of power, as it was discussed in Chapter 6. These universals operate
at the level of normative ideology, but they affect behavior profoundly.
There is always a point, variable in its expression, at which desperate sub-
ordinates may rise to remedy a situation that has become intolerable by
local standards of political legitimacy. It is powerful dispositions to domi-
nance and submission that oblige us to live always in hierarchies of one
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
251

type or another, and it is our antiauthoritarian tendencies that lead us to
limit the power of leaders or other dominants, and that make politically
illegitimate despots wary of popular rebellion. This dynamic appears to be
universal.
Some of our societies may be seen as "cultures of rebellion," insofar as
the limits of authority or domination are circumscribed on a vigilant,
decisive, all but rigid basis. Other societies amount to true "cultures of
dominance," insofar as people not only accept but identify with a strong
political authority that rules them. Of course, a culture of dominance can
quickly become a culture of rebellion if a despot begins seriously to abuse
his legitimately great power. The rebellion may not change the basic politi-
cal order, however. By no means do all national revolutions end in democ-
racy of the type de Tocqueville extolled.
The political dispositions in human nature are powerful, but at the same
time they are highly susceptible to cultural conditioning. One agency of
conditioning I have emphasized is human design, whether the strategy of
an individual or of a group. Others are the external environment, accidents
of history, and self-organizing dynamics of cultural systems that lie beyond
human control. The underlying political dispositions are susceptible to
such conditioning precisely because they are merely genetic preparations,
albeit fairly strong and deﬁnite ones. They provide obvious ﬂexibility, yet
human beings always live in some kind of hierarchy and all humans are
sensitive to the abuse of power. These are formidable political universals.
We humans will never be able to live in relaxed egalitarian societies, in
the way that squirrel monkeys do much of the time. These monkeys' innate
dispositions appear to be substantially different from our own apelike
dispositions, which are ethologically despotic. It is our capacity for moral-
ity, a most important cultural universal, that enables us to create egalitari-
anism out of what would otherwise be despotism.
Hierarchy in the Forest
This book tells a political story, one that began with a Common Ancestor
who was innately despotic in the ethological sense. The story moved on to
a more chimpanzee-like mutual ancestor, one equally given to forming
social dominance hierarchies but who probably had a greater potential to
form large coalitions for the purpose of undermining the power of leading
despots. I say this because humans, chimpanzees, and bonobos all form
252
Hierarchy in the Forest

small subordinate coalitions that can signiﬁcantly rearrange the internal
balance of power within their groups, and because humans and chimpan-
zees form much larger temporary coalitions that can clamp down deci-
sively on powerful individuals.
After the mutual ancestor gave birth to the human lineage, at some point
humans (conceivably even hominids) were poised on the threshold of
inventing not only morality, but egalitarianism. Innately they were still
despotic, for they were given to dominance, subordination, and the forma-
tion of power pyramids with just a few dominators at the top. But with
help from morality, an insubordinate rank and ﬁle learned to combine
their power in a politically focused, durable way and managed to turn such
pyramids upside down. This political invention proved attractive to other
groups whose subordinates resented being dominated, and it spread. Peo-
ple lived in dominance hierarchies that were decisively reversed for at least
several thousand generations.
Gradually, many millennia of egalitarianism modiﬁed our basic social
dispositions; I have discussed at length the unusual human balance be-
tween egoism, nepotism, and altruism. All those generations under the
egalitarian syndrome were likely to have affected our basic political disposi-
tions as well. Even though the invention of efﬁcient hunting or scavenging
weapons probably started the process, egalitarianism could have contrib-
uted strongly to our loss of bristling displays.
Other behaviors changed. Flagrant individual competition, strongly dis-
approved by egalitarian moral communities, was severely punished. As a
result, as members of politically vigilant moral communities we became
adept at controlling our desires for power and at political dissembling—as
Innutiaq did in his Utku band. With these presumptive evolved propensi-
ties for political self-control, most of us became able to ﬁll prominent roles
such as "great hunter" or "inﬂuential group leader" without giving our
peers the idea that we were serious upstarts.
As we have seen with extant foragers, the adult males are still far from
being perfect in this respect. Because, fairly frequently, severe punishment
is leveled at those who become active intimidators, it is possible that over
time dominance dispositions were gradually weakened or somehow were
changed qualitatively. Within groups, any obvious engagement in antiso-
cially aggressive behavior is seriously punishable and therefore is individu-
ally maladaptive. With the reduced reproductive success of extreme upstart
types, natural selection seems likely to have changed our political disposi-
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
253

tions considerably—in addition to having eliminated stereotyped displays
and long, full-body, erectile hair. This could have taken place through
debilitation of aggressive responses, strengthening of inhibitory controls,
or both.
I suspect that the most radical effect of the egalitarian syndrome on
human behavioral dispositions came in the social ﬁeld, because of robust
selection of genes for altruism. That evolutionary saga ends with a species
altruistic enough to cooperate quite efﬁciently in large or small groups, but
at the same time prone to competition and conﬂict. This cooperation is
possible because human groups invariably act as moral communities that
implement prosocial blueprints even as they suppress the aggressive ego-
ism and dedicated nepotism that are so powerful in our nature.
In this respect, our most amazing accomplishments are complex socie-
ties that verge on being antlike in their division of labor and organic
cooperation—and also their unusual capacity to go to war. I believe that
the potential for intensive, genocidal warfare would not have arisen had we
not invented both morality and the egalitarian syndrome. It is morality
that enables us to shame our males into putting their lives on the line for
the group, while it is innate altruistic propensities that help to motivate
those males to suffer and die in the interest of the rest of the group.
We continue to live in a forest that is hierarchical. Aside from going to
war and creating complex cooperative societies, another political outcome
derives from our extended egalitarian phase of hierarchical living. That is
the gloriﬁcation and empowerment of the ordinary individual, a cultural
habit that preoccupied foragers the world over for scores of millennia, and
stayed with most of the tribesmen who followed. This peculiar and won-
derful means of doing political business was continued by egalitarian Iro-
quois tribesmen who lived in a large, segmentary, matrilineal "nation," and
we have seen that they in turn transmitted it to the framers of the Ameri-
can Constitution. As we enter a new century, one must wonder if this
tradition can ﬂourish in a troubled, divided, and politically very tentative
"world order" that is composed predominantly of nonegalitarian nation-
states.
Since its prehistoric invention and diffusion, "egalitarian society" has
constituted a remarkable and unbroken cultural tradition. As I write,
modern democracies are becoming its only powerful representatives. The
surviving Iroquois tribes are living on reservations, their politically inde-
pendent Confederation gone but not forgotten. Most of the world's egali-
254
Hierarchy in the Forest

tarian hunter-gatherers are either annihilated, living at missions, or accul-
turating rapidly as their political and cultural environments change. A few
egalitarian tribesmen still exist (quite a few on certain continents) and a
few of them wield some real political power on the world stage. We may yet
hear again from the Kurds and the Afghanis, but they and others are no
longer the standard-bearers of egalitarianism and freedom. It is mainly
North Americans, Europeans, and the people of India who have taken over
the job.
The present forest we face is as dominated by issues of hierarchy as the
past one, for human nature changes but slowly. The political future of
democratic egalitarianism is uncertain, but as a century turns, the eco-
nomic and military strength of the world's democracies make them a
strong and politically signiﬁcant minority force in world politics.
This book has chronicled some major surprises in human political and
social evolution. One is the loss of long, bristling hair and ﬂagrant intimi-
dation displays. Another is symbolic language and its transformation of
group traditions. The moral community was a profound development
indeed, and it empowered large subordinate coalitions as they outlawed
domination by stronger individuals in their bands. This was the egalitar-
ian surprise. After the Neolithic, another unexpected occurrence was the
larger-scale, tribal egalitarian society, a segmentary type of reverse hierar-
chy that permitted individual autonomy and freedom to combine (ephe-
merally) with some centralized governance and large-scale military opera-
tions. Eventually that society led to the development of a few tribal
republics, which consolidated themselves politically on a durable basis yet
remained egalitarian—a special (and rare) innovation in the tribal ﬁeld.
Given our apelike despotic nature, the advent of chiefdoms was no political
surprise. Indeed, I have likened chimpanzee alpha males to the leaders of
human chiefdoms because both have some limited means of controlling
the destiny of their group. By contrast, the degree of centralized political
control in primitive kingdoms and early civilizations was phenomenal by
primate standards.
As a relatively recent surprise, national political democracies provide a
workable compromise between individual liberty and centralized govern-
ance for the beneﬁt of all, a compromise that seems to be in tune with
human political and social nature as I have described it. Underlying as-
sumptions are that the rank and ﬁle are committed to keeping their auton-
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
255

omy, and that those entrusted with authority may try to aggrandize their
power—even if they are working for the common good. De Tocqueville
was quick to notice this, as he scrutinized the goals of American democracy
and the checks and balances created by our founding fathers.
On the world scene, another major surprise (had it worked as adver-
tised) would have been the communal society conceived by Marx and
Engels. Communism presented a competing, and to many a compelling,
blueprint; it seemed to take the idea of democracy to a new level that
placed economic equality on a par with political equality. The utopian
prediction was that economic exploitation would end, that competition
would thereby become unnecessary, and that state power would naturally
wither away because humans were basically "good."
Had this blueprint taken shape as envisaged, a truly remarkable surprise
would have appeared in human social evolution. Entire nations would have
behaved much like cooperative hunter-gatherers in their bands, with the
same economic egalitarianism and the same freedom from personal domi-
nation. The rapid spread of communism, on the basis of an ideology that
gloriﬁed the political empowerment of the rank and ﬁle, provides us with a
possible model for how the egalitarian syndrome diffused from band to
band in the Late Paleolithic (or whenever it occurred). We humans are
attracted to political "deals" that free us from domination and exploitation,
precisely because we are innately prone to resent authority. However, in
practice, the Paleolithic "deal" was a far better one than Marxism.
Marx and Engels were sincere altruists and political reformers, but as
visionary democrats they were unrealistic. Unfortunately for the modern
world, they subscribed to a strongly "Rousseauian" position on human
nature: remove the cancer of exploitative capitalism, and human social
systems would all but automatically become egalitarian, noncompetitive,
and noncoercive. Had these political visionaries understood human nature
as it has been described in this book—and understood, therefore, the depth
of the need for political vigilance and formal checks and balances—the
world might have been spared a long and costly Cold War that fortunately
was won by realistic democrats.
Marx and Engels were not alone. In their anthropological naiveté, vi-
sionary communists everywhere failed to see that human hierarchical ten-
dencies are simply too strong to allow dominant competition to evaporate
and the state to wither away on its own. The image was compelling, and it
captured the hearts of resentful underdogs everywhere. But the social engi-
256
Hierarchy in the Forest

neering was inept: the blueprint was not laid out with an accurate view of
human political nature.
Hunter-gatherers maintain similar blueprints, but they are utter realists
about human nature. Intuitively they comprehend the need for eternal
political vigilance, and the need for force in the hands of the rank and ﬁle
as means of controlling the self-aggrandizing tendencies of their own lead-
ing citizens. Similarly, the Iroquois understood the need for formal checks
and balances in their very large version of tribal government. From them,
the equally realistic American revolutionaries borrowed wisely, having re-
cently been dominated by a foreign king. A belated communist response
was to declare a Dictatorship of the Proletariat, but this ideological Band-
Aid solved none of the problems of poorly controlled despotism.
Anthropology is not generally a predictive science, but I believe we can
foretell certain directions that human political life is likely to take in the
future. Indeed, the political dynamics I have described constrain us to a
limited variety of options with respect to nations. There will be democra-
cies. There will be types of government, both secular and sacred, that are
far more autocratic. There may be societies in between. These national
types will continue to compete at the level of political ideology, even as they
compete culturally, economically, and militarily as nations. I would like to
predict an eventual sweep for realistic, effective democracy at the levels of
both national and world government, but here I may be indulging in
wishful thinking.
The creation of the United Nations was yet another major surprise in
world political history. It combines principles of egalitarianism (the Gen-
eral Assembly) with principles of oligarchy (the Security Council), but in
many ways it behaves very much like a hunter-gatherer band. For one
thing, no serious policy step can be taken unless everyone in the Security
Council agrees. For another, as with bands and tribes, the control of serious
conﬂicts is tenuous, at best. Today, as an incredibly violent twentieth cen-
tury fades and disappears, we face the invention and diffusion of increas-
ingly effective (and increasingly long-distance) means of mass destruction,
and there is no way for nations at odds with one another to practice
avoidance in the way that mobile hunter-gatherers do when lethal conﬂict
invades one of their small communities. The further development of
"world government," as a political organization that could create trustwor-
thy and effectively controlled yet potent power at the political center, may
well be the most daunting challenge we face.
Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature
257

In designing future political systems, we must take into careful account
the ﬂexible speciﬁcity of human political nature and the constraints it
places on our behavior. At the same time, we must try to envisage new
possibilities and new—but anthropologically realistic—political blue-
prints. Sober realism is called for, yet we must not make predictions that
are unduly limiting. Indeed, the next political experiments that humans
undertake may bring further surprises, for better or for worse.
I close by wishing democratic egalitarianism well, as it prepares for a
new century—and, let us hope, for a new millennium.
258
Hierarchy in the Forest

References
Alexander, Richard D. 1974. "The Evolution of Social Behavior." Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics, 5: 325-384.
——— 1987. The Biology of Moral Systems. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Alexander, Richard D., and D. W. Tinkle. 1968. "Review of On Aggression, by Kon-
rad Lorenz, and The Territorial Imperative, by Robert Ardrey." Bioscience, 18:
245-248.
Ardrey, Robert. 1966. The Territorial Imperative: A Personal Inquiry into the Animal
Origins of Property and Nations. New York: Atheneum.
Arnhart, Larry. 1998. Darwinian Natural Right: The Biological Ethics of Human
Nature. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Baker, Kate C., and Barbara B. Smuts. 1994. "Social Relations of Female Chimpan-
zees: Diversity between Captive Groups." In Richard W. Wrangham, W. C.
McGrew, Frans B. M. de Waal, and Paul G. Heltne, eds., Chimpanzee Cultures,
pp. 227-242. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Balikci, Asen. 1970. The Netsilik Eskimo. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland.
Barbosa, Artemio. 1985. "The Ethnography of the Agta of Lamika, Penablanca,
Cagayan." In P. B. Grifﬁn and A. Estioko-Grifﬁn, eds., The Agta of Northern
Luzon, pp. 12-17. Cebu City, Philippines: San Carlos Publications.
Barclay, Harold B. 1970. "Is There a Theme of Equality in the Arab Rural Commu-
nity?" In M. D. Zamora, J. M. Mahar, and H. Orenstein, eds., Themes in Culture,
pp. 285-306. Quezon City, Philippines: Kayumanggi Publishers.
——— 1993. "Comment on Christopher Boehm, 'Egalitarian Behavior and Re-
verse Dominance Hierarchy.'" Current Anthropology, 34: 240-241.
Barkow, Jerome, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, eds. 1992. The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Barnsley, John H. 1972. The Social Reality of Ethics: The Comparative Analysis of
Moral Codes. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
259

Basehart, Harry. 1970. "Mescalero Apache Band Organization and Leadership."
Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, 26: 87-105.
Basso, Keith H. 1971. Western Apache Raiding and Warfare: From the Notes of
Grenville Goodwin. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Beattie, John. 1967. "Checks on the Abuse of Political Power in Some African
States: A Preliminary Framework for Analysis." In R. Cohen and J. Middleton,
eds., Comparative Political Systems: Studies in Politics of Pre-Industrial Societies,
pp. 355-373. Garden City, N.J.: Natural History Press.
Benedict, Ruth. 1934. Patterns of Culture. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Bergstrom, Theodore C., and Oded Stark. 1993. "How Altruism Can Prevail in an
Evolutionary Environment." American Economic Review, 83: 149-155.
Bern, John. 1987. "Is the Premise of Egalitarianism Inequality?" Mankind, 17:
212-223.
Berndt, Ronald M., and Catherine H. Berndt. 1964. The World of the First Austra-
lians: An Introduction to the Traditional Life of the Australian Aborigines. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Betzig, Laura. 1982. "Despotism and Differential Reproduction: A Cross-Cultural
Correlation of Conﬂict Asymmetry, Hierarchy, and Degree of Polygyny." Ethol-
ogy and Sociobiology, 3: 209-221.
——— 1992. "Roman Polygyny." Ethology and Sociobiology, 13: 309-349.
——— ed. 1997. Human Nature: A Critical Reader. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bidney, David. 1947. "Human Nature and the Cultural Process." American Anthro-
pologist, 49: 375-399.
Biocca, Ettore. 1970. Yanoáma: The Narrative of a White Girl Kidnapped by Ama-
zonian Indians, autobiographical account of Helen Valera; trans. Dennis
Rhodes. New York: Dutton.
Black, Donald. 1984. Toward a General Theory of Social Control. Orlando, Fla.:
Academic Press.
Bloch, Maurice, ed. 1975. Political Language and Oratory in Traditional Society. New
York: Academic Press.
Blurton-Jones, Nicholas G. 1972. "Characteristics of Ethological Studies of Human
Behavior." In N. G. Blurton-Jones, ed., Ethological Studies of Child Behavior,
pp. 3-36. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1984. "A Selﬁsh Origin for Human Food Sharing: Tolerated Theft." Ethol-
ogy and Sociobiology, 4: 145-147.
Boehm, Christopher. 1978. "Rational Preselection from Hamadryas to Homo Sapi-
ens: The Place of Decisions in Adaptive Process." American Anthropologist, 80:
265-296.
——— 1979. "Some Problems with 'Altruism' in the Search for Moral Universals."
Behavioral Science, 24: 15-24.
260
References

——— 1981. "Parasitic Selection and Group Selection: A Study of Conﬂict Inter-
ference in Rhesus and Japanese Macaque Monkeys." In A. B. Chiarelli and R. S.
Corruccini, eds., Primate Behavior and Sociobiology, pp. 160-182. Berlin: Sprin-
ger-Verlag.
——— 1982a. "A Fresh Outlook on Cultural Selection." American Anthropologist,
84: 105-124.
——— 1982b. "The Evolutionary Development of Morality as an Effect of Domi-
nance Behavior and Conﬂict Interference." Journal of Social and Biological
Structures, 5: 413-422.
——— 1983. Montenegrin Social Organization and Values. New York: AMS Press.
——— 1984a. "Can Social Hierarchy and Egalitarianism Both Be Ascribed to the
Same Causal Forces?" Politics and the Life Sciences, 1: 12-14.
——— 1984b. "Mountain Refuge Area Adaptations." Proceedings of the Southern
Anthropological Meetings, 17: 24-37.
——— 1985. "Execution within the Clan as an Extreme Form of Ostracism."
Social Science Information, 24: 309-321.
——— 1986. Blood Revenge: The Enactment and Management of Conﬂict in Mon-
tenegro and Other Tribal Societies. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
Press.
——— 1987. "Capital Punishment in Tribal Montenegro: Implications for Law,
Biology, and Social Control." In M. Gruter and R. D. Masters, eds., Ostracism: A
Social Biological Phenomenon, pp. 157-172. New York: Elsevier.
——— 1989. "Ambivalence and Compromise in Human Nature." American An-
thropologist, 91: 921-939.
——— 1991a. "Lower-Level Teleology in Biological Evolution: Decision Behavior
and Reproductive Success in Two Species." Cultural Dynamics, 4: 115-134.
——— 1991b. "Vocal Communication of Pan troglodytes: Possibilities for Explain-
ing Human Language Origins." In J. Wind, E. G. Pulleyblank, E. de Grolier, and
B. H. Bichakjian, eds., The Origins of Human Language, vol. 2, pp. 323-350.
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
——— 1992. "Segmentary 'Warfare' and the Management of Conﬂict: Compari-
son of East African Chimpanzees and Patrilineal-Patrilocal Humans." In A. H.
Harcourt and F. B. M. de Waal, eds., Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and
Other Animals, pp. 137-173. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——— 1993. "Egalitarian Society and Reverse Dominance Hierarchy." Current
Anthropology, 34: 227-254.
——— 1994a. "Pacifying Interventions at Arnhem Zoo and Gombe." In Richard
W. Wrangham, W. C. McGrew, Frans B. M. de Waal, and Paul G. Heltne, eds.,
Chimpanzee Cultures, pp. 211-226. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
——— 1994b. "Reply to Erdal and Whiten: 'On Human Egalitarianism: An Evolu-
References
261

tionary Product of Machiavellian Status Escalation?'" Current Anthropology, 35:
178-180.
——— 1996. "Emergency Decisions, Cultural Selection Mechanics, and Group
Selection." Current Anthropology, 37: 763-793.
——— 1997a. "Egalitarian Behavior and the Evolution of Political Intelligence." In
D. Byrne and A. Whiten, eds., Machiavellian Intelligence, vol. 2, pp. 341-364.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1997b. "Impact of the Human Egalitarian Syndrome on Darwinian Selec-
tion Mechanics." American Naturalist, 150: 100-121.
——— 1999a. "Forager Hierarchies and Their Effect on Human Behavioral Dispo-
sitions." In Michael Dietz, ed., Hierarchies in Action. Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press (in press).
——— 1999b. "The Natural Selection of Altruistic Traits." Human Nature (in
press).
Boesch, Christophe. 1991. "The Effects of Leopard Predation on Grouping Patterns
in Forest Chimpanzees." Behaviour, 117: 220-241.
——— 1994. "Cooperative Hunting in Wild Chimpanzees." Animal Behavior, 48:
653-667.
Bohannan, Paul J. 1954. "The Migration and Expansion of the Tiv." Africa, 24:
2-16.
Boinski, Sue. 1994. "Afﬁliation Patterns among Male Costa Rican Squirrel Mon-
keys." Behaviour, 130: 191-209.
Boone, James. 1992. "Competition, Conﬂict, and Development of Social Hierar-
chies." In E. Smith and B. Winterhalder, eds., Evolutionary Ecology and Human
Behavior, pp. 301-338. Hawthorne, N.Y.: Aldine de Gruyter.
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis. 1998. "The Evolution of Strong Altruism."
Paper presented at the Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Boyd, Robert, and Peter J. Richerson. 1982. "Cultural Transmission and the Evolu-
tion of Cooperative Behavior." Human Ecology, 10: 325-351.
——— 1985. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
——— 1991. "Culture and Cooperation." In R. A. Hinde and J. Grobel, eds.,
Cooperation and Prosocial Behavior, pp. 27-48. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
——— 1992. "Punishment Allows the Evolution of Cooperation (or Anything
Else) in Sizable Groups." Ethology and Sociobiology, 13: 171-195.
Brace, C. Loring. 1995. The Stages of Human Evolution, 5th ed. Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Brain, C. K. 1972. "An Attempt to Reconstruct the Behaviour of Australopithecines:
The Evidence for Inter-Personal Violence." Zoological Africana, 7: 379-401.
——— 1981. The Hunters or the Hunted? An Introduction to African Cave Ta-
phonomy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
262
References

Bridges, E. Lucas. 1948. Uttermost Part of the Earth. London: Hodder and
Stoughton.
Briggs, Jean L. 1970. Never in Anger. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
——— 1982. "Living Dangerously: The Contradictory Foundations of Value in
Canadian Inuit Society." In E. Leacock and R. Lee, eds., Politics and History in
Band Societies, pp. 109-131. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Briggs, Lloyd Cabot. 1958. The Living Races of the Sahara Desert. Papers of the
Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology 28 (2). Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Brooks, Alison S. 1988. "Middle Stone Age." In I. Tattersall, E. Delson, and J. van
Couvering, eds., Encyclopedia of Human Evolution, pp. 346-349. New York:
Garland.
Brown, Donald. 1991. Human Universals. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Brunton, Ron. 1989. "The Cultural Instability of Egalitarian Societies." Man, 24:
673-681.
Butt, Audrey. 1952. The Nilotes of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and Uganda [Nuer,
Dinka, Acholi, Luo of Kenya, Shilluk, Lango, Burun, Alur]. London: International
African Insitute.
Byrne, R. W., and J. M. Byrne. 1988. "Leopard Killers of Mahale." Natural History,
97: 22-26.
Calvin, W. H. 1983. The Throwing Madonna: From Nervous Cells to Hominid Brains.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Campbell, Donald T. 1965. "Ethnocentric and Other Altruistic Motives." In D.
Levine, ed., Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, pp. 283-311. Lincoln: Univer-
sity of Nebraska Press.
——— 1972. "On the Genetics of Altruism and the Counter-Hedonic Component
of Human Culture." Journal of Social Issues, 28: 21-27.
——— 1975. "On the Conﬂicts between Biological and Social Evolution and be-
tween Psychology and Moral Tradition." American Psychologist, 30: 1103-26.
Carpenter, C. R. 1942. "Societies of Monkeys and Apes." Biological Symposia, 8:
177-204.
Cashdan, Elizabeth A. 1980. "Egalitarianism among Hunters and Gatherers."
American Anthropologist, 82: 116-120.
——— 1983. "Territoriality among Human Foragers: Ecological Models and an
Application to Four Bushman Groups." Current Anthropology, 24: 47-66.
——— ed. 1990. Risk and Uncertainty in Tribal and Peasant Economies. Boulder,
Colo.: Westview Press.
Chagnon, Napoleon. 1983. Yanomamo: The Fierce People. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
——— 1988. "Life Histories, Blood Revenge, and Warfare in a Tribal Population."
Science, 239: 985-992.
Chagnon, Napoleon A., and William Irons, eds. 1979. Evolutionary Biology and
References
263

Human Social Behavior: An Anthropological Perspective. North Scituate, Mass.:
Duxbury Press.
Clark, Adam P., and Richard Wrangham. 1993. "Acoustic Analysis of Wild Chim-
panzee Pant-hoot: Do Kibale Forest Chimpanzees Have an Acoustically Dis-
tinct Food Arrival Pant-hoot?" American Journal of Primatology, 31: 99-109.
Clastres, Pierre. 1977. Society against the State: The Leader as Servant and the Hu-
mane Uses of Power among the Indians of the Americas. New York: Urizen Press.
Cohen, Mark N. 1985. "Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The Meaning of Social
Complexity." In T. Douglas Price and James A. Brown, eds., Prehistoric Hunter-
Gatherers: The Emergence of Cultural Complexity, pp. 99-119. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Conn, Stephen. 1985. "Inuit Village Councils in Alaska—An Historical Model for
Effectuation of Aboriginal Rights?" Inuit Studies, 9: 43-59.
Corning, Peter. 1984. The Synergism Hypothesis: A Theory of Progressive Evolution.
New York: McGraw-Hill
Cosmides, Leda, and John Tooby. 1992. "Cognitive Adaptations for Social Ex-
change." In Jerome H. Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby, eds., The
Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, pp. 163-
225. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Count, Earl. 1958. "The Biological Basis of Human Sociality." American Anthro-
pologist, 60: 1045-89.
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson. 1988. Homicide. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Damas, D. 1972. "The Copper Eskimo." In M. G. Bicchieri, ed., Hunters and Gath-
erers Today, pp. 3-50. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Dart, Raymond. 1959. Adventures with the Missing Link. New York: Harper and
Brothers.
Darwin, Charles. 1865. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. [1972.]
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——— 1871. The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. New York: D.
Appleton.
Denig, Edwin T. 1930. The Assiniboin. Bureau of American Ethnology Report No.
46. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Dentan, Robert K. 1993. "Comment on Christopher Boehm, 'Egalitarian Behavior
and Reverse Dominance Hierarchy.'" Current Anthropology, 34: 241-242.
Dickson, H. R. P. 1949. The Arab of the Desert: A Glimpse into Badawin Life in
Kuwait and Sau'di Arabia. London: Allen and Unwin.
Djilas, Milovan. 1966. Njegosh: Prince, Poet, Bishop. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Dole, Gertrude E. 1966. "Anarchy without Chaos: Alternatives to Political Author-
ity among the Kuikuru." In M. J. Swartz, V. W. Turner, and A. Tuden, eds.,
Political Anthropology, pp. 73-87. Chicago: Aldine.
Draper, Patricia. 1978. "The Learning Environment for Aggression and Anti-Social
264
References

Behavior among the !Kung (Kalahari Desert, Botswana, Africa)." In Ashley
Montagu, ed., Learning Non-Aggression: The Experience of Non-Literate Socie-
ties, pp. 31-53. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dumont, Louis. 1970. Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dunbar, Robin. 1996. Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of Language. London:
Faber and Faber.
Durham, William H. 1991. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity. Stan-
ford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Durkheim, Emile. 1933. The Division of Labor in Society. New York: Free Press.
Earle, Timothy. 1991. Chiefdoms: Power, Economy, and Ideology. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Edgerton, Robert B. 1975. Deviance: A Cross-Cultural Perspective. Menlo Park,
Calif.: Cummings Press.
——— 1992. Sick Societies: Challenging the Myth of Primitive Harmony. New York:
Free Press.
Eggan, Fred R. 1936. The Kinship System of the Hopi Indians. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenaus. 1971. Love and Hate: The Natural History of Behavior
Patterns. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
——— 1974. "The Myth of the Aggression-Free Hunter and Gatherer Society." In
R. L. Holloway, ed., Primate Aggression, Territoriality, and Xenophobia: A Com-
parative Perspective, pp. 435-457. New York: Academic Press.
——— 1979. The Biology of Peace and War: Men, Animals, and Aggression. New
York: Viking Press.
——— 1989. Human Ethology. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
——— 1996. "Reply to Christopher Boehm, Emergency Decisions, Cultural
Selection Mechanics, and Group Selection." Current Anthropology, 37: 779-
780.
Ekman, Paul, E. R. Sorenson, and W. V. Friesen. 1969. "Pan-Cultural Elements in
Facial Displays of Emotion." Science, 164: 86-88.
Elkin, Henry. 1940. "The Northern Arapaho of Wyoming." In Ralph Linton, ed.,
Acculturation in Seven American Indian Tribes, pp. 207-258. New York: Apple-
ton Century.
Ellis, Lee. 1995. "Dominance and Reproductive Success among Nonhuman Ani-
mals: A Cross-Species Comparison." Ethology and Sociobiology, 16: 257-333.
Ember, Carol. 1978. "Myths about Hunter-Gatherers." Ethnology, 17: 439-448.
Endicott, Kirk. 1988. "Property, Power, and Conlict among the Batek of Malaysia."
In T. Ingold, D. Riches, and J. Woodburn, eds., Hunters and Gatherers, vol. 2,
Property, Power, and Ideology, pp. 110-128. Oxford: Berg.
L'Equipe écologie et anthropologie des sociétés pastorales. 1979. Pastoral Produc-
tion and Society. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
References
265

Erdal, David, and Andrew Whiten. 1994. "On Human Egalitarianism: An Evolu-
tionary Product of Machiavellian Status Escalation?" Current Anthropology, 35:
175-184.
——— 1996. "Egalitarianism and Machiavellian Intelligence in Human Evolu-
tion." In P. Mellars and K. Gibson, eds., Modelling the Early Human Mind,
pp. 139-150. Cambridge: MacDonald Institute for Archeological Research.
Erhardt, Carolyn, and Irwin S. Bernstein. 1994. "Conﬂict Intervention Behavior by
Adult Male Macaques: Structural and Functional Aspects." In A. H. Harcourt
and F. B. M. de Waal, eds., Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and Other Ani-
mals, pp. 83-112. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1940. The Nuer: A Description of the Modes of Livelihood and
Political Institutions of a Nilotic People. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Firth, Raymond. 1936. We the Tikopia: A Sociological Study of Kinship in Primitive
Polynesia. London: Allen and Unwin.
——— 1949. "Authority and Public Opinion in Tikopia." In Meyer Fortes, ed.,
Social Structure: Studies Presented to A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, pp. 168-188. Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press.
Flanagan, James G. 1989. "Hierarchy in Simple 'Egalitarian' Societies." Annual
Review of Anthropology, 18: 245-266.
Flanagan, James F., and Steven Rayner, eds. 1988. Rules, Decisions, and Inequality in
Egalitarian Societies. Brookﬁeld, Vt.: Gower Press.
Flannery, Regina. 1953. The Gros Ventres of Montana, pt. 1-2. Washington, D.C.:
Catholic University of America Press.
Fortes, Meyer, and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, eds. 1940. African Political Systems. Lon-
don: Oxford University Press.
Fossey, Dian. 1983. Gorillas in the Mist. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Fox, Robin. 1989. The Search for Society: Quest for a Biosocial Science and Morality.
New Brunswick, N.J.: Rutgers University Press.
Freeman, Derek. 1970. Report on the Iban. LSE Monographs on Social Anthropol-
ogy No. 41. New York: Humanities Press.
Freuchen, Peter, ed. 1961. Peter Freuchen's Book of the Eskimos. Greenwich, Conn.:
Fawcett Crest Books.
Freud, Sigmund. 1930. Civilization and Its Discontents. London: Hogarth Press.
Fried, Morton H. 1967. The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political
Anthropology. New York: Random House.
——— 1975. The Notion of Tribe. Menlo Park, Calif.: Cummings Press.
von Fürer-Haimendorf, Christoph. 1967. Morals and Merit: A Study of Values and
Social Controls in South Asian Societies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gardner, Peter. 1969. "Paliyan Social Structure." In D. Damas, ed., Contributions to
Anthropology: Band Societies, pp. 153-171. Ottawa: Ottawa National Museum
of Canada.
266
References

——— 1991. "Foragers' Pursuit of Individual Autonomy." Current Anthropology,
32: 543-558.
Gayton, A. H. 1930. Yokuts-Mono Chiefs and Shamans. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Geertz, Clifford. 1965. "The Impact of the Concept of Culture on the Concept of
Man." In John R. Platt, ed., New Views of the Nature of Man, pp. 93-118.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gluckman, Max. 1939. "The Balance between European and Native Political
Authorities in Zululand." Man, 39: 42-43.
——— 1965. The Ideas in Barotse Jurisprudence. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Godelier, Maurice. 1986. The Making of Great Men: Male Dominance and Power
among the New Guinea Baruya. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goodall, Jane. 1971. In the Shadow of Man. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
——— 1979. "Life and Death at Gombe." National Geographic, 155: 592-622.
——— 1982. "Order without Law." Journal of Social and Biological Structures, 5:
349-352.
——— 1985. "Conditions of Innovative Behaviour in Primates." Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 308: 203-214.
——— 1986. The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior. Cambridge, Mass.:
Belknap Press, Harvard University Press.
——— 1990. Through a Window. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
——— 1992. "Unusual Violence in the Overthrow of an Alpha Male Chimpanzee
at Gombe." In T. Nishida, W. C. McGrew, P. Marler, M. Pickford, and F. B. M.
de Waal, eds., Topics in Primatology, vol. 1, Human Origins, pp. 131-142. Tokyo:
University of Tokyo Press.
Goodman, Madeleine J. 1985. "The Compatability of Hunting and Mothering
among the Agta Hunter-Gatherers of the Philippines." Sex Roles, 12: 1119-
1209.
Goody, E. 1991. "The Learning of Prosocial Behavior in Small-Scale Egalitarian
Societies: An Anthropological View." In R. Hinde and J. Groebel, eds., Coopera-
tion and Prosocial Behavior, pp. 106-128. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Gould, Richard A. 1982. "To Have and Have Not: The Ecology of Sharing among
Hunter-Gatherers." In N. M. Williams and E. S. Hunn, eds., Resource Managers:
North American and Australian Hunter-Gatherers, pp. 69-81. Boulder, Colo.:
Westview Press.
Greenberg, Joseph H. 1966. Language Universals: With Special Reference to Feature
Hierarchies. The Hague, Netherlands: Mouton.
——— 1975. "Research on Language Universals." Annual Review of Anthropol-
ogy, 4:75-94
———, ed. 1963. Universals of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
References
267

Gruter, Margaret, and Roger D. Masters, eds. 1986. Ostracism: A Social and Biologi-
cal Phenomenon. New York: Elsevier.
Guenther, Mathias. 1991. "Reply to Peter Gardner, 'Foragers' Pursuit of Individual
Autonomy.'" Current Anthropology, 32: 563-564.
Hamilton, W. D. 1964. "The Genetical Evolution of Social Behavior, I and II."
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 7: 1-52.
Hand, Judith Latta. 1986. "Resolution of Social Conﬂicts: Dominance, Egalitarian-
ism, Spheres of Dominance, and Game Theory." Quarterly Review of Biology,
61: 201-220.
Harcourt, Alexander H. 1979. "Social Relationships among Adult Female Moun-
tain Gorillas." Animal Behavior, 27: 251-264.
Harcourt, Alexander H., and Frans B. M. de Waal, eds. 1992. Coalitions and Alli-
ances in Humans and Other Animals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hart, David M. 1976. The Aith Waryaghar of the Moroccan Rif: An Ethnography and
History. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
Haviland, John B. 1977. Gossip, Reputation, and Knowledge in Zinacantan. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Hawkes, Christen. 1992. "Sharing and Collective Action." In E. A. Smith and B.
Winterhalder, eds., Evolutionary Ecology and Human Behavior, pp. 271-300.
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Hayden, Brian, M. Deal, A. Cannon, and J. Casey. 1986. "Ecological Determinants
of Women's Status among Hunter/Gatherers." Human Evolution, 1: 449-474.
Heider, Karl G. 1988. "The Rashomon Effect: Where Ethnographers Disagree."
American Anthropologist, 90: 73-81.
Heintz, H. 1972. "Territoriality among the Bushmen in General and the !Ko in
Particular." Anthropos, 67: 405-416.
Herskovits, Melville J. 1952 (1947). Man and His Works. New York: Knopf.
Hewes, Gordon. 1973. "Primate Communication and the Gestural Origin of Lan-
guage." Current Anthropology, 14: 5-32.
Hilger, Sister Inez M. 1952. Arapaho Child Life and its Cultural Background. Bureau
of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 148. Washington, D.C.: Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
Hinde, Robert A., and Jo Groebel, eds. 1991. Cooperation and Social Behavior.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hockett, C. F. 1963. "The Problem of Universals in Language." In J. H. Greenberg,
ed., Universals of Language. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hoebel, Bartley. 1983. "The Neural and Chemical Basis of Reward: New Discover-
ies and Theories in Brain Control of Feeding, Mating, Aggression, Self-Stimula-
tion, and Self-Injection." In M. Gruter and P. J. Bohannan, eds., Law, Biology
and Culture: The Evolution of Law, pp. 111-128. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Ross-
Erikson.
268
References

Hoebel, E. Adamson. 1940. The Political Organization and Law-Ways of the Co-
manche Indians. American Anthropological Association Memoir 54. Washing-
ton, D.C.
——— 1954. The Law of Primitive Man: A Study in Comparative Legal Dynamics.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hogbin, H. Ian. 1951. Transformation Scene: The Changing Culture of a New Guinea
Village. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Holmberg, Allen. 1950. Nomads of the Long Bow: The Siriono of Eastern Bolivia.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
van Hoof, Jan A. R. A. M., and Carel P. van Schaik. 1992. "Cooperation in Compe-
tition: The Ecology of Primate Bonds." In A. H. Harcourt and F. B. M. de Waal,
eds., Coalitions and Alliances in Humans and Other Animals, pp. 357-390. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Howe, James. 1979. "How the Cuna Keep Their Chiefs in Line." Man, 13: 537-
553.
James, William. 1890. Principles of Psychology, vol. 2. New York: Holt.
Jenness, Diamond. 1922. The Life of the Copper Eskimos. Report of the Canadian
Arctic Expedition, 1913-1918, volume 12. Ottawa: F. A. Acland.
——— 1935. Ojibwa Indians of Parry Sound. National Museum of Canada Bulletin
No. 78. Ottawa.
Kano, T. 1992. The Last Ape: Pygmy Chimpanzee Behavior and Ecology. Stanford,
Calif.: Stanford University Press.
Kaplan, Hillard, and Kim Hill. 1985. "Hunting Ability and Reproductive Success
among Male Ache Foragers." Current Anthropology, 26: 131-133.
Keeley, Lawrence H. 1996. War before Civilization: The Myth of the Peaceful Savage.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Kelly, Raymond. 1985. The Nuer Conquest: The Structure and Content of an Expan-
sionist System. Ann Arbor: University of Michican Press.
Kelly, Robert L. 1995. The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways.
Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
Kent, Susan. 1993. "Comment on Christopher Boehm, Egalitarian Behavior and
Reverse Dominance Hierarchy." Current Anthropology, 34: 243.
Kluckhohn, Clyde. 1944. Navajo Witchcraft. Papers of the Peabody Museum of
American Archaeology and Ethnology 22 (2). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
——— 1952. "Values and Value-Orientations in the Theory of Action: An Explora-
tion in Deﬁnition and Classiﬁcation." In T. Parsons and E. Shils, eds., Toward a
General Theory of Action, pp. 395-418. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
——— 1953. "Universal Categories of Culture." In A. L. Kroeber, ed., Anthropology
Today, pp. 507-523. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
References
269

——— 1959. "Common Humanity and Diverse Cultures." In Daniel Lerner, ed.,
The Human Meaning of the Social Sciences, pp. 245-284. New York: Meridian.
Knauft, Bruce B. 1987. "Reconsidering Violence in Simple Human Societies: Hom-
icide among the Gebusi of New Guinea." Current Anthropology, 28: 457-500.
——— 1989. "Sociality versus Self-Interest in Human Evolution." Behavior and
Brain Sciences, 12: 712-713.
——— 1991. "Violence and Sociality in Human Evolution." Current Anthropology,
32: 391-428.
——— 1993. "Comment on Christopher Boehm, Egalitarian Behavior and Reverse
Dominance Hierarchy." Current Anthropology, 34: 243-244.
——— 1994a. "Culture and Cooperation in Human Evolution." In L. Sponsel and
T. Gregor, eds., The Anthropology of Peace and Nonviolence, pp. 37-67. Boulder,
Colo.: Lynne Rienner.
——— 1994b. "Reply to Erdal and Whiten." Current Anthropology, 35: 181-182.
Konner, Melvin. 1982. The Tangled Wing: Biological Constraints on the Human
Spirit. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Kroeber, A. L. 1948. Anthropology. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Kummer, Hans. 1971. Primate Societies: Group Techniques of Ecological Adaptation.
Chicago: Aldine.
Layton, Robert. 1986. "Political and Territorial Structures among Hunter-Gather-
ers." Man, 21: 18-33.
Lee, Richard B. 1976. "!Kung Spatial Organization: An Ecological and Historical
Perspective." In R. B. Lee and I. DeVore, eds., Kalahari Hunter-Gatherers,
pp. 73-97. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
——— 1979. The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a Foraging Society. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1982. "Politics, Sexual and Non-Sexual, in an Egalitarian Society." In
Eleanor Leacock and Richard Lee, eds., Politics and History in Band Societies,
pp. 37-59. London: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1984. The Dobe !Kung. Chicago: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Leeds, Anthony. 1962. Ecological Determinants of Chieftainship among the Yaruro
Indians of Venezuela. [Akten des 34 Internationalen Amerikanistenkongresses,
Wien 1960.] Vienna.
Lewis, I. M. 1961. A Pastoral Democracy: A Study of Pastoralism and Politics among
the Northern Somali of the Horn of Africa. International African Institute. Lon-
don: Oxford University Press.
Lieberman, Philip. 1998. Eve Spoke: Human Lanaguage and Human Evolution. New
York: W. W. Norton.
Lorenz, Konrad. 1963. On Aggression. New York: Harcourt Brace and World.
Lowie, Robert. 1949. Social and Political Organization of South American Indians.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 143. Washington, D.C.: Govern-
ment Printing Ofﬁce.
270
References

——— 1973. "Political Organization among American Indians." In D. Black and
M. Mileski, eds., Social Organization of Law, pp. 278-303. New York: Seminar
Press.
Lumsden, Charles, and Edward O. Wilson. 1981. Genes, Mind and Culture: The
Coevolutionary Process. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Madhi, Niloufer Qasim. 1986. "Pikhtunwali: Ostracism and Honor Among the
Pathan Hill Tribes." Ethology and Sociobiology, 7: 295-304.
Maine, Sir Henry. 1861. Ancient Law. London: Oxford [1931].
Mair, Lucy. 1962. Primitive Government. New York: Penguin.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. 1929. The Sexual Life of Savages in Northwestern Melanesia.
London: George Routledge.
——— 1939. "The Group and the Individual in Functional Analysis." American
Journal of Sociology, 44: 938-964.
——— 1944. A Scientiﬁc Theory of Culture. Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press.
Man, E. H. 1882. Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands, pt. 1. London:
Trubner.
Manson, Joseph H., and Richard W. Wrangham. 1991. "Intergroup Aggression in
Chimpanzees and Humans." Current Anthropology, 32: 369-390.
Marler, Peter. 1969. "Vocalizations of Wild Chimpanzees: An Introduction." In
C. R. Carpenter, ed., Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Prima-
tology, vol. 1, pp. 94-100. Basel: Karger.
Marshak, Alexander. 1989. "Evolution of the Human Capacity: The Symbolic Evi-
dence." Yearbook of Physical Anthropology 32: 1-34.
——— 1992. "The Origin of Language: An Anthropological Approach." In J. Wind
et al., eds., Language Origin: A Multidisciplinary Approach, pp. 421-448. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer.
Marshall, Lorna. 1967. "!Kung Bushman Bands." In R. Cohen and J. Middleton,
eds., Comparative Political Systems: Studies in Politics of Pre-Industrial Societies,
pp. 15-43. Garden City, N.J.: Natural History Press.
Masters, Roger D. 1989. The Nature of Politics. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Maybury-Lewis, David. 1967. Akwe-Shavante Society. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
McGrew, William C. 1992. Chimpanzee Material Culture: Implications for Human
Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McGrew, William C., P. J. Baldwin, and C. E. G. Tutin. 1981. "Chimpanzees in a
Hot, Dry, and Open Habitat: Mt. Assirik, Senegal, West Africa." Journal of
Human Evolution, 10: 227-244.
Mead, Margaret. 1928. Coming of Age in Samoa. New York: Morrow.
Meggitt, Mervyn. 1977. Blood Is Their Argument. Palo Alto, Calif.: Mayﬁeld Press.
Menzel, Emil. 1964. "Patterns of Responsiveness in Chimpanzees Reared through
Infancy under Conditions of Environmental Restriction." Psychologische For-
schungen, 27: 337-365.
References
271

Middleton, John and David Tait, eds. 1958. Tribes without Rulers: Studies in African
Segmentary Systems. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Mirsky, Jeannette. 1937. "The Eskimo of Greenland." In Margaret Mead, ed., Coop-
eration and Competition among Primitive Peoples, pp. 51-66. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Mitchell, William E. 1978. "On Keeping Equal: Polity and Reciprocity among the
New Guinea Wape." Anthropological Quarterly, 51: 5-15.
——— 1988. "The Defeat of Hierarchy: Gambling as Exchange in a Sepik Society."
American Ethnologist, 4: 638-657.
Mithen, Steven J. 1990. Thoughtful Foragers: A Study of Prehistoric Decision Making.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1996. "On Early Paleolithic 'Concept-Mediated Marks,' Mental Modularity,
and the Origins of Art." Current Anthropology, 37:666-670.
Montagu, Ashley. 1976. The Nature of Human Aggression. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Moody-Adams, Michelle. 1997. Fieldwork in Familiar Places: Morality, Culture, and
Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Moore, Alexander. 1992. Cultural Anthropology: The Field Study of Human Beings.
San Diego, Calif.: Collegiate Press.
Moore, Jim. 1996. "Savanna Chimpanzees, Referential Models, and the Last Com-
mon Ancestor." In W. C. McGrew, L. F. Marchant, and T. Nishida, eds., Great
Ape Societies, pp. 275-292. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moore, Sally Falk. 1972. "Legal Liability and Evolutionary Interpretation: Some
Aspects of Strict Liability, Self-help and Collective Responsibility." In M. Gluck-
man, ed., The Allocation of Responsibility, pp. 51-107. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Morgan, Lewis H. 1877. Ancient Society; or, Researches in the Lines of Human
Progress from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization. New York: Henry
Holt.
Morris, Desmond. 1967. The Naked Ape. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Murdock, George Peter. 1945. "The Common Denominator of Culture." In Ralph
Linton, ed., The Science of Man in the World Crisis, pp. 123-142. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Murphy, Robert F., and Buell Quain. 1955. "The Trumai Indians of Central Brazil."
American Ethological Society Monographs vol. 25. Locust Valley, N.Y.: J.J.
Augustin.
Myers, Fred R. 1980. "The Cultural Basis of Politics in Pintupi Life." Mankind 12:
197-214. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press.
——— 1986. Pintupi Country, Pintupi Self. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Insti-
tution Press.
Nishida, Toshisada. 1979. "The Social Structure of Chimpanzees of the Mahale
272
References

Mountains." In D. A. Hamburg and E. R. McCown, eds., The Great Apes,
pp. 73-122. Menlo Park, Calif.: Benjamin/Cummings.
——— 1987. "Local Traditions and Cultural Transmission." In B. B. Smuts, D. L.
Cheney, R. M. Seyfarth, R. W. Wrangham, and T. T. Struhsaker, eds., Primate
Societies, pp. 462-474. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——— 1994. "Review of Recent Findings on Mahale Chimpanzees: Implications
and Future Research Directions." In Richard W. Wrangham, W. C. McGrew,
Frans B. M. de Waal, and Paul G. Heltne, eds., Chimpanzee Cultures, pp. 373-
396. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Nishida, Toshisada, and Kazuhiko Hosaka. 1996. "Coalition Strategies among
Adult Male Chimpanzees of the Mahale Mountains, Tanzania." In W. C.
McGrew, L. F. Marchant, and T. Nishida, eds., Great Ape Societies, pp. 114-134.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nishida, T., M. Hiraiwa-Hasegawa, T. Hasegawa, and Y. Takahata. 1985. "Group
Extinction and Female Transfer in Wild Chimpanzees in the Mahale National
Park, Tanzania." Zeitscrift für Tierpsychologie, 67: 284-301.
Nishida, T., K. Hosaka, M. Nakamura, and M. Hamai. 1995. "A Within-Group
Gang Attack on a Young Adult Male Chimpanzee: Ostracism of an Ill-Man-
nered Member." Primates, 36: 207-211.
Opler, Marvin K. 1940. "The Southern Ute of Colorado." In Ralph Linton, ed.,
Acculturation in Seven American Indian Tribes, pp. 119-203. New York: Apple-
ton Century.
Ortiz, Sutti. 1967. "The Structure of Decision Making among Indians in Colom-
bia." In R. Firth, ed., Themes in Economic Anthropology, pp. 191-228. London:
Tavistock.
Palmer, Craig T., B. Eric Fredrickson, and Christopher F. Tilley. 1998. "Categories
and Gatherings: Group Selection and the Mythology of Cultural Anthropol-
ogy." Ethology and Sociobiology, 18: 291-308.
Peristiany, Jean G., ed. 1966. Honour and Shame: The Values of Mediterranean
Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Peterson, J. 1978. The Ecology of Social Boundaries: Agta Foragers of the Philippines.
Illinois Studies in Anthropology 11. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Peterson, Nicolas. 1993. "Demand sharing: Reciprocity and the Pressure for Gener-
osity among Foragers." American Anthropologist, 95: 860-874.
Pilbeam, David. 1972. The Ascent of Man: An Introduction to Human Evolution.
New York: MacMillan.
Pinker, Stephen. 1994. The Language Instinct. London: Allen Lane.
Popper, Karl. 1959. The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. London: Hutchinson.
Pospisil, Leopold. 1963. The Kapauku Papuans of Western New Guinea. New York:
Holt Winston and Rinehart.
Potts, Richard. 1987. "Transportation of Resources: Reconstructions of Early
References
273

Hominid Socioecology: A Critique of Primate Models." In W. G. Kinzey, ed.,
The Evolution of Human Behavior: Primate Models, pp. 28-50. Albany: SUNY
Press.
——— 1996. Humanity's Descent: The Consequences of Ecological Instability. New
York: Avon Press.
Power, Margaret. 1991. The Egalitarians, Human and Chimpanzee: An Anthropologi-
cal View of Social Organization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Price, T. Douglas, and James A. Brown, eds. 1985. Prehistoric Hunter-Gatherers: The
Emergence of Cultural Complexity. New York: Academic Press.
Pulliam, H. Ronald, and Christopher Dunford. 1980. Programmed to Learn: An
Essay on the Evolution of Culture. New York: Columbia University Press.
Pusey, Anne E., Jennifer Williams, and Jane Goodall. 1997. "The Inﬂuence of
Dominance Rank on the Reproductive Success of Female Chimpanzees." Sci-
ence, 277: 828-831.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. 1922. The Andaman Islanders: A Study in Social Anthropol-
ogy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rasmussen, Knud. 1931. The Netsilik Eskimos. Reports of the Fifth Thule Expedi-
tion, vol. 3. Copenhagen.
Read, Kenneth E. 1959. "Leadership and Consensus in a New Guinea Society."
American Anthropologist, 61: 425-436.
Richards, Audrey, and Adam Kuper, eds. 1971. Councils in Action. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Riches, David. 1982. Northern Nomadic Hunter-Gatherers: A Humanistic Approach.
New York: Academic Press.
Ridley, Matt. 1996. The Origins of Virtue: Human Instincts and the Evolution of
Cooperation. New York: Penguin.
Rosman, Abraham, and Paula G. Rubel. 1986. Feasting with Mine Enemy: Rank and
Exchange among Northwest Coast Societies. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland
Press.
Ruyle, Eugene E. 1973. "Genetic and Cultural Pools: Some Suggestions for a
Uniﬁed Theory of Biocultural Evolution." Human Ecology, 1: 201-215.
Sackschewsky, M., D. Gruenhagen, and J. Ingebritson. 1970. "The Clan Meeting in
Enga Society." In P. Brennan, ed., Exploring Enga Culture: Studies in Missionary
Anthropology, pp. 51-101. New Guinea Lutheran Mission. Wapenamanda, New
Guinea: Kristen.
Sahlins, Marshall D. 1959. "The Social Life of Monkeys, Apes and Primitive Man."
Human Biology, 31: 54-73.
——— 1961. "The Segmentary Lineage: Instrument Of Predatory Expansion."
American Anthropologist, 63: 322-345.
——— 1968. Tribesmen. New York: Prentice-Hall.
Salzman, Philip C. 1979. "Inequality and Oppression in Nomadic Society." In
274
References

Pastoral Production and Society: Proceedings of the International Meeting on
Pastoral Nomadism, Paris 1976, pp. 429-446. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Sanday, Peggy. 1981. Female Power and Dominance: On the Origins of Sexual In-
equality. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Schaller, George. 1963. The Mountain Gorilla: Ecology and Behavior. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press.
Schjelderup-Ebbe, T. 1922. "Beitrage zur Socialpsychologie des Haushuhns." Zeit-
schrift für Psychologie, 88: 225-252.
Schneider, Harold. 1979. Livestock and Equality in East Africa: The Economic Basis
for Social Structure. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Service, Elman R. 1962. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective.
New York: Random House.
——— 1971. Cultural Evolutionism: Theory in Practice. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
——— 1975. Origin of the State and Civilization: The Process of Cultural Evolution.
New York: W. W. Norton.
Sharp, Henry. 1994. "The Power of Weakness." In E. S. Burch, Jr., and L. J. Ellanna,
eds., Key Issues in Hunter-Gatherer Research, pp. 35-60. Providence: Berg Press.
Sharp, R. Lauriston. 1958. "People without Politics: The Australian Yir Yoront." In
V. F. Ray, ed., Systems of Political Control and Bureaucracy in Human Societies,
pp. 1-8. Seattle: American Ethnological Society.
Shea, John J. 1988. "Spear Points from the Middle Paleolithic of the Levant."
Journal of Field Archaeology, 15: 441-450.
Shostak, Marjorie. 1981. Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Silberbauer, George. 1982. "Political Process in G/Wi Bands." In E. Leacock and R.
Lee, eds., Politics and History in Band Societies, pp. 23-35. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Simon, Herbert. 1976. Administrative Behavior. New York: Macmillan.
——— 1990. "A Mechanism for Social Selection and Successful Altruism." Science,
250: 1665-68.
Slobodin, Richard. 1969. "Leadership and Participation in a Kutchin Trapping
Party." In D. Damas, ed., Contributions to Anthropology: Band Societies, pp. 56-
89. Ottawa.
Smuts, Barbara. 1992. "Male Aggression against Women: An Evolutionary Perspec-
tive." Human Nature, 3: 1-44.
——— 1995. "The Evolutionary Origins of Patriarchy." Human Nature 6: 1-32.
——— 1999. "Multi-level Selection, Cooperation, and Altruism: Reﬂection on
Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology of Unselﬁsh Behavior," Human Na-
ture (in press).
References
275

Sober, Eliott, and David S. Wilson. 1998. Unto Others: The Evolution and Psychology
of Unselﬁsh Behavior. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Soltis, Joseph, Robert Boyd, and Peter J. Richerson. 1995. "Can Group-Functional
Behaviors Evolve by Cultural Group Selection? An Empirical Test." Current
Anthropology, 36: 473-494.
Spencer, Baldwin, and F. J. Gillen. 1976. "The Avenging Party in Central Australia."
In J. Poggie, Jr., G. H. Pelto, and P. J. Pelto, eds., The Evolution of Human
Adaptations: Readings in Anthropology, pp. 262-264. New York: MacMillan.
Stanford, Craig B. 1993. "Review of The Egalitarians—Human and Chimpanzee, by
Margaret Power." International Journal of Primatology, 14: 663-664.
——— 1998a. Chimpanzee and Red Colobus: The Ecology of Predator and Prey.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
——— 1998b. "The Social Behavior of Chimpanzees and Bonobos: Empirical
Evidence and Shifting Assumptions." Current Anthropology, 39: 399-420.
Stanford, Craig B., and J. S. Allen. 1991. "On Strategic Storytelling: Current Models
of Human Behavioral Evolution." Current Anthropology, 32: 58-61.
Stent, Gunther S., ed. 1981. Morality as a Biological Phenomenon: The Presupposi-
tions of Sociobiological Research. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Steward, Julian H. 1955. Theory of Culture Change. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press.
Strehlow, T. G. H. 1947. Aranda Traditions. Melbourne: Melbourne University
Press.
Strier, Karen B. 1994. "Brotherhoods among Atelins: Kinship, Afﬁliation, and Com-
petition." Behaviour, 130: 151-167.
Sussman, Robert. 1995. "The Nature of Human Universals." Reviews in Anthropol-
ogy 24: 1-12.
Tanaka, Jiro. 1980. The San Hunter-Gatherers of the Kalahari: A Study in Ecological
Anthropology. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Taylor, Douglas. 1956. "Kinship and Social Structure of the Island Carib." South-
western Journal of Anthropology, 12: 180-212.
Teit, James. 1930. The Coeur d'Alene. Bureau of American Ethnology Report No. 45.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce.
Teleki, Geza. 1973. The Predatory Behavior of Wild Chimpanzees. Brunswick, N.J.:
Bucknell University Press.
Thoden van Velzen, H. U. E., and W. van Wetering. 1960. "Residence, Power
Groups, and Intra-Societal Aggression." International Archives of Ethnography,
49: 169-200.
Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall. 1959. The Harmless People. New York: Vintage Press.
Tiger, Lionel. 1969. Men in Groups. New York: Random House.
Tiger, Lionel, and Robin Fox. 1971. The Imperial Animal. New York: Delta Press.
Tinbergen, Niko. 1961. The Herring Gull's World. New York: Basic Books.
de Tocqueville, Alexis. 1994 [1835]. Democracy in America. New York: Knopf.
276
References

Tonkinson, Robert. 1978. The Mardudjara Aborigines: Living the Dream in Austra-
lia's Desert. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
——— 1984. "Councils, Corporations, and the Aboriginal Polity." Anthropological
Forum, 5: 377-381.
Tooby, John, and Leda Cosmides. 1992. "The Psychological Foundations of Cul-
ture." In J. H. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby, eds., The Adapted Mind:
Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, pp. 19-136. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tooby, John, and Irven DeVore. 1987. "The Reconstruction of Hominid Behavioral
Evolution through Strategic Modeling." In W. G. Kinzey, ed., The Evolution of
Human Behavior: Primate Models, pp. 183-238. Albany: SUNY Press.
Trivers, Robert L. 1971. "The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism." Quarterly Review
of Biology, 46: 35-57.
——— 1972. "Parental Investment and Sexual Selection." In B. G. Campbell, ed.,
Sexual Selection and the Descent of Man, 1871-1971, pp. 136-179. Chicago:
Aldine.
Tuden, Arthur. 1966. "Leadership and the Decision-Making Process." In V. W.
Turner, M. J. Swartz, and A. Tuden, eds., Political Anthropology, pp. 275-283.
Chicago: Aldine.
Turnbull, Colin M. 1965. Wayward Servants: The Two Worlds of the African Pygmies.
Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.
——— 1972. The Mountain People. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Turner, Victor. 1957. Schism and Continuity in an African Society: A Study of
Ndembu Village Life. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Turton, David. 1977. "War, Peace, and Mursi Identity." In K. Fukui and D. Turton,
eds., Warfare among East African Herders, pp. 179-210. Osaka, Japan: National
Museum of Ethnology.
Tutin, Caroline E. 1996. "Ranging and Social Structure of Lowland Gorillas in the
Lopé Reserve, Gabon." In W. C. McGrew, L. F. Marchant, and T. Nishida, eds.,
Great Ape Societies, pp. 58-70. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Uehara, Shigeo, Mariko Hiraiwa-Hasegawa, Kazuhiko Hosaka, and Miya Hamai.
1994. "The Fate of Defeated Alpha Male Chimpanzees in Relation to Their
Social Networks." Primates, 35: 49-55.
Van de Velde, Franz. 1956. "Les regles du partage des phoques pris par la chasse aux
aglus." Anthropologica, 3: 5-15.
Vehrencamp, Sandra L. 1983. "A Model for the Evolution of Despotic versus Egali-
tarian Societies." Animal Behavior, 31: 667-682.
de Waal, Frans. 1982. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. New York:
Harper and Row.
——— 1989. Peacemaking among Primates. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
——— 1992. "Coalitions as Part of Reciprocal Relations in the Arnhem Chimpan-
References
277

zee Colony." In A. H. Harcourt and F. B. M. de Waal, eds., Coalitions and Alli-
ances in Humans and Other Animals, pp. 233-258. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
——— 1994. "Chimpanzee's Adaptive Potential: A Comparison of Social Life
under Captive and Wild Conditions." In Richard W. Wrangham, W. C.
McGrew, Frans B. M. de Waal, and Paul G. Heltne, eds., Chimpanzee Cultures,
pp. 243-266. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
——— 1996. Good Natured: The Origins of Right and Wrong in Humans and Other
Animals. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
de Waal, Frans, and Frans Lanting. 1997. Bonobo: The Forgotten Ape. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Wade, Michael J. 1978. "A Critical Review of the Models of Group Selection."
Quarterly Review of Biology, 53: 101-114.
Wagner, Günter. 1940. "The Political Organization of the Bantu of Kavirondo." In
M. Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard, eds., African Political Systems, pp. 196-
236. London: Oxford University Press.
Washburn, Sherwood L. 1960. "Tools and Human Evolution." Scientiﬁc American
203: 62.
Watson, James B. 1983. Tairora Culture: Contingency and Pragmatism. Seattle: Uni-
versity of Washington Press.
Watts, David P. 1996. "Socio-Ecology of Gorillas." In W. C. McGrew, L. F. Mar-
chant, and T. Nishida, eds., Great Ape Societies, pp. 16-28. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Weatherford, Jack M. 1988. Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas Trans-
formed the World. New York: Crown Press.
Weber, Max. 1947. [n.d.]. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization ed.
Talcott Parsons. New York: Free Press.
Westermarck, Edward. 1894. The History of Human Marriage. New York: Macmil-
lan.
Weyer, E. 1932. The Eskimos. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Whallon, Robert. 1989. "Elements of Cultural Change in the Later Paleolithic." In
P. Mellars and C. Stringer, eds., The Human Revolution: Behavioural and Bio-
logical Perspectives on the Origins of Modern Humans, pp. 433-454. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Wheeler, Peter E. 1985. "Loss of Functional Body Hair in Man. The Inﬂuence of
Thermal Environment, Body Form, and Bipedality." Journal of Human Evolu-
tion, 14: 23-28.
White, Frances J. 1992. "Pygmy Chimpanzee Social Organization: Variation with
Party Size and between Study Sites." American Journal of Primatology, 26: 203-
214.
White, Leslie. 1959. The Evolution of Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill.
278
References

Whiten, Andrew, and Richard Byrne. 1988. "Tactical Deception in Primates." Be-
havioral and Brain Sciences, 11: 233-244.
——— eds. 1997. Machiavellian Intelligence II. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wiessner, Polly. 1982. "Risk, Reciprocity and Social Inﬂuences on !Kung San Eco-
nomics." In E. Leacock and R. B. Lee, eds., Politics and History in Band Societies,
pp. 61-84. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——— 1996. "Leveling the Hunter: Constraints on the Status Quest in Foraging
Societies." In P. Wiessner and W. Schiefenhovel, eds., Food and the Status Quest:
An Interdisciplinary Perspective, pp. 171-191. Oxford: Berghahn Press.
Williams, B. J. 1969. "The Birhor of Hazaribagh." In D. Damas, ed., Contributions to
Anthropology: Band Societies, pp. 142-150. National Museum of Canada Bulle-
tin 228. Ottawa.
Williams, George C. 1966. Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some
Current Evolutionary Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Wilson, David S. 1975. "A General Theory of Group Selection." Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 72: 143-146.
——— 1977. "Structured Demes and the Evolution of Group-Advantageous
Traits." American Naturalist, 111: 157-185.
——— 1980. The Natural Selection of Populations and Communities. Menlo Park,
Calif.: Cummings Press.
——— 1983. "The Group Selection Controversy: History and Current Status."
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 14: 159-187.
——— 1989. "Levels of Selection: An Alternative to Individualism in Biology and
the Social Sciences." Social Networks, 11: 257-272.
——— 1990. "Weak Altruism, Strong Group Selection." Oikos, 59: 135-140.
——— 1991. "On the Relationship between Evolutionary and Psychological
Deﬁnitions of Altruism and Selﬁshness." Biology and Philosophy, 7: 61-68.
——— 1992. "Complex Interactions in Metacommunities, with Implications for
Biodiversity and Higher Levels of Selection." Ecology, 73: 1984-2000.
——— 1997. "Incorporating Group Selection into the Adaptationist Program: A
Case Study Involving Human Decision Making." In J. Simpson and D. Ken-
drick, eds., Evolutionary Approaches to Personality and Social Psychology,
pp. 345-386. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
——— ed. 1997. Multilevel Selection: A Symposium Organized by David Sloan
Wilson. American Naturalist 150: S1-S134.
Wilson, David S., and Kevin Kniffen. 1999. "Social Transmission and Multilevel
Selection: The Partitioning of Phenotypic Variation within and among
Groups." Human Nature (in press).
Wilson, David S., and Elliot Sober. 1994. "Reintroducing Group Selection to the
Human Behavioral Sciences." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 17: 585-654.
References
279

Wilson, Edward O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press.
——— 1978. On Human Nature. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, James Q. 1993. The Moral Sense. New York: Free Press.
Wissler, Clark. 1923. Man and Culture. New York: Crowell.
——— 1926. The Relation of Nature and Man in Aboriginal North America. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Wolpoff, Milford H. 1996. "Australopithecus: A New Look at an Old Ancestor."
General Anthropology, 3: 1-7.
Woodburn, James. 1982. "Egalitarian Societies." Man, 17: 431-451.
Wrangham, Richard. 1980. "An Ecological Model of Female-Bonded Primate
Groups." Behaviour, 75: 262-300.
——— 1987. "African Apes: The Signiﬁcance of African Apes for Reconstructing
Social Evolution." In W. G. Kinzey, ed., The Evolution of Human Behavior:
Primate Models, pp. 51-71. Albany: SUNY Press.
Wrangham, Richard, and Dale Peterson. 1996. Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins
of Human Violence. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Wrangham, Richard W., William C. McGrew, Frans B. M. de Waal, and Paul G.
Heltne, eds. 1994. Chimpanzee Cultures. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press.
Wright, Robert. 1994. The Moral Animal: Why We Are the Way We Are: The New
Science of Evolutionary Psychology. New York: Vintage Press.
Wynne-Edwards, V. C. 1962. Animal Dispersion in Relation to Social Behavior. Edin-
burgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Yamigawa, Juichi, Tamaki Maruhashi, Takakazu Yumoto, and Ndunda Mwanza.
1996. "Dietary and Ranging Overlap in Sympatric Gorillas and Chimpanzees in
Kauzi-Biega National Park, Zaire." In W. C. McGrew, L. F. Marchant, and T.
Nishida, eds., Great Ape Societies, pp. 82-100. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Zvelebil, Marek. 1991. "Reply to Peter Gardner, 'Foragers' Pursuit of Individual
Autonomy.'" Current Anthropology, 32: 565-566.
280
References

Index
Abuse of power. See Power
Aché, 184
Actuarial intelligence. See Cognition
Adaptive modiﬁcations, 126, 131
Afghanis, 101, 118, 255
Agonism. See Conﬂict
Agta, 8, 248
Alaskan Eskimos, 78, 82
Alexander, Richard D., 2, 11, 14, 129, 185,
199, 202, 221, 225, 229, 230, 246
Allen, J. S., 150
Alliances. See Coalitions
Altruism, 197-224; genetic, 3, 12, 14, 15; as
genetic paradox, 197, 200, 205, 210, 211;
deﬁned, 199-201, 203, 204-212, 222,
254; socially inﬂuenced, 202, 211, 213,
246; psychological, 203, 245-247
Ambivalence: structural conﬂicts at the
level of genotype, 3, 4, 15, 162, 231-258;
phenotypic, 15, 71, 117, 163-164, 166,
167, 169, 170, 192, 195, 213, 214, 225,
227, 229, 231-232, 239, 243; in political
life, 15, 237-247; in social life, 242-245
America, 1, 4, 11, 26, 56-57, 71, 74, 86, 101,
226, 254, 256-257
Anarchic societies, 32, 87, 152, 226, 233
Anatomically Modern Humans. See
Evolution
Andamans, 33, 78
Anthropology, 2, 21, 30, 31-32, 40, 44, 47,
50-52, 58, 61, 67, 76, 81, 84, 103-104,
118, 128-129, 152, 154, 197, 199-200,
203-204, 218, 226, 229-230, 232-234,
236, 241, 246-247, 251, 256-258;
anthropologists meet egalitarians, 16-42,
103; biases, 33, 41-42, 200, 225-226, 233;
methodology, 66, 68, 85, 116, 149, 228,
230, 240
Antihierarchical behavior, 9, 10-12, 14, 52,
56, 60, 67, 82, 83, 84, 86, 102, 105,
112-113, 172, 194, 236, 251;
counterdominant behavior, 10, 86;
resentment of domination, 15, 39, 54,
103, 112, 194, 215, 235, 237, 238, 240,
242; revolutions, 173, 177, 196, 252, 257
Anuak, 120
Apes, 2, 3, 12-14, 17-18, 30, 34, 64-66,
125-127, 130, 134-135, 137, 147, 149,
151-152, 154, 170, 175, 181, 187, 226,
252, 255; bonobos, 13, 30, 140, 146, 150,
152-159, 161, 182, 252; dissembling, 15;
Arnhem Zoo, 16, 156, 160, 164, 167, 171,
187-188; chimpanzees, 16-42; harems,
29, 127-128, 131-133, 146, 151, 153,
156-159; gorillas as despotic species, 29,
131-132; chimpanzees as despotic
species, 130-131; bonobos as
semidespotic species, 133-137; pig grunt
(gorilla), 155
Apinaye, 108, 109
Aranda, 77
Arapaho, 70, 71, 76, 77
Ardrey, Robert, 2, 41, 177, 229
Aristotle, 220
Arnhart, Larry, 204, 229
Arnhem Land, 81
Arunta, 82
Assiniboin, 70, 78
281

Australian Aborigines, 36, 68, 70, 74-75,
81-82, 119, 249
Baker, Kate C., 25, 130
Baldwin, P. J., 153
Balikci, Asen, 47, 73, 77, 81, 83, 185, 203,
211, 214, 216, 243, 244
Band level societies, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 30;
mobile bands, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13, 30, 37-38, 63,
66, 69, 76, 79, 85, 86, 90, 91, 124, 140,
183, 193, 198, 257; causal explanation of
bands, 30, 31, 32, 33-38, 192; sedentary
bands, 36, 69, 78-79, 86, 88, 94-95, 102,
113, 124, 142-144, 223; immediate-
return foragers, 64, 88, 143; nexus, 
227
Bantu, 106, 120
Barbosa, Artemio, 8
Barclay, Harold B., 32, 66, 154
Barkow, Jerome, 228-229
Barnsley, John H., 245
Baruya, 121
Basehart, Harry, 70, 78
Basso, Keith, 70
Batek, 78
Beattie, John, 145
Beethoven [chimpanzee], 28
Behavioral dispositions, 230
Benedict, Ruth, 247
Berbers, 92
Bergstrom, Theodore C., 204
Bern, John, 75
Berndt, Catherine H., 82
Berndt, Ronald M., 82
Bernstein, Irwin S., 26
Betzig, Laura, 129, 208, 229
Bidney, David, 234
Big-man societies, 13, 123, 142, 147, 237;
big men, 13, 100, 102-105, 114-116, 121,
142
Bihor, 77
Bilateral kinship, 6
Biocca, Ettore, 92
Black, Donald, 212, 245
Bloch, Maurice, 113, 116
Blueprints. See Cognition
Blurton-Jones, Nicholas, 45, 117, 138, 154
Boehm, Christopher, 2-5, 9-11, 25-29, 35,
40, 60, 64, 67, 71, 75-76, 80, 82, 84, 86,
88, 91, 95-99, 101, 114, 118-119,
122-123, 127-130, 135, 152, 154-155,
158, 163, 172, 174, 182-185, 189,
193-194, 199-200, 203, 205, 207-208,
210-211, 215-223, 225, 227-229, 231,
233-234, 236, 239, 242, 244-245
Boesch, Christophe, 159, 192
Bohannan, Paul, 92, 96
Boinski, Sue, 125-126, 133, 171
Bonobos. See Apes
Boone, James, 125
Bowles, Samuel, 204
Boyd, Robert, 95, 112, 207, 213, 229,
244-245, 247
Brace, C. Loring, 181
Brain, C. K., 177, 226
Bridges, E. Lucas, 62
Briggs, Jean L., 47, 50-59, 63-64, 77-78,
119, 188, 212, 214, 225, 241
Briggs, Lloyd Cabot, 120
Brooks, Alison S., 181
Brown, Donald, 6, 129, 228-229, 248-251
Brown, James A., 143
Brunton, Ron, 37
Busama, 109, 120-121
Butt, Audrey, 105
Byrne, J. M., 136, 159, 177
Byrne, Richard W., 136, 159, 177, 182
Calusa, 86
Calvin, William H., 176
Campbell, Donald T., 3, 69, 140, 199, 204,
207, 213, 222, 225, 228-229, 231, 243, 245
Canela, 113
Cannon, A., 6
Carib, 120
Carpenter, C. R., 34, 39
Casey, J., 6
Cashdan, Elizabeth A., 37, 43, 75, 138, 153,
222
Cayapo, 113
Central Canadian Eskimo, 83
Chagnon, Napoleon, 92-94, 96, 109, 119,
204
Chickens, 171, 172
Chiefdom level societies, 3, 5, 6, 10, 13, 29,
31, 65, 69, 90-91, 97, 104, 106, 123,
144-147, 152, 237, 242, 255; kingdoms,
6, 13, 31-33, 104, 106, 145-146, 242, 255
282
Index

Child-rearing, 7
Chimpanzees. See Apes
Civilized societies: civilization, 3, 6, 32-33,
65, 95, 97, 106, 140, 146, 255;
democracies, 11-13, 42, 146, 237, 242,
254-255, 257; state formation, 97,
100-101
Clark, Adam P., 189
Clastres, Pierre, 78, 108, 113, 120
Coalitions, 2, 3, 23, 25, 35, 94, 155-158,
159-162, 159-162; fraternal interest
groups, 5, 141; rank and ﬁle, 9-12, 29,
40, 60, 66, 75-76, 79, 117, 120, 123, 128,
140, 142, 145, 154, 162, 172-173, 193,
196, 236, 237, 239, 241, 253; mobbing
behavior, 18, 28, 130, 137, 158-160, 177,
182, 240; factions, 87, 116, 145, 157;
tribal segmentation, 90, 91, 92, 97, 98,
101, 113, 119, 141, 144, 254, 255
Coeur d'Alene, 70, 78
Cognition: ideologies, 4-5, 7, 12, 14, 38, 67,
72, 90, 93, 103, 106, 123, 137, 141, 203,
227, 246, 251, 256-257; blueprints, 12,
60, 87, 109, 186, 193-194, 223, 254,
257-258; actuarial intelligence, 24, 46,
183-187, 192, 193, 213; political
intelligence, 181-183, 191, 193, 198
Cohen, Mark N., 40
Comanche, 81
Common Ancestor, 3, 13, 14, 127, 149-155,
157-159, 161, 170, 182, 252
Competition, 1, 10, 14, 16, 32, 34, 40, 41,
44, 84, 88, 95-96, 118, 126, 143,
145-147; by males for females, 7, 8, 94,
126-128, 130-132, 135, 137, 140-141,
160, 170; as status rivalry, 10, 16, 23, 24,
40, 79, 88, 95, 106, 129, 130, 131, 135,
138, 141, 145, 163, 238; as
self-aggrandizement, 72, 87, 108, 110,
113; over food, 138-139, 151, 154, 163,
174, 176, 197, 204, 217, 222, 227, 231,
233, 248, 254, 256
Conﬂict: warfare, 5, 6, 8, 33, 81, 83, 91-93,
94-98, 99, 108, 109, 112, 115, 118, 119,
141, 143, 158, 182, 206, 221, 236, 239,
254; raiding, 5, 48, 91-94, 96, 98,
108-109, 112, 114, 130, 136, 141, 158,
221-223; feuding, 5, 81, 91, 96-100, 112,
119, 141, 158, 180, 233; homicide, 7, 44,
45, 63, 68, 80-81, 93, 94, 96, 121,
137-141, 175, 179, 186, 226, 227, 267,
272; weapons, 14, 82, 174-181, 194, 221;
agonism, 16, 133, 135, 166, 176, 189;
warriors, 70, 90, 92, 95-100, 106, 107,
111, 118, 164; ﬁssioning, political, 76, 86,
93-94, 96, 108, 119, 131, 133, 146, 190,
211; revenge, 80, 81, 96, 140, 233;
dueling, 93, 137; refuge area warriors,
98-101, 255; head-hunting raids, 99,
101; warfare hypothesis, 221-223
Conﬂict management, 16, 35, 93, 96, 97,
108, 137; conﬂict resolution, 16, 26, 80,
97, 108, 118, 141, 145, 237; conﬂict
interventions, 26-27, 34-35, 80, 93, 108,
109, 132, 134, 145, 155, 160, 167, 169,
188, 239; truces, 96
Conn, Stephen, 67
Cooperation, 67, 69, 72, 73, 76, 80, 185,
192, 203, 208, 212, 213, 214, 226, 227,
231, 233, 245, 250, 254; sharing, 7, 22,
31, 33, 38, 42, 44, 46, 47, 49, 55, 56, 62,
64, 67, 70, 73, 76, 77, 108, 135, 138, 139,
141, 143, 147, 163, 183, 184, 191-193,
203, 205, 207, 209, 212, 213-216, 222,
226, 244, 250; prosociality, 185, 245;
antlike societies, 254
Copper Eskimo, 81
Corning, Peter, 204
Cosmides, Leda, 204, 228-230
Count, Earl, 33
Cross-cultural methodology, 84
Cultural ecology, 128
Cultural variables, 8
Cuna, 117, 120
Current Anthropology, 10, 154
Daly, Martin, 81, 95, 221, 227, 229-230, 
233
Damas, David, 81
Dart, Raymond, 177, 226
Darwin, Charles, 40, 41, 174, 201-202, 204,
207, 220, 228-229, 244
Deal, M., 6
Democracies. See Civilized societies
Denig, Edwin T., 70, 78
Dentan, Robert K., 66
Despotism: ethological, 1, 30, 64, 125-148,
252; political, 2, 242; slavery, 4, 5, 6;
Index
283

Despotism (continued)
bullies, 8, 27, 29, 67, 68, 121, 192, 195,
207, 208, 212, 214, 235, 245
de Tocqueville, Alexis, 1, 252
DeVore, Irven, 14, 150
de Waal, Frans, 2, 5, 11, 16, 23-27, 66, 125,
129, 131, 133, 135, 154-156, 161,
163-164, 166-169, 172, 182, 188, 214,
238
Dickson, H. R. P., 120
Dimorphism, 7, 8, 15, 40, 127, 131, 159,
174, 175
Djilas, Milovan, 97, 100
Dole, Gertrude E., 119
Dominance, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 15, 17, 23, 126;
threats, 10-11, 24-25, 27, 39-41, 43,
55-57, 59, 66, 67, 68, 70-71, 73, 75,
79-80, 82-83, 98, 102, 111, 113, 115, 127,
140, 163, 166-167, 169, 175-176, 180,
239-240, 250; instability, 25, 163-164,
195; domination episodes, 79, 82-83,
86-88, 90, 118, 121-124, 140, 186, 190,
240, 242; insults, 96, 118; collective
domination of leaders, 235, 239. See also
Despotism
Doves [ideological], 2, 226-227
Dumont, Louis, 40
Dunbar, Robin, 174, 182, 190, 191, 198,
206, 214
Dunford, Christopher, 162, 228
Durham, William H., 247
Durkheim, Emile, 60, 92, 118, 246
Earle, Timothy, 97, 123
East African pastoralists, 103-106, 117, 239
Ecological variables, 8, 104, 151
Economics, 6, 36, 37, 38, 71, 104, 106, 112,
123, 141, 142-144, 146, 183, 248, 250,
255, 257
Edgerton, Robert B., 119, 138, 185, 245
Egalitarianism: ethological, 1, 30; equality,
1, 6, 75, 105; societies of equals, 1, 4, 234;
personal autonomy, 1, 9, 11, 36, 43,
63-68, 75, 83-84, 87-88, 100, 124,
140-141, 186, 190, 193, 236, 255; leveling
mechanisms, economic, 1, 4, 8, 33, 59,
64, 68, 70, 102, 103, 248, 256; leveling
mechanisms, political, 2, 3, 4, 5, 19, 33,
64, 93, 102, 182; classless society [see also
Marx; Marxism], 4, 256; gender equality,
6; individualism, 15, 36, 105; leveling
mechanisms, 34, 38-40, 102, 104, 109;
primus inter pares, 33, 68-69, 107, 111,
116, 151, 232; intentional societies, 60,
67, 193; freedom, 65, 68, 84, 114, 170,
172, 226, 237, 255, 256; gambling, as
leveling mechanism, 102, 103; theory of,
1-42, 102, 105; egalitarian revolution,
172-173
Eggan, Fred, 6
Egoism. See Natural selection, individual
selection
Eibl-Eibesfeldt, Irenäus, 147, 152, 174-175,
220, 225-229
Ekman, Paul, 228
Elkin, Henry, 71
Ellis, Lee, 207
Ember, Carol, 6, 62, 81
Emotions: anger, 50-51, 53, 56-59, 65, 68,
72, 80, 120, 138, 201, 244; jealousy, 107,
137; lust, 244
Endicott, Kirk, 78
Enga, 97, 113-116, 117, 118
Engels, Friedrich, 256
Environment, 2, 13, 26, 30-31, 35-38, 41,
52, 54, 60, 67, 73, 85-86, 104-106, 122,
127-129, 133, 146, 147, 150, 158, 175,
183, 194-195, 206, 210-211, 217-219,
222-223, 228, 230, 243, 244, 252, 255;
resource unpredictability, 6; climate
changes, 95
L'Equipe ecologie et anthropologie des sociétes
pastorales, 88, 106
Erdal, David, 2, 10, 66, 86, 88, 154, 191,
193, 207, 213-214, 225
Erhardt, Carolyn, 26
Eskimos [traditional ethnographic term for
Inuit peoples], 47, 50-51, 53-54, 57, 75,
78, 82-83, 86, 193, 243. See also speciﬁc
groups by name; Inuit
Ethology, 2, 125, 232
Ethos. See Morality; Values
Europe, 4
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 31-33, 92, 96, 98
Evered [chimpanzee], 18, 27, 28
Evolution: origins, 1, 4, 14, 105, 173, 191,
194-196; hominoids, 3, 12-13, 125, 127,
146, 160, 187; evolutionary psychology,
12, 14; referential model [chimpanzee],
13, 14, 150, 252-253; cladistic models,
284
Index

14, 149-152; evolutionary biology, 14,
230; anti-evolutionism, 32; U-shaped
curve (Knauft), 64, 236; Homo sapiens,
127, 129, 198, 219, 247; Anatomically
Modern Humans, 150, 176, 191, 194,
196, 219; Homo erectus, 176, 183, 191,
196, 198; rate of, 196; modular
evolutionary approaches, 228
Faben [chimpanzee], 20
Falsiﬁcation, 83-86
Familial ideology in bands, 72
Family, 4, 5, 8, 9, 31, 38, 46, 51, 52-57, 62,
67-70, 73, 77, 87, 100, 110-112, 138, 
139, 159, 180, 184, 209-213, 216, 243,
245, 248
FBI, 242
Females. See Gender
Feuding. See Conﬂict
Figan [chimpanzee], 20
Firth, Raymond, 144
Fissioning. See Conﬂict
Flanagan, James G., 38, 227
Flannery, Regina, 70
Foragers, 64-89
Fortes, Meyer, 31-33
Fortune, Reo, 226
Fossey, Dian, 29, 131-132, 153, 155-156
Fox, Robin, 2, 33, 40, 152, 221, 225,
229-230, 247
Fraternal interest groups. See Conﬂict
Fredrickson, B. Eric, 37, 211
Freeman, Derek, 117, 120
Free-riders, 198, 203, 205, 206, 212-217,
224, 243
Freuchen, Peter, 73, 81
Freud [chimpanzee], 18, 19, 20, 23, 28, 168
Freud, Sigmund, 18-20, 23, 28, 168, 231
Fried, Morton H., 2, 29-30, 32-35, 37-39,
41, 50, 60, 62, 68, 90, 96, 104, 112, 128,
138, 141, 147-148, 152, 170, 208, 227, 230
Friedman, Milton, 104
Friesen, W. V., 228
Frodo [chimpanzee], 20, 23, 27
Gahuku-Gama, 111
Gardner, Peter, 36, 43, 66, 67, 68, 75, 86, 88
Gayton, A. H., 78
Gebusi, 36, 83
Geertz, Clifford, 247
Gender: females, 2-9; males, 2-9
Geronimo [Apache leader], 78
Gillen, F. J., 82
Gingrich, Newt, 11
Gintis, Herbert, 204
Gluckman, Max, 37, 120
Goblin [chimpanzee], 18, 19, 20-23, 26-29,
160, 164, 167, 169, 188-189, 241
Godelier, Maurice, 103, 121, 142
Gombe National Park, Tanzania, 16, 17,
21-27, 39, 136, 158, 160, 166, 168, 171,
177, 188-189, 192, 241
Goodall, Jane, 5, 16, 18, 20, 22-25, 27, 29,
34, 39, 91, 130, 133, 136, 155-156, 158,
160, 163-167, 171, 176, 182, 187, 189,
222, 238
Goodman, Madeleine J., 8
Goody, E., 203, 213
Gorillas. See Apes
Gould, Richard A., 89, 138, 143, 210
Government, 11, 32, 33, 35, 39, 51, 67, 86,
87, 92, 98, 101, 108, 111, 144, 146, 149,
231, 237, 249, 251, 255; constitutions, 4,
12, 67, 254; democracy, 4, 13, 42, 242,
249, 252, 256-257; political
centralization, 4, 123; consensus, 5, 31,
76, 87, 102, 113-114; checks and
balances, 11, 98, 146, 256-257; bills of
rights, 12; governance among
chimpanzees, 26, 27, 29, 31; tribal
councils, 48, 99, 116; political transitions,
88, 125; kingmakers, 171
Greece, 1, 4
Greenberg, Joseph H., 247
Greenland Eskimos, 83, 86
Groebel, Jo, 245
Grooming, 24, 159, 191
Gruenhagen, D., 97, 113, 115-117
Gruter, Margaret, 74, 118, 213
Guenther, Mathias, 36
Guggenheim Foundation. See Harry Frank
Guggenheim Foundation
Hadza, 44, 75, 82, 117, 120, 138
Haig, General Alexander, 11
Hamadryas, 127
Hamai, M., 156, 238
Hamilton, W. D., 202, 205
Hand, Judith Latta, 192
Harcourt, Alexander H., 135, 155, 182
Index
285

Harry Frank Guggenheim Foundation, 64
Hart, David M., 92
Hasegawa, T., 130
Haviland, John B., 73, 246
Hawkes, Christen, 184
Hawks [ideological], 2, 226-227
Hayden, Brian, 6
Heider, Karl G., 226
Heintz, H., 227
Heltne, Paul G., 187
Hercegovina, 5, 51, 98, 101
Herskovits, Melville J., 247
Hewes, Gordon, 190
Hierarchies, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 16, 24, 34, 64,
79, 86, 151; social dominance
hierarchies, 1, 12, 14, 24, 25, 39, 64-66,
79, 88, 126-128, 132, 133, 136, 145, 151,
152, 155, 162, 173, 175, 182, 188, 190,
207, 236, 252; alphas, 2-3, 5, 11, 16,
18-20, 22-28, 30, 38, 61, 66, 79-80, 105,
123, 130-131, 137, 145, 147, 156-157,
160-161, 166-169, 171, 173-174, 177,
182, 187-191, 194-196, 207, 217, 235,
238, 240-241, 255; reverse dominance
hierarchies, 3, 10, 11, 12, 14, 22, 23,
64-66, 79, 85-88, 91-116, 123, 127-128,
146, 154, 172-174, 181, 182, 187, 190,
198, 227, 235, 237, 253, 255; prestige, 7,
34-35, 46, 62, 77, 92, 142, 248; orthodox
hierarchies, 14, 134, 237; of chimpanzees,
16-42; linear hierarchies, 171; social
stratiﬁcation, 32, 88, 104, 142, 248
Hilger, Sister Inez M., 70, 77
Hinde, Robert A., 245
Hiraiwa-Hasegawa, M., 130, 238
Hitler, Adolph, 26
Hobbes, Thomas, 2, 149, 225, 226-227
Hockett, C. F., 189
Hoebel, Bartley, 228
Hoebel, E. Adamson, 81, 137
Hogbin, H. Ian, 109-110, 120-121
Holmberg, Allen, 77, 138-139
Homicide. See Conﬂict
Hominoids. See Evolution
Honor. See Morality
Hopi, 6, 48, 226
Hosaka, Kazuhiko, 156, 160, 238, 280
Howard, A., 48
Howe, James, 117, 120
Human nature, 3, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, 33, 42,
60, 129, 227-231, 235; political, 1, 2, 6,
12, 15, 29, 86, 87, 105, 130, 149, 173-174;
social, 2, 3, 12, 15; innate dispositions, 2,
32, 147, 171, 225, 230, 236, 252; lability
of, 2, 3, 24, 128, 228, 233, 236; behavior
genes, 7, 15, 127, 147, 152, 174, 175, 197,
199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 205, 206, 207,
209, 212-217, 220-221, 223, 224, 236,
238, 243, 249, 252, 254; innate
dominance, 10, 34, 39, 41, 64, 88, 124,
234; egoism, 14, 15, 17, 23, 243, 244, 245,
254; nepotism, 14, 15, 139, 184, 199, 200,
202, 203-204, 210, 217, 221, 231, 235,
243, 244, 253, 254; generosity, 15, 33,
68-73, 106-113, 122-123, 142, 185-186,
200-201, 203, 210, 213, 221, 234,
244-246, 249; displays, 16-42, 58, 80,
105, 126, 132, 136, 164, 166-169,
175-177; hedonistic tendencies in, 20,
229; innate dominance denied, 32, 40;
drive to parity, 35, 39, 128, 148, 170;
blank slate, 39, 127-129, 237; drive to
dominance, 39, 128, 147; aversion to
subordination, 162, 173, 174, 234, 235,
238; displays, loss of, 181, 253-255;
innate ambivalence, 227, 231-232, 237,
243. See also Ambivalence
Hunter-gatherers, 64-89
Hunting: hunters, 7, 8, 9, 62; large game
hunting by humans, 7, 8, 195; meat, 8,
17-18, 20, 22, 31, 34, 37-38, 43, 45-46,
62-64, 67, 95, 138-139, 167, 169,
183-184, 186, 191-192, 195, 203, 205,
207, 209, 213-214, 216; hunting by
chimpanzees, 17, 21; variance-reduction,
46, 139, 193, 195
Hussein, Saddam, 26
Iban, 117, 120
Iliaura, 82
India, 4, 75, 77, 255
Inﬂuence. See Power
Ingebritson, J., 97, 113, 115-117
Intentions: decisions, 5, 6, 8, 27, 28,
113-117, 235; intentionality, 10, 12, 22,
23, 45, 59, 60, 64, 67, 85, 92, 164, 172,
174, 188, 227, 232, 239, 250, 251
Inuit, 56, 68, 73, 78-79, 81. See also Eskimo
286
Index

Inuttiaq, 43-63, 87
Irons, William, 204
IRS, 242
James, William, 225, 231
Jenness, Diamond, 68, 70
Jimoh [chimpanzee], 161, 168-169,
239-240
Jomeo [chimpanzee], 18, 24, 22, 26
Kalahari foragers, 31, 45, 61, 69-70, 75-77,
82, 117, 169, 178, 186, 226. See also !Kung
Kano, T., 30, 134, 136, 155, 182
Kaobawa, Yanomamo leader, 109
Kapauku, 111, 121
Kaplan, Hillard, 95, 184, 207
Keeley, Lawrence H., 94, 221, 223, 226
Kelly, Raymond, 98
Kelly, Robert L., 2, 6-7, 30, 37, 40-41, 46,
62, 76, 86, 88, 90-91, 94, 138, 143, 153,
155, 183, 192, 199, 207, 211, 213,
216-218, 222
Kent, Susan, 41, 66, 69
Kiavirondo Bantu, 106
Kingdoms. See Chiefdom-level societies
Kluckhohn, Clyde, 49, 84, 129, 229, 234, 247
Knauft, Bruce B., 2, 4, 7, 31, 36, 44, 65-66,
75-76, 80, 83-84, 138, 153-155, 198,
199, 208, 225, 227, 236
Kniffen, Kevin, 224
Konner, Melvin, 228
Kroeber, A. L., 33, 66, 247
Kummer, Hans, 126-128
!Kung, 33, 45-47, 61, 69, 75, 82, 88, 179,
180, 186, 208
Kuper, Adam, 113
Kutchin, 71
Kwakiutl sedentary foragers, 86, 88-89,
143-144, 208
Lake Tanganyika,17
Language, 7, 18, 44, 49, 51, 150, 165,
187-192, 228, 236; oral tradition, 44, 87,
187, 190, 249; displacement in, 160, 174,
189-191, 195, 223
Lanting, Frans, 136
Latin America, 4
Layton, Robert, 37
Leadership, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 27, 31, 32, 33, 61,
68-69; despotic, 3; hereditary, 3, 62, 78,
100, 104, 142, 143, 144, 172; by
inﬂuence, 8, 9, 27, 54, 61, 97, 104, 111,
120, 121, 154; ignoring leaders, 24,
55-56, 76-78, 120; chieftains, 32, 62,
70-71, 108, 113, 117, 143-144; chiefs, 45,
61, 70, 75, 77-78, 80, 93, 100, 104,
108-109, 117, 120-121, 138-139, 144;
Big Men, 45, 104, 114-116, 120-121,
142; Inuit, 52-55; disobedience to
leaders, 55, 73-74, 76-77, 79, 84, 105,
119-122; desired qualities in, 69-72;
deposing leaders, 73, 74, 78-79, 84,
119-122, 144, 242; desertion of leaders,
74, 78, 119-121; theocratic leaders, 100;
war chiefs, 108, 109; peace chiefs, 109;
benevolent leader, 242; charisma in, 242
Lee, Richard B., 45-47, 60-62, 64, 67,
69-70, 75, 80, 82, 88, 95, 117, 121, 152,
176, 178-180, 186, 203, 213, 227
Leeds, Anthony, 121
Leveling mechanisms. See Egalitarianism
Lewis, I. M., 107, 120
Lewis, Oscar, 226
Lieberman, Philip, 190-191, 228
Locke, John, 127
Lorenz, Konrad, 2, 41, 162, 200, 201, 229,
231
Lowie, Robert, 108-109, 113
Lumsden, Charles, 162, 228
Madhi, Niloufer Qasim, 118
Maine, Sir Henry, 60
Main political actors, 5, 11, 32, 34, 43, 62,
63, 67, 69, 72, 87, 88, 96, 114, 123, 137,
140, 187, 235, 240, 242, 239; deﬁned, 9
Mair, Lucy, 120
Males. See Gender
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 144, 228, 247
Man, E. H., 78
Manson, Joseph H., 91, 130
Marler, Peter, 164
Marshak, Alexander, 198
Marshall, Lorna, 70, 226
Maruhashi, Tamaki, 153
Marx, Karl, 256
Marxism, 4, 193, 237, 256
Masters, Roger D., 2-3, 74, 119, 174, 201,
204, 213, 225, 228-229, 230-231
Index
287

Matrilocality, 6
Maybury-Lewis, David, 117
Mbuti, 36, 75, 77
McCarthy, Senator Joe, 11, 242
McGrew, William C., 153, 176-177
McKinley, Howard, Jr., 48-49
Mead, Margaret, 226, 247
Meggitt, Mervyn, 95, 97, 113-114
Mennonites, 60
Menzel, Emil, 39
Mescalero Apache, 70
Middleton, John, 31-32
Mirsky, Jeannette, 83, 210, 244
Mitchell, William E., 40, 102-105, 110-111
Mithen, Steven, 75, 183, 198, 208, 228
Montagu, Ashley, 177
Montenegro. See Civilized societies; Serbs;
State level societies; Tribal republics
Moody-Adams, Michelle, 226
Moore, Alexander, 98
Moore, Jim, 150, 153
Moore, Sally Falk, 119
Morality, 1, 3, 171, 182, 187, 190, 192, 193,
194, 213, 224, 250, 252-254; moral
judgment, 8; moral communities, 8, 10,
11, 14, 43, 47, 55, 60, 64, 67, 82, 110, 119,
122, 123, 139, 140, 144, 159, 167, 172,
180, 182, 185, 188, 190, 191, 193-194;
ethos, 12, 33, 43, 50, 60, 66-72, 78-79,
83-84, 86, 88-89, 91, 98-100, 102-106,
108-112, 117, 121-124, 138, 142-145,
172, 186, 190; moral codes, 15, 140, 229;
sharing ethic [see also Cooperation], 67,
70; values, ethical, 68; moral outrage, 72;
honor, 95-96, 118-119; female role in
moral communities, 140; protomorality,
172; ethics, 171, 188; preaching, 199, 227
Moral sanctions: social sanctions, 9, 10, 13,
84-85, 122; execution, 9, 10, 36, 47, 59,
74, 79-88, 112-113, 121-122, 147,
179-180, 190, 241; ridicule, 9, 44, 46, 61,
73-77, 79, 84-85, 88, 116-118, 121-122,
212, 214-215, 241; ostracism, 9, 44,
55-58, 69, 77, 117-119, 241; social
pressure, 9, 45, 76, 103, 201; social
control, 10, 43-44, 46-47, 55, 59, 60,
62-64, 66-67, 72-73, 75, 79, 91, 121, 188,
190, 192, 212, 214, 227, 234, 241, 245;
public opinion, 33, 69, 74-75, 113-117,
124, 144, 168, 207, 237, 240-241;
moralistic aggression, 43, 44, 45, 58, 142,
188; criticism as social control, 43, 66,
70, 73-75, 77, 79, 84-85, 117, 118, 122,
124, 214-215, 239, 240; conformity, 44,
60, 207, 214, 244; shunning, 59, 74, 78,
118-119; gossip, 73-74, 86, 113,
117-118, 187, 190-191, 212, 214, 240,
242, 246; capital punishment, 81-82,
112, 119, 180, 227; execution by kin, 83,
119, 121-122; sanctioning, statistical
patterns, 122-123; social coercion, 199
Moral transgressions, 43; political upstarts,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 43-48, 51, 55, 57, 58, 60,
69, 74-75, 77-79, 85-87, 100, 103,
116-122, 140, 143, 173, 187, 193, 232,
235, 239, 240, 253; deviance, 9, 44, 47,
61, 67, 72-74, 80, 84, 113, 121, 159-160,
187-188, 191, 194, 216, 245-246;
adultery, 35, 80, 82, 93, 110, 138, 141,
194; witchcraft, 36, 49, 82, 83, 84, 162,
263, 272; sorcery, 36, 75, 79, 83, 110;
greed, 39, 43, 49, 107; murder, 43, 53, 68,
73, 79, 81-83, 86, 100, 140, 179, 194, 245,
249; recidivist killers, 43, 79-83, 86, 88;
incest, 47, 85, 140, 194; stinginess, 56, 61,
68, 70, 73, 246; lying, 69, 98, 194; theft,
69, 73, 85, 135, 194, 214; proscriptions,
70, 140, 185, 245, 250; deviant colonies
(Inuit), 73; cheating, 85, 194, 203, 212,
214-216; rape, 92, 194, 245, 249;
deception, tactical, 182; freeloading, see
Free-riders
Morgan, Lewis H., 4, 30, 98
Morocco, 92
Morris, Desmond, 229
Multi-level selection. See Natural selection
Murdock, George Peter, 247
Murphy, Robert F., 120
Mustard [chimpanzee], 18, 19, 22-24, 28
Mwanza, Ndunda, 153
Myers, Fred R., 68, 70, 74-75
Nakamura, M., 156
Nambikuara, 108
Nandi, 120
Natural selection: genes, 2, 7, 12, 13, 41, 42,
86, 132, 181, 198, 202, 204, 205-207,
209-210, 222, 230, 231, 242;
288
Index

sociobiology, 2, 12, 14, 203, 225, 247;
reproductive success, 3, 7, 76, 126, 130,
132-133, 156, 159, 163, 175, 182, 200,
202, 205, 207-208, 210-211, 220, 253;
levels of selection, 12, 14, 15; phenotypic
variation, 12, 205, 207-209, 212, 214,
217, 224; preadaptations, 14, 149, 159,
173, 176, 181, 194; group selection, 14,
197-199, 204-212, 217, 219, 221;
reciprocal altruism, 15, 184, 199, 202,
203; inclusive ﬁtness, 41, 199-200, 202,
220, 229; sexual selection, 131, 174, 175,
176; kin selection, 184, 199, 202, 220;
rate of evolution, 196; free-riders, 198,
203, 205, 206, 212-217, 224, 243;
individual selection, 199, 203, 204,
206-210, 217; parasitic selection,
220-221; pleiotropic effects, 220-221,
223, 229
Navajos, 47-51
Netsilik, 47, 60, 81, 83, 184, 211, 216, 243
New Guinea, 36, 83, 95, 97, 100, 103, 109,
111, 113-117, 120-121
Nilotes, 105
Nishida, Toshisada, 23, 25, 29, 34, 130, 136,
156, 160, 187, 222, 238, 280
Nixon, Richard, 11, 242
Nuer, 92, 98-99, 105
Ona, 62
Opler, Marvin K., 78
Ortiz, Sutti, 48, 129
Ottoman Empire, 98-101
Pakistanis, 117
Paleolithic, 1, 3, 12, 14, 15, 91, 95, 137, 197,
199, 201, 203, 205-207, 197-224, 229,
236, 242, 256
Palmer, Craig T., 37, 211
Patrilocality, 6. See also Fraternal interest
groups
Peristiany, Jean G., 96
Peterson, Dale, 2, 13, 23, 129, 132-136,
150-151, 155, 176, 204, 238, 249
Peterson, J., 8
Peterson, Nicholas, 45, 138, 213
Philippines, 8
Philosophers, indigenous, 45, 87, 164
Philosophy, 4, 116, 200, 204, 225, 226
Pilbeam, David, 175
Pinker, Stephen, 228
Plains Indians, 108
Pleistocene, 14
Pokot, 120
Policemen, 98, 109, 146, 224, 249
Political intelligence. See Cognition
Popper, Karl, 85
Pospisil, Leopold, 111, 119, 121
Postmodernist School of Anthropology, 247
Potts, Richard, 37, 95, 150, 195, 218-219,
222, 228
Power, 4, 5, 6, 7, 27, 67; inﬂuence, 4, 6, 8, 9,
27, 29, 31, 34, 44, 54, 61, 71, 76, 97, 100,
104, 111, 120-121, 124, 136, 154, 202,
245; coercive, 4, 7, 27, 39, 41, 79, 97, 100,
105, 145-146, 160, 199-200, 202, 237,
241, 256; authority, 5-7, 10-11, 14, 18,
26, 27, 30-36, 39, 53, 60-62, 66, 68-69,
71, 76, 80; female power, 5-9; ambition,
8, 10, 22-23, 25, 107, 163, 238, 248;
abuse of, 11, 83, 145, 241-242, 251, 252;
deﬁned, 86-88, 91-93, 97-98, 100-101,
105-112, 116, 119-121, 141-142,
144-145, 166, 172, 195, 252, 255-256
Power, Margaret, 131, 134
Preadaptive potential, 152
Predators, 29, 127, 131, 136, 158, 159-163,
167, 176, 181, 182, 183, 200, 243;
predator defense, 158-159
Pregnancy, 7
Price, T. Douglas, 143
Primates, 1, 3, 7, 33-35, 125, 127, 146, 158,
174, 182, 237; monkeys, 2, 34, 126, 133,
138, 167, 171, 252; squirrel monkeys,
126, 133, 171, 252. See also Apes;
Hamadryas
Primatology, 2
Promiscuous breeding, 17, 26, 127
Psychotics, 7
Pulliam, H. Ronald, 162, 228
Pusey, Anne E., 25, 130, 156
Python, 28
Quain, Buell, 120
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R., 33
Rasmussen, Knud, 82
Rayner, Steven, 38, 227
Index
289

Read, Kenneth E., 111
Reagan, Ronald, 11
Redﬁeld, Robert, 226
Reproductive physiology, 8
Reputation, 7, 54, 74, 80, 82, 107, 246. See
also Status
Richards, Audrey, 113
Richerson, Peter J., 95, 112, 207, 213, 229,
244-245, 247
Riches, David, 79
Ridley, Matt, 229-230
Rosman, Abraham, 88
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 2, 32, 84, 149,
225-227, 256
Rubel, Paula G., 88
Ruyle, Eugene E., 225, 228-229, 247
Sackschewsky, M., 97, 113, 115-117
Sahlins, Marshall, 2, 30, 40, 90, 92, 141
Salzman, Philip, 37, 88
Sanctions. See Moral sanctions
Sanday, Peggy, 6
Satan [chimpanzee], 27, 28
Schaller, George, 159
Schjelderup-Ebbe, T., 162, 171
Schneider, Harold, 103-106, 112, 117, 120,
124, 128, 142
Segmentary society. See Coalitions
Self-aggrandizement. See Competition
Sepik River Basin, 102
Serbia, 5, 16, 65
Serbs, 98, 106
Service, Elman, 6, 30, 32-33, 50, 60, 84, 87,
90-91, 95, 97, 141, 144-146, 153, 227
Sexual dimorphism. See Dimorphism
Shamans, 7, 83, 88
Sharing. See Cooperation; Morality
Sharp, Henry, 41
Sharp, R. Lauriston, 32, 36, 226
Shavante, 117
Shea, John J., 181
Shostak, Marjorie, 137, 217
Silberbauer, George, 76, 78, 113, 169
Simon, Herbert, 185, 220
Siriono, 77
Slaves. See Despotism
Slobodin, Richard, 37, 71
Smuts, Barbara, 6-7, 25, 130, 210, 249
Sober, Eliott, 2, 14, 60, 129, 172, 199, 200,
204-205, 210-211, 219, 221, 225, 229,
231, 236, 246
Social dominance hierarchy. See Hierarchies
Social harmony, 84, 226-227, 246
Socialization, 249. See also Child-rearing
Social sanctions. See Moral sanctions
Sociobiology. See Natural selection
Soltis, Joseph, 95, 112
Sorenson, E. R., 228
Sororal interest groups, 6
Spencer, Baldwin, 82
Stanford, Craig B., 13, 131, 150, 167, 192
Stark, Oded, 204
State level societies, 1, 5, 6, 98, 100-101,
242, 254
States. See Civilized societies
Status, 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 18, 19, 25, 32, 38, 56, 96,
99, 100, 102, 103, 112, 121, 131, 143, 164,
171. See also Competition
Status rivalry. See Competition
Stent, Gunther S., 229
Steward, Julian H., 42, 67, 128-129
Strehlow, T. G. H., 77
Strier, Karen B., 125
Submission, 15, 22-24, 36, 39-41, 65,
104-105, 126, 131, 140, 147, 151, 154,
162-163, 169, 174, 202, 231-232, 235,
237-238, 242, 251, 238; appeasement, 24,
25, 41, 163, 169, 232; ﬂight, 24, 39, 41,
141, 163, 169, 180, 232; avoidance, 80,
141, 257
Sussman, Robert, 129, 227, 230-231, 248,
250
Tabula rasa. See Human nature, blank slate
Tairora, 117
Tait, David, 31-32
Takahata, Y., 130
Tanaka, Jiro, 209
Tanzania, 16
Teit, James, 70, 78
Teleki, Geza, 192
Territoriality: of chimpanzees, 17, 26, 34; as
resource defense, 158; patrols
[chimpanzee], 17, 26-28, 39, 91, 136,
158, 160, 167, 176; of humans, 37, 91,
130, 131, 136, 151-153, 219, 221, 222,
290
Index

223; as social boundary defense, 153,
222; as perimeter defense, 153, 222
Theft, tolerated, 233
Thoden van Velzen, H. U. E., 5, 96
Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall, 33, 226
Tiger, Lionel, 2, 33, 40, 152, 225, 229-230,
247
Tikopia, 237
Tilley, Christopher F., 37, 211
Tinbergen, Niko, 162
Tinkle, D. W., 2, 221
Tiv, 92
Tolowa, 88
Tooby, John, 14, 150, 204, 228-230
Tool-use, 13, 177
Tozzer Library (Harvard), 64
Triage, 243, 244
Tribal republics, 4, 90, 98-101, 237, 255;
Iroquois Confederacy, 4, 98, 108, 254,
257; Montenegrin Confederacy, 98-101
Tribal societies, 5, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13, 32;
clans, 5, 6, 93-94, 96, 99-100, 107-108,
112, 114-116, 118-119, 157; similarity of
tribesmen to foragers, 38; deﬁned,
90-91, 92; tribesmen, 90-124
Trivers, Robert L., 14, 44, 172, 184, 199, 202
Tuden, Arthur, 107
Turkey hens, 200-201, 230
Turnbull, Colin M., 36, 75, 77, 215
Turner, Victor, 107
Turton, David, 239
Tutin, Caroline E., 153
Uehara, Shigeo, 238
Universal People, 248-251
Universals, biocultural, 128, 140, 145, 147,
170, 251-252
Universals, cultural, 7, 36-39, 60, 68-69, 77,
85, 86, 107, 122, 129, 185, 229, 241, 246,
247-252
Upper Paleolithic. See Paleolithic
Ute, 78
Utku, 44, 47, 50-51, 60, 73, 77-78, 119
Values, 43, 66, 67, 68, 188, 233, 234, 240,
244, 251; in ethos, 66, 190, 203; as
independent variable, 67; political, 67,
69, 118, 122, 235
van de Velde, Franz, 184
van Hoof, Jan A. R. A. M., 125
van Schaik, Carel P., 125
van Wetering, W., 5, 96
Variance-reduction. See Hunting
Variation, phenotypic, 12, 205, 207-209,
212, 214, 217, 224
Vehrencamp, Sandra L., 2, 30, 125-128,
130-134, 136-137, 139-141, 145-147,
170, 173, 208, 232
von Fürer-Haimendorf, Christoph, 80
Waa vocalization, 25, 163-169, 172, 188,
239, 241
Wade, Michael, 204, 211
Wagner, Gunter, 106-107
Wape, 102-103
Warfare. See Conﬂict
Washburn, Sherwood L., 174
Watson, James B., 117
Watts, David, 29, 131, 155, 157
Weapons. See Conﬂict
Weatherford, Jack M., 4
Weber, Max, 5, 39
Westermarck, Edward, 60, 229
Weyer, E., 82
Whallon, Robert, 172
Wheeler, Peter E., 175
White, Leslie, 33, 247
Whiten, Andrew, 2, 10, 66, 86, 88, 154, 182,
191, 193, 207, 213-214, 225
Wiessner, Polly, 40, 46-47, 76-77, 86, 199,
207, 212-214
Wilkie [chimpanzee], 23
Williams, B. J., 77
Williams, George C., 14, 212
Williams, Jennifer, 25, 130, 156
Wilson, David S., 2, 14, 60, 129, 172,
199-200, 204-205, 210-211, 219, 221,
224-225, 229, 231, 236, 246
Wilson, Edward O., 2, 14, 129, 147, 162,
198-199, 202, 204-205, 221, 225,
228-230
Wilson, James Q., 220, 225, 228-230
Wilson, Margo, 81, 95, 221, 227, 229-230,
233
Wissler, Clark, 247
Wolpoff, Milford H., 133, 150
Index
291

Woodburn, James, 37, 64-65, 75, 82, 88,
117, 143, 152-153, 177
Wrangham, Richard, 2, 13, 23, 91, 129-130,
132-136, 150-151, 155, 176, 189, 204,
238, 249
Wright, Robert, 229-230
Wynne-Edwards, V. C., 212
Yamigawa, Juichi, 153
Yanomamo, 92-93, 96, 106
Yaruro, 121
Yokuts, 78
Yumoto, Takakazu, 153
Yurok, coastal, 88
Zvelebil, Marek, 40
292
Index


