Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
Available online 25 July 2024
0305-4403/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Micro-computed tomography of the fired clay venus of Dolní Vˇestonice
(Czech Republic)
Petr Neruda a,*, Petr Hamrozi a, Zuzana Pat´akov´a b, Grzegorz Pyka b, Frantiˇsek Zelenka b,
ˇS´arka Hladilov´a c, Martin Oliva a, Eva Ors´agov´a d
a Moravian Museum, Historical Museum, Anthropos Institute, Brno, 659 37, Czech Republic
b Thermo Fisher Scientific, Brno, 627 00, Czech Republic
c Masaryk University, Faculty of Science, Department of Geological Sciences, Brno, 611 37, Czech Republic
d Brno University of Technology, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Communication, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Brno, 616 00, Czech Republic
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Palaeolithic art
Burnt clay
μ-CT scan
Ceramic composition
Ceramic matrix provenience
Shaping technology
Venus taphonomy
Gravettian
A B S T R A C T
Small figurines made from fired clay belonging to the Gravettian (Pavlovian) culture (30-25 ka cal BP) represent
one of the main forms of spectacular Palaeolithic art. The most well-known example is the Venus from Dolní
Vˇestonice I in the Czech Republic, which is the biggest and best-preserved human figurine made from clay. Due
to its high cultural value, exploration of the internal structures of this figurine has represented a huge challenge,
as only non-destructive methods could be applied. Thanks to tremendous technological advancements, we were
able to use high-resolution micro-CT imaging. This imaging revealed the structural compositions of the ceramic
paste, the technology of the statuette's shaping procedure, and the taphonomy of this piece of art. We reveal that
the ceramic paste was prepared from loess sediment containing stones, microfossils, and carbonate aggregates
from the basement complex as an natural admixture. The particles are randomly distributed. We did not find any
bones or ivory remnants inside the body. Missing joined areas of different parts of the body of the Venus indicate
that the figurine was made from a single piece of clay using the non-additive method of shaping. The internal
cracks in the body of the Venus statuette represent the main feature of its taphonomy and influence the way it
will be manipulated in the future.
1. Introduction
The discovery of X-rays by Wilhelm Konrad R¨ontgen in 1895 was a
massive scientific advancement. X-rays have been used not only in the
field of medicine but also widely applied across archaeological and
anthropological research. The first practical use of this method was
documented just one year after their discovery (Fiori and Nunzi, 1995;
Hughes, 2011). The applicability of X-ray radiography to a range of
different materials soon drew the attention of other specialists such as
researchers specialising in ceramics, which is arguably the most com-
mon material among archaeological findings (for overview see Berg and
Ambers, 2016). Thanks to X-rays, a new methodological approach to
classifying ceramics by tempers was used for the first time in 1935
(Titterington, 1935). Other research also focused on analyses of tempers
and documentation of vessel manufacturing methods (Shepard, 1956;
Van Beek, 1969). The groundbreaking work of Rye showed the full
potential of radiography (Rye, 1977). This has been followed by many
other studies (Braun, 1982; Carr, 1990, 1993; Carr and Komorowski,
1990).
A subsequent advancement in the field of radiography was the in-
vention of X-ray computed tomography (CT). In addition to a frontal
view of an object, as with regular X-rays, CT can also "slice" through an
object, providing the researcher with cross-sectional views (Berg and
Ambers, 2016). An often used technique is medical computed tomog-
raphy (e.g. Anderson and Fell, 1995; Applbaum and Applbaum, 2005),
which provides a widely accessible non-destructive low-cost technique
(Berg and Ambers, 2016). However, the image resolution is not suffi-
cient for certain analyses. X-ray microtomography (μ-CT) allows 2D and
3D output even in micrometres, unlike a normal medical scanner with
lower sensitivity capabilities (e.g. Landis and Keane, 2010). The effec-
tiveness of μ-CT is mainly in specific edge cases where thin sections are
not possible (for this issue e.g. Kozatsas et al., 2018). The high sensitivity
of μ-CT has wide applicability across a variety of ceramic objects in
archaeology. This method allows researchers to gain more detailed data
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: pneruda@mzm.cz (P. Neruda).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Journal of Archaeological Science
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jas
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2024.106034
Received 27 March 2024; Received in revised form 19 July 2024; Accepted 19 July 2024

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
2
while enabling them to solve more perplexing scientific issues, namely, a
study of pores in historical bricks (Reedy and Reedy, 2022a, 2022b), 3D
orientation particles and void analysis for identification of hand-built
forming techniques (Gait et al., 2022), or other studies focused on the
technology and internal structures of ceramics (Bernardini et al., 2019;
Kahl and Ramminger, 2012; Kozatsas et al., 2018).
The use of CT technology is crucial for the analysis of many prehis-
toric artefacts, especially pieces of art. Considering their uniqueness and
the high level of protection they are subjected to, any use of destructive
techniques such as thin sections is impossible. This is, in particular, true
in the case of Palaeolithic artefacts, due to their scarcity and fragility.
The application of non-destructive μ-CT imagery represents the only
effective way of obtaining quantitative and qualitative data regarding
the internal structures of highly valued objects (Farbstein and Davies,
2017; Vigorelli et al., 2022). Apart from the non-destructive character of
this method, there is another benefit as opposed to the thin section
method, which is the capability of exploring the full volume of an object,
which is particularly useful for different types of spatial or clustering
analysis. This technique was widely applied to post-Palaeolithic figu-
rines and other objects (e.g. Insoll et al., 2016; Kreiter et al., 2014; Pavel
et al., 2013; Pizzeghello et al., 2015). Nevertheless, μ-CT is still rela-
tively little used for statuettes from the Palaeolithic period. One of the
first cases of use of this method was an analysis of the limestone pro-
venience for creating the Willendorf Venus (Weber et al., 2022). Unlike
ceramic objects, the internal composition of this rock material could not
be adjusted by humans in any way. Regarding ceramic objects, not only
the shape but also the composition of ceramic paste and the processing
technology could have been subjected to the creator's preferences.
Despite the huge research potential of Palaeolithic figurines, micro CT
has been only used on pellets from Dolní Vˇestonice I (cf. info in Farbstein
and Davies, 2017). Considering this scarcity of scientific papers using
this μ-CT technique, this study aims to use this opportunity and shed
new light on this issue by exploring the material and internal compo-
sition of the Venus of Dolní Vˇestonice.
1.1. Site location and history of research
The complex Gravettian station of Dolní Vˇestonice I is located in the
southeast part of the Czech Republic, approx. 35 km from the city of
Brno (Fig. 1:B) on the northeastern slopes of the Pavlov Hills by the river
Dyje (Thaya), where the huge Nov´e Mlýny reservoir was built in the last
century. (Fig. 1:C). Dolní Vˇestonice I is part of an extensive cluster of
several Gravettian sites along the Dyje and includes sites like Dolní
Vˇestonice II, Pavlov I, and Pavlov II (Fig. 1:D), among others.
This site is divided into four areas (Fig. 1:D), that lie approx. between
the contour lines 180-240 m a.sl. From the point of view of the
researched issue, the most important part is the so-called Upper part,
where the Venus of Dolní Vˇestonice was found. Other fragments of
stylistically identical Venuses were also found in the Middle and Up-
permost part of the station (Fig. 1:D). The archaeological layer in Dolní
Vˇestonice I is located in the basal part of the loess complex, while in
many places it touches the underlying Tertiary sediments, into which
weathered Jurassic limestone bedrock is mixed (Klíma, 1963, 1981;
Svoboda et al., 2018).
The history of research in Dolní Vˇestonice I is vast (for this topic see
Oliva, 2014; Svoboda, 2020). The first systematic excavations were
carried out in 1924 by Karel Absolon (Absolon, 1938a, 1938b; Absolon
and Zapletal, 1945), who continued the work of several amateur ar-
chaeologists from the years 1922 and 1923. During the years of 1939
and 1942, the archaeological site came under Nazi research funded by
the Ahnenerbe Institute, which focused on the origin of the Germans.
The research was conducted under the leadership of Assien Bohmers.
After the end of the war, the excavation was again taken over by Czech
archaeologists, initially by Karel ˇZebera in 1945 and 1946 (Knor et al.,
1953) and afterwards by Bohuslav Klíma, who focused on this site
intermittently from 1947 to 1979 (Klíma, 1963, 1981, 1983). In 1990
and 1993, Jiˇrí Svoboda carried out an excavation of several test pits
(Svoboda et al., 2018). In the upper part of the site, in the area of the old
Klíma test pits from the mid-60s, Martin Nov´ak began new research in
2022, under the patronage of ERC Consolidator Grant "MAMBA", reg.
nr. 101045245 (MAMBA, 2024; Nov´ak et al., 2022).
1.2. History of statuette research
The unique statuette, known as the Venus of Dolní Vˇestonice, was
found in Dolní Vˇestonice I (Czech Republic) on July 13, 1925 during the
excavation led by Karel Absolon from the Moravian Museum in Brno
(Czech Republic). The discovery was made as a part of a larger exca-
vation of a hearth with dimensions of 13 × 5 m, consisting of a red
burned loess layer that covered a thick layer full of ash and charcoal
fragments (Absolon, 1938b). Initially, a broken-off part of the right leg
was found at this layer. This was followed by the discovery of the rest of
the body. The distance between both parts was only 10 cm (in detail in
Oliva, 2014). Soft ashes formed a crust on the surface of the artefact.
Some parts of the body were also covered in a thin layer of carbonates
(Fig. 2:A).
Absolon unimaginably delayed the publication of one of his most
outstanding discoveries. The Venus, without an attached picture, was
mentioned a year after its discovery and the first good-quality photo-
graphs were made public in the world-renowned social journal "The
Illustrated London News" on November 30, 1929 (Absolon, 1929). A
comprehensive scientific examination and photographic documentation
of the Venus was conducted in the second scientific report in 1938
(Absolon, 1938b). However, Absolon did not describe the figurine as
ceramic. Based on the chemical analysis of a sample obtained from the
mass of the Venus, he determined the material to be a mixture of crushed
burnt bones and mammoth tusks mixed with loess that only resembled
burnt clay.
The question regarding the material composition and the internal
structure of the figurine was difficult to answer due to its uniqueness and
high level of safekeeping, which did not allow the use of any kind of
destructive methods. The first analysis of the Venus's material compo-
sition, in particular a fragment that was broken off the figurine's side,
was performed in the late 1980s using X-ray diffraction and an electron
beam microprobe. These analyses revealed that the body was created
from a local source of Dolní Vˇestonice coarse-particle loess with only a
small amount of clay in it (Vandiver et al., 1989).
However, this approach only brought some information about the
material, while the internal structures remained shrouded in mystery
until the year 2004, when a medical CT scanner showed some cracks and
white spots inside the Venus body. The white spots represent a material
with a higher density compared to the rest of the body. Nevertheless,
other detailed analyses were not performed, and the scan results did not
provide many new insights (Hloˇzek et al., 2008).
2. Methods
2.1. Research objectives
Our goal was to address several questions related to the analysis of
the Venus and other ceramic figurines by using μ-CT scanning.
1) What is the composition of the ceramic paste?
a. Was Absolon's idea about the appearance of mammoth bone frag-
ments inside the ceramic paste correct?
b. Is there any admixture in the ceramic paste that can be considered
direct evidence of placing inclusions into the paste for symbolic
reasons?
c. What is the distribution of inclusions and what are their attributes?
2) Are we able to specify the sediment provenience used for making the
ceramic paste?
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
3
Fig. 1. Location of Dolní Vˇestonice I on an inset map of Europe (A), the Czech Republic (B), and regions of Dolní Vˇestonice - Pavlov (C). Plan of Dolní Vˇestonice I
with marked areas where researchers unveiled the Venus and other fragments of analogous shape (D; modified according to (Svoboda, 2020; Oliva, 2014). Map P.
Neruda, with the use of DMR5G (ˇCÚZK, 2017), water sources and buildings (ˇCÚZK, 2021), and SRTM90mDEMver4 (Jarvis et al., 2008).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
4
3) Was the figurine manufactured using additive or non-additive
technology?
4) What is the taphonomy of the Venus?
2.2. Statuette settings
The preserved statuette, stored in the Anthropos Institute of the
Moravian Museum in Brno, Czech Republic under the ID DV 30000,
consisted of two separated pieces with the refitted body being 111 mm
long, and 44 mm wide (Fig. 2:B). The lower part of the legs is missing.
The figure is characterised by an oval head with four holes at the top and
two grooves representing eyes, large breasts (the right one is slightly
damaged), wide hips and fat folds shaped on the back. The hands are
only schematically indicated, and the legs were modelled as a single unit
but visually distinguished by two vertical grooves on the front and back.
The statuette is not directly dated. To determine its age, only
Fig. 2. The Venus from Dolní Vˇestonice. A: the state of preservation at the time of the findings (archive of the Moravian Museum), B: current preservation status
(photo O. Kroupa, Moravian Museum).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
5
contextual data collected in the closest vicinity can be used. The only
accurately located date from the area of the upper part of the Dolní
Vˇestonice I station was gained by analysing the postcranial remains of a
woman from DV3 (Fig. 1:D). The skeleton is dated back to 25,870 ± 220
14C BP (OxA-36176), allowing us to estimate the age of the figurine in
the range of 30,817-29,776 calBP (Nerudov´a et al., 2019). The results
correlate with other data that have been collected from the uppermost
and middle part of the site (Svoboda, 2020).
2.3. μ-CT scanning of venus
To analyse the internal structure of the statue, we chose CT tech-
nology using X-rays. This is non-destructive imaging, where different
materials absorb X-rays differently, thus making it possible to visually
distinguish them from each other. The method itself does not result in a
chemical analysis of the material. Therefore, we also scanned artificially
created phantoms that contained material fragments, the presence of
which we expected to find in the Venus itself. We were inspired by
medical diagnostic methods, where this procedure is used to refine the
material analysis of a sample (McGarry et al., 2020; Shikhaliev, 2012).
For the scan of the statue itself, we chose a helical (spiral) trajectory
and acquisition scheme, which is suitable for iterative data reconstruc-
tion. The scanning was performed on 17. 8. 2016 in Brno (Czech Re-
public) on a HeliScan microCT scanner developed by Thermo Fisher. At
the time of scanning, the scanning area of the scanner did not allow the
entire Venus to be scanned. The scan was divided into two parts, which
required a specific technical solution.
2.3.1. Scanning pretreatment - a sample holder
An essential requirement for successful tomography data acquisition
is to minimise the uncontrolled sample movement during scanning.
HeliScan uses geometrical magnification to form the image. Therefore,
the sample holder must allow for close proximity between the sample
and the X-ray source to enable optimal scanning resolution. Material
with low X-ray attenuations was preferred in order to optimise the X-ray
flux and spectra impacting the sample. These limitations led us to
develop the unique sample holder for the Venus, which was made from
polyethylene foam shaped to the outer diameter of the cylinder. We split
the holder into two halves and based it on a plaster model of the Venus,
the negative copy of its shape was carved into the foam to provide secure
housing for the statuette. To enable scanning of the Venus and material
phantoms under the same conditions, two additional compartments for
phantoms were created in the same holder (Fig. 3:A). The foam holder
was then secured by gauze and the bottom third was inserted into a
plastic cap mounted on a standard HeliScan sample holder (Fig. 3:B).
2.3.2. Data acquisition
Before scanning the archaeological artefact, which is subjected to a
high level of safekeeping, test scanning was conducted on a plaster cast
of the Venus. It was necessary to verify whether the sample mounting
was sufficiently robust and at the same time optimise the parameters of
the acceleration voltage along with exposure time.
To secure good resolution and contrast, several test scans were per-
formed using similar materials and geometry, but without scanning the
actual Venus itself, so that potential physical strain on the statuette was
minimised. This allowed us to verify that the sample mounting was
sufficiently robust and also to optimised the parameters of the acceler-
ation voltage and exposure time.
We opted for a scan strategy using the space-filling trajectory
(Kingston et al., 2018), where X-ray projections were acquired from
directions uniformly distributed onto an imaginary cylindrical surface
surrounding the artefact. This trajectory allowed us to scan elongated
samples with a relatively large aspect ratio in a continuous scan without
potential stitching artefacts. Due to the scale of the statuette, a multiscan
approach was applied. The upper and lower parts of the Venus were
scanned separately with an overlapping region captured in both scans
for accurate merging purposes. This allowed us to maximise the reso-
lution and overcome the vertical translation stage travel range limita-
tion of 100 mm. This left one overlapping region in the final image of the
complete sample.
Key acquisition parameters.
• Acceleration voltage: 110 kV
• Beam current: 60 μA
• Exposure time: 2.3 s per projection (accumulative)
• Number of projections per revolution: 1800
• Beam filtering: 0.1 mm of stainless steel
• The geometry of the scan was chosen to target voxel size 19 μm or
lower.
A total of 7500 X-ray projections were collected from the statue and
divided into two disjoint space-filling trajectories. From this, a digital 3D
representation of the statuette was formed using an iterative recon-
struction algorithm specifically designed to take advantage of the pro-
jection angle distribution of the space-filling trajectory to generate a
geometrically faithful representation of tall samples (Varslot et al.,
2011). To compare the known composition and structure of the phan-
toms with that of the Venus figurine, it was crucial to minimise effects to
Fig. 3. A - Polymeric foam (polythene) case used for scanning the Venus and 2 material phantoms (ID, 2016/1 and 2016/2); B - Placement of the Venus figurine in
the holder inside the HeliScan scanning chamber. The steel pivot at the bottom of the holder enables shifting of the holder up and down (photos Z. Pat´akov´a).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
6
avoid streak artefacts around dense inclusions in the statue. Therefore,
the 0.1 mm stainless steel filter was used to filter out the lower-energy
X-rays from the spectrum applied on the statue. The material and
thickness of the filter were determined during the testing scans as we
were optimizing the intensity of the signal on the detector vs. exposure
time and X-ray filtering. The output is a voxelised greyscale represen-
tation of the statue. The final length of an edge of a voxel was 18.54 μm.
2.4. Reference samples
To address the defined research goals, it was crucial to compare the
obtained results from the figurine with the reference samples, which
contained inclusions that were expected to be found inside the Venus
based on our previous insights. Some of the used phantoms carried
specific properties to account for different modification methods applied
to the figurine. These modifications encompass punctures into wet ma-
terial or a conjoint area between two pieces of material. In total, 3 sets of
phantoms were made to document the process of this research (Tab. 1;
Appendix B; Fig. 8). In all cases, the loess sediment from Dolní Vˇestonice
II (WGS-84: 48.8839939 N, 16.6548236 E) was used to closely replicate
the original wet ceramic paste, even containing various inclusions and
subjected to different forming techniques.
The first set (Table 1:2016/1 and 2016/2) was scanned directly with
the Venus and consisted of two cylinders made from Dolní Vˇestonice
loess. One cylinder contained carbonates separated from the loess by
floating. The same loess was used for the second phantom and contained
weathered fossil bones and fossil mammoth ivory. Both phantoms were
burnt on a laboratory stove at a temperature of 600 ◦C. Both bone and
ivory changed structure into a form of charcoal.
The second phantom set was scanned in 2019 after the first pre-
liminary analysis of the Venus composition. Because the fossilised bone
and mammoth tusk turned into coal remnants, we were not able to
investigate their internal structures using micro CT. For this reason, a
pair of new phantoms, containing fresh bone fragments and recent
elephant ivory (Table 1:2019/1 and 2016/2), was created. The ivory
was a remnant from an experiment by Sebastian Pfeifer from Friedrich
Schiller University in Jena, who registered it as ID 1001 (Pfeifer et al.,
2019). The first phantom (2019/1) was heated to 400 ◦C and the second
one (2019/2) to 600 ◦C to compare differences in the preservation of
both organic materials. Both phantoms were made of two separate parts.
The wetted parts were merged either using pressure or a twisting
movement. Fragments of charcoal were expected in the ceramic paste;
therefore, a huge piece of charcoal originally found in the waste material
during MZM research on the Mesolithic site in Smolin (Table 1:2019/3)
was placed inside a loess phantom. In this context, the sample's surface
was subjected to punctures made into the dry ceramic material by the
quill part of a feather.
Phantom 2019/4 contained several small charcoals that we sepa-
rated from the original archaeological layer from Dolní Vˇestonice that is
preserved in the collection of the Moravian Museum in Brno. The exact
location in the context of the site is unknown, but most likely we are
dealing with one of the samples collected during the B. Klíma excavation
carried out in the 1940s (Table 1:2019/4). The hard inorganic material
was taken from the same sediment for the purpose of checking its
appearance on CT images and comparing them to the fragments of rocks
found inside the Venus. In addition to this organic material, experi-
mental chipped fragments made from flint and small pieces of quartz
(Table 1:2019/5 and 2019/6) were also added to this sample set. In the
case of quartz and silicites, we wanted to verify how they are repre-
sented on the CT image, especially with regard to density. Finally, a
lump of this sediment was scanned in order to ascertain the porosity of
the original archaeological layer (Table 1:2019/7).
In 2020, we extended reference sample scanning to a third set of
phantoms (Table 1). Sample 2020/1 contained quartz fragments from a
river pebble and a hematite rock from the original archaeological layer
from the Dolní Vˇestonice site. Sample 2020/2 recorded punctures by a
bird feather into the semi-dry ceramic matrix shaped to the form of a
head. Two grooves appeared to be imitating the eyes of the Venus.
2.5. Image processing and segmentation of particles
There were two stages in the segmentation of the particles inside the
Table 1
List of reference samples (phantoms).
Phantom
ID
Upper part
Lower part
Temperature
of heating
(◦C)
Applied
technological
processes
related to Venus
shapping
2016/1
carbonate concretions
2016/2
fossil bone
fosiil
mammoth
ivory
600
2019/1
mammoth
ivory ID 1001a
recent bone
400
Two isolated
cylinders of a
wet ceramic
paste simply
joined without
twisting;
smoothing of
the surface
2019/2
mammoth
ivory ID 1001a
recent bone
600
Two isolated
cylinders of a
wet ceramic
paste joined by
twisting;
smoothing of
the phantom
surface
2019/3
Charcoal (Mesolithic Age)b
600
A row of
punctures into a
semi-dry
ceramic paste
2019/4
Charcoal from an original
archaeological layer
600
2019/5
Small stones
from a cultural
layer
Three small
sillicite
flakes
(arteficially
knapped)
600
Four punctures
by a feather
shaft into the
surface of wet
ceramic paste
smoothed by
ivory (imitation
of the surface
finishing); two
grooves,
resembling the
eyes of Venus
on the surface
and three small
flint flakes
2019/6
A lump of
hematite
Four grains
of quartz
600
2019/7
A lump of the original
archaeological layer
not burnt
testing of the
original content
2020/1
Hematite from
the
archaeological
layer
Quartz
fragments
from river
pebble
600
2020/2
600
Four punctures
by a bird
feather on the
top of the head
and two
engraved
grooves imitate
eyes; the semi-
dry ceramic
paste
a Provided by S. Pfeifer.
b Collection of Anthropos Institute, waste from the excavation in Smolín. For
images see Appendix B Fig. 8.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
7
Venus. For the morpho-statistical analysis, we used the complete model
of Venus conjoined from the two scanned parts of Venus. The inner
particles in the 3D scan of the Venus body were segmented based on
their brightness, which is given by the material absorption of the X-ray
beam. All selected particles were recorded as independent material and
later manually edited using tools for segmentation available in Avizo
software. This was especially necessary for the parts near the surface,
where automatic segmentation was not accurate since the thinner parts
of Venus had the optimal histogram shifted to a different range in
comparison to the thicker parts, such as the pelvic region. Calcite crys-
tals developed in the cracks as a by-product of the manufacturing
process were manually edited out since they were not part of the original
ceramic paste. All inclusions in such an edited model were stored for
specific analysis as an individual dataset. Subsequently, a collection of
smaller, bright inclusions was singled out from this dataset for the
purpose of morphological analysis. In addition, some of these inclusions
were also converted into 3D models.
Segmentation of the cracks was conducted through a similar
approach. Two 3D models of cracks were rendered, implementing
automatic segmentation by utilizing the histogram and subsequently
using the manual editing option. The first one included only cavities
inside the body, and the second one included cracks that were connected
Fig. 4. Distribution of particles larger or equal to 2 mm3 (A) and 1 mm3 (B) in the body of the Venus. Anterior views on the left, right lateral views on the left.
Numbers correlate to the numbering of particles (P) in Appendix B; Figs. 1-7. Segmentation and Visualisation by P. Neruda.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
8
to the surface.
To investigate the possible occurrence of mammoth bone remnants
and other admixtures, a group of larger inclusions were set apart. Taking
into account knowledge already possessed about Gravettian culture,
mammoth ivory remnants, animal teeth, or tiny fossils could have been
placed inside the figurine for symbolic purposes. Therefore, it was
necessary to create a volume constraint for the group of larger in-
clusions, defined as being the size of an average rice grain, about 2 mm3.
Two groups were set apart from the inclusions dataset. The first was a
group of inclusions with a volume equal to or larger than 2 mm3 (Fig. 4:
A), and the second one included all inclusions larger than 1 mm3 in case
of possible comparison (Fig. 4:B). All these inclusions were numbered
based on their vertical position in relation to the body, ranging from the
head to the legs. These numbers were used as an identification for the
documentation of these objects, utilizing orthoslices and 3D models in
some cases. The documentation of individual inclusions was conducted
separately using the upper and lower models of the Venus in the original
resolution. The process of segmentation was based on the use of histo-
gram settings according to local conditions, and manual segmentation
tools served to increase the selection accuracy of parts affected by his-
togram shifting.
In the same way, microfossils were segmented, even though their
volume was mostly smaller than the defined volume constraint. In this
scenario, it was essential to obtain a very accurate 3D model, allowing
their taxonomical classification.
2. 4. Statistical analyses
The descriptive statistical analysis was applied to the inclusions
segmented by semiautomatic segmentation of the model of the Venus.
The original dataset for the statistical analysis was generated by Avizo
software in Standard Shape Analysis format, which consisted of 102,515
records and 37 different features (see original dataset). The analysis was
performed in several steps (see Appendix A). Firstly, the dataset was pre-
processed, encompassing dropping redundant and erroneous values.
Secondly, exploratory data analysis was carried out, gaining insight into
data distributions, and basic descriptive statistics were used to provide
information about the number of particles, their size, shape, and posi-
tion in three-dimensional space. In order to obtain an insight into the
shape distribution of the segmented inclusions, a spherical index was
calculated along with outlining the multidimensional data points
dispersed in 3D space by using their coordinates. The aim was to
determine whether there was a prevalence of a certain kind of inclusion
shape or any obvious clusters. Any obvious cluster or inclusions of a high
level of sphericity could indicate intentional manipulation with the
ceramic material for specific technological or symbolic reasons.
2. 5. Microfossils determination
Given the fact that the segmentation revealed the presence of mi-
crofossils in the ceramic material of the Venus, a part of this research
focused on their age and location determination in order to interpret
their geographical origin. This admixture in the building material of the
Venus can indicate the building sediment provenience.
Paleontological objects were studied using orthoimages along with
3D images and were classified based on morphological traits. To
determine a stratigraphic classification, the following publications were
used: (Flügel, 2004; Holzknecht and Hamrˇsmíd, 1988; Hunter and Un-
derwood, 2009; Jüttner, 1922; Krajewski et al., 2020; Kroh and Luke-
neder, 2009; Moore, 1966; Moore and Jeffords, 1968; Müller, 1963,
1980; Murray, 1990; ˇReh´anek, 1987; ˇRehoˇr et al., 1978; Salamon et al.,
2021; Schneider et al., 2013; ˇZítt and Michalík, 1984).
3. Results
3.1. Description of large inclusions
The main goal was to determine the composition of the building
material with the intention of answering the questions raised about the
presence of mammoth ivory and bones or identifying larger inclusions
inside the sedimentary material that could have been placed inside for
symbolic purposes.
The comprehensive data obtained from scanning the Venus signifi-
cantly expands our interpretive possibilities. Semi-automatic micro-CT
segmentation generated a data file containing 102,515 records. Each
record corresponds to a scanned particle with a volume ranging from
6.78647 × 10-6 mm3-91.7529 mm3. The initial exploratory analysis of
the cleaned dataset, which contained 92,320 records, showed that a
large portion of the particles scanned were incredibly small (Table 2).
The average volume was only 0.011 mm3 (S.D. 0.381 mm3, max =
91.753 mm3, min = 0.00001 mm3). Although only 133 particles exceed
a threshold of 1 mm3 (Fig. 4:B), they comprise a significant 59.12% of
the total volume of all particles. In the case of inclusions ≥2 mm3 (Fig. 4:
A), 69 identified items represent 51.9% of the volume of all particles
(Table 2).
Firstly, we investigated whether the ≥2 mm3 particles exhibited any
clusters in terms of their position in three-dimensional space, as well as
their physical properties such as anisotropy, elongation, flatness, and
sphericity (see Appendix A and GitHub). Based on the methods used, we
did not identify any cluster of inclusions. Subsequently, the issue of
particle shapes using the sphericity index values was addressed (see
Appendix A and GitHub). In the observed group of particles with a
particle volume ≥2 mm3, the average index of sphericity is equal to
0.400 (S.D. 0.082, max = 0.557, min = 0.222), indicating a predomi-
nance of uneven and angular shapes.
Based on the results of clustering and the index of sphericity ana-
lyses, our main attention was redirected towards the classification of
internal structure with a volume ≥2 mm3. Apart from the 69 particles
(Fig. 4:A) that met the volume threshold, a few additional microfossils
discovered inside the body of the Venus were analysed along with the
particle group. Although the particles exhibit minor variations, they can
still be categorised into distinct groups (Appendix B) by taking into
account their shape and internal composition.
The majority of the particles exhibit polyhedral shapes with slightly
rounded edges, and they contain prominent veins that are visible on the
orthoslices (Fig. 5:P17). These veins are easily distinguishable due to
their bright white colour (Group 1; red arrows in Appendix B; Fig. 1).
The second group contains inclusions that share the same shape as those
in the largest group, but their internal structure tends to be less compact
(Group 2; Fig. 5:P13 and red arrows in Appendix B; Fig. 2). The third
group
of
particles
is
characterised
by
a
strongly
disintegrated,
porphyritic-like texture. While their shape is similar to that of the two
previous groups, their edges are slightly rounded, and the surfaces
appear to be eroded (Group 3; Fig. 5:P5 and Appendix B; Fig. 3). The
next group of particles is distinguished by a fairly rounded shape and a
porphyritic-like texture, which differs from the particles of Groups 1 and
2 (Group 4; Fig. 5:P10 and Appendix B; Fig. 4). The fifth group is
Table 2
Particle quantity and volume overview.
Components
Measurements
Count
Volume [mm3]
Venus body
39,560
All segmented particles
102515
995.76
All particles without measurement errors
92320
955.66
All particles ≥2 mm3
69
496.42
All particles ≥2 mm3 without measurement errors
69
496.42
Cracks and porosity
5486
210.18
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
9
Fig. 5. Inclusions overview in the ceramic paste. P17 - group 1, P13 - group 2, P5 - group 3, P10 - group 4, P47 - group 5, P16 - group 6, P29 - group 7, microfossils
and BS1 - bright spots, heavy minerals. For more images see Appendix B.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
10
comprised of inclusions with a higher density and irregular shape,
sometimes displaying an oval shape and compact texture. (Group 5;
Fig. 5:P47 and Appendix B; Fig. 5). The reference calcium carbonate
images (Appendix B; Fig. 8:E1) suggest that objects P41 and P47 are
likely calcareous nodules, which are commonly found in loess se-
quences. The sixth group is composed of just two objects; these differ
from the previous groups in terms of their oval shape (Group 6; Fig. 5:
P16 and Appendix B; Fig. 6). The two objects (Fig. 5:P16; Appendix B;
Fig. 6f: P2 and P16) manifest distinct differences in texture. (P2) has two
different surface textures, with one part being notably lighter than the
other. In contrast, (P16) seems to be relatively uniform in texture but has
a minor crack running through it.
Group 7 is distinct from the others by containing fossils with a vol-
ume less than 2 mm3 (Fig. 5:P29 and Appendix B; Fig. 7). All the iden-
tified fossils are generally quite small, with only two of them (Appendix
B; Fig. 7:P29 and P39) having a volume larger than 2 mm3. Most of the
identifiable fossils in the images belong to the phylum Echinodermata,
particularly pluricollumnalia of crinoids (class Crinoidea). The fossils
with five-part radial symmetry in the orthophotos P29 and P39 are likely
from the order Isocrinida and are typically found in Jurassic deposits.
Aside from the Echinodermata fossils, there is also a fragment of a snail
from the phylum Mollusca, class Gastropoda, as seen in Appendix B
Fig. 7:Px1. Most of the fossils mentioned above were found in Jurassic
deposits in the area of Dolní Vˇestonice, which is part of the Carpathian
flysh belt, a tectonic zone stretching from the Danube to the Dyje river in
Lower Austria and South Moravia (Jüttner, 1922; ˇReh´anek, 1987;
Schneider et al., 2013; ˇZítt and Michalík, 1984; Appendix B; Fig. 7).
There was a significant emphasis placed on identifying hard animal
tissues (HAT), such as bones and mammoth tusks. Their identification
should be relatively easy due to their characteristic structures (compare
Appendix B; Fig. 8:A and B). HAT reference samples show that the in-
ternal structure of bone exhibits small lens-shaped cavities (white ar-
rows in Appendix B; Fig. 8:A1-A5); the remains of a porous structure
that represents spongiosa are characteristic (cf. pink arrows in Apendix
B Fig. 8:A1-6). Ivory, on the other hand, has a very fine homogeneous
structure with indications of lamination (Appendix B; Fig. 8:B1-B5).
Fragments of elephant ivory are distinctly angular with sharp edges
(Appendix B; Fig. 8:B5). Given these characteristic features, there is no
clear evidence of the presence of these HAT inside the Venus. Likewise,
no evidence was found of any artefacts that could have potentially
appeared in the ceramic paste. However, CT images of the cultural layer
from Dolní Vˇestonice I show, for example, small flakes (Appendix B;
Fig. 8:F1-F2). Moreover, the experimentally made pieces demonstrate
that their identification is simple because we can see the rest of the
striking platform and a bulb (Appendix B; Fig. 8:F3).
3.2. Small particle description
Our attention was also drawn to the small inclusions with less than 2
mm3, since the analysis of their spatial distribution or their shapes could
indicate the quality of the ceramic paste. Firstly, we attempted to
address these questions through clustering analysis, which was applied
to the entire cleaned dataset. However, this approach proved to be
ineffective due to the majority of particles being extremely small,
leading to significant overlap among individual clusters. This means that
the distribution of the small inclusions is completely random throughout
the whole volume of the body.
Subsequently, the issue of particle shapes was addressed by using the
sphericity index values. In the observed group of particles with a particle
volume ≥2 mm3, the average index of sphericity is equal to 0.400 (S.D.
0.082, max = 0.557, min = 0.222), indicating a predominance of uneven
and angular shapes. A sphericity index greater or equal to 0.7 was only
found within the particles smaller than 0.003 mm3, which would also
include the bright particles randomly distributed across the body of the
Venus. For these "bright" particles, the sphericity index mean value is
0.682 (S.D. = 0.0725, max = 0.806, min = 0.381). Upon closer
examination of its form, it bears a resemblance to the shape of a crystal
(cf. Fig. 5:BS1 and Appendix B; Fig. 9).
3.3. Technological features of the statuette
The obtained µ-CT data allows us to study the technological aspects
related to the manufacturing process. One of the most addressed issues is
the question about the manufacturing technique used, specifically, the
usage of additive and non-additive techniques. For this reason, we were
looking for any traces showing the joining areas between the extremities
and the body. At first, the reference samples made from the loess sedi-
ment were used as an attempt to join two pieces at various moisture
levels by applying either pressure or a twisting movement. Nevertheless,
all the samples showed distinct joining surface areas (red arrows in
Fig. 6:F-G). Subsequently, the analysis focused on the figurine itself,
namely, the longitudinal slices at the junction of the head and body
(Fig. 6:A-D) and transverse slices across the chest area, where breasts
could have been attached to the corpus. In both cases, the use of the
additive technique represents a certain technological advantage and
would have simplified the shaping of the figurine. Even though the
connection of two body parts should be easily detectable (Kreiter, 2008),
in particular by utilizing high-resolution images, interlayer regions were
found that would demonstrate an additive method of creating the
figurine (cf. Fig. 6:A-E). Only at the lower edge of the left breast is a
crack visible (white arrows in Fig. 6:D and E), which may have formed in
areas where a part of the breast was subsequently pressed against the
body of the figurine.
The slice images indicated kneading of the ceramic clay, since the
pores in the body material are significantly smaller (Fig. 7:A and B) than
the pores in the piece of sediment obtained from the original cultural
layer (Fig. 7:C). It is evident that on some longitudinal and transverse
sections, a hint of layering is visible. This follows the external body
shape, which corresponds with the preparation of the ceramic clay
(Fig. 7:A and B).
More specifically, we can also address a specific feature preserved on
the top of the head of the Venus figurine. There are four holes (Fig. 8:A)
whose morphology has not been precisely known until now. The di-
mensions of the holes range from 2.7-2.9 × 1.1-1.2 mm, and the depth
is about 1.5-1.9 mm (Fig. 8:D). The white layer at the bottom of the
punctures, which is prominently visible in the images as a light colour,
represents a secondarily created CaCO3 coating (Fig. 8:C). The created
3D model clearly shows that all four holes are similar in shape (Fig. 8:B)
and were therefore made with the same pointed tool of a lens-shaped
cross-section. Based on the comparison with reference phantoms, we
can state that the punctures on the top of the head were made in partially
dried ceramic paste because their edges are rounded (cf. white arrows in
Fig. 8:F). In the case of wet ceramic paste, a burr is formed along the
periphery of the holes (cf. blue and white arrows in Fig. 8:G). In addition
to the rounded edges observed around the punctures on the top of the
head, rounded edges were also noticed around the eyes (Fig. 8:E) and
navel of the Venus figurine.
3.4. Taphonomy
An important part of this research is the analysis of the taphonomy of
the inner part of the Venus. We had only very limited information about
the taphonomy based on images with low resolution. The analysis of the
images stressed the concerning number of cracks. The cracks and larger
pores in the clay material have a total volume of 210.18 mm3 (Table 2),
which accounts for 0.5% of the total volume of the figurine. The densest
collection of cracks was revealed in the abdominal area (Fig. 9:A3) and
chest (Fig. 9:A2, B and D.) Most of the larger cracks are oriented along
the longitudinal axis of the entire body (Fig. 9:C). It is clear that there is
an extensive crack situated on the left side of the Venus (Fig. 9:C light
blue) as well as three smaller ones in the chest area (Fig. 9:C red, orange
and yellow).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
11
Within these cracks, very light objects of an irregular shape resem-
bling branched crystals appear (Fig. 10:A). These irregularly shaped
objects have multiple sharp protrusions (Fig. 10:A and B), while the
whole structure resembles sea corals.
Two boreholes drilled into the body from the area where the body is
attached to the broken-off part of the right leg are also related to the
taphonomy of the statuette. They are identical in shape and size,
measuring approximately 3 mm in diameter (Fig. 10:C and E). The larger
hole goes as deep as 8 mm and reaches an inclusion (Fig. 10:D, light grey
oval indicated by white arrow), which was the probable source of the
chemical data indicating the presence of ivory remnants reported by
Karel Absolon.
4. Discussion
4.1. Composition of ceramic paste
The main goal of this analysis was to confirm or disprove the pres-
ence of inclusions that could have been added to the ceramic paste for
symbolic reasons. The Venus itself is considered to have a symbolic
purpose. Therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that some of the
artefacts or products of nature might have been placed into the body
Fig. 6. Analysis of the shaping technology of the Venus in areas where additive technology could be applied. A - sections in the neck area; B - transverse section in the
area of the breasts and hips; C - longitudinal sections in the area of the right breast; D - longitudinal sections in the area of the right breast, the white arrow shows an
interlayer region represented the crack (for detail see 5:E); E −detail of the irregular interlayer region (the white arrow) in the area of the left breast; F - detail of the
connection of two parts of the reference phantom 2019/2, two parts connected by wet compression and twisting (red arrows indicate character of the interlayer
region); G - connection on the reference sample 2019/5 - connection of two slightly dried parts (red arrows indicate character of the interlayer region).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
12
intentionally. The material used - loess - provide us the space for such
speculations because it is quite easy to add an object into the ceramic
paste during the manufacturing process. This is proven, for example, by
two Neolithic female statuettes from Malta (Rich, 2008).
The segmentation discovered a considerable number of inclusions in
the clay material that were measured, and a group containing inclusions
of a volume larger than 2 mm3 per inclusion which approximately
matches the volume of a grain of rice, was set aside and subjected to
further analysis. The particles of such size were quite easily manipulated
by fingers; no known Gravettian symbolic or decorative artefacts are
smaller than 2 mm3 (e.g. L´azniˇckov´a-Galetov´a, 2022).
When considering materials that may have been included in the
Venus statue for symbolic purposes, fragments of hard animal tissue
from mammoths, such as bones and ivory, would be a likely choice. The
mammoth played an important role in the everyday lives of Gravettian
hunters and gatherers, and not only were these materials used to create
objects of everyday use, but they also likely had a symbolic significance
(e.g. L´azniˇckov´a-Galetov´a, 2021; L´azniˇckov´a-Galetov´a, 2022; Oliva,
2021; Svoboda, 2020; Wolf and Vercout`ere, 2018). The high frequency
of these types of findings might have influenced Absolon's interpretation
of the results of chemical analysis, which should have indicated
mammoth bones and ivory as the predominant components for the
building material of the statuette. Although such material remnants are
quite easy to distinguish from other items on orthoslices, the data
collected by CT scanning did not confirm the presence of any ivory or
bones inside the Venus. We can, with high probability, rule out the
original theory proposed by Absolon (1938b) and support the inter-
pretation of the chemical makeup of the ceramic paste published by
Vandiver (Vandiver et al., 1989).
Another material that might have had a symbolic significance and
was significantly represented in the Gravettian culture was different
types of mostly Tertiary mollusc fossils, such as those belonging to the
Dentalium or Melanopsis genera (Cˆarciumaru et al., 2019; Hladilov´a,
2011; Soffer and Vandiver, 2005). In all cases, these are fossils of several
centimetres in size. In the case of the Venus, the situation is somewhat
different. The high resolution of the CT images made it possible to
segment the fossils into 3D objects so that some of them could be
taxonomically classified, similar to the case of the study of the Venus of
Willendorf II limestone (Weber et al., 2022). We distinguished a few
remnants of fossils that belonged to the Crinoidea class, usually in the
shape of regular stars (Appendix B; Fig. 7:P29 and P39), or the Gastro-
poda class (Appendix B; Fig. 7:P29 and P39). The dimensions of the
fossils do not exceed 3 mm in diameter, therefore it is highly unlikely
that the remnants of these fossils were placed inside the body of the
Venus intentionally. They are randomly distributed throughout the body
of the figurine, with no special focus on a certain place, e.g. the head or
the abdomen. Moreover, such microfossils could appear in loess as the
result of contamination from Jurassic bedrock deposits caused by a va-
riety of diluvial and deluvio-eolian processes. Such layers are commonly
preserved at Dolní Vˇestonice I (Houˇsa et al., 1963; Jüttner, 1922; Klíma,
1963, 1981; Svoboda et al., 2018). Due to these processes, small pieces
of weathered Jurassic rocks commonly occur in overlaying layers that
are rich in loess. If this type of loess were used as the main component of
the ceramic paste (e.g. for creating the figurine), it would naturally lead
to the presence of fossil remnants that commonly appear among the
coarse pieces of Jurassic sediments.
The analysis of smaller inclusions with a volume of less than 2 mm3
did not provide any useful information about the use of these inclusions
as the temper. We were looking for a specific group of inclusions that
would be imported from different places, such as quartz grains with a
high spherical index. In addition, we were looking for any clusters of
these grains that could be caused by adding the temper to the paste or
insufficient mixing of the ceramic paste. The statistical analysis did not
prove any of these theories. The distribution of the inclusions was
random. The higher level of sphericity that distinguishes a certain group
of inclusions consisted solely of bright white inclusions, resembling
crystals on the 3D model (Fig. 5:BS1; Appendix B; Fig. 9). Given their
size, the occurrence inside the ceramic paste seems to be of natural
origin. Considering their high density, we are most likely dealing with
heavy minerals of some kind. These are a common component of eolian
sediments. Similar objects in ceramics from the Hamburg-Boberg site are
interpreted in the same way (Kahl and Ramminger, 2012). Our inter-
pretation of the obtained results is that no temper was intentionally
added to the ceramic mass during its preparation, and, on the other
hand, the mass was not purified by releasing coarser impurities. This
fully coincides with the published results of µ-CT scans of Pavlovian
ceramic pellets from DV I (Farbstein and Davies, 2017).
4.2. The provenance of the sediment in the ceramic paste
Despite rather negative results, the gained insights can be used to
improve our provenience knowledge of the sediments utilised in the
ceramic paste by combining our information about the composition of
the paste and the taphonomy analysis. The used sediment was calcar-
eous, which is illustrated by the presence of CaCO3 nodules (Fig. 5:P47)
and secondarily formed structures inside the cracks located in the inner
part of the statuette. Calcareous sediments are represented by loess in
Fig. 7. Comparison of the porosity derived from μCT scans of the Venus (A -
anterior view and B - superior view) and a lump of the original cultural layer
from the Dolní Vˇestonice site (C). The ceramic paste of the Venus is more
compressed in comparison to the original loess. Visualisation by P. Neruda.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
13
the area of Dolní Vˇestonice. Even the presence of heavy minerals, which
are a common part of loess, would not deviate from such a classification
(Britannica, August 13, 2010). The original loess in situ is a clastic,
predominantly silt-size sediment without any rock components. The
only coarse components of a loess sediment are the CaCO3 concretions.
In the case of the Venus's ceramic paste, we recognised inclusions,
mostly among inclusions larger than 2 mm3, that represent different
rocks and Jurassic microfossils. It most likely means that the calcareous
sediment is a type of loess contaminated by other sediments. If we refer
to the cultural layer in Dolní Vˇestonice, we can find a loess-based sedi-
ment contaminated by sediments of Tertiary age and weathered Jurassic
bedrock. The outlined interpretation does not contradict the results of an
earlier chemical analysis of a ceramic fragment from the body of the
Venus (Vandiver et al., 1989). Therefore, we assume that the main
sediment for the ceramic paste was taken from the archaeological site
area. However, the absence of hard animal tissue fragments and stone
artefacts, which are typically found within a cultural layer, suggests that
the material used to make the Venus was selected from an area outside
the main living areas. It would have to be an area where the loess was
contaminated by subsurface sediments, similar to the situation on the
archaeological site. Farbstein and Davies proposed that the building
sediment was a naturally wet sediment found along the river Dyje
(Farbstein and Davies, 2017). We cannot reject this theory; nonetheless,
it is necessary to point out that a wet sediment could have been found
even within the area of the site, for example, in puddles or depressions in
the ground. Such places could be represented in Dolní Vˇestonice I by the
watery terrain groove, on the western edge of which there was a deposit
of mammoth bones. This place is about 20 m away from the spot where
the Venus was found (Fig. 1:D). In this area, the contaminated loess
sediments were well documented (Klíma, 1963; Nov´ak et al., 2023).
Moreover, the water could have been added to the sediment intention-
ally (Vandiver et al., 1989).
4.3. Chaînes operatoires remarks
The new µ-CT images can have a significant impact on the ongoing
discussion about the questions related to the technological process used
to produce the figurine. Given that it was not previously possible to
examine the internal structures of the Venus in detail, there are certain
debates regarding the technological process used to create it, specifically
Fig. 8. Analysis of the punctures located on the top of the head and their comparison to the reference samples. A - position of 4 holes on the top of the head of the
Venus head; B - segmented 2D model, cf. colours on A; a cross-section through one hole, the white matrix is carbonate; D - dimension of individual holes; E −
morphology of eyes created in semi-dry ceramic paste; F -reference samples (Phantom 5) with holes made by a small pigeon feather to a semi-dry ceramic paste,
borders of holes are rounded (see white arrows), similar to B; G -reference samples (Phantom 5) with holes made by a small pigeon feather to a wet ceramic paste, the
shape of 3D imprints differs from imprints of original holes on the Venus's head (B) - borders of holes in cross-section create are sharp and the ceramic paste is pulled
out into the small ridge (blue and white arrows). Segmentation and visualisation by P. Neruda.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
14
whether an additive method (Vandiver et al., 1989), a non-additive
method (Farbstein and Davies, 2017), or a combination of both
methods were used (Bougard, 2011; Farbstein and Davies, 2017;
Gonyˇsevov´a, 1999). Regarding the Venus itself, it seems easier not to
have shaped the statue as a single piece, including the head and breasts,
but rather to have fashioned them separately and then joined them
together, possibly using organic tools. Alternatively, additional material
could have been added to the specific parts of the core form in order to
attach any protruding details of the body. The use of additive techniques
in the process of making post-Palaeolithic figurines has been confirmed
in various instances by applying microtomography (Kreiter et al., 2014;
Pavel et al., 2013; Pizzeghello et al., 2015). Moreover, the additive
approach is indicated by multiple examples, including a broken-off
breast fragment from the middle part of the archaeological site (Fig. 1:
D and Fig. 11:D), other detached pieces of the body (Fig. 11:C, E, and F),
broken heads (Fig. 11:A and B), and the lower part of legs (Fig. 11:G and
H).
Nevertheless, a shrinkage gap between joined regions is usually
visible (Kreiter, 2008) and is considered radiological evidence for
slab-built vessels (Berg and Ambers, 2016). Such joins are used for the
reconstruction of technological processes used for making Neolithic
hand-made pottery (Kozatsas et al., 2018). Experimentally made phan-
toms also show joins between construction units (see Fig. 6:F and G).
Only through the use of wet clays and the application of strong forces
Fig. 9. Cracks and cavities inside the body of the Venus in cross-sections (A) and longitudinal sections (B), C - position and size of cracks that are not connected to the
surface, D - position and size of all cracks. The cracks were formed during the firing process of the artefact. Segmentation and Visualisation by P. Neruda.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
15
that cause homogenising adhesion can traces of joins among individual
construction units be thoroughly eliminated (Kozatsas et al., 2018).
Such conditions are difficult to fulfil in the case of figurines because the
application of strong force in one direction affects the shape of the
figurine on the opposite side.
The analysis of radial, horizontal, and tangential sections did not
uncover any joined regions among possible individual parts of the
Venus. The one join area is visible only on the outer part of the left breast
and has an irregular shape that corresponds with the micromorphology
of the rough dry join type (for definition see Kozatsas et al., 2018). It was
most likely created by pressing a piece of semi-dry material of the breast
towards the body during the shaping of this part. All this suggests that
the creator used a non-additive method. There are a few more instances
of the use of the non-additive method across the area inhabited by the
Pavlovian people, as noted by Farbstein and Davies (2017).
Additionally, the experimental phantoms revealed that the final
details on the surface, such as the legs, navel, eyes, and punctures on the
head, were made on partially dried ceramic material by using a pointed
tool. Thus, the results correspond with the previously published analysis
of animal figures found in Dolní Vˇestonice (Farbstein and Davies, 2017).
It would be useful to compare different techniques for the prepara-
tion of ceramic paste, particularly in comparison with other experi-
mental figurines. It could be interesting, for example, to compare the
porosity of several Palaeolithic statuettes, possibly original pieces and
copies made experimentally, using different methods according to
methodological procedures developed for studying historical bricks
(Reedy and Reedy, 2022a). Our data suggests that the statuette was
shaped from a piece of ceramic pasted moulded into some kind of cy-
lindrical form. This is indicated by the vertical distribution of the main
cracks in the material (Fig. 9), a certain directing of pores and inclusions
into layers following the shape of the Venus in cross-section (Fig. 7:A
and B). From the technological processes of ceramic moulding, this
would correspond to the so-called pinching (Berg and Ambers, 2016) or
moulding (Kozatsas et al., 2018; Middleton, 2005) techniques, although
Fig. 10. Structures inside the cracks and two drilled holes. A - orthoViews of the growths in the cracks in the head area, B - segmented 3D models of growth
structures that represent CaCo3-based crystals. C and D - position and E −the shape of probes drilled into the body of the Venus, probably under the curation of Karel
Absolon. The white arrow indicates an inclusion that could serve as the source of data for Absolon. Segmentation and visualisation by P. Neruda.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
16
the terminology created to describe the production of vessels is difficult
to apply to figurative plastic art.
An interesting question arises regarding the level of ceramic tech-
nology in the Gravettian period. According to Bougard (2011), the
process of ceramic use was standardised, allowing for the transfer of
manufacturing information from generation to generation in a consis-
tent form. This theory is supported by multiple findings of statuettes
from Dolní Vˇestonice I, II, and Pavlov I. However, this resemblance does
not provide any information about how the ceramic material was pro-
cessed and fired. Considering the technology, Farbstein and Davies
previously pointed out, based on the results of µ-CT images of animal
figurines, the experimental character of this new technology in the
Palaeolithic (Farbstein and Davies, 2017). This conclusion can be sup-
ported by the results of this analysis. The character of the ceramic paste
suggests the presence of non-standardised coarse inclusions that have
affected the homogeneity of the paste and the result of the firing process.
The cracks and fractures visible on the figurine were not the result of
deliberate manipulation, as was the case with some animal Palaeolithic
figurines (Soffer and Vandiver, 1994).
4.4. Taphonomy and its implication for future protection
The scans revealed frequent cracks inside the body of the Venus,
some of which are not connected to the surface. There are two main
issues arising from this discovery.
Firstly, the cracks reduce the homogeneity of the material, increasing
the impact resistance, mainly in the area of the abdomen or head. The
second issue is related to the enclosed cavities, which can lead to
structural destabilisation caused by a rapid drop in atmospheric pres-
sure. This can be especially challenging while transporting the figurine.
It is highly unlikely that the missing part of the lower limbs will ever
be found. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that their original shape was
pointed, as we can illustrate in examples of similar figurine fragments
found in Dolní Vˇestonice (Fig. 11:G and H).
4.5. Methodological remarks for μCT scanning and image processing
For the scan of the statue itself, we chose a helical (spiral) trajectory
and acquisition scheme, which is suitable for iterative data reconstruc-
tion. Thanks to the helical trajectory, we were able to scan more than
half of the statuette's volume in one pass. Thus, two scans were enough
Fig. 11. Fragments of other finds of Venuses found at the Dolní Vˇestonice site. A-B heads, C fragment of a body, D fragment of breasts, E-F fragments of middle parts
of Venuses, G-H fragments of legs. A-C and G the collection of the Archaeological Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences; D-F and H the collection of the
Anthropos Institute of Moravian Museum. Drawings A-D according to Klíma (1983), E-H Klíma (1981) and photos D, E, F and H made by J. C´aga (archive of the
Moravian Museum).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
17
for the entire acquisition of the statuette, including the phantoms. If we
were to use a more traditional circular scan, there would be up to 6 scans
that would require stitching together. The data would thus be more
significantly disturbed by the so-called stitching artefact, which would
reduce the accuracy of later data analysis (Kalender, 2011).
Using the helical trajectory, the sample moves in two axes during the
scan - rotational and translational, which makes it more difficult to
maintain the exact positions of the acquisition scheme, especially if we
want to achieve resolution in the order of micrometres. However, an
algorithm can be used to reconstruct the data. This can compensate for
the mechanical inaccuracy of the sample movement during scanning
and thus achieve a perfect scan trajectory (Varslot et al., 2011).
A significant problem was identified within the statistical processing
of the original data set. The exploratory analysis of the original dataset
discovered erroneous records (corrupted data) that represent approxi-
mately 5%-10% of all records, depending on the feature being exam-
ined. These records included faulty values in relation to their physical
characteristics, such as an elongation value of −1, which is beyond the
possible range between 0 and 1. Similar problems appeared in the
context of other features, such as anisotropy or flatness. It is crucial to
point out that all of these erroneous values had a minuscule volume with
a maximum volume of 0.000034 mm3 and an average volume of
0.000009 mm3.
4.6. Gravettian ceramic production
Despite the relatively lower level of technological advancement in
ceramic production during the Gravettian period compared to later
prehistoric periods, it was a cultural practice firmly rooted in the
Gravettian population in much of Central Europe and the Central Dan-
ube region (Fig. 12). Based on the discovery of various forms of figu-
rative art in complete or fragmentary form, the centre of Gravettian
ceramic technology is believed to have been located near the Pavlov
Hills in Moravia. However, it is important to note that the Dolní
Vˇestonice I (Bougard, 2011; Oliva, 2015; Svoboda, 2020) and Pavlov I
(Bougard, 2011; Farbstein and Davies, 2015, García Diez, 2005; Svo-
boda, 2020) sites, both located in the area, are the only sites that have
provided rich collections of largely preserved human and animal stat-
uettes. Other findings from sites such as Pavlov VI (Svoboda et al., 2009)
or Krems-Wachtberg (Einw¨ogerer and Simon, 2008; H¨andel et al., 2009)
only consist of pieces of animal statuettes, while findings from Pavlov II,
Borˇsice-Chr´astka, Dolní Vˇestonice II, and Pˇrerov-Pˇredmostí are only
oval-shaped or conically-shaped clods of ceramic material that cannot
be classified as figurative art (Bougard, 2011; Gonyˇsevov´a, 1999; Kr´alík
et al., 2008; Soffer and Vandiver, 1994, 1997, 2005). Nevertheless, most
of these fragments have an irregular shape, making it difficult to
determine whether they are associated with ceramic production or are
just a by-product of any human-conducted firing process. When looking
at regions outside of Central Europe and the Danube area, there are
other sites with animal figurative art discoveries, for example, Vela Spila
in Croatia (Farbstein et al., 2012) which belongs to the Epigravettian
culture, or ceramic fragments from Kostenki (Zheltova and Yanshina,
2015).
Fig. 12. Map of the distribution of burnt clay in Europe. The yellow colour in the map (upper) indicates the position of the Czech Republic. Map P. Neruda, using
SRTM90mDEMver4 (Jarvis et al., 2008).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
18
5. Conclusion
μ-CT scanning of the Venus of Dolní Vˇestonice provided high-
resolution images that enabled the study of the inner structure in
detail. By studying orthoslices and segmented 3D models, we confirmed
that the Venus was made of a loess-based sediment with a natural
admixture of Jurassic rocks derived from the bedrock. This finding
aligns with the composition of the cultural layer in Dolní Vˇestonice.
Several fragments of Jurassic microfossils were identified inside the
figurine's body. However, Karel Absolon's conjecture regarding possible
fragments of mammoth tusks and bones inside the building material of
the Venus was disproved. A similar outcome applies to the theory of the
possible symbolic placement of small objects inside the body. In addition
to this, the spatial distribution of small rock particles does not indicate
any intentional manipulation of the content of the building material in
this sense, since the distribution is random and without any visible
clusters. On the other hand, the analysis showed interesting results
regarding the technique of forming the statuette, where a so-called non-
additive technique seems to be the most likely procedure chosen by the
creator. Subsequently, we can assert that indented elements such as four
holes, eyes, and a navel on the surface were pushed into the semi-dry
ceramic material. The discovery of fairly frequent internal cracks
represent another interesting finding from the point of view of
taphonomy. Under certain conditions, these could cause the disinte-
gration of the statuette, which must be taken into consideration while
manipulating the Venus.
Competing interest declaration
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
The original data are stored in the Moravian Museum and Thermo
Fisher Scientific (both Brno, Czech Republic). Statistical analyses are
available on GitHub. The authors declare no competing financial in-
terests. Readers are welcome to comment on the online version of the
paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Petr Neruda: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft,
Visualization, Investigation, Conceptualization. Petr Hamrozi: Writing
- original draft, Formal analysis. Zuzana Pat´akov´a: Writing - original
draft, Resources, Project administration. Grzegorz Pyka: Resources,
Data curation. Frantiˇsek Zelenka: Writing - original draft, Resources,
Data curation. ˇS´arka Hladilov´a: Writing - original draft, Investigation.
Martin Oliva: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft. Eva
Ors´agov´a: Visualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This paper was financially supported by the Ministry of Culture of the
Czech Republic through institutional financing of the long-term con-
ceptual development of the research institution (the Moravian Museum,
MK000094862) for the years 2024-2028. We would like to thank
Sebastian Pfeifer from Friedrich-Schiller-University in Jena (Germany)
who provided small fragments of fresh ivory. We would like to also
acknowledge the efforts of the police of the Czech Republic for providing
protection during the transport and scanning of the Venus. We express
gratitude to the laboratory of the Archaeological Institute of the Mora-
vian Museum for the burning of reference samples.
Appendix A. - Statistical analysis
1. Explonatory analysis
Original dataset for the statistical analysis was generated by the Avizo software in Standard Shape Analysis format, which consisted of 102,515
records and 37 different features (see original dataset).
During the exploratory analysis of the original dataset, a huge percentage of erroneous records were discovered, representing approximately 5%-
10% of all records depending on the feature being examined. These records included faulty values in relation to their physical characteristics, such as
the elongation value of −1, which is beyond the possible range between 0 and 1. Similar problems appeared in the context of other features, such as
anisotropy or flatness. It is crucial to point out that all of these erroneous values had a minuscule volume with a maximum volume of 0.000034 mm3
and an average volume of 0.000009 mm3.
To prevent any misleading results, all erroneous records were removed from the subsequent analysis. In addition to the invalid values that were
identified, other outliers were detected with values that were extremely close to 0 or 0.99 for anisotropy, elongation, and flatness. Although these
values do fall within the acceptable range for these parameters. As none of these outliers appeared in the group of particles that had a volume of 2 mm3
or greater, their thorough analysis was deemed unnecessary for the scope of this study.
Furthermore, there were over 10 unnecessary features (such as eigenvectors and eigenvalues) generated automatically by the software AVIZO for
processing the CT images that were not required for our analysis. All these features were as well not utilised in subsequent analyses. In total, eight
features were used from the original data file including all particle coordinates (barycenter x, barycenter y, barycenter z), volume, voxel face area,
anisotropy, elongation, and flatness (Tables 1 and 2, and preprocessed data).
Table 1
Summary statistics of the entire cleaned dataset.
Statistics
Features
Volume [mm3]
Anisotropy
Elongation
Flatness
VoxelFaceArea [mm2]
Sphericity
count
92320
92320
92320
92320
92320
92320
mean
0.010785
0.746096
0.539786
0.474873
0.162819
0.643407
std
0.380968
0.182282
0.230214
0.265469
1.725816
0.070223
min
1.36E-05
0.000357
1.20E-21
0
0.003584
0.167262
(continued on next page)
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
19
Table 1 (continued)
Statistics
Features
Volume [mm3]
Anisotropy
Elongation
Flatness
VoxelFaceArea [mm2]
Sphericity
25%
7.47E-05
0.628122
0.361577
0.278658
0.012904
0.608038
50%
0.00021
0.771202
0.535856
0.489836
0.026525
0.650886
75%
0.000733
0.890259
0.713814
0.678028
0.063803
0.68979
max
91.7529
1
0.99998
1
244.736
0.805996
Table 2
Summary statistics of particles with a volume greater than or equal 2 mm3.
Statistics
Features
Volume [mm3]
Anisotropy
Elongation
Flatness
VoxelFaceArea [mm2]
Sphericity
count
69
69
69
69
69
69
mean
7.194427
0.749591
0.522337
0.490613
43.18686
0.399711
std
11.87967
0.138979
0.190592
0.223466
40.25292
0.082241
min
2.05733
0.373645
0.141648
0.094506
15.814
0.222475
25%
2.64934
0.659225
0.399644
0.304423
22.9474
0.334487
50%
3.76338
0.762504
0.492984
0.491434
29.3879
0.406799
75%
7.21237
0.860182
0.672624
0.626743
44.7756
0.464705
max
91.7529
0.96651
0.917335
0.959761
244.736
0.557364
2. Descriptive statistic
Besides the features automatically generated by the AVIZO software, another feature so called sphericity was calculated. This feature is one of the
most useful ways to describe non-spherical objects, describing how closely the shape of a measured object approaches the sphere shape. It is conveyed
as a value between 0 and 1. To calculate the sphericity of a particle the surface area (Ap) and the volume (Vp) were used Wadell's sphericity factor
(Wadell, 1932), defined as: ψ = (̂π1 /3 (6Vp)ˆ2 /3)/Ap, where Ap is the area of a particle and Vp is the volume of a particle (see sphericity).
The entire cleaned dataset was at first examined as a whole, however, due to a significant overlap caused by the sheer number of particles, a
hypothetical boundary was set under the assumption that smaller particles, could not have been deliberately added to the building material of the
Venus for any intended purpose. The boundary was established based on a particle volume of two cubic millimetres, which is roughly equivalent to the
size of a small grain of rice. This distinction is significant from the perspective of exploring the intentional addition of distinct particles into the ceramic
paste, mostly for symbolic purposes. To investigate this hypothesis we decided to look for potential clusters of material within the body of Venus.
Initially, we decided to use a clustering technique for all scanned particles no matter what size. Secondly, a more doable approach was chosen by
limiting the data input for an unsupervised algorithm only to records with a total volume of 2 mm3 or more, totalling to 69 particles. Despite being a
small subset, these particles constitute 49.9% of the overall volume of all particles obtained from the cleaned dataset. Clustering analysis was selected
as the method to identify potential patterns in the dataset based on similarities in the feature values. In particular, K-means++ was utilised as the
primary technique for pattern recognition due to its simplicity and efficiency. The WSS (within-cluster sum of squares) and silhouette score were used
as the primary metrics to determine the optimal number of clusters (K). The crucial input parameters used for the clustering algorithm were the space
coordinates (BaryCenters) of all scanned particles. After applying the elbow method with the WSS metric, 2 clusters were designated. The null hy-
pothesis (H0) for this case was defined as there is no significant difference regarding the mean values of the physical measurements between the first
and second clusters.
H0 : μ1 −
μ2 = 0
These measurements include anisotropy, elongation, flatness and sphericity. As the main statistical test, two-sample t-test was chosen, where the
first cluster contains 37 particles and the second one 32. The p-values for all the differences between two samples for each feature were greater than
0.05, indicating that there was no significant difference between any of these samples.
Subsequently, we tried to group our particles based on their physical features including anisotropy, elongation, flatness and sphericity. Initially, a
PCA analysis was conducted on standardised (z-score) features of particles with a volume of 2 mm3 and more. Only two components were taken into
consideration as they account for more than 80% of the total variance. The K-means++ algorithm was applied to the PCA scores obtained earlier. To
determine the optimal number of clusters, the elbow method was employed and determined that three clusters would be the best choice. We then
labelled our original data according to the resulting cluster designations and plotted it in a 3D scatterplot. The first two clusters exhibited overlap,
whereas the third cluster formed a relatively homogenous group in the upper torso area of the Venus.
The distinctiveness of this particular cluster was indicated by its high average anisotropy value (0.880) and very low average flatness value (0.251).
Although the original volume threshold only identified 69 particles, we chose to reduce the threshold from 2 mm3 to 1 mm3 in order to increase the
number of particles in our analysis. By doing so, we were able to reduce the uncertainty of our results and increase the probability of correctly rejecting
the null hypothesis.
The same procedure as for the particles greater than or equal to 2 mm3 was applied to the particles with a volume greater than 1 mm3. The result
clusters were far less distinct from each other from a physical perspective and their spatial distribution was rather evenly spaced without any distinct
agglomerations across the figurine's body. Considering that the k-means algorithm belongs to so-called non-deterministic (stochastic) methods and
the result interpretability and the performance evaluation are not as trivial as in the case of supervised learning algorithms.
Our third approach to address the clustering problem involved dividing the figurine into six equal-sized parts along the vertical axis, using the
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
20
BarycenterZ coordinates. Particular attention was given again to the particles with a volume greater than or equal to 2 mm3. The mean values of the
physical features were found to be quite similar across all six parts, and the proportion of particles with a volume of 2 mm3 or greater in a given part of
the Venus figurine ranged from 0.34% in the head part slice to 0.82% in the upper torso part slice. These proportions did not show any significant
fluctuations (see. clustering).
Appendix B. - description of inclusions ≥2 mm3
Appendix B Fig. 1. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 1: Compact prism particles with slightly rounded edges and prominent veins running through
them (some examples indicated by red arrows. Orthoviews: XY (right-top), XZ (right-bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Numbers correspond to particles in Fig. 4:A.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
21
Appendix B Fig. 2. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 2: particles cf. Group 1 with disintegrated structures. Orthoviews: XY (right-top), XZ (right-
bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Numbers correspond to particles in Fig. 4:A.
Appendix B Fig. 3. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 3: inclusions with disintegrated structures with higher density parts (the best example
indicated by red arrows and blue and red parts of 3D model P15), slightly rounded edges and eroded surfaces (see 3D models in blue and red colours and blue).
Orthoviews: XY (right-top), XZ (right-bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Numbers correspond to particles in Fig. 4:A.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
22
Appendix B Fig. 4. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 4: inclusions with a slightly rounded shape and with a porphyritic inner texture. Orthoviews:
XY (right-top), XZ (right-bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Numbers correspond to particles in Fig. 4:A.
Appendix B Fig. 5. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 5: higher density particles, relatively homogenous, from irregular (cf. the blue 3D model P47)
to rounded shapes (cf. the 3D model P41). Orthoviews: XY (right-top), XZ (right-bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Numbers correspond to particles in Fig. 4:A.
Appendix B Fig. 6. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 6: oval particles with an irregular internal structure. Orthoviews: XY (right-top), XZ (right-
bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Numbers correspond to particles in Fig. 4:A.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
23
Appendix B Fig. 7. Catalogue of inclusions bigger than 2 mm3. Group 6: microfossils. White arrows indicate the position on orthoviews, red arrows the position of
fossils among the surrounding particles (P18 and P29, right images) and in the body of Venus (Px1). 3D models segmented in red colour, view into objects - silver
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
24
parts. Orthoviews: XY (right-top), XZ (right-bottom), YZ (left-bottom). Images and models by P.N, classification by ˇS.H.
P18. unidentified organic object
Orthophoto (right side) - an object with a cylindrical shape that bends into a hook-like structure. It is approximately 7 mm in length and 0.2 mm in
width.
The 3D image (in the middle, in red) indicates approx. circular cross-sectional view of the object, furthermore, there are at least 3 small holes of the
same size, evenly spaced from each other and a continuous groove that extends throughout the object's entire length. There are structures similar to
incremental lines, at one place, the outer layer of these structures is visibly peeling off.
Orthophoto (left side) - longitudinal section, cylindrical shape, an object is slightly bent with thick edges accounting for approx. 4/5 of the total
diameter. There is a visible cavity stretching throughout the entire length (its diameter is approx. 1/5 of the whole). Transverse structures (segments)
are not well visible in the image. Transverse cross-sections of approximately elliptical shape, with 'grooves' visible on their perimeters that reach up to
"the central canal"?
P29
class: Crinoidea indet. (sea-lilies), order: ?Isocrinida
On the left side in orthophotos and the 3D model in the middle, two segments that are still connected (pluricolumnal) are visible (white arrows).
The outlines of the crinoid columnals show a five-part radial symmetry and the hole in the centre of the columnal is a part of the so-called axial canal.
On the right side of the orthophotos, isolated segments of various types of crinoids are clearly visible. P29 indicated by red arrows.
P39
class: Crinoidea indet. (sea-lilies), order: ?Isocrinida
Both in orthophotos and in the 3D images a part of crinoid stem is visible, which is formed by 4 connected columns (pluricolumnalium; indicated
by white arrows).
In the orthophotos is noticeable a five-part radial symmetry, in particular resp. the pentagonal shape of columnals. Dimensions of the fossil: total
length 2.45 mm, diameter 0.993 mm, height of one segment 0.377 mm.
P62 ?Invertebrata indet
Unidentified organic object. When viewed in orthophotos, the object has a slightly curved, cylindrical shape with a length of around 2 mm. In
cross-section, it appears more circular in shape. The central part of the object is filled with a solid substance, while the surface appears more structured,
with free spaces or cavities, arranged in transverse sections in a (semi)circular, arc-shaped pattern (with indications of gradual enlargement?).
The 3D photographs show that the surface of the object is more complex with many cavities (images on the right). One end of the object seems more
rounded, while the other end has a slight depression (with unclear symmetry).
Px1
?Gastropoda indet
An object, which is roughly oval-shaped, has a circular outline and appears approximately spherical. This can be observed both in orthophotos and
3D images, and has a diameter of 0.684 mm. In the orthophotos, the object appears to be hollow inside (cf. red views). There are two visible holes, one
located roughly in the middle with a hexagonal to circular outline, and the other one is located closer to the edge of the object with a more crescent-like
shape.
Inside this second hole, there are poorly visible and indistinct internal structures resembling radial, slightly curved, thin, and parallel lamellae. The
3D images (Px1) provide almost no additional relevant information for a more precise determination of the object, except for the slight indications of
an indistinct spiral structure in the image located in the centre of the upper-left corner and the image located on the bottom-left.
Px2
unidentified organic object
In the orthoimages, there is an elongated, almost cylindrical, roughly bilaterally symmetrical object with a length of 1.43 mm. It is open at one end
and rather closed at the other one. Inside, there is a central cavity, whose diameter in the cross-section is about 1/3 of the total diameter of the element.
In the middle of the cavity, there is a distinct "rod-like" structure: at the open end of the object, its first roughly quarter is thickened and pointed,
the second quarter is narrowed, the third quarter irregularly expands and fills almost the entire internal cavity of the object, and the last quarter is
again somewhat narrowed (its diameter is roughly the same as the diameter of the tapered part). In the 3D images, a segmented structure of the inner
surface of the central cavity and the tapered part of the rod-like structure are visible.
Px4
Phylum: ?Echinodermata indet. (echinoderms)
An object of rod-like shape, hollow inside, dimensions approximately 1.2 × 0.3 mm, in the 3D image there is an indication of segmentation
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
25
(comparable to samples P29 and P39) and an inner canal.
Appendix B Fig. 8. Reference raw materials in phantoms. A1-A3 - orthoslices of a fresh bone (heating temperature of burning 400 ◦C), A4 - cf. A1 (600 ◦C), A5 -
orthoslices of a bone from an original Gravettian layer (not burnt pantom), A6 - a segmented model of A5 (pink). White arrows indicate bone pores, pink arrows a
cancellous bone. B1-B2 - orthoslices an elephant ivory (400 ◦C), B3-B4 - orthoslices of an ivory (600 ◦C), a segmented 3D mocel of A1; C1 - orthoslice of a mesolithic
charcoal in Phantom 3 (600 ◦C), C2 - a segmented model of C1, C3-C4 - orthoslices and a segmented 3D model charcoal from an original gravettian layer; D1-D2 -
orthoslices and segmented 3D model of quarz fragments (600 ◦C), D3 - a rock, cf. hematite from an original Gravettian layer (600 ◦C), D4 - the comparisond of D1
(lower part) and D3 (upperpart) in Phantom 6, D5-D7 - orthoslices and segmented 3D models of rocks from an original Gravettian layer (600 ◦C), D7 - a porphytitic
rock from an original Gravettian layer (not burnt); E1 - carbonate nodules from Dolní Vˇestonice site loess; F1-F3 - orthoslices and segmented models of flint (red
models and arrows) chipped chips from an original Gravettian layer (F1-F2; not burnt) and experimentaly made small flake (F3; 600 ◦C).
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
26
Appendix B Fig. 9. Segmented 3D model of bright spots (small examples indicated by white arrows). It is likely that the bright spots are heavy minerals as they
exhibit crystal-like shapes. Orthoviews: XY (right top), XZ (right bottom), YZ (left bottom).
Appendix C. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2024.106034.
References
Absolon, K., 1929. An amazing palaeolithic "pompeii" in Moravia: II. Revelations
concerning the mammoth-hunters of central Europe. The Illustrated London News
November 30, 934-938.
Absolon, K., 1938a. Die Erforschung der diluvialen Mammutj¨ager-Station von Unter-
Wisternitz an den Pollauer Bergen in M¨ahren. Arbeitsbericht über das erste Jahr,
1924, Studien aus dem Gebiete der allgemeinen Karstforschung, der
wissenschaftlichen H¨ohlenkunde, der Eiszeitforschung und den Nachbargebieten,
Palaeoethnologische Serie 5, Barviˇc & Novotný, Brünn.
Absolon, K., 1938b. Die Erforschung der diluvialen Mammutj¨ager-Station von Unter-
Wisternitz an den Pollauer Bergen in M¨ahren. Arbeitsbericht über das zweite Jahr
1925, Studien aus dem Gebiete der allgemeinen Karstforschung, der
wissenschaftlichen H¨ohlenkunde, der Eiszeitforschung und den Nachbargebieten.
Palaeoethnologische Serie 6 (9). Barviˇc a Novotný, Brünn.
Absolon, K., Zapletal, K., 1945. Výzkum diluvi´alní stanice lovců mamutů v Dolních
Vˇestonicích na Pavlovských kopcích na Moravˇe : pracovní zpr´ava za tˇretí rok 1926.
Sdˇelení z palaeolithick´eho oddˇelení Moravsk´eho zemsk´eho muzea, Barviˇc &
Novotný, Brno.
Anderson, T., Fell, C., 1995. Analysis of roman cremation vessels by computerized
tomography. J. Archaeol. Sci. 22, 609-617. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-4403
(95)80146-4.
Applbaum, N., Applbaum, Y.H., 2005. The use of medical computed tomography (CT)
imaging in the study of ceramic and clay archaeological artifacts from the ancient
near east. In: Uda, M., Demortier, G., Nakai, I. (Eds.), X-Rays for Archaeology.
Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, pp. 231-245.
Berg, I., Ambers, J., 2016. Radiography of archaeological ceramics. In: Hunt, A. (Ed.),
The Oxford Handbook of Archaeological Ceramic Analysis. Oxford University Press.
Bernardini, F., Leghissa, E., Prokop, D., Veluˇsˇcek, A., De Min, A., Dreossi, D., Donato, S.,
Tuniz, C., Princivalle, F., Montagnari Kokelj, M., 2019. X-ray computed
microtomography of Late Copper Age decorated bowls with cross-shaped foots from
central Slovenia and the Trieste Karst (North-Eastern Italy): technology and paste
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
27
characterisation. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 11, 4711-4728.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-019-00811-w.
Bougard, E., 2011. Les c´eramiques gravettiennes de Moravie : derniers apports des
recherches actuelles. L'Anthropologie 115, 465-504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
anthro.2011.05.007.
Braun, D.P., 1982. Radiographic analysis of temper in ceramic vessels: goals and initial
methods. J. Field Archaeol. 9, 183-192. https://doi.org/10.2307/529476.
Britannica, T.E.o.E., 2010. loess. August 13 Encyclopedia Britannica. Access date: 21.11.
https://www.britannica.com/science/loess.
Cˆarciumaru, M., Nițu, E.-C., Obad˘a, T., Cîrstina, O., Covalenco, S., Lupu, F.I., Leu, M.,
Nicolae, A., 2019. Personal ornaments in the mid upper palaeolithic east of the
carpathians. PALEO - Revue d'arch´eologie pr´ehistorique 30, 80-97. https://doi.org/
10.4000/paleo.4446.
Carr, C., 1990. Advances in ceramic radiography and analysis: applications and
potentials. J. Archaeol. Sci. 17, 13-34. https://doi.org/10.1016/0305-4403(90)
90013-U.
Carr, C., 1993. Identifying individual vessels with X-radiography. Am. Antiq. 58, 96-117.
https://doi.org/10.2307/281456.
Carr, C., Komorowski, J.-C., 1990. Nondestructive evaluation of the mineralogy of rock
temper in ceramics using X-radiography. MRS Proceedings 185, 435. https://doi.
org/10.1557/PROC-185-435.
ˇCÚZK, 2017. Prohlíˇzecí sluˇzba WMS - DMR 5G (Stínovaný model reli´efu). In: ˇCeský Úˇrad
Zemˇemˇeˇrický a Katastr´alní, 2017-05-29.
ˇCÚZK, 2021. Prohlíˇzecí sluˇzba WMS - ZABAGED®. In: ˇCeský Úˇrad Zemˇemˇeˇrický a
Katastr´alní, 2021-12-21.
Einw¨ogerer, T., Simon, U., 2008. Die gravettienfundstelle krems-wachtberg. Arch¨aologie
¨Osterreichs 19, 38-42.
Farbstein, R., Davies, W., 2017. Palaeolithic ceramic technology: the artistic origins and
impacts of a technological innovation. Quat. Int. 441, 3-11. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.quaint.2016.11.012.
Farbstein, R., Radi´c, D., Brajkovi´c, D., Miracle, P.T., 2012. First epigravettian ceramic
figurines from Europe (Vela Spila, Croatia). PLoS One 7, e41437. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0041437.
Farbstein, R.A., Davies, W., 2015. Rediscovering paleolithic art: overlooked ceramic
figurines from the pavlovian. In: S´azelov´a, S., Nov´ak, M., Mizerov´a, A. (Eds.),
Forgotten Times and Spaces, Institute of Archeology of the Czech Academy of
Sciences, Brno. v.v.i. and Masaryk University, Brno, pp. 328-339.
Fiori, M.G., Nunzi, M.G., 1995. The earliest documented applications of X-rays to
examination of mummified remains and archaeological materials. J. R. Soc. Med. 88,
67-69.
Flügel, E., 2004. Microfacies of Carbonate Rocks. Analysis, Interpretation and
Application. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg.
Gait, J., Bajnok, K., Szil´agyi, V., Szenti, I., Kukovecz, ´A., Kis, Z., 2022. Quantitative 3D
orientation analysis of particles and voids to differentiate hand-built pottery forming
techniques using X-ray microtomography and neutron tomography. Archaeological
and Anthropological Sciences 14, 223. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12520-022-01688-
y.
García Diez, M., 2005. Chapter IV.1. Catalogue of worked ceramic pieces. In: Svoboda, A.
J. (Ed.), Pavlov I SouthEast. A Window into the Gravettian Lifestyle, the Dolní
Vˇestonice Studies, 14, pp. 399-414. Brno.
Gonyˇsevov´a, M., 1999. Experimental reconstruction of Gravettian pottery artefacts and
oven (Moravia, Czech Republic). L'Anthropologie 103, 519-530.
H¨andel, M., Simon, U., Einw¨ogerer, T., Neugebauer-Maresch, C., 2009. New excavations
at Krems-Wachtberg - approaching a well-preserved Gravettian settlement site in the
middle Danube region. Quartar 56, 187-196. https://doi.org/10.7485/QU56_11.
Hladilov´a, ˇS., 2011. Chapter II.6. Tertiary and quaternary molluscs from Pavlov VI. In:
Svoboda, A.J. (Ed.), Pavlov. Excavations 2007-2011, the Dolní Vˇestonice Studies, 18,
pp. 54-60. Brno.
Hloˇzek, M., Krupa, P., Kˇrístek, J., 2008. Aplikace Poˇcítaˇcov´e Tomografie (CT) V
Archaeologii, Antropologii a Konzervaci, Muzea, Pam´atky, Konzervace. Technick´e
muzeum v Brnˇe, Brno.
Holzknecht, M., Hamrˇsmíd, B., 1988. Mikrofauna malmu ve vrtu Nov´e Mlýny - 3 (jiˇzní
Morava, ˇCSSR). Miscellanea micropaleontologica 16, 21-59.
Houˇsa, V., Scheibner, E., Str´aník, Z., 1963. Tithonian stratigraphy of west carpathians.
Geol. Sb. 14, 3-17.
Hughes, S., 2011. CT scanning in archaeology. In: Luca, S. (Ed.), Computed Tomography.
IntechOpen, Rijeka, pp. 57-70.
Hunter, A.W., Underwood, C.J., 2009. Palaeoenvironmental control on distribution of
crinoids in the bathonian (middle jurassic) of england and France. Acta Palaeontol.
Pol. 54, 77-98.
Insoll, T., Kankpeyeng, B., Fraser, S., 2016. Internal meanings: computed tomography
scanning of koma figurines from Ghana. Afr. Arts 49, 24-33. https://doi.org/
10.1162/AFAR_a_00264.
Jarvis, A., Reuter, H.I., Nelson, A., Guevara, E., 2008. Hole-filled seamless SRTM data V4.
International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT).
Jüttner, K., 1922. Entstehung und Bau der Pollauer Berge, A. Bartosch, Nikolsburg.
Kahl, W.-A., Ramminger, B., 2012. Non-destructive fabric analysis of prehistoric pottery
using high-resolution X-ray microtomography: a pilot study on the late Mesolithic to
Neolithic site Hamburg-Boberg. J. Archaeol. Sci. 39, 2206-2219. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jas.2012.02.029.
Kalender, W.A., 2011. Computed Tomography: Fundamentals, System Technology,
Image Quality, Applications, third ed. John Wiley & Sons.
Kingston, A.M., Myers, G.R., Latham, S.J., Recur, B., Li, H., Sheppard, A.P., 2018. Space-
filling X-ray source trajectories for efficient scanning in large-angle cone-beam
computed tomography. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging 4, 447-458.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCI.2018.2841202.
Klíma, B., 1963. Dolní Vˇestonice. Výzkum T´aboˇriˇstˇe Lovců Mamutů V Letech 1947-1952,
Monumenta Archaeologica 11. Nakladatelství ˇCeskoslovensk´e akademie vˇed, Praha.
Klíma, B., 1981. Stˇrední ˇc´ast paleolitick´e stanice u Dolních Vˇestonic. Pam´atky
archeologick´e 72, 5-92.
Klíma, B., 1983. Dolní Vˇestonice, t´aboˇriˇstˇe lovců mamutů, 1. vyd. In: Pam´atníky Naˇsí
Minulosti, 12. Academia, Praha.
Knor, A., Loˇzek, V., Pelíˇsek, J., ˇZebera, K., 1953. Dolní Vˇestonice. Výzkum T´aboˇriˇstˇe
Lovců Mamutů V Letech 1945-1947, Monumenta Archeologica 2. Nakladatelství
ˇCeskoslovensk´e akademie vˇed, Praha.
Kozatsas, J., Kotsakis, K., Sagris, D., David, K., 2018. Inside out: assessing pottery
forming techniques with micro-CT scanning. An example from Middle Neolithic
Thessaly. J. Archaeol. Sci. 100, 102-119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jas.2018.10.007.
Krajewski, M., Ferr´e, B., Salamon, M.A., 2020. Cyrtocrinids (cyrtocrinida, Crinoidea) and
other associated crinoids from the jurassic (Kimmeridgian-Tithonian)-Cretaceous
(Berriasian-Barremian) of the carpathian foredeep basement (western Ukraine).
Geobios 60, 61-77.
Kr´alík, M., Svoboda, J., ˇSkrdla, P., Nývltov´a Fiˇs´akov´a, M., 2008. Nov´e n´alezy
keramických fragmentů a otisků v gravettienu jiˇzní moravy. New finds of ceramic
fragmenty and imprints in the South moravian gravettian. Pˇrehled výzkumů 49,
3-22.
Kreiter, A., 2008. A Celtic pottery kiln and ceramic technological study from
Zalakom´ar-Als´o Csalit (S-W Hungary). Zalai Múzeum 17, 131-148.
Kreiter, A., Riebe, D.J., Parkinson, W.A., Pet˝o, ´A., T´oth, M., P´ancz´el, P., B´anffy, E., 2014.
Unique in its chaîne op´eratoire, unique in its symbolism: undressing a figurine from
the 6th Millennium BC K¨or¨os culture, Hungary. J. Archaeol. Sci. 44, 136-147.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2014.01.027.
Kroh, A., Lukeneder, A., 2009. Crinoids from the late jurassic of the nutzhof section
(lower Austria, gresten klippenbelt. Ann. Naturhist. Mus. Wien 110 A, 383-399.
Landis, E.N., Keane, D.T., 2010. X-ray microtomography. Mater. Char. 61, 1305-1316.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchar.2010.09.012.
L´azniˇckov´a-Galetov´a, M., 2021. Gravettian ivory ornaments in central Europe, Moravia
(Czech republic). L'Anthropologie 125, 102870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
anthro.2021.102870.
L´azniˇckov´a-Galetov´a, M., 2022. Nejstarˇsí ˇsperky a ozdoby tˇela. Moravsk´e zemsk´e
muzeum, Brno.
MAMBA, 2024. Exploring Mammoth Bone Accumulations in Central Europe. European
Research Counsil. Access date: 3. 6. 2024. https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/
101045245.
McGarry, C.K., Grattan, L.J., Ivory, A.M., Leek, F., Liney, G.P., Liu, Y., Miloro, P., Rai, R.,
Robinson, A.P., Shih, A.J., Zeqiri, B., Clark, C.H., 2020. Tissue mimicking materials
for imaging and therapy phantoms: a review. Phys. Med. Biol. 65, 23TR01 https://
doi.org/10.1088/1361-6560/abbd17.
Middleton, A., 2005. Ceramics. In: Lang, J., Middleton, A. (Eds.), Radiography of
Cultural Material. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 76-95.
Moore, R.C., 1966. Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology, Part U - Echinodermata 3,
Volume 1. The Geological Society of America, Inc. and The University of Kansas
Press.
Moore, R.C., Jeffords, R.M., 1968. Classification and Nomenclature of Fossil Crinoids
Based on Studies of Dissociated Parts of Their Columns. , the University of Kansas
Paleontological Contributions, Serial Number 46, Echinodermata, Article 9. The
University of Kansas Publications.
Müller, A.H., 1963. II. Unterstamm Eleutherozoa Bell, 1891, Lehrbuch der Pal¨aozoologie.
Band II, Invertebraten, Teil 3 Arthropoda 2 - Stomochorda. VEB Gustav Fischer
Verlag, Jena, pp. 398-547.
Müller, A.H., 1980. Lehrbuch der Pal¨aozoologie. Band II, Invertebraten, Teil 1 Protozoa -
Mollusca 1. VEB Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena.
Murray, J.W., 1990. Wirbellose Makrofossilien. Ein Bestimmungsatlas. Ferdinand Enke
Verlag, Stuttgart.
Nerudov´a, Z., Vaníˇckov´a, E., Tvrdý, Z., Ramba, J., Bílek, O., Kostrhun, P., 2019. The
woman from the Dolní Vˇestonice 3 burial: a new view of the face using modern
technologies. Archaeological and Anthropological Sciences 11, 2527-2538. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12520-018-0698-3.
Nov´ak, M., Boriov´a, S., Herˇcík, O., Chlachula, D., 2022. Dolní Vˇestonice (okr. Bˇreclav).
Pˇrehled výzkumů 64, 147-148.
Nov´ak, M., Wilczy´nski, J., H¨andl, M., Boriov´a, S., Herˇcík, O., Chlachula, D., 2023. On the
periphery of a mammoth "kj¨okkenm¨odding". The new excavation of the extensive
bone deposit at Dolní Vˇestonice I. In: 29th EAA Annual Meeting (Belfast, Northern
Ireland 2023) - Abstract Book, European Association of Archaeologists, Belfast,
pp. 1013-1014.
Oliva, M., 2014. Dolní Vˇestonice I (1922-1942). Hans Freising - Karel Abosolon - Assien
Bohmers, Anthropos 37 (N.S. 29). Moravsk´e zemsk´e muzeum, Brno.
Oliva, M., 2015. Umˇení moravsk´eho paleolitu. Atlas sbírky Ústavu Anthropos
Moravsk´eho zemsk´eho muzea, Anthropos 38/N.S. 30.
Oliva, M., 2021. Mammoth remains, burials, and art (30-15 KY AGO): anthropological
perspective. Anthropologie 59, 225-249.
Pavel, C., Suciu, C., Constantin, F., Bugoi, R., 2013. X-ray computed tomography
investigations of Cucuteni ceramic statuettes. Documenta Praehistorica 40, 323-332.
https://doi.org/10.4312/dp.40.26.
Pfeifer, S.J., Hartramph, W.L., Kahlke, R.-D., Müller, F.A., 2019. Mammoth ivory was the
most suitable osseous raw material for the production of Late Pleistocene big game
projectile points. Sci. Rep. 9, 2303. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-38779-1.
Pizzeghello, A., Vidale, M., Salemi, G., Tin`e, V., Di Pilato, S., 2015. De-constructing
terracotta female figurines: a chalcolithic case-study. Interdisciplinaria Archeol. Nat.
Sci. Archaeol. 6, 7-17.
P. Neruda et al.

Journal of Archaeological Science 169 (2024) 106034
28
Reedy, C.L., Reedy, C.L., 2022a. High-resolution micro-CT with 3D image analysis for
porosity characterization of historic bricks. Heritage Science 10, 83. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s40494-022-00723-4.
Reedy, C.L., Reedy, C.L., 2022b. Micro-computed tomography with 3D image analysis to
reveal firing temperature effects on pore systems in archaeological and ethnographic
ceramics. Appl. Sci. 12, 11448.
Rich, S.A., 2008. Midwifery and neolithic Malta: interpreting and Contextualizing two
terracotta figurines, OMERTAA. Journal of Applied Anthropology 2008, 260-268.
Rye, O.S., 1977. Pottery manufacturing techniques: X-ray studies. Archaeometry 19,
205-211. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-4754.1977.tb00200.x.
ˇReh´anek, J., 1987. Biostratigrafie a faci´alní vývoj karbon´atov´eho malmu jv. svahů
ˇCesk´eho masívu. Miscellanea micropaleontologica 2, 251-282.
ˇRehoˇr, F., ˇRehoˇrov´a, M., Vaˇsíˇcek, Z., 1978. Za zkamenˇelinami severní Moravy, Ostravsk´e
muzeum. Ostrava.
Salamon, M.A., Bubík, M., Ferr´e, B., Duda, P., Płachno, B.J., 2021. Hrabalicrinus zitti
gen. et sp. nov., and other Upper Jurassic crinoids (Echinodermata, Crinoidea) from
the Brno area (Czech Republic). Ann. Paleontol. 107, 102482 https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.annpal.2021.102482.
Shepard, A.O., 1956. Ceramics for the Archaeologist. Carnegie Institution of,
Washington, Washington, D.C.
Shikhaliev, P.M., 2012. Dedicated phantom materials for spectral radiography and CT.
Phys. Med. Biol. 57, 1575-1593. https://doi.org/10.1088/0031-9155/57/6/1575.
Schneider, S., Harzhauser, M., Kroh, A., Lukeneder, A., Zuschin, M., 2013. Limestone and
klentnice beds (kimmeridgian - berriasian; waschberg-ˇzd´anice unit; NE Austria and
SE Czech republic): state of the art and bibliography. Bull. Geosci. 88, 105-130.
Soffer, O., Vandiver, P., 1994. The ceramics. In: Svoboda, J. (Ed.), Pavlov I - Excavations
1952-53, ´Etudes et Recherches Arch´eologiques de l'Universit´e de Li`ege 66.
Universit´e de Li`ege, Li`ege, pp. 163-173.
Soffer, O., Vandiver, P., 1997. The ceramics from Pavlov I-1957 excavation. In:
Svoboda, J. (Ed.), Pavlov I - Northwest. The Upper Paleolithic Burial and its
Settlement Context, the Dolní Vˇestonice Studies 4, Institute of Archaeology AS CR
Brno, Brno, pp. 383-401.
Soffer, O., Vandiver, P., 2005. Chapter IV.2. Ceramic fragments. In: Svoboda, A.J. (Ed.),
Pavlov I SouthEast. A Window into the Gravettian Lifestyle, the Dolní Vˇestonice
Studies, 14, pp. 415-431. Brno.
Svoboda, J., Kr´alík, M., Culíkov´a, V., Hladilov´a, S., Nov´ak, M., Fis´akov´a, M., Nývlt, D.,
Zelinkov´a, M., 2009. Pavlov VI: an upper palaeolithic living unit. Antiquity 83,
282-295.
Svoboda, J., Nov´ak, M., S´azelov´a, S., Hladilov´a, ˇS., ˇSkrdla, P., 2018. Dolní Vˇestonice I.
Excavations 1990-1993. Pˇrehled výzkumů 59, 35-67.
Svoboda, J.A., 2020. Dolní Vˇestonice - Pavlov. Explaining Paleolithic Settlements in
Central Europe. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Titterington, P.F., 1935. Certain bluff mounds of western Jersey county, Illinois. Am.
Antiq. 1, 6-46. https://doi.org/10.2307/275856.
Van Beek, G., 1969. Hajar Bin Humeid. Investigations at a Pre-islamic Site in South
Arabia. John Hopkins Press, Baltimore.
Vandiver, P.B., Soffer, O., Klima, B., Svoboda, J., 1989. The origins of ceramic
technology at dolni-vestonice, czechoslovakia. Science 246, 1002-1008.
Varslot, T., Kingston, A., Myers, G., Sheppard, A., 2011. High-resolution helical cone-
beam micro-CT with theoretically-exact reconstruction from experimental data.
Med. Phys. 38, 5459-5476. https://doi.org/10.1118/1.3633900.
Vigorelli, L., Re, A., Buscaglia, P., Manfredda, N., Nervo, M., Cavaleri, T., Del Vesco, P.,
Borla, M., Grassini, S., Guidorzi, L., Lo Giudice, A., 2022. Comparison of two ancient
Egyptian Middle Kingdom statuettes from the Museo Egizio of Torino through
computed tomographic measurements. J. Archaeol. Sci.: Report 44, 103518. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jasrep.2022.103518.
Weber, G.W., Lukeneder, A., Harzhauser, M., Mitteroecker, P., Wurm, L., Hollaus, L.-M.,
Kainz, S., Haack, F., Antl-Weiser, W., Kern, A., 2022. The microstructure and the
origin of the Venus from Willendorf. Sci. Rep. 12, 2926. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-022-06799-z.
Wolf, S., Vercout`ere, C., 2018. L'exploitation de l'ivoire de Mammouth au Pal´eolithique.
L'Anthropologie 122, 579-587. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anthro.2017.09.001.
Zheltova, M., Yanshina, O., 2015. "Ceramics" and pigments from kostienki-1 site:
research and perspectives. In: S´azelov´a, S., Nov´ak, M., Mizerov´a, A. (Eds.), Forgotten
Times and Spaces: New Perspectives in Paleoanthropological, Paleoetnological and
Archeological Studies. Institute of Archeology of the Czech Academy of Sciences &
Masaryk University, Brno, Brno, pp. 340-346.
ˇZítt, J., Michalík, J., 1984. Upper jurassic crinoids in the west carpathian klippen belt.
Geol. Carpathica 35, 601-629.
P. Neruda et al.

