CHAPTER TWO
The Origin of Innovation

Here is an amazing experiment you can try at home. Put wheat in a container and seal the opening with dirty underwear. Wait twenty-one days, and mice will emerge. Not just newborn mice, but grown adult mice. At least that’s what the seventeenth-century physician and chemist Jan Baptista van Helmont reported. (He also revealed that scorpions would emerge from basil placed between two bricks and warmed by sunlight.)
Van Helmont wasn’t the first to postulate the doctrine of spontaneous generation, which dates back at least to Aristotle, though he was among the last. Today, any scientist reporting that wheat and underwear conspire to create new life would be forever branded as a crackpot, but Van Helmont’s sloppy experiment did not cause much of a stir, and he died a respected man in 1644. Spontaneous generation was so widely accepted in his time that his experiments just proved the obvious.
A few decades after Van Helmont’s death, the Italian physician Francesco Redi showed us how experiments like this should be done. Dump meat in a jar and in good time it will be crawling with maggots. But not spontaneously created ones: When Redi covered the jar with muslin, no maggots emerged, because flies could no longer deposit their eggs in the meat.
Redi helped speed the decline of spontaneous creation. So did the seventeenth-century Dutch fabric merchant and lens grinder Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, whose microscopes opened the door to the world of microbes. For a time, microbes, being so much smaller than visible life, offered refuge to the remaining advocates of spontaneous generation. These were people like the Scottish priest John Needham, who argued in the mid-eighteenth century that decaying organic matter created microbes. Another century later Louis Pasteur would show that Needham had it backward: Microbes cause the decay of organic matter, not the other way around. Pasteur hammered the last nail into the coffin of spontaneous creation when he sterilized a nutrient broth and the air around it and showed that it remained lifeless. 
Pasteur could show that spontaneous generation didn’t exist, but he and his contemporaries could not have known why: The origin of life is a problem for chemists, not biologists. And chemists in the nineteenth century suffered from the same disease as the Mendelists who tried to understand new variation in the early twentieth century: They were born too early. Dmitri Mendeleev had barely worked out the periodic table of the elements, and the chemistry of life was a big blank spot. Chemistry in general took a long time to become a respectable science in its own right, perhaps because of its deep roots in alchemy. Well into the twentieth century, after his first wife had run off with a chemist, the Nobel Prize–winning quantum physicist Wolfgang Pauli would remark to a friend that “had she taken a bullfighter I would have understood, but an ordinary chemist  .  .  .” 
A century later we know that the overwhelming obstacle facing spontaneous generation is probability, or rather improbability, resulting from life’s enormously complex phenotypes. If even a single protein, a single specific sequence of amino acids, could not have emerged spontaneously, how much less so could a bacterium like E. coliwith millions of proteins and other complex molecules? Modern biochemistry allows us to estimate the odds, and they demolish the spontaneous creation of complex organisms.
This does not mean that spontaneous creation did not occur in life’s early history. A natural origin of life even requires it, but in a much humbler form than a modern cell or even a modern protein. Earth’s first life form was far more like an oxcart than a Ferrari. In fact, it was a lot more like a wheel than an oxcart. And even this wheel was not created in one giant leap, but in many modest steps. Although the muck of deep time has eroded their footprints, chemists have reconstituted some of these steps, which are the subject of this chapter. They not only illustrate how it could have happened but prove an even more important point: Even before life itself arose, nature’s creativity used the same principles it uses today. Then and now, the new and improved arrives through new chemical reactions and molecules.
The Hadean Eon, which marks the beginning of earth’s geological history more than four billion years ago, is aptly named after the Greek underworld, because the early earth was a hellish place. It began with a surface of liquid magma surrounded by an atmosphere of vaporized rock. And even after the surface had congealed into a solid crust, Mother Earth was not an inviting place. Had you visited the Hadean earth from outer space, you would have seen a tortured skin pockmarked with countless volcanoes, steamed by scalding rains that poured into the primordial oceans. Only the enormous pressure of the atmosphere—much denser than today—prevented these oceans from boiling away. Needless to say, breathing this atmosphere would have felled you instantaneously, noxious as it was from deadly amounts of carbon dioxide and hydrogen. Ducking for cover might also have been smart, for multiple giant asteroids tore into early earth during a period called the Late Heavy Bombardment. You can still shudder at their scars, giant craters visible nightly on the moon, even though the churning continents here on earth have erased most visible traces of these ancient cataclysms. We know their age—and that of earth itself—from ancient rocks that contain slowly ticking chemical clocks, materials like uranium, whose radioactive decay marks the passing eons.
Most remarkable about this period is the speed with which life got going once the worst was over, just about 3.8 billion years ago. A mere few hundred million years later—less than 10 percent of earth’s age today—the first fossilized microbes appear. Even closer to the magic boundary of 3.8 billion years ago, telltale traces of an ancient metabolism in the form of light isotopes of carbon appear in rocks from West Greenland. Life wasted no time, and appeared almost as soon as it couldappear. This tells us that life’s origin and the innovations behind it might not be that hard to come by. And that innovability is as old as life itself.
Life’s early appearance on earth demands a theory of its chemical origin. Among the earliest ones is the “primordial soup” theory, usually credited to Alexander Oparin and J. B. S. Haldane, the Haldane of modern synthesis fame, who wrote about it in the 1920s. Remarkably, however, the ever-prescient Charles Darwin had this idea half a century before them. In an 1871 letter to his friend Joseph Dalton Hooker, he speculates, “If (and oh what a big if) we could conceive in some warm little pond with all sorts of ammonia phosphoric salts, light, heat, electricity etc present, that a protein compound was chemically formed, ready to undergo still more complex changes.” And in the same breath Darwin gives us a good reason why we might look in vain for such a warm little pond today: Its content would be instantly “absorbed or devoured” by today’s organisms. 
The primordial soup remained speculation for decades, until 1952, when it received a huge boost from Stanley Miller, a graduate student in the laboratory of Nobel laureate Harold Urey at the University of Chicago. Based on an informed guess at the composition of the gases that were present in the early atmosphere, Miller sealed these gases in a container, showered them with electric sparks to simulate primordial lightning, and washed the mixture in a rainfall of condensing water. After mere days, many organic molecules—those normally created by living organisms—had appeared in Miller’s miniature world. This was a monumental discovery, for it showed how organic molecules could have emerged from inorganic matter during the turbulent youth of our planet. And Miller’s primordial ocean produced not just any organic molecules. It created amino acids such as glycine and alanine, basic building blocks of modern proteins. Later experiments produced many other of life’s construction materials, including sugars and parts of DNA14But even more important was that Miller’s experiments moved life’s origin from philosophical speculation to the realm of hard, experimental science.
In September 1969, the world learned something that Miller had not known in 1952: Life’s molecules can emerge in environments even more hostile than that of the early earth. That September an exploding fireball briefly created a second sun in the sky over Murchison, an Australian town of a few hundred souls some one hundred miles north of Melbourne. After fracturing, the meteorite left a trail of smoke and smaller fragments, the largest of which fell harmlessly into a barn. This cosmic accident happened two months after man had first walked on the moon, at a time when scientists were itching to study extraterrestrial rocks.
As they scratched this itch, they found that the Murchison meteorite ferried a most unusual cargo. As old as the earth itself, it had wandered through outer space for eons, yet it contained several of the amino acid building blocks of proteins, as well as purines and pyrimidines, which are important DNA building blocks. Later work used twenty-first-century spectroscopy to show that it harbored more than ten thousand different kinds of organic molecules, although many of them in exceedingly small quantities. 
The Murchison meteorite, it is important to know, is not a freak of nature. Similar meteorites have landed on earth, and countless other rocks ferry organic cargoes through the heavens. Fortunately, we no longer need to wait until another one of them drops. Because molecules in the universe absorb or emit radiation that reveals their structure, the hypersensitive ears of radio telescopes can distinguish hundreds of different organic molecules whose voices whisper to us in multitudes from clouds of interstellar gas. Actually, they shout, since three-quarters of the molecules in these interstellar clouds are organic, and include key constituents of life, such as the amino acid glycine. Incidentally, the single most abundant three-atom molecule in interstellar clouds is water, another blow to the notion that we and our planet are oh so very special.
Life’s simpler building blocks are so prevalent in the universe that molecules from space may have seeded life on earth itself. Meteorites and comets, especially those that bombarded the early earth, discharged ten times more water than currently fills all of the earth’s oceans, and a thousand times more gases than its present-day atmosphere. What is more, they also delivered the rich buffet of organic molecules we find in interstellar space, and in a staggering number of servings. At least ten trillion tons of organic carbon, and perhaps a hundred times as much, have entered our atmosphere from outer space. That is at least ten times more than all the carbon that circulates in living cells today. Especially important is the dust trailing behind comets that pass our orbit. Unlike large meteorites whose white-hot temperatures destroy some of their organic cargo during their explosive landing, cometary dust merely blankets the earth in an invisible but unceasing rain of life’s seeds. Perhaps we really are made of stardust.
We may never know whether most of life’s molecules were created in outer space or on earth. But regardless, these observations contain some simple and important lessons. The first is that life’s molecules emerge spontaneously in the right environment. The second is that this environment need not be, like Darwin’s warm pond, a nearby and very special place in the universe. It could be light-years away or as ubiquitous as interstellar gas.
The third is a lesson about innovation—I already mentioned it—that is still valid today: Innovation revolves around new molecules and the reactions that create them. To understand innovability, we need to understand the origins of these molecules.
The molecules of life are not yet life itself, any more than a pile of bricks and lumber is a mansion. At a minimum, life needs a metabolism, a network of chemical reactions that harvests energy and combines chemical elements into life’s molecular building blocks. Life also needs the ability to make more of itself—to replicate—and pass its accomplishments on to future generations as heritable traits. Without offspring that resemble their parents, Darwinian evolution would be unworkable, natural selection impossible.
This doesn’t mean that metabolism and replication must have appeared simultaneously. Even today they do not always occur together. Viruses replicate but have no metabolism of their own, hijacking instead the metabolic machinery of their host cells. But true life requires both metabolism and replication, and that requirement raises the earliest chicken-and-egg question ever: Which came first?
Perhaps seduced by the ethereal beauty of the DNA double helix, mainstream science held for years that replication came first. But to explain its origins is a tall order, because modern replication is extremely complex. What’s more, the nucleotide letters of DNA do not replicate themselves. Rather, they only carry information. They are transcribed into RNA, which is translated into proteins (figure 1), and these proteins are tasked with just about everything else, including transcription and replication. Because no one protein masters all the necessary skills, dozens of proteins share these tasks, and each protein has a precisely specified amino acid sequence. This sophisticated division of labor leads to another chicken-and-egg problem, this one about whether proteins or nucleic acids—the collective term for DNA and RNA—appeared first. To have both emerge simultaneously would be asking too much—we would be back to odds-defying spontaneous creation. But if the first life consisted of a single replicator, this molecular Adam (or Eve) would have to be spectacularly versatile, able to both carry information andcopy itself.
In their 1953 discovery of the double helix, Watson and Crick had already recognized that the key to replication was the pairing of complementary DNA bases—G with C and A with T—which glues the two strands of the double helix together. In their words, it “immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the genetic material.” That very mechanism excludes proteins as the first replicators, because their amino acid parts cannot transmit information in this way. They lack the simple complementarity that allows two DNA strands to build the twisted ladder of the double helix.
So proteins are poor replicators. But nucleic acids seemed to be just as poor at everything else. Could they do what proteins excel at? Could they catalyze their own replication? Could they catalyze anything at all? The very purpose and structure of DNA made that seem unlikely. DNA’s primary task is to do as little as possible except to store information, inertly, faithfully, generation after generation after generation22For more than half a century after the discovery of enzymes, most scientists thought that only proteins, not nucleic acids, could catalyze chemical reactions.
And so the stuff of the first replicator remained mysterious. Until 1982, that is, when the chemists Thomas Cech and Sidney Altman transformed RNA from an ugly duckling into a white swan. RNA had been the stepchild of molecular biology, largely a messenger ferrying information from DNA to the ribosome, the hugely complex molecular machine that synthesizes proteins. But these two chemists jolted science with the discovery that RNA can catalyze chemical reactions all by itself.
The knowledge that RNA could perform the job of proteins catalyzed—pardon the pun—many other discoveries. Before long, biologists realized that RNA had an ancient history, even older than that of proteins and DNA, and that RNA had ruled over a sunken world of early life. Unlike the fabled Atlantis, however, this world has left many traces. One of them is that RNA remains a key molecule in today’s command centers of life. For example, in the ribosome machine, which contains dozens of proteins and also a few RNA molecules, the RNA—not the proteins—catalyzes the concatenation of amino acids into proteins, including those that make the ribosome’s own proteins. 
RNA may once have both carried life’s information and helped catalyze its own replication, but we are none the wiser how it got there. To find that firstinnovation, the origin of life itself, it would help if we could construct a simple molecule that replicates itself. This molecule would be an RNA replicase,an enzyme that catalyzes the replication of RNA. 
Some of today’s finest chemists are on a quest to find this single replicase. Their best efforts so far created a 189-letter-long RNA string with sometalent as a copyist—it can’t actually copy itself, but only a shorter molecule template of about fourteen letters. This tells us that RNA-based replication might just work, if several obstacles can be surmounted. One of them comes from the very feature that makes nucleic acids replicable: base pairing. Complementary bases stick together, which means that a parent molecule and the complementary copy strung together by a replicase would anneal into a double-stranded RNA molecule like the familiar double-stranded DNA. To make another copy from them, the two strands would have to be separated, so their information can be read. But as soon as you—or a replicase—pulled them apart, their sticky bases would anneal again like two ribbons of Scotch tape. The very same feature that allows replication is also its worst enemy.
Another problem is that the first replicase would have needed to be unfathomably accurate, because a sloppy replicase would trigger an error catastrophe,a process discovered and baptized by the Nobel Prize–winning chemist Manfred Eigen. 
To understand error catastrophes, it is helpful to think of how medieval monks copied sacred texts, transcribing letter by letter by tedious letter. If one monk misread a letter, the error might be inherited in the copy. A second scribe might propagate the error, introduce errors of his own, and so on, until monk by monk, over generations and centuries, the text might slowly erode to a meaningless jumble of letters. An RNA replicase, whose one and only ability is encoded in a molecular text, faces a similar problem, but with an added twist: In an RNA world, the monk and the text he copies are one and the same. The replicase is a book that transcribes itself, and its errors erode not only the text itself but also its own ability to copy. Subsequent generations of monks become ever more error-prone.
Only a replicase that creates mostly error-free copies of itself can preserve the information in its letter sequence, which encodes the very ability to replicate itself. But if it is too sloppy, most of its copies will be inferior replicases—slower, perhaps, not as faithful—and will degrade over time into useless molecules from which the original information is erased. In 1971, four years after winning the Nobel, Manfred Eigen calculated the accuracy required to evade this error catastrophe. The longer a replicase is, he found, the more accurate it needs to be. As a rule of thumb, a replicase with fifty nucleotides would have to misread fewer than one in fifty nucleotides, a replicase with one hundred nucleotides would need to misread fewer than one in a hundred nucleotides, and so on. The current best candidate of 189 letters misreads several times as many. Even if it could replicate itself, it would gallop straight over the cliff of the error catastrophe.
Fortunately, life does much better than that today. The DNA-copying machinery of protein enzymes misreads fewer than one in a million letters. But its accuracy comes at a price: complexity. The machinery includes highly specialized proteins that proofread and correct the errors of other proteins, as if every text were copied by groups of monks looking over one another’s shoulders. These proteins are encoded by long genes, much longer than any primordial RNA replicase could have been. And to preserve information over time, the replication they supervise needs to be highly accurate. You may already see the next chicken-and-egg problem lurking here. It is also known as Eigen’s paradox: Faithful replication needs long and complex molecules, but long molecules require faithful replication. To this day, nature has not shown us an exit from this labyrinth, but as we shall see in chapter 6, a principle of innovability found in today’s life provides a clue.
The unwelcome stickiness of RNA and the catastrophic Eigen’s paradox are already daunting obstacles to the idea that replicators were life’s first innovations. But they are mere foothills to the Himalayas of a third problem: finding a sufficiently rich supply of raw materials—energy-rich molecules that also contain all the needed chemical elements, including carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen. Examples include the energy-rich precursor nucleotides of DNA’s letters, of which modern replication proteins consume nearly a thousand every second when they copy DNA. And even if an early replicase were much slower and more inefficient—perhaps copying one letter per second, replicating itself in some three minutes—the demand for raw materials wouldn’t disappear. Since each copy would itself be a replicase, both the number of copies and the ability to make even more copies would increase in lockstep, which means that even a glacially slow pace of replication by modern standards would still result in an exponential population explosion and a huge demand on nucleotide raw materials. After the first six hours, this population would already have devoured 1 ton, after a day 2.5 tons, and after a week no fewer than 800,000 tons of nucleotide raw materials.
Once life has arrived, it quickly multiplies into an army of molecules that is voraciously hungry for a continuous supply of energy-rich materials. Like any military expedition, it would quickly collapse without such a supply chain. What is more, absent a steady food supply, Darwinian evolution and natural selection cannot work. Their power unfolds over many generations and thus needs replication—a lot of it. In addition, it does not help that replicases, like soldiers, are mortal. Over time, they decay through random collisions with other molecules. Starving, they would decay faster than they could make copies. Life’s campaign to conquer the planet would fizzle out like a wet match, moments after it had ignited.
The supply chains created by Miller’s experiments and by interstellar chemistry are not strong enough to sustain this army. Although they create molecules like amino acids that life craves as raw materials, they do not create enough of them to feed life continuously. Miller’s experiments take days to produce a few milligrams of organic molecules from about a kilogram of carbon. And while meteorites may help import megatons of organic carbon given enough time, the first replicators would starve without having food in enormous quantities, at the same time, and in the same place. Depending on meteorites to sustain life is like relying on a manure-carrying truck to crash into your backyard garden every few days.
All this leaves a gnawing suspicion that the replicator-first idea puts the cart before the horse. Seduced by the beauty of the double helix, its advocates have dreamed up a gleaming and sophisticated automobile factory—before reliable parts suppliers existed. The factory’s high-throughput assembly line is useless until wheels, axles, transmissions, and engines can be built in quantities. And if the supply’s trickle is so slow that only one car can be built every few years, then decay and eventual bankruptcy become inevitable. The obvious alternative is that before a single self-replicating molecule could emerge, the supply network had to be in place, a network of chemical reactions that could produce life’s raw materials.
In other words, life started not with a replicator, but with a metabolism. 
When the right molecules come close enough, the chemical reactions needed to produce energy and life’s building blocks proceed—eventually. But eventuallycan be a long time, a verylong time. Some of life’s chemical reactions would take thousands of years to proceed without help. For this reason, metabolism needs catalysts, molecules whose main job is to speed up chemical reactions. Catalysts have a remarkable feature: Driven by heat—the incessant bouncing and vibrating of atoms and molecules—they can arrange other molecules such that their atomic parts come in contact and react, but they themselves stay above the fray and are not eaten up by the reaction. Catalysts are accelerants for the fire of metabolism. Their main job is to lower the activation energy for a particular chemical reaction, and accelerate it by several orders of magnitude. The catalysts of modern metabolism are protein enzymes, extremely efficient and sophisticated chemical agents, each one specific to one reaction, some of them accelerating their reactions by more than a trillionfold. Our bodies harbor thousands of these catalysts. A good thing, too. Were one of them to falter, we would die, snuffed out like an early replicator without supplies.
But 3.8 billion years ago, protein catalysts had yet to be invented. Darwin’s “warm little ponds” are poor sources of catalysts, which is one reason why many scientists became disenchanted with them. Another is that two molecules have to meet before they can react. Because molecules are jostled erratically through water by heat’s atomic vibrations, molecular encounters are chance events, and the chances are directly proportional to the number of molecules in a given volume of water: too few molecules, too few reactions. In other words, a metabolism can get going only if its molecules are concentrated. Dilute them in a bowl too large, and primordial life would end before it began. This is why chemists perform experiments in small test tubes and not in swimming pools. Washed out into the primordial ocean, newly created molecules would never be seen again.
Some think that tidal pools, a variant of Darwin’s warm ponds, might solve this last problem. At low tide, water in such a pool evaporates through heat, thus concentrating chemicals. At high tide, new water flooding in can stir up the broth. But earth’s violent youth casts doubt on this scenario as benign as a beach vacation. The moon orbited only a third as far away as it does today and tugged ferociously at the oceans, creating gigantic tides at least thirty times higher than today’s. What is more, the moon positively whirled around the earth (which itself rotated twice as fast), circling it at least every five days, and would have created these extreme tides every few hours, leaving little time to concentrate life’s ingredients. 
Evolutionary biology had been aching for better and smaller test tubes for decades, when an answer to its prayers arrived out of the blue—the deep blue. In 1977, the research submarine Alvindiscovered an exotic menagerie on the Pacific seafloor near the Galápagos Islands, more than two thousand meters below the surface. Red-plumed mouthless tube worms more than two meters long, snails with feet and shells armored with iron minerals, and eyeless shrimp thrived down there, cushioned by lawns of never-before-seen microbes that do double duty as food. But even more bizarre than this community is how it survives: Its raw materials come straight from Mother Earth herself, through searingly hot fissures in the earth’s crust that overflow with nutrients, chemical energy, and the very catalysts that warm little ponds lack.
Cold ocean water percolates through these hydrothermal vents, sinking until it reaches the vicinity of giant magma chambers that heat it beyond the boiling point. From there it rises, like heated air in the atmosphere, until it is reunited with the cold waters above. On its journey through the deep-ocean volcanoes, this heated water leaches from the crust a thick broth of minerals, gases, and other nutrients. As it cools, they precipitate like snow from humid air. Unlike snow, however, they slowly aggregate into enormous chimneys whose height can exceed sixty meters. While growing, these chimneys continue to exhale a mix of hot water and small particles, and are thus aptly named smokers—black or white, depending on the chemicals in their breath. 
The hot water rising through hydrothermal vents may seem an obvious source of energy for life, but it is not the most important one—it’s not the heat that makes a soup, but the ingredients. The vent fluids abound in energy-rich chemicals such as the hydrogen sulfide that gives rotten eggs their aroma. These volcanic chemicals would be pure poison to us, but they are fertile fuel to some microbes. Unlike plants, which photosynthesize—they extract energy from sunlight to build complex molecules from CO2—these microbes chemosynthesize. They build their own organic molecules from energy-rich inorganic molecules, as well as from the vent’s abundant sources of carbon and other elements. And theirs is not the only way to thrive around a vent. Although it is pitch-dark two thousand meters below the ocean surface—hardly any sunlight penetrates below two hundred meters—a heated vent also emits the faintest of glows, enough that some bacteria can scavenge its light for energy. A vent’s ways of provisioning life may be bizarre, but they are also highly effective, supporting oases with thousands of times more organisms than the surrounding seabed. 
Unlike the tepid soup of Darwin’s pond, deep-sea hydrothermal vents are primordial pressure cookers. They are prevented from boiling over only through a kilometer-high water column that pressurizes them to some 200 atmospheres—equivalent to a mass of two million tons pushing down on every single square meter. Remarkably, even these extreme conditions do not deter life, as earth’s current high-temperature champion testifies. The microbe called Methanopyrus kandlerican reproduce at temperatures above 122 degrees Celsius, which is higher than the temperature microbiologists use to sterilize their equipment. (M. kandlerigets too toasty to reproduce only at 130 degrees, although it still survives there.)
Since Darwin’s visit on the Beagle,the Galápagos Islands have been famous as an unusually fertile laboratory of evolution. This volcanic archipelago has already brought forth giant turtles, unique marine iguanas, and the playful Galápagos sea lion. So another seemingly unusual laboratory, the hydrothermal vents only 250 miles away, may seem a fitting if ho-hum companion. But the hydrothermal vents are not unusual. Thousands of them are fuming throughout the earth’s oceans. They occur wherever magma rises from the earth’s core and causes the seafloor to spread. And that is about everywhere along a giant chain of underwater volcanoes called the Midoceanic Ridge, a long wound reaching deep into the earth, bleeding liquid magma that constantly renews the planet’s crust. A bit like the sutures on a tennis ball, this ridge circumnavigates the globe and is four times longer than the Rockies, the Andes, and the Himalayas combined, more than twice the circumference of the planet—all of it under water. Just as impressive as its length is the volume of water passing through the hydrothermal vents that litter this chain of volcanoes: More than 200 cubic kilometers every year, which means that all of the ocean’s water circulates through one vent or another every 100,000 years. 
Hydrothermal vents have become favorite candidates for life’s origin, but hardy and primitive life forms like this are not the most important reason. More important is that sources of energy and chemical elements are everywhere in their nutritious waters. Also, these vents are old, as old as the liquid oceans themselves. They have been exhaling nutrients since long before life began. Since then, all ocean water would have passed through them more than ten thousand times, enough to seed the oceans many times over.
Even better, hydrothermal vents solve several problems that plague warm little ponds. They provide exactly the needed test tubes, and in vast quantities. For the chimneys that rise when minerals precipitate from the hot rising water have a shape that is neither smooth nor simple. As the chimneys accrete from the precipitating vent fluid, they become suffused with numerous pores and channels, each one a minuscule test tube where microscopically small volumes of molecules can mingle and recombine without getting washed into the open ocean. Think of these chimneys as ever-growing laboratories stuffed with millions of tiny reaction chambers. 
As if that were not enough, these laboratories also come equipped with catalysts, not enzymes but minerals such as iron sulfide and zinc sulfide, some of them floating as particles in the vent fluids, others coating the surface of the reaction chambers. And yet another benefit comes from the mixing of hot vent fluids and cold water. Both the reactions that build life’s complex molecules and those that destroy them proceed faster when it’s hot. The searing heat in a vent’s core would render life’s molecules unstable, whereas in the coldest areas around it life’s reactions might proceed too slowly. But because waters of all temperature mix around a vent, a suitable temperature niche exists for any one of proto-life’s chemical transformations.
Hydrothermal vents may well have been the laboratories that created the first metabolism. But even if we were sure of that—origin-of-life researchers don’t agree on much—this knowledge by itself wouldn’t specify whichchemical reactions comprised the first innovation of life’s history. The best candidates are the reactions found in the oldest parts of our own metabolism, those we share not only with other animals but also with plants and microbes, including the hardy ones around hydrothermal vents. Out of those possibilities, one candidate sticks out: a short cycle of chemical reactions called the citric acid cycle.
The citric acid cycle uses ten chemical reactions to transform one molecule of citric acid, the substance that gives lemons their sour taste, through several intermediates with uncommon names—pyruvate, oxaloacetate, acetate, and others—until it has completed one turn and manufactured another molecule of citric acid51
A chemical cycle that creates two molecules from one sounds fishy, like the long-discredited perpetual motion machines of the nineteenth century. But this cycle does not violate any laws of physics. It cleaves the starting citrate molecule into two smaller molecules, from which its reactions build new molecules step by step, using as materials the carbon from carbon dioxide, and feeding on energy-rich nutrients.
Portions of the citric acid cycle appear in the planet’s oldest known life forms, but its ancient heritage is not the only reason it is a prime candidate for the earliest metabolism. The molecules that it creates are also ingredients for many other building blocks of life. Oxaloacetate provides atoms to build multiple amino acids and DNA nucleotides, pyruvate does the same for some sugars, acetate contributes to lipids—all-important components of cell membranes—and so on. If you sought one metabolic core from which you could build what life needs, the citric acid cycle would be it.
What is more, the citric acid cycle is extremely versatile, for it can run in two directions. In the first direction, described above, it operates a bit like an engine that performs the work of building new molecules, powered by a chemical battery of inorganic molecules. The kinds of bacteria that live in hydrothermal vents, bacteria that chemosynthesize for a living, use it in this way. Run in the opposite direction, the cycle charges the chemical batteries that power life. Our bodies run it in this way to create chemical energy from the food we eat.
Even though the citric acid cycle’s ancient heritage, source of building blocks, and versatility all advocate for its primacy, we are still waiting for an experiment like Miller’s that would jump-start the cycle. Don’t hold your breath. Such an experiment would be much harder than Miller’s, because hydrothermal vents create such extreme conditions. Moreover, a chimney’s reaction chambers have a complex shape and chemical coating that might have been the essential habitat for early life. You can’t exactly order test tubes like this in the mail. But although we do not know yet how the entire cycle can emerge spontaneously, some experiments already point the way: With catalysts like iron sulfide and zinc sulfide, pyruvate, a key cycle molecule, has already been created spontaneously at high temperatures and pressures, and some of the cycle’s reactions advance on their own in the laboratory. 
The citric acid cycle is attractive for one more reason: It makes more of itself. With each turn, it transforms a starting molecule into two, each of which spawns a new cycle and all its molecules, eventually creating four molecules, and so on. Chemists call this property autocatalysis,a fancy word for a defining feature of modern cells and primitive RNA replicators alike: They all make more of themselves.
The autocatalysis of the citric acid cycle differs from that of an elusive RNA replicase. Citric acid does not copy itself directly, nor do the cycle’s other molecules. Instead they get copied indirectly through the entire network of reactions in the cycle. The hypothetical RNA replicase would be a self-replicating molecule,while the citric acid cycle is an autocatalytic networkof chemical reactions. This isn’t a shortcoming of the citric acid cycle, but another hint that a defining feature of life may not require RNA replicators and their genetic information: Life can exist before genes. 
We do not know—yet—whether the citric acid cycle is the grandfather of all metabolic activity. Nor do we know whether a metabolism of any sort came before RNA replicators. We do know, however, that the very first thing in the planet’s history that deserves to be called alive needed an autocatalytic metabolism to still its hunger. Such a metabolism is more than a mere supply chain of parts, because each of its suppliers creates more suppliers, which can produce parts in ever-increasing numbers. And once both the factory and its supply chain are in place Darwinian evolution can kick in. It can preserve better factories, which demand improvements in the supplier, which permit better factories, and so on, in the unending cycle of evolution that lifts all boats.
It is perhaps more than a coincidence that hydrothermal vents can help close thiscycle too. For they contain another curious catalyst called montmorillonite, named after the French town Montmorillon, where farmers use this clay mineral to retain water in drought-prone soils. Late in the twentieth century, the chemist Jim Ferris and others revealed another useful quality of montmorillonite, when they discovered that it can rally small RNA building blocks to assemble spontaneously into RNA strings more than fifty nucleotides long. 
Once metabolism and replication were in place, life was almost ready to crawl out of its cradle, but it still needed a travel bag. All of today’s life uses the same kind of material to pack up its molecules, lipid molecules that are amphiphilic, from the Greek words for “both” and “love.” An amphiphilic molecule “loves” both water and fat, because one of its ends likes to mingle with water, whereas the other avoids water—like oil that spreads in a thin film on a puddle. Observe lipid molecules in a solution and you are in for a surprise: They can formvesicles,minute hollow droplets enclosed by a tiny spherical membrane, in which the lipid molecules are arranged, as shown in figure 2.59How they could arrange themselves into complex highly ordered membranes without a guiding hand may seem mysterious but is not that hard to understand: This arrangement satisfies both parts of each molecule. The water-loving parts (solid circles in the figure) are close to water, whereas the water-avoiding parts (sticks in the figure) are away from it and close to each other. What is more, these membranes can grow spontaneously, incorporating new lipid molecules as you add them to the solution. And they grow autocatalytically: The larger they are, the faster they can grow.
FIGURE 2.Biological membranes
To see where the building blocks of these membranes came from, we do not have to look far. The citric acid cycle produces one of their precursors, and they arise even in extraterrestrial rocks like the Murchison meteorite. Heat up powdered meteorite with water, and you will find molecules that self-assemble into vesicles. What is more, montmorillonite, the same vent mineral that can string together RNA, accelerates membrane assembly. And hydrothermal vents can help in further ways, by concentrating membrane ingredients. This is what a team around Jack Szostak from Harvard University found when they re-created tiny reaction chambers like those of hydrothermal vents in their laboratory. They heated small amounts of lipids in tiny capillaries and saw that the lipids become concentrated at one end, until they start to form vesicles. All by themselves.
It smacks of Van Helmont’s spontaneous generation, all this complexity emerging from nothing but the right ingredients. But there is a crucial difference. Spontaneous generation—of mice, maggots, or microbes—requires the mysterious and perhaps supernatural vital force that Buchner’s discovery of enzymes began to expose as an old wives’ tale. In contrast, the spontaneous creation of membranes and molecules—self-organization in modern language—requires only mundane physics and chemistry. Assembling membranes requires nothing but the attraction of similar molecules. Like the self-aggregation of volcanic particles into towering underwater buildings, or the spinning of RNA strings by clay minerals, the self-organization of both membranes and molecules is explained by well-known laws of nature.
Self-organization permeates the universe so completely that most of us don’t even notice it. Much older than life and natural selection, self-organization is how stars and solar systems form, how the earth accreted, how it acquired a moon, oceans, and an atmosphere, and how the continents started to shift. Self-organization creates the microscopic symmetry of a snowflake and the raging clouds of a hurricane, the shifting shapes of sand dunes and the timeless beauty of a crystal. We shouldn’t be surprised to find self-organization in life’s precursors, because it is everywhere else too.
Life’s self-organizing membranes can solve another one of early life’s puzzles: the mechanism by which the first cells divided. Modern cells use very sophisticated machinery—dozens of proteins—to constrict and divide cells, and to make sure that each daughter cell receives a copy of the mother’s DNA. But they could do the trick in simpler ways, as Szostak’s team found in 2009. The researchers observed how rapidly growing membrane droplets change their shape when they divide, and transform into threadlike hollow tubes. Unstable tubes, I should say. Agitate them a bit and they fragment spontaneously into smaller droplets. Even better, when the researchers placed RNA molecules inside these tubes, they were partitioned among the droplets. Lifeless membrane droplets can divide like living cells—an innovation without an innovator, emerging from a simple property of the system’s chemistry. All by itself.
Although we have come a long way from the first musings about a primordial soup, there are some problems that still defy solution. One of them is the last obstacle on the path from a self-dividing membrane droplet to a primitive cell. If the RNA inside this cell replicated faster than the cell grew, it would divide until the vesicle was ready to burst. But if the cell outpaced the RNA in growing, the RNA inside would become increasingly dilute, and many droplets would spawn empty-shelled offspring. To succeed, life needed to balance, to regulatereplication and growth with precision, such that RNA replicated no faster than its container grew. How it learned to do that remains a mystery that twentieth-century science has left for another generation.
Fast-forward from the first wheel to the Ferrari. Although some of life’s features did not change in the thirty million centuries since it began—molecules, regulation, and metabolism are still wellsprings of innovation, as we shall see in later chapters—evolution transformed just about everything else about it. Early RNA replicators have been replaced by complex protein machines. Life has learned to regulate not just RNA and lipids but thousands of molecules. And innumerable innovations have turned the metabolism of a modern cell—the Ferrari’s engine—into a miracle of chemical technology.
Imagine driving home in this Ferrari from an evening picnic and running out of gas on a lonely stretch of highway in the middle of the night. No gas station is in sight, nor is anybody you could hitch a ride with. But no matter. You open your trunk, where a cooler contains leftover food and drinks. You pour a bottle of orange juice into the tank, and after it a quart of milk, and then a glass of wine. That will be enough to tide you over to the next gas station. And on you drive.
Modern metabolic engines are just like that. They can run on many different fuels. And more than that, they can also use each fuel as raw material to manufacture the smallest molecular parts of their body, parts the body needs to grow, to reproduce, and to heal. It’s as if a car could use the stuff in its gas tank not only to operate the engine but also to patch a leaky tire or mend a broken windshield.
The molecular parts in question comprise a few core molecules, some sixtybiomass building blocksfrom which our bodies are constructed and repaired. The most important are the four DNA building blocks of our genome, the nucleotides composed of a sugar, a phosphate group, and one of the four nitrogen-containing bases adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), or thymine (T). Next are the four building blocks of the RNA into which this DNA is transcribed, and that still controls much of life. They—A, C, G, and U, for uracil—differ only in a single oxygen atom from DNA building blocks, but this single atom makes a huge chemical difference. It makes RNA the better catalyst, and DNA the better—because more stable—information repository. Then there are the twenty amino acid building blocks of the amino acid strings translated from RNA, some of them familiar, like the tryptophan blamed for post–turkey dinner drowsiness, or the glutamic acid of the flavor enhancer monosodium glutamate (MSG). Together with the lipids in membranous bags, some energy storage molecules for hard times, and molecules that help enzymes do their job, these comprise the sixty different kinds of bricks from which cells build themselves.
The tasks of metabolism—procuring energy and making stuff—have not changed in the last 3.8 billion years. And neither has its basic nature, a network of chemical reactions like the one where the white table sugar sucrose reacts with water and splits into the two more digestible molecules glucose and fructose. What has changed is the number of those reactions. Our earliest ancestors got by on a handful of reactions, but modern metabolism, like modern life in general, is much more complicated.
FIGURE 3.A tiny sliver of a metabolic network
Modern metabolism is an interlaced, highly connected network of chemical reactions, the product of four billion years of innovation. If you were to chart it out, it would resemble a map of every street in the United States, from the shortest residential cul-de-sac to the complete interstate highway system. At its core is the ancient citric acid cycle—as central as Pennsylvania Avenue, which connects the White House with the U.S. Capitol. Figure 3 shows a tiny sliver of such a network, whose lines connect different molecules (shapes) that react with one another. Think of it as the road map of a village. The four molecules involved in cleaving white table sugar are written out and encircled within an ellipse. But don’t take this visual crutch for the real thing. Fructose can participate in thirty-seven reactions rather than the single one shown, and many more molecules and reactions are needed to run a modern metabolism.
To find out how many required more than a century of research. During this time, thousands of biologists built a tower of knowledge about metabolic reactions by studying the human gut bacterium Escherichia coli.Its construction took about as long as a medieval cathedral, but the vista from the top is spectacular. We now know how E. coli’s metabolism—more than a thousand small molecules that rearrange themselves in thirteen hundred metabolic reactions—is wired. And we know that in the metabolism department E. coli and many other microbes beat us hands down. For example, of the twenty amino acids in our proteins, our bodies can only manufacture twelve. The other eight we have to get from food. In addition, we need thirteen vitamins to live, but can synthesize only two of them, vitamins D and B7(biotin). E. colican cook all of them up from scratch.
Part of the reason why E. coli’s metabolism is so complex lies in the sixty-odd biomass building blocks. Manufacturing each of them requires multiple reactions and intermediate molecules. Another part is that E. coliis a phenomenal survivor, thriving not only on the rich nutrient broth of our guts but also in an austere nutrient desert where only seven small molecules supply chemical elements and energy. This minimal environment is so spartan that one molecule like glucose does double duty as a source of both energy and the chemical element carbon. From these few ingredients, E. colican manufacture everything it needs, all sixty-odd biomass building blocks, and from them, the entire cell
But that’s not all. You can remove glucose from a minimal chemical environment and replace it with another source of carbon and energy, such as glycerol. E. colican still build its body from the carbon and energy in this molecule. Replace glycerol with the acetic acid in vinegar and, again, E. colican build its body. All in all, E. colican use more than eighty different molecules as its onlysource of energy and as its only supplier of every single one of the billions of carbon atoms in its cells. It is similarly flexible about other elements, such as nitrogen and phosphorus. E. coliis like a self-building, self-multiplying, self-healing race car that can run on kerosene, Coca-Cola, or nail polish remover.
Simple chemical environments are useful for studying microbes in the laboratory, but they are rare in the wild. An environment like the soil or the human gut contains dozens of ever-changing fuel molecules. To harvest energy and to extract building materials from these molecules require a distinct sequence of chemical reactions for each of them. And to make a good living, a microbe must be able to exploit all of them.
Suddenly, a thousand reactions don’t sound like a lot.
Another difference between today’s life and its shadowy ancestors lies in the catalysts, those molecules that accelerate chemical reactions. If your gut did not contain the right catalyst—an enzyme known as sucrase—the sucrose in a drink of sugared water would take years or decades to split into glucose and fructose. You could drink gallons of sugared water every day, and starve to death.
Reactions like this are no longer accelerated by the simple metal-containing mineral catalysts of early life. Modern catalysts speed up some reactions a trillionfold, allowing molecules to react as soon as they meet. Each of these molecular machines—and there are several thousand of them—is a specific string of amino acids. The enzyme sucrase, for example, is a gigantic molecule with 1,827 amino acids, each of them with at least a dozen atoms, adding up to twenty thousand atoms per sucrase molecule68The table sugar sucrose with forty-five atoms is minuscule by comparison—like a pea compared to a football—which explains why enzymes are called macromolecules, as opposed to the small molecules they help react and the biomass building blocks they help construct. Sucrase may seem large, but it is not even unusual. Many enzymes are much larger.
While the sucrase string is manufactured, it curls and twists in three dimensions, like a ball of wool, but with important differences: Every ball of wool is unique, but every sucrase molecule is the same. As sucrase is manufactured, it folds in space in a precisely stereotypic manner. What is more, folded sucrase is constantly wiggling, jiggling, and vibrating to perform its catalytic duty. Think of sucrase as a self-assembling nanomachine whose movement is so fast it would be a mere blur, taking molecules in, cleaving them, and spitting out their products at lightning speed.
Every cell contains thousands of such nanomachines, each of them dedicated to a different chemical reaction. And all their complex activities take place in a tiny space where the molecular building blocks of life are packed more tightly than a Tokyo subway at rush hour. Amazing.
We do not yet know how life evolved all this complexity from its simple origins, and we may never know for sure. The oldest single-celled fossils are as complex as modern cells, and their ancestors are shrouded in darkness. This should come as no surprise. The eons have ground away most ancient rocks, and even if the churning continents had not liquefied their remnants, early life was a fragile bag of molecules. It was nothing like the sturdy mats of blue-green algae—more correctly called cyanobacteria—that left behind 3.5-billion-year-old calcium imprints known as stromatolites, and even less like the big-boned dinosaurs who lived a relatively recent hundred million years ago.
We do know, however, that we all come from a single common ancestor. This is not the same as saying that life originated only once. Given the powers of self-organization, I would not be surprised if life arose many times, in hydrothermal vents, in warm ponds, or who knows where else. Among a multitude of faint lights that flickered on and off throughout the earliest history of the planet, some held steady, while others shone more and more brightly. But only one of them became bright enough to spawn all of today’s life. This is not a matter of opinion. It has to be true, for a single reason: standards. More accurately, universal standards.
The computer scientist Andrew Tanenbaum once quipped, “The nice thing about standards is that you have so many to choose from.” I know what he was talking about. Whenever a remote control, a clock, or some other gadget stops working in my home, I rummage through a cabinet in my living room that contains a zoo of batteries large and small—but usually not the right one. Life would be easier if it offered only one kind of battery. Or one kind of coffee filter, data storage medium, or computer operating system. Even old technologies suffer from this problem: After more than a century of public electric power, fourteen incompatible outlet standards exist around the world, a curse for millions of international travelers who arrive in foreign countries every day accompanied by laptops, hair dryers, electric razors—and the wrong outlet adaptors.
Nature is different. It has standardized energy storage. Among the many forms that energy can take, such as mechanical (a wrecking ball smashing into a house), electrical (the current of electrons powering a computer), or chemical (the bonds that tie atoms together in a molecule), chemical energy is life’s favorite. All organisms on the planet, from single-celled bacteria to the blue whale, use a standard means to store energy, the molecule adenosine triphosphate (ATP). When its energy-rich chemical bonds rupture, energy is transferred to other molecules, and the less energy-rich molecule adenosine diphosphate (ADP) is created. To regenerate the energy-rich ATP, specialized enzymes can transfer energy to ADP from fuel molecules.
Not all of ATP’s chemical energy ultimately ends up in other molecules. Bacteria use ATP to power the tiny whirring flagellae that propel them through water. Fireflies use ATP to illuminate their bodies when they hope to attract mates. Some eels transform ATP into electrical energy that dispatches prey with powerful electric shocks. But regardless of its final form—mechanical, light, electric—the energy in living things ultimately comes from the chemical battery of ATP.
When a cell uses a chemical fuel like glucose to manufacture one of the cell’s biomass building blocks, it first converts the chemical energy from glucose into the chemical energy of ATP. It then uses ATP’s chemical energy to build, step by step, the chemical bonds of the building block. In this way, the energy stored in the fuel eventually ends up in the bonds of the building block. ATP is a crucial middleman in this energy transfer.
Living things have adopted ATP as the universal energy storage standard—no rummaging for batteries or paying a premium for an airport power adapter. Every organism living today can trace its descent from the inventor of life’s most successful power storage innovation. And power storage is not life’s only standard. We have already encountered the ancient heart of metabolism, the citric acid cycle, and the universal membrane molecules with their love-hate relationship to water. And let’s not forget DNA, RNA, and the genetic code that translates triplets of DNA letters into amino acids—a code understood by all organisms. 
ATP and the citric acid cycle aren’t universal standards in the same way that the speed of light is a universal speed limit. They aren’t the onlyway to build life. We know alternatives to our genetic code, to ATP as an energy carrier, and even to DNA as an information repository. Life’s standards are the historical legacy of a single ancestor. The marathon that started at life’s origins may have begun with many hopeful participants, but whether through natural selection or dumb luck, only one crossed the finish line to leave its descendants today. This is a bit depressing, if you extrapolate from the present to your chances of leaving descendants in the distant future. But it also contains a hopeful message, at least for frequent travelers: Wait another four billion years, and you may not need an outlet adapter.
By the time you read these lines, the puzzle of life’s origin may be complete. We may know whether life began in a warm pond, in a hydrothermal vent, in a freezing ocean, or in outer space. Or we may have to wait another century. But more important for understanding innovability than reconstructing the one true scenario are two general lessons that all scenarios have in common.
The first is that life needed to innovate even before it became life—by creating the first autocatalytic metabolisms and the earliest replicators.
The other is that life’s symphony of innovation has three major themes. First, innovations created new combinations of chemical reactions, such as those that form life’s building blocks and that built the first replicators. Second, innovation required molecules that could help other molecules react. Third, innovation created new regulation, the key to coordinate complex life. These three themes resounded louder and louder in the biosphere as life became more and more complex and innovability increased. Primitive metabolism has grown into a giant network in which chemical reactions are combined and recombined to permit life’s expansion into every conceivable habitat. Sophisticated protein molecules have pushed aside simple inorganic catalysts, and have given rise to innovations as different as light-detecting opsins and armor-providing keratins. And regulation, a seemingly mundane process, has become an innovation industry all by itself, bringing forth multicellular organisms with limbs, a heart, and a brain.
From the origin of life to today, innovations have been transforming metabolism, proteins, and regulation. And although the three seem very different, a curious but powerful kind of self-organization stands behind their ability to innovate.

