CHAPTER FOUR
Shapely Beauties

The Arctic cod is a slender, brownish fish, with a silver belly and black fins, between eighteen and thirty centimeters long, a perfectly unremarkable occupant of the world’s oceans. Except for one thing: The Arctic cod—Boreogadus saida—lives and thrives within six degrees of the North Pole, nine hundred meters beneath the surface, in waters that regularly chill below zero degrees Celsius.
At that temperature, the internal fluids of most organisms turn into ice crystals with edges as beautiful as well-forged swords, and just as deadly, for they carve up living tissue like butter. Warm-blooded animals have a built-in thermostat that allows them to survive in subfreezing weather. Fish don’t. And yet, there’s the Arctic cod.
B. saidasurvives by producing antifreeze proteins that lower the freezing temperature of its body fluids, much like the antifreeze in a car’s engine coolant. These proteins are prototypical examples of nature’s innovative powers. Change the amino acid sequence needed to produce a particular protein and, presto, huge areas of the earth’s oceans become livable. 
Antifreeze proteins are among thousands of innovative wonders that populate the cells of fish and of every other living being. If you could shrink yourself and travel through a cell, you would first be astonished by how many differentkinds of molecules there are, millions of them. Tiny molecules like water, larger molecules like sugars or amino acids, and even larger macromolecules like proteins all push and jostle and shove past each other like subway commuters during rush hour.
Proteins, the giant hulking monsters of a cell’s molecular population, are life’s workhorses. We have met the metabolic enzymes that synthesize everything a cell needs—including their own amino acids—by linking smaller molecules, cleaving them like molecular scissors, or simply rearranging their atoms. But not all proteins are enzymes. Some are molecular motors, like the proteins that help your muscles contract, or like the kinesinsthat “walk” along stiff molecular cables that crisscross the cell, carrying tiny membrane vesicles that shelter various molecular cargoes. Mayhem ensues when these truckers of the cell no longer do their job. One kinesin, for example, transports building materials needed to wire the cells in our nervous system, and mutations in its gene can cause an incurable disease called Type 2A Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, which hampers movement and sensation in feet and hands. 
Yet other proteins attach to DNA and switch genes on or off. These regulatoryproteins allow the information encoded in a gene to become transformed into an amino acid string. Hundreds of such regulators work simultaneously, each of them flipping the switch on some genes but not on others. (They are the source of yet another kind of innovation we will explore in chapter 5.)
And there’s more: rigid protein rods that form a cell’s molecular skeleton, proteins that import nutrients, proteins that dump waste outside the cell, proteins that relay molecular messages between cells, and on and on.
Each of these proteins has its own special talent, expressed in its phenotype, whose most important aspect is shape. I do not just mean the molecular shape of the twenty kinds of amino acids in proteins, and the order in which they are strung together—the primary structureof a protein. I mean the shape this string forms in space through the protein folding process that I first mentioned in chapter 1.
Hydrophilic amino acidslove to be near the water that surrounds them, whereas hydrophobic amino acidsavoid water—like the oily parts of membrane molecules—and these molecular sympathies help an amino acid string fold in a stereotypical manner. Driven by heat’s vibrations, a folding protein explores many shapes of its amino acid chain until it finds one where most water-avoiding amino acids cluster together and form a densely packed core that is surrounded by the water-loving molecules on the protein surface. What’s more, some amino acids attract and others repel each other, and these chemical sympathies also influence a protein’s fold. The protein folding process—driven by nothing but erratically bouncing molecules—is yet another reminder of the power of self-organization. It occurs millions of times a day in each of our trillion cells, whenever they manufacture a new protein string.
Viewed atom by atom, the three-dimensional fold of a protein like the sugar-splitting sucrase from chapter 2 would appear like a shapeless blob. But by stepping back and focusing on the string that holds the amino acid beads together (figure 10), one can discern regular and repeated patterns of amino acid arrangements in space that occur in many proteins. They include helixlike corkscrews—one is labeled in the figure—or several parallel strands, an arrangement also called a sheet. Helices and sheets are major elements of protein folds and form the secondary structureof a protein. And these helices and sheets, together with the strands that connect them, form the labyrinthine three-dimensional or tertiary structureof a protein’s fold shown in figure 10.
FIGURE 10.Sucrase folded in space
Even though it may look like a tangled pile of spaghetti, the fold in figure 10 is actually highly organized: Any two sucrase amino acid strings spontaneously fold into the exact same shape. This shape is critical to a protein’s function, because its helices and sheets guide and constrain the endless heat-induced vibrations and oscillations of the folded protein. Such constrained movement allows enzymes like sucrase to cleave sucrose—a bit like the blades of scissors whose movement is constrained by the pivot that connects them and enables them to slice paper. Because heat-caused vibrations are so important to enzymes, these molecules also have an optimal temperature: Too little heat and their vibrations are not powerful enough to reorganize molecules. Too much heat and the vibrations shake the fold apart—into the linear string of amino acids. Worse than that, unfolded proteins often aggregate into large inert clumps like the proteins in boiled eggs. Such clumps of unfolded proteins are more than useless: When too many of them accumulate, for example in your brain, they bring forth horrible diseases like Alzheimer’s. 
In the bewildering realm of oscillating shapes that sucrase and other proteins inhabit, each shape has a specific job. Each is well suited for what it does and highly complex. In the words that Darwin used to describe the living world, it is a world of “endless forms most beautiful,” but theseforms—unknown to Darwin—keep the living world alive
Proteins do not just perform existing jobs. The economy of living organisms, like that of the human world, is constantly changing, and in response, evolution brings forth new protein shapes, innovations that take on new jobs. These jobs open whenever life needs to solve a new problem, like that of surviving the menacing knives of growing ice crystals.
And just as in the human economy, where inventions from blast furnaces to smartphones are often made several times independently, the innovations that fill these jobs are often discovered more than once. Antifreeze proteins are a case in point: They originated not just in the Arctic cod but also in Antarctic fish, and from different proteins in their ancestors. They even originated more than once in the Arctic. What’s more, some fish evolved more than one kind of antifreeze protein. The winter flounder, a flatfish from the North Atlantic, manufactures one antifreeze protein that prevents its bloodstream from freezing, and another that protects its skin. And some of these proteins arose very quickly in evolutionary terms—in less than three million years.
Dozens of amino acids had to change from proteins in some frost-sensitive ancestor to create antifreeze proteins, but protein innovations often require much less change. Alter as little as one amino acid in the enzyme needed to manufacture the amino acid histidine, and the result is a new enzyme that helps manufacture the amino acid tryptophan. Mutate a specific amino acid in an E. colienzyme that helps extract energy from the sugar arabinose—its name comes from gum arabic, a natural gum from acacia trees—and this enzyme transmogrifies from a rearranger of atoms to a cleaver of molecules. 
Such minimal changes can have dramatic consequences for life, as the bar-headed goose from Central Asia could tell us. It is one of the world’s highest-flying birds. It has to be, since its migratory route takes it across the Himalayas at altitudes that exceed five miles, where the air is not only thinner—requiring birds to flap harder—but contains only a third as much oxygen by volume as sea-level air. At that altitude, the mountaineers who struggle up Mount Everest use oxygen tanks, and the passengers on jet airliners require pressurized cabins. The goose can’t benefit from either technology, but no problem, it has an even better trick. Its hemoglobin—the protein that shuttles oxygen from lungs to muscles—harbors an amino acid change that helps it bind oxygen much more tightly than our hemoglobin. It allows the goose to scavenge oxygen molecules from thin air, and keeps this bird flying where others are grounded. 
Molecular innovations like the Arctic cod’s antifreeze or the bar-headed goose’s oxygen-binding hemoglobin are valuable because they expand an organism’s habitat, which means more food, better survival, and more offspring. Other innovations confer a different kind of advantage, such as the ability to discriminate between one kind of food and another, to choose a nutritious rather than a poisonous plant for dinner. They depend on improving perception, rather than mobility, and they are why the retina in the back of our eye contains three kinds of opsins. These are highly specialized proteins that detect light and are tuned to the different wavelengths of blue, red, and green light. Thanks to them, we see the world in color. This was not always the case. Our most distant ancestor among the vertebrates probably had only one opsin. Theirs was a black-and-white world. Most mammals have two different opsins, those for red and blue. They can see in two colors. But we and some of our relatives like chimpanzees can see in three colors, perhaps because color vision helped our distant ancestors forage: It lets fruits stand out from the background of green foliage. Whatever the reason, the innovation of color vision takes very little change, as little as three altered amino acids that retune an opsin from red to green. 
Innovations like color vision benefit us, but others harm us—those of deadly bacteria that resist the antibiotics your doctor prescribes. They are the unfortunate side effect of our continual improvement of antibiotics, the result of a biological arms race of bacteria against biotechnologists. This race evokes the Red Queen of Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking Glass,who famously told Alice, “Now, here, you see, it takes all the running youcan do, to keep in the same place.” Through it, bacteria have discovered various protein innovations, some of which destroy antibiotic molecules, whereas others, known as effluxpumps, force antibiotics out of the cell like some bacterial rescue squad pumping toxic gas out of a contaminated house. (Horizontal gene transfer, combined with human travel, can spread such innovations throughout the world within months.) Especially sinister are proteins that pump not just one but many kinds of antibiotics, and thus render bacteria resistant against multiple antibiotics. Curiously, when our own body cells go rogue, proliferate wildly, and evolve rapidly—in cancer—they often use similar efflux pumps to rid themselves of unwanted cancer drugs. These are not only independent solutions to a similar problem but also one of many reasons why the war on cancer is hard to win. 
The proteins behind these innovations were not created from scratch. They are modified transporters, proteins that are essential in a cell’s daily life, because they ship thousands of molecules—nutrients, waste, building materials—to various destinations within the cell. So should we really call them innovations? The same question arises for the goose’s improved hemoglobin and primates’ color vision. Nature just fiddled with hemoglobin to tighten its binding to oxygen, and it tinkered with opsins to tune their color sensitivity. Neither was a qualitatively new protein. But consider the impact of these changes. Consider the millions of square miles of new habitat opening up to a bird that can traverse anymountain range. Consider how much duller our world would be in black and white. And consider the life-and-death change that drug resistance can make to a bacterium. For their dramatic consequences alone, these small changes deserve to be called innovations. They show how minute alterations of no more than a few atoms can have effects that percolate through an organism that is a million times as large and alter the life of its descendants forever. 
In chapter 3, we saw how nature continues to create ever-novel sequences of chemical reactions, by combining and recombining metabolic enzymes through horizontal gene transfer. But that is not how metabolic enzymes themselves first appeared. As the last few examples showed, nature creates new proteins, including every one of the known five-thousand-plus enzymes, by altering the amino acid sequence of their protein ancestors. That’s also how it created the countless proteins that regulate genes, ferry materials, contract muscles, transport oxygen, import nutrients, export waste, communicate between cells, and perform a thousand other tasks. Entire books could be written—have been written—that describe a few such innovations in great detail.
This book is not among them.
You cannot understand what made all these innovations possible through anecdotes—an antifreeze protein here, an opsin there—any more than you can draw a map of the Unites States with satellite images of a few counties. The task requires comparing many old proteins and the new ones they brought forth. Thousands of them.
This task is made easier if one can read the DNA of genes or the amino acid strings they encode—the genotypes of proteins. Among the first learning to read both was the British biochemist Frederick Sanger, one of few scientists to win two Nobel Prizes—the first for deciphering the amino acid sequence of insulin, the second for techniques to read the letter sequence of DNA. His discoveries came decades earlier than our ability to read the genotypes of metabolisms, and we therefore know many more protein genotypes and phenotypes. They hail from organisms that live in Arctic wastelands and tropical jungles, on mountaintops and in ocean depths, in our gut and in boiling hot springs, in barren deserts and in fertile soil, in filthy sewers and in pristine rivers.
Without organization, this giant heap of protein facts would be like a million shuffled words in a madman’s dictionary, but once organized, it becomes part of a library just like the gigantic metabolic library from chapter 3. The volumes in this universal library are protein genotypes, texts written in a twenty-letter alphabet, where each letter corresponds to one amino acid. The universal protein library is the collection of all proteins that life has created, and all proteins that it couldcreate. It is sometimes also called a protein spaceor a sequence space—because each text corresponds to a single sequence of amino acids. 
The size of this library is no less staggering than that of the metabolic library, as an already familiar calculation helps us see. Recall that there are 20 × 20, or 400, possible two-letter texts using one of twenty possible amino acids. Similarly, there are 20 × 20 × 20, or 8,000, texts of three amino acids, 160,000 texts of four amino acids, and so on. Short texts like this are called peptides, but most proteins comprise much longer texts—polypeptides—and the number of possible amino acid texts explodes with their length, such that the number of proteins with merely a hundred amino acids is already greater than a 1 with 130 trailing zeroes. But the library is larger than even this unimaginably large number, because proteins like sucrase have more than a thousand amino acids, and some human proteins are many times longer. (Among them is a behemoth called titin,a 30,000-amino-acid-long protein spring in our muscles.)26The universal library of proteins is another library of hyperastronomical size.
The similarity to metabolism does not end with the size of this library. Like the metabolic library, the protein library is a high-dimensional cube, with similar texts near one another. Each protein text perches on one vertex of this hypercube, and just like in the metabolic library, each protein has many immediate neighbors, proteins that differ from it in exactly one letter and that occupy adjacent corners of the hypercube. If you wanted to change the first of the amino acids in a protein comprising merely a hundred amino acids, you would have nineteen other amino acids to choose from, yielding nineteen neighbors that differ from the protein in the first amino acid. By the same process, the protein has nineteen neighbors that differ from it in the second amino acid, nineteen neighbors that differ from it in the third, the fourth, the fifth, and all the way through the hundredth amino acid. So all in all, our protein has 100 × 19 or 1,900 immediate neighbors. A neighborhood like this is already large, and it would be even larger if you changed not one but two or more amino acids. Clearly, this can’t be bad for innovation: With one or a few amino acid changes, evolution can explore many proteins.
In another parallel to the metabolic library, you would get lost wandering through thislibrary’s maze unless you had an unrolling skein of wool to gauge how far you traveled. Once again, a notion of distanceserves this purpose. It is the number of amino acids by which two proteins differ. It tells you how far you need to walk—how many amino acids you need to change—to travel from one protein text to any other. 
The texts in this library are important, but even more important is the meaning each one carries. Our eyes cannot read this meaning, the words, sentences, and paragraphs of a protein’s chemical language, but life is fluent in this language. And it can tell whether a protein is meaningful or embodies jumbled chemical ramblings.
Cells take a hard-nosed view on which proteins are meaningful: those that help them live. A protein is meaningful only if it is useful, and defective mutant proteins that do not fold properly have lost their meaning. If a protein’s “meaning” feels too anthropocentric a word, it is worth reminding ourselves how “meaning” is defined by semiotics, an offshoot of linguistics that explores the meaning of meaning: whatever a sign—which could be anything from a road sign to a book’s text—points to. If that sign is a protein’s amino acid text, then the meaning it encodes is the protein’s phenotype and the function it serves inside a cell. 
We still do not know how many meaningful books a universal library of books would contain, but decades of research allow us to estimate this number for proteins, because most useful proteins fold into a specific shape. If you blindly took a random protein from a random shelf in the library, the odds that it folds are at least one in ten thousand. That may not seem much, but keep in mind how vast the library is, containing more than 10130proteins of a hundred amino acids. Even if only one in ten thousand of them folds, you are still left with 10126proteins, a 1 trailed by 126 zeroes, much greater than the number of hydrogen atoms in the universe. The number of meaningful proteins is itself large beyond imagination. 
Evolution explores the protein library through huge populations of organisms. Their proteins change, one amino acid at a time, with the occasional copying errors that alter a DNA string’s letters—A to C, T to G, or in any other way—as this string replicates generation after generation. To understand how such change creates texts with new and useful meaning, we need to map the protein library like we mapped the metabolic library. This is less difficult than it seems: Thanks to decades of work by armies of protein scientists, we know the folds and functions of tens of thousands of proteins and their place in the library. What’s more, the technologies of twentieth-century molecular biology allow us to take any volume off its shelf—to manufacture any protein—and study its fold and function in the laboratory.
The simplest question about innovability in proteins is one we encountered before. How hard is it to find a protein with any one meaning, one whose function helps an organism to survive? If there is only one of it in the library, even the eons elapsed since the Big Bang would not suffice to find it. Since meaningful proteins exist in huge numbers, just about every problem that life solved with a protein innovation must have more than one solution. But how many?
In 2001, Anthony Keefe and Jack Szostak from Harvard University set out to answer this question for a family of proteins whose invention was as crucial as any in life’s history: the proteins that can bind the ATP that we encountered as life’s battery in chapter 2. Proteins that carry out work—they transport materials, contract muscles, build new molecules—cleave ATP, and in doing so, harness its energy for this work. 
To use ATP’s energy, a protein first needs to bind ATP. If only one protein in the vast protein library were able to bind ATP, then searching blindly for it would be futile. Its discovery would require a miracle. To find out how rare ATP binding proteins are in the library, Keefe and Szostak used a chemical technology that can create many different proteins, each one with a different and completely random amino acid string, a process equivalent to pulling random volumes from the shelves of the protein library. The random proteins these researchers generated were all eighty amino acids long. Because there are more than 10104such proteins, no experiment could create all of them, but this one created an impressive number, about 6 trillion, or 6 × 1012random proteins.
Keefe and Szostak found that four of them—unrelated to one another—can bind ATP. Four new ATP-binding proteins out of six trillion doesn’t sound like too many, but when the proportions are extrapolated to the number of potential candidates, the number is much larger. It comes out to more than 1093proteins—a 1 with 93 zeroes—that can bind ATP. The problem of binding ATP has astronomically many solutions. 
John Reidhaar-Olson and Robert Sauer from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology approached the same problem from a different tack. They focused on a regulator protein that can shut down genes in a virus that infects bacteria. The DNA of this virus—bacteriophage lambda—encodes proteins that help it replicate and kill its host bacterium. But this virus can also remain dormant inside the bacterium, using this off switch to shut down its genes until the time is ripe to divide and kill the host. This time usually comes when the host falls on hard times—starved, poisoned by antibiotics, or irradiated with too much ultraviolet light. The virus then starts to replicate, and its children abandon the cell, rats scurrying from the proverbial sinking ship. 
Reidhaar-Olson and Sauer explored a neighborhood of the protein library near this viral off switch, creating many random amino acid sequences in this neighborhood, and asked which of them produced a switch that works, one that can shut down the viral genes. From this information, they calculated that more than 1050texts in the library encode a working off switch. When they tried a similar approach on a different protein, an enzyme needed to synthesize amino acids, they found that some 1096amino acid strings can do this enzyme’s job. 
Nature’s antifreeze proteins gave us a hint, and laboratory experiments like these prove it: Problems like that of binding ATP, shutting down a virus, or catalyzing a chemical reaction don’t have just one solution. Or even a million solutions. They have astronomically many solutions, each embodied by a different volume in the protein library. To imagine the sheer number of these solutions is difficult, but that says more about the limits of our imagination than about life’s innovability.
It’s not enough to know, of course, that a library contains a virtually inexhaustible supply of books describing solutions to a particular problem. We also need to find out where these solutions are and how they are organized—in meticulous stacks or thrown together in unruly piles. And for that we need to move beyond laboratory experiments. Even though such experiments can create and test impressive numbers of different proteins, these numbers vanish into insignificance compared with those found in nature, which churns out new proteins every day in countless trillions of live organisms. Every one of these organisms harbors thousands of proteins, and each is only the last link in an unbroken chain of protein creation that goes back billions of years.
Protein scientists have been aware of this bounty for many years. And they throw themselves at it with gusto, like kids in a warehouse-sized candy store. And what these scientists have learned about protein creation in thousands of different organisms goes far beyond laboratory experiment. The oxygen-ferrying hemoglobin we already encountered in the bar-headed goose illustrates how far.
The humble function of hemoglobin, binding and releasing oxygen as it shuttles between the lung and the body’s tissues, belies its near-universal importance. Hemoglobin is a member of a large family of oxygen-binding proteins, the globins,which are vital not only to us but also to many other mammals, birds, reptiles, and fish. Countless generations have elapsed, parents followed by their children, grandchildren, and innumerable generations of great-grandchildren, since all these organisms shared a common ancestor. During this succession of generations, the DNA that encodes hemoglobin and all other proteins has replicated countless times. The copying errors it suffers each generation are rare—about one for every forty million copied DNA letters in our cells37—but given enough time, all genes in a genome will suffer errors that alter the proteins they encode.
An altered amino acid text that prevents a globin from folding also prevents oxygen from traveling where it is needed. In other words, it spells death. But an altered protein does not always lose its function and meaning. Some alterations impair neither folding nor function, and get passed on to the next generation. Over thousands and millions of generations, copy error after tolerable copy error can thus accumulate and slowly change a protein’s amino acid sequence.
FIGURE 11.Proteins change in time
Figure 11 shows a snippet of ten amino acids from human hemoglobin and from three of our animal relatives. Each letter in the figure is taken from the twenty-letter alphabet that scientists use to abbreviate amino acids, V for valine, A for alanine, and so on. We and our closest relatives, the chimpanzees, shared a common ancestor some five million years, or roughly 200,000 human generations, ago—a huge amount of time compared to a human life span, but precious little in evolution. And because little time means few errors, the globin text of chimpanzees has not changed much since then. In the figure’s snippet, the only difference is that chimp globins harbor the amino acid glutamate (letter E, in black) in place of the human alanine (A).
The human lineage split from the mouse lineage some eighty million years ago. Mouse globins thus had more time to accumulate changes than chimps’, which shows in the two amino acid differences of figure 11 between mice and humans. The chicken lineage separated from us even longer ago—almost three hundred million years—and accrued six altered amino acids. 
Millions of other organisms harbor globins, not only warm-blooded vertebrates but reptiles, frogs, fish, sea stars, mollusks, flies, worms, and even plants. Some of these organisms grow on the same twig of life’s gigantic tree and have a recent common ancestor. Their globin texts shared most of their journey through time, split only recently, and are still similar. Others lie on different branches, share more distant ancestors, and harbor globins with different texts. But however different these texts are, each of them works just fine, since otherwise it would not have survived. Each surviving text encodes a different solution to the problem of binding oxygen. And every millennium that life continues, it travels further and further through the library of proteins, discovering ever-new globin texts in its blindly groping evolutionary journey. 
FIGURE 12.Two hemoglobins with similar folds
To see how far this journey has already led the globins, consider some of our most distant relatives: plants, some of which indeed have globins, even though they have no blood. 
Legumes like soybeans, peas, and alfalfa can extract vital nitrogen from its nearly unlimited supply in the air. (Most other plants need to extract nitrogen from the soil, where it is often scarce, unless a farmer has applied fertilizer.) For this purpose, legumes employ bacteria that live in clumps of tissues around their roots, and that harbor a special enzyme that converts airborne nitrogen gas into ammonium, the same ammonium that nitrogen fertilizers contain. This ingenious symbiosis has only one problem: Atmospheric oxygen destroys the enzyme. To protect those enzymes, plants manufacture globins, which keep oxygen safely away from the bacteria.
Plants and animals dwell on different major branches of life’s tree, because their common ancestor lived more than a billion years ago. Their globins are staggeringly different, which reflects their long and separate evolutionary journey. For instance, the globins from lupins and insects differ in almost 90 percent of their amino acids. Yet these globins not only bind oxygen, they also still fold into the very similar shapes of figure 12. The fold on the left is from a legume, the one on the right from a midge, a tiny two-winged fly. Both proteins have several spiral-staircase-like helices that are arranged similarly, such as the two helices that run in parallel from the upper left to the lower right. The image does not do full justice to just how similar these globins are. If you rotated these molecules to place one exactly above the other, their atoms would occupy almost exactly the same places. Despite more than a billion years of separation, these globins still fold the same way.
The amino acid differences between these globins are extreme, but not unusual. Even globins from some animals, for example those of clams and whales, can differ in more than 80 percent of their amino acids. Despite these differences, though, these and thousands more globins from other organisms are connected by a network of unbroken paths through the protein library, paths that began at their common ancestor, took one amino-acid-changing step at a time, but left the text’s meaning unchanged. You will recognize a theme that we already encountered in the metabolic library, where evolution could travel far and wide without losing the meaning of a metabolic phenotype. The steps evolution takes through the protein library are different—single amino acid changes instead of horizontal gene transfer—but the principle is the same. A genotype networkconnects globins and extends its tendrils far through the protein library. Evolution can explore the library along this network without falling into the deadly quicksand of molecular nonsense.
When it comes to forming vast and far-reaching genotype networks, globins are not an exception but the rule. Enzymes with the same fold, catalyzing the same reaction, and sharing the same ancestor typicallyshare less than 20 percent of their amino acids. We know this because scientists have mapped the location of texts encoding thousands of known enzymes in the library. By cataloging these texts, we can map the paths of genotype networks in the library, which reveals that some networks can reach even further through the library than globins, and none more so than that of TIM barrel proteins. Their name is an acronym for triose phosphate isomerase, an enzyme that helps extract energy from glucose, and their fold is called a barrel because its sheets and helices are arranged like the staves of a barrel. The stunning fact is that some enzymes with this fold do not have a single amino acid in common. They occupy opposite corners of the protein library—texts that do not share a single letter—yet carry the same chemical message. Proteins like these are a bit like innumerable versions of Hamlet, all of them equally stageable, while sharing only a few hundred—or even none—of the play’s four thousand lines.
Thousands of proteins from nature’s laboratory tell a similar same story: When a problem can be solved with new proteins, be they enzymes, regulators, or transporters like hemoglobin, the number of solutions is too large to count. And all of those proteins are connected by a vast network of amino acid texts that spread throughout the protein library. We know thousands of proteins from some of these networks, but they are grains of sand on a vast beach of the unknown—most of the many trillions of proteins that share the same phenotype. Some of these unknown proteins belong to long-extinct organisms. But most have not even formed yet. The four billion years of life were not nearly enough time—they would suffice to create only some 1050proteins, a vanishingly small fraction of all texts in the protein library. Life’s enormous tree and all its proteins, however vast and beautiful, is but a smeared reflection in a filthy mirror, a faint shadow of the vast Platonic realm that genotype networks inhabit.
In chapter 3, we saw that genotype networks help evolution’s billions of readers explore different and far-flung neighborhoods of the metabolic library. Through these networks, some of the library’s explorers find innovative texts with new phenotypes, even though others get knocked off a network and die. Genotype networks might do the same for proteins, but only if the neighborhoods of the protein library are diverse. Otherwise, an evolving population of proteins might as well stay wherever it is. No need to explore the library if its different stacks host the same books.
Do the shelves near each protein in the library contain texts with similar meaning, a bit like modern suburbs with their identical cookie-cutter homes? Or is each neighborhood more like a medieval village, with unique buildings and their individual charm, containing proteins with unique new functions? Until recently, we had no idea, even though decades of protein research allow us to answer this question with computers that can mine mountains of protein data.
Answering this question needs more than just computers. It also needs a librarian’s love of texts. A young Chilean researcher named Evandro Ferrada brought just this love to Zürich when he joined our group of researchers to get his Ph.D. He had already studied proteins and become skillful at mining huge protein databases for information about proteins, from their folds to their smallest atomic details. I had seen Evandro’s quiet, pensive personality before, in people whose minds constantly grapple with the deep mysteries of life. Perhaps this is why he agreed to work on this problem, because the structure of protein space is just such a mystery: one that not only is challenging and profound but also can be unraveled. What’s more, it also holds the secret to protein innovability.
Evandro focused on enzymes because they are an extremely diverse group of proteins—no surprise, since they catalyze more than five thousand different chemical reactions. They are also especially well studied: Thousands of them scattered throughout the library have been mapped. Their locations are precisely known, and we can use computers to analyze them. Evandro asked his computer to choose a pair of proteins with the same fold, but in different places on the same genotype network. He then explored a small neighborhood around the first protein, and listed all known proteins in it, together with their function. After that, he explored the neighborhood of the second protein, and listed all known proteins and their functions in itsneighborhood. Finally, he compared these lists, asking simply whether they were different, whether proteins in the two neighborhoods had different functions. He then chose another protein pair, yet another pair, and so on, asking the same question for them, until he had explored hundreds of pairs and their neighborhoods.
The final answer was simple. The neighborhoods of two proteins contain mostly different functions, even if the two proteins are close together in the library. For instance, even proteins that differ in fewer than 20 percent of their amino acids have neighborhoods whose proteins differ in most of their functions. The protein library has neighborhoods that are highly diverse, just like the metabolic library. And just as with metabolism, this diversity makes vast genotype networks ideal for exploring the library, helping populations to discover texts with new meaning while preserving old and useful meaning.
Both metabolic and protein libraries are full of genotype networks composed of synonymous texts that reach far through a vast multidimensional hypercube, and both harbor unimaginably many diverse neighborhoods. They have much in common with each other, but little with human libraries. And that’s not surprising: They were here long before us.
At least three billion years before us. That’s when proteins took over most of life’s jobs from RNA. They did so for a good reason. Because they have many more building blocks—twenty different amino acids compared to the four nucleotides of RNA—nature could write more texts with proteins. In an alphabet of four letters, you can write about one million different ten-letter strings, whereas an alphabet of twenty letters allows more than ten trillion such strings—ten million times more. This vastly larger number of protein texts increases further with longer texts. More texts mean more shapes, more chemical reactions you can catalyze, more tasks you can perform. 
But RNA didcome before proteins, and for this reason alone it deserves an honorable place in the pantheon of biological innovation. Without innovations made by the first replicators, we would not be here. And our job would be incomplete without understanding their innovability.
Fortunately, there are many parallels between RNA and proteins that can help us understand RNA innovability. We can organize RNA texts into a hypercubic library—not quite as large as that of proteins, but still formidable—where similar texts are near each other and dissimilar texts are far apart. This library also exists in many dimensions, meaning that its neighborhoods are much larger than in three-dimensional space—near any one text are many others. The meaning of many RNA texts is also expressed in a language of shapes, because RNA chains are highly flexible, like proteins. They bend and twist in space, organizing themselves into elaborate folds, like proteins.
Unfortunately, the parallels end with the recalcitrance of RNA molecules to reveal their shape. Experiments have traced this shape only for a few hundred RNAs, a paltry number compared to the many thousands of proteins whose form and function we know. Therefore, what we can do for proteins—compare many naturally occurring molecules to map the library—is not yet possible for RNA. 
Thanks to the Austrian scientist Peter Schuster and his associates, though, the RNA library is not a lost cause. One of the grandfathers of computational biology in Europe, Schuster is now a retired professor at the University of Vienna, where he taught since the 1970s. A first encounter with Schuster seems to confirm the stereotypes that many Europeans have of Austrians. A jovial man with a generous girth and a wry sense of humor, Schuster would not have been out of place in the traditional Viennese cafés of the last days of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, where formidably well-educated polymaths held forth on everything from psychoanalysis to quantum theory. He is a scientist in that tradition, a purebred intellectual conversant with a broad variety of subjects. Not taking himself too seriously, Schuster opines with a tongue-in-cheek attitude, peppering the gravest discourse with humorous asides. He epitomizes an oft-repeated saying about how Austrians view life and its many challenges: “The situation may be hopeless, but it is never serious.”
There’s a broad mind and an incisive intellect, however, beneath the surface of Schuster’s jovial demeanor. He was among the first to propose how an RNA world might have originated. And his research group developed computer programs that predict an important aspect of an RNA text’s molecular meaning, its secondary structure phenotype. 
RNA secondary structure is what emerges first when an RNA string folds. As the string twists and bends and curls, some of its nucleotides pair with one another and create short stretches of double helices in the molecule, much like DNA’s famous spiral staircase. The secondary structure is a pattern of multiple such helices connected by stretches of intervening single-stranded text, all formed by a single molecule. Like the sheets and helices of proteins, these helices are the flowers that self-organize into the final bouquet of a three-dimensional fold. 
Not only was Schuster able to compute RNA’s secondary structures from their nucleotide sequences, but his group’s computer programs were also blazingly fast. They could predict hundreds of these molecular shapes within seconds. (To this day, we cannot do this for the more complex three-dimensional RNA fold.) With programs as fast as this, one can begin to map the RNA library. And even though we are still miles from understanding RNA’s complete fold and function, the secondary structure is very important on its own: If a mutation in the letter sequence of an RNA molecule disrupts its secondary structure, the molecule can no longer fold properly in three dimensions. Secondary structure is essentialfor the molecular meaning of RNA molecules, just as there can be no bouquet without flowers. And that’s a very good reason to study it.
Schuster’s researchers found a bewildering number of potential molecular meanings in the RNA library, all of them expressed as shapes. For example, RNA strings that are merely one hundred letters long can already form 1023different shapes. Many natural RNA molecules are much longer, and such longer texts can form many more shapes. What is more, texts with the same shapes are organized much like in the protein library. They form connected networks that reach far through the library, allowing you to revise any one text in little steps, radically, while leaving its molecular meaning unchanged. And just as in the protein library, different neighborhoods are more like medieval villages than cookie-cutter suburbs. Each neighborhood contains many different shapes, and any two neighborhoods do not share many of them. All this hints that innovability in RNA follows the same rules as in proteins. And recent experiments show that this is indeed the case.
In an ingenious experiment performed in the year 2000, Erik Schultes and David Bartel from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology blazed a trail through the RNA library. The experiment started from two short RNA texts with fewer than a hundred letters each. The texts are far apart in the library and differ in many letters, but they are not just any two strings. Both molecules are enzymes—ribozymes,because they are composed of RNA rather than protein. Each of them wiggles into a different three-dimensional shape and catalyzes a different reaction. The first molecule can cleave an RNA string into two pieces, while the second does the exact opposite, joining two RNA strings by fusing their ends with atomic bonds. Let’s call these enzymes the “splitter” and the “fuser.”
If you already had a splitter, and you needed to find a fuser somewhere in the library, would that be easy or hard? And what about the opposite, creating a splitter from a fuser? In other words, can you create a specific molecular innovation from either one of these molecules by exploring the library as evolution would? If you were ignorant about genotype networks, you would think that should be impossible, because the two molecules are far apart. And even if were possible, it might be exceedingly difficult, since a single misstep that creates a defective molecule spells death in evolution.
Undaunted, Schultes and Bartel started from one of the molecules and walked toward the other, modifying its letter sequence step by step while requiring that each such step preserve the molecule’s function, just as natural selection would demand. They used their chemical knowledge to predict viable steps through the library, manufactured each candidate mutant as an RNA string, and asked whether it could still catalyze the same reaction as its ancestor. If not, they tried a different step. 
What they found may no longer surprise you. Starting from the fuser, they were able to change forty letters in small steps toward the splitter without changing the molecule’s ability to fuse two RNA strings. And starting from the splitter, they could also change about forty letters in small steps toward the fuser without changing itsability to split two RNA molecules. About halfway between the two molecules, something fascinating happened: Fewer than three further steps completely transformed the function of either molecule. They changed the fuser into a splitter and vice versa. 
Like many good experiments, this one carries more than one powerful message. The first is that many RNA texts can express the molecular meaning of the starting fuser and splitter molecules. Second, trails connect these molecules in the library, and they allow you to find a new meaningful text, even if each step must preserve the old meaning. (Genotype networks make all this possible.) Third, while you walk along one of these trails, the innovation you are searching for will appear at some point in a small neighborhood near you.
The experiment used a single reader to explore the library, not the huge populations that do so in real evolutionary time. And what’s more, this reader did not take blind, random steps, but was guided by the biochemical knowledge of expert scientists—its steps were designed to stay on the genotype network. This left a lingering doubt in my mind. Could genotype networks also help real evolution—blindly evolving RNA populations—innovate? It would take another ten years to find the answer, which came from an evolution experiment in my Zürich laboratory.
Most people think of evolution as glacially slow, unfolding on time scales much longer than our brief life span. While that is true for human evolution, where a mere fifty generations span a thousand years, many other organisms have much shorter generation times, such as E. coli,which reproduces every twenty minutes. Fifty of its generations pass in less than a day. And an RNA molecule can replicate in mere seconds, using the kind of molecular copying machine that replicates DNA. You could fit thousands of its generations in a single day.
Fast-replicating organisms and molecules allow ambitious experiments to reenact evolution in the laboratory. Such laboratory evolution experimentsmonitor how evolution transforms entire populations over many generations. RNA molecules are especially attractive for such experiments, and for the same reason that they were central to early life. They contain both a genotype that can replicate and mutate, and a selectable molecular phenotype, in a single, extremely compact, evolvable package.
In the fall of 2008, I interviewed candidates to conduct a laboratory evolution experiment that could put my nagging doubt to rest. One of them was a young American scientist who stood out, not just because of his credentials but also because he showed up for his interview in hiking boots. While most academic scientists dress informally and would disdain the rigid dress code of other professions, that was still a bit unusual. At least it spoke of a healthy self-confidence.
The young man, Eric Hayden, had just finished his Ph.D. at the University of Oregon, where he had done excellent work on RNA enzymes. A chemist with little prior knowledge about evolutionary biology, he exuded a deep curiosity about innovation. He was instantly likable, thanks to an open face and a smile that lit up the room. After a brief conversation I asked him to chat with other researchers in my group to see whether he would be comfortable in our community. He must have felt right at home, because an hour later he returned to my office in socks—the boots were too warm, he explained.
Eric got the job, and I have never regretted my decision. He was deeply knowledgeable about RNA, a careful experimenter, and a supremely pleasant human being. I felt privileged to work with him.
In my research group, Eric studied a ribozyme, an RNA enzyme that helps some bacteria express their genes. This enzyme recognizes RNA strings with a specific letter sequence, cleaves them, and then attaches one of the string’s fragments to itself. (Many organisms harbor molecules that recognize and cleave specific DNA and RNA texts, for purposes as varied as destroying the foreign DNA of infecting viruses and joining shorter snippets of DNA to form larger meaningful texts.)64I had a simple question for this enzyme: Could genotype networks help transform it to recognize a new RNA molecule?
To find out, Eric created more than a billion copies of this enzyme—all of them would fit comfortably into a teaspoon—and used a molecular copy machine to replicate each molecule in this population. This machine is imperfect, because it occasionally makes copying errors, thus sprinkling the population’s ribozymes with mutations. Eric then used a chemical trick to let only some of those mutants replicate—those that could still react with their RNA target. The trick satisfied natural selection’s key requirement that a molecule’s function be preserved for its survival to the next generation.
Eric’s experiment cycled multiple times—think of each cycle as a generation—between this error-prone replication and selection. Before the first cycle, all the molecules in his population were identical, like a billion readers hunched over the same volume in a library. After the first generation, many molecules had already mutated, and only some mutants had survived. The survivors mutated further in the second generation, and so on, until after a mere ten generations, the molecules in the population differed from the starting RNA by an average of five letters, and some by as many as ten letters. The billion readers had spread out in the library.
This simple observation concluded a first part of Eric’s experiment. The population now contained many different RNA molecules, all connected to their parents through a series of single-letter changes. Forced by selection, the molecules in the population had preserved their phenotype, even though their genotype had changed. Because the population had spread through the library, Eric’s experiment had shown that a genotype network exists for RNA enzymes with this phenotype
The second part of the experiment involved two populations. The first population was the one I just described, while the second was like the starting population, with all identical molecules. Eric supplied both populations with a new and different RNA string to cleave. In this string he had replaced one atom of phosphorus with an atom of sulfur, which makes the enzyme’s job much more difficult. He then evolved both populations separately, through multiple rounds of replication and selection, except that now he selected only molecules that could cleave the newRNA string as well. He then asked which populations got the hang of this new task more quickly, the first, spread out over a genotype network, or the second, concentrated in one spot.
If genotype networks help innovation, then the first population should do better, because its members can explore more neighborhoods in the RNA library. And this is exactly what Eric found. The spread-out population found an RNA molecule that excelled at the new task eight times more rapidly than the highly concentrated population. 
Eric’s experiment also harbored another surprise. This one occurred when we read the letter sequence of the best new molecule that evolution had found, the molecule that was superior to all others at the new job
Many researchers have studied the RNA enzyme with which we started our experiment. It is a short molecule with only some two hundred letters. We know its letter sequence, its fold, what it does, and how it does it. We know most of what you might want to know about it. And we precisely controlled the environment in which the enzyme evolved, down to the concentration of every molecule, for many generations. With this near-perfect knowledge, you might think that we should be able to predicthow the molecule would change to solve its new task. If you knew a machine inside out, every single cog, bolt, lever, and spring, and how they work together, you would surely know how best to improve the machine.
We didn’t. The solution that nature came up with to improve our enzyme was completely unexpected. To this date, we do not fully understand why it works best.
Such surprises occur time and again in laboratory evolution experiments. No matter how well a molecule is studied, no matter how simple the experiment, no matter how precisely controlled, nature never ceases to surprise. Even simple enzymes are more difficult to understand than most human machines.
But although we failed to predict a specific solution, we had managed to predict something more important: that a genotype network could accelerate the population’s discovery of this solution. And this prediction was right on target. We can predict innovability even if we cannot predict individual innovations.
Many nonscientists feel troubled when science demystifies nature, identifies the laws that rule it, and thus takes away from their feelings of wonder and awe about the world. In the words of the poet John Keats, a scientist is the sort of killjoy who would “clip an Angel’s wings” and “unweave a rainbow.” That sentiment surely was one reason why Darwin’s theory met resistance, but an experiment like this shows us that we can have it both ways. Science can explain generalprinciples of innovability even if it cannot predict any individualinnovation. Understanding innovability can leave the magic of innovation intact. And that, by itself, is reason for wonder and awe.

