CHAPTER FIVE
Command and Control

It’s hard to beat milk as a metaphor for goodness. Lady Macbeth’s husband is too full of the “milk of human kindness” to commit regicide, the third chapter of Exodus promises the Hebrews a “land flowing with milk and honey,” and to this day we call harmless things “safe as mother’s milk.” But for more than half of the world’s population, a healthy glass of milk is decidedly not good. It means bloating, gas, and diarrhea. The reason is a lack of lactase, the enzyme that prechews the milk-sweetening sugar lactose for our bodies. Without it, bodies cannot break down lactose, leaving it to gut bacteria that happily scavenge this unused fuel and leave waste products with nasty side effects.
When those lactose-intolerant adults were babies, they could digest the sugar in their mother’s milk just fine. Their lactase gene was turned on—in technical terms, it was expressed—which means that their bodies transcribed the DNA instructions for lactase into RNA and translated this RNA into the needed enzyme. The bodies of lactose-intolerant adults have switched the lactase gene off permanently and no longer express it. Genes like the lactase gene, which our bodies can turn on or off, are regulated genes
For most of human history, the “off” position in adults was the norm. If you are lucky enough to tolerate lactose, you have a mutation in the lactase control region, a stretch of DNA near the lactase gene that leaves the lactase gene turned on well into adulthood. Chances are that your distant ancestors were milk-drinking cattle farmers, because mutations that cause lactose tolerance first spread through pastoral populations, like those of East Africa and Scandinavia. And they spread blazingly fast, from zero to more than 90 percent of some populations, in a blip of time, the eight thousand or so years since humans first discovered the pastoral lifestyle. They are among the strongest recent signatures that natural selection has left in our genomes. 
Surprising as it may seem, lactose-induced indigestion is deeply connected with innovation. What connects them is regulation—the tuning of the activity of molecules like the lactase gene. Accounting for much more than intestinal upset, regulation is also complicit in the endlessly varying forms of organisms, the gracefully undulating umbrella of a jellyfish, the lethal torpedo of a shark’s body, the slender stem of a rose, the gargantuan trunk of a redwood tree, the deadly coil of a viper, the light-footed legs of a rabbit, and the soaring wings of a bird. Regulation has come a long way from its murky origins in the first cells, where it balanced the growth of a membrane container with that of an RNA genome. More than three billion years later, regulation is shaping the bodies of every living thing on the planet. And no understanding of innovability would be complete without grasping how new regulation appears.
Although regulation controls the form and function of even the most complex organism, like so much else it is most easily studied in the simplest cells, those of bacteria. This is how two French geneticists, François Jacob and Jacques Monod, won their Nobel Prize. Starting in the 1950s, at a time when the double helix had just been discovered, they showed how primitive bacteria like E. coliregulate the expression of the genes that permit them to digest lactose. 
Gene expression begins with the kind of molecular copying machine that we briefly encountered in Eric Hayden’s experiment in chapter 4. It is a polymeraseenzyme that makes—the name says it all—a polymer, a stringlike molecule consisting of many smaller building blocks, the four nucleotides that we find in the faithful RNA transcript of a gene. When this polymerase transcribes a gene, it first attaches to the gene’s DNA, slides along this DNA letter by letter, and strings together an RNA molecule whose letter sequence is identical to that of the gene. This is also how bacteria express the gene for their variant of lactase, an enzyme called beta-galactosidase. (The name is cumbersome, hence it is often abbreviated as beta-gal.) This enzyme cleaves lactose into the two simpler sugars glucose and galactose, from which other metabolic enzymes can extract energy and carbon
To regulate the beta-gal gene, cells manipulate its transcription with a transcriptional regulator. This protein does mostly one thing: It latches on to short stretches of DNA near a gene. Inside the liquid environment of a cell, multiple kinds of regulators drift this way and that, and whenever any one of them encounters a specific DNA sequence—a DNA “word”—it will bind and stick to it. Different regulators have different keywords—the beta-gal regulator recognizes one that contains the letters GAATTGTGAGC. 
What enables this recognition is the same folded protein shape that makes enzymes work. Regulator and DNA need to have complementary shapes, a bit like Lego blocks where several small studs on one block fit snugly into indentations on another. The analogy is apt but also limited, because shape is not all that matters. For instance, the two molecules also need to have complementary charges or they may repel each other. And where the standard set of Lego blocks has only a few dozen shapes, molecules have many more, tens of thousands in proteins and even more in DNA, where there are as many shapes as there are possible words. 
What is more, unlike Lego blocks, many molecules spontaneously change shape, not only when they vibrate like enzymes but also when they bind one another. This shape change is similar to what happens when you insert the right key in a lock: Only then can the lock’s cylinder turn and open a door—although in molecules nothing but heat is doing the turning.
The regulator’s Lego-like binding modulates beta-gal production in the simplest possible way: It creates a roadblock for the polymerase, because the regulator’s keyword is placed right where the polymerase starts to transcribe (upper part of figure 13). When no lactose is around, the regulator (R) binds this word and blocks the polymerase (P) from reading the gene—the gene remains turned off.
FIGURE 13.Gene regulation
To use lactose, cells need to get rid of this roadblock whenever the energy-rich substance appears. To understand how they do that, it helps to know that the regulator can bind not only DNA, but also another molecule—like one Lego block that can connect to several others. The other molecule is lactose itself. And when the key of lactose binds the lock of the regulator, the regulator changes shape (see the diamond shape in figure 13) and is no longer complementary to DNA (lower part of figure 13). It detaches from the DNA, which the polymerase can now transcribe freely, letter by letter, into the RNA from which the cell will manufacture the beta-gal protein. In sum, the beta-gal gene is on—beta-gal is produced—whenever lactose is available, but otherwise the gene is off, because its transcription is blocked.
Beta-gal is great stuff. But it isn’t cheap. A cell that expresses beta-gal doesn’t just contain a few dozen of the beta-gal proteins, but rather some three thousand identical molecules, each of them comprising more than a thousand amino acids that need to be manufactured and strung together, which has to be paid for in molecular materials and energy. Common sense suggests that cells should regulate beta-gal to avoid wasting these materials, but if common sense were the surest guide to nature’s ways, biologists would have little to do. The cost to produce beta-gal constantly may well be negligible, given the millions of other molecules that cells manufacture. And leaving the gene on all the time could have a real advantage too, a head start when lactose becomes available.
In 2005, Erez Dekel and Uri Alon from the Weizmann Institute in Israel wanted to find the true cost of expressing beta-gal. They tricked cells into believing that lactose was around when in fact it was not. The cells turned on the beta-gal gene without reason, and if that wastefulness makes a difference, they should divide more slowly. And indeed they did, by a few percent. It’s a bit as if a cash-strapped developer built a house with an unnecessary swimming pool, which cost him money and materials that should have been used to build other, essential rooms. A better builder would finish faster, sell the house, and start a new one, while the other one is still agonizing over the tiles to choose for the pool.
A construction delay amounting to only a few percent may not seem like much, a single minute or so, added to the twenty minutes that E. colicells need to divide. But that minute will eventually be deadly. A population that initially contains 50 percent of such wasteful cells would contain less than 1 percent after eighty days, and fewer than one in a million after merely three hundred days. Rapidly, inevitably, and fatally, they get washed out by the faster-reproducing cells. This is natural selection in rapid and brutal action.
If regulation matters because it avoids waste, then it should be everywhere. And indeed it is. Think of a metabolism with its hundreds of reactions—lactase catalyzing only one of them—as a sophisticated interconnected network of pipelines. Into this network flow nutrients, out of it flow biomass molecules. Each pipe has a dedicated pump, an enzyme that propels materials through it. A cell can regulate each pump according to its needs. If new nutrients turn up in a patch of soil—a fallen apple, a rotting carcass—the soil bacteria turn up the pumps through which these molecules flow. Once the nutrients are gobbled up, they shut these pumps down. And if more of some nutrients and less of others become available, cells can fine-tune the pumps to the right speed.
The beta-gal gene is repressedby a regulator, but other genes are regulated in the opposite way: Cells leave them off by default and activatethem only when needed—through transcriptional regulators that help rather than prevent DNA polymerase from transcribing a gene. And even though the regulation of transcription is the most important kind of regulation, there are many others. Cells regulate how fast they manufacture proteins from transcribed RNA, how active these proteins are, how long-lived, and on and on. This is perhaps the most convincing evidence for regulation’s importance: Life has invented a dozen different ways of doing it.
Imagine the kitchen of a high-end restaurant. The pantry is well stocked with all manner of vegetables, meats, fruit, fish, cooking oils, spices, and flavorings. There are enough ingredients to create every conceivable dish, from the mundane to the exotic, each one nutritious and delicious. The executive chef wants a complete supply of everything, all the time. One of regulation’s roles in metabolism is that of a penny-pinching manager, requisitioning just the right amount of ingredients, anxious not to squander money on even as little as an extra potato.
But regulation is much more than that. It also provides the recipes, the kind that call for cooking a cup of beans with two cups of chicken stock and a dash of salt in a 350-degree oven for thirty minutes. Each recipe is a sophisticated gene expression program encoded in the genome. It tells cells just when and how much to make of each protein ingredient in an organism
If comparing a blue whale to a soufflé seems offensive, consider the complexity of life’s recipes. Each cell type needs many more ingredients than even the most complex dish, thousands of them, in amounts so finely tuned and so exquisitely timed that not even the most skilled five-star cook could hope to follow life’s recipes. What is more, evolution has untiringly created new recipes that brought forth ever-new dishes, innovations in cells, tissues, and organs, as well as entirely new kindsof bodies that emerge through the shifting and enormously complex patterns of regulation.
Regulatory recipes are the business of developmental biology, a branch of biology that studies the near-magical process of creating a body from a single cell. It ponders how the cells in a body form not just an amorphous, shapeless blob, but organs like brains, livers, hearts, and lungs in animals, and stems, leaves, roots, and flowers in plants. Each organ has a highly specialized task, and each contains many specialized types of cells. Your heart, for example, includes contracting cells that make the cardiac muscles pump, connective tissue cells that hold them together, and pacemaker cells that coordinate the heartbeat via electric signals, like a drummer beating the rhythm of the oarsmen on a galley. How do these cell types form from a single fertilized egg cell, and why do they form at exactly the right time and place? How does a cell know to become a pacemaker cell rather than a neuron or a liver cell?
The answer lies in regulation, which guides the development of all organisms. The specialized cells in multicellular organisms get their identity from the proteins they manufacture. Each cell contains complete copies of all our genes, but cells differ in which of these genes they express as proteins. Muscle cells express motor proteins, tiny molecular machines that allow them to contract, which is about all muscles do. Cells in your eye make transparent proteins whose purpose is to transmit light and focus it on the light-sensing retina. Cartilage cells express collagen and elastin, proteins that cushion the bones in your joints and prevent them from rubbing against each other. 
The relationship between specialized cells and distinctive proteins seems a simple one, but while cells do express specific proteins, they don’t do so exclusively. Any one protein, in fact, can be expressed in multiple cell types. The vitreous body of your eyes—the clear gel between the lens and the retina—produces the same collagen as cartilage, the muscle cells in your biceps express the same molecular motors as the heart, and so on. What gives a cell its identity is not one molecule, but a molecular fingerprint, a combination of hundreds of proteins that is unique to a cell. And the identity of an innovative cell type is really a newfingerprint, caused by a new pattern of gene regulation. 
Because identity-shaping genes can be expressed in multiple cell types, they have not just one but multiple on-off switches, symbolized in figure 14 through several small rectangular boxes. Each of these boxes stands for a different word that can bind its own regulator (open shapes). An example is the gene encoding crystallin, a protein in the fingerprint of your eye lens that also helps your eyes focus (more about this gene in chapter 6). No fewer than five regulators, including a protein called Pax6, bind near it and determine its expression. Some such regulators bind DNA strongly and also influence transcription strongly, others bind weakly and influence transcription weakly. Like a cabinet of counselors who jockey for influence over a king, these regulators jockey for influence over the polymerase’s “decision” to express a gene. Some favor repression, others activation, some are influential, others less so, and the sum of their influences determines gene expression.
FIGURE 14.One gene, multiple regulators
And what regulates the regulators? Simple: more regulators. Keep in mind that the regulators of the gene in figure 14 are proteins, and like all proteins, they are encoded by genes that are usually also regulated. The Pax6 regulator of lens crystallin is itself expressed not just in the lens but also in the cornea, the pancreas, and the developing nervous system, where multiple regulators guide itsexpression. And what about these regulators, how are they regulated? Through other regulators. And their regulators? Through yet other regulators. All these regulators often form daisy chains, regulation cascades like that shown in figure 15.
FIGURE 15.A regulation cascade
That would seem enough complexity for one day, but alas, regulation can get muchmore complicated: Regulators form not just linear chains but complex regulator circuitswhere regulators regulate each other. Figure 16 illustrates this idea with a regulator circuit of five genes labeled A through E, each symbolized by a rectangle. To keep it simple, the figure no longer shows where regulators bind DNA, but only which regulators regulate each other, through black arrows indicating that a regulator activates a gene, or through gray lines ending in crossbars for regulators that repress a gene. (As a verbal shorthand, we can say that genes activate or repress one another.) The dashed lines hint at yet another complication: Each regulator can twiddle the knobs of other genes—up to hundreds—outside the circuit. The Pax6 gene is a member of such a circuit, and mutations in it illustrate the power of regulator circuits: Defects in the human Pax6 gene can cause blindness through aniridia—a missing iris—as well as an opaque lens and a degenerate retina. The gene has counterparts with similar roles in many animals, including mice, fish, and even fruit flies—despite the great architectural differences between their compound eyes and ours. The fruit fly version of Pax6 is known as eyeless,for the simple reason that flies lacking eyeless form no eyes. But even more striking is what happens when flies get too much of a good thing, when biologists turn on eyeless in unusual places while a fly embryo develops: In that case, flies can sprout eyes on their antennae, legs, and even wings. 
FIGURE 16.A regulator circuit
Figure 16 looks a bit like a wiring diagram an engineer might create. This metaphor, of genes being wired, is useful, even though no real wires run between them. A wiring diagram is a compact way of writing down a circuit’s genotype, the DNA that encodes its regulators and the keywords that each regulator binds. It allows you to read at a glance that gene A in figure 16 activates B and E, but represses D, B activates C and D, but is repressed by E and C, D represses C, and so on. Inside a cell these influences create a symphony of mutual activation and repression, where each instrument in the orchestra of genes responds to the melodic cues of others with its own notes, until the circuit reaches an equilibrium—like a polyphonic closing chord—where the expression of circuit genes no longer changes and their mutual influences have reached a balance. At this point of balance, some circuit genes are turned off whereas others are turned on. As a hypothetical example, genes A and C in figure 16 might be on, whereas B, D, and E might be off. This state of a circuit (e.g., “on,” “off,” “on,” “off,” “off”) is the gene expression pattern that ultimately creates a cell’s molecular fingerprint, because each of the circuit genes regulates many other genes. This pattern is also the circuit’s phenotype. It is another one of those phenotypes that can’t be perceived directly but needs to be measured with sophisticated instruments. Ultimately, however, it creates the most visible phenotype of all—a body and its shape. And new gene expression patterns are needed to create new, innovative types of bodies.
Regulatory circuits help build the bodies of organisms as different as the tiny fruit flies that congregate on rotting fruit, the small weedy plant known as the thale cress, and the zebrafish, a striped freshwater fish less than ten centimeters long. None of these organisms is eye-catching, but they have other qualities that make them favorite examples for researching development: They are small and they develop fast, thus allowing us to study many of them in little time.
One lesson they taught us is that regulation circuits can shape a body incredibly rapidly. The larvae of fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster,hatch a mere fifteen hours after a fruit fly has laid its eggs, pupating and metamorphosing into adult flies after as little as seven days. Fifteen hours to produce a complex organism that can feed, crawl, and navigate the world—no wonder that thousands of scientists spend their careers trying to figure out how thatrecipe works.
A fly’s body has three major parts that are further subdivided into fourteen segments: a head, a thorax with three segments, and an abdomen with eleven more, where individual segments have special tasks like walking or reproducing. They are not, to most people, especially beautiful or elegant: nothing like the perfection of a bird’s wing, or the majesty of a giant redwood. However, those fourteen segments and their special tasks, as distinctive to a fly as a flying buttress is to a Gothic cathedral, or a Doric column to the Parthenon, have produced as much scientific enlightenment as any aspect of the living world. They are still studied by multitudes, from high school biology students to Nobel laureates. That’s because they are full of lessons about regulation, many of which apply to all animals. 
Before laying an egg, a fruit fly deposits several chemical signals in the egg, tiny snippets of the complicated recipe to form a larva. One of these signals is an RNA copy of a gene called bicoid,from which the egg can make a bicoid protein. (Yes, fly biologists use strange names.) Deposited near the egg’s front, where the head will later form, bicoid disperses through the egg like a small glob of syrup through a glass of water. Its concentration remains highest at the front and decreases toward the rear.
In addition to bicoid, the mother fly also deposits RNA transcripts of several other genes at the front, and yet other transcripts at the rear, where they spread toward the front. After the mother’s job is done, each region of the embryo is bar-coded with a combination of regulators in amounts unique to that region.
After a sperm has fertilized the egg, the egg begins to divide into many cells, and the developing embryo synthesizes proteins from the deposited RNA molecules. In any one cell, the amount of each synthesized protein depends on how much RNA the mother deposited nearby. These proteins are—you guessed it—regulators that can turn other genes on or off, depending on their amount. If a gene’s activator, for example, is abundant in the front like bicoid, the gene would be turned on by bicoid in the front, but nowhere else.
Among the many genes these regulators control, some are special, because they encode further regulators, which turn yet other genes on, some of which also express regulators, and so on. What’s more, these regulators then regulate each other. They form a complex regulation circuit with more than fifteen different genes. This circuit performs the choreography of mutual regulation I described earlier, creating a pattern of gene expression in which some regulators are expressed and others are not.
An especially remarkable protein in this circuit is called engrailed. Guided by the circuit’s choreography, it becomes expressed in seven highly regular stripes across the embryo. Seven regions that produce engrailed alternate with seven other regions that don’t, and the stripes of engrailed expression demarcate the nascent fourteen segments of the fly. Engrailed and other regulators then control many further genes that specify each segment’s identity, specifying whether a segment will carry legs, or support wings, or be part of the abdomen. 
All this and more happens in a matter of hours, but it’s not only their speedy development that made fruit fly embryos a boon to developmental biology: Until segmentation is well under way, the embryo’s cells are not separated by walls. This means that molecules can drift freely through the growing embryo. In most other species, cells are walled off right after fertilization, which makes communication between them more challenging.
Not impossible, though. The male reproductive apparatus in humans—the penis and scrotum—is an instructive example. When a male fetus is about eight weeks old, clusters of so-called Leydig cells release chemical signals called androgens near the area where sex organs will eventually form. These signals are hormones like testosterone that are crucial for sculpting sexual organs. Released from the Leydig cells, they instruct nearby cells to specialize in forming the penis, the scrotum, and, much later, sperm cells. Once an androgen hormone molecule has been released by a Leydig cell, it drifts through the space between cells, and because its chemical structure allows it to penetrate the cellular membrane, it eventually enters another cell. Inside, an androgen receptor, a special protein that can recognize the hormone’s shape, is already waiting for it. And when the two connect, the receptor protein changes its shape—yet another turning lock. Its new shape allows the protein to bind specific words on DNA and activate nearby genes. The androgen receptor turns on many genes, some of which make regulators that eventually arouse hundreds of genes to create unique cellular identities within the male sexual organs. 
From flies to humans, hundreds of similar signals crisscross every tiny sliver of tissue during every moment of an embryo’s development. This unimaginably complex communication process instructs cells about their location and fate, like the bicoid-expressing cells that “know” they are near the front. These signals also command cells to divide, move, swell, shrink, flatten, and, eventually, to acquire an identity and shape a body. And they are involved whenever cells acquire new identities that lead to innovative shapes and body plans.
If we could predict the regulatory dance that shapes embryos from flies to humans, we could predict how organs, tissues, and cells form, and why different organisms have very different body plans. That would be quite a feat. Unfortunately, a circuit’s expression pattern can be extremely complicated, even for a simple circuit like that of figure 16. If A activates B and C represses B, whereas B activates C, and D represses C, it’s not immediately obvious which gene expression pattern would result. And worse, many circuits contain many more genes than this one, dozens of regulators that form a dense filigree of interwoven regulation, complex beyond our mind’s grasp. But there is hope, in the form of computers that can describe a circuit’s choreography through mathematical equations, process these equations in their silicon brains, and predict a circuit’s gene expression patterns.
One remarkable computational scientist who devotes his life to this task is John Reinitz. I first met John when I was a graduate student at Yale in the 1990s. He was a few years my senior, and what they call a character, chain-smoking filterless cigarettes at a time when smokers were already ostracized, and dressing in ways that made casual Friday look like a formal banquet. He drove a fossilized Volkswagen Beetle, whose rear seats had disappeared beneath a landfill of discarded fast-food packaging. John’s nonconformism surely was an asset in his research, because he swam with bold strokes against the mainstream.
At the time, many scientists studied fly embryos, but they used computers for little more than writing their research papers. Instead they studied regulation by changing the DNA text of a gene, or manipulating a regulator in the laboratory, and measuring how such changes altered segmentation. Their experiments were productive: Among other things, they established which among thousands of genes formed the fruit fly’s embryo. But their efforts to understand a circuit’s entire expression patterns, one gene at a time, were doomed to fail, because a whole circuit is so much more than the sum of its parts. Today this is widely accepted, but in the early 1990s John’s efforts to emulate fly development in a computer made him an outsider. His work was ignored by many and belittled by some.
This work was analogous to building one of those flight simulators that are indispensable for training military and commercial pilots—by reproducing not only all the complex machinery of a cockpit, but also disturbances like turbulence and instrument failures. Similarly, John’s fly simulator collected mountains of data about the regulators of early fly embryos and how they regulate each other, encapsulated this information in equations, and simulated them in a computer. And like a good flight simulator, this one worked—not a small achievement. It can mimic the early development of fruit flies, and does so at enormously accelerated speed. It can be run over and over again, to tease out patterns that might be missed in isolated examples. And more than reenacting the choreography of a normal embryo, it can also simulate the plane crashes of regulator malfunction, and explain how mutant genes lead to deformed embryos. As I write these lines, John has devoted decades of his life to building this simulator, often in the face of ignorant and condescending peers. His dedication often crosses my mind when I am about to swat a fly. (Then I swat.)
Beyond sharing a backbone and a spinal cord, the more than sixty thousand species of vertebrates, which include fish, mammals, amphibians, reptiles, and birds, have incredibly diverse bodies. This diversity is built on similar structures, however, because all vertebrates can trace their lineage back to a common ancestor that appeared more than five hundred million years ago. For example, the paired fins—one pair in front, one in the back—that help fish push and steer themselves through water gave rise to the arms and legs of animals that crawl, walk, jump, and run on land. And the forearms of some of these animals—dinosaurs—changed into the wings of birds.
Limbs are key innovations of land-living vertebrates. They have three familiar parts, the upper arm and upper leg, the lower arm and lower leg, and the hands and feet. The major bones in our arms and legs correspond to arm and leg bones in horses, dogs, eagles, bats, pigs, crocodiles, and many other animals. Transform their sizes, as evolution did, and many specialized functions become possible, such as the slender limbs of horses custom-made for running, and the light bones of wings perfected for flying.
Limbs—old and new—owe their existence to a family of regulators that are used in building the bodies of thousands of organisms, from jellyfish to humans. Though these regulators are essential for normal body development, the name for the genes that encode them—homeobox, or Hox, genes—comes from their role in homeosis, a process that creates malformed organisms when these genes are mutated, such as flies with (useless) legs sprouting from their heads in place of antennae. For better or for worse, changing life’s recipes can have dramatic effects. 
The homeobox is a protein sequence of sixty amino acids that binds DNA and allows Hox regulators to control gene expression. In organisms as different as fruit flies and humans, these regulators are lords over hundreds of other genes that give texture to cells, tissues, and organs. Hox regulators also regulate one another’s expression. That is, they form a regulator circuit like that of figure 16, but much more complex, because animals can have forty or more of them. This circuit shapes important parts of many bodies—including ours. Among these parts are the thirty-three vertebrae in our spinal column and their unique identities—two vertebrae in our neck with flexible joints, twelve vertebrae in our thorax with attached ribs, and so on.
The Hox gene circuit expresses different combinations of genes in the neck, thorax, and abdomen as our backbone develops in the womb. Each of these combinations is a gene expression code,an on-off pattern of Hox genes that is specific to each body region. One on-off pattern specifies neck vertebrae, another specifies thoracic vertebrae, and so on.
Hox genes mold not just the human body but also the bodies of vertebrates like pythons and other snakes whose body plan—another ancient innovation—allows them to slither, burrow, and swim. Some snakes have more than three hundred vertebrae, most of them identical and rib-carrying like our twelve thoracic vertebrae. Hox genes are responsible for these differences between snakes and other animals: In most vertebrates, the Hox code for the thorax is expressed in only a small region of the embryo, but this region stretched like a rubber band when snakes evolved from lizards more than a hundred million years ago. The thoracic Hox code became expressed along most of the main body axis, and allowed snakes to build the hundreds of vertebrae that define their new body plan. 
Hox genes shape not only the main axis of an organism’s body—the axis defined by the backbone in vertebrates—but evolution also co-opted them to mold another ancient innovation, the fins of fish. And it did not stop there. Over millions of years, evolution transformed these fins into limbs, by altering, refining, and differentiating the fins’ Hox code. Eventually it created a three-part code in organisms that walk or fly, a specific combination of Hox genes for the upper arm, another for the lower arm, and a third for the hand. We know all this from the effects of mutations that garble this code and appear as horrific birth defects that are well studied in animals. When two genes called Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are not expressed while limbs develop, the results can be no lower arms at all, or a hand sprouting from somewhere near the elbow. Likewise, missing fingers or palms in a newborn can result from a failure to express two hand-specific Hox genes—Hoxa13 and Hoxd13. If the expression of a third group of Hox genes fails, only the upper arm will form. 
Most of the time, though, Hox genes do their job very well. And they do it in an impressive number of locations, helping form structures from the pelvis to the vertebrate brain. They also help to build the bodies of organisms as different as shrimp, jellyfish, worms, and even fruit flies, where the Hox circuit is as important as the segmentation circuit. In fact, the two work sequentially. After the segmentation circuit establishes segment numbers,the Hox circuit specifies segment identities—which segments will carry legs, which ones wings, and so on. And these circuits are only two among many that flies and most animals use to build their bodies, and have used ever since the first animals emerged hundreds of millions of years ago.
Hox gene circuits were instrumental in the origin of new body parts—like limbs—as well as new body plans,like those of snakes. How exactly these innovations originated may be forever lost in the mists of life’s deep history, but one principle is crystal clear: They originated through changes in regulation.
The same principle is just as clear in other, more ancillary innovations.
Imagine a slender lizard that weaves its way through a dense meadow hunting for its next meal when suddenly a huge pair of eyes stares into its face. It freezes, knowing that it will be torn to pieces in a moment. But then two wings flap, and the eyes are gone like a mirage. No predator was near, just two enormous colored spots on the wings of a tasty butterfly.
The eyespots of butterflies are lifesaving bluffs, formed by an unusually versatile regulator protein called distalless. A member of a circuit that molds the legs, wings, and antennae of flies, distalless has also been co-opted to paint eyespots on the butterfly’s wings. We know that distallessis part of an eyespot-specific expression code, because developing butterfly larvae make distalless exactly where the eyespots will later form. Some butterflies have smaller eyespots, others larger eyespots, some have only one eyespot, others several. Regardless, developing butterflies unfailingly express distalless in the location of their eyespots. And distallessis really a cause of eyespots rather than just correlated with their appearance: If one transplants distalless-producing cells of a developing wing to different wing locations, development will paint an eyespot there. 
The cathedral of a butterfly’s body is built by regulation, from the nave of its main segments to the gargoyles of its eyespots. So are bodies with completely different blueprints, like those of plants, with their roots, stems, flowers, and leaves. When flowering plants first originated more than two hundred million years ago, they had simple leaves whose blades were undivided and formed one continuous surface. Later, simple leaves gave rise to the innovation of a dissected leaf, where many small leaflets subdivide a leaf blade (figure 17).
FIGURE 17.Leaf shapes
Dissecting a simple leaf into leaflets offers more than one advantage. Dissected leaves have a greater surface area than simple leaves. They can absorb more carbon dioxide for photosynthesis, which allows plants to grow faster, and they can prevent leaves from overheating in hot environments, which can slow down photosynthesis and damage the leaf. If dissected leaves are so useful, we might expect them to appear more than once in evolution, and indeed they did: Dissected leaves arose more than twenty times in flowering plants alone. 
Each time this innovation required changes in regulation. When a plant seedling germinates and pushes through the soil, a tiny speck of tissue at its very tip contains dividing cells that enlarge the seedling and push it upward. It is here that leaves begin to form. Before you can see a nascent leaf with the naked eye, a cluster of multiple cells—the leaf primordium—is already set aside around the tip to become a leaf. Cells in this primordium express a regulator protein called KNOX. When Angela Hay and Miltos Tsiantis from Oxford University manipulated this protein in the modest weed known as the hairy bittercress, which sports dissected leaves, they found how crucial this regulator is. By decreasing the amount of KNOX, they could reduce the number of leaflets down to one, creating a simple leaf. Increasing the amount of KNOX created leaves with more leaflets. Plus, they found that KNOX plays this role not just in the hairy bittercress but in several other plant species with dissected leaves. 
These examples and hundreds more illustrate the power of regulation to innovate. The lab notebooks of thousands of researchers and the pages of dozens of scholarly journals are overflowing with research on regulators like KNOX in plants, distalless in butterflies, and engrailed in fruit flies. Our own genome encodes more than two thousand different regulators in dozens of separate circuits. A half century of research has told us how important regulation is to building bodies old and new. It has helped us to understand the natural history of many innovations and the new expression codes behind them.
But a list of examples, however long, cannot go beyond that. Lizards’ limbs and fishes’ fins are shaped by different variants of Hox circuits—different circuit genotypes—that produce different expression codes. Identifying any one such circuit variant does not explain how evolution found the one whose expression code is best suited for a task. (If there are too many circuit variants, this could be impossibly hard.) What’s more, while circuits change little by little in evolution, useful expression codes need to be preserved before new and better ones are found. No list of examples, however long, could tell us how innovation through regulation is even possible.
If the problem is familiar, so is the solution: Study not just one circuit but many, an entire library of circuit genotypes and their expression phenotypes. The texts in this regulation library are the DNA genotypes that encode regulators and the words they recognize. But writing them like that would be unnecessarily long and tedious, as if you described a house through the position of all its molecules, rather than by an architect’s blueprint. Much better to write them as wiring diagrams like those of figure 16.
The entire library comprises all possible such circuits—all possible wiring diagrams. To compute its size we need to count these wiring diagrams. That may seem hard, but it is surprisingly easy. Any regulator in a circuit, call it A, can influence another regulator, B, in three principal ways. Regulator A can activate B, it can repress it, or it can have no effect. The same holds for any other pair, say, A and C, or D and E, in the circuit of figure 16. One can activate the other, repress the other, or have no effect on it. These are the only three options. This simple idea takes us almost all the way to counting all five-gene circuits. What’s left is to count the number of gene pairs. The circuit of figure 16 has 5 × 5 = 25 of them, each with three regulation options. To find the total number of circuits, we then need to multiply three for the first gene pair with three for the second gene pair with three for the third pair, and so on, for all twenty-five pairs. Three multiplied with itself 25 times yields 325, or more than 800 billion circuits.
FIGURE 18.Two neighbors in the circuit library
An impressive number. Five genes. More than 800 billion circuits. Especially since actual regulation circuits can have many more than five genes. The Hox gene circuits of vertebrates, for example, comprise some forty-odd genes. To count the number of circuits that these genes could form, we use the same idea: Compute the number of gene pairs (40 × 40 = 1,600), and then multiply the number 3 with itself 1,600 times. The magnitude of the resulting number has the ring of familiarity. It is greater than a 1 with 700 zeroes behind it, more zeroes than would fit on this page.
But even that number, impressive as it is, doesn’t yet capture all circuits. So far, we assumed that all regulators were equally influential, turning their target genes either on or off. But remember the king’s cabinet of counselors. Some regulators can be weak, others strong, and that difference further increases the number of circuits: Any two genes might face not three but five possibilities, no regulation, weak or strong activation, weak or strong repression. In this case, we would need to multiply the number 5—not the number 3—by itself many times. And why stop there? We could distinguish ever-finer gradations of activation or repression leading to ever-increasing numbers of possible circuits. Fortunately, research in my laboratory has shown that these finer gradations of influence don’t change the library’s organization—a good thing, since even three gradations create enough circuits to fill yet another hyperastronomical library.
The circuit library and its genotype texts have much in common with the metabolic library and the protein library we encountered earlier. Clip or add a wire in a circuit through DNA mutations—remember that these “wires” are not made of metal, but symbolize regulatory connections between two genes that can be altered through DNA mutations—and you create one of the circuit’s neighbors, like that on the right of figure 18, where gene B no longer regulates gene D (see the thick black arrow in the left circuit). Each circuit has many such neighbors, more than three thousand for a circuit with forty genes. If we arrange all circuits on the corners of a hyperdimensional cube, one circuit per corner, then stepping away from a circuit is like moving along an edge of this hypercube to the next corner. And many edges lead away from each circuit, because this hypercube also has many dimensions, sixteen hundred for circuits of forty genes. It has even more corners, 10700of them, the number of texts in the entire library of forty-gene circuits. 
As in the other two libraries, each circuit on each corner has a neighborhood that includes all texts on nearby shelves—the circuits that differ from it in only one or a few wires. Evolution can easily explore this neighborhood in a few steps, DNA alterations that change as little as one DNA word, and create or destroy regulation between two genes. Walk beyond this neighborhood and you encounter circuits that are ever more distant—another familiar concept. Here, distance is the number of wires by which two circuits differ. Neighboring circuits are closest, and farthest apart are two circuits that do not share a single wire. They are texts in opposite corners of the hypercube library.
Many circuit genotypes will be as meaningless as a random string of English letters. Others may encode meaningful words or sentences, even though the text as a whole may be incoherent, or even destructive like the mutant Hox circuits that create crippled arms without hands. The language of meaningful texts is once again a chemical language, that of gene regulation and expression codes that cells and tissues understand. It ultimately manifests itself in a backbone, a leaf, or a hand, each one a parcel of meaning embodied in flesh. And when evolution creates new embodied meaning, it does so through the kinds of mutations that turn a simple leaf into a dissected leaf. 
A circuit’s meaning is expressed through the elaborate choreography of gene regulation I described earlier. Starting from a pattern of expressed regulators—like the one a fly imposes on its egg through its chemical signals—circuit genes regulate each other and change this pattern. Genes twinkle on and off until a circuit finds an equilibrium resembling the human sculptures that troupes of circus acrobats build with their bodies. In such a sculpture, the acrobats are in a stationary equipoise where the push of one body equals the pull of another, and where the structure would collapse if only one acrobat were to let go.
After many years of research, we have learned enough about this kind of regulation to compute this equilibrium, as John Reinitz showed with his fly simulator. This means we are ready to read not just one, not a few, but millions of circuits. We can map an entire hyperastronomical library of them.
We already know that this library contains unimaginably many circuits, but the number of their expression codes is not for the fainthearted either. If each gene in a forty-gene circuit can only be on or off, it contributes two possibilities to a gene expression pattern. To calculate the total number of possible expression patterns, we need to multiply two with itself, as many times as there are genes, to arrive at 240possible phenotypes. This number is already greater than a trillion, but it grows much larger if we consider that a gene can be more than just on or off—it can express a small, medium, large, or very large amount of regulator protein. What’s more, several circuits often cooperate to shape any one body part, which multiplies the number of possible expression codes. Compared to the number of these possible meanings, the few hundreds of cell types and tissues of a complex body like ours are paltry. Even if we allow that all cells in a body must be laid out with precision in space, there are plenty of expression codes to go around—perhaps too many to find any one of them.
Evolution explores this circuit library through the familiar crowd of randomly browsing readers, populations of organisms in which circuits get modified through occasional DNA copying errors that arise as genes get passed from parents to children with some corrupted letters. Any one such mutation can have two kinds of effects. It can deform a regulator’s shape and prevent it from recognizing DNA. Or it can alter one of the DNA “words” a regulator recognizes, either clipping a single wire of the circuit—actually disrupting the regulator’s effect on a gene—or creating a new wire, a new molecular word recognizable by some regulator.
The first kind of change often results in disaster, because each regulator affects so many other genes. Destroying a regulator’s ability to recognize DNA is akin to scrambling a complex recipe’s ingredients and thus destroying the entire dish. It can lead to organisms with terrible malformations or to embryos that die before they are born. The second sort of copying error, however, is more like a typo in a recipe. By changing the activity of merely one gene and the amount of protein it expresses—one among thousands of protein ingredients—it is less likely to cause serious damage. One might think that changes of this second kind are more tolerable and could thus steadily accumulate on evolutionary time scales. If so, they could slowly transform a circuit’s wiring diagram.
When one compares circuits that have evolved separately over millions of years, like those in some of the more than a thousand different fruit fly species, one finds indeed that most tolerable changes have occurred in the wires and not in the circuit genes themselves. Evolution alters most circuits one wire at a time, because messing with the circuit genes invites disaster. What is more, these small wiring changes indeed accumulate to transform circuits, and this process is far from slow. The reason is that a regulator’s DNA keyword can be as short as five letters and occur thousands of letters away from a gene. By chance alone, random mutations can easily create new keywords and thus new wires in a circuit. 
If only one and no other circuit in the hyperastronomical library of 10700texts expressed the code to create a specific innovation, evolution might as well pack up and go home, because this code would be a needle in a haystack many times the size of the universe. The question of why it had not thrown in the towel had called to me since the early 1990s, but I had ignored it—too many other projects. My procrastination ended in 2004 when I spent a research sabbatical at the Institute for Higher Studies near Paris in France. 
Set in a bucolic park with plenty of old trees, sculpted shrubbery, overflowing flowerbeds, and footpaths to explore while pondering life’s questions, the institute is a monastic refuge from the endless fund-raising, networking, and community service of an academic’s life. Its few resident researchers are highly decorated scientists, among them several recipients of the Fields Medal, widely known as the Nobel Prize for mathematicians. The institute focuses on mathematics and physics, but its leaders were aware that a seed long dormant in molecular biology, the insight that the whole is more than the sum of its parts, had germinated and flowered into an enormous subdiscipline known as systems biology. This emerging research field joins experimental data with mathematics and computation to find out how molecular parts like a fly’s regulators cooperate to shape whole biological systems, that is, organisms. Mathematicians and physicists have many tools to crack problems like this, and so the institute invited biologists like me for extended visits to see what we could do together.
Luckily for me, I accepted the invitation. Because it was in Paris that I met Olivier Martin.
Olivier is an internationally respected professor of statistical physics at the University of Orsay near Paris. Statistical physicists like him deal with huge collections of things like the molecules in a pressurized container of propane gas, and how they create properties like the pressure of that gas. To predict this pressure is important—we don’t want our gas tanks to explode—but also impossibly complex, because trillions of molecules bounce into the container walls every instant. Statistical physicists love to think about wholes with trillions of parts—too many to track individually—and they develop clever ways to describe those wholes, employing sophisticated statistical methods that share little beyond the name with the statistics that pollsters use to predict the outcome of elections in the United States. 
Olivier had a problem, though. Statistical physics is like a buffet where a hungry mob has devoured the choice dishes and left only small morsels behind: Most of its big questions are answered, and the remaining ones are either too hard or too trifling—not altogether surprising since scientists like James Clerk Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzmann had solved thermodynamical problems with statistical methods since the nineteenth century. Like most scientists in his situation, Olivier wanted to make a bigger contribution than physics would allow him. His problem was to find a question in systems biology that was new and challenging enough for him to chip away at.
I had a library of 10700regulation circuits to map. Boy, could I help Olivier out.
As Olivier Martin and I began to collaborate, I first came to appreciate him as a scientist whose intuition and technical skills prevented us from getting lost in the library. But he turned out to be much more than a surefooted travel companion. He was a kind and generous teacher who would patiently explain how the tools of his trade could help us find our way. 
We started with small steps whose purpose was to answer a question you will recognize. Is there only one text in the circuit library that expresses any one meaning? To find out, we started out with a single circuit in the library and computed its expression code. Then we changed one wire, asked whether this mutation altered this expression phenotype, went back to our starting circuit, changed another wire, and so on, until we had created all neighbors of our circuit and knew their phenotypes. And to make sure that the neighborhood of this one circuit was not unusual, we explored the neighborhoods of many different starting circuits, circuits with different numbers of genes, different numbers of wires, a different arrangement of wires, and different phenotypes.
They all gave the same answer. Circuits typically have dozens to hundreds of neighbors with the same phenotype. In other words, the phenotypes of these circuits remain unchanged even after encountering mutations that alter individual wires. They are not quite as delicate as those acrobat-formed human sculptures, where a body’s shifting by a few millimeters can spell disaster. Regulatory genotype circuits can tolerate such changes, because not all individual wires are critical to their function.
This first step away from a circuit already told us something very important: No one expression code—be it the one segmenting a fruit fly, dissecting a leaf, or shaping a vertebral column—has only one, special, unique circuit producing it. Each expression code can be produced by many circuits that differ in how their genes are wired. Finding out how many was trickier, because the number is so large that we could not even compute it, at least for circuits of forty or more genes. All we knew was that the number had to be enormous, since we had been able to calculate it for smaller circuits: Those with ten genes already had more than 1040circuits, and those with twenty genes had more than 10160circuits able to produce a given expression code. Producing any one expression code is another problem with more solutions than one can count. 
To find out how far apart different solutions to the same gene expression problems are in the library, we took the same random walks we had used when investigating metabolisms and proteins. Starting with a circuit, we computed its expression code, altered a wire—adding or eliminating regulation of one gene—and thus stepped to a random neighbor with the same expression code, and from that to the neighbor’s neighbor, and so on, until we could not go further without changing the expression code.
Once again, we could walk almost all the way through the library. Circuits that differed in more than 90 percent of their wires could still produce the same expression code. Looking at their wiring diagram, you would never guess that one arose from the other in many tiny steps. Yet each one was a different solution to the same problem: how to produce a specific pattern of gene expression that can shape a cell’s identity
To make sure that the starting circuit—and its expression code—was not unusual, we started to explore the library from many different shelves, circuits with different numbers of genes, different numbers of wires, different arrangement of wires, and different expression patterns. It did not make a big difference. Some circuits with the same expression code differed in every single wire, whereas others differed in “only” 75 percent of their wiring. But even these would not be recognizably related when examined side by side
Our explorations also taught us that allcircuits with the same expression code are typically connected in the library. We can start from any one of them, change one wire at a time, and transform the circuit step by step into anyother circuit with the same meaning, such that each step leaves the meaning unchanged. Once again, we could find a path from nearly every point in the library to nearly every other one, without ever getting stuck in a morass of regulatory nonsense.
All this means that circuits with the same phenotype form a vast network in the library of circuits, a genotype networklike those we found in the metabolic library and the protein library. The library is filled with these networks, each of them containing more circuits than you can count, each of them reaching far through the library. All circuits in the same network are solutions to the same problem: how to produce a specific expression code that helps shape a cell, a tissue, or an organ. Small wonder that innovations like dissected leaves could evolve dozens of times independently, if vast numbers of circuits have the expression code that can get them there.
To map the millions of circuits needed to understand the library would have been impossible with any available technology aside from computation—hundreds of researchers had to experiment on millions of fruit flies over several decades to understand the single circuit segmenting a fly. However, some intrepid scientists are beginning to map circuits in simpler organisms, such as bacteria and yeasts. One of them is Mark Isalan, a researcher in Barcelona, who rewired a transcriptional regulation circuit in E. coliby adding new wires—regulation between pairs of genes—and created hundreds of circuits in its neighborhood. And he found, as we had, that regulation circuits are sturdy enough to be rewired. Ninety-five percent of his rewired circuits function normally.
Other researchers compare regulator circuits among different species of the yeasts we use to brew beer, to see how far they have to travel through the circuit library. One such circuit activates genes that allow yeasts to digest the sugar galactose. You might think that there must be one bestway to wire this circuit, and that the yeast species that has discovered this way would have passed it on, unchanged, to others. Not so. In two yeast species that split many million years ago, this circuit not only has become completely rewired but even uses different regulators. Neither of these circuits is inferior, otherwise it would not have survived. Nature has solved the same regulation problem in two different but equally adequate ways. Not only that, but a path of small mutational steps connects these solutions, because the species shared a common ancestor.
Genes for the ribosome, the complex multiprotein machine that translates all RNA into proteins, tell the same story. A cell must manufacture its dozens of proteins in precisely balanced amounts, or else it will disappear like those wasteful E. colicells overproducing beta-gal. Achieving this balance might seem a delicate affair with only one best solution, but again, two different species of yeast have come up with equally successful solutions that regulate these genes in completely different ways. 
Examples like these show that organisms can indeed travel far through the circuit library. But when searching for rare nuggets of new and useful expression codes on their journey, they face a problem similar to that of innovating metabolisms and proteins: There are many trillion possible expression codes, but the immediate neighborhood of any one circuit contains at most thousands of other circuits—those differing in one wire—too few to find all possible expression codes nearby. To discover myriad new expression codes, evolving circuits need to venture out of their neighborhood. Such expeditions yield many discoveries only if differentneighborhoods contain differentexpression codes. To find out whether they do, we asked our computers to draw two arbitrary circuits from the same genotype network—call them A and B, they produce the same expression code but have different wiring—identify all circuits near them, and compile a list of expression codes of all these circuits. We found that most expression phenotypes in the neighborhood of A are different from expression phenotypes in the neighborhood of B—regardless of A and B’s phenotype, number of genes, or wiring. Different neighborhoods contain different phenotypes.
So we are back to a familiar story. The regulatory circuit library has the same layout as the metabolic and the protein libraries. Circuits with the same gene expression phenotype are organized in vast and far-reaching genotype networks. And that has consequences for a crowd of readers wandering aimlessly along such a network, figuratively seeking something new to read, actually propelled only by the steady if directionless force of mutation that slowly changes circuits, one regulatory interaction at a time: Even though some steps garble a circuit’s expression code, many others preserve it and thus allow readers to move along the genotype network. While the readers wander, they reach ever-new neighborhoods that contain texts with ever-new meanings, ever-new expression phenotypes, one of which may seed the next big thing in life’s architectural contests. Once again, genotype networks and their diverse neighborhoods create innovability. 
These similarities among different libraries are mysterious. How could innovability in metabolism, in proteins, and in regulation circuits have the same source, a library full of chemical meaning with a common cataloging system? The answer is held by an invisible hand that guided the world long before life’s origin—self-organization, a peculiar kind of it. We will turn to it next.

