EPILOGUE
Plato’s Cave

In October 1970, the magazine Scientific American published a description of the Game of Life, a creation of the British mathematician John Conway, and a simplification of ideas on building self-replicating machines proposed by the polymath John von Neumann. Not requiring a human player, the “game” can unfold inside a computer on a two-dimensional grid of cells, each of which can be either “on” (alive) or “off” (dead). Each square on Conway’s grid has eight neighbors, and a very simple set of rules determines their status. For example, if a cell has fewer than two live neighbors it turns off. In the game’s lingo it “dies.” Same result if it has between four and eight live neighbors. However, if the cell has two or three “live” neighbors, it gets to live. The final rule: A dead cell with three live neighbors is reanimated.
And that’s it. But depending on which cells are on and off when the game starts, what follows is anything but simple. Enormously complex patterns can emerge, a huge and unpredictable variety of forms, including “self-replicating” clusters of cells that spawn more of themselves. And from these simple beginnings, the Game of Life can go on indefinitely, creating complex patterns that never repeat or terminate.
Like life itself.
The game is a metaphor rather than a model for life, but it reflects a broader human aspiration: to understand life and its diversity through the language of mathematics and computation. This aspiration is much older than the game. Seventeen years after the publication of the Origin, Charles Darwin wrote in his autobiography, “I have deeply regretted that I did not proceed far enough at least to understand something of the great leading principles of mathematics, for men thus endowed seem to have an extra sense.” 
Like the zoopraxiscope that filmed Sallie Gardner four years before Darwin’s death, Darwin’s work sparked a revolution, but even if he had been a mathematician he would have been in the dark about the hidden architecture of life—he could not even know that it existed. To illuminate nature’s giant libraries, the flames of this revolution would require more fuel than Darwin’s theory.
Biology and mathematics first needed to become fully intertwined, which would take another century. It began with the mathematics of Sewall Wright and R. A. Fisher, which bridged the gap between traditional Darwinism and Mendelian genetics, and led to the modern synthesis that allowed the first accurate predictions of how fast natural selection can help innovations spread. Another half century had to elapse until systems biology taught us how molecules cooperate to produce the complex behavior and phenotypes of life. In doing so, it showed us that cells are vastly more complex than the simple elements of the Game of Life. Through regulatory circuits operating a bit like the neural networks of our brains, they perform sophisticated computations that regulate their own molecules and help them survive. And while these circuits are very different from digital computers—for one thing, they are self-assembled from organic molecules—they hint at a deep unity between the material world of biology and the conceptual world of mathematics and computation, a unity that Conway and Darwin could barely have guessed at.
The mathematical perspective of systems biology also allowed us to decipher the staggeringly complex phenotypic meaning of genotypic texts in nature’s libraries, which is crucial to understanding innovability. It led us to identify genotype networks, and to grasp that genotype networks are the common origin of the different kindsof innovations—in metabolism, regulation, and macromolecules—that created life as we know it. They propelled life from its very beginnings to single-celled organisms, from our bacterial and eukaryotic ancestors to primitive wormlike creatures, fish, amphibians, mammals, and all the way to humans, spanning billions of generations.
More than that, the mathematics of biology allowed us to see that these libraries self-organize with a simple principle, as simple as the gravitation that helps mold diffuse matter into enormous galaxies. This principle—that organisms are robust, a consequence of the complexity that helps them survive in a changing world—brings forth the intricate organization of these vast libraries.
These libraries and their texts differ fundamentally from the muscles, nerves, and connective tissues that an anatomist dissects and that we can touch with our bare hands. They are not even like cellular organelles visible through a microscope, or the structure of DNA revealed by X-ray crystallography. They are concepts, mathematical concepts, touchable only by the mind’s eye.
Does that mean they exist only in our imagination? Did we discover them or invent them?
The question whether knowledge—especially mathematical knowledge—is created or discovered has occupied philosophers for more than twenty-five hundred years, at least since Pythagoras and certainly since Plato. Plato saw our visible world as a faint shadow cast by the light of a higher, timeless reality on the poorly lit walls of a cave we inhabit. Platonists posit that we discovertruths, which come to us from a higher reality. They exist even if nobody is there to see them, like the dark side of the moon. Others, such as the Austrian philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, argue that mathematical truths are invented—in Wittgenstein’s words, “the mathematician is an inventor, not a discoverer.” 
Platonism has the upper hand in this debate, even though Plato himself was unaware of the best argument for it. It is the startling congruence between mathematical theorems and physical reality, encapsulated in a dictum often attributed to Galileo Galilei: “Mathematics is the language in which God wrote the universe.” (Words that should give any naïve creationist pause.) TheHungarian-born Nobel Prize–winning physicist and mathematician Eugene Wigner called it “the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences.” 
Unreasonable indeed: We know no reason why Newton’s laws should predict so much more than the speed of a falling apple, phenomena as different as the rotation of planets and the shaping of galaxies. Except they do. And so do countless other mathematical laws that explain phenomena so remote in space and time that we will never experience them directly. The nexus between math and reality is so tight, in fact, that the Swedish theoretical physicist Max Tegmark argues that the entire universe ismathematics. 
But the “unreasonable effectiveness” of math is not the only reason to believe in the reality of nature’s libraries and their genotype networks. Another is that the technology of the twenty-first century grants us unrestricted access to these libraries. In so doing it can shift the debate about discovery versus invention—uncomfortably abstract for millennia—from its traditional focus on languages like that of mathematics to incorporate experimental science. The reason is that we now can read individual volumes in nature’s libraries. We can, for example, manufacture any volume of the protein library—anyamino acid sequence at all—and study its chemical meaning with the instruments of biochemistry. Many of these volumes were discovered by other organisms long before us, and their molecular meaning has surprised us greatly, as antifreeze proteins, crystallins, and Hox regulators testify. It’s a safe bet that nature’s libraries will continue to surprise us—more than anything we just invented.
When we begin to study nature’s libraries we aren’t just investigating life’s innovability or that of technology. We are shedding new light on one of the most durable and fascinating subjects in all of philosophy. And we learn that life’s creativity draws from a source that is older than life, and perhaps older than time.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Some key collaborators are mentioned by name in the text, but I am greatly indebted to numerous others, from graduate students to postdoctoral fellows and faculty colleagues at multiple universities. I am especially grateful for discussions with research associates in my laboratory, among them Aditya Barve, Sinisa Bratulic, Joshua Payne, José Aguilar-Rodríguez, and Kathleen Sprouffske. In many conversations superficially unrelated to this book, they have unknowingly sharpened my thinking about the material represented herein. My thanks also go to the numerous colleagues and fellow visitors whom I have encountered over the years at the Santa Fe Institute, which has remained a wellspring of new ideas and stimulation. Special thanks go to Jerry Sabloff and Doug Erwin, who provided feedback on an early draft of the manuscript. I am also indebted to Cormac McCarthy, who not only read this early draft but also provided many useful editorial comments. (Bowing to his avowed aversion to punctuation, this book is free of semicolons.) My faculty colleagues at the University of Zürich deserve thanks for helping create the kind of research environment in which projects like this can thrive.
Bill Rosen taught me that a good editor can turn caterpillars into butterflies. His guidance was instrumental at all stages of this project. He did an outstanding job and I cannot thank him enough. He and my agent, Lisa Adams, also helped me navigate the treacherous waters of the publishing industry. Lisa superbly handled all contractual matters. Furthermore, I am indebted to Niki Papadopoulos of Current for editorial support. Her incisive comments and questions have helped improve the manuscript greatly. She and her assistants, Kary Perez and Natalie Horbachevsky, have also promptly and patiently handled numerous queries. Last but not least, thanks go to my family for their benevolent tolerance of my moods when the roller coaster of the writing process went on one of its downturns.

