You know, we live in a special era
because of fossil fuels and and so we
live in an era of energy surplus that no
past humans ever experienced. And so
complexity today does grow because of
opportunity because we have surplus
energy. Because of that, there's some an
opportunity to think that we'll always
overcome challenges of complexity. Um
not understanding that and energy is
finite, that there's only so much of it
in the universe.
Hello and welcome to Urgent Futures, the
show that finds signal in the noise. I'm
your host, Jesse Damiani. I'm a writer,
curator, and professor who's on a
continual quest to learn about reality
and how it's evolving.
Each week I sit down with leading
thinkers whose research, concepts, and
questions clarify the chaos from culture
to the cosmos.
My guest this week is Joseph Tainter.
Joseph Tainter is an anthropologist and
retired professor formerly at Utah State
University. He is the author of The
Collapse of Complex Societies and
co-author with Timothy FH Allen and
Thomas W. Hstra of supply side
sustainability with Rodrik and Susan
Macintosh. He edited The Way the Wind
Blows: Climate History and Human Action
with Today Pac. He wrote Drilling Down:
The Gulf Oil Debacle and Our Energy
Dilemma. Dr. Tainter's research has been
used in over 50 countries and his books
have been issued in 10 languages. His
work has been consulted in the United
Nations Environment Program, UNESCO, the
World Bank, the Rand Corporation, the
International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis, the Bayer Institute of
Ecological Economics, the Earth Policy
Institute, Technology Transfer
Institute/Vanguard,
and the Highlands Forum. His research
has been applied in economic development
and energy. Having researched the topic
of collapse for more than half a decade,
I can say with some confidence that
interest in it has increased over the
past few years. And it makes sense
wherever you look, be it politics,
climate change, the economy, public
health, tech accelerationism, or
anything else. We're getting a lot of
scary signals. But collapse is a
slippery word. What exactly does it
mean? and what exactly qualifies a
particular breakdown as collapse. To get
granular, I'm happy to share this
conversation with collapse studies
legend Joseph Tainter, who was
researching collapse long before it was
in vogue, notably authoring the collapse
of complex societies nearly 40 years
ago. Perhaps his most notable argument
from this work is that collapse occurs
when a civilization reaches a point of
diminishing returns on complexity. That
is when increasing amounts of capital,
energy, and resources are required just
to sustain the system until the cost of
maintaining it outweighs the benefits.
It's a provocative argument, and folks
like existential risk researcher Luke
Kemp, who I had on the show late last
year, have proposed alternative
viewpoints, but which nevertheless build
on Professor Tainter's remarkable
scholarly legacy. This argument is
especially worth considering when we
look at the current strain on the
rules-based international order that the
United States has otherwise maintained
since the end of World War II. There's
so much in this conversation drawing
together his collapsology research with
his contributions to energy and
sustainability and much more examining
how it all fits together in today's
global context. So without further ado,
please enjoy this illuminating
conversation with Joseph Tainter.
All right, I am joined today by
Professor Joseph Tainter. Professor
Tainter, thank you for being on Urgent
Futures.
>> It's my pleasure.
>> I have to assume given your area of
research that you've been getting a few
more calls than you usually get uh this
in with with everything that's happening
in the United States right now. Is that
is that a fair assessment?
>> Yes. Um and actually I I I have noticed
that since COVID struck um I I've been
getting more and more requests for
interviews. I I've always had a steady
stream of them over the years. I'm not
famous by any means, but because of the
nature of the work that I've done, um
people seem to perceive a crisis, and
it's more than just avoiding getting
sick. Or when COVID struck, people
perceived a crisis. And it was about
more than just avoiding illness. People
were really concerned about something or
other about disruption of their way of
life. And so I started getting requests
to do these kinds of interviews. And uh
the requests have continued fairly
continuously.
>> Understood. And I I dispute the fact
that you're quote not famous or
anything. Um in our circles, you're
quite famous. And your your landmark
text, the collapse of complex societies,
is now 36 years old. I understand you
you were doing research toward that book
before that. Um so you know in the
neighborhood of four decades now
>> for folks who may not be familiar could
you describe what you mean by collapse?
I know that's a loaded question
>> and also how complexity feeds into it
thinking through that that full title.
>> Yes, I I can do that. It it will take a
a little time to uh explain it fully. Um
but but I will the um you know my my
career uh my career background is I'm an
archaeologist. I love the study of
ancient societies. I love history. And
over the course of uh human history
there are four or five what are called
big questions that just persist and have
a hard time getting answers and it's
hard time developing a consensus on
them. And one of them is um the fact
that from time to time ancient societies
would collapse.
And and the famous examples which most
of which I have worked on include the
Roman Empire for example, the Western
Roman Empire, the classic Maya of
Central America, uh the Hittite Empire,
um and and even ones in the United
States uh in the in the four corners
area, particularly northwestern New
Mexico, Chocoan Society, um in uh in
East St. Lewis, Illinois, uh the society
around the a site called Cahokia, there
was a collapse and and there were
probably others as well um that we just
don't have much data on. So, it's a
recurrent phenomenon and it it intrigued
me. Why does this keep happening? We we
have this story about ourselves that we
developed what we call civilization
through hard work and ingenuity and
pulling ourselves up by our bootstraps
and and and if that's the case then why
do these societies suddenly
go flat? Why do they suddenly simplify?
Well, so that was the I mean that was
the question that I took on and in fact
I started working on it you know five
years before the book came out. It was
1983 that I started getting an idea for
how to approach it.
Uh we we the first thing I want to
mention is that I try to avoid as much
as possible terminology that's value
laden. I try to be an objective social
scientist. So I just use the word
civilization but for the most part I
don't like to use it. What I talk about
are what I call complex societies.
Complex societies complexity consists of
two parts. What I call the structure of
the society which are the parts. What
are the parts? Institutions, social
roles, technologies, things like that.
And then the second element is
organization. What binds all these
together to make a whole to make a
system that functions most of the time
pretty well. So structure and
organization I mean organization's
critical and it's a little it's a little
abstract to grasp but it but it's
critical you know it consists most
basically of societal norms what are the
things we all agree on um it consists of
how children are socialized
to taught how does one behave in our
society and it consists of more formal
things like laws um appropriations from
Congress regulations and so forth. Those
are all elements of organization that
make the parts of the system supposedly
work together and for in most societies
they do. Structure and organization the
parts and what makes the parts work
together. Well, one thing that you know,
one of the consistencies of of human
history are or of of much of human
history, not in all parts of the world,
is that
societies have shown a tendency to grow
increasingly complex. more and more
parts, more and more population, more
and more rules and regulations, more and
more and more elaborate technologies,
um more conflict with with other people
who are also growing in complexity.
Now what we have to understand about
complexity
um is that it is to think of it in terms
of let's say physics. You think of the
concept of entropy in physics. What what
what is entropy? Entropy is complete
disorganization, randomness. Everything
is random. Nothing influences anything
else. Well, how how do how do I mean how
does any system get away from entropy, a
physical system or a living system like
us, it's that you have it takes energy
to keep a system away from entropy, away
from a condition of randomness. And if
you think in terms of a society, we in
fact we have to work to make the society
work. It takes our expenditure, our
work, it takes us expending energy to
make a society work. So increasing
complexity
means that people work harder. So this
is one of the things that has bothered
me about um the conventional
explanations of why human societies grow
and become complex and also why they
collapse. Um because if increasing
complexity means that people have to
work harder, why ever did human
societies become more complex? Um
it's a bit of a conundrum. Well, the the
answer I developed is that
complexity grows because most of the
time it works. We develop new
technologies.
We develop new laws and regulations. We
develop new social norms. We develop new
ways of behaving and these are all added
on top of what was developed before so
that the complexity of the society
grows. Complexity grows most of the time
it grows to solve problems and it works
because
I I like to say that complexity is
seductive. It's seductive in that it
grows by small steps each of which seems
reasonable at the time and each of which
solves the problem.
The problem is that complexity tends to
be cumulative so that each new solution
builds on all the ones before so that
the overall cost human cost of being any
particular society grows as the society
grows more complex.
Now if we look at
if we look at ourselves today we're
largely unaware of this because to us
complexity seems to be free. We pay for
it with fossil fuels and we have since
at least the 19th century, beginning in
the 18th century. Um it's no longer paid
entirely by human and animal labor,
although it is still still to a large
degree and particularly in in some parts
of the world. But we have the societies
that we have today because they rely on
energy. So because of this because
because we rely on fossil fuels to power
our societies, we're not aware that in
the past complexity wasn't free. If a
society increased in complexity, people
had to work harder. So the question
becomes, as I'm repeating myself, why do
societies ever grow more complex? And
the answer is they grow complex to solve
problems. When you look at the history
of these societies, the initial adoption
of complex elements seems to work.
um they cost but they work. They do
solve the problem. You know, a famous
example is when when hunting and
gathering no longer suffice to support
human populations, people developed
agriculture. Agriculture is hard work.
It's hard work to be a farmer. Um as any
farmer will tell you, even ones today
that are subsidized by fossil fuels. Um,
but people did it because they had to
because populations were growing,
landscapes were becoming packed, people
could no longer move to other places,
and so they had to intensify production
where they lived.
If we if we look at um the evolution of
increasingly complex societies, um let's
look at um the formation of what are
called states. You know, a state is you
live in a state. We live in states.
State the world today consists of
states.
But this wasn't the case in the past.
States are complex institutions that
have laws and regulations and
hierarchies. They often have armies. In
fact, they usually have armies. They
have police forces. They sometimes issue
money. They do all of the complex things
that societies do. And and and these are
elements of increasing complexity that
began to emerge after states emerged,
which as far as we know is about 3 to
4,000 BC. state organizations began to
emerge around then um shortly after uh
states are at war with each other and
they're supporting armies. The armies
have to grow more capable and more
complex. The governments grow larger and
more cap capable and more complex. Uh
the the governments encourage
populations to grow so that they can re
have people to pay taxes and recruit
sons for the army and the societies just
grow more and more complex. Um but the
growth in complexity at first it seems
to work. The societies thrive. They well
I don't know whether thrive is a good
word but but they survive. They make it
um and and and and gradually um some
make it better than others do. And the
the famous example I like to use is is
is the Roman Empire, which grew very
largely um by absorbing neighboring
peoples and taking their surplus wealth,
their yearly taxes and so forth and
channeling them into the Roman
government. So that for the population
of the Roman Empire, the people who were
Roman citizens, being part of the Roman
Empire was beneficial. Um it it the cost
of complexity was paid for by the people
who were being conquered. But in time
what happens in the Roman Empire is that
the empire becomes full. It becomes just
about impossible to expand any farther.
You have to remember that these people
didn't have our transportation
technology. Um I mean it could take
months to travel from one end of the
empire to the other. Um and and so the
empire has to reach a certain size and
and and is capped at a certain size. The
famous size of it you can see in any
history map. Um and and and and at this
point uh when this begins to happen, the
government starts to experience
financial problems. Um it had developed
this very large complex organization,
the Roman Empire, the Roman government,
the Roman army. And this was all costly.
The government was was minting coins um
to pay all of these costs. Uh this
starts out um in the last two centuries
BC is good quality silver 98%.
But then you get to the middle of the
first century AD and the expenditure the
costs begin to exceed the income and so
they begin to debase the currency by
adding more and more copper into it. And
and the reason for this is that the cost
of being the Roman Empire was simply
going up. the cost of defending the
frontier against enemy peoples who all
wanted to get in and and and and join
the party uh was was going up and so the
they had to expand more and more and
more simply to be the Roman Empire
simply to be the more complex Roman
Empire and in fact it did grow complex
over time to meet this threat. So, so
what we see in the case of the Roman
Empire is that complexity reaches a
point that economists would call the
point of diminishing returns where
expenditures grow but the benefits
either don't grow as proportionately or
perhaps even begin to decline. And so we
see in the later Roman Empire, we see
cases of peasant populations rebelling
against paying taxes. We find large land
owners managing to get away from paying
taxes. revenue to the government is
declining. Uh they can the government is
forced to continue to debase the
currency. And so the time comes
eventually when they simply can't afford
to be the Roman Empire anymore and they
collapse. Uh they can no longer defend
they no longer have the wealth to defend
themselves. And it and it illustrates
the evolution of of complexity and how
complexity can lead to a collapse that
the society grows in complexity to solve
problems eventually reaches a point of
diminishing returns. This induces fiscal
weakness in the society and then it's
just a matter of time or mathematical
probability until some challenge comes
along that's insurmountable and the
society collapses. Uh and so um that
that is my assessment overall of of why
ancient collapses happen. Now now what
is a collapse?
I got that far into it without actually
defining what I mean by it because it's
it's a colloqu it's a colloquial term.
People have various meanings for it.
>> I I define a collapse as a rapid
simplification. Now remember we're
dealing with complexity. So the opposite
is a rapid simplification. The society
rapidly simplifies. institutions go
away, technologies go away, laws go
away, sometimes the army goes away and
so forth and so on.
>> Got it. Thank you for that very thorough
marathon definition. Um, one question
that immediately follows that of course
is do you see this cycle as being
inevitable? Is it inevitable that all
societies will collapse? like is that
complexity that that ever growing
complexity a process that is that has
the seeds of its own undoing in it from
the start?
>> Well, let let me say overall that I I
don't I don't say that complexity is
good or bad. Complexity is useful and
affordable or it isn't. And it's useful
and affordable until it isn't. Now, you
know, I I get that question of course
all the time. The implication being is
our society going to collapse? And um
you know I because because of that
question because of what I learned way
back in the 1980s when I did the
collapse study um my own work shifted
beginning in the 1990s to more work on
uh contemporary sustainability of of of
ourselves and and our descendants. you
know, can we continue to maintain the
way we live? And the way we live is is
very heavily dependent on fossil fuels.
And so, uh, you you know, I I have
teamed up with people who who work on
things like petroleum technology. I'm a
social scientist. I don't work on that
myself, but I work on energy in society.
And so, uh, my work has shifted to that.
uh and and and and also to um questions
about innovation because it's often
argued that well what we're ingenious
we'll just innovate our way out of all
future problems resources will never be
scarce we'll just invent new ones and
and so forth and so on. So those those
are the two areas where my work has
shifted in recent years. Uh and and this
grew out of this the study of the
ancient societies. Why did ancient
societies collapse? There were lessons
in that um for all societies all times
and places including us. But we are one
major difference today and that's that
we have fossil fuels. In the past
societies that collapse relied on energy
from the sun um you know we rely on
energy from the sun but it's in the
ground and accumulated over millions of
years. Um and and so that is why
collapse um if if it happens again it's
going to have a lot to do with energy.
>> I that is a subject I want to spend a
lot of time talking to you about. Right
before we do I want to probe a little
deeper on the question of complexity's
role in society. So you you me you've
referenced a couple times now that
complexity emerges as a means of solving
problems. Do you see it also as being a
force that produces those problems? Like
>> of course yes yes of course it does. Um
and and and there are exceptions to that
rule because there are occasions when
complexity emerges because it can when
humans have surplus resources complexity
emerges. Um we just tend to invent
things. We you know if we have excess
energy we always find ways to use it up.
But those occasions are rare in human
history. They're so rare that we call
them by special terms like the
agricultural revolution, the industrial
revolution. Those are the two main ones
that historians two terms that
historians use. And and today um you
know, as I've said several times and and
I'll keep repeating, you know, we live
in a special era because of fossil
fuels. Um and because and and so we live
in an era of energy surplus that no past
humans ever experienced. And so
complexity today does grow because of
opportunity because we have surplus
energy and and there's a because of that
there's some an opportunity to think
that um we'll always overcome challenges
of complexity um not understanding that
uh
and energy is finite there's only so
much of it in the universe.
>> Absolutely. And of course, your work
also looks at um EROY, energy return on
investment. Um so, but before we get
there, uh I want to take a moment for
folks who maybe aren't familiar, you
know, longtime listeners of the show
will definitely be familiar, but um if
you could state plainly how novel fossil
fuels are from a complexity and um
society standpoint compared to life
before fossil fuels.
Look at there's a concept called energy
slaves which is a concept of how many
theoretical humans you would need to
have working for you to do the work that
fossil fuels do for you. Now the
calculation is that every American
possesses the equivalent of 100 energy
slaves. Every European possesses the
equivalent of 50 energy slaves. This
this is how we live today. We live by
slavery. Except the slavery isn't um
animate, it's inanimate.
That's a that's a quite a bracing um
metaphor and of course makes total sense
and it connects with um William Ree's
idea of the ecological footprint
analysis and how even when you think
you're living sustainably you're so many
of the functions of your life are you
know brought to you by by fossil fuels.
>> Yes. Yes.
Um, so let's talk about Eeroy a little
bit for I guess first of all the best
place to start is could you describe or
sorry could you define what Eeroy is?
>> Certainly it takes energy to get energy
and what matters is is the energy
profit. What do you get back for what
you put in? Eeroy is energy return on
investment. Um it's sometime it's
usually spelled E ROI sometimes E R O EI
to emphasize that it's not monetary
investment. it's energy investment. And
just to give some illustrations,
uh in 1940, the United States produced
uh gas and and oil at an energy profit
of 100 to1. For every barrel of oil that
we would invest in finding and producing
oils, we got a 100 barrels back. And in
fact, we had so much oil in 1940 that
something like a third of our production
capacity was simply shut in. Um, you
know, this is this is how we fought
World War II. We with all with all of
our own oil and and the oil that we
provided to a lot of our allies,
particularly particularly Britain, but
but we were even providing oil to
Russia, which is considered an oil rich
country. Um, and and and and our other
allies, too.
You know, we we fought World War II with
with our surplus oil. I I I wanted to
find out I did a chart once. wanted to
find out how did oil production increase
uh because of World War II. And what I
saw in the chart was that it didn't
really. All they had to do was open
valves because we something like a third
of our production capacity was shut in.
So 1940 were producing oil and gas at an
at an eeroy of 100 to one. In the United
States today that's down to about 15 to1
and the trend is irreversible.
we and the reason why this happens is
because of complexity and because we
first um because we always use up the
easiest resources first. You know,
there's a there's a saying about always
plucking the low-lying fruit. That's
what humans do. In petroleum production,
the low-lying fruit is large pools in uh
you know in in in the southeastern
United States in the southern California
area, the Los Angeles basin.
um that that that you could be tapped
simply by sticking straws in the ground.
Um I I was surprised to learn a number
of years ago, hold on, I'm going to turn
a phone upside down. I was surprised to
learn a number of years ago, this is
kind of amusing, that when oil was first
produced in the Los Angeles basin in the
area where Dodger Stadium is now, um it
it the hole was the hole was drilled
simply using a eucalyptus tree log, if
you can believe that. We don't we don't
produce oil with eucalyptus tree logs
anymore. Uh it's become a highly complex
operation and and what you know this is
what's called easy oil. E oil that's
shallow onshore in big pools. But of
course in the principle of always
plucking the low-lying fruit first.
Those are the pools that we've first
began to to use and to drain. and easy
easy oil is has been very substantially
tapped which means that we have to go
offshore
um and and to uh other kinds of marginal
environments difficult environments to
continue producing oil. Um so um back in
2008 2009 whatever it was um when there
was that that blowout and and and major
oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico that a
colleague and I wrote a book about um
you know that would that I mean that the
the technology was highly complex. It's
uh you really have to pay attention to
just how complex the technology was and
and this is this has been the standard
story of how complexity increases. Um we
use up the easy resources first. We then
have to develop more elaborate
technologies and more elaborate
institutions to uh move on to other
resources. Um the resource extraction
grows more complex. The it grows costly
and the eeroy declines. uh the energy
return on investment declines because we
are spending more and more on uh on the
technology
and so in in short that's why it
matters.
>> Thank you. And what do you make of the
the fact that there's now in many cases
not just price parity but actually less
cost associated with you know so-called
renewable um energy sources.
How does that fit into complexity?
Because of course, um, installing solar
panels in your backyard, for example,
>> that's not as that's not nearly as
complex as fracking or these, you know,
deep sea oil wells.
>> So, h how does that fit into the
picture? Because that seems like it's a
simplification toward more complexity.
>> Well, well, it it may be. Uh I mean one
of the things that happens um when
complexity becomes problematic is is
that sometimes you can just do a maybe a
lateral shift. You don't necessarily
have to collapse. You can do a lateral
shift and and everyone can put up solar
panels on the roofs. Uh if if that's
really feasible um or or windmills in
the Great Plains or windmills off the
coast of New England, wherever. Um there
are there are alternatives to producing
energy and and you we we're exploring
them now. Um it it's I mean these also
have cost. You have to remember that
these also have cost. They're not
simple. And what will happen is um they
will they will gain in in efficiency and
productivity initially
but then the landscape becomes saturated
with with solar collectors, windmills,
whatever. And we need more and more
energy. We need more and more of them
and the technology grows more complex
and the complexity cycle starts over
again. So it the complexity cycle
probably never really goes away. It's
just always resetting itself.
>> It's It still seems to me though that
you know even with like let's say we you
know put wind turbines and solar panels
like in a proverbial freezer and they
didn't they didn't innovate at all from
this point. It still seems like a
simpler process and and this is me sort
of talking out of school. um it still
seems like a simpler process than some
of the really really um labyrinthan
technologies and efforts that are being
undertaken to you know get that last
drop of of oil
>> and I what I'm I guess what I'm trying
to square is is there like let's call it
a complexity sweet spot where it
continues to solve problems but it
doesn't tip us toward collapse because I
can look at fossil fuels and and pretty
clearly see how the continued depend on
fossil fuels is a is a pretty clear
vector for collapse. So yeah, I'm
curious curious about your take on that.
>> Well, if I hear correctly, you're
asking, can we just say, okay, enough
complexity, no more. No, we can't do
that. Complexity grows to solve
problems. And it and complexity is
seductive. It is it is always um there's
always a temptation to grow in
complexity to solve whatever is the
immediate problem. So no, I mean there's
no point such thing as a complexity
resting point.
>> Got it. Okay. Yeah. And I know also, you
know, the classic example of Jeban's
paradox, you know, whatever whatever
energy surplus you create gets gobbled
up and actually exceeded. Um maybe it's
just my my wishful thinking invading our
conversation.
>> Um
>> Oh, well, I I hope you're right.
>> Well, I hope I'm right, too. I hope
>> if that's the future, I hope you're
right.
Well, so assuming that I'm not, and I'm
probably not, what does this decreasing
mean for us? Like, if you can kind of
sort of spell that out um in ways that
people can understand in their personal
lives.
>> Well, there there's a phenomenon called
the energy cliff. Um, as I said, in the
United States, the last time I checked
and and and I say I'm a social
scientist. I'm not a specialist in in
this, but the last time I talked to my
colleagues about this, the United States
was producing oil and gas and any arrive
about 15 to1.
There's a general consensus that as long
as production is above 10:1, you're
doing okay. You're safe. If production
falls below 8:1, then you go off what's
called the energy cliff where production
then essentially the decline in
production picks up speed. it takes more
and more and more investment to keep
production up. Uh and and and eventually
you can't you can't increase production
because um I mean the resources has
gotten to the point where it's simply
too it's simply too expensive to extract
it, too difficult to extract it. Uh so
so eight I mean 8 to one is what's
called the energy cliff and you know if
you look at a chart showing um showing
through time that shows I mean it it
shows da da da da da everything's fine
and then you hit 8 to1 and boom you go
you go off a cliff. It really is a cliff
and and and
if we ever get to that point
we're sunk. We can't if we get to that
point and do not have good alternative
energy sources in place then then we'll
be in deep trouble because because then
you don't no you no longer have the
resource or the wealth to um develop
alternatives.
>> So as a social scientist what are you
tracking right now in terms of the
social factors associated with these
questions?
I I am still working at a general level.
What am I tracking now? I'm still
tracking history. Um I mean that's my
first love. It's my interest. I track
archaeology. Um I I am still working on
on the general theory of of complexity,
diminishing returns and and collapse. Um
but a a major area that I took on a few
years ago and that I hinted at in in the
collapse book in 88 um is is innovation.
You there is there is an argument among
some schools of economics and uh some
people who are called technological
optimists that resources don't matter.
Um that we will always find a way to
innovate our way out of resource
problems.
um that uh you know if if resources
become scarce uh the price mechanism
signals that there are rewards to
innovation and new resources will be
found or we'll find new ways to use the
old ones. We'll develop new technologies
and so forth and so on and it's a it's a
good argument. It's it's a comforting
argument. Um, and it it's it's something
that uh we rely on and and that I would
have to say has largely been correct up
until now. But when I began to
understand the reasoning behind this, I
thought
the the technological optimists are
making an implicit assumption that
they're unaware of. And the assumption
is that the productivity of innovation
in the future will remain as it is now.
um and and and will never decline. Well,
innovation is an area in like everything
else we do, we first pluck the low-lying
fruit. Um
the the fields of science and
technological development have have
emerged really began to emerge in
recognizable form in let's say 18th
century maybe 17th century in some
fields 16th century in optics so forth
and so on. Um and
the these fields immer began to emerge
um as as the province of what are some
call lone wolf scholars, people like
Charles Darwin, um Gregor Mendel and and
so forth where anti in individuals,
individual scientists, individual
naturalists working alone could
revolutionize entire fields of knowledge
and and set a basis for decades,
centuries of of future scientific work.
And and we benefit today from the work
they did centuries ago. But the
scientists of the past, the way I like
to put it is well well as I saying, they
they plucked the lowlying fruit,
they they solved a lot of the
fundamental problems um that an
individual scientist working alone could
solve. So, for example, um, electricity
is no longer waiting out there for us to
discover it. It's been discovered. Okay?
Um, evolution is no longer waiting for
us to discover it. Charles Darwin did
that for us. Thank you. Um and and and
and as these simple basic principles are
developed, science science if science is
going to continue to grow know if we're
going to continue to acquire knowledge,
it has to be through increasing
specialization in more and more in more
narrow narrower areas of knowledge. And
so what we see is that over time um
science grows from the province of of
the individual naturalists to
interdisciplinary teams today uh working
in large expensive institutions. And
this is very largely how um how how
innovation is done today. And it's
expensive. It's expensive to do
innovation this way. You know there
there is this ancestor myth about
the Ullet Packard company um being
established in in someone's back some
some in a garage in someone's backyard.
Ullets or Packers I don't remember who
it was and and and there's this
mythology that that this is how
innovation comes about. No, it's not how
innovation comes about anymore or or not
much innovation comes about that way
anymore.
um you know innovation today is is the
subject of interdisciplinary large
interdisciplinary teams that are costly
that include a lot of different
specialists working together. So
I I I raised a question about this in in
the collapse book back in 1988. And for
a long time I didn't have a data set um
that would allow me to evaluated. But I
always had it in the back of my mind
that that that if innovation should
become less productive over time then
the assumptions about the future of the
technological optimists may not be
correct. Uh I had the good fortune in
2005 I moved to Arizona State University
and from there I met um a couple of
people who work in the area of
innovation. Jose Lobo an economist and
Deborah Strumsky um who who's a a
geographer
and Deborah had been compiling a
database from the United States Patent
Office. And this is I mean this is this
is an incredible database. It's
something like 3 million patents we had
to work with. And and so we we we we
just developed a chart showing from
about uh 1974 up through 2012 was the
last time we um the the last time we ran
one of the charts um showing what I call
the the productivity of innovation which
is which we measure as patents per
inventor. Now, as it takes more and more
people working from different fields
working together to create something
worth a patent, the converse is is how
many patents are awarded per scientist.
Patents per inventor. And what we found
is that over that period uh 74 to about
2012 I think it was the productivity of
innovation went down by about 24%.
the productivity of innovation is
actually declining. There's no reason to
think it's going to change. Um this
trend is going to continue in the
future. Now it's again this is hard for
people to perceive because you can go
online or you can go in into an
electronic store and there's always
widgets more and more widgets for people
to buy. Um but it's taking more and more
resources to produce those widgets. So,
so we're talking about declining
productivity of innovation. And let me
give you some concrete examples of what
it actually means. Um, the first
examples come from a colleague by the
name of Rodri Edgar um who studies
material culture. This comes from
testimony he gave before Congress a
number of years ago. Um, I believe he's
at Washington State University. Anyway,
um, in the 1980s, cell phones used about
30 elements from the periodic table.
Okay, in 2014, which was the last data I
have here, um, smartphones, what we call
smartphones, used something like 60 to
70 mineral derived elements from the
periodic table. In the 1980s, a typical
household used about 30 elements from
the periodic table. In 2014, General
Electric used 70 of the first 83 mineral
elements of the periodic table. Um,
obviously this is a trend that can't
continue forever. We're going to run out
of elements. Obviously, this can't
continue. And it's a perfect example of
of increasing complexity and diminishing
returns. Now,
technological optimists like to counter
with what's called Moore's law. You
know, Moore's law postulates that the
number of transistors on a chip doubles
about every 18 months at half the cost.
And that's the reason why you and I can
talk today through this technology with
computers and smartphones and everything
else. Um and and Moors law has uh I mean
the technology the information
technology industry has largely kept
Moore's law going for several decades
now. And and this is why we are able to
have the information technologies that
we have today because of Moore's law.
And so they like to use this as an
illustration for how Moore's law
contradicts the notion that there could
be diminishing returns to innovation.
Well, that's great except that it now
takes 18 times as many researchers to
continue Moore's law as it did in the
1970s. In fact, it is an example of
diminishing returns to complexity and
innovation. Um this is a constant
exponential growth rate of 35% a year.
Um but a research productivity decline
of 7% per year year after year after
year. And so Moore's law has a limited
future. It will not be in operation
forever.
>> And so what what conclusions can we draw
from this that that we're you know
putting all our eggs in particular
baskets. And so there are pockets of
innovation but not broad innovation the
way there was like what do you what what
is that data telling you?
Well I I I'd like to say something
idealistic like gee wouldn't it be nice
if people could recognize these
long-term trends and adjust their
behavior accordingly? But that's not how
people think and are how people act. Um
people think short term and act short
term um and and and and in ter and I
mean you you can you can see this now
with uh the opposition to acknowledging
the problems of climate change and and
the problems of
fossil fuels bringing on climate change
and so forth and so on. Um
I I don't know what will happen. I I
innovation is not about to go away.
We're not we're not about to stop
innovating. I mean that's that would be
ridiculous to to suggest that uh you you
our innovation
remain highly productive in terms of
just turnurning out new things, new
products that we can use. But
it it looks likely that we are in a
entering into a phase of diminishing
returns to complexity and innovation.
And what does that mean for the future?
I I I'm a historian. I think long term I
but I can foresee that by the end of
this century our system of innovation is
likely to have changed very
substantially. It'll be very different
from what it is today. Our system of
innovation will have will have to
change. It simply has to um you know
certain lines of research will stop
being funded or or the funding will
decline. Uh I mean that that's probably
one of the ways that it will come about.
uh in other lines of research, people
may want to continue them, but they'll
be discouraged from doing so. Um for
example, if you're in a university, you
may be told, "No, you're never get
you're never going to get 10 year
studying to going down that line of
research. It's not productive." And and
so by the end of the century, I think
our system of innovation is going to
change. Uh it may our innovation may be
a smaller sector of our economy than it
is now. Um or maybe just the opposite.
It may be a much larger sector of the
economy as we keep trying to um keep
trying to develop technologies to um to
to forestall
major societal problems. Um but this I
mean this is how this is this is how
it's going to be. Um
yeah the the principle of increasing
complexity to solve problems uh is is
just about immutable.
uh we have been doing it for thousands
of years and there's no reason to think
we're going to change anytime soon. So
thinking speculatively like looking
forward into the future, drawing lessons
from history in this example you've just
given us, you've referenced um patents
as a pretty key data source for
understanding the um trajectory of
innovation. In this case, a deceleration
of innovation.
That's one of I assume many different
data points you could be looking at to
track innovation. So I'm thinking about
if if you're imagining that the shape of
innovation will change in the years to
come, are there other data sets or
domains we could look to to start to
make sense of where innovation is
occurring?
>> Patents are not a perfect measure of
trends in innovation over time. They are
however the best measure. There is no
better one.
>> Got it. Well, simply simply put um on
this subject of innovation
again thinking use putting your um
historian hat on here. Is there any
historical precedent to the
technoutopian
approach to innovation because obviously
you know I'm not old but I'm not young.
It's certainly novel in my lifetime and
it's novel as far as I can look back. Um
but are there Yeah. Are there historical
precedents for that that type of
breathless belief in technological
progress?
>> To my knowledge, it's very largely a
phenomenon of um of the modern world. uh
let's let's say since the 19th century,
you know, the the Victorian era had a
belief in progress,
a belief in and and and and there people
going back to the 19th century who who
believed in what was called the the
perfectability of humanity that humans
could be made into a perfect species,
that we would behave morally and and and
and with with due respect for nature and
for our other our fellow humans and so
forth. forth the perfectability of
humanity. And some people still believe
that and they're entitled to believe it
if they want to. Uh I I I don't I don't
see it. Um I don't see that happening.
>> So in your current work, it sounds like
innovation is the primary area that
you're Oh, sorry. Innovation and um
energy are the primary areas you're
looking at. Are there any other fields
that you're particularly drawn to
um that might connect back to? some of
what we talked about today.
>> Study history. You will see things that
you recognize. You read enough of it,
you'll see things that you recognize. Um
be beyond that, uh I think psychology is
a very worthwhile field to study. Um
there's a we're learning a lot and again
I'm I don't have much technical
knowledge of this, but we're learning a
lot about ourselves from brain imaging.
Um there are things to be learned from
studying that that we have learned from
studying um small bands of hunter
gatherers. There's still a few of them
on the earth. Not many but there are a
few. And we have learned things about um
our the evolution of our species uh from
from studying such people. I mean these
are all worthwhile things to do. And I I
I wonder sometimes if um if there be any
any point in in trying to revamp our
education system in some ways or if it's
even possible to do, but that's what I'm
going to address in one of the final
questions.
>> All right. Well, um maybe before we get
there, um I feel like we've covered a
whole lot and hopefully that it's, you
know, an amazing invitation to um the
collapse of complex societies and all of
your ensuing work. Is there anything
about now like I feel like I can't have
a conversation with you in fall of 2025
with everything that's happening in
America and not ask the kind of obvious
pointed question of is there anything
that you're tracking now related to this
past research that's worth sharing?
>> How many interviews I get asked to do?
And as I explained right at the
beginning, this is I I I've noticed that
people are upset. people are upset. They
they they they don't have the
terminology or the vocabulary to express
what they are upset about. But but
people seem to be worried and and it
really picked up with CO. Uh I mean CO
worried people more than um fossil fuel
depletion has or that climate change
has. But CO really made people nervous.
And it's clearly not just about how do I
avoid getting sick. it I mean it's
perceived as a threat somehow to our way
of life and and and
um you know pe people can't articulate
it so people like you pick up that this
is happening and then you people like me
do interviews about it
>> yes indeed um well yeah thank you for
that so I you know I have these three
recurring questions that I like to ask
folks at the end of every episode so
just for folks listening that's what's
one thing you wish people paid more
attention to
>> yeah I I will I will not precisely well
yeah I think as as I already said I
think people should pay attention to
history psychology um brain imaging uh
the various areas in which we are
developing better understanding of
ourselves um and some aspects of my own
field anthropology
and what what I have realized is as an
anthropologist
is that as a species humans did did not
evolve to be broadscale thinkers. We did
not evolve to think broadly in either
time or space. And yet that is precisely
what our situation today requires us to
do. Um and what I mean by that is that
we evolved as small hunting gathering
bands who foraged on the landscape.
um you know hunting game, gathering
plant foods and moving seasonally as
resources became available in in
different different in different areas.
So that that people never had knowledge
much knowledge of broader areas over the
horizon or longer time periods beyond uh
one or two generations. They might they
mean they would have known their
parents, they would know their children,
three generations, that's their concept
of time. And and so because of this,
there was never natural selection for
the ability or an inclination to think
broadly in time and space. To think
broadly in space because people didn't
know there was broad space. To think
broadly in time because there was never
selection to think about that. And so as
a species, we do not think broadly in
time and space. Most people are simply
not inclined to. They live their lives
locally and short term, dealing with
their day-to-day challenges and and
voting for candidates on the basis of
those short-term perceptions and
short-term concerns.
Can anything be done about this? Can
anything be done to to counteract
um this negative aspect of the evolution
of our species? Um, you know,
sustainability today requires exactly
the opposite. That we be able to think
broadly in time and space, but we don't.
Most of us don't. Most people don't. So,
can anything be done about that? I I I
sometimes wonder um if something could
be done in K to2 education
um to to inculcate in in very young
children uh an inclination and interest
in um in in in in humans around the
world in human geography around the
world in human history through time in
our evolution of as a species through
time. If if if school children K to 12,
it would have to start early, could be
inculcated with an inclination, an
interest in broadscale time and space.
Uh if I was 40 years younger, I might
spend more time talking to K to2
educators about this. It's not something
I would be very optimistic about because
it would take really a I think a
revolution in uh in in education to pull
it off. But um that doesn't really
answer your question, but it is
something that's it's a realization I've
had for some time. Um and and and
I I suggest a way perhaps to um to
address it, but I don't know whether it
could be possible.
>> As a foresight strategist, I that is
music to my ears and it definitely uh
more than answers my question. I it it's
such a such a an important um thing for
us to be considering. The next question
is what's one resource you recommend for
making better sense of reality?
>> Well, it would be more it's more than
one. It would be the ones I have just
mentioned. History, psychology, social
psychology, anthropology, sociology,
geography. Um I I I can't I can't name
one as more important. May maybe well I
I I have prejudices in this area. I
might name it but but the others are are
also very very important.
>> Understood. And finally, what is one
moment when your sense of reality was
disrupted?
>> Well, that that's an interesting one
because I can give you an answer, but it
has nothing to do with what we've been
talking about. It's just
>> feel that's that's what these are for.
Well, um
I I will preface it by saying that
except for this one trivial example, I
don't think my reality has ever been
disrupted. I have been a a current
affairs junkie since age 11 or 12. Um
I'm 75 now. I've seen it all. Um you
know, crises don't alarm me because
crises come and go. Um bad rulers don't
alarm me. bad presidents don't alarm me
because bad presidents come and go. And
so, um, that, you know, I I I've none of
this has really surprised me.
The one thing that that's disrupted my
sense of reality, it may have to do with
just the fact that I'm I've gotten old,
is I I will often fall asleep after
lunch, sitting in my chair, my easy
chair. Um, I'll be in the middle of
reading a book or something as I eat
lunch. I'll fall asleep for 30 to 60
minutes. I'll wake up and for a split
second I'm not sure whether it's day or
night because I'm used to waking up in
the dark when early morning. So I mean
that's my little break from reality.
Utterly trivial probably a function of
getting old. Um but that's so you wanted
it there it is.
>> Well I appreciate it. Um and I actually
read a study recently who knows you know
who knows what the bias is. I didn't
read the paper itself that um people who
take daily naps are on average smarter.
So
you have uh you have you have that to uh
thank those naps for. Um
>> I feel better already.
>> Professor Tainter, this has been an
amazing conversation. Thank you so much
for taking the time. Um is there
anything that anything else that you'd
like to share? places people can find
your work um or anything like that.
>> I mean there there is there is a
collapse book which gives the basis of
um of the theory. There there are other
article I mean there are sort of
articles I've written that uh and and in
fact I'm developing now that I have an
article forthcoming in which I lay out
11 techniques for coping with
complexity. It's uh coming out in an
academic book that's going to be
published in England. Um, I I can I can
get the the reference to you if people
want to look for it if you may need to
remind me, but I can email at least the
reference to you. And and that might be
pertinent to people for pe some people
to read. How do how do you cope with
complexity? Well, I've laid out 11 ways
of doing it. Um, none of them's easy. I
mean, you can't avoid complexity
altogether. Um and and the book that I
did with the petroleum geologist Tad
Patek in in 2009 following the Gulf oil
spill. Uh Tad wrote about the technology
of drilling and what caused what would
have caused the accident. I wrote about
energy in society and that um that book
it's it's available as a popular
paperback. Uh you find it on Amazon. The
authors are Tainter and Patek. P A T Z
K. The title short title is drilling
down and I wrote chapters 1 5 6 and nine
and in those at that point it summarized
the research that I had done until then
um starting from the study of ancient
societies and expanding to energy and
innovation in our societies today. So
that's that's an easy source for people
to get hold of and an inexpensive one.
>> Wonderful. Well, I'll get that reference
from you for that paper which sounds
amazing. I can't wait to read it and
I'll put a link to the boh both books in
in uh in the show notes. Thank you again
for for being on Urgent Futures.
>> My pleasure.
>> This podcast is edited and produced by
Adam Ler and me, Jesse Damiani.
The podcast is presented by Reality
Studies. You can learn more by visiting
realitystudies.co.
And if you appreciate the work I'm
doing, please subscribe and share it
with someone you think would enjoy it.