All right. So this is where the lecture
starts for today.
And there is something called Goi
which means good old-fashioned AI.
And it turns out that GoFi was in some
real sense the birthing place not just
of modern-day applied ontology but also
of modern-day AI. So the same people who
were using and developing Goi were also
developing
what we now think of as applied
ontology.
So Gi means something like this. It's
deterministic in the sense that it's
based on logic. The the goi AI would be
a set of logical axioms and you can use
those logical axioms then to draw
inferences and those inferences would be
like the the responses to prompts that
we are familiar with in modern day
stochastic AI. I say here ontologydriven
in some cases they were explicitly
ontologydriven in other words the
collection of logically formulated
axioms and I'll explain what that means
later were in fact called ontologies and
I'll give you some interestingly uh
influential examples of that in a
minute. What we have today are
stochcastic
not deterministic but stochastic or
statistical
AI models. These are found in what we
call machine learning in deep neural
networks and nowadays most fashionably
in large language models. So there are
two approaches. One approach is based on
logic. One approach is based on
statistics. And there is a mer there is
a kind of gray zone where the
logic-based approach ceased to be so
attractive for various reasons which I
will explain and where gradually
alternative approaches arose which made
up for some of the uh problems with the
logic- based approach and I will
describe all of that uh as best I can in
the course of this lecture. Now some
people talk not in terms of gi versus
stochastic AI but in terms of weak AI
versus strong AI. I have nothing to
object to in this uh dichotomy. It's
just that even the authors of this chart
and all the links to all the items which
I include in my lectures are included in
the slides which you can download from
the wiki page when when the lecture is
finished.
So even the author of this comparison
chart says that strong AI does not
exist.
The only thing we have at the moment is
weak AI. And by weak AI, we're talking
about AI algorithms or AI powered
machines
which are built to address certain
narrow problems. So this is also
sometimes called narrow AI where strong
AI is going to be an AI which exhibits
human characteristics. Humans can think
about more or less anything and they can
change their direction of their thought
on a whim. Weak AI is built to answer
certain sorts of questions to perform
certain sorts of tasks and it doesn't
have anything like the flexibility that
we find in human beings.
So strong AI does not exist. LLMs are
not strong AI in the sense of this uh
dichotomy here. That is in part because
the the large language models and so so
forth have powers or have been described
as having powers on the basis of a large
amount of hype. And anyone who's
interested in reading about the AI hype,
they're welcome to look at this book,
which I think is uh very useful. Already
a long time ago, people were talking
about the AI hype cycle because it's
characteristic of each wave of AI that
it is associated with hype. That's
because building AI systems, retraining
people to build AI systems and to use AI
systems is expensive. People have to be
persuaded that building the the systems
and training the people is worthwhile
which means that people have to have a
reason why we we should want to have
machines of this sort. So the first AI
hype cycle began with what was then
called strong logical AI in Stanford
around about 1960. I guess one of the
core examples of use of this logical AI
or goi or whatever we call it was to
train robots to have common sense.
So the idea is that if we build robots
they need to be able to navigate through
the world with the same kind of common
sensical beliefs and skills that humans
have. And so a lot of the the the most
interesting work in this phase in the
development of AI was robot common sense
work and I'll come back to some details
to illustrate that in a minute. So this
was the birth of AI and it was also the
birth of applied ontology. The very same
people John McCarthy is the most
important of these people. He is the
person who is normally credited with
having coined the phrase artificial
intelligence.
He was also one of the early people to
describe some of what he was doing using
the ontology word. Now the reason or the
the the marketing gimmick depending on
your evaluation of this kind of
activity. The reason why they thought
they needed this logical AI was to
support as I understand it anyway
military planning. So they persuaded the
military that with these new big
computers which were just being uh
produced they they could use these new
big computers in order to help military
planning and military costing of plans
and so forth. And it's true that we now
have some very clever AI systems which
can do wonderful jobs which help
military planning. Uh an example is
shipsto planning. So there is a uh quite
famous former marine architect
who created computer models of all the
ship holes which were used for
transporting military equipment, tanks
and so on in ships across the world. And
he devised what what is called an expert
system whereby what used to take weeks
to plan in which order the tanks and the
the other devices were brought to the
port
moved into the ship and then arranged
inside the ship. That used to take weeks
using his software. It takes a few
seconds. You just type in what you want
to go on the ship and it will tell you
which order where and so forth. That's a
really good example of an expert system.
But then at that stage, these promises
did not hold out. The military was very
disappointed with the abilities of these
new machines that they had paid a lot of
money for. And so the the money dried
up. The AI world was split into two
groups, both of which hated each other.
One group were the uh realists who said
we knew that this would not do what we
were promising. We have to be much more
careful in what we say about AI. Those
people were accused of having ratted out
the other people who are really still
really enthusiastic about the
possibilities of these machines. And
this is characteristic of in each cycle
the AI world gets split. I predict it
will happen soon. We'll come to that.
All right. Then the next phase it was
the phase of neural networks. Minsky is
the the name often associated with this
phase. So the idea is that you can build
machines which use networks which are
something like the connection networks
in the human brain and these neuronet
networks then are more powerful than the
logic- based AIO approaches which had
been around in the previous phase. And
this didn't work either. So the neural
networks were they just didn't do the
job. And so this led to the second AI
winter when there was a collapse in
investment. There was a lot of
infighting between different camps in
the AI world. And
then came deep neural networks
and reinforcement learning and alpho and
what we have today chat GPT and grock
and claude and so forth. And I predict
that there will be a third AI winter. We
may already be entering the third AI
winter because of the poor responses to
chat GPT5 which was for many purposes
slower and and had other problems than
its precursors.
But certainly when we're standing here
at the apogee of what these things can
do and when we can see how clever it was
to produce them that use of
reinforcement learning to create the
initial chat GPT is really an amazing
achievement albeit one which as we know
had a strong tendency to hallucinate
but still I project that there will be a
third AI winter. It's reasonable given
the history of AI so far. It's
reasonable given the concerns that
people are already expressing in terms
of cost, in terms of errors, in terms of
um the crazy salaries which are being uh
paid to the people who are building
these things. And if you look at the
financial planning that which is trying
to support the these investments in
machinery and in training runs and in
hiring new new experts and in buying new
Nvidia chips and so forth, there's
there's no way in which it can make a
profit. It gets worse and worse from
months to months rather than better and
better. And if you're interested in that
question, I recommend the work of a man
called Ed Zitron.
Zi TR O N. He has some really
interesting analyses of the financial
state of the GPT world. Okay. So let's
let's go through a timeline. Then we
have the first phase starts with
uh a paper by McCarthy and Hayes. So
John McCarthy is normally credited as
having coined the phrase artificial
intelligence. Patrick Hayes was a young
Englishman who communicated with
McCarthy about philosophical problems
from the standpoint of artificial
intelligence. That's the title of their
first paper. He wrote to to McCarthy and
McCarthy was so impressed that he
immediately invited him to come to
Stanford to work with him. Patrick Hayes
more than anyone else invented what we
now call applied ontology.
Hayes's work is typical of the work
which was going on in the 1970s
to try and use goi so logic axiom based
AI in order to solve various kinds of
problems primarily problems about
machinery and engineering
and um and we'll see some details about
the the work of Hayes in a minute so
there were lots of people trying to
solve problems about engineering
robotics being one of the families of
problems that they were trying to deal
with in different groups, different
universities, different companies. And
they were all doing interesting work,
but they were all doing it differently.
They used different abbreviations,
different symbols. They had different
problems, different technical terms. And
so there arose a movement called the K
movement.
which I'm calling it the KIF movement uh
with whose goal was to create a
knowledge interchange format.
In other words, you would persuade
everyone who's engaging in this activity
of trying to create axioms which could
be used to train a robot for instance.
You persuade them all to use the same
terms, the same symbols, the same
predicates so that all the knowledge can
be exchanged and combined from one group
to another. Sounds like a really good
idea. And one of the leaders of this
kith movement was Tom Gruber. Tom Gruber
is otherwise famous for having been the
author of Siri.
Now, a Siri is almost certainly the most
successful ontology ever. It's an
ontology artifact.
In 1984, there arose something very
closely related to the K endeavor, which
was something called Psych. We'll talk a
lot about psych uh later on today.
And then in 1985, Hayes Hayes published
his two most famous pieces called the
naive physics manifesto and the ontology
of liquids. And I'll talk about both of
those. Hayes and McCarthy wrote this
piece and it's about
logical knowledge representation.
Now, philosophers
think that when you know something, you
know something about the world.
And so when you're
trying to understand, let's say, how to
buy salad
in a in a restaurant with a salad bar,
then what you're interested in are
things like salad and tomato prongs or
tweezers or whatever they're called and
tables and money, the things that you
need in order to buy salad. You're not
interested in the knowledge. if you're
interested in the world
and that is a at this point in in the
evolution of ontology a very important
division between two schools of thought.
One very small school of thought which
said an ontology is a representation of
reality.
Aristotle belongs to that school of
thought. On the other hand, you have
those people who say that an ontology is
a representation of knowledge or of the
concepts that people have about the
world. And Tom Gruber is a good example
of this conceptbased approach to
ontologies.
So what were Hazer McCarthy doing? Well,
they were working in what they called an
AI field of logical knowledge
representation.
They were working on representation and
reasoning about time. They were working
on the idea of all in this one paper the
idea of a a situation calculus and they
were working on the use of logic for
representing knowledge in a computer.
The red stuff here is epistemology and
the green stuff is ontology. They are
all run together.
Now Hayes was a in part anyway a
philosopher a young British philosopher.
McCarthy was a a Stanford computer
engineer. We can't say that he was an AI
expert. It's still interesting that we
don't really have a word for the person
who works in AI
like AIST or all right. So this is a a
clash between epistemology and ontology
which is was not yet separated. It's
become separated out much more in recent
times. uh knowledge representation is
not a sexy word or it's not as sexy as
it used to be but in those days there
was a whole discipline of what was
called knowledge representation and
reasoning there were journals of
knowledge representation and reasoning
and it was a very popular way to
describe oneself I went to meetings on
knowledge representation and reasoning
which from my point of view were really
meetings about ontology
so the line was still confusing used.
So Siri is an ontologydriven application
for the masses. And if you look down
here in the middle, we have an ontology
of restaurants, an ontology of movies,
an ontology of events, an ontology of
weather. And so when you enter your
prompt into Siri about whether there is
a traffic jam on the road to such and
such a restaurant, what time does the
restaurant close, the Siri app is using
ontologies in order to provide the
answer to your question.
There is this big volume 800 pages or so
which which collects the classic papers
in this robotics reasoning about
physical systems machinery and so forth
to which Patrick Hayes made uh such
important contributions. The two papers
of his which were reprinted in this big
volume are well the titles you can see
here. There's naive physics manifesto
and then naive physics chapter one
ontology for the liquid liquids.
There was only one naive physics
manifesto that this is not the second.
It's just a re rewrite of the first and
there was only one chapter and that's
the ontology for liquids but still
they're incredibly important pieces of
work. So the naive physics manifesto
says this
and you think about the goal of building
a robot with common sense. How do we do
that? Well, we have a lot of words like
tomato, tweezers, customer, money, cash
register,
apology,
and then we have axioms. If you bang
into a table when approaching the salad
bar, you don't need to apologize.
But if you bang into a human being, that
would be another word. Then you do need
to apologize. So that would be an axiom
of naive physics. The physics for robots
buying salad in a restaurant, which is
common sensical thing which in those
days everyone was doing all the time
because there were salad bars
everywhere. It's now there are salad
bars only in I only know of one salad
bar in the whole of Buffalo.
That was what the second naive physics
manifesto was all about. How we need to
do this in order to capture the whole of
human common sense. Maybe it would take
9,600 predicates
which just means words like bar or human
tomato.
Now this has a philosophical root. The
the use of the word ontology. Remember
he called it the ontology for liquids.
The word ontology runs through what
Patrick Hayes is doing. I I believe it
was him who made the word ontology a
technical term recognized by computer
scientists.
The origin of it was the work of a
philosopher, a very famous 20th century
philosopher called Willard Fan Orman
Quin.
He was a legician, famous legician,
famous philosopher,
very influential, particularly in the
United States, but also to a degree in
other English-speaking parts of the
philosophical world. So his name is
known to all philosophers from the 20th
century. He had this idea
of what an ontology is. Now you have to
remember that in America in the mid 20th
century
the common view was based not on
Aristotle. It was based on physics or on
science. So philosophers wanted to be
scientific philosophers. They didn't
care really about old metaphysics.
They wanted to work in a world where
science was the queen of the
philosophical world.
But they still wanted to do ontology. So
how do you do that? Well, you say,
"We're not interested in what exists."
That's the old way of doing ontology.
We're interested in what scientists
believe exists.
He called this the onlogical commitments
of a scientific theory. And that the
slogan is to be is to be the value of a
variable.
And so if you consider the sentence for
all X, if X is a rabbit, then X is a
mammal. That's a very typical kind of
sentence that you find in these axiom
systems created by the naive physics
people. I mean, they don't talk about
rabbits so much, but that's the kind of
sentence that you find.
And now the variable here is X, and the
value of the variable is rabbits.
Not the kind rabbit. There's nowhere
here where you're talking about any
kinds or categories or classes or
universals. You're just talking about
instances.
So what you're ontologically committed
to the existence of if you have this in
your scientific theory and it might be
in the biological theory
>> that means that rabbits are in your
ontology.
The ontologist is answering the
question, what exists? And the answer is
rabbits.
Nothing more. Not the kind rabbit, not
the species rabbit, not the genus
rabbit. Because you don't quantify over
those things. You only quantify over
individual rabbits.
Now another feature of Quin's approach
is that he doesn't say set of
ontological commitments of a true
scientific theory because who knows
which one is true. I we have a some good
ideas but he didn't want to be committed
to
an ontology based on the true scientific
theory because he was modest enough or
skeptical enough or radical enough to
think that we don't know what is the
true scientific theory. And so you might
have an autotology of golems for
instance
because you can say true things about
golems. Maybe all golems are clay
creatures that have been magically
brought to life. Here the values of the
variable are golems.
The golem example is not very
convincing. So
Patrick Hayes had the marvelous idea. He
so he got the word ontology from Quin. I
I'm sure about this. He doesn't say so
anywhere as far as I know. But he is
going to study not the onlogical
commitments of scientific theories but
rather the ontological commitments of
human beings. Common sense onlogical
commitments.
So we're going to use first autologic
axioms to capture human common sense and
then we will build an expert system
reason over these axioms in order to
enable a robot to buy salad.
the in the ontology for liquids. I don't
know if you can read this, but these are
the possible physical states of liquid.
This is the kind of thing that he does
in his ontology for liquids. So, it can
be a wet surface if it's lazy and still.
It can be flowing down a surface if it's
lazy and moving, a kind of not very
steep surface. And it can be energetic
moving. for instance, waves lapping on
the shore.
And so he has 15 different states of
liquid.
In principle, you could do that for a
tomato.
You would have unripe tomato, ripe
tomato, overripe tomato, unsquashed
tomato, uncut tomato,
and so on. Blended tomato. And you can
see that to do this for everything in a
salad bar would take a long time. to do
it for everything in the world of human
common sense would take an even longer
time and that was why naive physics
failed.
Well, that was one of the reasons.
Another reason is that they were writing
axiom systems
to describe the behaviors of machines
or of physical systems. And it turned so
this was called naive physics or
qualitative physics. Physics without
numbers and it turned out that physics
without numbers doesn't work very well.
You you don't get beyond the first two
or three steps.
An example of physics without numbers
would be the following. That if you if
you have a
you have a ball on a string and you you
you make the ball go round and round and
let go of the string.
Which direction will the ball take? Will
it take a straight line or will it
continue in a curved motion?
Anyone?
>> Yes.
>> Straight line.
>> Yeah, we'll go in a straight line.
you're not necessarily naive.
So some people would say it continues in
a curving motion because that's it seems
closer to common sense. What this means
is that naive physics and real physics
are not necessarily always in tandem
with each other. I'll give you some more
that lazy built bulk liquid history. So
here we have the liquid state but
liquids also engage in moving in wetting
something in spreading in flowing in
being contained in being in the
container being emptied and filled
flowing down a steep incline and then
there still and moving unsupported
flowing supported on one side flowing
supported on neither side and then we
have pouring a cup of milk onto a Okay,
I this is the table. Then eventually it
spreads and starts falling and then wets
the carpet.
>> So when you said Quinn, you know, using
a rabbit example, just focus on the
existence of instances,
not genuses of the species.
>> By aggregation though, if you say FX is
a rabbit, then a rabbit I mean is a map
so on and so forth. If a line is and so
on,
wouldn't that give rise to at least
primitive taxonomies and operations and
classes?
>> That is the way I would view it. But
Aquin truly was
a a skeptical reductionist. The only
things which exist in the universe are
individuals. There are no sets even,
>> no collections. There are just
individuals.
And then the other one was when you said
the naive thing held the object of
>> so he's interested in common sense and
the view of commonly held beliefs as a
>> well actually no that that's unfair to
Quin Quin was not interested in common
sense he was interested in the onlogical
commitments of science it's Hayes was
interested in common sense
>> when you say the common sense uh aspect
of physics right So naive physics is
intended to capture what commonly held
views about the world the way people
normally think about function in a
>> so I think the the the safer way of
saying it would be the following. The
naive physics in the in the haze
community was really seriously
interested in getting robots that would
work or in in understanding the way
machines would work you not without
using numbers it's qualitative physics.
So they thought it would be useful. It
turned out that it was not useful for a
number of reasons and so the movement
died but it left behind this thing
called applied ontology which is from my
point of view anyway quite important.
There is another kind of naive physics
which is a a part of psychology namely
studying the physical beliefs that
ordinary people have about the world and
I'm going to be talking about that in a
minute.
Everything that that Hayes was doing was
connected with first order logic. Now,
does everyone in the room know what
first order logic is?
No. Okay. So, in a way, very simple.
I give you a sentence from Hayes's
paper. A container is either a closed
container or an open container.
That's the right way up.
You can contain water in an open
container only if the container is the
right way up. So you've a sentence which
is the of the form B holds of O if and
only
either O is a closed container or O is
an open container that is the right way
up. That's a sentence of of first order
logic that you see before you get. And
we're using the abbreviation V to mean
O. That's just the way we do it in first
order logic. We're using and to mean and
and we will be using which if we do any
more of this we'll be using this side
here to mean not. Sometimes people use
upside down V to mean and. So there are
different symbolisms but this is the
basics approach. Then we have if then
which is this U on its side and if and
only if which is this three three bar
equal sign.
We have this for all which is an upside
down a and we have the for some which is
an upside down e. You could also read e
as meaning there exists.
>> And then I'll give you just one example.
Everybody loves somebody.
This would be expressed as for all X if
X is a body then there is some Y which
is also a body and which is such that X
loves Y.
So that's a first order logic sentence.
It illustrates all kinds of of features
but one thing it illustrates is that
this would be true even if the only body
you love is yourself.
In order to rule out that case, you
would need another clause which would
say for all X, if X is a body, then
there exists some Y. Y is a body and Y
is not equal to X and X was one. Anyway,
we're not going to do any more first
order logic, but first order logic
was amazingly important for philosophy,
for ontology and for AI.
So, at least for the early stages of AI
and without the early stages of AI,
there wouldn't have been a later stage.
All right. The philosophical role of
first order of logic goes something like
this.
in
the history of 20th century philosophy,
which is all that we're interested in
now. We're interested a little bit in
the 21st century, I suppose. But
round about the beginning of the
century,
there was a lot of very interesting
activity devoted to the philosophy of
mathematics.
In the course of that activity, first
order logic was invented. the inventor
of first all logic a man called Frager F
re ge he is also the grandfather the
eminance giz of analytic philosophy he
was a German most of the action in
analytic philosophy was in England
originally and then it spread analytic
philosophy was built around the work of
Frager
it was built around using logic to
understand language to understand the
nature of language the nature of
knowledge and so forth. And to the to
the extent that analytic philosophy
almost woripped first order logic, they
said that first order logic is the
mirror of reality.
And I think that's a big mistake. And so
I wrote this paper called phantology
which
well the an analytical philosophy of the
last 100 years has been heavily
influenced by a doctrine to the effect
that the key to the correct
understanding of re reality is captured
syntactically in the f holds of a or r h
holds of a b of standard first order
predicate logic. I think that that was
that a mistake made by great names in
the history of analytic philosophy such
as Vickenstein and so forth. But leaving
that aside, I my paper was not
successful.
There are still many phantologists a
foot in analytic philosophy and they are
not aware of the fact that they are
narrowing their scope by insisting that
the first autologic way of organizing
sentences is the correct picture of how
the world is organized.
All right. Now phil philosophy analytic
philosophy of the 20th century also had
two movements which were a bit more
sophisticated than phantology. one is
called social ontology. So social
ontology is a discipline in philosophy
which is accepted by everybody as a
discipline and then analytic metaphysics
which is really
ontology as I understand it but seen as
part of analytic philosophy and the the
leading figure in this field is kit
fine.
That part what is important is that
first logic is the basis of owl which
means the web ontology language. The web
ontology language is the de facto
standard language for ontology work
and we're going to see a lot of owl as
we go down the road in the next few
weeks. Uh so first all logic is very
expressive.
uh I gave you just one example. I could
give you much much more uh interesting
examples of the expressivity of first
order logic. So I I along with some
colleagues built an ontology of
infectious diseases
and in the definition of infection in
that ontology
I would need to have uh one part of the
definition be an eight place relation.
So instead of f holds at AB so loves
John Mary you would have something like
infected in by and then you would have
eight
terms separated by commas. Owl can't
capture anything more than a two place
relation. First order logic can be used
to capture any number of places. You can
have a 50 place relation in first order
logic. So owl is very very narrow
compared to first order logic. But the
reason why it's used is that it's
computationally
very useful. It computes more or less
instantly. If you give it axioms in owl
and ask them whether they're consistent,
it will give you a yes or a no answer
almost immediately. If you do the same
thing with a collection of first order
logic axioms, it might never give you an
answer.
So it's not computationally tractable
and for applied ontology we need
computationally tractable
axiom systems and so we use owl. Now
there there are some people including
myself who still use first level logic
in ontological contexts but not in the
kind of applied philosophical context
where rapid fire um testing and
applications are needed of the sort
which I will will let you build.
>> How would you handle a problem of that
sort where you have eight? Would you use
like four statements and combine
themselves? I'm just trying to
>> Yeah, in very many cases you can't do
anything. There is no way in which you
can capture the idea that is being
expressed by this definition which has
as part one eight place relation. What
you can do in many cases and this is
true for defining nearly all diseases
actually you can't define the disease in
the sense that you have necessary and
sufficient conditions for being an
instance of that disease. What you can
do is just define the necessary
conditions.
So an infection is always in an
organism. An infection always involves a
pathogen. An infection always involves
some locus of the infection. But you can
have a p pathogen and a locus and a
human being without having an infection.
So you don't have sufficient conditions.
And you just have to get away with what
you can get away with just by specifying
sufficient conditions. You have a lot of
power in other ways but there's no
shorefire way of capturing the things
that you can say in first order logic by
using owl. If there was then first order
logic would be computable because you
could just use this shorefire way of
translating into owl and then compute
with the owl.
>> Could you tell like second order
statistics to sort of take the results
of the initial classifications and
combine them? I'm thinking very
primitive like cluster analysis
>> that then you're going outside the realm
of that that is normally considered the
realm that that is the responsibility of
the ontologist but there are some
ontologies which do indeed go down that
road. So one of the most successful
ontologies in the disease space is
something called the human phenotype
ontology
which is successful because it actually
helps doctors with their statistical
analyses.
>> Barry I have a question. Yeah. Sorry. So
Tavy has been working on looking at what
Allen built for the 12 or 13 modules in
common logic of BFO and trying to build
a hyperraph. Are you saying are you
saying that we're just not able to to
reason over common logic right now and
we will be in the future or are you
saying that it's going to be uh
conditionally impossible to do it?
>> Well, there are a number of different
levels here. First of all, in the eye of
God, it's impossible.
Uh so God just made the world so that
first logic is not uh computationally
tractable. There are many many sentences
in first order logic or many many
collections of sentences in first order
logic which you can't prove to be
consistent or disprove the consistency.
you focused on just basic formal
ontology just
>> no even even just focusing on BFO you
won't you won't be able to get around
this however
uh now I have to express myself very
carefully here there are things called
logic theorem provers
and Allan is is
a brilliant master using these logic
theorem provers to prove first order
logic IC sentences to be true relative
to a a given theory. So in other words,
you can use these logic theorem provers
in order to go beyond what seems to be
an insurmountable hurdle, but you can't
do it automatically. You need a human
being to coax the improver in the right
directions. And that's what people like
Allan can do.
>> Yeah. And would you would you say a lot
of relationships
we don't really need common logic for
them because they're simple
relationships even if they're broken
into parts.
>> Common logic from my point of view is
really just first order logic with a few
extra wrinkles. So what applies to first
order logic applies to common logic and
vice versa.
>> Yeah. Common logic is if you like a
version of first order logic that is
computer friendly in a syntactic way. In
other words, it's easier to feed into
the computer.
>> Yeah. Well, I the way I've always
explained it to people with with owl is
that we're really trapped in this binary
relationship of of object subject
predicate and in common logic you're
really in an N area situation. But
you're saying that it's going to be
impossible to build a reasoner to prove
realistically
consistently
uh statements in common logic.
>> So what I would say that the people who
are working in building common logic
axiatizations
will be very careful to make life easy
as easy as they possibly can. So that in
many cases it will indeed be possible to
prove that adding this new axiom to the
existing set of axioms will not lead to
an inconsistency. So you can in other
words you can add it safely.
In some cases that will be done
automatically. You can just see it. In
other cases it will be done with the
help of a theorem prover
you need a bit of skill using the
theorem prover. In some cases, it will
not be possible to do it. Uh you just
won't know and so you probably should
avoid going down that road.
>> Okay.
>> Do you think that playing around with
the temperature
uh token of your prompts could have
prevented chat GPT from fabricating
sources? So in other words, could I have
spoken to the to chat GPT more politely?
I am always very polite. I always say
please even when I'm talking to a
machine.
Um I was polite even when I said
uh that that shouldn't you apologize for
that? Uh I I moved in the direction of
not being polite when I said I do not
need to know how to format a a citation.
I need to know the source of this
particular citation. So, but so I don't
know the answer to your question, but I
I you can try. It's very hard though
because you can't predict where chat GPT
is going to falsify a quote. So, you can
never know whether it's your politeness
which helped or whether it's just
randomness.
Does it make sense to say that Hayes's
ontology of liquids described the
behavior of liquids but did not go so
far as to specify any type of hierarchy
of liquids? Yes. So he did say a little
bit more about certain types of liquids.
He talked for instance about rivers
versus lakes.
um he didn't talk about liquids from the
point of view of chemistry but that
would actually be one area in which the
bas the general idea of naive physics
uh as seen by Hayes could be could help
part of real physics
because chemistry chem chemistry as a
science
uh so as as a part of real science I
mean chemistry is a science which is
interested prec precisely in the
behaviors of different kinds of liquids
amongst other things, different kinds of
metals, different kinds of proteins and
so forth. And so the Kebby chemistry
ontology does indeed have a module which
deals with the common some of the common
sensical features of chemicals like
coffee and alcohol
which are very important chemicals.
They're also liquids.
So what you're suggesting we can do is
actually already being done.
So now in the wake of Patrick Hayes in
the wake of the Kif movement ontologies
started to be born which became
generally known and used. The first
influential one I think was Sumo or one
of the first. It was built by a group of
people were all working on different
things including me although they took
over only part of what I had to offer
but there is part of my work on ontology
in sumo. It was built in a very uh
democratic sort of way. So different
people could vote on different uh
ingredients in the ontology and it
broke. So there is one man called John
SOA again talk about again in a few
minutes who was part of the group that
was building sumo and it said that he
was always making objections to every
suggestion and the whole thing just
collapsed because primarily because of
him. I I know him. I even like him in
some ways but and I but I can well
believe that he did cause the collapse
of sumo. However, sumo still exists
because it was rescued by one of the
people who was part of this group. And
so, you can find it on the web and there
is a book about it. And it's not a bad
ontology. It has some interesting
features.
And then it does incorporate a little
bit of BFO it, but it's not a true
formal ontology, but BFO means basic
formal ontology. Formal means completely
general.
And sumo contains little bits of
chemistry, little bits of physics. Uh it
even contains little bits of biology but
not necessarily scientific bi biology.
And so it it isn't really used very
much. Then there is dolce. Dolce will
play play a very important role. Dolce
is Italian for sweet. Uh dolce. It it
was built by Italians. That's going to
be an important part of our talk today.
So do stands for the domain ontology
linguistic and cognitive engineering.
So linguistic and cognitive here you see
this this fusion or confusion between
ontology and epistemology.
Dolce is really
built to be an ontology of common sense
language and knowledge
cognition
but it looks very much like BFO in fact
and it BFO was inspired in part by
Dolure.
So that's BFO. I I there are mappings
that show the relations between the two.
It's no accident that BFO looks like
Dolce. I worked with the Dolce people
for some time and I learned things from
them.
All right. So then the next stage in the
ontology timeline is a famous
conference, the first worldwide web
conference where Tim Berners Lee used
the phrase semantic web. And this was
also the birth of the resource
description framework which creates
these um triples.
John loves Mary, the Mona is in the L
and so on. These are RDF triples which
make triple stores.
And then Tom Tim Berners Lee and some
other people wrote a famous paper in
Scientific American about the semantic
web. And at the same time owl and RDF
became popular and this led slowly to
the growth and growth and still further
growth of a movement called linked open
data. So this is a knowledge graph built
out of RDF triples. So um Lily is
interested in Dainci who painted the
Mona. James likes the Mona and James is
a person and Lily is a friend of James.
So that's what you get from RDF and uh
you can get a lot of it. So the semantic
web is basically seeing the web itself
as being joined by all of these triples.
That was the dream of Tim Bernersley
and using owl as the web ontology
language in order to enable reasoning
over all of these triples because RDF
doesn't really enable reasoning just
enables you to make assertions triple
assertions. So the the it the semantic
web connects all of these things
together including Google hummingbird. I
have no idea what that is.
Um this is linked to open data the
version of two 2009.
So it has uh this is the version of
2021. I I couldn't find a 2025 version.
This is the legend with what the colors
mean.
And uh this is 2014. So this has the
virtue that you can still read it
provided you have me to expand the
picture. So you have semantic web.food
Food, Semantic Web, University of
Southampton, Semantic Web, VAF, The More
Lab, Archives, Hub, Link Data, The Drug
Bank of the Free University of Berlin,
Yago
and
Cider of the Free University of Berlin
and so on. There's a lot of stuff here.
This is a big knowledge graph, as it
were.
Notice that the term knowledge graph
means that it's not connecting things in
the world, it's connecting data about
things in the world.
And here is the legend for 2014.
So this is the my favorite part has
audio scrabbler and data
so forth. This is the biology part.
All right. So then we come to the next
stage in the timeline of ontology which
is the appearance of BFO and the hub and
spokes idea. This was BFO was created uh
when I was working with something called
the open open biomedical ontologies
community which was founded by an
English geneticist
and one of the leaders of the human
genome project circle. He was in charge
basically of the fly genome project, the
house fly, domestic fly
by the name of Michael Ashurner.
And uh he was a very good friend of
mine. He he he
um he he was chaperoning me when I first
started working with these biologists.
And
so he built gene with some friends. I
had just got a large grant from the
German government to build an institute
for the study of medical ontology. I
found the gene ontology and I realized
that this was the this was going to be
the core of my institute. We were going
to be working on this because it's so
good, so useful. What it does is it
connects in a uniform language all the
various different descriptions of let's
say proteins to keep it simple that were
being collected all over the world with
the results of the human genome project
fly genome project and so forth. So it
made this huge
collection of energy bursts in different
countries become unified so that they
could exchange data confidently.
And um it was built by four people in a
pub in Montreal on the back of a
cigarette packet and it grew and grew
and grew. I I
encountered it, started working with it.
I realized more and more that this was
really useful and really important. But
I then also realized more and more that
it was
full of holes logically speaking. They
didn't know what a definition was.
Although they had definitions for all
their terms, they made all kinds of
mistakes. So I used my money to invite
them to my institute and I humiliated
them in public by pointing out all the
mistakes and Michael Ashurn
congratulated me. He said this is
fantastic.
We want to put you in charge of the
logic the geneontology but you have to
promise never to criticize the
geneontology in public.
And I sold my soul and uh for a time I
became very important. Unfortunately,
Michael uh then got brain cancer and so
there is no more Michael. Uh but anyway,
this was how I came to be involved. I
along with other people created what was
called the open biomedical ontologies
foundry
which is a hub and spokes structure. So
you have a hub which is BFO and then you
have various ontologies which are the
spokes and then you have various other
ontologies which is spokes coming out
through those spokes and this ensures
that the ontologies are being developed
in tandem with each other and so common
core ontologies the industrial
ontologies foundry
uh BFO became an international standard
and now we have the actually it's now
called the National
National Security Foundry, the NSF,
which is the the Department of Defense
and Intelligence Community official uh
ontology
uh repository.
All right. So this is the common core
ontologies
which is a collection of mid-level
ontologies created on the basis of money
from the intelligence community but it's
completely open and this is the common
core ontologies collection of space
ontologies which is not quite so open
although you can get better im this is a
bad you can get readable images that
then we come to the ontology timeline
number three.
Uh so in 1998
you we still have expert systems. I'll
explain what expert systems are in a
minute. Um and the they relied I so
really the the um naive physics idea is
an expert system idea. They rely on
human crafted rules and ontologies. By
symbolic rules they mean logical rules.
So, Deep Blue, which is the uh IBM chess
playing computer, is an expert system.
It's not a piece of AI in the in the
modern sense anyway.
And uh the the most famous expert system
uh which which be it became a kind of
model for a lot of work. uh it it's not
good enough in the end for all kinds of
reasons but still it it was a step a
stepping stone towards better things
and um and now why is it not why is my
sin and um deep blue why are they not
called AI
and the reason is that thing as soon as
things become used and useful
commonplace you stop calling them AI.
That's what they say anyway. So people
call these old things expert systems
because they want to reserve AI for the
really exciting stuff which is coming
along the pipe. Another reason is that
no one would think that my sin was
intelligent
and AI is supposed to mean artificial
intelligence. So the baseline for being
AI has to be that you are counted
intelligent. Of course none of them are
intelligent. U but we can come back to
that problem later.
Deep blue was not intelligent. Deep blue
was built by brute force computation.
Really old-fashioned
collecting lots of data and reasoning
with it. And we'll come we'll come to
that idea of brute force computation
later on.
So intelligence, you have to have
intelligence. That means you have to
have the the smoke of intelligence
before your eyes. Uh and you don't have
that with an expert system.
Now psych is mentioned in this timeline
also. We'll come back to that later. So
banks use expert systems and um one of
the reasons why bank expert systems
failed
uh or many of them is because it it's
very expensive to populate an expert
system. This was true already of naive
physics the the for robots. It's just
too expensive to collect all those names
and give them formal definitions and
work out how to compute with those
formal definitions. So we have expert
systems and then it starting in the
1990s we have ontologies in biology in
in engineering in various domains. In
biology they had a hub and spokes model
and that means that the bi the biology
ontologies built in the n in the 2000s
are still alive still growing still
used. None of the engineering ontologies
built at that time are still alive. They
all died because they were all
different. So they didn't have a hub
which would keep them connected and
consistent and interoperable with each
other. We're now trying to build that
hub in the industrial ontologies
foundry. Then we have the Tim Berners Le
Semantic web vision which is a part of
this timeline because this is where
ontology really became generally um
known about
and the Google knowledge graph was
launched. Wiki data was launched which
is a gigantic body of data built around
built around Wikipedia which it doesn't
have a hub and spoke structure. It has
this
linked open data I'm not sure what you
would call it spaghetti ball structure I
don't know but now the beginnings of
neuros symbolic AI emerge. Now you
remember that there were two kinds of AI
at the beginning. There was sorry I I I
described two kinds of AI at the
beginning. Goi and stochcastic AI.
Neuros symbolic AI is a combination of
both. The idea of this combination came
already around about 2012.
Now I've been talking a lot about
knowledge bases um knowledge graphs
rather. Now I will just mention the
terminology of knowledge base versus a
database. So a database looks like this
and it's very good. You can do things
with it. It's not very flexible. If you
want to add a new feature about the
people in your customer list, for
instance, their debts, it might not be
easy to change your data structure. But
anyway, there are traditional databases.
What is a knowledge base? Well, a
knowledge base is a database plus an
ontology.
And you'll see, I hope, how this works.
So, this is a very simple ontology.
We have persons who have names and who
have skills.
Now in the not in the database you just
have person, age, name, skill and so on.
And the problem is that another database
which you might want to join with uses
different codes for person. It gives the
name in a different format. It puts the
last name first. It uses special codes
for skills. uh part of it gives numbers
to skills and and so on and so when you
try to put the two together you will
fail. If you have an ontology
then you can put things together. So we
have these ugly codes here. These are
four different database models. So I'm
just giving you one line of data. This
is this doesn't have persons. It has
person IDs and skill ids. This has skill
ids plus the name and the description of
the skill. Uh this has an ID for a skill
description.
And this has an employee ID which is a
person uh associated with a skill name.
So skill name here, skill description,
skill ID. They there's just no way of
putting them together. Now what you do
is you have this little ontology
and you tag each of these data models
with a term the very same term for the
ontology.
So this is what you get if you try and
put the data together
uh without the ontology. If you have the
ontology very easy to put all the person
names down one column whether they are
in the form employer ID or just ID or
person ID and then you can have the
associated field value. In this case
you're interested in skills. So you have
field values, Java description,
programming and so forth. And you can
arrange all the people along one column
or you can arrange all the skills along
one column because you've tagged the
data with one ontology. So that the
skills are all brought together through
the tag and you'll see how that works in
a minute.
Here you have the data, here you have
the ontology, and you tag appropriately.
So the knowledge graph is the data plus
the tags. This is a database pertaining
to lots of aircraft components of some
sort which were subjected to a
radiographic exam. So you have the exam
ID the token the act of performing the
exam the result of the exam and then you
have various other things. And now you
want to reason about this and you have
an ontology of
um
act of lot acceptance for testing, act
of radiographic exam, inflation device,
act of production and so on. These are
all in the ontology which was built to
be used in different act testing
stations across the US Air Force. And
then using the ontology you can see how
this particular column is linked to this
column for instance and you can reason
about those cases where that the values
in these two columns are in the wrong
relation to each other. They shouldn't
be like that. Something's gone wrong.
And um you can work out which are are
the tokens which go hand inhand with
specific exam results again by using the
ontology
and this tagging can be done very easily
because there are programs software what
one of the programs is called karma
whose job is to help you tag the um the
column headers of all your databases
using a single ontology so that all your
base database bases which were hitherto
scattered and disconnected from each
other become connected through the
ontology into one big database which you
can then reason over. So this
illustrates the sort of thing which is
being done on this front. All right. So
that's knowledge graphs and now pause
again for questions. Does it make sense
to say that hazes ontology of liquids
describes the behavior of liquids?
knowledge graph just contain ontology
plus data. If so, if so, does BFO make
this distinction
explicitly?
Now, BFO has room for data. BFO has has
room for those kinds of data artifacts
which are called ontologies.
But BFO doesn't go down into the
entrails of how different kinds of data
artifacts are linked together. For that
you need the information artifact
ontology
which which deals precisely with
different kinds of information artifacts
identifying kinds of information
artifacts but also identifying relations
between the instances of those kinds and
that's where you would get the
definitions of terms like knowledge
grow.
So now we have the birth of neuro
symbolic AI which neuro means the use of
deep neural networks. Symbolic means
you're still using goofi. So you propose
a hybrid approach symbolic structures
for reasoning neural nets for nets for
perception for instance and deep mind is
a hybrid neurosy symbolic architecture
in this sense.
We'll go on. So DARPA in 2019 started
talking about explainable AI and machine
common sense programs were pushed but
nothing really of value was created. Uh
neurosy symbolic reasoning systems were
being tested. The AI world tests a lot
of things. Chad GPT
broke through because the thing it
tested turned out to be useful to a
large population of people. And and for
me it was useful because it was an
interesting toy. Other people find it
valuable for their uh companies but it
broke through. Lots of other things
which were tested by DARPA and by other
organizations didn't break through in
that way. Integrating LLMs with
knowledge graphs is something that
people are
interested in. I would say that they are
riding on the back of the LLMs but they
see the problems of the LLMs and they
think that some of the older ideas can
be used knowledge graphs for instance
which which is to say ontologies can be
used to counteract some of these
problems.
I'm not going to talk about this because
John Beverly is going to talk about how
knowledge graphs are used with LLMs in
on November the 3rd and November the
10th.
And now current trends
knowledge graphs are increasingly
serving as memory for LLMs. Neuro
symbolic AI focuses on explanability
and reasoning beyond just pattern
recognition. Uh so this is often framed
as a way to overcome the limit
limitations of purely statistical AI.
Um so we started here. There are two
approaches. one is implicit. So this is
a piece of terminology actually which I
think is important.
I say here that deep neural networks and
large language models are implicit AI.
The the the intelligence or whatever it
is that is at work is hidden. It can
never be explainable.
A typical
link between a prompt and a response in
uh chat GPT
is going to be an algorithm which might
have a billion parameters or hundreds
and thousands of parameters and there's
no way a human being can understand what
that algorithm is doing. So there's no
way a human being can explain what an
alg algorithm is doing. And so we can't
have explainable AI, explainable AI in
the sense of large language models. You
can have explainable AI in the sense of
goi
easily. That's part of the package. So I
want to call the AI in large language
models implicit which means hidden. And
then I want to call the AI which is
contained in gi as explicit which means
it's open.
Now
I talked last week about the glory of
large language models glory of chachi
pt. The glory is they invented a new way
of doing mathematics.
Oldfashioned mathematics involves a
mathematician with a beard and a pencil
and an eraser. Philosophers don't need
an eraser.
And the mathematician thinks and he
works out explicitly what he has to do
next and so forth. That's explicit
mathematics.
LLMs are mathematical algorithms. That's
all they are. But they're not made by
people. They're made by pouring huge
amounts of data into a funnel and having
the data then processed using uh
statistical processes to create
algorithms.
And these algorithms can do fantastic
things and they are mathematical.
They're just pieces of mathematics.
That's why they are not conscious.
That's why they're not intelligent.
That's why they don't have values
because mathematical algorithms
are not conscious or intelligent or have
values. They can't be responsible for
anything. They're just pieces of
mathematics. Now, this is um this
opposition between explicit mathematics
and implicit mathematics is comparable
to the opposition between two kinds of
steps in a conversation.
So when I say something,
what I say, my my utterance is explicit.
You can hear it. But what I'm thinking,
you can't hear or see or know. And
similarly, I can't hear or see or know
what you're thinking before you speak.
So each conversation is a collection of
explicit and implicit steps, turns as
the linguists say. And so what we're
what we're dealing with when we're
trying to make a machine which would
participate in human conversations
is a a body of data half of which is
inaccessible.
We can only access the explicit part of
the conversations that we are recording.
So, however many recordings chat GPT
might troll out of the YouTube videos or
whatever it is that it's using, they
will always only be half the relevant
data.
>> The term top down AI,
>> yeah,
>> which is rules based where it
>> Yeah.
>> is that
an updated name for goi
in the sense that's built on an explicit
system of rules ced into the software.
So it depends what goes on down at the
bottom but the top part is indeed at
what you find in gopher. The top part is
characteristic of go the top down part.
We go back down to the real roots. So
for Aristotle Aristotle was a realist.
He thought that the world existed that
the things we see in it exist that they
beha the behavior that they engage in
exists and that we can know it because
we just look around. So for Aristotle
there's there's no way in which you can
falsify any of his beliefs
because everything is just common sense.
So if you point out to him that there is
here a black swan,
he will just shrug his shoulders.
It's not important because we all know
that swans are white.
Uh so he had a realist theory of
categories which are otherwise called
universals, types, species, genera
and um he was an epistemological
optimist. He thought that we could know
everything and we all almost certainly
already know everything and there are
there are some things that we don't know
very well but uh there's no he we just
shrug his shoulders regarding birds. Our
human common sense provides a broadly
accurate picture of what exists and of
the major categories of what exists.
And this worked for 2,000 years.
Um so it was called the perennial
philosophy. Everybody believed in it.
There were some crazy medieval
philosophers who tried to poke holes in
it but even they believed in it
basically.
And so there are reasons why it survived
for so long.
But eventually it was brought down by
bad guys like Dikart and Berkeley and
Hume and Kant especially Kant
and then in the late 19th early 20th
century this is my view of the history
of philosophy uh the the good guys came
back nobody reads the really good guys
who are rhining
we've mentioned Husel already some
people do read husel and and then
there's Quin, we've already mentioned
him. There's S, we've already mentioned
him. Then there are people like Kit
Fine, uh, who are listed here, who are
analytical metaphysicians
who are basically realists. They are
they do not think that the the first
philosophy is epistemology. They they
think like Aristotle that the the top of
philosophy, the top down starting point
of philosophy is metaphysics.
And then we have at the very end bad
guys of a quite different flavor who are
called fourdimensionalists.
Now if you look at the anthologies that
I mentioned sumo Dolce BFO there are a
few others GFO UFO
they are all three-dimensionalist. What
this means is that they have objects and
they have processes. Objects are in
three dimensions. Processes are plus
time. So we have three dimensions plus
time. Fourdimensionalists say that there
are no objects. There are only spaceime
worms.
Everything in the universe including the
universe itself is a space-time worm.
Now Quin was not a fourdimensionalist
but he was an anti-realist.
So that means he rejected the idea of a
mind depend independent reality that
would exist independently of our best
scientific theories. It's obvious we can
only know what's in our best scientific
theories. Therefore we can't know about
an independent reality.
That is a a characteristic bad argument
in philosophy.
And another version of that argument is
we can only see with the help of our
senses and therefore we can't see what
really exists independent of our senses.
There's a whole junkyard of such bad
arguments proving that we can't know
what the world is like. All right. So
Quinim was one of those. John Sull was a
realist. He was a good guy. I'm not sure
whether he was a good shot, but he was a
good good guy. and he he founded this
modern discipline of social ontology.
And then Rodrik Chisum is another good
guy. He's not he died and his his
following to which I belonged rather
collapsed after he died. But he wrote a
very interesting book called a realistic
theory of categories which gives you
some idea that he was on the right
lines. Uh and and this looks like a a a
reasonable starting point for an
ontology of categories. and his heart is
in the right place. But the the it's not
BFO. There are things missing. And then
there is the real bad guy, David Lewis.
He was the almost certainly the most
influential philosopher in the United
States in the second half of the 20th
century and even still today in the
sense that nearly all the important
figures in philosophy were his students.
So he was in Princeton. The idea I mean
it gets worse but I won't go into all
the bad parts. There is no space. There
is no time. There is no there are no
enduring objects but only a gigantic
universal space-time worm. So there's no
Donald Trump. There is only a sequence
of trumpinating processes
which unfold through time. And and then
the question is what is shared in common
by the first and second terms of the
Trump presidency and the
threedimensionalist says Trump but the
four dimensionalists can't say that
they have to talk around it somehow. I
they these people really do exist.
They're influential. They get they are
in charge of big government projects.
All right. So applied ontologies come in
two types. There are the broadly
successful ones. I could list the GFO
and so forth. And then there are the
fourdimensionalist ones. So they've been
around. They get funding. They they are
important in some realms for incidental
legal reason particularly in the oil and
gas production industry where the ISO
standard
uh for data handling is based upon this
fourdimensionalist junkyard crap.
So I wrote this paper called against
idiosyncrasy in ontology development
which is about ISO5926
part 14 which is where this four
dimensionist ontology put forward as a
top level ontology for oil and gas
production facilities.
I'll give you one example of one of the
easier definitions. A class is a thing
that is an understanding of the nature
of things and that divides things into
those which are members of the class and
those which are not according to one or
more criteria. Now, one obvious problem
with this definition is that it's
circular.
You've got the word plat on both sides
of the definition. But otherwise, it's
it's completely useless.
We don't know what an understanding is.
We don't know what a nature is.
Um anyway,
it's a f if you want to read a funny
piece of ontology then you you could
read this. All right. The birth of
applied ontology. We already met Quine
and we met Patrick Hayes. We can see
that Patrick Hayes uh wrote important
things. He's still alive. He works at
the Institute for Human and Machine
Cognition in Tampa.
And um he was born in England. He
studied mathematics. He taught
philosophy alongside computer science,
computer science, cognitive science and
so forth. And he worked for Xerox Park.
He was president of the triple AI
association. He was really an important
figure. And his research interests were
all of these things. So philosophical
foundations of AI and computer science,
ontology design. He was part of the team
which was trying to build this. I I
don't really believe it but this is what
it says on the website.
And now we come to the strangest of all
things in the ontology timeline which is
Italy.
So I mentioned Dolce
and uh the Italians invented applied
ontology as an institutional phenomenon.
They had the f first institute, first
conference, the first journal,
uh all kinds of things that they did
first
and that this was almost all of it due
to Nicolola.
He who organized the first international
conference on formal ontology.
uh he created with his colleague Dolce
Smith worked for a time with with with
Barino actually but also with two other
Italians Kasati and Vati who are quite
important figures in philosophy and
cognitive science today.
uh BFO was built in part on the basis of
time I spent working in Padua with the
Guina
and then in 2003 they established a
laboratory for applied ontology in two
parts one in Trieste and one in Rome and
um
the working group in applied ontology
that they started was founded in 1991
we've seen that already and then
Nola wrote a paper about me and it
starts like this. Let me start with a
confession. I feel responsible for the
fact that Barry Smith is not a
philosopher anymore. I used to be a
philosopher. He keeps saying now I am an
ontologist. On the other hand, Barry is
definitely responsible for the fact that
as some people say, I am not an engineer
anymore because I'm irreversibly
contaminated by philosophy.
Now I visited Ladzep this institute in
1993. Later in the same year there was a
fire in Ladzep
and so the library was practically
eliminated but there were two books
which survived.
One was this and the other was an French
translation of Aristotle's category.
So that was they were the most important
books obviously the eyes of the god of
fire. Now in 1993
in Padawa, Nicola organized I think it
was the first international workshop on
formal ontology and Thomas Gruber gave a
keynote uh at that to uh conference.
Roberto Casati and Akil Vati and I gave
a talk on um ontological tools for
geographic representation at a
conference in the same series a few
years after that. And so this is all of
it in one way or another connected with
Italy. That's the point I'm trying to
make. And I will come to an end I guess
with one more joke.
John SOA hate hated me for a long time.
And the only reason he gave was because
I'm English and the reason why you hate
English people is because Pur was an
American philosopher and he was
American.
This this is sort of the reasoning that
John Sway used. Now I think he has a
more balanced view of me but he says
intelligent things. So he points out
just this year that Apple worked for two
years to use LLMs to derive a better
version of Siri but they gave up because
of the hallucinations.
Siri didn't hallucinate. It was a goofy.
When you build Siri using LLMs it
hallucinates and that could be
dangerous. you could set your house on
fire and so Apple cancelled their
project for an LLM based Siri. This is
so he says a better method would be 90%
accuracy plus a message for the all the
others which say please restate that
request or please ask a human being or
something like that. So a good hybrid
system would be much more reliable and
vastly cheaper than the behemoth for
which Elon M is wasting billions of
dollars. This is what he looks like. he
gets angry very easily.
And um so in 2002 I founded this
institute in Germany which I mentioned
and uh the same year somebody wrote to
him saying what do you think of this
Barry Smith and he said Barry S is not
someone that I would recommend as an
expert on ontology and certainly not on
its applications to information
technology. He has published a lot of
nonsense. I didn't cite purse. You see
that was the problem. He has published a
lot of nonsense in which he never cited
pur on the subject which seems to have
misled many people including the people
who gave him the money. But I seriously
doubt that anything useful will come of
it. On my YouTube video uh YouTube site
you can see some short videos. one is
about 1 minute 7 seconds long about him
engaging in an argument with me.
I'll just me finish with Gary Marcus. So
Gary Marcus is one of my heroes
uh because he attacks Sam Alman all the
time uh for all the right reasons which
are the reasons which we give in our
book and which are still valid. He
himself wrote a book called rebooting
AI. Ernest Davis who was his co-author
is one of the naive physics movement the
common sense ontology movement and
they've worked together on a number of
things. So building artificial
intelligence we can trust means building
artificial intelligence which is based
on a good ontology. Now he chose the
wrong ontology.
I said I would talk about psych. So this
is psych. I need to be very quick. So,
this is something that I I talk about a
lot, especially on LinkedIn and things
like this. Uh, I had a um I had somebody
in my company go to an AI convention out
in Vegas two weeks ago and he was like,
"They never mention ontology." Is it
because they the people like Sam Alman
think that like if you talk about
ontology or knowledge graphs, it's a
step backwards
>> and they want to go forwards. Is this
this an ideological thing where they
want to not talk about things that have
been founded for 20 30 years because
they feel as though it's not you know
>> I think enough or
>> so all the ontology work that's been
done or at least huge parts of it is in
there it's in the training data it's
just that it doesn't govern anything.
>> Yeah. So the reason why ontologies are
useful is because you can use them to
govern data repositories in such a way
that the data inside them becomes
interoperable.
>> But it's funny because it's like they
hide the fact that they use ontologies,
but then you look at all of these
companies and they're constantly hiring
ontologists.
>> That's another story.
I don't think it's right to say that Sam
that Sam Alman or or Chad GPT uses
ontologies. I would say that they have
intologies in there, but it's part of
the general soup. It adds a little bit
to the statistical signals in on
occasions. It can it it can read back a
paragraph in BFO terms if you ask it to
do so. And it will do quite a good job.
a paragraph about anything golems if you
like. It will give you a BFO analysis
but it will give you analysis in 98
other different frameworks including
nonsense frameworks. So an analysis of
this passage in in the eyes of um golem
believers or something. It it doesn't it
it doesn't favor one particular approach
to the way in which prompts prompts
should be responded to. it will allow
you to issue prompts of any sort. So I
don't think there's any uh there's
conspiracy here. I think it's just that
ontology is buried in the soup of
everything else.
There are people like Ernest Davis and
others who are working seriously on
euros symbolic AI. They are taking
ontology seriously.
>> Yeah. I I found that I I think Barry
that you know you you mentioned how like
things stop becoming called AI when they
figure out what it is and you know that
Gartner has that trough of disillusion
after their hype cycle
>> and I feel like when these AI companies
get down in there they start trying to
call people like us because they're
trying to get it out of that trough and
I'm hoping more of them call people like
us.
>> Well, I predict that that something like
that will happen.
All right. So, let me just finish with a
little bit on the psych. It's short for
encyclopedia. It has top level
categories. If you look at the very
bottom, it has the category composite,
tangible and intangible object. That's
you and me. So, we are composite
tangible and intangible object because
we have minds which you can't touch.
And it has the following entity
conceiving something biological
reproduction event. So conceiving
something is conceiving a baby.
And it's a collection of events which is
a subolction of the biological
reproduction event.
In each conceiving something biological
reproduction event, someone becomes
pregnant. And then the immaculate
conception is the conceiving something
biological reproduction event in which
Mary mother of Jesus was con conceived.
So both of these are part of common
sense. This psych is an on is an
encyclopedia.
It in some context he calls it an
ontology. It still exists but lots of
people are working to build it. It gets
bigger and bigger. It's built using
first order logic as I understand it and
it's made of definitions like this and
axioms. Um,
and it I've been part of projects where
it's been applied and I I was not
impressed by its usefulness and you now
see psych being Doug Lennon died not so
long ago. Sykes psych is history's
forgotten AI project. Then there are
obituaries for psych. And so it it
achieved long-term financial stability.
It will go on for a long time. There are
still people working on it, but it it
doesn't do anything better than other
competitor things.
All right, that's the end of this week's
lecture and we can spend time for
questions if anybody wants to hang
around.
>> How does four dimensional
work? I mean it if people put money into
it as you pointed out it's like but how
would a massive you know time space
>> so I I don't know because I don't
understand four dimensionalism but I can
tell you this you know what a digital
twin is
a digital twin is a
>> Chris Chris partridge uh uh came to
Buffalo what a week last year Barry
>> and and and he came to our class with
John a few times and I had some long
discussions. Is that what you're talking
about?
>> Yes, absolutely. He he is
>> he is one of the lead uh conspirators in
this movement.
>> Yeah. So So John doesn't even know if
he's actually building an ontology. He
thinks he's building something that
might be important. But was the question
about Burrow?
>> Well, I don't know whether Burrow will
be important, but Burrow influences
people and they seem to become four
dimensionalists as a result.
>> Yeah. But is that what the
four-dimensional question was, Barry?
>> The four-dimensional question in the
room here was what do people use this
for? And my example would be this. So
there are digital twins. People build
digital twins of rivers or of housing
projects or of surgical wards in
hospitals in order to use software and
even to use AI to predict flaws or
faults or shortages or so. Somebody was
given the job of building a digital twin
for England.
And the man who was given put in charge
of this project was a
fourdimensionalist.
And so England doesn't appear anywhere
in this digital twin, I'm assuming, nor
do any buildings or roads or anything.
It's all processes. And he he got the
MBE for his work. So I think it was the
MBE which is the master of the British
Empire. It's a kind of knighthood
and then he died.
>> Uh
>> he didn't die of course the process came
to an end.
>> Chris Burrow he tried to explain this to
I mean he he explained it but basically
it's almost like a Calvinist approach
where all points in time of an
occurrence exists at the same time. you
know the full. So it's sort of like well
you know if the ship is being built you
already account for the pieces of the
ship that haven't been built before
they've been built. I really how useful
that is.
>> So if it's useful then I already know of
a of an alternative which is more common
sensical and John Beverly and I just
wrote a paper on it.
>> Yeah. I mean I I don't think it is use I
I think it's kind of useless. I mean,
>> I think it's worse than useless because
it's not common sensical.
>> Yeah.
>> So, you're not going to get people to
take it seriously unless it co coheres
with what people assume to be common
sensically true.
>> I I I much more rather have the idea of,
you know, a independent continuent that
can exist like the ship of thesis and it
can account for the fact that it remains
itself even if it changes over time. But
this idea that things can change over
time and and that time is an important
valuable asset, not just to be looked
upon as like we're inside of a
tesseract.
>> Yeah. So that you're just describing
what BFO does.
>> Well, exactly.
>> All right. I'm going to stop now.
>> Hey, Bear, before you go, are you going
to share the paper you've co-written
with John on this?
I do not have the most recent version,
but if you raise that next week, then I
will uh well, actually, if you send me
an email reminding me, that would be the
best. I'll get the most recent version.
>> We'll do. Thank you.
>> Okay. So, thank you all very much. Now I
think the main lesson to be learned from
the success of BFO based ontology
development in particularly in the
biological world is that if you have
large numbers of people using an
ontology framework then there is
accumulation of knowledge on the part of
those people so that the framework
becomes better. the the teaching tools
become more sophisticated. The number of
people who are uh familiar with the
principles which need to be applied
becomes larger and so they can help
other people to apply them more
correctly. And al most importantly the
ontologies themselves become better
because if you have multiple users then
they find errors and then you have the
opportunity to correct the errors and
then the ontology gets better because of
those corrections. And the geneontology
is now much larger than it was when it
was first created. Precisely because all
of those thousands of users of the
geneontology are confronting real data
about biological phenomena on a daily
basis. And when they can't find a
correct correctly defined geneontology
term for a given phenomenon, then they
will request from the editors that a
corresponding term be added to the
ontology. And this is another argument
why users having lots and lots of users
is an indispensable criterion for having
an ontology which is not only good but
also
evolving into something which is even
better. Uh so something like the Pur
Wilkins ontology that John described
will only be able to evolve into
something better as soon as he's able to
recruit even one user. Um, and I still
am making the bet that in five years
time he will not have recruited even one
user.
>> One, first of all, it's uh just
something that I cooked up very
recently. I originally only had Wilkins
for
>> But but John, you said it was the best
ontology you'd ever seen.
>> Yes.
>> So you can't have it both ways. You
can't you can't make the excuse that it
was just something you cooked up a few
minutes ago and then say the best
ontology you've ever seen.
>> I am saying that I include everybody's
ontology under it and everything that
you have said about VFO fits perfectly
beautifully into uh this ontology as a
special case as an approximation to
this. Now the point is that uh what I'm
uh I I agree that I have to uh take
those labels and show precisely how they
map into very nice formally defined uh
top level. I also point however that BFO
has a huge amount of users that has
added a lot of what one might call
incrustation that it does not belong
where it does. The information artifact
ontology all that information about
abortances and so on. Those are all
information things that belong on the
left hand side. Anything that deals with
information, anything that deals with
science, anything deals with the paper
shuffling with the uh x electron
shuffling in a data computer, all of
that is seen. All of that belongs on the
left hand side.
>> Okay. Then so in other words, in other
words, you agree that the BFO, IAO and
so forth are not in fact specializations
of your P Wilkins universal best
ontology
>> because we put the things on the wrong
side. So it Every ontology is an
approximation and if it's not an
approximation then it is extremely
brittle and it cannot be used with more
than one teeny weeny tiny
>> BFO has existed now for 14 years and
it's hard it's changed hardly at all the
gene ontology has existed for 20 years
it's been used by thousands of people
>> and it's not brittle it's not
>> irrelevant it's totally
>> so you say all ontologies of type
covered this enough
>> for both of you. I think we've covered
this enough.
>> Something burning.
>> We don't want the room to start start on
fire. Okay. Uh
>> so if you want to say that a given
ontology, say the purse Wilkins cubed
ontology is higher up the tree than
another ontology, say BFO, then you have
to provide a true path connecting the
lower to the higher. John John doesn't
tend to do that detailed work.
>> I will do that. I will do that. I will
>> he loses his temper instead.
>> And so that's the difference. That's the
difference.
>> I will do that.
>> Okay.
>> I will come back in five years and see
if you did it.
>> I'll do that tomorrow.
>> All right. I think we've Okay, we've
addressed that and uh we've run out