\documentclass[11pt,oneside]{article}

\usepackage[margin=1.15in]{geometry}
\usepackage{setspace}
\setstretch{1.15}

\usepackage{fontspec}
\usepackage{unicode-math}
\setmainfont{Libertinus Serif}
\setsansfont{Libertinus Sans}
\setmonofont{Libertinus Mono}
\setmathfont{Libertinus Math}

\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb}
\usepackage{microtype}
\usepackage{hyperref}

\title{A Plan for Venezuela}
\author{Flyxion}
\date{\today}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

\begin{abstract}
This essay presents a deliberately unsentimental plan for Venezuela that begins from the premise that collapse has already occurred and that conventional policy responses have failed to engage the structural nature of that collapse. Rather than framing Venezuela’s condition as a moral or ideological crisis, the essay treats it as an infrastructural, coordinative, and temporal failure rooted in extreme dependence on oil revenues, the neglect of downstream value creation, and the erosion of institutional capacity following the global oil price collapse of 2014. It argues that oil wealth did not fail Venezuela; Venezuela failed to construct the systems required to convert petroleum reserves into durable economic and political stability.

Rejecting the metaphor of oil as latent treasure, the essay reframes energy as a process dependent on infrastructure, law, labor, and power continuity. On this basis, it proposes a program of deliberate overbuilding centered on heavy-crude refining capacity, electrical grid reconstruction, and digital infrastructure, financed through external capital and executed under concentrated transitional authority. The plan explicitly embraces the chaos of the current geopolitical moment, arguing that attempts to restore legitimacy without first restoring capacity are structurally incoherent.

The essay advances a controversial but historically grounded claim: that in contexts of institutional vacuum, temporary authoritarian coordination and transnational infrastructure may function as necessary scaffolding for recovery rather than as ideological betrayals. By treating legitimacy as an outcome of operational success rather than a precondition for it, the plan seeks to convert volatility into momentum and collapse into construction. The resulting framework challenges prevailing assumptions about sovereignty, democracy, and development, insisting that the ethical evaluation of policy must account for causal consequences and counterfactual outcomes, not procedural purity alone.
\end{abstract}

\newpage
\section{Introduction}

This essay does not propose a polite policy. It proposes a plan. It begins from the premise that the current situation surrounding Venezuela is already chaotic, already violent in its implications, already saturated with improvisation, contradiction, and performative authority. The question, therefore, is not whether chaos should be avoided, but whether chaos should be acknowledged, formalized, and directed toward outcomes that are at least structurally coherent rather than merely theatrical.

Venezuela occupies a peculiar position in contemporary geopolitical discourse. It is simultaneously described as a humanitarian catastrophe, a rogue petrostate, a victim of imperial sabotage, a cautionary tale of socialism, and a latent treasure chest of natural wealth waiting to be unlocked. These descriptions coexist without resolution, producing a fog in which incoherent action becomes not merely possible but routine. The absence of a stable policy narrative is not an accident. It is the consequence of a deeper failure to articulate how value is created, how power is exercised, and how legitimacy is maintained in a world where infrastructure, finance, energy, and information are tightly coupled systems rather than independent domains.

The dominant fantasy that Venezuela is poor despite having oil obscures a more troubling reality: Venezuela is poor precisely because it structured its economy almost entirely around oil. The possession of oil did not diversify the Venezuelan economy; it narrowed it. It did not create resilience; it amplified fragility. When oil prices were high, this fragility was masked by revenue flows that allowed the state to substitute cash transfers and imports for institutional development. When oil prices collapsed in 2014, the underlying structural vacuum was suddenly exposed. What followed was not merely an economic downturn but a systemic unraveling.

This essay argues that any serious plan for Venezuela must abandon the moral theater of regime change, the sentimentalism of humanitarian intervention, and the extraction fantasy that imagines oil as a static resource to be seized rather than a process that must be sustained. Instead, it must confront Venezuela as an infrastructure problem, a coordination problem, and a legitimacy problem simultaneously. These dimensions cannot be addressed sequentially. They must be addressed together, or not at all.

The provocation of this essay lies in its refusal to pretend that solutions will be clean. It entertains, explicitly and without apology, proposals that will sound outrageous within conventional diplomatic language. These include the deliberate use of external authoritarian governance as a temporary stabilizing mechanism, the construction of transnational floating transport infrastructure that bypasses sovereign bottlenecks, and the intentional reorientation of Venezuelan oil production away from raw export and toward refined, value-added output. These proposals are not endorsements of domination for its own sake. They are attempts to match the scale and violence of the problem with interventions that are at least commensurate in ambition, while remaining grounded in the material realities of energy, logistics, and capital.

To write a plan for Venezuela is to acknowledge that plans already exist, even when they are unspoken. Improvisation is a plan. Neglect is a plan. Predatory extraction is a plan. The question is not whether Venezuela will be shaped by external forces, but whether those forces will continue to operate through incoherence and denial, or whether they can be made explicit, legible, and contestable. This essay chooses the latter, not because it is safe, but because the former has already failed.

\section{The Petrostate Trap}

To understand Venezuela’s present condition, it is necessary to abandon the superficial question of why a country with oil is poor and instead ask how oil came to dominate the structure of Venezuelan life so completely that it displaced almost every other mechanism of value creation. Venezuela did not merely discover oil; it reorganized its political economy around oil to a degree few other nations have attempted. Over the course of the twentieth century, petroleum revenues replaced taxation, industrial policy, and long-term institutional development as the primary interface between the state and society. The result was not prosperity in the durable sense, but a form of revenue anesthesia that delayed structural reckoning.

Oil allowed the Venezuelan state to import what it did not produce, to subsidize what it could not sustain, and to postpone the difficult work of building diversified productive capacity. Agriculture declined, manufacturing stagnated, and domestic technical expertise became increasingly concentrated within the oil sector itself. This narrowing of competence created a brittle economy whose apparent strength depended entirely on external price signals over which it had no control. When oil prices were high, Venezuela appeared functional. When they fell, the entire system convulsed.

The collapse of global oil prices in 2014 was not an unforeseen shock in economic terms, but it was treated as one politically. Oil prices fell from over one hundred dollars per barrel to less than thirty within a matter of months. For a state whose export revenues, fiscal capacity, and foreign exchange reserves were overwhelmingly oil-derived, this was not a downturn but an existential event. Government revenues evaporated, imports became unaffordable, and the monetary system fractured under the strain of attempting to maintain obligations that were no longer grounded in productive output.

The severity of the Venezuelan collapse was compounded by the specific character of its oil. Much of Venezuela’s reserves consist of extra-heavy crude, particularly in the Orinoco Belt. This oil is viscous, sulfur-rich, and expensive to extract and refine. It cannot be efficiently processed without specialized infrastructure, blending agents, and energy-intensive upgrading facilities. In favorable market conditions, such oil can still be profitable, but only within a system that is capital-rich, technically competent, and institutionally stable. Venezuela, by the time prices collapsed, was none of these.

Rather than responding to declining margins by investing in refining capacity and downstream value creation, the Venezuelan system doubled down on raw export dependence. The state oil company, increasingly politicized and stripped of technical expertise, became less capable of maintaining even basic operations. Skilled engineers emigrated. Maintenance was deferred. Pipelines degraded. Refineries malfunctioned. Production fell not because oil disappeared, but because the organizational capacity required to move oil from ground to market disintegrated.

This is the core paradox of Venezuelan oil wealth. Oil did not fail Venezuela. Venezuela failed to build the systems necessary to make oil a foundation rather than a crutch. The result was not merely poverty, but a loss of temporal agency. Once oil revenues collapsed, the state lost the ability to plan, to invest, and even to imagine futures beyond immediate survival. Hyperinflation, shortages, and mass emigration followed not as ideological consequences, but as systemic ones.

\section{Oil as Infrastructure, Not Treasure}

Any serious plan for Venezuela must therefore begin by rejecting the metaphor of oil as treasure. Oil is not wealth waiting to be seized. It is a flow that exists only when supported by infrastructure, labor, law, and energy. Without roads, electricity, courts, data systems, and skilled workers, oil remains underground or becomes a liability rather than an asset. This distinction is not rhetorical. It is causal.

The fixation on oil reserves as a measure of national potential has repeatedly led external actors into strategic error. Possession of reserves does not imply control over production. Control over production does not imply profitability. Profitability does not imply legitimacy. Each step in this chain requires institutional support that cannot be conjured through force or decree. Venezuela’s tragedy is that it possessed the first link in abundance while neglecting the others almost entirely.

Heavy crude intensifies this problem. Unlike light oil, which can be refined with relatively standard processes, extra-heavy crude demands sophisticated upgrading facilities capable of converting it into usable fuels. These facilities are capital-intensive, technologically complex, and highly sensitive to power stability and supply chain integrity. Venezuela’s existing refining capacity is insufficient and degraded. Without massive reinvestment, Venezuelan oil will continue to sell at steep discounts, enriching intermediaries rather than the country itself.

This observation leads to a counterintuitive conclusion. If Venezuela is to escape the petrostate trap, it must not reduce its engagement with oil in the short term, but deepen it in a very specific way. It must move downstream. It must stop exporting crude and begin exporting products. Refining oil into fuels, petrochemicals, and industrial inputs captures value that crude exports permanently forfeit. This requires refineries, grids, ports, and trained operators, none of which can be built incrementally under conditions of political paralysis and capital flight.

\section{The Case for Deliberate Overbuilding}

The conventional response to Venezuelan collapse emphasizes stabilization, humanitarian aid, and gradual reform. These approaches fail because they underestimate the depth of infrastructural decay and the speed at which human capital is lost. Venezuela does not need marginal improvement. It needs deliberate overbuilding.

A credible plan would involve the rapid construction of multiple large-scale refineries designed specifically for heavy crude, built not as symbols of sovereignty but as export-oriented industrial platforms. These facilities would anchor a broader reconstruction of electrical grids, transport corridors, data infrastructure, and logistics hubs. The objective would not be self-sufficiency, but reintegration into global production networks on terms that favor value retention rather than extraction.

Such a program cannot be financed domestically. Venezuela’s capital stock has been exhausted, its credit destroyed, and its currency rendered unreliable. External investment is unavoidable. The question is not whether foreign capital will shape Venezuela’s future, but which capital, under what conditions, and toward what ends. Investment from Gulf states experienced in energy infrastructure and from China, with its tolerance for long time horizons and state-backed financing, is not an ideological choice but a structural one. These actors possess both the capital and the operational capacity to execute projects at the scale and speed required.

The political cost of such arrangements is real. External financiers will demand guarantees, control mechanisms, and priority claims. This is often framed as a loss of sovereignty. In practice, Venezuela has already lost sovereignty through incapacity. The choice is not between autonomy and dependence, but between chaotic dependence and structured dependence with pathways to recovery.

\section{Using the Chaos}

What distinguishes this plan from conventional development frameworks is its refusal to wait for political resolution as a prerequisite for economic reconstruction. The current Venezuelan political system lacks the legitimacy, coherence, and trust required to coordinate a national rebuilding effort. Pretending otherwise merely extends the stalemate. In such conditions, governance does not disappear; it fragments. Power migrates to whoever can maintain flows of food, fuel, and security.

Rather than denying this reality, a plan for Venezuela must instrument it. This may involve temporary external governance arrangements, imposed not as moral exemplars but as operational stabilizers. The installation of an external authority, even an authoritarian one, is not proposed here as a normative ideal, but as a recognition that coordination failures cannot be solved by appeals to democratic procedure alone when institutions have already collapsed.

This is the most controversial claim of the essay, and deliberately so. The history of development is littered with failures produced by insisting on ideal governance forms in contexts incapable of sustaining them. The alternative is not purity, but paralysis. If Venezuela is to rebuild, someone must have the authority to coordinate infrastructure, guarantee contracts, suppress armed sabotage, and enforce timelines. Whether that authority is local or external is less important than whether it is functional.

The chaos surrounding Venezuela is not merely a problem to be solved. It is a signal. It reveals where systems have failed and where power actually resides. A plan that ignores this will fail. A plan that uses it, channels it, and constrains it may yet succeed.

\section{Transnational Infrastructure Beyond the Nation-State}

At a certain scale of collapse, national borders cease to function as meaningful planning units. Venezuela has reached this scale. Its economic recovery cannot be conceived solely within its territorial boundaries, because the systems it requires in order to function—energy markets, logistics corridors, financial clearing mechanisms, data infrastructure, and labor mobility—are already transnational in practice. The pretense that reconstruction must be nationally contained serves only to preserve bureaucratic dignity while material conditions continue to deteriorate.

For this reason, the plan outlined here deliberately bypasses the nation-state as the exclusive substrate of infrastructure. It proposes the construction of floating, modular transport and energy corridors linking Venezuela to Cuba, Florida, and the Yucatán Peninsula. These corridors would not merely move people or goods; they would function as semi-autonomous economic arteries, insulated from the paralysis of domestic politics while remaining anchored to global trade flows.

Floating infrastructure is not science fiction. Offshore platforms, modular ports, and mobile energy installations already operate in hostile environments across the world’s oceans. What is radical is not the technology, but the willingness to treat the Caribbean basin as a continuous logistical field rather than a collection of sovereign fragments. A raft-based hyperloop system, operating at moderate speeds and optimized for redundancy rather than spectacle, would allow for the rapid movement of refined petroleum products, industrial inputs, technicians, and data hardware without relying on decayed terrestrial networks.

The strategic purpose of such infrastructure is not merely efficiency. It is leverage. By relocating critical pathways outside the immediate reach of domestic sabotage and bureaucratic capture, reconstruction efforts gain temporal stability. Power outages, road blockades, and local political interference lose their capacity to halt the system entirely. The infrastructure becomes harder to govern in the traditional sense, but easier to operate. This inversion is intentional.

Cuba occupies a key position in this configuration. It possesses decades of experience operating under constrained conditions, a centralized governance structure capable of enforcing continuity, and an existing role as an intermediary between Latin America, China, and other external partners. The installation of a Cuban-backed administrative authority in Venezuela, framed explicitly as temporary and task-bound, would not represent ideological alignment so much as operational pragmatism. The objective would not be to export Cuban governance wholesale, but to import its capacity for continuity under pressure.

\section{Authoritarian Coordination as a Transitional Mechanism}

The suggestion that Venezuela may require an externally installed authoritarian administrator will provoke predictable objections. These objections typically rest on moral grounds, invoking sovereignty, democracy, and self-determination. While these values are not dismissed here, they are treated as outcomes to be built rather than premises to be assumed.

Democracy is not a mechanism for generating infrastructure. It is a mechanism for legitimizing power once infrastructure exists. In the absence of functioning grids, courts, transport systems, and labor markets, democratic processes devolve into symbolic contests disconnected from material capacity. Venezuela’s recent history demonstrates this repeatedly. Elections occurred, but coordination did not follow. Legitimacy was asserted, but enforceability was absent.

The plan therefore treats authoritarian coordination not as an end state, but as a scaffolding phase. Its purpose is to concentrate decision-making authority long enough to execute projects that cannot survive prolonged negotiation or factional interference. This includes refinery construction, grid rebuilding, security enforcement along transport corridors, and the reestablishment of contract law in practice rather than theory.

Such authority would need to be constrained not by electoral cycles, but by explicit performance metrics tied to infrastructure milestones. Completion dates, output targets, and operational reliability would serve as the legitimacy function during this phase. Failure to meet them would delegitimize the administrator more decisively than any ideological critique.

This is not a romantic proposal. It acknowledges the risk of abuse, entrenchment, and external exploitation. It accepts these risks because the alternative is continued decay under the guise of moral correctness. The choice is not between clean hands and dirty hands, but between dirty hands that build and clean hands that watch collapse continue.

\section{Refining, Electrification, and Digital Anchors}

Central to the plan is the deliberate construction of five large-scale refineries designed specifically for Venezuela’s heavy crude, initiated no later than December 23, 2023. The symbolic precision of this date is intentional. It marks a clear temporal break from improvisation and signals commitment through irreversible action. Once poured concrete meets installed steel, the future becomes harder to deny.

These refineries would not operate in isolation. They would anchor new electrical grids designed with redundancy and export capacity, allowing surplus energy to stabilize surrounding regions and power industrial clusters. Electrification is not merely a quality-of-life issue; it is the precondition for modern refining, logistics automation, and data processing.

Alongside physical infrastructure, the plan calls for the construction of server farms colocated with energy generation. These facilities would serve multiple functions: domestic administrative capacity, financial clearing for oil transactions, and participation in global data markets. Venezuela’s geographic position, energy potential, and labor surplus make it a plausible node in a distributed computational economy, provided reliability can be guaranteed.

The inclusion of digital infrastructure is not ornamental. Modern states fail not because they lack ideology, but because they lack memory, accounting, and feedback. Server infrastructure provides the substrate for these functions. Without it, corruption flourishes by default, not by conspiracy, because information cannot circulate fast enough to constrain behavior.

\section{Interpretive Synthesis}

What emerges from this plan is not a traditional development strategy, but a reconfiguration of causality. Value is treated as emergent from coordination rather than extracted from territory. Legitimacy is treated as downstream from capacity rather than antecedent to it. Governance is treated as a technical problem before it is treated as a moral one.

The chaos surrounding Venezuela is not incidental. It is diagnostic. It reveals where narratives have replaced mechanisms and where declarations have substituted for construction. By embracing this chaos rather than denying it, the plan seeks to convert volatility into momentum. It uses the instability of the present as a forcing function, compelling decisions that would otherwise be postponed indefinitely.

This approach will offend sensibilities accustomed to incrementalism and procedural purity. It will be accused of cynicism, imperialism, and technocratic arrogance. These accusations may not be entirely wrong. What matters is whether the alternative produces outcomes that are materially superior to continued collapse. Moral clarity without material capacity is indistinguishable from abdication.

\section{Conclusion}

A plan for Venezuela cannot be a wish. It must be an intervention at the scale of the failure it addresses. It must accept that sovereignty has already been eroded by dysfunction, that legitimacy cannot be restored without infrastructure, and that infrastructure cannot be built without concentrated authority and external capital. To deny these facts is not ethical restraint; it is denial.

The plan outlined here is intentionally unsettling. It refuses to flatter any constituency. It treats oil not as salvation but as a demanding system that punishes incompetence. It treats power not as a right but as a responsibility to produce outcomes. It treats chaos not as an aberration but as a signal to act decisively.

Whether Venezuela ultimately emerges from collapse will depend less on ideology than on whether someone is willing to build, at scale, without pretending that the conditions are cleaner than they are. The time for narratives has passed. What remains is construction.

\newpage
\appendix

\section{Appendix A: Historical Precedents for Resource-Centered State Failure}

Venezuela’s trajectory is not anomalous. States that organize themselves around a single extractive commodity repeatedly exhibit the same structural vulnerabilities regardless of ideology, geography, or historical period. The cases of Nigeria, Angola, Equatorial Guinea, and pre-2003 Iraq demonstrate that oil-centered development tends to displace taxation, weaken accountability, and concentrate political power in institutions that are optimized for rent distribution rather than productive coordination. When revenues flow from exports rather than from domestic economic activity, the feedback loop between citizen welfare and state capacity is severed.

In such systems, political legitimacy becomes decoupled from performance. Governments can survive long periods of mismanagement so long as commodity prices remain high. Conversely, when prices fall, collapse can be sudden and catastrophic because there is no diversified base to absorb the shock. Venezuela’s post-2014 contraction fits squarely within this pattern. What distinguishes it is not the existence of oil dependence, but the degree to which oil crowded out every alternative form of institutional learning.

The historical lesson is not that resource wealth is inherently destructive, but that it must be subordinated to broader systems of coordination. Where oil revenues were used to build manufacturing capacity, transport networks, and human capital, as in Norway, long-term stability followed. Where oil revenues substituted for these investments, collapse eventually ensued. Venezuela followed the latter path with exceptional thoroughness.

\section{Appendix B: Heavy Crude Economics and Refining Constraints}

The physical properties of Venezuelan crude impose constraints that cannot be negotiated away by political will. Extra-heavy crude from the Orinoco Belt has high viscosity, elevated sulfur content, and low hydrogen-to-carbon ratios. These characteristics require either blending with lighter hydrocarbons or upgrading through coking and hydrocracking processes before the oil can be converted into usable fuels.

These processes are capital intensive and energy intensive. They require continuous power, specialized catalysts, and highly trained personnel. They also generate waste streams that must be managed under regulatory regimes capable of enforcing safety and environmental standards. In the absence of such regimes, refining becomes not only unprofitable but dangerous.

The tendency to treat Venezuelan oil as immediately monetizable ignores these constraints. Heavy crude is not simply sold at a discount; it is sold at a discount that reflects the buyer’s anticipation of political risk, infrastructure unreliability, and legal uncertainty. Without domestic refining capacity, Venezuela permanently exports value while importing finished products at higher prices. This asymmetry is one of the central mechanisms by which oil wealth has translated into poverty.

\section{Appendix C: Infrastructure as a Legitimacy Engine}

Throughout modern history, legitimacy has followed infrastructure more reliably than ideology. States that provide electricity, transport, water, and predictable administration tend to stabilize even under imperfect political arrangements. States that fail to provide these services lose authority regardless of their formal constitutional structure.

Infrastructure performs three simultaneous functions. It enables economic activity. It creates visible evidence of state capacity. It generates temporal expectations, allowing individuals and firms to plan beyond immediate survival. When infrastructure decays, legitimacy decays with it, not because citizens suddenly reject authority in principle, but because authority ceases to be operationally meaningful.

The proposal to prioritize refineries, grids, transport corridors, and data centers rests on this logic. These systems are not merely economic assets. They are governance substrates. Their construction creates facts on the ground that re-anchor social expectations. Elections conducted in their absence are symbolic. Elections conducted after their restoration have substance.

\section{Appendix D: External Authority and Transitional Governance}

The use of external authority in post-collapse environments is historically common, though rarely acknowledged without euphemism. From postwar reconstruction in Germany and Japan to international administration in the Balkans and East Timor, external governance has repeatedly served as a bridge between institutional vacuum and domestic self-rule.

The failures of such arrangements are well documented, but so are their successes. The determining factor is not the presence of external authority per se, but whether it is bounded by mission clarity, temporal limits, and measurable objectives. Unbounded occupation breeds resentment. Bounded reconstruction can restore agency.

In the Venezuelan context, the absence of any coordinating authority has already produced fragmentation, informal power centers, and foreign influence without accountability. Formalizing authority under explicit constraints would not introduce domination where none exists. It would replace diffuse domination with structured responsibility.

\section{Appendix E: Temporal Risk and the Cost of Delay}

Delay is not neutral. In collapsing systems, delay compounds damage. Each year without reinvestment accelerates capital decay, human flight, and institutional forgetting. Skills atrophy. Informal economies entrench. Violence professionalizes. At a certain point, recovery costs grow nonlinearly.

Venezuela is approaching this threshold. The longer reconstruction is postponed in the name of political purity or diplomatic caution, the more expensive and coercive it will become when it eventually occurs. Early, decisive overbuilding is therefore not recklessness but risk minimization.

This appendix underscores the central claim of the essay: that the true danger is not acting too forcefully, but acting too late. Infrastructure, once destroyed, does not wait for consensus. It demands replacement or it imposes collapse.

\section{Appendix F: On the Ethics of Uncomfortable Solutions}

The ethical discomfort provoked by this plan is not incidental; it is diagnostic. Ethical frameworks built for stable societies fail when applied to systemic breakdown. In such conditions, refusing to choose is itself a choice, one that privileges existing power asymmetries and ongoing harm.

This appendix does not argue that authoritarian coordination, external capital dominance, or infrastructural bypasses are morally ideal. It argues that moral evaluation must include counterfactuals. The relevant question is not whether these measures violate abstract principles, but whether their absence guarantees continued suffering at scale.

Ethics without causality is sentiment. Ethics with causality is responsibility. The plan for Venezuela, as outlined, accepts responsibility for consequences rather than retreating into procedural innocence.

\begin{thebibliography}{99}

\bibitem{Auty1993}
R. M. Auty.
\newblock \emph{Sustaining Development in Mineral Economies: The Resource Curse Thesis}.
\newblock Routledge, London, 1993.

\bibitem{SachsWarner2001}
J. D. Sachs and A. M. Warner.
\newblock The curse of natural resources.
\newblock \emph{European Economic Review}, 45(4--6):827--838, 2001.

\bibitem{Ross2012}
M. L. Ross.
\newblock \emph{The Oil Curse: How Petroleum Wealth Shapes the Development of Nations}.
\newblock Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2012.

\bibitem{Weisbrot2019}
M. Weisbrot and J. Sachs.
\newblock Economic sanctions as collective punishment: The case of Venezuela.
\newblock \emph{Center for Economic and Policy Research}, Washington, DC, 2019.

\bibitem{Monaldi2018}
F. Monaldi.
\newblock The political economy of oil contracting in Venezuela.
\newblock \emph{Harvard Kennedy School Faculty Research Working Paper Series}, RWP18-002, 2018.

\bibitem{CorralesPenfold2015}
J. Corrales and M. Penfold.
\newblock \emph{Dragon in the Tropics: Hugo Chávez and the Political Economy of Revolution in Venezuela}.
\newblock Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, 2015.

\bibitem{HausmannRodriguez2014}
R. Hausmann and F. Rodríguez, editors.
\newblock \emph{Venezuela Before Chávez: Anatomy of an Economic Collapse}.
\newblock Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park, 2014.

\bibitem{Karl1997}
T. L. Karl.
\newblock \emph{The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States}.
\newblock University of California Press, Berkeley, 1997.

\bibitem{BPStatistical2023}
BP.
\newblock \emph{Statistical Review of World Energy 2023}.
\newblock BP plc, London, 2023.

\bibitem{IEAHeavyOil2022}
International Energy Agency.
\newblock Heavy crude oil production and refining challenges.
\newblock \emph{IEA Energy Reports}, Paris, 2022.

\bibitem{PDVSAHistory}
R. Mommer.
\newblock \emph{Global Oil and the Nation State}.
\newblock Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2002.

\bibitem{North1990}
D. C. North.
\newblock \emph{Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance}.
\newblock Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1990.

\bibitem{AcemogluRobinson2012}
D. Acemoglu and J. A. Robinson.
\newblock \emph{Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty}.
\newblock Crown Business, New York, 2012.

\bibitem{Ferguson2005}
N. Ferguson.
\newblock \emph{Colossus: The Rise and Fall of the American Empire}.
\newblock Penguin Press, New York, 2005.

\bibitem{Scott1998}
J. C. Scott.
\newblock \emph{Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed}.
\newblock Yale University Press, New Haven, 1998.

\bibitem{Kipling1897}
R. Kipling.
\newblock Recessional.
\newblock \emph{The Times}, London, 1897.

\bibitem{Rothkopf2005}
D. Rothkopf.
\newblock \emph{Running the World: The Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power}.
\newblock PublicAffairs, New York, 2005.

\bibitem{Frum2026}
D. Frum.
\newblock Trump has no plan for Venezuela.
\newblock \emph{The Atlantic}, January 2026.

\bibitem{IEAInfrastructure}
International Energy Agency.
\newblock World energy infrastructure and investment outlook.
\newblock \emph{IEA World Energy Outlook}, Paris, 2021.

\end{thebibliography}

\end{document}
