Notes from chapter 3 part 9 of Deleuze and Guattari's Anti Oedipus, my friend who is teaching me the book answering my questions about this chapter for 3 hours, as we do every week or every other week. This is a central chapter, key themes are why capitalism makes you feel stupid, the calculous of symbolic castration x + dx, why conservatives don't conserve shit, and how the mega-machine controls your mind:

One of most important chapters, gauntlet gets thrown down with Lacan. Part of agenda in reading this book, is to combat a kind of assumption that this book is anti Lacanian. Lacan 4 out of 5 are laudatory. This is the 5th one. This where we start to articulate, accept Lacanian insight, accept a great deal of his critique, conflate Lacan and psychoanalysis. To be critical of psychoanalysis is to be critical of Lacan. Brushes over riff with Lacan and psychoanalysis, started own school with blackjack and hookers. Lacan and Lacanianism is distinct minority trend within psychoanalytic institutions. Idea D & G is wholesale opposed to psychoanalysis and Lacan, critical of, but in this chapter and the next one, then the last part of this section Oedipus at less, are more or less of equal importance for the reasons described. What are we literally doing. what is this book about? Oedipus. What we get to here? Oedipus. Whole story so far, journey of how we get to the distinct psycho social configuration of Oedipus, and what exactly that means. And what this tells us about psychoanalysis and language generally speaking. I tried to give some notes to the D & G  here, big criticism is it asks a lot of the reader, both in terms of knowledge outside of D & G with differential calculous, and elsewhere, structural anthropology, engagements with psychoanalysis and Lacan specifically. The technical terms in this chapters are defined in this text. Flow and schizophrenia. To that we have to add in relation to the flow, the relations of code, overcode, decode, and axiomatic. All of those are in here somewhere. 

If this was written today this would be called anti heteronormativity, a mouthful and not quite as poetic. In addition to being paternalistic, its a self conscious investment of paternalism. You can kind of think of an unconsciously paternalistic society, paternalistic by default, it's always been paternalistic. Men, for whatever reason, whether they're stronger, or just less morally scrutable, have become into power broadly speaking, and are able to dictate the flow of women instead of vice versa. The Oedipal step is where we become self conscious of this and become invested in it as such. What's it called, the great example of this would be modern resurgence of the family image, the trad wife image within the context of American fascism. As well as of course the violent and profoundly insecure homophobia, queerphobia generally speaking. We can feel, tell the difference between a kind of investment where it's like we're paternalistic, we don't call it that, we call it being American. Something has to happen to where ideology as we call it becomes self visible, and becomes invested as such.

This is honestly what drew me back to psychoanalysis in a serious way in the first place was like, clearly if you listen to people's actions, look at the paturn of action, words that come out of their mouth, it's obvious that psychosexual bullshit is more important to most people than any kind of rational interest. I do not need further evidence that human beings are not great at acting in their own rational interest. Trying to act in their own interest, failing because they're dumb; they wouldn't fail in this same direction over and over again if they were aiming for something else and failing. If you aim at something and miss it, you would expect the misses to be tending towards what you're aiming at. To be more specific, how the reactionary will couch the rhetoric, security, civility, national, traditional values, the family. Actually invested in cruelty in itself. Looking for excuses to be cruel. Drowning in ressentiment. If there is a precursor to that it's Nietzsche's ressentiment. Oedipus is D and G's version of bad conscious, ressentiment, nihilism. You brought up Oedipus, mentioned Oedipus as heteronormativity, Oedipus as the myth here.

The reason Oedipal myth so crucial for psychoanalysis, haven't read Oedipus since 10th grade, details of story less important than how it's been taken up philosophically, Oedipus receives a prophecy, dad receives a prophecy Oedipus kills his father and marries his mother. To try to avoid this, send him away through convoluted twist of fate, efforts to avoid that fate, have brought him exactly to his fate. On an instinctual level, feel the affinity psychoanalysis has for this kind of logic here. But let's look at symbolically what's happened. So on the one hand, you have this what we can call an unconscious desire for the mother. Even though Oedipus didn't know it, he's being driven towards his mom. 

Let's think about this symbolically. The moral of the story Freud reads here. We have this unconscious desire for our mothers. Freud was predicated from the fact, this always had a logic to it. Mother is first attachment, in a physical and symbolic sense, mother tends to be person whom you're first attached. It makes sense that this would have an important role or that this would be influential upon all future attachments. Getting the hole a shape. Effect what fits in the hole in the future (object large A). Child the ego, we repeat the family's economy within the ego's libidinal economy. Father, mother, child, have the object of desire, law, and the ego or the subject. So in the Oedipal symbolism, the child is the ego, the mother is the ID and the object of desire, and the father as Lacan will put it, the name of the father is the law regulating access to the desired object. So Oedipus for both Lacan and Freud, and D & G, for everyone, Oedipus in a psychoanalytic context, is your initiation into a social order. It is your buy in to be part of society, this is what they mean by symbolic castration. It is essentially your price to enter society.

We add the double bind, you have to ask for food, but not too much in a certain sense.

So Lacan's theoretical move is to essentially equate society with language. Hard to imagine society as we know it without language. This is how we get the unconscious is structured like a language. If you read it differently, depending on how you cache out language, you can even get to D & G, if closer to a programming language than a natural language. The version they're most critical of, is the linguistic unconscious as signifier. Very specifically the signifier they are critical of. Most underrated points, much more theoretically concrete than we're used to. Theories of the signifier are substantially more consistent than a lot of other aspects of psychoanalytic theory. Comes from structural linguistics discipline.

Specifics of the signifier, don't get too much into it this chapter, but we will get into the specifics of how capital writes and uses language and how it's different from language as we regularly know it. To me the only convincing critiques of intersubjectivity are critiques of subjectivity that any intersubjective theory should avoid if it succeeds in what it tries to do in the first place, is avoid the problems of subjectivity. Think about the intersectionality, discourse around intersectionality. The tension between our subject categories, whether racial gender, or otherwise, and the intersections thereof. So the upshot from D & G's perspective, tension explained in paradoxical unintuitive way the intersection is what is primary or real and the subjective categories are derivative extractions from them and not vice versa, by extracting from intersections we get categories. Same principle of subjectivity in general. What we normally think of as points in a sense, at least solid bodies that have a spatial consistency, definite bounds, both Lacan and D & G point towards thinking of subjectivity as circulating. Same way an electric current flows and circulates, need to think of circuitry and flow of subjectivity. Instead of solid objects interacting. Think about it from the perspective of flows, and circulation, even interpenetration seems like in a sense they are interpenetrating, but it's almost even more than that. There's a what's it called, a useful concept from physics where we kind of have a tendency to assume or believed that two objects can't occupy the same place at the same time, how we would define space. Physics gives us the idea of a super position, two entities are occupying the same space at the same time.

I think you've captured the key effective or subjective feeling of living in capital. If we really look at what do we mean by code overcode axiomatic. Different ways of evaluation, ways of evaluating a thing, asking how much value is this. It's not until capital that that value becomes determined or evaluated quantitatively. The thing about the code and the overcode, is that they're qualitative. This is how we get to the idea that differential relation, how did you just express it, was I productive today, do I have more than I started with, becomes the criteria or measuring stick we're using to evaluate ourselves. That is quite literally what X plus DX means. DX is the principle of profit. In this looking at 228, see the X plus DX, if X can be anything, that's the power of x, can put anything in there and can still work, what that little d stands for is usually the smallest amount of change, or the smallest possible change in X. So if X is our time so to speak, our value, whatever we have, DX is the next step more. They use, I guess to do a brief background, have you ever taken calculous? What we use this math for, calculous is the heart of physics. Calculous was revolutionary it helped us understand moving bodies in a way we had been really bad at because the greeks were stupid. How do they do this. If you've got the dividing arrow paradox, what motivates us here, if I throw a ball, how do I measure the speed at any one moment. So the ball never actually stops, has to be moving the whole time or speed would be zero. How do you know how fast the ball is moving if you can't interact with the ball to take a measurement of it? If you consider it as moving continuously through space, if you think of plotting that movement on a graph, if you draw a graph, you have in theory your smallest possible denomination of that graph.
Something has to happen between the points you're actually marking. D of X was introduced to represent the changes that are too small for your given symbolic field to represent itself. So another way of thinking about this, it's the change that is happening in an instant. The instant is an abstract image of time, from our perspective it appears as a freeze frame because it's happening beneath our, pretend our, imagine if you will our brain works the same way as a video game does, or a movie does. Presents us with frames. Something happens in between the frames. We just don't see it because we only get to see the frames. D of X represents what happens from frame to frame.

Surplus value, have you read Capital, how do we define capital, money that makes more money. Capital is literally M C M, money, capital, more money. What does that give you, transition through capital, capital is a means of going from money to more money, M prime, could switch this for X plus D of X. This is why it is the filiative form of capital. money makes money as in a blood relation. What is the instantaneous rate of profit. How do we measure profit at an instant. At a given moment. X plus DX, M to M prime are the same thing. What is D of X, I first referred to it as the principle of profit. If there's no differential, there's nothing to make a profit off of. The differential is the minimum difference. DX means differential of X, X plus D of X, largely mathematical equivalent to M plus M prime. DX is surplus value, what will be organized into lack.

The clearest example of D of X is the physical one. Let's imagine we're throwing a ball. Physical example. We're graphing the motion of the ball, we want to draw the ball's motion, relative to its origin point, on a graph. The graph is going to have two dimensions, an X and a Y. The line will be divided up into units of some sort. In principle the line can be divided forever, but as we've seen from the Iliadic paradoxes, if we apply that principle to real movement, we could literally never get anything. It doesn't seem like real movement is infinitely divisible. Hits a real piece at some point. The differential of X is how far the object moves on the X axis in an instant. At each, if you treat the line, a 10 foot line, in principle infinite points on that line. If you treat all of them as D of X, add them up, add D of X an infinite number of times taking a limit, you will get the distance your ball has traveled over the X axis. To use xeno's paradox as a reference, the reason he is wrong, the differential is real, there is a real movement that occurs in no time. An instantaneous amount of time.

so one way we can think of the differential, infinitesimally small, values themselves mean nothing, have to take limits for D of X to mean something. If the thing itself is infinitely small, doesn't add up until dealing with an infinite amount. Familiar with process of taking the limit in calculous. The limit is really interesting, I do think is kind of necessary for D and G, it involves how we think about functions, mathematical expressions, equations, as their values approach infinity. An arbitrarily large number. What happens to certain equations when you plug infinity into them. Historically speaking this is how we've tackled this problem, mathematicians might quibble, but this is how we tackle these problems.

So if we think of D of X, smallest possible unit of change, smallest difference that can be made, these are like our building blocks of the system. D is the difference. Think about how wild the real number line is, not integers, not naturals, but reals. Weird because continuous. Basically saying for any point, infinite points between the two. Now if I started asking you what is the distance on a real number line, that's a very complicated question. We see that in Xeno's paradoxes, try to treat real space, space through which we move in the same way we treat the real numbers as infinitely divisible. Leads us to all these paradoxes of motion Xeno is famous for, what is the movement that happens in an infinitely small amount of time.

Intigers and naturals are counting numbers, they don't include fractions. Not true for any two natural numbers another one between them. Not an integer between 3 and 4. Between any two real numbers you pick, always another one in between, an infinite number.

X can be anything, think of as physical distance, quantity of money, X plus DX, is X plus making money. X is money, trade X for M, X plus DX is mathematically the same as M plus M prime.

What's it called, X plus DX, just is another way of writing M plus M prime. This is why n 228, X plus DX, filiative form of capital. Capital reproducing itself. The equation of capital as they put it relation of DY and DX, bottom of 227 and 228, they suggest DY derives from labor power and fluctuation of variable capital, D of X derives from capital, fluctuation of constant capital. Not super familiar with the Marxist jargon, constant capital is machiner the fixed elements, the variable capital is more or less labor. The labor power that is purchased. So when we talk about a differential relation, a conjunction of decoded flows, these two flows capital and labor both encounter each other as decoded. This is important, what makes capital capital, and why it had to take time to occur, whereas the first two modes of organization have more or less always been there, the state and the tribe. Depends on what you mean by state, capital has been here in the same sense, if the state had not shown up, people were preventing it from showing up. It's there as negated as a Hegelian would say. If it hasn't formed the state has prevented it from doing so. Counter state organization.

I was trying to look at the bigger picture, what is it like to live i capital, to live capital, how you just put it. How we describe these social machines, modes of evaluation. How do you evaluate what you did that day. How do I evaluate what I have done today. Code and overcode, qualitative evaluations, differences between coding and overcoding. Some quality in the day, good or relaxing, or overcoded as "honored by god" or "I pleased the king, he looks upon me with favor." Ways of evaluating your time. None involve a quantity, or differential, only in capital, not only, but in capital it becomes ubiquitous, de jour, the whole society is organized around the profit motive. What is X plus D of X but the profit motive. We organize society. This is why they refer to it as the transformation of a surplus value of code, into a surplus value of flux. What is the difference, the code was qualitative, evaluating the flows in relation to a particular social organization. We can think of capital kind of as caching thing out. Things we are invested, we have been invested in for a long as time, for good or bad. Not should or should not be invested. Capital turned that into a profit. This is what is interesting here, the undead language is dated, and misses. Every time someone talks about AI will take over the world, an AI has been running the planet for at least 150 years. What do I mean? How much of earth's resources are allocated depending on expected returns of investment. How much of human life is planned according to X plus D X, M plus M primed.

The internal clock.

Coding of everything is profitable use of time.

A fundamental change, fact a mathematical appearance hear replaces the old code, one witnesses a breakdown of the subsisting codes and territorialities, for the benefit of a machine of another species. The point is it's not a code, no longer qualitative, defined in terms of itself. This abstract quantity getting bigger. If I had another lifetime, I would do a study of fiduciary duty. It is basically a legal principle under which you have a legal obligation to, I think in general the word itself could apply to a lot of things, in a capitalist context, its most important use, if you are acting as a part of an organization, a corporation. You have a fiduciary duty that obligates you to maximize your profits. Obligated by fiduciary duty to shareholders to maximize returns. There's even a method of a hostile takeover. You want to purchase a company, purchase something that they do not want to sell to you. You can make an offer if you have the resources, that is so exorbitant, you can legally expose the person you're offering, they could be sued, prosecuted, if you don't take it. It would be financially irresponsible decision not to take this money, in the hypothetical of I want to buy your company but you don't want to sell it, i could offer you so much money the shareholders would take it. They would have the law on their side. Terrifying in so many ways, you haven't seen anything yet, often read as the slogan of accelerationism. Bone chilling warning, actually described is capital as a runaway feedback loop. The line has to go up. Burrough's no more stalins no more hitlers quote?

https://genius.com/William-s-burroughs-no-more-stalins-no-more-hitlers-annotated

"We have a new type of rule now. Not one-man rule or rule of aristocracy or plutocracy, but of small groups elevated to positions of absolute power by random pressures and subject to political and economic factors that leave little room for decision.

They are representatives of abstract forces who have reached power through surrender of self. The iron-willed dictator is a thing of the past; there will be no more Stalins, no more Hitlers. The rulers of this most insecure of all worlds are rulers by accident; inept, frightened pilots with controls of vast machines they cannot understand, calling in experts telling them which buttons to push."

Not ideology it's a flow, that's that in a nutshell, argue with D and G on fascism, Zizek's reading. Fascists are just irrational, that misses the point. Asking whether rational or irrational, doesn't matter. Rational some parts, irrational in others. Makes sense kinda, there's a logic to fascism, a consistency to fascism, is it something we would ever recognize as a reasonable or considered way of thinking? No. This passage shows how complicated it is. It's a combination of systemic logic, individual fear, a-rational system, a system that is not necessarily irrational, but one that is not trying to be rational either. That is why we have to map it. We have to see where the flows are going.

The key development with regard to anti production is internalization. It's in that sense, money and the market are the true police. The money and market literally perform the role of the police better than the police. Police enforce order, not very good at that, good at defending capital, not enforcing order. Mostly good at harassing minorities, enforces the macro social order. Money and the market are really good at enforcing behavior. Market is a global panopticon evaluate ourselves from its perspective. If our life depends on market and marketability, are we compelled to become what it wants us to become. To make money and participate the market, I have to fit a certain image. Play the game they want me to play it, or they won't let me win anything. Shareholders are symbolic castration. This is where we get castration.
Gilber Strain.
Calculous textbook.

MIT OpenCourseWare
RES.18-001 Calculus (f17), Full Textbook | Calculus Online Textbook...
MIT OpenCourseWare is a web based publication of virtually all MIT course content. OCW is open and available to the world and is a permanent MIT activity
RES.18-001 Calculus (f17), Full Textbook | Calculus Online Textbook...

Infinite Powers: How Calculus Reveals the Secrets of the Universe
Without calculus, we wouldn’t have cell phones, TV, GPS, or ultrasound. We wouldn’t have unraveled DNA or discovered Neptune or figured out how to put 5,000 songs in your pocket.

What does it mean to think in terms of X and Dx instead of the code. What does it mean to think like a capitalist. He gives the example of machine adoption. On 233 they point out that the bottom of the paragraph, middle of the page - rate of profit investment offers by lowering production cost, and if not they keep existing equipment - end quote. Really interesting point people other than D and G make, contrary to intuition and propaganda of capital, innovation, creativity, risk taking. Actually systemically, inclined towards conservatism, won't take a risk until believes it will get a return on investment. Capitalist mindsets evaluate a return on investment, it doesn't operate qualitatively, is this cool, good, noble, or American thing to do anymore, now is it the profitable thing to do. The conceptual system, and set of assumptions that go into measuring D of X is what we'll call the axiomatic.

We're evaluating things from the perspective of X plus D of X, what is our X, in the capitalist case, we already know it's money. Always money. We can generalize and kind of say you can take a capitalist mindset and apply it to stuff that's not money. You can take this kind of, if X in the big picture of capital is money, its social manifestation, then X plus DX is the image of profit. The fact we've created an image of profit can be applied to a lot of stuff. Earlier mentioned pages read. I need to do more, never evaluating in terms of a quality, not asking yourself okay what am I trying to achieve here, am I well read enough. Have I reached it, perpetual loop, more, more, invested in an abstract quantitative differential, invested in the surplus value in the abstract. It's almost like it doesn't matter what it so long as you can keep as you can keep getting more.

This is exactly what's happening, this is why we get to this weird paradox in liberal capitalism, the more you act in your own best interests, the more you're enslaved to a machine. The internalization of guilt is also key. We can think of this in terms largely of the superego. We've talked about, that vague unconscious sense of wrong, or dumb, as you put it. So it doesn't have to be, this is a Zizek point, talks about the superego, in the context of capital and enjoyment, seen as prohibitive. Superego is Trump wants you to enjoy, for McGowan. The compulsion to enjoy can be just as tyrannical a prohibition. So I think Zizek's sharper of McGowan, enjoyment under capital. Constant feeling I'm not enjoying enough, I could be living better, tyranny of D of X. You're terrified, something else could be better. 

Think of all of the trends in major industries that cater to this collector mindset, our generation has deeply, probably because of the 90s, fucking Pokemon. Folks cashing in on this impulse, collection and always needing one more. Difference in logic, you for instance have a clear deep attachment to your books, they mean a great deal to you, it makes sense to me that you would be excited to find new ones, way you talk about it is it's not like in terms of the collection. I have all these books I have to lug around or whatever. The value of preserving, enthusiasm for the book itself - that would look so cool on my shelf. That's a qualitative mode of evaluation. Thinking in terms of code and territory. Not one is better or worse, it is different, don't want to disparage, maybe I don't care about that, folks who collect figures, funko pops, idk no personal attachment to the subject matter. This isn't literature. The mode of investment can be so different, I have this collection, invested in the value pristine condition, may sell this collection one day. These are different modes of evaluating, only exist independently in the abstract. Actually they would inter mingle always, they would kind of see the particularity of the capitalist mindset, these two different approaches we've sketched in the abstract to collecting, motivations we have, collection oriented vs item oriented. One of them thinks in terms of growing value of the collection, the other one thinks in terms of the qualitative value of each.

That is the value of preservation, we do not have old spaces in this country, I think that matters. No appreciates fucking time, I feel the most conservative at the same time I am radical. So much of capital has destroyed living things, systems of ideas, cultures, faces, that have taken so long to come into being, and can never do so again. You think you're conservative? Defenders of tradition? You haven't read anything but Naruto, I hate them. Drives me crazy, you build nothing, you have no values, you guys are just fucking nihilists crying about the fall of the west, you are the cultural degeneracy, weak apathetic slave mentality last man piece of shit. Mad now. No one appreciates time, it's hilarious you and I who get our doing queer theory in our spare time, are able to appreciate history, actual cultural. Words and all this book that you have in your hand, represent a tremendous accomplishment of time, being able to hold a crazy amount of time in one place. That is not a given we take so much for granted today as we do it. Absolutely insane.
Irreplaceable things.

That's what's so interesting about Bergson, he straightforwardly equates memory with spirit. Very interesting connection with Derrida, hauntology broadly speaking, don't know how else, referring to a spiritual dimension in this case. Damn thing is haunted, exactly the reasons you described. We are compelled to these conclusions, from a physicalist conclusion, precisely because, if we accept that energy can't just spontaneously come into existence, has to be work done, action happening the reason that these books have this quality for you, they have acquired a charge, transfers affect into its surroundings. The management of relation of affect to object, whole problem of coding the flow and inscribing the socius.

My distinctions that I'm drawing here can only be drawn entirely in the abstract, can say they're different logics, can define them. The investment in the price is different in the quality of the book itself. Not in practice, one does not come without the other. The question from the concrete in practice thing, which is driving the bus. This is our question, essentially of the whole book. Described different social machines, explained that they're there at the same time. Which ones are organizing and which ones are organized. Codes and overcodes, two earlier machines are still present in capitalism, they are just now working pieces of the axiomatic in the same way that the overcoding is something that happens to the code. A directly experienced quality, a directly felt quality, the overcoding, something like an indirect quality, an idealized quality. To give concrete examples, we might say what's it called, two different versions of good or bad, one in terms of pain or pleasure, pain is bad, pleasure is good. One in terms of a moral duty, or obligation. Where it's more like wrong and right. This is what we discussed previously, difference between the territory and the law, the tribe and the state, one is bodily, customary. The other is cerebral, linguistic, ideal, regulative.

The capitalist machine is defined by the axiomatic, instead of the, to follow an example all the way through, something causes us pain. On a bodily level we say this is bad, don't like this. Occurs in a context where let's say we deserve it. We've done something wrong. This pain is part of our punishment. Guilt, pain alleviates the punishment, this would be the perspective of the law. From another dimension, it may be possible we profited off of this pain. It caused some quantitative increase in one of our values most likely money. So we can evaluate at the same pain, humiliation, the chronic structural humiliation of working in customer service, all sorts of ways of evaluating the pain. Perspective of the tribe, humiliation is bad, this is part of our duty to our family, I need to go provide for them. So I am going to suffer this humiliation, in the name of my family and this humiliating code has been overcoded by the dignity of my familial duties. I could also say I'm doing this humiliating for profit to make myself richer, saving up to move out of this shitty town or something like that.

So that was the same humiliating analyzed different ways. Favorite examples, market in daybreak, if these are 3 different ways of evaluating, ask ourselves which one of them is driving the bus so to speak? On an individual and social scale? Tribe, state, and market, the words they use primitive territorial machine, barbarian despotic machine, also called the state, and the civilized capitalist machine. This is what I call tribe, state, and market. You can see that in our what's it called, our example of the working a humiliating job, 3 different ways of evaluating.

Flux is the raw material of experience. Whatever we're talking about considered from the angle of where it's moving. We look at its flow, whatever we talk about, how did it come into being, and out of being. Soccer ball example, the movement how should I put this, the reason we call universal production schizophrenia, what happens when we treat things in the way of flux. What is our kind of, stereotypical image of schizophrenia. Me and my cohort, always golum, my precious, schmeagle and golum, two distinct personalities. We need to generalize this into a general splitting, not just between two, but basically whenever we want to we can follow splits. Think about any actually solid object, it's not actually solid, it's composed of matter that if we look at it from a different scale, think about if you were to fast forward existence, a playback of the universe, you did it faster, see things that appear solid are in their own way just flowing very slowly. So the flow is not a question of what is the flow necessarily but the flow is one dimension of everything that exists. Everything that exists exists as essentially the cutout, a partial movement within a flow.

Think about the level in schmeagle golum in which the two are indistinguishable. Over any length of time, either schmeigle or golum. Like he's both, could be one or the other. If we fast forward we would lose the distinction between schmeagle golum blur.

The two solid objects we get are the two solids that precipitate in a fluid, if you have ever made a crystal in a solution. Mix sugar and water in a solution, and you put a string down it, how they make rock candy. Sugar will leave the water and bind to the rope, the sugar will bind to itself, binding to the sugar bound to the rope and will develop distinct crytals. Grow out of the solution, appears as if out of nowhere, from perspective of flow can't distinguish one or the other, but they are distinct. Want to think of the flow as essential our raw experience in a continuous flux we have to cut into pieces to make sense of.

Perspective in technological rationalism that treats all of nature as something to be ordered as standing reserve - the essence of technology. Definitely a relation, the flow is related to potentiality, but it is not correct to think that it is something treated at our disposal. Exactly the flow is where our power ends. Our powers begin literally with the ability to take slices out of the flow, not the flow in and of itself that is available as a standing reserve for us, have to cut our standing reserve out of the flow. It's the potential for use part that doesn't apply to the flow, the flow is still potential, but there's no need of a reference to any kind of utility or end. Potential as in potential energy, a potential movement. A difference between a potential movement or a potential use for us. A potential utility for us. We might say from a Heideggerian perspective, D and G's readings of Heidegger, if we, because I believe rather than treating being as a kind of standing reserve, we want to let it disclose itself to us, let being be. Something along those lines. I think D and G would say this is true, when you let it go, when you let it be, it starts moving. It was only holding still because we were holding onto it. Once it starts moving, we see the movement as a potential movement. The flow itself is a potential movement, we were actualizing a particular way, and in so warding off the consequences of the movement. In the sense of like, this is basically my criticism of Heidegger, the question of being should immediately raise the problem of politics. If you take being seriously, you should be led more or less expeditiously the political being, and the discrepancy of what it means to be for different humans. A glaring omitions on Martin fucking Heidegger's part to not be led from A to B and see the problem of politics as being contained essentially in being, precisely because when we let being be...

when we stop treating it in terms of a potential utility which is a socially constructed concept necessarily, always in the context of utility of society, without that we see these pure movement of potentiality. Being in itself is being multiple. Is to have multiple potentials. The question of which potential should be actualized and which should not is immediately a political question, whether it wants to be or not. The flows are the raw material component of society. It is what's actually moving, it is the pure potentiality of a body social or otherwise at a given point in time. This is what we have been calling the body without organs.

TIME IS MONEY 

It has no other justification than to make a profit. Take that Heidegger.

I try to be respectful on great thinkers, whether they deserve it. No way to defend Heidegger from his blind spot, can't escape into his own project. Whole history of phenomenology has shown, it should have been the first thing he saw. Crisis of his career, where he doesn't finish his biggest work, retreats into the mountains writing poetry, never found courage to face critical question, critical question of membership in the Nazi party. So much great work in phenomenology on race and gender, it's like how did this not occur to you man.

At the very beginning the event of capitalism, when does capitalism happen? When does it happen? Interesting question, give an interesting answer to in the theoretical sense. Differential from earlier, decoded flow of labor has to meet decoded flow of capital. How did we describe the flow? Why is it decoded? Remember the flow was the thing considered in potentiality, the code was a way of incorporating potentiality into a social form, the decoded flow of labor is the result of primitive accumulating, in a Marxist sense. What is it but a bunch of labor, in Marx's bitter irony free to do other things. It has been repotentialized, in a brutal and violent fashion. Repotentialized, decoded and axiomatized in terms of capitalist value, how it relates to a return on profit. Without both ingredients, decoded potentialized labor, and decoded potentialized capital, raw resources sophistication of technology, without both of these coming together capitalism as such can't take place. This didn't happen in china because the state refused to let it happen. China is the most sophisticated anti capitalist machine that has ever or will ever exist, that is not a comment on the ethics of china, not saying they are good or bad, most effective resistance machine to capital that has ever existed. They could have been capitalist, made a collective decision not to by closing the mines, would have created too much free capital.

So on 225, it gives some of the examples of what has to happen. Brings into play several processes of decoding and deterritorialization. Different organs. Soil has to be deterritorialized, privatized. Has to be uprooted from a local system of land management. Has to be privatized, has to come under the control of one abstract individual. Individual in the sense that it can be transfered between individuals. Loss of individual through family, favors the machine. Worker is no longer coded, but a free variable, what is coded is the machinery. Worker is adapted to the machinery. It's all this complicated play of potentialization and repotentialization. On capital's side, you need abstract money, you need decoded flows of production in terms of merchant capital. Why is merchant capital a decoded flow of production? What is a decoded flow? a potentialized version of whatever we are talking about. Potentialized flow of production, merchant capital in the sense that it can buy production. How is flux different from standing reserve, need the flow in and of itself, flow has been coded and decoded, the flow in and of itself should not be treated necessarily as at our disposal. It may come into our disposal, there are facts of, maybe a metaphor, facts of the universe we can know that do not put them at our disposal. To me the difference is more along the lines of motion and rest.

When we talk about the standing reserve, do see parallel in terms of potentiality, but potentiality in terms of motion see the difference. Standing reserve involves potential from the view of a particular something, and its usefulness. Usefulness to something's end. Whereas the flow's potential is along the lines of an electric or a kinetic potential, a potential energy that could be useful to us in some way, but might just be a piece of a machine that's operating we don't have any immediate input under. May work a way that has inputs we don't have control over. Not trying to understand it in terms of that utility. Not just letting being be, just saying when we do that, let it go, it's moving. when we don't follow it in that movement we won't have being for very long. This brings us to the criticism of his apoliticalness, doesn't see the movement inherent to humanity. Not just society, but like at the end of the day, Heidegger is still a humanist, this is more unforgivable than nazzism just kidding, he remains a humanist the standing reserve is interpreted in terms of human protection. What can it do for humans. D and G with Nietzsche are like fuck that noise, letting being be, letting go of image of humanity at all, seeing being as it is is not something stable or eternal, but is exactly a chaotic flux, seething, breathing, how does the book open? It is at work everywhere, smoothly at times... what a mistake to have ever said the ID. the seething breathing teaming mass is what raw reality is once we strip away the human all too human subjective furniture, architecture, profoundly alien existential geography.

So it's standing neither nor reserve, standing water is still water, it is flowing and it is unreserved. It is flowing unreserved.
It is the code that is the standing reserve, code is the flow interpreted by a particular social body, in terms of its usefulness. That's what the social body exists to do.

This is Oedipalization, triangulation of desire within the coordinates prescribed by society. It becomes the point where profitability and heteronormativity collude, Oedipus is born.

TIME IS MONEY, MONEY IS RACIST, AND MONEY DOES NOT CARE IF YOU ARE QUEER.

Money is conformity.

Sex gender, common ingredient, expected to conform to a particular image, or you will be ostracized or worse.

So few people on the left, so few people read at all anymore. Understanding right wing thought is uncommon on the left, disappointing. Leveraging their ideas against them, ranting in this vein earlier. Want to think of themselves, aristocratic ubermensch's free of herd mentality. In reality, this is all part and parcel with the single biggest movement of cultural degeneracy and voluntary self castration you can possibly imagine. Any meaning to reactionary in the Nietzschean sense, the quote unquote conservativism, has no value, history, or skills. Not a warrior class, entrepreneurs, inept frightened babies that inherited a machine they don't understand that will get us all killed.

Idk how much active murder will happen from the government, any day could, something could happen that could set a relatively small chain of events that would drop the bottom out of the global food network. Because of interconnectivity, wouldn't die all at once, but mid 19th century technologically and medically speaking, could happen. I guess what I mean when I say get us all killed, reckless nonsense directly or indirectly break something that can't be rebuilt. They don't conserve shit, conservatives my ass.