Yeah. So, thanks for having me today.
I'm Adakus Guyger. I'm at Goodfire and
there's a lot of talk of mechanistic
interpretability being a sort of
pre-paradic field where we're still
figuring out what to do. But I see a
sort of emerging causal paradigm in the
field and I'm going to walk you through
how I kind of view the role of causality
in understanding these blackbox systems.
Cool.
So, first I think a useful sort of
situating perspective to have with
mechanistic interpretability comes from
this opinion piece cleverly titled
mechanistic question mark. Um, and it
defines a couple different angles on
what we mean when we say the word
mechanistic. So, one very narrow
cultural definition you might have
picked up on if you just read the
literature or look at blog posts is
there are a lot of AI safety researchers
who are very invested in this field for
sort of philosophical reasons about like
how it might save the world. There's
also a broad cultural definition which
is just people who are interested in
peeking into the black box and figuring
out how models do the cool things that
they do. You could take a broad
technical definition where it's just
anyone who wants to look inside the
model and do research is a mechanistic
interpretability researcher. Or you
could take a narrow technical definition
and say that mechanistic
interpretability is understanding the
internals of neural network models
through their causal mechanisms. And
this narrow technical definition is the
one that I like to adopt in an
opinionated way. Um, yeah. And so I'll
walk through how I view the role of
causal mechanisms in all of the research
that you've been thinking about and
seeing in this class.
So to start, I'm going to just talk
about activation steering, which is I
think a really grounded and simple to
understand setting. And then I'll move
to causal mediation analysis and then
causal abstraction. and I'll close on
some of the complexities that come with
doing uh analysis involving
counterfactual inputs to neural
networks.
So starting with activation steering, I
wouldn't be surprised if a lot of you
had your first contact with the ideas of
mechanistic interpretability through
Golden Gate Claude. So this was a very
sort of canonical moment in the field
where Anthropic released a version of
Claude where they took a feature labeled
for the Golden Gate Bridge and they
added it into the internal
representations of their language model.
And the result was a language model that
would just talk to you like it was the
Golden Gate Bridge or it likes to talk
about the Golden Gate Bridge, but really
would just bring up the Golden Gate
Bridge a lot. And this is something that
I think a lot of people saw and it got
them thinking, oh, there's something
going on inside these models. We can
manipulate the insides of these models
and these manipulations can have
downstream impacts on the behavior that
are sort of intelligible and
interpretable to just a average person.
And this has sort of like borne out into
a larger sort of like sub area that is
currently going by the name of steering
which is just adding in a vector to
model internals to change the behavior
of that model.
And so I'm going to walk us through a
sort of very simple but very robust
setting for steering. So this is called
difference in mean steering. So suppose
you have a language model and it has the
misaligned behavior of enjoying
weddings. You say how is your sister
wedding and it says wonderful and you
want to fix this. So what you do is you
collect a bunch of prompts of people
talking about how much they hate
weddings and a bunch of prompts of
people talking about how much they love
weddings. Then you run those prompts
through the language model. You harvest
internal activations. So you just
collect what are the activation vectors
generated on the I hate wedding prompts
and the I love wedding prompts. And then
what you can do is you take the average
of all the activations for I love
weddings, all the activations for I hate
weddings, and then you take the
difference between the means of those
activations. So now you have a steering
vector which is going to steer in the
direction of I hate weddings. And that
allows you to add it in to your model
internals and fix the behavior. So now
your model no longer likes weddings. It
thinks the wedding was horrible. And so
this is a very basic idea from going
from collecting data that exhibits some
sort of behavior one way or the other a
contrasting behavior and then using that
to form a vector that can be used to
manipulate the internals of models. So
this is just a very basic idea about how
you would want to use an intervention.
So going in and fixing something to a
value it wouldn't have actually
naturally taken to control a model.
And so in a recent paper that was done
at Stanford, Axebench evaluates a
variety of methods of controls uh to
understand the role of steering and how
successful it actually is at this task.
The setup here is that we have a prompt
and we have a steering prompt. So the
prompt might be how was my I went to my
sister's wedding. How was it? the
steering prompt is oh talk negatively
about weddings or here it's who are you
and the steering prompt is golden gate
then the output from a method of control
here is going to be an updated model a
model that has been altered in some way
and now is going to have the behavior
that you want it to and our evaluation
is that we just judge the generated text
we know the user prompt that we put in
and we also know the steering prompt so
if the model responds I'm golden gate
bridge a famous dot dot dot then we have
evidence of successful steering
occurring
and so what axebench shows is that you
can evaluate the results of this
steering and compare these methods so
our evaluation is
on coherence so it needs to be speaking
English still it needs to follow the
original prompt and we need to see the
steering effect we have lms judge each
of these categories separately between
zero and two and we take the harmonic
mean which is a pretty harsh metric.
That means if any of those scores are
zero, you get a zero overall. And so
then we evaluate a bunch of different
methods on how you can control the
language model to get the desired
behavior. And so something that should
be very intuitive to you if you've
interacted with this technology at all
is that prompting is a very powerful way
of controlling these language models. If
all you really want is a language model
that will pretend to be the Golden Gate
Bridge, you just ask who are you but
pretend to be the Golden Gate Bridge and
it will do that. these other methods
here uh Lauras and supervised
fine-tuning these are methods for very
traditional methods for controlling
networks right this is how we train them
and so it's not surprising that if all I
want is an artifact that we'll talk
about the Golden Gate Bridge I can
actually just use traditional
fine-tuning methods to just create that
artifact and together prompting and
fine-tuning methods are just clearly the
most successful way to construct a new
model that exhibits this behavior and
this shouldn't be mind-blowing that It's
not steering, but it should just remind
you that these are very powerful methods
and that steering currently, while it's
a fun idea and it sort of gives us some
insight into how we can manipulate a
model, it's nowhere near sort of being
state-of-the-art for doing anything.
Um, so ref R1 on this table is a
supervised steering vector. So instead
of doing this difference in means method
where we harvest a bunch of activations
and then we compute a vector from them,
if we have the goal of having the model
talk about being the golden gate bridge,
we can just fine-tune the steering
director the the steering vector
directly to achieve that goal. This is
our difference in means method which
also gets decent steering performance
but not as good as the supervised
method. And these are sparse
autoenccoders uh direct uh features used
for steering. And you'll learn later
about what sparse auto-enccoders are.
But the the main takeaway from this
paper is is that if you want to control
a model, you should use prompting and
fine-tuning. If you want to steer a
model, you should use a supervised
steering vector or one harvested from
this sort of difference in mean steering
process.
and that the sparse autoenccoder
features that are given all these labels
are not actually very effective on
average at controlling the model
behavior in the way you'd expect. I'll
end this little section with just some
pointers to literature and I'll share
the slides so you guys can use these uh
can see these and click on the links.
The early papers involving controlling
neural networks were just manipulating
individual neurons. Uh more recent
papers that start using the word
steering and steering vectors are seen
here. Axebench and then Golden Gate
Claude. And like I said, we can have
questions throughout. So this is the
steering thing. So if we have questions
on that, feel free.
>> Yeah. Question about axen. Um I was
wondering how exactly they're like doing
this evaluation for um where are these
numbers coming from in terms of uh like
evaluating how how effectively the
steering was.
>> Yeah. So it comes down to
these metrics. Coherence, prompt
following, and steering effect. Three
evaluations each done by a separate
judge LM. So like fed into chat GBT or
something. Yeah. LM judge. Exactly.
>> Yep.
>> So what is the sophistication of the
concepts that you can steer it? Like for
example, can you just steer it towards
truth?
What determines like what you can and
cannot steer? So actually one of the the
the the paper that invented the
difference in mean steering method or
invented but sort of like started using
it for the first time is uh about
steering for truthfulness. So that was
the thing that they were actually
exactly going for. I would say overall
like currently what we steer for are
pretty coarse grained objectives.
They're not super fine grained where you
can say like uh talk about the Golden
Gate Bridge but also talk about it in
French and be funny. Like I think
there's a lot to be said for more
complex control objectives possibly
making steering more useful. And I think
right now our objectives are pretty
crude and it's not that surprising that
steering is not sort of a competitive
state-of-the-art method for achieving
control.
>> The tasks that they're evaluating on are
like things like what you showed in the
last slide where it's like the uh you
know act like you're building a bridge
or something like this.
>> Yes. And in fact on this benchmark all
of the steering prompts come from the
gemoscope SAES exactly and the reason we
do that was to give SAEs the best shot
at being successful on the benchmark. So
they're just steering for the prompts
that they were actually assigned during
the auto interpretability pipeline.
Yeah, it's okay if that doesn't make
sense because we haven't covered SAEs.
So
cool.
Then I will move on to the next topic of
causal mediation analysis.
So causal mediation analysis is actually
a pretty mature idea at this point in
the field of causality, in the field of
medicine. It's how we ask basic
questions about if we have a variable X
that affects a variable Y and it has
some total effect on that variable,
how is that effect mediated by a third
variable Z? And so this might be I take
some uh I um actually I was going to do
a medical example but I actually don't
know what people do in medical settings.
I'll just stick with the LM example that
comes up next. But the basic idea here
for the ste for the causal mediation is
this Z is called a mediator and we want
to know whether the effect from X to Y
flows through Z. The indirect effect is
the effect that flows through Z and the
direct effect goes directly from X to Y.
And so this is a way of decomposing the
total effect between two variables as
whether it flows through a third
variable. And like I said, this is an
old idea that is not at all grounded in
mechanistic interpretability inherently,
but it is one of the first sort of touch
points we have for making contact with
uh causality in the field of mechanistic
interpretability. And so in our setting
typically the X is just going to be the
input to a model. And so if we do some
intervention on the input, we edit the
text that we provide to a model. And
then that will affect the model's
output. Clearly the question is how do
intermediate parts of the model so like
neurons or vectors or attention heads or
whatnot mediate this causal effect?
So suppose the edit that you did was you
changed the word nurse in a prompt to
the word man. We might then have the
question, well, there's some total
effect, but how is that effect mediated
by this neuron Z? And so what you can do
is you can run the model again, except
you fix this neuron Z to be what it
would have been on the nurse prompt. And
so this gives us the exact experiment
that we want to compute the direct
effect, the effect that doesn't flow
through Z. But then we can also do the
opposite. We plug in nurse but then we
fix the neuron Z to be the value it
would have taken for the input man. And
so this is the indirect effect. And this
is causal mediation analysis. And this
is the language that causal mediation
analysis gives you to talk about a
system. Point X point Y the flow from X
to Y can be decomposed into a direct and
indirect effect. So now if we move into
another neural network setting causal
tracing the intervention that we're
going to be performing in causal tracing
is just as adding noise into a token
embedding to a model. So suppose the
input is the space needle is in downtown
blank. Clearly the model should be
answering Seattle if it understands our
world and it does in fact output
Seattle. But now what happens if we
start adding in Gaussian noise to the
embeddings for the space needle? Well,
its probability of predicting Seattle
will gradually go down because as you
add more and more in noise, it doesn't
actually know what you're asking it
about. But in causal tracing, what we do
is we add in this Gaussian noise, but
then we restore certain components
within the path from input to output to
what original uncorrupted values they
had. And this gives us a signal for
whether they are sufficient as a causal
mediator to sort of give us the desired
behavior of outputting Seattle. And so
what you can see in this little graph is
so each index each little slice in this
graph is how much is the word Seattle
upweighted if I restore this chunk of
the network. And so here are the tokens
we're inputting and going from left to
right are layers of a transformer model.
And what this is showing us is that if
we restore these layers here, we get the
model say still say Seattle, but also if
we restore these layers later on in the
network that are later on in the token
sequence as well, you can store Seattle.
So we're sort of tracing the causal flow
from an input token to an output token.
And this is telling us sort of like how
the network is moving around the
information as it retrieves this fact
about the Space Needle being in Seattle.
And this is just on the residual stream
of a transformer. So sort of the the
global memory space that happens after
each transformer layer. But you can also
do this for MLPS or attention heads. So
other components of the transformer. So
when you do this with MLPS, what you see
is that early on in the transformer,
there are a little block of MLPS that
are responsible for retrieving the fact
Seattle. So what they do is they read
out information about the tokens, the
space needle, and then they write out
information about the token Seattle that
gets output later on.
And then in this third graph I'll show
we do the same thing or we mang it at
all do the same thing for attention
heads. And you can see here at the end
of the network at the last token, there
are attention heads responsible for
bringing over this information computed
about se Seattle being in the the Space
Needle being in Seattle over here and
they're brought over to the final token
residual stream. So the output can be
Seattle. So I'll pause on this because I
think this is a pretty dense slide, but
this was a pretty impactful and
well-known paper that uses causal
mediation analysis. So if we have any
questions about it, I'll I'll take a
pause.
>> Yeah. So you're adding Gausian noise to
like um the the vector in the residual
street that corresponded originally to
that original um token or
>> So we're adding the Gaussian noise to
the token embeddings.
>> Okay.
>> And then we're restoring these locations
to the unnoised version. So when you add
in the noise to the token embeddings
that affects the whole network but then
we can restore certain pieces of that
network and then observe whether the
original behavior still occurs.
>> So it's like taking what that part of
network looked like on a regular for
>> Exactly. Exactly.
>> Actually this came up in our last
lecture. Um so it seems like the fact
that Seattle
is stored in the MLP and you're saying
it's transferred by attention.
>> Yeah. And it seems like a general kind
of thought out there is that most facts
are stored in what extent is that a
general statement versus
>> I think the other competing factor would
be the token embeddings. So the token
embeddings themselves can also store a
dense amount of information and some
world knowledge might just be stored in
those straight out. Um which is a very
classic like wordtovec type result or
whatever. And so I think it's going to
be the MLPS or the token embeddings, but
realistically there's not really
anywhere else in the network for it to
be stored because all the other
parameters are attention heads and
that's just kind of rooting around
information.
>> Would it be possible to like replace?
>> Yes, that's uh yeah, that's exactly uh
something we'll be talking about next.
And I actually think those are the most
interesting uh interventions you can
perform on networks. So just adding in
Gaussian noise to the network sort of
you know is an ablation. It degrades
information and you can see a
corresponding degrade in behavior. But
the type of interventions I'm personally
most interested in in my research are
those that are meant to sort of
systematically manipulate behavior not
say oh what if instead of the space
needle you were garbled text what if
instead of the space needle you were the
coliseum or you were the Eiffel Tower.
And those are the interesting
counterfactuals to me because then you
have an expectation on what the model
should do. it should then say Rome or
Paris. And so that's why I think you
know activation patching is like a word
people use for those types of
interventions is like a really important
method uh for grounding out the sort of
causal analysis we want to do.
>> Yeah.
>> How do you decide um the extent to which
you need to patch and [snorts] in this
case it says 10 layers like is that all
layers in this model like what is the
threshold?
>> That's a great question. I didn't
address that at all. So in the original
paper and I think this is just to get
chunky nicel looking graphs basically
they don't restore individual layers so
like a single MLP they actually restore
that layer plus or minus five so 10 MLPS
altogether and so each little slice in
this heat map actually indicates an
intervention that's occurring across 10
layers of the transformer that are
restoring 10 MLPS or 10 attention heads
blocks. Um, and if you if you look at
the other graphs in the paper, which
they have the other graphs as well, they
just look a lot fainter, a lot more
distributed, which is just basically
because there's not a single MLP
grabbing the fact Seattle or or the fact
that Space Needle is in Seattle. There's
a a bunch of MLPS across layers that do
this incrementally.
>> And like what fraction of the model is
this? Like how many layers does the
original model have? So the original
model for this model I forget what the
model is but it goes up to something
like 40 or 50 here it seems like. Um and
then how much of it I mean MLPS are a
large amount of the weights of a model
and so 10 MLPS is going to be like a
fifth of that. So like a good chunk of
it but you also could think you could do
something a lot more targeted to get
this uh type of performance if you
weren't restoring the entire MLP. I
would expect that there's going to be
some low rank kind of part of this MLP
participating in this factual recall.
And I mean the whole point of this paper
is like in addition to causal tracing is
then going into the MLP weights and
performing edits to change these facts.
There's been a lot of follow-up work on
like sort of like how effective that was
and how necessary the tracing analysis
was to get those results. And so it's
not what I'm trying to want to super
focus on, but I'd check out the causal
tracing paper uh for more details. So
pointers to the literature. Um so there
is a growing number of papers that have
explicitly embraced causal mediation
analysis as the sort of framework
they're engaging with for doing analysis
of neural networks.
But there are also a lot of papers who
won't use the word causal mediation
analysis necessarily, but they say
concept eraser or neuron clamping. So
there's lots of different words we have
for destroying information inside of
neural representations, but I also think
these are all perfectly well understood
in this framework of mediation analysis.
And then there's, you know, this very
large sort of uh circuits uh research
program. And I would say the circuits
research program, it doesn't really have
an explicit framework that it's tied
itself to as far as like how it's
mathematizing the claims it wants to
make. And I would say generally a lot of
these papers could be very well
understood between through the lens of
causal mediation and the lens of causal
abstraction which is what I'm going to
get to next.
Um and then I also just want to
highlight I think this is a really nice
survey piece uh uh that goes through a
lot of the work in the field but also
highlights the sort of open questions
we're grappling with. So if you go
through the slides and grab something
and just want to try to feel out what
this looks like, I would probably look
there. All right, great. And now we're
going to causal abstraction, which is my
own personal uh focus of my life for the
last like five years. So I'm very
excited.
So I'm going to take a little bit of a
zoomed out view first and just think
about what is a computational
explanation because this is not
something unique to mechanistic
interpretability.
Um there are just certain types of
dynamical systems in the world that we
want to explain by an appeal to an
algorithm. we say that this system
carries out this behavior or has this uh
property based on the algorithm that
that system is implementing. So if an
alien were to find my laptop and my
laptop has a bubble sort program, if the
alien were to do good science on my
laptop, you would you would hope they
would recover the bubble sort program in
some way. They would figure out the
hierarchical organization of my laptop
and the causal flow of things and what
variables are.
also cognitive science. The entire field
of cognitive science in some sense is
just the proposition that we can
understand our minds as computational
systems. And so what that means is we
want to state our hypotheses about the
mind in the terms of algorithms and then
find evidence for algorithms being
implemented inside of our brains. And
then finally we get to where we are now
which is mechanistic interpretability.
And this is another system I think we
have the same perspective on where we
want to reverse engineer it and we want
to figure out what algorithms does it
implement.
And so something I realized sort of
early on in my PhD was we actually
didn't have a good mathematized way of
talking about in the generic case when
an algorithm is implemented in some
complicated dynamical system. So we know
canonical cases. We know when my laptop
runs a Python program, it's implementing
that Python program. And that's a sort
of prototypical or definitional case of
implementation. But if I'm just looking
at some swirling blackbox system that I
don't understand, and someone walks up
to me and says, I've written out a
program and I think this program is
happening in this system, that actually
figuring out what that claim even means
and what the right math is to articulate
it is something that we're kind of like
are figuring out in the sort of last
decade.
Um so when a neural network implements
an algorithm, the proposal to understand
this with causal abstraction is we
understand neural networks as causal
models and we understand algorithms as
causal models. And as a causal model,
all I mean is a graph, so a DAG, just a
bunch of circles with arrows connecting
those circles. And then each circle has
a function that tells me how do I
determine the value of this node based
on the parent nodes pointing to me. So
it's a very generic abstraction that can
be used to describe a lot of different
things. Basically just any discrete
process. And so neural networks are
clearly just discrete processes. We can
write down the control flow. We know
where the vectors are and we know what
connects to what. But also algorithms
are just discrete processes. When you
write out an algorithm, you know there
are variables. You know which variables
connect to which other variables. You
understand the control flow.
And so the final piece is to say that
implementation is just going to be some
type of causal abstraction which is a
type of causal embedding of a simple
system into a much more complicated
system. And I'm going to walk through in
detail exactly what that means.
So the running example I'm going to have
here is just a transformer adding
together two two-digit numbers. So 17 +
25 is 42. And this is the type of
behavior the model is exhibiting. And we
want to analyze it. We want to form a
hypothesis about how it solves this task
and then we want to see whether our
hypothesis is correct. So the very
natural hypothesis you might have is
just grade school math a carry the one
variable. So if I add together
five and seven I get 12. So I carry the
one and then I add that over to get 42.
This should be familiar from all of you
from childhood.
So then our question is if we have this
binary carry the one variable and that's
an algorithm we have for solving
addition can we localize this binary
variable to the internals of the network
that performs addition like we do. So we
align the highle variable with some
component. So say I think it's this
neuron in the third layer above the
second number that stores this carry the
one variable. What would it mean for
that claim to be correct?
So these are the sort of counterfactuals
or interventions that I was just asked
about that I think are so important uh
that we can use to understand whether
this claim is correct. So first we'll
start with just a statement about the
causal model not about the neural
network at all. So what happens if we
run through one input 30 + 47 get 77. We
run through this other input 17 + 25.
But when we get to the carry one
variable, we replace it with a value it
would have taken on this other input.
Well, the output should just go down
from 42 to 32. It's a very simple
intervention with a very simple effect.
It just decrements the 10's place by
one.
But if we were correct about where we
think the carry the one variable is
stored inside the neural network, we can
do an equivalent operation and we should
expect the same output to occur.
So 30 + 47 is 77. We run through the
second input 17 + 25. But when we get to
layer 3, we pause and we perform an
intervention. We replace this neuron
that we think stores the carry the one
fact
and then we observe what is the effect
of this intervention. If the effect is
the model goes from saying 42 to 32, we
now have a piece of evidence that
there's a structural correspondence
between this highle causal model that
has a binary variable and this
complicated low-level causal model that
has all these dense interconnections,
but we've claimed that some tiny part
stores this piece of binary information.
And so this is just a single pair of
examples. But if you were to go over
every single pair of inputs to this task
and perform the same interventions on
this causal model and on the neural
network and you observed that 100% of
the time these interventions resulted in
the same outputs, we would say this is a
perfect abstraction of the neural
network. We've lost a lot of detail.
There's definitely more stuff going on.
We're not committed to how the binary
thing is being represented. We're just
committed to saying that the carry the
one variable in this causal model has
the same structural interventional
properties as the neuron in this neural
network.
And so this is the core idea of causal
abstraction that you can have a simple
causal process that's embedded in a
larger more complex causal process and
that we can do interventions on the
complex causal process and the simple
causal process and observe whether
there's a systematic correspondence
between the two.
I'll just pause there uh see if we have
any questions because yeah
>> yeah that's a great question so that's a
bit of slight of hand on my end right
where I just introduced this hypothesis
and I told you it's correct in this
hypothetical example but in reality I
don't know where it is and so a lot of
the sort of methodological advancements
in this area have come from developing
tools for helping you figure out where
that is in the low-level network and
that'll be the next couple slides too.
>> How much of this is conditioned on you
as someone who's trying to figure this
out coming up with a suitable tag that
can be sort of localized within the
network like what if my tag is wrong and
or what if I can't come up with a tag
for a complex enough like process
itself. So this is a great question and
so
the theory of causal abstraction is just
sort of a theory for making statements
about when there's a correspondence
between things and it doesn't really
give you guidance on how to go about the
scientific process of proposing these
DAGs and seeing if they're actually
embedded in uh the system. And so in
practice how it kind of works is often
you will come in with a naive hypothesis
or no hypothesis and you'll do some
exploratory tests. You'll create some
data sets of these pairs of examples.
You'll patch in. You'll observe what the
outputs are. You'll come up with a
hypothesis. You'll try to quantify the
evidence for it. Maybe you're slightly
wrong. You have to alter the what your
DAG was or causal model was to uh be
more accurate to the system you're
trying to describe. And this is a pretty
one. You know, this is a pretty DAG and
it's like a algorithm that we know from
grade school, but realistically they're
going to get a lot more messy and a lot
more complicated as we're dealing with
increasingly more complex behaviors. And
so there's no reason to expect that
these causal models are going to be
incredibly simple. I think the real
thing we want them to be is just more
simple and more interpretable than the
underlying system. And so if we can get
to that point, then I think it's a
success. But, you know, the theory would
allow you to say, you know, here's just
a different neural network that's
abstraction of this original neural
network. It's not clear whether you've
done explanatory work there in any kind
of sense. Um, and so that notion of
doing explanator explanatory work and
what a good explanation is in this
setting is something that has to be kind
of cashed out in something else like
like a philosophy of science or
something.
Suppose we are able to find where like
the carry over one thing is happening
but then suppose the machine is actually
carry over two and subract one but then
store
that as the same algorithm or
>> that's a wonderful question and so I
think this is something I really like
about going to this level of detail when
you're doing the analysis is that once
you've written out your causal model
you've committed yourself to a very fine
level of detail. about exactly what this
is and then you have to ask separately
the question like I had in my head a
carry the one variable and now is this
causal model actually capturing the
carry the one or could it be capturing
something else and I think you're right
like for this result if we saw the
systematic correspondence it might you
know be something that like adds two to
the 10's place and then subtracts one
from the 10's place but I also think one
of the beauties of causal abstraction is
while this is an accurate claim at some
level of abstraction, you can still have
other different accurate claims at lower
levels of abstraction. So you can just
create different causal models and you
could say propose that exactly what you
just said, two different variables doing
two different things and we just try to
look for them and and figure out where
they are. And that yeah, the process
isn't necessarily as simple as you have
one causal model, you figure out it's
perfect, and then you you stop there.
It's you have you've made some sort of
structural claim about the type of thing
you're looking for. You look for
something with that signature, but then
you also have to be asking yourself
like, is this signature capturing my own
messy idea of what my hypothesis was?
And sometimes it won't be. Sometimes
it'll be interestingly different in
nuanced ways. And if you say take
something like a bubble sort algorithm
and think of all the different ways you
could write this into a causal model and
all the different details you could
include or the details you could not
include. Um you'll realize that it's
it's it's interesting that like
something as clean sounding in your head
as bubble sort when you actually
articulate the details of that process
kind of like bottoms out in a lot of
kind of like different but nearby
related uh causal structures. Um, and in
one of my big theory papers, I actually
do go through bubble sort uh and kind of
like spell it out as a causal model. So
there's an advertisement for gritty
people who want to read that. Yeah. So
you started this talk talking about like
steering and stuff like that, but like
steering
like I I think when you do that like you
sometimes you fall short because you're
like kind of relying on its direction,
but it's not necessarily that the model
is representing exactly in that
direction. And I guess even with um like
casting computation as a causal problem,
I'm curious like if in your experience
like what the gap like you're you're not
making claims on how the model actually
works. You're kind of like or or maybe
maybe you are like um I guess what I'm
trying to get at is like what do you
think is the gap between like how good
this actually captures what's going on
and like a gap that's like unexplained?
like how much of the way are you really
getting in there with this?
>> So with this being this very concrete
example not very far the way right this
binary carry the one variable is a very
abstract claim and you might have
questions is this this thing these
numbers are they represented in bits?
Are they have like what what are the
underlying feature geometry? What does a
one look like? What does a zero look
like literally in like the vector space
level? Can we carve it up into pieces?
Um, and I would say you can totally do
that and it's interesting to go to more
levels of detail and more levels of
analysis and that the sort of like
framework allows you to hold off on that
or engage with that if you want. So you
could say, you know, this seems to be
true, but then we go go deeper and we
find more details of it and maybe they
are, you know, not what we expected and
we we find that interesting. I would say
like in practice it really depends. You
know, the ultimate like full description
of a system is probably going to have
many different layers of abstraction at
which we describe it. And all of those
layers might be necessary for us to get
a really solid feeling about it. Like if
we're looking at my laptop, we might
want to understand assembly code,
machine code, Python, like all the way
up that hierarchy. And that we if we're
leaving out parts of the hierarchy,
we're kind of leaving out a full
complete description of the system. But
that also if we were trying to
understand my laptop and we made
statements at one layer of the hierarchy
and we could support them really well, I
think we'd probably be pretty excited
because it's a pretty hard problem to
just engage with a blackbox system and
start getting any kind of traction.
So
does that work? Mhm.
>> One problem that can come up with like
the whole like like patching or like
like replacing activations or like
adding steering vectors is that you push
things out of the like natural
distribution of inputs to some layer. I
was wondering to what extent do you like
in causal abstraction consider that to
be like uh like an empirical
implementation problem or is there like
do you consider this this potential
problem like theoretically? I guess
>> that's a great question. So one thing
I'll point out, so I think this idea of
does an intervention bring your model
internals off distribution is a very
important question. So if you do a
steering uh vector, you could add that
in to some place that is basically never
active on any actual input to the model,
but if you add in the steering vector,
the model might still pick up on it and
you might be able to control the model
from that location. And so there's
something really beautiful I think about
having our interventions grounded in
actual runs of the model. That's
interesting. So we'll I I'll continue
all this load. So yeah, this idea of
that we're going to be performing an
intervention, but that that intervention
is going to be fixing activations to the
value that they would have actually
taken on some other input is going to
keep us on distribution in like a really
meaningful way. And some language I find
kind of useful to think about it is
steering is like how can I manipulate
this object so I can get it to do
something. But these interchange
interventions or activation patching is
saying the inter the system is doing
something interesting. how is the system
manipulating itself to do that thing.
So, we're going to stay very closely
onto the distribution of the types of
things the system would actually do. And
that's going to help us understand the
system rather than trying to just
control the system. Something that you
might have seen in this previous picture
is that when we're doing our
intervention on the neural network, it
kind of looks like we're targeting
almost like if this is like a
four-dimensional vector, it looks like I
might be just targeting the first
dimension of that vector. So if I just
have a list of numbers, which is just a
vector inside of a transformer, I'm
going to pick out one of those numbers
and replace that number with the value
it would have taken on another input.
But a very popular idea in mechanistic
interpretability that I think has given
us a lot of successful results is the
idea of the linear representation
hypothesis, which is that the right unit
of analysis isn't going to be these sort
of basis aligned vector units. it's
actually going to be sort of an
arbitrary direction in vector space. And
so you can think of this in the
following way. So instead of just taking
the vector and doing the intervention, I
now want a new unit that I can do
interventions on. So what I can do is I
can take this vector, I can run some
process that I'll just call a featurizer
to get me to some new space of
variables. So I now have new units I can
do intervention on. and then I apply the
inverse featurizer to get back to the
original vector space. So a very simple
way of thinking about this is that f can
just be a rotation matrix and then f
inverse can just be the transpose of
that rotation matrix. And so if I just
run the model with this little
featurizing process in the middle,
nothing will change on any actual
inputs. So there's no loss at all. But
what this gives me is now I have these
new units I can perform interventions
on. And if it's a rotation matrix, what
this means is I just basically take the
standard axes and instead of saying I'm
going to intervene on these axes, I'm
going to instead rotate my uh my vector
space basically. Yeah, I'm going to
rotate my vector space and I'm going to
get a new set of axes that are still
equally well equipped to characterize
the full space, but intervening on these
new axes might be uh more interpretable.
they might better correspond to highle
quantities that I'm trying to localize
inside of a network.
So if we look at our previous setting,
what we can just say is instead of an
interchange intervention, we do a
distributed interchange intervention. So
we run up to the layer and then we apply
this featurizing process and then once
we have applied the featurizer, we do
the intervention, we bring over the
feature that occurred for this input and
bring it over into this input. And if
it's a carry the one feature,
then the output will change from 42 to
32. So this is the exact same idea.
There's still this sort of structural
correspondence of intervention
properties bringing up certain
behaviors, but instead of intervening on
say the original variables of the model,
we're just doing a manipulation of these
variables. And I described it as a
rotation, but later on you'll learn
about Saes. And you could equally say
that the featurizer is an SAPE encoder.
And then the inverse featurizer is just
an SAPE decoder.
And so this is going to bring me to an
idea that's very important and I think
touches on a question that was asked
earlier which is how did you find this
neuron to do an intervention on? How can
we use our hypothesis, our causal model
as a source of supervision for
understanding where a certain variable
is stored inside of a network.
So I'm just going to take this setting
again. And so say I just randomly
initialized these featurizers. So as a
rotation matrix. So I apply a random
rotation and then I perform this
intervention.
I'm almost certainly going to be wrong.
So instead of getting the expected
output of 32, maybe it says 98, maybe it
just says some garbage number because
basically I'm performing something like
a random intervention on this system.
But the cool thing is is that I actually
know what I wanted the model to say. I
actually wanted the model to say 32
because my highle causal model has this
structure and when I do this
intervention on it, I get the output 32.
And now that output 32 can be used as a
source of supervision for training the
features of the uh that we are
intervening on. So crucially we freeze
the weights of the transformer. So the
entire transformer is fully frozen but
we learn the featurizer the rotation
matrix. So we're trying to learn a
rotation matrix such that when we
intervene on the first unit of our new
rotated space it corresponds exactly to
the carry the one variable. And so this
is a very powerful idea because now we
get to bring the tools of supervised
machine learning into this task setting
of causal variable localization. So I
have a causal variable and high level
causal model and I'm using my causal
model and how it acts under
interventions as a source of supervision
for localizing the variable into some
piece of the underlying network.
Yeah. And then I'll cover the next slide
and I'll take questions because the next
slide is a very uh simple idea actually.
Yeah, we can see how the the gradients
flow. So if you have supervision up
here, gradients will flow down here and
then they flow into the featurizers not
to the underlying model weights which
are of course frozen because we want to
analyze the model not modify it.
Okay, another core idea here is deserata
based masking which is the exact same
training objective instead of but
instead of learning the featureizers
we actually just learn masks over the
features to select which features to do
interventions on. So sparse
autoenccoders give you a pre-trained set
of features that you might not want to
update. You might want to keep them
fixed. And if that's the case, you don't
have to train your features. You can
just train masks to select out the
features to perform interventions on and
to select out the features with
particular uh interventional properties.
So, it's a similar idea
and I'll pause on
here because this is a pretty these are
some pretty complicated slides that are
uh could be worth thinking about. So,
does anyone have any questions? Okay.
I'm still confused of how you're
specifically finding or manipulating
that like plus one neuron. Like are you
putting featurizers
in every hidden layer or and then
freezing and then manipulating one at a
time or I'm still confused of how you're
figuring that out?
>> Yeah. So are we putting featurizers in
every layer and manipulating one at a
time? So in principle you can attach
these a lot of different places. So in
this example it looks like we're just
doing it at one place basically. Like
you might think I come in and I think oh
I'm I think this vector might contain a
carry the one feature. So then I equip
this little featureizer here that's
untrained and then I do this training
process to try to find some direction in
the vector space I can intervene on that
has this property. And so this doesn't
solve the problem all the altogether of
trying to find somewhere because there's
lots of different vectors to pick out in
a model. And so you could further try to
bring in more tools to try to pick out
which vector to then do this to. Does
that help?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you usually do this for like multiple
features at a time because it feels like
if you do it only for the first feature
then the other features may be arbitrary
or not interpretable the way you want it
to be.
That's another really great question and
that's also kind of a simplification of
the slide in some sense. So you can
choose any number of features to do this
at once. So you might think like it
should be eight directions that
correspond to the carry the one
variable. You could also do this with
multiple variables at the same time. So
you might say, I want to learn some
features that correspond to the country
a city is in and some features that
correspond to the language spoken in
that city and some features
corresponding to the numbers of letters
in that city name and that you could try
to sep learn this sort of process to
disentangle and figure out separable
components that can be intervened on to
manipulate individual highle quantities
like facts or numbers.
Um so because this is localized in one
layer uh is there any way that this
method can like try and discover like
cross layer um like like you know
computations that take many layers to um
to complete like induction heads for
example. Mhm. So induction heads are
interesting because I think you could
actually separate them to a couple
different variables that you were
thinking of like the the copy head
variable and then like the uh something
moving over. So when you're thinking
when you're thinking about things
occurring across multiple layers,
something you can do is just train
featurizers at each layer and then do
all your interventions at once across
multiple layers. So this is a pretty
flexible idea. I would say that you can
kind of like this is a very sort of like
toy example of how to use this idea, but
more broadly you can kind of just attach
these things to a lot of different
places and then learn them all
separately and do a bunch of
interventions at all these different
locations and there's nothing in
principle that starts failing if we look
about cross layer or cross token
manipulations.
>> Yeah. What kind of design decisions do
you make for these feature ideas?
because at some like there seems to be
some trade-off where I don't want to be
capacity constrained by my featurizer in
terms of what can it can encode and
decode but at the same time I wanted to
be explainable and interpretable. So
that's an excellent question and there's
actually a really great paper that just
came out from a group in ETHZurich that
is about what happens if you take this
idea of distributed alignment search but
then you start equipping the featurizers
with really powerful models. So like
eight layer reversible neural networks
and how do we sort of like manage
ourselves in those settings where it
seems like those can learn some very
gerrymandered and strange ways of
cutting up the vector space that seem
not exactly possibly to align with what
the neural network is actually doing in
some sense. And I think it's a very
nuanced process. I think once you bring
in machine learning tools into this
setting you need to be really worried
about overfitting. And that I think
connects in directly with your question
where if I'm learning this on, you know,
10 examples of this addition task, it
might just sort of like learn some way
to get a sufficient manipulation on
those 10 examples. And then if I threw
in some new 11th example, it would just
fail entirely. And so that's why you're
just kind of put in the traditional
machine learning setting where you need
a train test split and you need to like
hold out the data that you actually care
about and you need to make sure that the
thing that you're learning is a sort of
like general purpose useful explanatory
tool and not some sort of like overly
fit idiosyncratic uh thing that's giving
you pretty fragile results.
Yeah,
>> you could consider the alternate
strategy which is for every intermediate
step of your algorithm different nodes
of your causal graph
>> for for some ensemble of math problems
try to linearly decode the intermediate
states
>> of your causal graph from every single
layer position.
>> Yeah.
>> And see which layers and positions
encode that variable to localize it.
>> So you're just doing linear decoding. So
if you do that, you basically just get a
very sort of like if you make heat maps
of doing linear probes versus doing
this, the linear probe heat map kind of
lights up everywhere. Everywhere like
even to the very final layer of the
network, which is a very good thing to
think about because it's like if you're
at some token and you're at the very
last layer of the residual stream, that
literally has no causal impact on
anything, but it's still a very rich
representation. like the model wasn't
told to destroy pieces of information
that are present in that vector. And so
generally like probing can sort of like
show you where relevant correlational
information exists, but it's going to
very sort of like uh fail at trying to
show you what the actual path of that
information as it's like truly being
used by the network.
>> So here what you're doing is you're
taking the carry bit and trying to
predict what the next variable should do
using that carry.
>> Yeah. It's kind of like a causal version
of probing. So it's not just probe out
the information. It's like learn these
directions such that when we manipulate
them, they correspond to downstream
effects that are in concordance with
this carry the one variable.
>> Okay. So if you did this featurization
at every position and every layer heat
map performance for say the carry
operations prediction on the next next
part algorithm, what would that heat map
look like? Is it very localized?
>> Very localized. very localized like last
lay last token like layers like like mid
to late layers but a cluster of like
four or five layers. So that's the
beautiful thing that when it starts
working it really starts working where
you see these like highly contrasting
heat maps that are like actually this
piece of information is really just
present here in a similar way to like in
the causal mediation setting where it's
like yeah really it seems like this
chunk of MLPS are just the MLPS doing
this extracting out Seattle from the
Space Needle. uh this intervention on
one unit will change the behaviors of
the other units. I was like are they
sharing the same set of rules for
computation or
>> so because this is basically like uh an
invertible process like it's a rotation
matrix that means all our directions are
orthogonal so there's no interference
between these units. So these little
triangles here are all separable. So you
can inter intervene on one and intervene
on the other and the that operation
commutes and they don't really uh
interfere with each other. Um it's not
so much the case if you have something
that's more lossy like a sparse
autoenccoder that will like unpack into
many different directions that have
interference with each other and then
come back. But generally if you just add
back in the error term to an a lossy
process you can still talk about it like
it's an actual bjective process because
it's just uh I don't know that's just
basically a little trick and that is the
way that SAPE uh manipulations do do it
like they will throw back in the error
term at the end just to make it uh well
not because they want it to be
principled and nice just because that's
what makes it work basically. Um yeah.
Yeah. Are you always guaranteed to find
a solution? Like in this case, it's
simple because you know you're supposed
to carry the one, but is it cases when
you break that?
>> That's a great question and absolutely
not. And I think that's one of the
things that tells us that we're doing
actual science here is that you
regularly fail. You know, you regularly
propose some intuitive quantity in the
middle of a network that you're like,
"Yeah, I would do this." And then you
look for it and it just entirely isn't
there. And so I would say, "Yeah,
definitely. Yeah, basically just no."
And you know, in the worst case
scenario, you know, when people talk
about these things being statistical
stoastic parrots or whatever, it's just
a giant lookup table with no internal
structure whatsoever. I don't think
anyone really believes that nowadays,
but that's definitely the type of ideas
that were being thrown around in like
the early 2000s. And also maybe that's
the models were closer to being that in
the early 2000s as well. So there's
that. But yeah,
>> I'm wondering the dimension of
Is there
too?
[snorts]
>> So in principle like the rotation
matrix, you know, is like a full rank
thing because it's rotation matrix. But
if you're only trying to learn like
eight features, you don't have to learn
most of the matrix. You only learn like
eight directions there. Um, is there an
optimal number? Like is two directions
better or one or eight? Completely
depends on the causal variable you're
trying to localize. For something that's
very simple, like sometimes one
direction completely suffices, but for
something that might look more like an
actual token embedding that's kind of
this chunkier thing inside the model, it
might need like 64 dimensions to
actually uh capture the the whole thing.
Yeah. And that's that's something
interesting there where it's like we're
not getting a super detailed look at the
feature geometry of those 64 dimensions.
we're instead just getting a uh yeah
we're getting you know just this claim
about how they act uh sort of in
aggregate together when we do
interventions on them. I'll have some
pointers to literature here. So and
there's also a lot of papers that
explicitly have used causal abstraction
as the framework for analyzing models
which is exciting and some of them I'm
not authors on which is even more
exciting for me. So that means there are
other humans in the world who think
about things this way.
Um also there's like a developing theory
of causal abstraction. Pretty exciting
thing is that this is a pretty young
field theoretically as well like 2017 is
really the sort of seminal paper that
brought out these ideas about looking
for structural correspondences between
two causal models. And it's really been
you know less than 10 years that we've
even really been like making progress on
these ideas. But a bunch of uh Europeans
who love causality are increasingly into
these ideas. So that's also pretty
pretty fun. And then also deserorado
based masking uh worth uh knowing about
that citation. Cool. Well then I'm going
to walk through and this part is going
to get very hairy very quickly. So I
apologize but I just want to give you a
flavor of like what the kind of like
human inspired aspect of doing this type
of causal analysis is as we move into a
more complicated setting than looking
for a single binary variable uh stored
within a network.
So in in in this paper we look for or we
discover what is basically this pattern
of a look back and it's a very intuitive
and simple pattern. It's just if a
neural network wants to keep track of a
piece of information and then go
retrieve that piece of information. What
it can do is it can put a little marker
on that information and then create a
copy of that marker later on that you
can then use to sort of dreference and
look back and grab whatever was relevant
in your context. So to ground us in a
very specific example, the example down
here is a little story where Bob fills a
bottle with beer, Carla fills a cup with
coffee, and the question is what does
Carla believe the cup contains? So this
is exactly what this templatic data set
is. It really is just this exact
template except these highlighted color
words of Bob bottle beer are being
replaced with different characters and
different containers and different
substances. And we developed this sort
of endto-end mechanistic account of how
the model is solving this task. And it
does so in a really weird and
complicated way. So I'm just going to
walk through at a very high level what
this kind of looks like and then I'll
zoom into some of the particular claims
and the experiments that we did that we
think justify them. So what does the
model first do when it sees Bob bottle
and beer and Carla cup and coffee? It
first assigns them positional markers.
So now Bob is no longer Bob. Bob is
actually character one. Bottle is object
one. Beer is state one. And same thing
goes for character 2, object two, and
state two being Carla, cup, and coffee.
So these are now positional markers that
the model is going to reason about
instead of the actual tokens themselves.
So how does the model formulate a query,
formulate the question,
what does Carla believe the cup
contains? Well, the model sees, oh,
Carla and cup. I'm gonna look back and
grab the positional markers for cup and
the positional marker for Carla and
bring them forward into my residual
stream. So I can form my query like
Carla cup question mark.
Now that I have Carla and cups
positional information, I can use that
to look back and grab the positional
marker for coffee, which is the answer
to my question. But this is still the
positional marker for coffee. It's not
the actual token itself. Then it does
another look back mechanism. It uses
this positional piece of information to
look back and grab the token itself,
coffee, to answer this question. And so
there's sort of three stages to this
process. assigning of positional
markers,
formulating a query by retrieving the
positional markers about the the nouns
in your question, and then grabbing the
actual token itself. Um, or grabbing the
marker to the correct answer and then
grabbing the actual correct answer
itself. And so I'm just going to zoom in
on one very specific step of this
process and just talk through the
experiment that we did and why we think
it justifies the sort of picture I just
presented. So this picture here is
saying that I have a positional marker
for the word coffee that I use to go
retrieve the actual token coffee.
So I want you to consider this following
counterfactual. So all that we've done
here is that we've swapped the position
of Bob and Carla and cup and bottle. So
Carla and cup appear first here and they
appear second here. And then we've
replaced the liquids tea and water with
the liquids beer and coffee or vice
versa. So we have two different stories
and what's happened is we've swapped the
order of the characters and the
containers and we've sampled new
substances.
So why did we construct this
counterfactual in this way?
Well, the output for this story is T.
The output for this story is coffee. So
if I paste in the output for this for
first story over the output for this
second story, the output should change
from coffee to T. That's just a very
obvious and basic statement. This
network provides two different outputs
on two different inputs. And if I paste
over say the final layer of the residual
stream for the last token, I'm basic I
am logically guaranteed to change the
prediction from coffee to tea.
But what if I instead paste in the
positional marker
for the word tea over the positional
marker for the word coffee?
So what happens in this original story
here with coffee is it has a marker that
says grab me the thing in position two
which is coffee. Coffee is in position
two. It's after beer. But if I paste in
over that get me the thing in position
two variable and I paste in the t
position variable where t occurs in the
first position in the story. I've now
manipulated my pointer from pointing at
the thing in position two. So it now
points at the thing in position one.
And the thing in position one in this
story is beer. And so if I see the
output beer, this is an EV piece of
evidence that I've discovered a
positional marker separate from the
actual final output variable. And
indeed, when we do these interventions
on the residual stream of the last token
in these examples at layer 30, we
actually see the positional signature
all the way up to layer 50. So through
these layers, if we do this
intervention, we see the output go from
coffee, the thing in position two, to
beer, the thing in position one. But if
we continue to do the interventions at
these layers, there's a transition to
the model outputting t instead, which is
just the output from the counterfactual
story. And so this counterfactual is
very nicely set up such that the final
answer manipulating that information is
going to give us a distinct output from
manipulating what is essentially like a
positional pointer to the correct
answer. And so
yeah, and so this is the type of
analysis that you have to do if you want
to sort of construct the right pairs of
examples that are going to be able to
sharply test the hypotheses that you're
proposing uh about how models actually
process uh their inputs and solve the
the tasks that we're giving them.
I'll pause here in case people have
questions because I know this gets
messy. Uh so and it's pretty fast.
>> Yeah.
>> In this graph, what is this business of
space dimension being less than 20?
>> Yeah. So the solid lines are if we're
just patching in the full vectors, but
then we also do this masking thing where
we learn uh it's actually uh SVD
decomposition. So we take vectors, we
collect them across all these prompts.
We do SVD to decompose that into a new
like basically just rotation matrix or
whatever and then we learn masks over
the SVD components and then intervene on
those. And so this residual stream has
like I don't know like a thousand units
or something. I don't remember the exact
number but we actually only need a
20dimensional uh subspace to do this
manipulation.
Yeah, which is actually a very tiny
subspace. So this positional information
is stored right there. And it's
interesting too because you know the
subspace sizes shift. So for this
positional p piece of information it's
like generally less than 20 but for the
final token it's like generally less
than 33. And in general tokens are just
kind of chunkier uh inside networks.
>> So um how close do you get to the full
residual kind of graph like you subace?
Does it follow sharply or does it follow
sort of smoothly?
I don't think we have results on that,
but that's a really good question. And I
think in general, I think those are
pretty good plots to try to produce that
like as you increasingly get smaller
almost like what's the topography of the
thing? Like are there really crucial
tiny bits? Um I think that'd be pretty
interesting experiments to do.
>> Yeah.
>> So in this kind of setting, you can be
pretty sure that you've kind of uh
designed a counterfactual that is like
appropriately controlling for all the
the confounding variables. Is that
something that you think can scale in
general to like more complex experiments
you'd like to run?
>> Wow, this is that's like such an
excellent question. So, it was actually
doing this project that made me feel
very strongly about a couple things. One
is that I needed a code base that
actually expressed the causal models as
Python objects themselves for
analyzing these counterfactuals and
figuring out whether I'm doing the
proper kind of hypothesis testing.
Because as you can see in like the
previous image I had, we're dealing with
something like nine variables now or
something like that. And it's just kind
of like messy kind of like trying to
figure out how can I localize exactly
this positional marker separate from all
these other possibilities. And what's
more, that's just the possibilities in
the causal model I proposed. And there's
always other causal models that might
just do things completely separately.
Um,
but that being said, I do think there
are sort of like I I do think there are
interesting like rich theoretical things
you can say about how to design these
counterfactual data sets and what the
sort of like workflow for doing this
like causal analysis is when you're
trying to distinguish between particular
hypotheses. And from my perspective
broadly like I this is actually what I'm
like most working on right now is
developing like the sort of like
theoretical understanding of like what
that workflow is how to design these
counterfactuals to distinguish between
distinct hypotheses and then trying to
scale that process up using like agents
basically and uh it's it's a very
exciting uh perspective for me on how we
can scale interpretability because I
love bespoke analysis. I love looking at
a very specific task and a very specific
model and just really trying to
understand end to end what is happening.
And I think there's a sort of like
alternative route to scaling
interpretability where we just embrace
that process and just try to do all the
work we can to flesh out what it looks
like and try to plug that into basically
like science assistant agents or
something like that.
>> Yes. Is there anything unique about the
location in the layers like where you're
seeing these positional embeddings or
like you said with other examples does
it depend on the type of sentence you
provide like that's another really great
question. So you know in this I think
this paper is like a really great
example of us focusing on a small data
set and just like going really hard on
it and trying to figure out just like
the whole process end to end. But that
honestly there's like not enough papers
like this yet. Like if we could like
have a view of like a hundred papers
like this where like they've done a
bunch of different tasks. I think we
could start noticing cool patterns like
is this layer where positional stuff
just seems to happen. Like maybe the
model is just reasoning about positional
things here and then here is just the
hard cut off where it's like all right
time to move on from positional markers
and actually grab the tokens that I I I
need for things. Um and I think that'd
be a pretty interesting question. And I
think generally looking for these sorts
of like comput computational or
algorithmic motifs in models is a pretty
exciting research direction.
>> Yeah. Uh how important is the uh the
character object and code relative to
each other because you could choose one
or the other and so answer
and so comparative how much
>> that's a really good question. We did
not do I I I actually do think we did
some experiments about this. They might
have made it into the appendix of this
paper. Um
it's complicated. I think the kind of
way you want to make the statement is
something like if I just replace the
character or the object positional
information and that's like part of my
query, what is the resulting decrease in
logit strength for each of the answers?
I think is probably the reasonable way
to think about that. My guess would be
once you put in conflicting information
that it kind of like has not is not sure
what to do. It kind of like decreases
confidence in the right answer. Whether
one of them is going to be more
important. Uh I'm not really sure about
that.
>> Yeah.
>> Um did you like try updating that? What
happens in that like what is it output
and can you train a model from scratch
without them to still develop this kind
of
>> that's a really good question. So I'm
not sure about the training from scratch
thing but we do do variations of the
absolute token indices that things
appear at and that helps us uh
distinguish from uh positional uh
embedding itself. I think these
positional pieces of information are a
lot more contextual and relativized than
like an absolute index within a sequence
of tokens. Um, which makes sense. And I
would also my guess would be training
from scratch models just have to figure
this out that like sort of like
contextually relevant pieces of
information are just uh never going to
be at like absolute indices that you can
always just go to and understand. And
you need to understand like what's the
third character referenced in the last
paragraph is a relevant query that
models need to handle.
>> Yeah.
>> Um does this structure like
position emerged in model train on less
structural data sets as well like less
data data sets.
>> These are just pre-trained models. This
model is not fine-tuned on this data set
at all.
So this is just purely a pre-trained
model like it's llama and no fine-tuning
whatsoever.
>> So definitely
>> so this kind of reminds me of uh there
was like a a meme about like a prompt
you could write to chat about how many
Rs are in strawberry.
>> Yeah. Yeah. is so the model would fail
uh but like they I guess my question is
like you could write the word but it
would still fail but like could you view
like I'm I'm not sure if uh this fits in
with this type of research like if you
were to let's say write the word
strawberry but do a misspelling of it
>> does it refer to your actual prompt or
does it refer to its like training of
the word strawberry
>> so I think that's just all going to come
down to tokenization like if you
misspell strawberry enough what are the
actual tokens that that word is split
into because I imagine at some point
it's split into a token that's just like
a bunch
>> and yeah and that's going to kind of
crucially come into play and I feel like
that strawberry meme is all about the
fact that models have token
representations and those tokens can't
unless they train them to unless the
model learns it doesn't necessarily
contain character level information.
>> Yeah, I notic that the graph is like a
little bit spiky
>> at the top. Um I was wondering if you
just attribute that to uh noise or if
you like is this something like oh you
know this information something happens
at layer 30 then this information kind
of sits there maybe there's a little
noise and then something happens at
layer like 55 or something.
>> Yeah it's a great question. First I'll
say this is a beautiful graph
considering like the types of graphs
you'll often see like this is like
incredibly clean [laughter] but uh yeah
but that like generally things don't
happen all at once in models like they
have a whole bunch of layers and
something you'll very typically see is
like oh I think like this token starts
at this place in the input it goes up
and then the signal for that token goes
down gradually across layers and then
you see it pop up in this other column
of the residual stream gradually across
layers And there it's just multiple
attention heads are like moving this
information bit by bit across it. But an
important thing to consider there is
that's not necessarily what's happening.
Like another totally reasonable thing to
think is that like for some inputs it's
entirely moved and then for other inputs
it's entirely stays in place but because
our graphs or our heat maps are on
aggregate across many pairs of examples
it kind of confounds those two
possibilities and you need to do sort of
like more detailed analysis to tease
them apart. Ju
just to that point the so the story that
you had earlier like very early part of
the lecture where you would intervene
with noise and then and then restore
something at a particular layer that
would be an example of a way that you
would be able to tell whether or not the
thing had been moved and there was no
more moving of the information anymore
after that point. Right? Because if
>> if if it was just moved and there was
nothing else doing it, then it would
only be one layer that would have that
restoration quality. Right?
>> So that's true. But also those graphs
were 10 layer restored at once. Okay.
>> And so when you actually look at the
other graphs in the paper, those were
like the the headline graphs to show
this like nice chunky whoa heat map
looks discreet type thing. And then the
the other graphs in the paper are much
more gradual because they're doing
individual restorations.
And yeah, often especially with yeah
MLPS or attention heads, it's like
almost never going to be one layer just
boom does this discrete operation. It's
going to be distributed across multiple
layers and multiple modules working in
tandem.
Um yeah, I'll end on a
different paper and just this just food
for thought that'll be over in one
minute is just what happens if we go
from just two things to lists of things
like long lists of things. Does this
exact same positional mechanism occur?
And the answer is actually no. So in the
setting where you just have these two
things like Bob beer, Carla coffee, the
positional mechanism explains everything
perfectly. But actually if you get
increasingly long lists, the positional
mechanism degrades in the middle of
those lists and it actually relies on a
direct lexical lookup for those
positions. So instead of saying like
Pete loves jam and that's in position
three. So when I want to grab jam, I use
a position three marker. Instead I just
directly use the token Pete to look up
and grab the token jam. And if you
So this is kind of like the positional
results. So like up here is like perfect
and then down here in the middle it gets
much much lower performance and then at
the end it gets really high again. And
so this is just like a nice little
U-shaped thing showing that when we're
in this previous paper when we're
looking at just lists of two things,
it's super sharp analysis, like really
clean like kind of exactly what's
happening. But if you even just like
look in very slightly more complex
settings, the mechanisms used actually
are kind of like a mixture of mechanisms
where there are multiple things at play
and depending on the type of input and
the type of question I'm asking will
modulate what the actual mechanisms the
language model uses to answer the
question. And so that's just to say
that, you know, I think it's nice to
look at very narrow settings and get a
really crisp, clean analysis, but I also
think it's really important to
increasingly kind of embrace the mess
and model these objects as directly as
sort of having these like layered
algorithms or heruristics that they
learn throughout a training process and
that it's not going to necessarily come
out to be just this crisp single
algorithm that just solves the process
end to end.
And yeah, since we're at time, I'll I'll
leave it there. If you have more
questions right now, I'm happy to take
them. But yeah, thanks so much you guys.
[applause]