Well, hi. Uh, I'm Elliot Murphy. I'm a

posttock at the Department of

Neurosurgery at UT Health in Houston,

Texas. And I'm going to be presenting

some work today about language in the

brain. Um, thank you to Mike for the

invitation to participate in this

symposium on the platonic space. I think

what I'll be offering today is a

perspective on what the nature of

language can tell us about properties of

neural computation that would otherwise

be potentially um difficult to explore

without the framing and help of

linguistic theory. Um I'm going to give

a brief introduction then I'll be

talking a little bit about um large

language models and their connection to

linguistic theory or disconnection. I'll

then be talking about theoretical

linguistics and the nature of language

and the uh its place in nature. I'll be

talking a little bit later about uh the

brain and how principles of linguistics

can help guide neuroscientific uh theory

formation.

So I'm going to argue that there's a

diverse causal landscape in the brain

and that different parts of the

soundscape can explain different

components of linguistic structure. So

the difference between sound, meaning,

and grammar and things like that. I'm

going to argue that mathematically

formalized theories of language can help

narrow down the list of plausible

candidate neural mechanisms and that

this mathematical space will involve the

use of concepts from category theory,

hop algebra and statistical physics. Now

with respect to previous speakers in

this symposium, some of this material

will be building off the work of Lauren

Ross and Colon and the ideas that they

presented in their lectures.

So to begin, I'm going to assume here

that the mind follows logical syntactic

algebraic rules. It has fixed scopes and

limits just like our century and

perceptual systems right uh therefore

our science forming faculties have

particular scopes and limits what we can

explain and what we can't explain what

kind of questions we can answer and what

kind of questions we can't answer and

that it can execute specific

computational operations.

I'm going to assume that humans abstract

away from sensation to generate a notion

of structure. Now what that notion is

exactly will be um clarified later on.

Uh I'm going to follow Chsky by arguing

that language is a generative system of

structured expressions and Petroski by

assuming that language provides

instructions to conceptual systems.

That's kind of the primary uh function

of the language system is to update and

provide conceptual instructions.

In the brain space I'm going to assume

that rhythmicity provides a means of

handling information via oscillations.

The brain is an inference generator

negotiating its internal model with

sensation.

and that the broad goal here is to seek

a uniting link between the operations of

matter and abstract mental processes.

Okay, so on to section two. I'll be

talking here about large language models

and interrogating the extent to which

they can offer cognitive neuroscientists

assistance with exploring the biology of

language. Uh but I'll be arguing that

they should really be described as large

corpus models, not large language

models. But why is that? uh a number of

reasons here. I'll just briefly provide

some evidence. There's some recent

papers of mine that you can look at for

more for more detail here. Uh but

firstly, LLM brain alignments in the

literature in uh the neural linguistic

space have been found to be driven by

fra fragile methodologies and overlooked

confounds like word rate and positional

signals. Uh transformers don't represent

sentence meaning in a manner akin to the

human brain. Right? They're actually

seemingly inferior to models explicitly

designed to encode the syntactic

relations between words, right? Explicit

symbolic models. LLMs don't reliably

distinguish between grammatical and

unrammatical structures.

Uh the so-called large reasoning models

seem to engage what in what Apple called

sophisticated pattern matching. Seven

leading LLMs do not show reliable

sensitivity to the meaning structure

distinction which is a major distinction

in uh human psych linguistics.

and chatbt doesn't uh capture

fundamental principles of linguistic

structure. This is a paper that actually

came out a couple days ago. Now, uh LLMs

don't capture generalizations about null

complimentizers, right? So, the way that

you can uh include or drop

complimentizer terms like that in

English sentences, which is a purely

syntactic phenomenon.

They also have a strong linearity bias

and don't capture deep syntactic

structures. So this is a recent review

paper in which the authors uh looked at

large language models and asked how much

of syntax can they provide for us and

capture and represent faithfully and

what they call the remaining challenges

in the field are basically all of human

specific syntactic knowledge and I'll

come back to that later. Uh but surely

large language models if they were

language models would align best with

language areas in the brain. Well that

doesn't turn out to be the case. uh

LLM's ability to predict brain

activation in fMRI in this paper doesn't

strongly differ between language and

non- language related brain areas which

suggests that whatever statistical

properties that LLMs are capturing is

not specific to linguistic computation.

LLMs al also prefer to manipulate noun

based information not verb related

information. That sounds a bit of a

broke criticism but it's actually quite

important uh because verbs encode the

core properties of compositional syntax

semantics. They set up things like

tense, voice, transitivity, mood,

argument structure, and things like

that. Uh whereas nouns are easier to

target uh uh by distributional models

due to their frequency.

And in some other papers that I've

published with Evelyn and Gary Marcus

and others, we've tried to interrogate

this uh compositional syntax abilities

not just of the output of large language

models themselves and their ability to

judge and make sense of coherent pros

but also in the um text to even image

space in the case of these um models

that generate images from uh structured

text or strings of text I should say. uh

they often don't do a good job of

capturing basic syntactic and semantic

relations. So this is a paper a couple

years ago about Darly 2 where the

sentences are not uh particularly well

captured. Um and a more recent paper has

looked at Darly 3 that came out this

year couple a few months ago showing

that this is also the case for um Darly

3 where it performs almost a chance

essentially. Um uh there's a couple of

structures that I performs fairly well

at above chance like passives but most

of them it uh gives you for example one

woman has glasses and one woman have has

no glasses. It's effectively a 50%

chance if it will be u both or not.

In the early days of generative text to

image um I generated this uh crayon

prompt which later became darling mini

in 2022. If you ask it, uh, give me a

wedding photo with absolutely no Shrek,

it provides you with this, um, which of

course does include a certain degree of

Shrekness. But what about GPT5, which is

claimed to provide thinking built in, so

you get the best answer every time. If

you ask it to draw a picture of 22

bananas, it gives you a rough

approximate. If you count them, it's

actually 26. Uh, I did this a number of

times and it never successfully gave me

22, which is very strange. Um, if you

ask it to draw a picture of a street at

night with every street lamp lit except

three,

uh, it doesn't perform very well. This

is a case where there are two unlit.

If you ask it to draw a picture of a

brick wall with the word nevertheless

painted on it, uh, with every occurrence

of the letter E having a red circle

around it, again, it fails. incorrect

spelling and incorrect circling which

suggests that this mapping between not

just the individual tokens in the prompt

but the compositional relations between

these tokens is not very well captured

and this is a quite a strange one I did

the other day as well I just decided to

on my walk home from work I opened my

chat app and decided let's have a little

conversation and I just decided to give

it this quote from a movie David Lynch

movie Mholland drive and over a series

of responses it didn't get the um didn't

correctly identify the movie that the

quote is from. Even though this

particular um quote is in scripts

online, it's been talked about. It's

quite a famous quote from uh any Lynch

heads out there will recognize it

straight away. Um it goes through a

number of iterations. It even claims

that it's from No Country for Old Men um

and from the Grand Budapest Hotel for

some reason. And then even when I tell

it it's from Woodholland Drive, it just

says, "Oh, okay. Thanks." and doesn't

actually explain why it's from overall

and drive like which character says it

and so on.

So yeah, to quote anchor man 60% of the

time it works every time. Um and I had a

similar issue about maybe a few months

ago in March when I gave it this

sentence. The mechanic who fixed the car

carefully packed his tools. If you ask

it what did he do carefully?

Well, there were two options, right? He

could carefully pack his tools or he

could carefully fix the car, right? Like

logically, regardless of intonation or

context, that sentence, that string of

text can be passed into two different

structures, right? The adverb can be

associated with pack his tools or fix

the car.

Well, Chach G said, um, he he packed his

tools. And when you ask it, did he

carefully fix the car? It says, well,

no, the sentence only specifies that he

carefully packed his tools. It doesn't

say anything about how he fixed the car.

So, based on that sentence alone, we

don't know whether he fixed the car

carefully. Well, that's not true. The

sentence does not only specify that he

carefully packed his tools because it's

structurally ambiguous, right? The

sentence in English is inherently

structurally ambiguous. Now, a lot of

people um when I show them the sentence,

they actually agree with chat GPT

because they say things like, well, if

you want to mean it that way, you have

to put some intonation. You have to put

commas. You have to, you know, you just

wouldn't say it that way. You'd rephrase

a sentence. And that's kind of missing

the point, right? uh as an experiment,

I'm just giving you this fixed data,

right? This fixed string of of of tokens

and seeing what your mind can recover

from that fixed string of tokens. Now,

yes, in the real world, context would

help, right? Like if you're standing in

a mechanics, you know, uh uh workspace

next to one or two mechanics who's uh

you know, uh doing his his his job in a

certain way. You can infer this one way

or the other, but that's not the point

of the example, right? The point of the

example is that this sentence is

inherently structurous. Um, oh yeah, and

and Gary Kasparov um disagreed with me

and said, "Ambiguity in language often

requires context and understanding,

likelihood, and custom. Uh, in a lecture

10 years ago, I used the sentence, the

chicken is too hot to eat, which is of

course example, but I think Gary's

missing the point here, right? Um,

language often requires context

understanding to fully enrich the

meaning, but you don't need any context

whatsoever to understand that sense,

right? you can impose it uh and uh use

additional contextual cues to narrow

down the intended meaning or the likely

meaning. But the point that I'm making

here is not about likely meaning or

intended meaning. It's about the

inherent structural ambiguity of the

sentence and that chbet just can't pass

that.

Uh there's another quick lesson here

from the baby LM challenge uh which is

when you limit these models to uh valid

amounts of data in the ecological sense,

right? number of a ways that children

are exposed to. These models then have

an unshakably strong bias to impose

linear solutions on linguistic tasks.

Right? They're more keen and more eager

to impose a linear rule or a linear

solution to a language task than to

impose some seeming or alleged type of

hierarchal representation. And that's of

course in contrast to infants who

instinctively impose hierarchal

structure dependent rules.

So let's think a bit more about the um

logical relations here between how we

can talk about large language models and

how they can relate to uh cognitive

theory cognitive science theory. So we

all know about modus ponent and modus

tolons right. So if p then q p therefore

q and if p then q not therefore not p.

some very simple logical relations. Uh

but people like Olivia Guest and Andre

Martin have pointed out in a number of

very good papers that the way that

researchers often make conclusions about

the output or behavior a lot of large

language models in terms of the

implications for linguistic theory and

cognitive science theory um is quite uh

facious and uh entertaining logical

correlations that don't actually obtain.

So for example, the obvious one is um

affirming the consequent right. So

correlation of our models to data is

necessary but it's not sufficient.

Right? The goal of science is not just

prediction satisfaction, it's

explanation.

It's very common in the literature to

confuse types of inference,

misunderstand the evidentary role that

correlation plays and offer no

formalized thought on the relationship

between model and observation.

So for example uh statement one uh if I

am Beyonce then I am fabulous. Statement

two I am fabulous.

Statement three, uh, therefore I am

Beyonce. Well, of course that's not

valid, but it's exactly the same type of

logical reasoning that many LLM

researchers use when they say that, um,

you know, if the model correlates with

human behavior or imaging data, then the

model does what humans do, right? We

find some correlations. So therefore,

the model does in fact do what humans

do. Well, no, that's just affirming the

consequence.

Uh, models of course do not equal

phenomenon. Explan does not equal

explan. So here's another case here,

right? Uh imagine the motion of bodies

under gravity and Newtonian mechanics,

right? As a case study. Now it would be

very strange to say if Newtonian

mechanics behaves like physical objects,

then Newtonian mechanics is physical

objects, right? No one would would make

that claim, but it's the same type of

logical reasoning that is done in these

LLM cases. Indeed. Um so here's another

example uh in the literature where the

term explain is doing a lot of heavy

lifting without much formal cashing out.

Uh we read that intermediate model

layers best explain primary auditory

cortical responses while deeper layers

best explain voxil and non- primary

areas. Well what does explain mean in

that case? Right? It's strong

correlation but that does not equal

explanation.

We often read things like this LLM

output has humanlike qualities to it.

Therefore, it gives us certain specific

implications for theories of human

cognition. But nobody argues, as far as

I know, nobody argues that Alph Go is a

plausible model of human strategizing or

that Cicero is a plausible model of

human theory of mind. Was Deep Blue a

plausible model of Casparov's brain

simply because it matched his

performance levels? So, wouldn't why

would an LLM be a model of human

language? Right? We don't follow that uh

inference all the way through.

Uh there's another problem here to do

with standards of evaluation. So

sometimes uh one can adopt a different

testing regime for models versus humans.

Uh and this can be used as a tool to

artificially inflate LLM accuracy. So

there are some cases of uh stimulus

hacking. My friend Evelyn calls it S

hacking. In S hacking, people try many

different prompts and testing regimes,

cherrypick the best performing ones, and

then rerun the tests and LM until the

desired result is achieved. Right? This

is analogous to P hacking, but today

many people in the AI space will call it

pre-esting.

So again this speaks to a poor causal

logic here. We can say that a barometer

can measure atmospheric pressure and

have its activity regulated by it. But

if we break the barometer the

thunderstorm doesn't stop, right? It's

just purely a correlation here between

these two things. Um there is no causal

relation.

Again just to really hammer home this

point, LLM text output looks like real

human language, but then again a fake

flower looks a lot like a real flower,

right? There's not much to make about

that. Again, the spectre of uh multiple

realizability also rears its head here.

Vastly different substrates and

mechanisms can perform the same input

output mappings, right? The question is

what is the algorithm um that's uh

providing that output. So digital clocks

and analog clocks both show the time,

right? The behavior is showing the time,

but they have completely distinct

implementations and LLMs and humans can

both generate coherent pros as as we

know. But what do we make from that?

There's a related criticism here um to

the brain LLM debate from Conrad Coding

uh who's pointed out that fitting RNN's

make attractors even when the data does

not have attractors right that's often

the case where you get these sorts of um

geometrical topological you know

circular types of um rotational dynamics

that may not actually be uh causal have

causal power. So he writes that a

popular approach to study brain data is

to fit an RNN to neural data and then

show that this RNN has attractors.

However, a recent paper from Europe last

year showed that in the context of

partial observations, a simulated system

that has no attractors also gives rise

to a fitted RNM that does not have

attractors. So in other words, in the

context of unobserved data, always the

case in neuroscience. We may even

wrongly infer that there are attractors.

Right? Now that theme will come back a

little bit later but I think that's a

very important lesson to to bear in mind

here. Uh so as I kind of hinted already

in the cognitive neuroscience literature

there are many uh curious shadowy

syllogisms to quote Russell that do not

obtain but which are disguised

rhetorically as complex mechanistic

insights and again that theme of

mechanistic insights I'm channeling very

much some of Lauren Ross' work here and

I'll return to that theme later. Um,

okay. So, I asked Chat Gupty another

question. Uh, just as a privacy, I

logged out of my chatbt account and

signed in as a guest. Of course, you

know, my personal chat history is

riddled with cases of me bullying chatbt

and uh trying to confuse it and so on.

So, I decided, okay, I'll be neutral

here for once. Um, here's a new question

for you. Do you think that

neuroscientists should use LLMs as

genuine theories of language to guide

investigation? And it said, "No, don't

do that. That's a terrible idea." Right?

You should not use LLMs as genuine

theories of language, right? And here's

why. They're not theories, they're

function approximators. Absolutely. They

lack cognitive plausibility. Well,

that's kind of less controversial these

days. Most people kind of accept that,

but even so, it's quite an important

point. Uh here's an important point,

though. They obscure rather than clarify

neural mechanisms. Right? This is

something that I'm going to be talking

about in the second half of the talk. Uh

treating LLM as theories can mislead

neuroscientific interpretations. They're

black boxes. uh and their success at

some tasks tempts researchers yes indeed

very tempting into post hoc

rationalization right it must be like

the brain therefore well that's a big

issue and they also bypass theoretical

linguistics which for many people is a

good thing um but I think not and again

I'll explain why in a few minutes time

um okay so why am I saying all this well

modeling linguistic semantics via this

type of vector space will only get us so

far language interfaces with various

conceptual domains

which have their own unique formats.

Some of these are digital and logical

whereas others are analog and graded and

continuous. Right? So when language

exports information to other systems in

the brain and other conceptual systems,

each of these systems have their own

type of requirements, right? It's like a

civ, their own types of um uh criteria

to be met. Um again, some of these have

different formal properties and

mathematical properties. So for example

within a single lexical item like a book

or city right we can use our posterior

middle temple gyus to access some kind

of lema type representation of city so

kind of mor moreic structure and then

send it off to uh phological and

semantic systems when we do that

especially in the context of a complex

sentence which I'll show you in a second

we can simultaneously trigger a bunch of

different conceptual domains that are

wildly heterogeneous right so a theory

of mind boolean logic uh intentionality

equation etc etc. Vector space semantics

treat lexical meaning however as points

in a continuous uniform space right uh

this may be okay for things like king

versus queen right where queen is like

you know king uh you know minus male

plus female right but even that's kind

of just approximate uh but semantics in

reality is highly typed in heterogeneous

so here's this example I was uh uh

promising you the progressive school

next to the river was high in the New

York Time rankings and had just hired a

new chancellor after being repainted.

Okay, so what is a school in that case?

What are we referring to? What kind of

object or entity is school? Right? Does

it exist in the physical world? Right?

Does it exist out there? Can you refer

to it? Well, no. It's just a coctive

recipe, right? It's a set of

instructions for uh internal inference

to use Fristen's type of metaphor. So, a

single word can call upon diverse and

categorically incompatible semantic

features. Right? These conceptual

domains are not dimensions in the

embedding sense. They host different

mathematical structures and implicate

different neural structures. By the way,

so word to vec and LM embeddings

collapse these senses into a blended

vector. Even contextual embeddings often

smear them because they lack an explicit

type system to separate sensors, right?

So when you say um the book was

interesting and it was heavy or it was

interesting and it was blue um there is

nothing in the physical world that can

simultaneously be an abstract piece of

information and a concrete piece of you

know paper right

um and I think this is very difficult to

capture in this type of language so

distances and vector space often reflect

corpus frequency artifacts right I say

often that's kind of an understatement

here's some other more delicate things

here that aren't considered um consider

asymmetric entailment relations, right?

If I say every dog barked, that means

that some dog barked but not vice versa.

But distributional vectors place every

and some close together because they co-

occur with the same kinds of nouns and

verbs, right? The frequency properties.

But as I said, one entails two but not

the reverse. So it doesn't capture the

semantics. Uh but these vector

approaches risk conflating the

implementation medium with the

computational level, right? the task the

what the kind of what it's doing what is

the goal here with the actual

algorithmic settlement if you like so

how does a vector-based learner discover

abstract exceptionist rules without

relying on statistical accident unclear

uh in this paper from uh Steven

Pianosian colleagues they risk

explaining compositionality post hawk

right it just emerges in the geometry

somehow rather than as a necessary

design property and later on in the talk

I'll come back to this nature of uh

these sorts of compositional rules being

necess necessary design features of

language, right? It's not an accident

that every child converges on the same

type of uh sets of um solutions here.

So, uh but the very properties that many

authors site as hallmarks of efficient

communication can also be reinterpreted

as pressures shaping internal

manipulation of thought. So, what does

that mean? Well, a lot of people have

used these types of LM uh uh discoveries

to argue that, you know, language is

clearly therefore in the game for

efficient communication. But many of the

evidence provided for this can also be

rethought as okay if it's efficient for

communication it's also by the way

efficient for internal thinking. So

things like dependency minimization

ambiguity and short words um they can

all help both with communication and

internal computational efficiency.

Right? What's important is what happens

when these two things clash.

I'll come back to that in a second. Um

so in philosophy of law coherentism

holds that a belief is justified if it

fits into a larger consistent um system

of beliefs forming a mutually supportive

network. You can see where I'm going

here, right? Claims about LLMs are like

the brain uh can certainly be internally

coherent within one's theory of language

and one's theory of computation and so

on. But this doesn't mean that it's

right. Yeah. Uh it doesn't mean that our

foundational assumptions are valid just

because we can define communication in a

certain way that relates to our

definitions about what large language

models are doing and what the how the

human brain computes and what our what

our theory of neural computation is

like. All these things can be internally

consistent and coherent, right? They can

be shielded and safe and protected from

all these other problems from the

outside, but that doesn't mean that it

is the correct theory.

I will call this um the definitional

fallacy, right? Similar type of thing.

Um so just because you can define a

concept like culture or communication in

relation to some scientific field, it

doesn't follow at all that this

definition will actually be able to be

operationalized within the context of a

productive explanatory theory. So I can

provide a definition of semantics as a

vector math or something similar but it

doesn't follow from that that just

because you can define semantics as x y

or z that it should be defined that way

right uh often researchers think half

the battle is already won just by

offering coherent definitions and

boundaries of inquiry right but that's

not the case

um now to return back to the earlier

point I was trying to make here um Gary

Marcus has made a very nice point that

perhaps GP2 was actually really the last

pure LL LM right and when I'm critiquing

LLMs here many of the subsequent cases

of LMS like if you download GPT5.2 too.

Right now, it will have a lot of um uh

symbolic like components smuggled in

essentially, right? Like it's code

interpreters and Python interpreters and

obviously things like guardrails, right?

There'll probably be some uh symbolic

filters there. Uh so none of these

contemporary large language models are

actually purely connections are purely

deep learning. They already invoke a lot

of these types of symbolic constraints

that I'm hinting at. Um so just to

conclude this little section in the

study of semantics we've moved from this

where we have a very formal you know

algebraically explicit model of what

human knowledge is with respect to

different types of semantic operations

how you compose meaning right how you

compose simple meanings into more

complex meanings we've moved from this

to this right which I think is not an

advance I think it's a form of uh

regression effect um so yeah just To

conclude this section, I've argued that

large language models cannot in fact

capture properties of uh human language,

genuine properties of human language.

They do a good job of uh learning a

bunch of statistical regularities, but

they don't capture genuine linguistic

principles. So that leads the question

then which I'm going to address in this

next section. If large language models

don't capture the mathematical um

algebraic properties of language, these

platonic forms hovering in the

background, then what are those

properties? Right? I've said a lot about

uh what language is not, but I haven't

really told you what language is. So,

let's think about that for a second. Um,

so my central scientific research these

days concerns how the brain coordinates

the binding of distinct features into

what linguists describe over the years

in progressively more uh baroque

terminology as a labeled set, a

compositional structure, an intentional

composite function, a hyamorphic

pluralistic mirillocial object or a free

nonassociative symmetric commutive

magma. Right? Or more simply what Otto

Yespen called a notion of structure as I

said at the beginning.

But the question for me is can these

formal accounts of language be of any

service to experimental neural

linguistics? Right? Does the high level

psychological theory of language that

you subscribe to have consequences for

cognitive neuroscience? Now, people like

Ray Jagenov have always insisted I think

very uh very correctly that your theory

of language and your theory of language

representation and your theory of

language evolution has massive

consequences for your theory of neural

computation. uh and I'm going to try and

push that idea quite far here. But

before we get there, just a couple of

lessons from the neural coralates of

consciousness that many of you will

already be aware of, but I just want to

uh kind of draw the connection here

between these two fields. Lesson number

one is correlating neural activity does

not equal explanation. Well, sure. Um

but number two, bad metaphysics gives

you bad science, right? Your assumptions

about what consciousness is will

determine the success of your and

fidelity and kind of conceptual

resolution of your neuroscientific.

theory. So Mark SS, South African

neuroscychologist has made this point

very well in his work. Um he argues that

studies of consciousness that prioritize

vision or visual perceptual report uh

miss the mark somewhat. Uh and the

reason why is because consciousness is

not primarily about perceptual report,

right? It's root level. It's necessary

and lowest order, you know, uh first

principle type of um necessary feature.

Uh is an effective state, right?

Consciousness is ultimately an effective

property. And on top of that you have

particular perceptual dimensions of that

property. Right? So at the most

essential level every conscious

experience has a feeling to it.

Consciousness is not reducible to

reportable perception. So therefore

neuroscientific studies that are based

on visual oddborn paradigms may not

expose critical neurodynamics for

consciousness. Same with ones that are

focused on auditory paradigms and so on

and so on. But the the lesson for

linguistics here on the language

sciences is that we have to boil down to

what are the necessary uh minimal uh

components of language right. So every

time you do language every time you

process language there is something

always happening right is it accessing

leal items is it building a constituency

structure right is it predicting? Do you

always have to engage prediction? Do you

always have to engage in um you know

certain types of semantic composition

and other types of semantic composition?

Do you always have to engage in some

kind of phological rhythmic processing?

You know, maybe that's like not a core

property of language. Maybe it's like an

external um thing. These sorts of

questions I think are what uh we need to

tackle with in order to narrow down on

neurobiology of X. Right? This is a

point that um a certain retired older uh

linguist living in Tucson used to make

which is the claim that in order to

study the nature of X, you have to have

a good definition of what X is. It's a

very simple point, right? If you want to

understand the neurobiology of language,

you should really have a clear

definition of what language is. Um same

for consciousness.

So at a minimum um we can think of

language as involving some form of

constituency structure, right? You have

a workspace of elements, workspace of

lexical items x y and z or syntactic

objects and then you have some kind of

compositional operator that binds them

together into some kind of set or union

um and then updates the workspace

accordingly. Right? where you still have

these set of elements but now the

workspace has updated slightly right and

now you have a structured set of

elements so for example you have eat and

cheesecake somewhere in your lexical uh

you know workspace and then you compose

them together into the unit uh eat

cheesecake uh now this crucially

involves asymmetry headedness there's a

little small point here that I think is

worth emphasizing

there are many forms of um cognitive

processes that admit for symmetry and

tolerate symmetry human language does

not likes symmetry. It's not a fan of

symmetry, right? Music tolerates

symmetry. Mathematics to tolerates

symmetry, no problem. Um, uh, geometric

reasoning, of course, tolerates

symmetry. Um, aesthetic reasoning and so

on. But language really doesn't like

symmetry. Whenever there's two objects

that are combined together into a set,

one of them wins. One of them, one of

them becomes the what's called the head

of the phrase or the phrase that

determines the distributional properties

and semantic interpretation. Right? So

for example, um a red boat is a boat

that is red, right? It's not a redlike

quality that happens to exhibit boatlike

features, right? So that would be a noun

phrase. And then you take things like a

verb phrase like John ran. What does

John ran mean? So John ran means there

was an event of running and John happens

to be its participant, right? It doesn't

mean John Ran does not mean that there

is a special kind of John who exhibits

uh running abilities, right? Doesn't

mean that uh Ran is the head of the

phrase John Ran and Bo is the head of

the phrase red bow. And you can follow

this through to all sorts of different

complex structures to kind of coordinate

and guide how linguistic constituency

directs and constrains and narrows down

the coordinates and conceptual space

that other systems entertain. Okay, it's

a very simple point, right? It's not

that complicated, but it has huge

consequences for how we organize and

theorize about the neurobiology of

language. Um, so algebraic models from

lingu linguistic theory provide hints at

what the neural code for syntax might

look like. Okay, I want to preface here

might. It's not necessarily the case,

but I think there's a good reason to

assume that um uh the uh kind of

algebraic recipe for language that we

have can guide and provide hints at what

the brain is likely doing here. So we

may be looking for a neural mechanism

that respects non-associivity of

constituent geometry. Right? So for

example we can say old men and women and

we can pass that as either old men and

women whether men and women are both old

or old men and women right where the

women might be uh might be old might be

young.

So syntactic knowledge boils down to a

non-associative commutative magma from

category theory that generates non-plane

arteries interfacing with distinct

cognitive systems providing instructions

to them in that particular form of

space. Uh Chsky for a while has argued

that formulations of merge should be

captured within naive set theory. Um but

it turns out that sets are too

unstructured. You can't really do

anything. You know any two elements in

the universe can be a set. It's kind of

hard to constrain um and build a formal

theory from just using naive set theory.

So recent category theoretic magma

formulations by people like Matilda

Makoli uh provide new avenues to

formally map syntax to possible neural

geometries and I'll be chasing on that

idea uh later on in the talk. So the

algebraic properties of natural language

seem to be unlike anything else in

cognition. uh how the brain neurally

enforces a free non-associative

symmetric commutative unbounded

digitally infinite combinatorial

hierarchal recursive structure building

tree formation category theoretic

magibration otherwise known as merge if

you want to save some breath remains a

mystery but it's the central question in

the cognitive neuroscience of language

right it is the central element of

knowledge of language

um so operations just to give an example

here operations are subject in natural

language to structural configurations

not linear sequential distance this is

channeling a very Classic example from

Chsky from the 50s. If you take

something like the boy who's holding the

flower is happy. If you want to form a

question, right, interrogate that

structure, you have to say is the boy

who is holding the flowers happy. Well,

you don't move the uh linearly closest

uh is to the front of the sentence,

right? You move the one that's actually

closest in structural depth, right? So,

is the boy who holding the flowers is

happy is un grammatical because it

extracts an more deeply embedded

question word even though they're both

legitimate question words. And there's

no logical reason why that would be the

case, right? Unless linguistic

operations are sensitive to structure

dependence, right? And that seems to be

a universal property of language.

So at a minimum then right just offering

a kind of parts list to cognitive

neuroscientists saying hey I want you

guys to explore the neurobology of

language and they say well what's

language okay I'm a sophisticated

neuroscientist I know everything about

the brain I have access to all sorts of

different uh you know imaging and

recording modalities I'm an expert at

all sorts of you know uh coding

languages and I can provide any

assistance you need but you just need to

tell me one thing what is language

Right. Um, if someone asks you that

question, well, here it is. This is what

we mean by a language. What is the

minimal essential components of of

natural language? Uh, well, one of them

is commutativity, right? Uh, the neural

code for a two item set must ignore

linear order at the moment of

combination. Why is that? That's a more

the reason why is potentially a little

bit more controversial. At a minimum, we

want to assume that um at the underlying

semantic representation, a Japanese

speaker and an English speaker and an

Italian speaker have the same type of

structural inferences, right? Even if

they put the words in different orders,

right? So, Spanish speakers might order

the words h in the sentence that I'm

saying right now in a different way. But

the ultimate conceptual recipe that I

arrive at, I assume I assume Spanish

speakers and Japanese speakers arrive at

the same types of conceptual coordinates

that I do when I read these sort of

sentences that I'm uh regurgitating to

you from the screen right now. Um, so

there is some sort of underlying uh

deeper structure there, right? Um, now

there's a little asterisk here that I'll

just mention briefly for those who are

more interested here. It's possible that

commutitivity um might only be a

property of um computational models,

right? And might not be realized in

performance, right? Might be a classical

competence performance distinction where

elements of commutivity dissolve and are

no longer needed when you get to the

performance level. But I'll leave that

aside here. I'll just assume that

commutivity is a core property that we

have to take seriously for neurobiology.

Um now another property that definitely

is um serious for neurobiology and it's

not as much of a edge case as

commutivity is nonassociivity right

because non associivity you see that all

over the place uh so this would imply

that once a third element is merged into

a structure that's already been built

like the workspace I mentioned before

right x y and z then the hierarchal

depth of previous combinations must be

recoverable and respected and shielded

uh usually through some kind of

categoral label right you you you kind

of categorize price a set in in in a

particular way um which would privilege

one member of the newly formed set.

Okay, so that's just a way of saying

that these hierarchs are respected and

conserved over time, right? You don't

just build a structure and then two

seconds later you kind of reconfigure it

just randomly, right? It's always

preserved and respected. And there are

some interesting theories about low

frequency dynamics providing some kind

of shield to working memory and

attentional resources that I've talked

about in my papers and I'll come back to

a little bit later. Um uh another

property is closure, right? So the

output of merge is itself a syntactic

object. Right? Whatever you build can

therefore be manipulated. Again that

links back to recursivity. Uh also

binarity merge builds binary branching

trees strictly binary branching

structures. Uh the theoretical reasons

for that you can consult the moli paper.

I'm not going to go into those details.

Uh and finally non-monotonic structure

building merge can involve deletion of

sub trees or workspace elements. Okay.

Okay. So therefore, candidate mechanisms

for neural implementation need order

insensitive pair-wise binding plus a

second depthsensitive process. Right?

Depthsensitive is absolutely a crucial

that's triggered only when the bound

item is itself subjected to a failur the

merge operation. So critically

experimental predictions for mergebased

syntax must be specific enough to help

adjudicate between salient support for

and against structural inferences.

Right? uh without that level of

precision then predictions for

experimental neuroscientists will risk

being ornamental and subject to

confirmation bias. Right? So later I'm

going to argue for a specific neural

model of language rows that satisfies

these mathematical criteria.

So here's a kind of graphical schema of

the idea of language that I've been

proposing so far. You have a lexicon

stored set of units. You can extract

them. You can put them into sets or

chunks, right? uh you can linearize them

as linear chunks or you can interpret

them as abstract sets without chunking

order. Right? Uh those are the two types

of things that you can do uh with

linguistic objects.

uh most of the time we don't do

externalization obviously right we just

internalize things and we think in our

heads and we build structures for

planning and inference and so on and

only now and then we externalize it and

a subset of that externalization happens

to be communication but most of the time

internalization is there and by the way

whenever you get externalization you

also therefore get internalization right

because whenever you any any case of

language production also presupposes

comprehension right that's kind of a

point that's often ignored in the uh

production literature but every case of

language production

presupposes I've generated at the in the

comprehension level a valid structural

inference that I'm then converting into

speech right whereas comprehension you

don't you with comprehension you just

don't do the uh external mapping part

right it's all comprehension all the way

down but these two options here can lead

to two uh very different dramatically

different it turns out philosophies of

language right uh one assumes that

language is a system of sound with

meaning and the other view assumes that

language is actually fundamentally a

system of meaning with sound. Right?

Those kind of sound maybe a little bit

symmetric. Um but the point of emphasis

there is that language is fundamentally

either a system of meaning at at its

heart that happens to involve

externalization in some form. Right? And

that that does seem to be the case. You

know, forget about theory and philosophy

and uh all these other things about

metaphysics. Just from a kind of

experimental perspective, the fact that

there are so many different types of uh

ways to recover and build and assemble

linguistic inferences from sign

language, right? You know, braille, you

know, tactile types of externalization

and comprehension, uh speech,

autographic processing, right? The the

level of variation on the

externalization side is pretty

significant. Uh in fact, the only

modality is maybe like alaction, right?

There's no kind of smell. Um, but it's

possible that if you, it's theoretically

possible that if you um coordinated uh

certain smells and associated them with

particular lexical items, it's possible

that you could maybe recover some type

of primitive language, right? Instead of

just using sign language or um uh you

know, braille or speech or reading, you

could maybe trigger your your sense of

smell to link into the language system

primarily as well. possibly unlikely

maybe because of the impoverish

impoverished uh domain specific like

representational scope or human

sensitivity to smell. Um but hey in

theory you could maybe do that. In

contrast, on the internalization side,

there's no negotiation, right? It's the

same type of computation no matter what

you do at the externalization side,

right? There's always the same type of

hierarchal sets and structures being

built to send off to conceptual systems,

right? There's no variation there. And

like I said, there's no variation across

human beings, right? Again, this is a

very simple point, but the way that

Japanese speakers uh can externalize the

phrase the whiskey bottle is very

different. But the way they think about

whiskey bottles is very similar, right?

Although don't tell that to my Irish

friends because uh Irish whiskey is

quite distinct here. But the main point

here is that there's variation in

externalization, right? But not

externalization

um in in in how it maps to

internalization, right? The mapping

seems to be quite uniform. So there are

lots of consequences of this that we can

kind of think about immediately for um

experimental purposes. But I'll just

kind of assume that this is the general

architecture that I want to pursue for

for language.

So what are the consequences of this for

biology right and evolution and the

sorts of things that uh Mike's

interested in. So uh we can assume here

as I do that there is no justification

to quote Beric and Chsky empirical or

conceptual for the decomposition of

boundary set formation into separate

steps. Right? There is no such thing as

half merge. You either have this merge

computation or you don't, right? There's

no it's a binary thing. It's like a

completely different phase transition in

human intelligence. You you just can't

have half a set forming capacity, right?

You either have it or you don't. Lots of

reasons why. You can read this paper for

more details. But that also kind of

therefore hints that it's maybe

implausible to go all the way down with

this neodyinian type of uh incremental

gradualist perspective on how language

therefore evolved.

Um and actually there's a really good

interview uh discussion with uh Steven

Pinker and Richard Dawkins. And Dawkins

is of course a famous classical uh you

know hardcore uh neodyarowanian

synthesis type of guy. So is Pinker. Um

but Pinker provides this kind of

gradualist theory of of language to to

Dawkins and Dawkins pushes back and in

fact he also pushed back in his memoir

in 20 maybe 2016 2015 I think where he

writes that um this kind of generative

chskin perspective on language evolution

that language evolved suddenly in this

kind of uh symbolic the kind of way that

um triggers symbolic reasoning and

structural inferences and recursivity

digital infinity right uh you can't

really get digital infinity in a

gradualist type of way and of Of course,

when he puts this to Pinker, Pinker

doesn't have any response. He just

changes the topic. Um, but Dawkins is

completely right. Um, there is no way to

embed this theory of um digital infinity

compositional recursive knowledge

through a gradualist mechanism. It's a

very good interview. I recommend it very

much. Uh, and indeed I would give it

five bags of popcorn. Excellent

interview. Strongly recommend listening

to that exchange. But unlike domains of

the language sciences like social

linguistics, pragmatics and experimental

psycho linguistics which deal with

highly complex systems, theoretical

linguistics can provide a streamlined

view on what it is that our brains must

be able to do in order to comprehend

natural language. Right? So that's why I

focus on theoretical linguistics here,

right? I'm not focusing on the complex

dimensions of communication, you know,

social interaction, uh all these sorts

of things. I'm just focusing on the bare

the bare minimum. So formal syntactic

models can basically act as a civ for

neural theories.

Uh but I mentioned there's no

gradualism. Well, there is turns out

some gradualism not in the computation

of syntax and merge but in the way that

it exports information to different

workspaces. So what do I mean by that?

Well, it turns out that some monkeys

have a kind of primitive morphology.

They can say crack oo or hawkoo for like

there's a landborn threat or you know

airborne threat and it's either the oo

morphim is like an intensifier right

it's like oh it's here right now versus

it's not here right now um but they do

seem to be restricted to uh

morphologically combining two different

elements right so element one element

two but not forming it into a hierarchal

set right just linear uh additive

combination right like x and y rather

than x y um human beings of course can

do that too. Um, but we also do things

like word phrase binding and phrase

phrase binding. So, Luigi Ritzy has this

nice framework for the workspace model

that I talked about where based on the

type of workspace that you can export to

will determine the complexity of

syntactic structures you can build,

right? If you only have access to one

particular workspace, then you can maybe

build uh one merge and two merge things.

But if you want to get beyond that and

interpret it and export it and hold it

in memory, then you really need multiple

workspaces. Now, in some more recent

papers of mine, I've talked about how um

posterior temporal cortex, which I'll

come back to, is potentially the

generator of syntactic structure,

whereas inferior frontal cortex might be

one of these workspaces. And there's a

more there's another uh part of the

brain, the dorsal language uh region um

around area 55B and posterior middle

frontal uh gyrus. That could also act as

a potential workspace too since it seems

to be involved in in syntactics uh

syntactic processing at the sentence

level. But I'll leave that aside and uh

just kind of notice here that there are

demands from the on the language system

to export information to multiple

workspaces. Okay.

Um okay. So I'm going to be arguing that

in my rose model at least the level of

word phrase and beyond requires a

workspace to store combined objects.

Right? Well that'll be called the e

level uh later on for my enc the

encoding of linguistic information.

Um but the possibility of developing in

parallel two complex phrases also

demands something that word phrase does

not need right at the phrase phrase

level uh it needs a workspace where

parallel struct is permitted according

to chsky or alternatively two separate

workspaces according to adger and ritzy

right this is a kind of debate in

theoretical linguistics that isn't as

relevant but the point is you at least

need to go beyond single workspaces for

for doing some of these types of

computations

so it's likely that from the 12 to 18

months age uh children child language

production systems are limited to zero

match right but their comprehension

systems are likely always one step ahead

so there's a lot of work which I'll come

back to later about child um linguistic

knowledge that seems to be uh fairly

sophisticated even by the age of like 18

months kids can seem to resolve uh

longdistance structural dependencies

which is uh again not produce them but

uh sus them out right figure them out so

I think this relates a little bit to

some of Mike's work on um sorting

algorithms, right? Whereby he's shown

that uh even some of the simplest

algorithms have emergent behaviors and

side quests. Well, likewise, natural

language is comprised of an elementary

structure building algorithm of

assembling compositional schemes. And

from this simple form of XY labeling, we

can build complex compositional

instructions that cannot be reduced to

the meaning of individual parts. Right?

That's a classic definition of

compositionality.

So getting closer to the topic of the

symposium here. I realize I've been

talking about large language models for

a while now, but moving closer towards

formal topics and neurobiological

topics. Mathematics is what it is. The

study of numbers, no. Platonic entities

and realms not explicitly and not and

not um uh necessarily right. Collections

of formulas, no. Abstract structures,

yes. Right. It's ultimately the study of

abstract structures. No matter what our

philosophy of mathematics is, right?

Whether we're plonists or

non-platoninists, right? Whether we

think mathematics is uh discovered or

invented, um it is ultimately the study

of abstract structures, right? Uh and it

turns out that human language is one of

the most interesting abstract structures

in nature.

There are other rival theories of syntax

that kind of emphasize less the

hierarchal constituency structure that

I'm talking about and emphasize more the

fact that human language has what are

called dependencies. Right? So if I say

to you the keys to the cabinet are on

the table that's grammatical. But if I

say the keys to the cabinet is on the

table that is not grammatical. Right?

And the reason why is because words

across sentences kind of relate to each

other. they share features that overlap

to uh provide uh more complex conceptual

instructions that cannot be achieved

with accessing a single lexical item

like a single word.

So in Ted Gibson's theory he emphasizes

these dependency relations as the core

necessary components around which he

builds other theories of uh other

components of language I should say. Um

but the issue here is that dependency

grammar is not a viable candidate theory

of natural language syntax since it

isolates word dependency graphs rather

than hierarchal constituency structure.

Right? So dependency graphs turn out to

be projections from this deeper

algebraic structure. Why? Well because

every dependency is also constrained and

guided by these hierarchical relations.

Right? So certain of these theories in

the literature are also intentionally

positioned simply to counter generative

grammar positions and be distinct from

it rather than being formed from a novel

first principles account of what

linguistic knowledge is. And I think

there are many cases in the literature

that have kind of built off of the

foundational work of geto grammar and

because they disagree on some of the

philosophical or acquisitional um or

processing types of or evolutionary

questions. They therefore assume that

the fundaments of geto grammar must

therefore also be wrong. And what we're

going to do is provide a novel

linguistic theory that simply is um

against whatever the geog grammar

theorists are saying without agreeing

that of course it seems fairly obvious

that language have to has to have some

type of uh unification compositional

operator at its basis. Right? So there

are usage based theories um construction

grammar other types of theories that um

try and allied these concerns over

constituency structure and focus on

other aspects of parsing whilst as many

people have written in the literature

they actually end up smuggling in

secretly a lot of these types of

mergebased um operations whilst not

explicitly invoking them. Right? So they

may not explicitly say we are going to

be doing um you know hierarchal

structure building but a lot of the in

fact we're going to have a you know a

non- hierarchal theory of language like

many usage based theories but it turns

out that a lot of these theories

inadvertently do actually kind of

presuppose a rich degree of hierarchy uh

even though they may not explicitly call

upon it. So that's a separate topic that

we can you know maybe talk about uh in

some other type of space. But um the

main point you're making here is that

these necessary design features like

hierarchal constituency structure uh

guide all of these other types of

processes that many other linguists

argue are central right so things like

chunking right know constructions right

memorizing constructions. Well in order

to do that you have to have a position

structure right you have to kind of

reassemble it. the fact that we can

interrogate and um be creative in the

kind of constructional um apparatus that

we have. The kind of free unbounded

genative capacity that language for

language production that humans have

really speaks against the idea that we

are simply memorizing and rehashing uh

uh chunks of of linear structure here

again this is a separate issue but just

worth mentioning. So in this connection

to quote David Foster Wallace defining

yourself in opposition to something is

still being analytic on that thing right

you're still kind of defining your

linguist uh theory of language in

opposition to some other type of of

theory and as far as I know all of the

most successful um theories in the

history of science have not been doing

that right you know Newton Einstein

Darwin they generate novel first

principles right they they're

imaginative they don't just say I don't

like this theory so I'm just going to

you know uh develop a particular set of

principles and hypotheses that

intentionally you know uh disagree with

this other type of theory. Um if they do

end up doing that then it should be

incidental right it should be an

incidental accident that you end up

predicting things that arrival theory

doesn't predict purely out of the um

kind of you know novel conception of

what the nature of the competence is

that you're describing. Right?

But just to retrace one final topic in

this connection, the internal competence

of LLMs is often better than their

actual output performance. Right? What

they know exceeds what they might appear

to know when playing around with chat,

right? As I do on my way on my way home

when I when I ask it about more Holland

Drive, it seems to be not doing a a good

job. But maybe there's something else

going on here, right? And there's some

nice work by Jonathan Brennan's lab

showing that um there is a very clear

discrepancy actually between performance

and competence. But however, this is

true. But however, it's only so far been

shown that the distance and direction of

LM embeddings might represent some

aspect of dependency grammars. Right?

But as I just said, dependency grammar

is not a candidate model for

compositional syntactic knowledge.

Right? So, it's true that LMS know

things beyond what they seem to know on

the surface, but it turns out what they

might actually know beyond the surface

is something that is not crucial to a

core um property of uh human language,

right? Okay.

So all of that is to say just to boil um

the last you know hour or so of of uh

conversation down to something very

simple what we're looking for um is a

set of candidate neural mechanisms that

must respect all the things I've just

talked about right has to respect set

grouping has to respect um sensitivity

to a type system of semantic categories

uh has to reflect the asymmetric nature

of phrase composition right as I said

this asymmetry the symmetry breaking

algorithm it has to recursively embed

headed structures inside other

structures and it has to be sensitive to

long distance dependencies that ar that

kind of come out of those constituency

relations right between elements. So

this figure here that I have in this

paper that came out in cognitive

neuroscience a few months ago I kind of

define a kind of schema of what I

consider to be the core language network

in the brain and the uh kind of not core

language uh uh network called the

extended language network. Right? So

it's common in the literature to define

the brain's language network as those

parts of the brain that show an increase

in activity to processing sentences

compared to processing lists of words,

unstructured lists of words. So there's

a few problems with that which I've

written about uh in huge obnoxious

levels of detail in my papers but I'll

just summarize it very simply. Um when

you process sentences compared to list

of words, you are also doing things that

are not language specific. Right? So

whenever you process a sentence yes it's

true you are building hierarchal

syntactic structures but you are also

recruiting potentially language specific

working memor resources attentional

resources you're building uh situation

model construction right uh you're

calling upon world knowledge right world

knowledge that's not specific to

language it's not linguistic computation

but it's still called upon when you have

a sentence right um so there's in other

words there's many things that you do

during sentence processing that are not

specific to language Okay, that's a kind

of simple way to put it.

So at its at the core, what we're

looking for are parts of the language

network or defining language network via

headedness, incremental node count,

dependencies and then of course the

individual units themselves, right? So

the atoms of computation or the units,

the lexical items and then these three

things headedness, note count

dependencies kind of arise from those uh

units. Now large language models seem to

be very good at the things in the subsy

symbolic feature space right as I've

already said they're very good at

sussing out word length and all the

nuanced you know frequency dynamics

around that they're very good at um

representing semantic vector similarity

um and they're very good at other things

too but they do not seem particularly

good at explicitly uh the whole slew of

lists that I've mentioned to do with um

narrow syntactic knowledge as I said

they may be There's some evidence that

they could be quite good at representing

dependency grammarss. But if so, that

will be again if they capture

dependencies but not other features.

Well, then that shows that they are

capturing dependencies not via syntactic

knowledge but they're representing

dependencies accurately via some other

uh solution. Right?

So when learning their language, no

child uses a strategy whereby a phrase

is category is unrelated to any element

inside it. Right? So headedness is

respected and dependencies are guided as

I said by structural information. Right?

Okay. I've already said that. So this

mergebased knowledge of language permits

a kind of information course graining,

right? Reformatting concepts and giving

us new kinds of things to think about.

So you can say John is happy or you can

provide a more specific instruction.

Those two old Italian men are happy, but

it's still a noun phrase, right? Uh so

language evolution didn't just make it

easier to communicate. It also made it

easier to think.

So this mergebased syntax gives us more

precise coordinates in conceptual space.

Right? But in the um literature we often

read that stroke patients have um

substantial language deficits but they

can still think you know they can pass

various cognitive tests. So therefore

language cannot be considered a thought

system.

Well the authors here equate evidence

that non-llinguistic thought survives

after a fasia with the conclusion that

language is not a thought system. But

this is a a flawed logic and a category

error. Inferring that language is not a

thought system because non-llinguistic

thought survives after damage to

language areas is like saying vision is

not a sensory system because blind

people can still smell and hear.

So the formal structure of language is

excellent for generating complex

semantic inferences but it's not as good

for efficient clear communication. Now

there are some examples in this paper

here that I won't go into but if you're

interested you can uh read this paper.

So the vast majority of everyday

language use is not for communication

but for organizing our thoughts,

planning, strategizing, aiding directed

attention, the consolidation of

experience, reflecting on personal

responsibilities, uh cognitive model

updating, right? World model updating

and more general and abstract forms of

reflection, right? Um and indeed many

cases of so-called communication are not

even about genuine communication, right?

It's about um you know social grooming,

you know, small talk, um you know,

gossiping, misdirection,

um um deception, right? All these sorts

of things. In fact, Richard Dawkins

going back to Dawkins again um before he

became famous um for his selfish dream

work, I think there were a few papers he

had in the maybe in the mid70s where he

uh talked about language and primate

communication and he said something like

um you know the evolution of language

probably was uh less critical for

helping people communicate truthful

messages and it was more useful um for

deception, right? and lying, right? If

if you have language, you can more

explicitly and creatively deceive and

manipulate people, right? Um if you want

to just communicate a simple message,

well, you can do that. You can do most

of those things fairly easily um without

language, right? Um okay, so even if

non-verbal reasoning remains, language

facilitates uh certain higher order

processes in these in these stroke

patients that I mentioned and syntax

provides precise instructions to these

systems, right? via multi-step logical

inference, counterfactual reasoning,

inductive definitions, that's a that's a

key one actually, inductive definitions.

Um, that really is closely related to

this mergebased constituency structure.

Um, complex nested planning and

evidentiality representations, right?

So, a final point here, it may not be

intuitive to think about language this

way, right? There are many uh very

excellent scientists who um you know

disagree that language is a thought

system. But I suspect it's because

they're kind of letting their intuitions

um guide them uh uh slightly further

than they than they should do. Uh you

know Newton and later physicists showed

that our intuitions about mass emotion

are wrong. Uh Mandelian genetics showed

our intuitions about much of biology are

wrong. Girdle showed that our intuitions

about mathematics are wrong. Right? And

of course mathematics is infamously

riddled with counterintuitive

conclusions. see John Conway's work. In

fact, one of my favorite examples here

is um uh the uh the fact that the

infinite series of natural numbers

summed uh towards um infinity. The

answer would presumably well it trends

towards infinity. Um this sum though

divergent turns out to be associated via

analytic continuation with what value?

It turns out it's the value minus 1 over

12. It's very very counterintuitive but

also has uh shown to be uh completely

true. So why should our intuitions about

language be taken seriously as feasible

means to guide scientific theories? And

why should our intuitions about anything

be used as additional constraints on how

we define and operationalize concepts

like thought and language? Remember I

talked about this definitional fallacy

earlier where I said that just because

you can define a concept in a very nice

careful way doesn't mean it's true at

all or useful. So why is language one of

the only major topics in cognitive uh

science where attitudes are so high

bound and intuitions and biases are so

unshakable that they guide theory

information? Well, it's probably for

sociological reasons, right? To do with

the fact that we do seem to be the only

species with language and it's very, you

know, uh our linguistic identity and our

use of language is very closely tied to

our sense of self and uh our existence

as a species. So it's harder to kind of

shake off intuitions about language than

it is about our intuitions about other

things. But um you know we also have

intuitions about working memory that

have been shown to be wrong. Uh and we

no longer allow them to be um you know

have any grasp on our uh science. And I

think the same should be true of

language, right? We should kind of shed

all of our um biases about the nature of

language, how it evolved, what it's for,

all these sorts of things and really

approach the issue from um you know a

more scientific way.

So for example, just to really hammer

hammer home this point here, uh the word

geometry literally means uh earth

measurement, right? But since classical

times at least, geometry has now matured

sufficiently to the point that more

generalizable and abstract mathematical

principles can be extracted. And modern

geometry these days has no relation to

measuring hills and mountains, right?

And I think the same is true for

linguistics and language, right? uh when

we think of language we may think of you

know communication speech whatever but

that's that's just an intuition right it

has nothing to do with the actual nature

of the beast okay so moving to the final

part of the talk here I've kind of set

up all of this through a lot of

philosophical um claims about the nature

of language the structural and formal

nature of language and I've argued that

I am going to use these mathematical

models of language to constrain the

neurobiology of language and that's what

I'm going to try and achieve in this in

this section here but before I get to

theoretical neuroscience. Let's just

talk about some experimental

neuroscience to kind of narrow down uh

what we're thinking about here. So, in

our lab here in Houston, Texas, we use

incraanial recordings in uh epilepsy

patients who are not responsive to

medication undergoing surgery for uh

seizure monitoring. And we do a number

of experiments uh with these patients to

do with language processing and

comprehension and production. And we use

a number of different types of

electrodes. We either use um surface

grid electrodes on the top here that

kind of just go underneath the jura over

the uh uh the cortical mantle or we use

penetrating depth electrodes that have

oblique trajectories targeting specific

like measial um uh sites that are

usually uh involved in temporal epilepsy

like hypocampus and you know these sorts

of sites.

Um so I've already established that

language allows us to construct phrases

out of words. Yes. Um with respect to

the neural basis of this though our

intercraanial recordings have indicated

a unique involvement of the posterior

superior temporal sulcus across

different phrase types and sensory

modalities.

So for example the plot on the left

shows general um regions involved in

accessing individual words and

processing words auditory words and then

the region on the left is the site that

is specifically involved in the meaning

of phrases. So how did we derive that?

Well, um, we gave patients, uh, types of

stimuli that were either real phrases,

so auditory recordings of red bow, or

involving a pseudo word, so a fake word

that barred semantic composition. Okay.

The plot in B shows the density of

coverage across uh, patients. Uh, C

shows the general uh, activation to

auditory stimuli in broadband gamma

activity, so high frequency gamma

activity 70 to 150 Hz. And then here

shows the evolution for after the onset

of the noun in red boat phrases. So 100

milliseconds to 300 millconds after the

onset of the uh phrase licensing word.

Uh and you show that this region you can

see that this region is clearly uh

sensitive to the initial successful

passing of the word during composition.

And then in non-compositional trials, it

tries hard to process it and make sense

of it, right? But it can't. So you have

this kind of interesting uh dynamic here

where it's clearly involved in

successful composition because the

auditory recording lasts about 350 400

millonds. So it's clearly passing that

element correctly. Um and then after the

auditory recording is stopped it still

tries to do some additional work to make

sense of it.

And across patients, we show that there

are um many electrodes that were

sensitive to word meaning and many and

there was a couple that were sensitive

to both word meaning and phrase meaning.

But many electrodes uh were sensitive

explicitly just to the meaning of

phrases and not the meaning of words,

right? Which is quite interesting. Um

whereby you would have electrodes that

didn't care about whether or not

something was a fake word or a real

word. It didn't access individual items,

but it was involved in the passing of

phrases. Right? So again that kind of

points to the idea that there's this

additional higher level of semantic

composition compositionality that cannot

be recoverable based on individual units

but it delivers a more nuance specific

type of meaning.

With respect to frontal effects we

showed that frontal cortex was more

involved in successful anticipation of

upcoming material. So after the patient

had heard a real word position one like

red, they would anticipate this could be

a real phrase I'm about to listen to

here. Right. Um, and you and you showed

very uh what we showed very nice

dynamics here between when the first

word was a real word versus a fake word

as in when you could versus likely would

not anticipate a real phrase.

We also looked at phrase uh

synchronization, generalized phrase

locking between uh uh parts of the

language network to show successful and

increased phrase uh phrase composition

in low frequencies during um phrase

structure building as predicted by

certain um neural models of language.

And then uh finally just to go back to

the task itself, the task involves

listening to phrases and then

identifying does this picture match the

phrase that you just heard? Yes or no.

Um when the phrase did match the

picture, you see this nice increase in

anterior insula and anterior frontal uh

gyrus. And when it did not, when there

was a violation, you see these nice

effects in um more classical kind of

syntax sites. So like IFS and posterior

IFG which I think suggests that but

again you don't see it in posterior

temporal cortex which for me suggests

that um a lot of people like Greg Kokock

and William Matchin are really onto

something when they claim that posterior

temporal cortex is in the game of

generating syntactic morphosactic

structures and ifrontal cortex is

involved in doing something like using

that structure for linearization

externalization working memory attention

whatever all these sorts of additional

demands Right? In this case, it's

clearly the task demand of, you know, uh

visual um uh attentional picture

matching, right? But the point is the

frontal cortex uses syntactic

information for a particular task. And

we've kind of um replicated these

findings in a different paradigm where

instead of using nouns, adjectives and

nouns, we use pronouns and verbs.

So things like you send versus you

sends. So sends would be a more

syntactic violation. it's un grammatical

whereas you send is good um and pop is

of course a pseudo. So this allows us to

look at semantic composition by

contrasting pop send and you send as in

the previous paper and it also allows us

to look at morpho syntactic composition

though right by looking at is the uh is

the uh phrase grammatical or not. Um and

some of these phrases were um made un

grammatical by including an s and some

of them are made grammatical by taking

away the s at the end. Right? Just for

uh full disclosure there um we we

replicate these effects for posterior

temporal cortex phrase composition. Uh

we didn't have explicit coverage right

over the part of PSJS that we would have

liked but we had more or less the same

type of coverage and we showed the same

general dynamics of uh posterior

temporal middle temporal gyrus effects

before IFS and IFG

and same for more syntactic effects. The

earliest sites were in PMTG and PSTS and

then later sites were in IFS. So, the

same type of temporal dynamics here.

Um, and then in another paper, we

decided to move beyond phrases and look

at sentences, right? I'm always a little

bit scared of sentences because they're

very complicated and they're hard to,

you know, uh, deal with all possible

compounds and manipulate all the factors

that you actually care about. So, I'm a

little bit hesitant of sentences. But

for this paradigm, we used um, phrases

that defined a common object. And the

task for the patients was simply to name

the object. Right? So if we say a round

red fruit, the patient would say apple.

If we say a round red age, that would be

nonsense because it's a not a meaningful

sentence, right? However, the

referential sentences, what I'm calling

referential, like the good sentences,

they differed as well. Some of the

sentences, the answer was obvious before

the final word. So things like uh it's

white and falls from the sky in winter.

Okay, that's pretty obviously going to

be snow. Whereas sentences like an

object used for weighing the final word

weighing that's not obvious at all until

the final word right if you hear an

object use for sorry if you read this is

reading I should say if you read an

object used for that could be literally

anything right um and then same too for

the non-referential sentences they could

also be passed in different ways so I uh

uh separated them classified them based

on whether they were semantically

coherent or incoherent so if they

violated some kind of theta role of the

of the words or whatever, right? If you

read the method, there's a more specific

linguistic definition, but a place where

ocean shop violates what we know about

oceans, right? They just can't shop.

Whereas a person at the circus who makes

you commute, that doesn't violate

anything about what we know about

people, right? Now, there just there

doesn't happen to be a word for that

concept, right? A person at the circus

who makes you commute, you would still

say nonsense because it's not a real

thing, but it's a perfectly fine

sentence, right? There could be a person

at the circus who makes you commute,

right? uh you could have a name for it,

right? Invent some name for the person

at circuses who makes people commute.

Okay. And what we show is that uh

there's a very large portion of the of

the language network and the extended

language network that is involved in

successful semantic composition,

semantic coherence, right? Refer lexical

access, successfully retrieving the word

to the sentence. We show effects in

hypocample theta followed by

parapocample gamma activity. We show

lots of effects in front of cortex. Um

we also show differences for the

coherent versus incoherent sentences.

And the overall map here is just a

summary of all the results where you can

see effects of um referential semantic

coherence and the narrowing effect that

I mentioned to do with if the answer is

obvious or not in different parts of the

brain. And the main semantic hub that we

showed was in IFS inferior frontal

sulcus. And we're increasingly thinking

more about frontal effects being in

inferior frontal sulcus not the gyrus.

uh this was previously not obvious

because of uh limitations in recording

modalities and resolution and the fact

that previous incraanial recordings have

mostly used these grid surface grids

which can't get into those deep circle

sites but it seems that these uh uh

portions of tissue in IFS are very

heavily sensitive to all manipulations

of semantic information which is very

interesting

now we also had uh the patient the paper

that I just showed you was around 60

patients we also published some case

studies every now and then based on the

uh particular interests that we have and

if the um subjects and the patient are

interesting enough to be uh relevant to

a particular specific scientific

question. So in this case we had a uh a

brain tumor patient in the O who was

undergoing awake uh tumor resection

surgery and this guy turned out to be a

uh professional musician which was

wonderful because we could um a get him

to play music in the ER to help to make

sure that the surgeon Dr. tendon

resected tissue that was not going to

that was not going to disrupt his

ability to play music. Right? This guy's

a professional musician. He wants to

preserve his musical abilities. He also

wants to pres preserve his language

abilities. And since we're very close to

to um a high order language cortex here,

we did a number of language tests as

well during the uh surgical resection to

make sure that the surgery was not

impacting on this patient's ability to

speak. So what we did here uh this

project was uh also co-led by uh

Meredith Picarti PhD student here in the

lab who's recently defended and um what

we did is we placed these grid

electrodes over um a portion of

posterior temporal and frontal cortex

and gave the patient two tasks. We had

them uh repeat and comprehend and repeat

different stimuli. So he comprehended

and then repeated um uh uh sentences. He

did the naming task that I mentioned

before around red fruit apple and then

he also uh listened to and then produced

different melodies on this little mini

keyboard here. Now the melodies were

either complex or simple right we

defined complexity in terms of lamp

complexity right our colar of estimate

of compressibility essentially um but we

also defined that we also selected the

high complexity melodies based on

whether or not they were aesthetically

uh we sus them as having aesthetic kind

of melodic structure right so the low

complexity would just be a bb right or a

a bbb the high complexity would be doo

right some kind of melodic structure to

it and it would involve more than two

tone types

So this is the ECOG grid. The uh shaded

purple area is the area of the the

tumor, the brain tumor. And the colored

electrodes represented which parts of

the brain were sensitive to different um

uh properties like language or music. So

the blue electrodes were sensitive to

language. They were active for language.

The yellow ones were active for music.

The green ones were active for both. We

did cortical stimulation mapping. And

when Dr. tendon electrically stimulated

different parts of the brain colored

here. Different behavioral functions

were

uh knocked out. So his ability to name

common objects was disrupted in this uh

more vententral portion. His ability to

uh perform uh comprehend and produce

music and language were also disrupted

in different parts of uh PSTG.

But most of these intercraanial

signatures are in high frequency gamma

activity. Right? So what is the

computational scope or expressive power

of gamma? That's an open question,

right? We look at high frequency gamma

activity, but what exactly does that

mean? What are the computations indexed

by high frequency gamma activity? Do

they differ from the computational power

of lower frequencies? Do they also

differ from the computational power of

intererial dynamics?

That's uh a question that I'm going to

ask and uh the answer I think will be

yes, but I'll explain why.

So moving more uh explicitly now into

the theoretical neuroscience space and

away from the messy world of

experimental neuroscience which is very

scary. Um we can consider as I said at

the beginning that different causal

structures can provide unique

explanatory perspectives in

neuroscience. Right? Neural mechanisms

quote unquote can have causal and

explanatory power but there are also

causal structures that are not

classically mechanistic. So things like

cascades and pathways channeling Lauren

Ross' work here of course, right? We

also have non-causal entities that

provide unique explanatory power like

mathematical models and neural

topologies. So what can we do with that?

Well, most high impact factor journals

will state their aim is to publish

mechanistic insights. Yet many journal

editors are unable to explain what

exactly a neural mechanism is. And

indeed funding agencies also request

mechanistic contributions even though

different agencies place distinct weight

on this notion. And of course, as I've

already mentioned, LLM's mostly obscure

insights into neural mechanisms. So, how

can we uh deal with this topic? So, here

are a number of explanatory structures

in neuroscience that we as psychologists

and psychologists of language can

potentially recruit and exploit when

doing theory formation. The first one is

well mechanism. Okay, this kind of

narrow and broad types of mechanisms

that uh Ross and uh u Lauren Ross and

her co-authors define throughout their

papers. uh there are fine grain they

provide fine grain detail kind of

they're conceptualized like clockwork we

also have uh pathways they involve a

logic of flow they dictate roots

information processing roots they're

conceptualized as highways then we have

circuits they are conceptualized as like

wiring diagrams right they offer

amisoscale scopus they drive narrow

ocillitary motifs they provide recurrent

dynamics and they are fixed closed loop

system we then have cascades which offer

a slight slightly different causal logic

from the other two in that they're

conceptualized as a snowball effect.

They involve amplification of effects

and momentum. And then finally we have

topological structures. Uh things like

neural geometries. These are often

abstracted away from temporality though

not always more more recently. Uh things

like manifolds are a case of this right.

They are conceptualized as a landscape.

So classic examples will be entrinal

cortex toids orthomic ring attractors.

So this is a fairly complex uh case of

what potential structures are out there

for cognitive scientists to exploit. And

what's um you know slightly frustrating

in the language space is that in the

working memory domain in the attention

domain in the spatial navigation domain

uh even in the auditory um perception

domain actually a lot of researchers

have made use they've made quite

imaginative use of a lot of these

different explanatory structures to help

explain their behavior of interest. But

in the language space, um, linguists

have been, I think, quite slow to catch

up to developments in cognitive

neuroscientists and kind of migrate some

of their questions and concerns and

frameworks over to this more updated um,

21st century style um, per uh,

conception of neural computation.

In fact, that was always the case. You

know, if you go back to the 90s and

early 2000s, lingus were the last uh

team to make use of uh scalpg and the

ERP revolution and uh all those other

sorts of techniques. Okay. And this of

course immediately uh leads into the

question of causation because

explanation seems to be very closely

related in these um uh conceptual

discussions with causation. So I kind of

assume a classical interventionist

definition of causation whereby X causes

Y. if we intervene on X in such a way as

to change the outcome of Y. Okay, that's

kind of a more modern conception of

causation that differs from some

classical human beliefs. You know, many

people like Conrad Cording and others

have kind of, you know, subscribed to

this theory of of causation.

So, counterfactual causation here would

almost be synonymous with control,

right? So, science allows us to do at

least three things, right? I like to

think of it as this three type structure

uh this triad. Um you can explain, you

can predict and you can control. Right?

Science is in the game of explanation,

prediction and control. Uh primarily

it's in the game of explanation and then

secondarily depending on your interests

and concerns and whatever type of field

you're in, uh prediction and then of

course control. Uh neurosurgeons of

course are highly interested in uh

control for clinical interventions. Um

and control can also therefore provide

quasi causal evidence for basic uh

neuroscientists too. So causes can be

proximal and distal right they can be

there's no kind of spatial bound on

them. Pathways and cascades are not

mechanisms but they do have causal

explanatory power as I mentioned. Uh but

if you cannot identify why something

would not qualify as a neural mechanism

then you've not successfully delimited

the concept. This goes back again to the

uh definitional fallacy that I mentioned

earlier. It's very tempting to um

especially for writing high impact

factor uh papers and getting grants to

claim that a lot of your findings and um

results uh literally equate with

mechanistic insights. But that's not the

case unless you cash out why exactly

when exactly this would no longer

qualify as a mechanism. Right? It's like

I think what there's an old quote from

Oscar Wild who says uh something like uh

to uh define is to delimit right as soon

as you define something successfully

you're immediately delimiting its scope

and separating it from the space of

other possible concepts.

Uh so what we need is a method to help

migrate the concepts of linguistic

theory into a testable framework.

So big question here is which

neurobiological scales of organization

are going to be causally prominent and

explanatorily useful for varying

representational levels of language.

That's a more nuanced question than

simply saying what are the neural

coralates of language because we can

find all sorts of coralates of language

in the brain at all sorts of different

recording scales units up to um

intererial dynamics at at low uh and at

slow and fast time scales. um at low and

high recording resolutions. But what we

really need is to kind of delimit why

we're going to find these effects and

what and what does it mean.

So it's been noted in many places that

um observable output behavior greatly

underdetermines network implementation.

Right? Many classic paper show this is

an excellent paper by Jonas and coding

of course famous paper that showed this.

So strict reductionism is extremely

ambitious here. Right? we need a kind of

a more complex systems perspective and

that's exactly what I try and achieve in

this paper that came out a couple uh no

last year sorry uh 2024 um this rose

framework and more recently in this

paper in cognitive neuroscience and uh

this book that came out in 2020 which is

on my website uh the oscillitary nature

of language where I kind of explore if

language is to be uh conceptualized in a

more updated version of neurodynamics

that goes beyond uh erpology or

boxologist or localizationist models of

language in the brain where we simply

assume some complex computation is

housed in some gross neuranatomical

region like syntax is in IFG or

semantics is in ATL right or morpho

syntax is in PMTG right if you want to

go beyond that sort of um more kind of

uh localization perspective we have to

think about these sorts of questions

so I'm going to explain what this M rose

model is um in a second. But first um

just think about how an emerging

consensus in neuroscience which is very

um influential is that complex behavior

and cognition rely on coordinated

interactions between brain regions with

phase synchronization being a major

candidate for implementing this

coordination major measuring major

measurement by gating information

transmission. Uh but as I said unlike

attention and working memory uh language

has not been uh given this level of

treatment.

So just to summarize a very long

history, reliable signatures of

syntactic structure tend to be found in

the low frequency range whereas reliable

signatures of semantic composition and

lexical information are rapidly found in

high frequencies and all over the place

too in lower frequencies too. There are

naturally many exceptions here that I

deal with in the paper. But it's this

tension and reconciliation that I

attempt to address.

So this rose model assumes that there

are single unit encodings of distinct

conceptual features at the uh unit level

that compose into manipulable objects

that can be accessed at the O and S

level. Okay. Um the O level involves

high frequency gamma ensembles

transforming coherently bound units at

the spike level into complex feature

bundles via spike phase coupling. Okay,

so spike phase coupling gives you that

first level of manipulation. And then S

controlling O would involve uh low

frequency synchronization and cross

frequency coupling to generate recursive

categorial inferences via the

transmission of lexical information at

the lower level up into this higher

order uh configuration constituency

configuration. Okay. And then different

types of memory systems workspaces as I

mentioned are coordinated via different

types of um uh low frequency codes right

so uh low frequency regimes like delta

theta for hierarchal memory or theta

gamma for lexical memory and then delta

gamma coupling for just generic

combinatorial processing. Now all of

these measurements have been aligned and

kind of experimentally tested and

recovered. So this is not just you know

wildly speculative um you know fiction.

Uh the theta gamma electrical memory

code involves linearization of objects

which is in turn synchronized to this

slower delta theta superordinate

structural memory code which involves uh

that's how you get um morph syntactic

objects um embedded inside other

structures.

uh so LLMs will be helpful with

isolating properties of funological and

lexical statistics which are sensitive

at the RNO level because that's where

the primitive units are but I suspect

that they will be less helpful with

isolating higher order syntactic

inferences at SN and I think some of

these predictions have already been uh

satisfied whereby brain LM alignments

are really quite uh useful at getting uh

you know uh frequent types of

perspectives on lexical frequency

profiles of you know you pro you process

a word in a sentence and you go from

high frequency to a low frequency wave

and vice versa and you keep bouncing up

and down. Uh LLM brain alignments do

seem to be good at capturing that but

they don't seem to be good at capturing

punctuated moments of structural

inference at the S and E levels. Right?

And I think the reason why the reasons

why I've already explained so that I've

just only mentioned the very brief uh

summary of what this model is, but I'll

cash it out in more specific details

later.

But for now, most accounts either place

heavy emphasis on symbolic knowledge

like theoretical models or freeto reuse

models um or predictive processing right

without a means for integration. So what

we need is a kind of neurosy symbolic

hybrid code of figuring out how the

brain uses statistical cues to update

symbolic inferences and that's what the

rose model is uh trying to do.

So the higher levels of rows, SNE

provide instructions for symbolic phrase

structure representations while the

lower levels provide probabilistic

aspects of linguistic processing with

different types of CFC being

hypothesized to interface these domains

where cross rings decoupling provides

the interface between these two levels

of um symbolic and subsy symbolic

representations. So in the paper in

these papers that I've mentioned

empirical and conceptual motivations are

presented to defend the idea that delta

theta interreional phase amplitude

coupling constructs multiple sets of

syntactic and semantic features and

imposes biases on how to read out the

items provided by this phase code. This

occurs when the phase of delta is

synchronized with the amplitude of

theta. In turn theta phase couples with

high frequency local cortical

processing.

So delta represents superordinate

syntactic categories and theta

represents morph syntactic feature

bundles generated via lexical access

right search at the R level phase

resetting of this mechanism alongside

concurrent encoding of its products in

workspaces again workspaces physically

housed likely in these IFG and P uh MFG

sites that I mentioned also in PMG2

they're these three kind of core syntax

sites um phase resetting of this

mechanism permits a facility for

recursive self call right that satisfies

another criteria of language that I

mentioned earlier now the paper provides

more explicit concrete details about the

phase and frequency dynamics but that's

the general architecture

uh so the bulk of work under rose is

achieved by a fronttotemporal symbolic

low-frequency phase code interacting via

crossf frequency coupling with a series

of local probabilistic inferences over

lexos semantic content with the latter

being implemented via spike phase

coupling assembling bundles of

linguistic features and which can emerge

into dynamical motifs.

So again just to rehearse this the

concept of dynamical motifs by the way

is explained in more detail in the 20 uh

205 paper. I won't talk about it too

much here but at the R level you have

single unit encoding of conceptual

features. This involves a cellular

barcode for distinct features that

compose into syntactic objects which are

then coherently bound via spike phase

coupling by high frequency gam activity

at the O level. Right?

central motor transformations are

conducted at this O level. So the O

level also involves vector codes for

ensembles hosting features common to

objects represented at O that are

ultimately coordinated by S. And this is

also where the dynamical motifs uh

neural manifolds theory kind of comes in

in terms of regular uh frequently

accessed bundles of features at the R

level. So at the O level as I said we

have high gamma sensory motor

transformations into lexicalized objects

right how you either uh comprehend or

produce these lexical uh items the core

network nodes here where would be midfus

cortex and ventral temporal cortex or

frontal cortex middle temporal gyrus

inferior frontal cortex and in parital

sulcus

uh they are accessible to the higher

order deltatheta phase locking

components right delta theta can see

these higher gamma ensembles and

coordinate them in uh to assemble more

complex semantic objects. This level can

implement the semantic composition of

language specific concepts that

coordinate the firing of our units. High

gamma activates ensembles assembly sorry

of distinct units hosting the barcode or

vector code for units that compose into

feature bundles. So what about the S

level? This is uh kind of following on

from everything that happens above,

right? Everything that happens above is

coordinated by the S level. A low

frequency neural pro program uh

generates structural inferences over the

O level. Delta theta phase amplitude

coupling uh in specific language sites

for categorial inferences uh modulate

the representation of feature bundles in

the theta gamma lexical memory buffer.

Right? Theta gamma is lexical memory

buffer by structuring the readout of

these complexes. And then finally at the

encoding level uh this involves

traveling waves where the uh complexes

built to f are then migrated and

transported and exported to other

systems for further inference. So this

involves local and global workspaces for

bottomup lexical memory and top down

hierarchal memory. Right? Delta theta

traveling waves implement delta theta

coupling for hierarchal memory and theta

gamma for lexical memory. Meanwhile,

alpha power codes for workspace

disruption. Right? I mentioned low

frequencies being involved in shielding

syntactic inferences earlier in this

talk and that's where alpha comes in.

Beta power codes for syntactic

predictions. I showed some incraanial

evidence for that a few moments ago from

our from our papers in the lab here.

So the basic data structures of syntax

are atomic features types of linearly

readable mental representations that are

coded at the single unit and ensemble

level.

I assume that representations encompass

any object manipulable by the generative

component of language being composed of

features determining constraints on

operations like uh what linguist

linguists would call selection agreement

licensing and movement. Examples would

include you know noun, plural,

demonstrative, commenter, tense and

prepositional and so on and so on. and

also conceptual features, conceptual

roots like the uh conceptual features

that compose into lexical items like

break and home. Um whereby for example

um you know uh let's see um swim merged

with n would make the noun swim merge

with v would make the verb swim. Okay.

Uh syntax builds structure through

recursive applications of merge and

these are then entered into a space of

syntactic working memory. So again that

theme of syntactic working in memory has

loosely been addressed in the literature

over the last five or six years I would

say only very recently. Uh it's roughly

associated with um certain portions of

broker's area but as I said I suspect

there are other parts of the frontal

cortex too like the dorsal posterior MFG

that is probably also involved in

aspects of working memory uh recruited

for recruited by the language network.

Uh lexical items are simplex conceptual

atoms okay in the formal semantics

jargon.

So if these features seem exotic and not

very you know neurally plausible well

just consider for a moment how we

already happily entertain things like

stubby animate concepts in high road

vision right um you know stubby um uh uh

animate dimensions compared to um you

know inanimate and uh non- stubby I

can't remember what the non- stubby is

but it's a DS work right we have stubby

and um you know smooth or hard type of

edges um representational eccentricity

is already normalized in sensory

neuroscience, right? So things like

elongated blue edge detector. Why is

that? Why is the concept of elongated

blue edge detector any more baroque and

exotic than the concept of uh

demonstrative?

If feature bundles like N or T appear

exotic, it's only because linguists

linguistics has historically lacked the

luxury of metaphoric raification that

vision science enjoys. So stubby cells,

simple uh cells, grandmother neurons are

all idealized explanatory constructs. Uh

Ros's representational primitives are of

precisely the same ontological kind.

Simplified handles on the

highdimensional feature specific sub

spaces that neural populations inhabit.

So depending on the lexical item in

question, uh spikes at the R level,

right? So individual spikes at the R

level from relevant cortical regions

will be coordinated by spike phase

coupling like posterior middle temporal

cortex for abstract word features as I

show in a second. Inferior parietal

cortex for eventive features. Anterior

temporal lobe for entity or object

features. Ventromporal cortex for face

and place features. Inferior frontal

cortex for more formal and function word

features. So what happens when you have

sentences involving entities and events?

Well then these two regions will be

coordinated. Right? So in this submitted

manuscript we did a concreteness word

judgment paradigm where we gave patients

individual words to read and they had to

make a judgment is this word concrete or

abstract. Okay museum concrete loyalty

abstract. Um okay and just to summarize

very quickly um most hubs of the

language network showed increased

activity for the kind of task response

of you know good nonviolation concrete

words. And the only reason that showed

increased activity for abstract words

was coincidentally this interesting part

of posterior temporal cortex. Um which

seems to suggest that posterior temporal

cortex codes for not just language

specific representations but also

language specific structures and

computations.

So uh rose invokes rose also invokes

coupling and dynamical motifs to guide

the construction of minimally complex

linguistic objects. If you read the 2025

cognitive neuroscience paper, I talk

about this in more detail

um at the appropriate level of

resolution where whereby statistical and

symbolic instructors will presumably

interface, right? This crossing coupling

dynamic between SN. These would likely

be commonly co-occurring lexical

semantic features that conspire into

dynamical motifs uh and that routinely

get merged via the mechanisms of rows.

So uh empirical data for stable local

attractors or motifs in higher order

language regions remain limited uh

demonstrating them flexical composition

is non-trivial but still the use of

dynamical motifs flexical information

seems all the more plausible in the face

of widespread flexible and mixed

highdimensional coding across the

cortical hierarchy. So that's why I'm

invoking them at this crucial transition

point between R and O where you have

primitive um representations occurring

in regularized types of combinations.

And in fact, there's a really nice

commentary paper um by Lanca and

Kazanina that came out recently that

kind of replies to my Rose paper and had

some really nice um discussion about how

we can kind of cash out the notion of

dynamical in a slightly more formal and

explicit way than I do in my paper.

Oh, I've already mentioned this. I'll

just skip this slide. Mentioned that

before. Um and there's some interesting

evidence uh already for this from a

paper that came out uh in 2024 on

bioarchchive. Uh this uh group used uh

21 acute neurosurgical patients in the O

and they had them do a bunch of language

tasks like uh you know sentence

repetition and comprehension and they

managed to recover around a thousand

good units from these 21 patients. These

are single unit recordings I should say

single unit recordings and they had

recordings in higher order language site

like broker's area and posterior

temporal cortex and they showed hundreds

of units were sensitive to phological

you know phonetic features many units

were sensitive to semantic features too.

uh but zero units were sensitive to uh

syntactic features and information which

I think really does support this idea in

rows that the seat of syntax is really

not to be found at the unit level but

rather in the interarerial type of

systems level perspective that I'm

pursuing here

this is um a more kind of simplistic

localizationist generalized map of what

I'm assuming will be the major regions

of the core and extended language

network again I've already called upon

PSDS and PMG G meduser form for early

lexical semantic processing especially

in the orthographic dimension. Uh IFG

will in uh be involved in some aspects

of morphos syntactic linearization but

different parts of conceptual structure

too and different work workspace demands

and IPL is involved in kind of event

level semantics. Okay. So there's lots

of more things to say about this but I'm

not I don't want to focus too much on

these you know uh localizationist types

of questions. I want to focus more on

kind of the um dynamics and the reason

why is because if you try and um use

localizationist models to interface with

any other types of models formal

mathematical models you just can't do it

right you can't map in the same way it's

hard to map a neuron onto a noun it's

even more difficult to map um a gross

neuron anatomical region onto an

algebraic you know formula right it's

very difficult to uh find a linking

hypothesis for that so as I said

prefrontal cortex more generally I think

for language uh hosts circuits

supporting variable binding sequencing

especially dorsal frontal sequencing

gating and working memory storage while

lateral posterior temporal cortex uh is

probably the true you know the core

language region I guess um it's more

reliably and efficiently subserves

crossmodal semantic integration

superordinate categorization and

recursive hierarchal processing so

syntax internal demands

Meanwhile, traveling waves build up this

workspace cycle by cycle. You can think

of it as a kind of evidence accumulation

for syntactic inferences that are

bounded by the cross frequency coupling

dynamics over language hubs.

There's a lot of recent work um already

kind of showing the behavioral relevance

of of rotational um uh you know brain

wave dynamics um in working memory and

attention spaces. So here's a quote from

El Miller. There's no reason in

principle why a rotation in this

mathematical subspace should correspond

directly to a rotation on the surface of

the cortex when they look at traveling

waves. But it turns out it does. That

suggests to me that the brain is using

these traveling waves to actually do

computation, analog computation for

Miller. Analog computation is way more

energy efficient than digital and

biology favors energy efficient

solutions.

Uh so I've kind of extended these ideas

and in this rose paper in 2025 um I map

these crossf frequency coupling

operations that I've already established

not just to gross kind of um uh complex

linguistic operations but to more

specific linguistic operations to do

with these features that I've already

mentioned right headedness uh no closure

incremental no closure um propri

accessing proprietary proprietary

representations and things like that and

this yields lots of very specific

predictions for the type of parsing um

algorithm that you would assume to be

involved in any moment of uh sentence

comprehension, right? Whatever your

parsing demands are during production

versus comprehension, during a um easily

predictable text versus a less

predictable text, your parser, your um

your mind's language parser will engage

uh to varying degrees in various in

different ways based on the context of

use, right? And your pre-existing

knowledge base essentially. um and that

leads to different predictions for when

these different dynamics will either be

present or static or increase or

decrease. Okay. And again I don't want

to ignore here at the very bottom um the

alpha and beta and gamma dynamics.

Right. So as I've said alpha dynamics

alpha amplitude seems to be very much

involved in lexical semantic shielding

and stabilizing and protecting

structural inferences

uh from decay and uh external

interference. Beta involved in

anticipation and set maintenance. Right?

Maintaining the state squire and gamma

in these kind of uh what's called shift

minimalist grammar operations just

lexical access essentially kind of

chunking in squeezing in a new uh uh

lexical item and then of course also

lexical semantic unification involving

those the kind of basic semantic level

composition.

But in response to other comments, we

might hear that it's not cognitively

plausible to have a simple one-to-one

isomeorphism between some parsing

computation and a narrow frequency band.

Right? So in previous decades in the

early 2010s, there was some work that

tried to argue that you know beta is

associated with syntax and gamma is

associated with semantics for example.

Okay. Um but of course this comment in

blue is obviously correct. uh because

the spatial temporal dynamics that I

invoke in rows are to be thought of as

the principal but not exclusive drivers

of parsing operations. Okay, these

dynamics are the pack relations with the

largest explanatory causal scope for

specific parsing operations and the ones

that best predict and drive them. Okay,

that's the difference from simply saying

you know beta equal syntax compared to

the types of CFC dynamics that I'm

invoking as the principal drivers. And

then of course well does that make rows

false uh falsifiability of rows a little

bit difficult? No, it doesn't for the

reasons that I explore in the paper.

It's very specific to falsify it. And

the reason is because rows provides a

possible infrastructure for flexibly

implementing distinct types of parsing

operations for the real-time processing

of language. Right? Uh in other words,

you have specific predictions for each

word in the sense. So this perspective

helps to furnish a more restrictive core

language network in the brain than

current language localizers that isolate

general sentence composition. Right? I

I've already levied this critique

before. sentences over word lists

because I define a language network as

being critically involved in selectively

computing and representing specific

parsing operations. And I also elaborate

on this in this paper, a short

commentary paper too if you're

interested in those sorts of critiques.

So rows can also be thought of as

indexing what physicists would term a

misoscopic protectorate, right? right? A

kind of an emergent um form of

organization uh that is stable and you

no longer need to kind of look under the

hood at component parts for it to kind

of um provide this level of um

misoscopic organization.

And this misoscopic protectorate is

graphically represented in this uh

figure from this paper where I kind of

step through the different components of

rows from R O S and E and talk about in

the figure description of course the

specific components of interest and how

each of these components is causally

related to another one. Right? How S and

O involves causal integration. How R

involves causal composition into O. and

how the diff the uh boundary between R

and E uh is a case of causal exclusion.

How the brain's kind of core dual

demands of diversity versus stability or

segregation versus integration, these

kind of dual tension that the brain

always deals with uh that Friston has

talked about quite a lot. These two um

demands can be settled and kind of

implemented through this rose mechanism.

So just to step through this one final

time just to really hammer it home. I'm

assuming that phase amplitude coupling

coordinates the hierarchal assembly of

features forming headiness inferences.

Now what does that mean? Well the

assembly with the greatest relative pack

strength I would assume codes for phrase

head. Right? So in that case um the uh

head of the phrase is simply whichever

of these um sets of um

uh features are exhibiting the strongest

pack strength with this higher order

like superordinate sle um delta or theta

wave. Uh meanwhile dynamical motifs at

the RNO level and spike phase coupling

coordinate constellations of semantic

features intellectical items. So here

causal composition, integration and

exclusion apply across these levels

yielding a misoscopic protectorate in

the brain for syntactic inferences.

So Rose uses a combination of

explanatory structures in neuroscience.

Right? I mentioned before here's this

big set of explanatory structures in

neuroscience that we can make use of to

help explain properties like language,

working, memory, and attention. And I'm

explicitly combining multiple of them,

right? I'm not just focusing on

cascades. I'm not just focusing on

neural manifold folds. I'm not just

focusing on tooids. I'm not just

focusing on broad mechanisms or narrow

mechanisms. I'm focusing on a number of

these features um to neurally enforce

nonassociivity, commutativity and other

algebraic properties of human language,

right? Ensuring that syntactic structure

uh is respected and enforced. So just to

elaborate on that a little bit further,

Rose enables potentially unbounded

recursion until rising frontto bridal

alpha signals that the syntactic

workspace is full while fronttote

temporal traveling waves in delta f each

completed complex to work in memory

buffers. Right? So each delta cycle ends

with a beta mediated commit burst.

Right? We can call it a commit operation

that silences the delta carriers for the

daughters uh daughters in the tree. is

ensuring the composite enters the next

workspace step as an indivisible unit.

Right? Again, respecting uh the

algebraic properties of language

because headedness is selected by pack

strength rather than presentation order.

The system is commutative for free,

right? It's already commutive. We don't

have to stipulate that. Yet the beta

commit best freezes the set thereby

preserving nonassociivity. Now you can

see the um supplementary supplementary

details in this uh 2025 paper for a mini

review of how LLMs fail to capture

higher order language if you want more

specific cases in the literature for

that um than the ones I've already

presented you. And the supplementary

materials in the paper also provide a

comprehensive table comparing different

connectionist models of composition and

how they compare with rows

because rose is of course a you know

symbolic connectionist like a hybrid

model. It's not a pure connectionist

model. So one of the interesting

consequences as I mentioned of this rose

theory is that we effectively get

commutivity for free given that we

assume headerness is established via

strength of pack active nodes. we don't

have to stipulate some additional

mechanism to allow for it since it's not

the order of pack complexes that matters

right and there's a really nice uh

review paper that came out this year in

uh in this uh in this paper which is in

non-English but you can easily translate

it that kind of compares different

models like my rose model uh with other

you know Ding Martin colmus' models and

looks at the kind of you know the pros

and cons and strengths and weaknesses of

different models and how they implement

uh syntax in this dynamical facility

fashion. It's a very nice paper. This

paper also gets five bags of popcorn.

Um, so reflecting the ever flexible

nature of symbolic knowledge, we do not

need to assume that frequency bands here

are strict types with rigid functional

interpretations. Rather, they're more

likely to be what Martin calls tokens of

processes with physiological bounds that

render them into functional types. So

for example, the obvious case here is

children's low frequency cortical

tracking of syntax has been shown by

Ushagwami and other people to be

slightly different from the adult brain.

The canonical frequency band itself is

less important than the causal

structuring force of the signal. These

are reflective of endogenous time scales

of specific computations rather than

being fixed bounds. So what's critical

is the logical and causal relations of

neural structures in this distinct

causal landscape of explanatory

structures invoked by rows and less the

kind of narrow you know 4.2 herz versus

4.1 Hz sorts of questions.

So do different types of macro versus

microscale traveling waves form their

own internal hierarchy of sensitivity to

distinct structures or higher order

relations in language processing right

so eg global situation model maintenance

versus local phrase structure um

coordination that's a future that's a

question for for future research as in

what type of workspace is being

constructed and can different workspaces

um yield different traveling wave

signatures in terms of you know the

speed and spread of the wave

uh excellent framework has already

provided here by El Miller's work. So he

assumes that one set of emergent

properties organization of coding and

communication in subspaces is observed

at the local spiking level and another

set of properties oscillations that can

birectionally influence spikes and

organize cortical information flow is

observed at the misoscale network level.

So for him organized traveling waves

execute computation in the brain through

so-called slow frequency waves which can

actually rapidly impact electric fields.

They're not slow at all. They're slow

waves, but they don't um impact the

brain in a slow manner. Uh Miller has a

content versus control model. So for

him, content in working memory, I should

say working memory content seems to be

indexed by gamma and control some type

of manipulation seems to be indexed via

alpha and beta. Now that model that he

um proposed a few months ago in uh this

current opinion paper is not dissimilar

to rose, right? It's very kind of

analogous to the way that we're thinking

about how to implement and execute

control versus content or in other words

the classical you know uh distinction in

cognitive science between computation

and representation or you know things

and events right nouns and verbs what

what the entity is versus how you

manipulate it.

Um so here's another lesson from the

history of science this time via uh Mike

himself. If you keep interrogating

deeper and deeper, getting more precise

and cause and mechanistic, then as Mike

says, you eventually end up in the math

department, right? And that's where the

language sciences and cognitive

neuroscientists should also be heading,

I think, right? Our g our aim is to

interface eventually with elements of

the of the math department, you know,

probably the applied math department,

right? Uh so how can we get there?

So here's um I'm going to spend some

time now focusing on some case studies.

I've already presented the rose model,

but I promised you that I'm going to try

and cash out more explicitly the

algebraic connections with rows. Now,

I've mentioned some way in which rows

can respect um algebraic properties of

language and kind of offer a concrete

linking hypothesis between Mari and

levels of computation algorithm and

implementation. But I want to explore

some other candidates too and other ways

of caching this out.

So there's an excellent paper by Matilda

Makoli at Caltech and Robert Beerwick at

MIT who focus on rows as a plausible

candidate theory for syntax and they

write a proof showing that the

mechanisms of rows like phase

synchronization can be mathematically

connected to the algebraic properties of

merge uh providing hints towards an

explanatory theory of neural linguistics

whereby the way that they formalize and

mathematically formalize the theory of

merge in general grammar using hot

algebra and category theory. you can

draw a mathematical um direct line of

communication to the mathematical tools

that they use to formalize that with the

way that you connect and formalize

things like phase synchronization.

Um now there is an open question here

for everyone in the field which is how

can we guarantee that the structures

generated by rows comply with

non-associivity

rather than simply generating node

boundaries just in case the structure

turns out to be nonassociative. Right?

That's a tricky question. Now, there's

some ways that we can think about

dealing with that, but you want to make

sure that when you're building this kind

of assilitary model of of of structures

that it's not um breaking associivity

just be just in case there happens to be

a linguistic object. You want to make

sure that no no in this case this is a

linguistic object linguistic structure

and not a non-llinguistic structure that

has a similar initial structural

configuration to it. Right? Um so that's

one of many uh questions for for future

research.

But if ma if mathematical linguists uh

can point more easily to rose compliant

neural processes than to others then

this leads us towards an exciting

terrain of previously inaccessible

neural linguistic research right where

previously um cognitive you know

psychological theory and cognitive

neuroscientists have been adjudicating

between different theories based on

other criteria right the criteria is the

usual ones does it predict an N400

response you know yes or no type of

thing does to predict the P 600 response

in this time window yes or no. Um we can

now add an additional constraint from

the realm of as Mike would call platonic

forms right this more abstract space to

draw direct lines of formal

communication between computational

algorithmic and implementational levels.

So here's another um candidate too,

right? I mentioned Marcoli and Berwick

in July 2025. They had this preprint and

then this month uh a few days ago

actually David Ager has a new book out

with MIT press which I think is open

access I'm pretty sure. Um it's really

excellent book. He argues for a new

theory of syntax that replaces set

theoretic categoric merge um with

morological syntax. Right? So this

morological sums involving part hole

relations where you have a morological

object like you know X and Y where Y is

part of of the X object. In this case he

would conceptualize a phrase like X and

Y not as X merged with Y but as X and Y

becoming a proper part. Right? So in in

his case he thinks about sub join.

Right? where X is part of Y instead of

it simply being X and Y are together

part of a set, right? Where but they're

still in principle separable. Um so his

theory is much more kind of um

mathematically relational whereby there

are intrinsic deep connections

intrinsically between the

representations that you're u

manipulating and the structures that

they build. They're the same system,

right? It's all just one big part hole

relation. Uh the formal details here

don't matter as much, but I'll just kind

of cash out and extract some of the most

interesting lessons from David AG's um

text. Uh now at this point it doesn't

matter if you subscribe more to the kind

of mergebased theory of syntax or AG's

theory of syntax. The point is we want

to extract different predictions and how

we can use mathematical theories to

negotiate questions in uh the cognitive

sciences and cognitive neurosciences. So

Agera uses part hole relations via

morological formalism whereby Maroli and

Berwick use category theoretic magmas.

Uh Agera highlights the necessity of

cyclic local integration steps. That's

really a core part of his um formal

system. While molian beric highlight the

role of cross frequency and

synchronization mechanisms as not just

correlative but necessary for building

recursive structure if we're assuming

the connection between category

theoretic merge and phase

synchronization the way that they do.

AJ's part hole subjoin operation which

he uh aims should replace merge speaks

directly to the marological nature of

multiplexed pack relations right while

Marcolian Bay's framework is

mathematically sympathetic more to

phrase phase synchronization right it's

can also be cached out with pack as they

say but it's most directly related to

phase synchronization

so different mathematical formalisms

will be more or less directly

translatable into processes at different

scales of neural organization

Hence, we'll yield distinct experimental

predictions for which types of neural

signatures will drive syntactic

inferences. Right? So, by ensuring that

the algorithms the brain uses respect

the formal design features of human

language, we help align experimental

neuroscience with what we know about the

nature of language. So for example,

perhaps the intimate relation between

lexical syntactic and semantic

processing in the brain's language

network speaks more to A's thesis that

lexical features are inherently part of

syntactic objects than it does other

theories that posit a starker

representational divergence between

units and operations. Now many points to

make here. There is already certain

evidence that these two things syntax

and semantics and lexicality are

potentially more dissociable depending

on the regions depending on your

recording modality depending on your

scale of neural complexity dep depending

on your theory of language right but I'm

just I'm not settling this issue here

I'm just opening this as a kind of you

know a plausible space of of contention

but unlike merge adjint operation

doesn't create a nested set but a new

object where both inputs are parts

No separate you know categorization

labeling object is required since the

composite's identity arises from its

parts.

So mapping this model more closely to

psych linguistic variables I think will

be really important here at this point

right because it'll give you assumptions

about the presence or absence of neural

signatures pertaining to headedness that

would differ from Marcolian Baywick's

model right because they have a very

explicit um uh more uh an account of

labeling which is kind of necessary

in contrast marianick proposed merge as

a binary magma operation via category

theory formalizing this as addition in a

semi- ring with entropy minimization

defining combination. All right. So they

take merge from naive set theory. They

partially formalize it into category

theory and then they formalize it again

uh via this apparatus. So this operation

and again once you do that that helps

you connect with phase synchronization.

Right. Um this operation can be

implemented by simple neural by a simple

neural circuit binary gate computing a

join of two input functions. The use of

a commutative non-associative semi- ring

for syntax by Makoli and Beric I think

suggests that any neural implementation

must allow combining signals without

order bias and without averaging away

hierarchy right which naturally points

to oscillary binding for me rather than

say simple additive firing rate

summation.

So for molian berwick

a plausible neural mechanism from merge

must allow reversible composition and

and decomposition since hop algebbras

have inverses cooperations. Uh this

points toward dynamic patterns like

oscillations that can flexibly bind and

unbind representations. A stable firing

rate pattern summing two inputs might

not easily be decomposed into the inputs

again. By contrast, oscilly phase coding

can be more naturally passed back into

constituents. Uh similarly, if we focus

only on one specific frequency band or

ARP component, right, we likely blare

parent child relations in any hierarchal

representation, right? So how can

compositional syntax emerge from high

frequency gamma activity activity um in

isolation on its own? There are no

accounts as far as I know for how we can

ground syntax in monocausal signatures,

right? Like an like a P600. It just

doesn't work that way. Again, there are

correlations with the P600 and N400, but

that's not a theory. Uh, Marcolian Beric

proved that the algebraic structure of

human syntax centered on merge as a free

commutative non-associative operation

can be faithfully embedded in a function

space governed by the thermodynamic

semi- rings and optimized by Rene

entropy. By modeling lexical items as

wavelet based functions and syntactic

combinations as entropy regularized

additions, a novel blueprint for neural

linguists can eventually be assembled.

The recursive nonassociative and

information sensitive structure of merge

here mirrors properties observed in

cortical oscilly dynamics such as cross

frequency coupling and spike phase

coordination. These insights suggest

specific empirical targets. For

instance, cortical circuits that

minimize local entropy under

compositional constraints or that

exhibit nonlinear gain modulation

aligned with reneer like cost functions

during structure building. Future

intercraanial uh or highdensity MEG

experiments can test whether syntactic

processes engage such entropy sensitive

wave interactions thereby grounding

formal language theory in

neurohysiological

um computation.

Ramping neural engagement for semantic

composition has already been well

documented in high frequency cortical

recordings. We're constraining the

hypothesis space towards more specific

mechanistic candidates for composition

right as in their merge uh two tree tree

structures and hop algebra markoff chain

in marole and beric remains a clear

challenge for contemporary cognitive

neuroscience relatedly if merge is to be

seen as an operation involving

minimization and entropy functionals

there may be certain roots from the

active inference world that might prove

that might provide support here

now we would also expect Rene entropy

cost to be associated with general

neural complexity metrics and ocillatory

complexity. For instance, pack

modulation index, MI strength and phase

concentrations can be converted to

discrete discrete probability

distributions from which Rene entropy

can be computed. Right? There's lots of

ways to cash this out. Um specific

passing windows u when merge is expected

to occur should exhibit a reduction in

rene entropy in high gamma amplitude

distribution like more structured focus

activation or impact strength between

relevant bands depending on how you you

know model your uh theory of neural

computation.

So psychological theory and theoretical

linguistics seek to uncover what kind of

neural machinery could carry the load

that syntactic theory says the brain

must perform. But the only way this will

happen is if linguists and psychologists

of language formalize their models of

language knowledge and processing in

more algebraically explicit ways.

There's a reason why Galileo said

mathematics is the language, you know,

the universal language of of science.

keeping to naive models of hierarchy and

basic graph theoretic models of tree

structures will likely be insufficient

for offering more acute experimental

predictions for direct cortical

recordings on the human brain.

So just stepping back a bit here now

I've offered a number of mathematical

and causal uh explanatory candidates for

how the human language faculty can be

neurally enforced. So let's think more

about causation here. I only mention it

uh very briefly. uh David Lewis once

said that there are infinite possible

causes for any event in the world.

Right? There are surely many lower order

causal structures that subserve

syntactic inferences. But rows places

greater emphasis on the misoscale

configurations as a way of reframing I

think where the heart of neural

linguistics should lie. Right? I'm not

dismissing or um you know discounting

the importance of these lower order

structures that I mentioned at the R

level or sub level but I'm just claiming

this is where I think the heart of

neural linguistics should be right in a

similar way that free reach used to say

that the the seat of syntax was in IFG

and not in you know IPL I'm kind of

saying that the seat of syntax is at

this specific scale. Uh scientists often

say uh causes should always produce

their effects. Well, again, ideally,

yes, uh it sounds reasonable, but it's

much too ambitious in reality for most

scientific models in the life sciences,

right? So, how we think about causation

in neurosciences is is very different

from how we think about it uh in other

sciences. But I think the point to make

to be made here is that we need to think

more carefully about what it means for

us to assess causal evidence in

neuroscience in relation to these sorts

of models. Right? So for example, if you

stimulate a part of um uh midfusform

gyrus during lexical processing, the

patient may experience alexia or some

kind of a semantic, you know, uh

paraphasia or something, some kind of

deficit in processing. And then you can

say, well, okay, there's probably good

evidence that this structure is causally

involved in this process. But then you

can also stimulate a part of for example

anterior temporal lobe laterally and

let's say there's no deficit no

immediate deficit. Many people will then

claim okay well this is causal evidence

that lateral ATL is not involved in the

behavior that we're targeting. But

that's not true at all right you haven't

shown that whatsoever. All you've shown

is that um stimulation did not lead to a

reduction in performance. But it's also

possible that other parts of the brain

can um help uh carry the slack here,

right? Be supporting uh processing um uh

features of the behavior in question,

right? So just because you stimulate ATL

and there's no behavioral disruption

doesn't mean actually that ATL is not

involved in the behavior. And there's

many other things as well in terms of

how we can uh use uh you know different

types of um stimulation uh extra

extraanial you know stimulation attacks

TMS and TDCS and all these sorts of um

methods to manipulate um ailatory

dynamics in a way that can improve our

causal resolution. But these questions

still have to be kind of um entertained

in the background before uh making

strong causal claims.

Um and ultimately of course a scientific

theory is only as successful as as the

number of new interesting research

questions it helps open up right uh and

you know luckily Rose has been used

productively I think to frame and

explain a range of neuro imaging and ag

results in the literature and

forthcoming work with uh multiple labs

who I'm working with and other labs too

uh will explore how rows can help

researchers ask new questions about the

neural implementation of second language

acquisition dependency resolution uh and

lexos semantic processing.

Okay. Uh the subtitle of the paper that

I uh mentioned in cognitive neuroscience

in 2025, the paper is rose a universal

neural grammar. Okay. So, so far I've

talked about the rose part, but I

haven't really talked about the

universal neural grammar part. So, let's

do that for a little bit. Uh I'm

claiming here that rose matures in

accordance with a genetically determined

biological matrix. So this implies an

innate endowment for the neural

organization of syntactic computation

and therefore an innate competence for

these platonic for how these platonic

forms that Mike would be interested in

ingress into types of neural

organization that I'm framing here. So

children use hierarchal knowledge and

statistical learning jointly. Uh the SNE

levels interface via cross coupling with

probabistic RNO levels. Right? That's

that's the prediction here. That's how

language learning is achieved.

uh Rose's anus claim rests on several

converging empirical and theoretical

points that I'll just review here very

briefly. So lots of points I mean each

of these points is worthy of their own

lecture but I'll just uh go through them

quickly.

uh structure dependence appears early in

development. Infants already compute

hierarchal rather than linear relations

18 months old infants even. There's

evidence for endogenous syntactic

organization. Right? So cross frequency

coupling mechanisms implement recursive

structure building and headedness in a

way that is independent of learn

statistical patterns suggesting that

these are prespecified motifs. There's a

species specificity and developmental

maturation in language. Right? The UNNG

claim, universal neural grammar,

universal neural grammar claim posits

that all human brains instantiate this

multi-level facilitatory infrastructure

for syntax which develops but is not

learned similar to all other

neurobiological systems with constrained

plasticity.

I've already mentioned the no half merge

point. The fact that merge itself is

unlearnable and you simply cannot learn

it. Um there's the classic poverty of

the stimulus arguments that are also

always important here, right? It's

always important to emphasis the POS

arguments. Uh children uniformly

converge on complex syntactic rules that

are not derable from surface level

statistics, right? Statistics is not the

same things as structure. Structure and

statistics are different and we use them

very uh you interface in in very tight

um and important ways during processing

and and acquisition, but they are

fundamentally not the same thing.

And then finally the usual neural

linguistic insights right so EEG and MG

studies show that the types of crossf

frequency coupling dynamics invoked by

ROS track hierarchal phrase structure

and syntactic closure so moments of

closure in both adults and infants in

ways that are updated by the statistics

of language but which are not reducible

to statistical information

and children as young as seven months

show sensitivity to the typical word

order pattern of their parents language

right uh of course you can say well

statistic excuse this for them. Sure, of

course. But the principles of phrase

structure are domain specific. Children

don't invent the notion of head or

structure or constituency. Right? Even

by 18 months, they show sensitivity to

non-local dependencies.

I see also here the work of Charles

Young. Uh an innate structural scaffold

seems to interact with general learning

biases. Right? So we have this innate

language knowledge to do with uh row

ccentric merge stuff. But then we also

have learning biases for Yang. He you

know talks about the tolerance principle

and other things like that. When we add

in constraints reflective of UG like you

know assume that there are categories

and phrase boundaries then statistical

learning becomes far more efficient. So

it's not really again to go back to the

LLM question it's not really about

statistical learning versus an H

structure or statistics versus

structure. It's rather structural

inferences via statistics and and how

else can it be, right? That's the only

way it can be. Um also see the case of

Nicaraguan sign language. This really

remarkable case where children rapidly

and effortlessly acquired um a recursive

grammar in the absence of explicit

instruction and any decisive evidence.

But of course there's still a very

strong obsession with learning in the

field of AI. Everyone talks about

learning, right? Uh of course this is

partly driven by the nature of the

enterprise ML. But this also has a

problematic influence when it bleeds

over into domains of psychology and

cognitive science. Not everything has to

be learned.

And in a slightly tangential point here,

Susan Kerry has argued quite nicely that

there is no good evidence for

non-llinguistic deductive reasoning

involving the uh destructive syllogism

and that animals and pre-linguistic

children probably don't make logical

inferences. Again, this goes back to the

point I made earlier about syntax being

uh a type of thought system, especially

in relation to things like inductive

definitions and counterfactual reasoning

and things like that.

Now having said that in the literature

there are some nice examples um which

are still fully connectionist but at

least trying to uh move away from uh you

know the 2017 2018 2019 types of

approaches to LLMs and how they can be

relevant to NLP research and towards a

more kind of biologically plausible

framework. Right? So this hierarchal

reasoning model is explicitly uh

influenced by uh the gamma coupling

dynamics and other things like that. So

neurobiologically partially

neurobiologically plausibly informed if

not you know a genuine um replacement

for the sort of thing I'm talking about.

Nevertheless these considerations I

think help refine these sorts of um uh

questions.

So again coming back to causation um in

the 17th century the mechanical

philosophy right uh saw explanations in

terms of contact mechanics with

deterministic interactions. That's a

kind of intuitive definition of

mechanism.

The imaginative space of cognitive

neuroscience mostly remains within this

kind of pre-Newtonian you know cartisian

mechanism mechanistic bounds despite

evidence for a distinct and complex

causal landscape. Right? There's many

distinct causal logics in the brain that

are entertained and uh you know most

fields uh in the cognitive sciences in

the kind of you know human cognitive

neuroscience tend to focus on their

favorite type of causal logic and just

focus on that as being the main

explanatory driver of any form of

behavior. But as I said before what I've

tried to do with Rose is uh have a much

more kind of pluralistic perspective on

uh this causal landscape. So there's no

reason to remain reductionist about the

causal structure of mental content.

Downward causation, which is really the

main theme here, right? This whole talk

I've essentially been hinting at the

theme of of downward causation, but I've

never mentioned it um until now. But

downward causation is readily apparent

in the brain. And the neuron doctrine

died some years ago. In fact, the neuron

doctrine was explicitly, you know,

inspired by uh late 19th and mid 20th

century kind of neuroscience into motor

uh and sentry motor processing. And

we've kind of exported a lot of our

theories of what neural computation is

from 20th century motor neuroscience

into the study of human language, which

I think is a mistake.

Uh so yeah, the neuron doctrine died.

How? Well, there's increasing evidence

that the central functional unit of the

brain is not the cell. Cells obviously

contribute to function, but they don't

causally anchor it. There's also

emerging evidence that types of

behaviorally relevant information, not

just any old information available at

the LFP level are not recoverable in

single units.

Although single neurons constitute the

basic units of the nervous system, their

impact on information processing is

contingent on their interaction with the

specific synaptic connection patterns of

underlying neural circuits. Which is why

we can say localization is not

explanation dot dot dot but it helps

right localization of course is not

explanation obviously but it's very

important to kind of know where you are

to help narrow down these mechanistic um

questions.

So consider also Daras Sar's work where

she's mapped this uh oh yes stubby spiky

IA tried to remember this right animate

versus animate and spiky versus stubby

um concepts in uh vententral uh uh

temporal and lat lateral temporal um uh

primate cortex. And so the question for

us is okay if this is how a decent map

of visual object recognition is this

conceptual space between anime anime and

spiky stubby um what is that going to be

for language right so just as higher

order visual cortex may have inborn axes

like that the language system might have

prescified dimensions such as predicate

versus non-predicate or concrete versus

abstract right that help organize

concepts into syntactic roles. So what

are the relevant axes for conceptual

combination in language? Is it event

entity predicate nonpredicate? We don't

know that. We have to uh think more

about these sorts of questions I think.

And there's a very recent a very

excellent paper

uh that just came out in the archive uh

maybe a few days ago about a week ago

that tried to um explore this hypothesis

space in um a more explicit way. So

whereby different researchers can kind

of be you know pegged along this um

spectrum whereby you assume waves are

purely epiphenomenal and it's mid- 20th

century moto view of you know spikes and

behavior um to a more um causally

explicit view where you assume that

waves are in fact uh doing some element

of computation. So I've just briefly

here, this is probably only partially

accurate, but I've tried to just, you

know, annotate where some researchers in

the field would lie on this spectrum.

People like John O'Keefe and Bazaki um

down at number two. The classic Lisman

Jensen model of working memory at three.

Uh my stuff uh rose at four, uh Krishna

Jan to Popel Miller at four likely. And

then people like Tanon Lenas

um slightly higher. I think this is not

a perfect spectrum, but I think it

helps. It's a very useful framework just

for thinking about um what waves are

doing. Um do they just impact behavior?

Do they um you know if if waves are

doing something causal, is it causal

towards behavior or is it just causal

back down to spikes? Right? Uh is it uh

causal towards perception but maybe not

hierarchical cognition? Right? These are

the sorts of questions that I think the

the field is of course trying to tackle

right now. Uh and this is a nice type of

way of thinking about this type of a of

framework.

Uh so

as I' as I've already kind of hinted

many researchers still think of

causation exclusively through the what I

call the human you know metaphors of

driving a transfer of energy the classic

bills example. But even synaptic

transmission itself doesn't actually

involve a transfer of energy. The causal

connection is really just constraint

satisfaction or signal transduction,

right? And especially in in in the

domains of of physics and chemistry, uh

the notion of constraint satisfaction is

very uh salient operative and it's

becoming more salient, I think, in the

uh cognitive neuroscience of language.

Um in fact, the notion of constraint

satisfaction has always been very

salient in theoretical linguistics.

So biological causation often involves

enabling or constraining rather than

actually actively producing, right? Like

funneling or canalizing and

constraining.

So on that note, here's a few uh

possible physical bounds on cortical

computation that may yield explanatory

power for neural linguistics. Now in a

paper I've written with Colston and Emma

Holmes um we've already kind of talked

about this where we have the notion of

algorithmic complexity being exported

into the domain of syntactic theory but

there's also things like Shannon Hartley

theorem the Beckenstein bound sphere

packaging constraints right for the kind

of topological structures and each of

these constraints will be relevant to

different explanatory structures in

neuroscience right I mentioned the five

that I mentioned um and I think it's

useful to kind

uh consider these as examples of that

type of constraint satisfaction, the

criterial causation that I mentioned. So

here's the paper uh in question that I

mentioned with Holmes and Priston that

talks about um using the language of

statistical physics to offer a new first

principled kind of grounding for the

nature of uh syntactic complexity

itself.

And as I mentioned, there's surely many

lower order causal structures that

subserve for syntactic inferences. But

Rose places greater emphasis on

misoscale configurations as a way of

reframing where the heart of neuro

linguistics should lie. Now this is

partly ontological and partly

methological, right? Due to what we can

actually record in the human brain and

and what signals we are currently um

getting.

A final point about time scales of

causality which is very relevant by the

way to um incraanial eg. Scientists are

often tempted to assign true causality

to whichever causal factor occurs over

the faster time scale. Right? What

whatever's first, whatever's fastest. Uh

even when two causal factors may produce

the same outcome, will equal

probability. Now we're very guilty of

this in human cognitive neuroscientists

where we record different brain regions

and we say look brain region one lights

up the first brain region two lights up

30 milliseconds later and then brain

region three lights up 100 milliseconds

later and we're very quick to assign

this kind of causal hierarchy based on

temporal dimensions but as you can see

by consulting the rose model things

ain't that simple uh we may be eager to

explain human language in terms of

single cell behavior. That's pretty

rapid, right? But true causality may

involve downward causation from

misoscale dynamics as in rows. Other

lessons to be learn here too, but I'll

just skip over that. So, uh I think we

should return to Aristotle's thesis of

causal pluralism that entertains

multiple interacting causal forces which

has been sidelined in contemporary

mechanism obsessed neuroscience.

Now, people like Kevin Mitchell have

written very nicely about this too. So,

I recommend their work as well in in in

this connection. So, you know, Aristotle

has these material, formal, efficient,

and final causes. Uh, some of them seem

more mystical and magical, as Bacon

called it, than others. But that's no

longer being seen to be the case, I

think, especially when we move into

these more kind of abstract topological

spaces and potentially non-causal models

of uh of neural function.

Francis Spacen, as I mentioned, uh, has

some blame here. In the 17th century, he

pushed the empiricist approach whereby

only material and efficient causes were

entertained. And uh the other you know

formal and final causes to do with

electricity and um you know the kind of

uh the use and function and purpose of

of an object were considered

metaphysical or magical.

Again going back to the point I made at

the beginning of this talk. It may seem

intuitive that both brains and LLMs do

very similar things and neural function

neural computation has to be executed in

a particular way. But our intuitions

about the three main branches of

philosophy also turn out to be wrong.

Right? So in epistemology the intuition

that no statement can be true and false

at the same time. That's wrong. In

ethics, the intuition that reducing pain

and increasing happiness is the primary

guiding principle of living an ethical

life. I know that's way too simplistic.

And in metaphysics, everything must have

a sufficient cause or reason, right?

Lenus' principle of sufficient reason.

That's no longer assumed to be true

either. There's some essays I've written

about this if you're interested in um

reading more about these these things.

So, when we hear people say, uh but real

understanding of the brain requires

lower level causal details. Well, so

too, right? What's the reason for that?

Um and of course when we read as we

often do on the archive our

artificial our artificial neural

language model offers a biologically

plausible account of language and compos

compositionality. Well what are the

concrete neurobiological predictions?

Right? If your artificial model is

biologically plausible well then what

are the experimental predictions across

different scales of neural organization

and complexity and temporal spatial

resolution?

So scientific explanations again I

mentioned science is in the game of

explanation prediction and control the

explanation part can be separated at

least into causal uh and non-causal

right um other potential distinctions

too but certainly causal and non-causal

is very central where causal is of

course cascades pathways mechanisms

non-causal although this is debatable

wherever mathematical and topological

are partially non-causal some of them

might be causal depending on the field

um and systems to right but where do LLM

fit in here right I don't see where LLMs

really fit in here they're datadriven

predictive models at best right and

final final point here that regression

does not equal exam data does not equal

theory right that's a separate component

so there's been many calls for open you

know open data open code you know open

access all that kind of stuff but I

think we also need open theory that's a

real point that I want to um hammer home

here

um researchers need to play the

inferential meta theoretical cards on

the table, right? And not just do these

sorts of uh experiments in cognitive

neuroscience which are not mapped

explicitly to a formal space. So in

conclusion,

uh diverse causal landscapes in the

brain uh can derive distinct components

of linguistic structure and explanatory

neural linguistics will require the

causal language of linguistics and

neuroscience to be in sympathy. And this

can't happen if we model language

processing as centered on sequential

probabilistic statistics, right? Because

that's not what language is, right?

That's not what it is at all.

There is something unique about our

species evolutionary ecological niche,

though it's maybe not as fashionable to

say it these days. Um, we inhabit more

than any other species a richly

symbolic, logical, and causal mental

realm. That's our internal mental space.

And we should not be surprised then if

sidelining these concepts in favor of

statistical, functional and frequentist

tools offers little help in theory

formation for hierarchal linguistic

structures. Why is that? Another reason

too here is that um you know science is

done through our mental science forming

faculties. It's a it's to quote Cornell

West, it's a very human thing, right?

It's a human thing to do. Um, and if we

forget that, if we think that science is

done by uh some kind of angelic force

and not by uh squishy, gooey uh neural

stuff inside our schools, then we will

probably sideline a lot of these

important causal and symbolic uh

structures and try and be uh more, you

know, empiricist, data driven, blah blah

blah. There's nothing wrong with

datadriven empiricist approaches to

science. Depending on the domain, it can

be very complimentary to theory work.

But the point I'm making here is that if

we're focused on human language um we

really will be missing out on uh the

core components of the system because

the core component of human language is

not prediction. That's not what it is.

In fact, I have a there's a I had my own

reply commentary paper in cognitive

neuroscience uh the cognitive

neuroscience journal in response to one

of uh par and and fristan's uh papers a

few months ago if you want to read more

about that.

So a mathematically explicit navigation

of linguistic knowledge these platonic

forms driving linguistic constituency

structure can help narrow down the list

of candidate neural mechanisms for

syntax. Right? And that's I think that

like I said before this was a previously

inaccessible space of uh psychology and

uh cognitive science which I think is

very exciting to explore.

So what about future directions? Well,

we can explore how to align further

these topics in experimental neural

linguistics, theoretical neuroscience

through rows and other models and

mathematical models of linguistic

computation and not just linguistic

computation but other domains of

cognitive science and psychology, right?

Working memory, attention, other things

like that. This can be achieved through

experimentally probing the parsing of

linguistic structures of various sizes,

right? So minimal compositional schemes,

minimal morphos syntactic objects up to

naturalistically presented sentences. Uh

we can do that in terms of how

punctuated moments of symbolic inference

occur alongside statistical processes.

Now crucially they will always be

alongside there will never be any moment

when your mind and your brain are purely

doing statistics and purely doing

symbolic inference. That's just not how

it works. There's always a necessary

integration as I hypothesize via cross

frequency coupling and other people like

Hugo Viceart and Andre Martin in their

meg work have tried to cash this out too

in terms of how you know we can use meg

to look at cross frequency coupling to

negotiate these sorts of inferences but

the point I'm making here is that we

have to be much more explicit about the

you know feature engineering that we

engage in in our lab in our labs plural

um for exploring these questions and we

can also do this through exploring the

processing of different types of

categories of composition, right? Um,

not just linguistic composition, but

comparing how the brain and what

mechanisms are involved in linguistic

composition compared to geometric

composition, melodic mathematical

structures, right? Uh, in a minimal

compositional scheme

in the theoretical space. This can also

be achieved through exploring which

psychological and computational theories

of language and other other um faculties

too can be formalized into a

mathematical language that is more

amunable to mapping into certain

neurocomputational regimes.

And that sounds um maybe ambitious, but

it's actually not that ambitious really

because like I said, even when you

compare things like naive set theory,

you know, X and Y equals XY with

category theory or marological um models

from ager even that simple transition

does yield quite substantial differences

in how you want to migrate things into

neural um mechanisms. So I think that's

quite telling that already we're seeing

evidence that the mathematical uh

structures and algebraic recipe that we

offer to neuroscientists can actually be

immediately helpful in narrowing down

the space of uh candidate models. Uh so

psychologists of language have the

potential to help guide the search for

the neural code of syntax in that case

right because they can provide cognitive

neuroscientists with an explicit

algebraic parts list to offer

constraints. It may be possible to use

the formal mathematical properties of

language to help narrow the space of

candidate mechanisms for how language is

biologically implemented. This is an

explanatory step that simply cannot

translate into models of language that

are purely box logical and localization.

Right? Like I said, and similar steps

have already been made in psychological

theories of working memory and attention

with respect to constraining neural

theories, but the language sciences are

yet to catch up.

So yeah, thank you again to Mike for the

invitation to be part of the symposium.

Thank you to all of my collaborators for

their help over the years with these,

you know, experimental and theoretical

types of issues. And uh one final point

here, uh in recent years, the cognitive

neurosciences have overwhelmingly

embraced functionalist statistical

methods and models, marginalizing

algebraic symbolic accounts of how

platonic forms may ingress into biology.

And I'll just leave this quote here from

Thomas Arnold um kind of reflecting more

on what it means and what it uh you know

what we can do when we're in a space

where a field has potentially moved on

into a domain where uh you know progress

is being achieved in a way that does not

uh truly align with the necessary kind

of design features of what we know human

language um can do. And thank you again

to Mike for inviting me to speak

alongside these uh these other uh uh

renuncients so to speak to quote Arnold

uh who are interested in platonic forms

and how they can inform uh the study of

biology and uh and mind.

