You're on team human, conscious
intervention in the machine. An
opportunity to tune into what matters,
turn on to the best ways of expressing
it, and then drop out of the
institutions that simply won't rise to
the occasion. I'm Douglas Rushkoff, and
I'm on Team Human.
Playing for Team Human today, the tech
culture journalist behind us Mag, Taylor
Loren. Taylor and I are going to
consider the demise of the Washington
Post and whether tech billionaires
really want the rest of us dead. It's
time to intervene on behalf of people
and all living things. I'm Douglas
Rushkoff and we're all on team human.
>> Hey.
>> Hi. Thanks for having me.
>> Oh god. Thanks so much for doing this.
So, for those of you who don't know, and
I'm pretty sure anybody who knows me
know I'm like a subset of the of the fan
base of Taylor, um she's, you know,
writing now the writing and producing
and editing and everything. Um the
magazine Usermag, which is at usermag.co
or I guess you can sort of find it on
Substack. She's also the author of the
book Extremely Online: The Untold Story
of Fame, Influence, and Power on the
Internet. Uh she like me and this is
there are very few of us who really do
this. Um she focuses on the cultural
side of digital media. And even though
one might intend to focus on the
cultural side of digital media, you
can't do that without occasionally
having to venture into the the negative
space of business and politics, which so
often seeks to enclose
uh prescribe or even just prevent us
from exercising the kind of agency that
humans like to in in culture. natural
social spaces. So I for years have
wanted to kind of compare notes both on
the journey that that you've been
through and uh sort of the journey that
we as a as a society have been through
um in this in this internet thing. We
got slightly different generational
perspectives and maybe I don't know I
like to become more happy or hopeful
after these conversations. Maybe that
that will happen.
>> I think so.
>> Yeah. I mean, the first thing I kind of
want to ask is is and obviously with
anything, just go as deep as you want
to, but I'm interested. I look at you,
you got out. You got out, you know, you
left. You left. And I've just always
loved people who do this. you you were
like New York Times, then Washington
Post, you know, like the person writing
about this with the giant tweets that
everybody knew and articles every week.
Did you see what what Taylor wrote this
week? Do you see what Lens wrote that
week? Um, but you got out voluntarily.
You got out. So, I'm wondering um how
you made the decision. How did your mom
react when you explained, you know what
I mean, to to do that?
>> Yeah. My sister worked at the Washington
Post for like seven years or something.
So we we but she was doing PR. My mom
doesn't really care. But um what I do as
long as I'm happy. Um but I started as
an independent blogger and most of my
career was I mean I worked in like
digital media before I worked in
traditional media. And in 2017 I I had a
Snapchat show covering the 2016
election. Um and then that was doing
really well also into 2017. And then I
felt like nobody back then was taking
independent now people take independent
journalists seriously but back then even
though my Snapchat show was with the
Hill but like because I was doing video
journalism it was always seen as subpar
and so I was like okay I'm just going to
have to like take a massive pay cut and
just like basically be a writer at these
like ancient places cuz like that's kind
of the only way that these like
journalism people will like understand
that I'm doing journalism. So, I took a
job at The Atlantic, uh, which I loved.
I I mean, I loved my I've always had
amazing editors. Honestly, I would die
for all of them. Um, but, uh, but yeah,
so I worked at The Atlantic and then
like the New York Times came and like
offered to double my salary and then
like I was at the times for a few years
and then the Post came and was like, "Do
you want to be a columnist?" And I was
like, "Sure." Uh, and I got to work for
this guy Mark Cybel who
>> is the best editor to have ever existed.
He retired last year, which is why I
left. Um,
>> and yeah, the week that he retired, he
retired on Friday and then that Sunday
they fired our first female
editor-inchief, Sally. They pushed out
all of like the leadership. Basically,
that a year ago is when like this whole
decline started. And I was like, okay,
well, Mark was the only reason I was
here and I don't want to like be part of
they were like trying to get us to join
these groups like build it, fix it, like
whatever. And I was like, I don't want
to do that. I just want to do my own
thing. So then I just quit and now I'm
doing my own thing.
But I I don't I I'm glad I had my time
in those places cuz it gave me a lot of
like I used to write when I started out
these like like negative critiques of
places like the New York Times and stuff
and I I never really understood what it
was like inside those places. And I I
just think I have a lot more nuanced
understanding of how power works within
those institutions now.
>> Right. Do you think their coverage of of
the net and of digital media was too
I don't know either like proc corporate
in in
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> It's just like they don't understand
technology outside of a business story.
So like a lot of their coverage I mean I
was on the business team. I was always
on the business desks. Um uh I guess at
the Atlantic I was on tech like just
their tech section but um they cover it
more through the lens of like Meta's
stock is up or like through like here's
what Elon Musk is doing like and I cover
tech from the user side. So it's like
how are the people how is it being used?
How are the people who are exerting
influence on these platforms like
influencers which I primarily cover like
the influencer economy like how are they
exerting power online and like what is
that relationship to these platforms and
so they just never take that stuff as
seriously I think as like the the like
fundraising announcement for Mark Andre
or like that type of stuff.
>> Yeah. And it's interesting because that
back in the real back in the day like
when I was just starting '92 9394
back before they thought there was any
business at all to be done
>> the only place you could write tech
stories was on the culture page was on
the arts page. So I'm writing it was so
fun. And so I'm writing like, you know,
kind of Mondo 2000 style articles, you
know, like about virtual reality and
psychedelics and the future of email or,
you know, pre-ocial social social about
MUDs and and and you know, dungeons and
things online and that business wanted
nothing to do with it. It wasn't until
um that day that AOL was going to buy
Time Warner. It's like 1999 that all of
a sudden the business people came and
they're like, "Oh, write about this,
write about that." And they wouldn't let
me write about it if I wasn't saying why
this synergy was the greatest blah blah
since sliced bread. And I'd always look
at it from, well, how is this affecting
now I sound like a a sound like you, how
is this affecting the user, right? What
is how does this change the way we the
way we the way we use this stuff? and
they weren't generally they weren't
interested. So I I know it's it's
strange but yeah even the speaking I
ended up doing business conferences like
web 2 and O'Reilly this and it's like
I'm just interested in that se
17-year-old girl who's thinking
differently about the world now because
she gets her advice from here instead of
there.
>> But they don't take those people
seriously. And it's interesting you
mentioned teen girls cuz like those are
some of the earliest adopters on so much
technology. I wrote a piece back in 2023
that was on the 10-year anniversary of
selfie being named word of the year. And
I wrote about like the media coverage of
selfies, which was so insane back in
2013. Like, and I remember this cuz I
was right out of college. And like I
remember reading this stuff and it was
like basically everyone that takes a
selfie is a narcissistic psychopath.
It's it's ruining society. Like it's the
downfall of and so much of it was just
this like deeply misogynistic framing
about women. um who were the primarily
people like putting themselves in selfie
images and stuff. So I I see that a lot
unfortunately in legacy media to this
day where like if you look at their like
internet culture cover like so much of
their coverage is just like look at
these stupid young people. It has no
respect for the people that are that are
that they're covering. No, it's funny
because 2013 I did this documentary
Generation Like and it was for PBS
Frontline and I was trying to do let's
look at it all, you know, the good, the
bad, the ugly, the and it's PBS. So they
kept it's like leaning into like the
hand ringing. Oh, what about you know oh
but is this girl what is she showing and
what is her self-image and what's that?
So I showed the two extremes, the boy
extreme and the girl extreme, you know,
in it. But then look at this kid who
decided he's going to make it just
create a company because there were al
just as many teens who were like
creating whole new ways for people to
interact.
>> Yeah. Or like I mean I grew up in like
as a kid and a teenager in the 2000s
which had the worst media environment
ever. It was dominated by legacy media
publications that and tabloid media
specifically that was so deeply
misogynistic and and evil towards women
like truly horrible stuff that they were
when I was doing research for my book I
was like I can't believe some of this
stuff was published in like 2007 like
these countdowns for Mary Kate Ashley to
turn 18 and like just the this like
disgusting way that people talked about
like Britney Spears. I'm like that media
environment was so toxic. Talk about
promoting eating disorders. Like that's
all it did. And then we have the
internet that gives rise to like body
positivity and all the I was a Tumblr
girly and like it really like showed you
like different understandings of gender
and sexuality and all this stuff and
like none of the media never focused on
that. was just this like moral panic
framing that was really like
disrespectful and not nuanced and I
think ultimately allowed like a lot of
blame to be allocated for like the users
like if you that selfie stuff was like
there's this woman Jean I can never say
her last name or twangi or whatever
>> she was like the leader of all that and
and now you know she's pushing like
authoritarianism and like surveillance
capitalism and like it just like devol
evolved so quickly
>> and it's hard.
I get it. If I'm I'm a congressman or a
senator, it's like, will you please
protect our kids from Mark Zuckerberg?
Mark Zuckerberg doesn't like your kids.
People running TikTok don't like your
kids. It's like Larry Ellison now is
running Tik Tok. So, it's like, sure,
regulate these people. Get Corey Doctoro
down here. Let's regulate. But what
you've been pointing out in some of your
later pieces is some of this regulation
is really just backdoor palunteer
surveillance by another name.
>> It's a massive massive reward to big
tech. It's the biggest gift that we
could ever give to big tech. That's why
all of these tech companies are
pre-complying. That's why I mean let's
not forget that like Elon Musk like you
know informed the language of KOSA, the
kids online safety act. Do you think
Elon Musk cares about child safety? Like
it's just such a farce.
>> What is the farce?
>> I would love to see regulation against
big tech. I would love to see them
target the actual like hyper capitalist
business models. Like I think it's such
a tragedy that last year, you know, both
of the Google and Meta like antitrust
cases were lost. Like I would have loved
to see the in I understand the reasons
why those failed, but like there's so
much anti-competitive behavior from
these companies that we don't even
bother to to prosecute. And bigger than
that, we don't have data privacy in this
country. like for all the I covered the
Tik Tok um ban extensively for the Times
and then the Post. They were doing this
like nonsense moral panic about like
fake Tik Tok trends that didn't exist.
But the reality is is that China can buy
as much of our data any anyone including
bad actors um can buy as much American
data as possible and the government
including places like you know ICE and
stuff is they're primarily relying on
commercially available data to to do to
do what they're doing and that's because
we don't have comprehensive data privacy
protections in this country which if you
do buy into the premise of Gan whatever
you know and no hate I'm not like trying
to like put her on blast or something
but like you know a lot of these people
where they say, "Oh, you know, the
predatory algorithms." Well, the
companies are able to target your
children with with ex, you know, extreme
content, predatory stuff. Hook them in
that way because of the massive amount
of data that they're harvesting. And you
think that now having little Johnny, you
know, scan, input his biometric data in
addition to all of that is going to
help. Like, no. You're just exacerbating
these problems. You're not doing
anything to fix them. The regulations
they want to do are like what are for
kids to scan stuff in there.
>> Yeah. It's to it's to allow tech
companies to harvest even more data.
>> But the idea I mean it's just for
listeners who haven't been following the
idea is we're going to protect your kids
from these companies. And the way
they're going to do it is by what?
Making sure that kids are a certain age
before they are able to log in to
something. So the goal, let's be clear
about the goal too, is to remove
anonymity from the internet. The
government has sought to do this for
years. There's also this far-right
re reactionary movement to dismantle
section 230 protections and basically
eliminate the ability for user generated
content online.
So there's a lot of these sort of like
self-interested
authoritarian efforts going on and
they're selling it under the guise of
this moral panic about children and the
the the response to that is these these
politicians saying like okay yeah we're
not going to target the business models
of big tech we're not going to go after
you know big meta is our biggest funer
we're not going to do anything
meaningful to curb their business model
instead we're going to regulate you the
users you are going to have to sc upload
your you know scan your days. Basically,
you will no longer have the ability to
anonymously access information online
and you will no longer have the ability
to anonymously speak online or if in the
UK you with chat control even message.
>> So then the gist of it is then under the
guise of being able to enforce parental
or age restrictions on say porn sites,
they're just going to have everybody's
retina scans up in the in the DNA and
whatever.
>> That's the the tip of the iceberg.
They're harvesting like I mean these
these companies are very interested in
tying your offline identity to your
online behavior because that's very
valuable for advertisers. That's very
valuable data. That's why Peter Teal you
know invested in Persona through
Founders Fund. Persona is the number one
identity verification tool um that that
you know platforms like Roblox and all
these other Reddit and stuff are using.
like this is a massively lucrative
industry especially as we see the rise
of AI and all of this data becomes
incredibly valuable. So instead of
allowing them to create more value for
you know new AI systems or whatever like
we should be curbing their value. We we
used to hall Mark Zuckerberg in front of
Congress for harvesting too much data.
Now we have Meta precomplying with laws
that are harvesting mass amounts of data
on children and they're just able to do
it because they're like, "Oh, it's going
to protect kids to, you know, again,
scan everyone's face, adults included."
It's crazy,
>> right? I mean, on one one hand, I look
at it and think, well, maybe the easiest
way to combat the the commoditization
of all of our data, everyone put
everything out and let's create a data
commons that then there's no value to it
because we all have each other's data.
>> No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
no, no. That's not the way it's going to
go for you. Because the thing is, maybe
that would work if if that data wasn't
valuable. This data is incredibly
valuable. I mean, look at what Google
did just announced, right? Like a week
ago that they're going to be testing uh
targeted deals aka surveillance pricing,
right? Like we're suddenly um or what
Instacart what happened with Instacart,
right? People certain people are being
charged 23% more for certain for their
grocery orders based on their data. So
as surveillance pricing and AI and all
this stuff integrates, we already see
this type of discrimination happening
with people getting different rates for
uh car loans, for rental uh
applications, all this stuff like your
data will be used against you for or
healthcare denials. It now they know
that you personally were chatting with a
friend on Discord, right, about like
health issues. Like all of this data
gets fed into these AI systems that
ultimately will be used to exploit you.
So we shouldn't want that. I know
they're not supposed to be. It's
supposed to be private. They're not
supposed to see that.
>> But we don't have priv we're eroding
priv My issue is like we're eroding
privacy in the name of kids safety. I'm
all for kids keeping kids safe. Let's
start by not allowing these tech
companies to target them and harvest
even more data. So the kid safety is
like another version of you know Trump
administration saying we need uh uh to
get whatever they were called Doge into
all the companies and take all the
employee data in order to make sure
there's no employees making too much
money. It's like where's that data
going? It's like back into Trump's Qatar
bank account. No, it's into Musk has it
all. And then what Musk doesn't have,
Larry Ellison has. So Larry Allison's
doing this one I've been reading about
called Stargate, which I thought was to
get to another dimension, but it's not
at all. You know, remember that? It was
a round thing and you could jump through
it and you get to this other dimension.
No. Stargate for Larry Ellison is to all
of our biometric data and DNA data into
one big thing. Now, the promise is that
like we're never no one's going to get
cancer or die or anything because they
have all our data. I I the cancer thing
really bothers me because every time
someone's like, "Oh, so you're anti-AII
or something." Which I'm not anti the
concept of AI or machine learning or
whatever. And they're like, "Well, what
if it cures cancer?" And I'm like,
"Well, is that what it is that the
application that we're discussing?" No,
we're discussing a completely different
application where they're harvesting
biometric data to do healthcare
surveillance pricing. Like right now AI
is being used to deny people healthcare.
If if AI was being used to grant people
healthcare, I would support that
application of it.
>> Right. And the interesting thing then I
mean going back to the press and it's
it's because it is a kind of a a a
tesseract or a fractal of of of
influences then is so the the when you
write about the manufactured outrage
cycles in mainstream media the
manufactured outrage cycles
perpetrated by the billionaires of
mainstream media outlets which include
Twitter and Paramount and CBS
>> then fuel the parental outrage and
desire desire for the very child
protections that are
reifications of the surveillance
apparatus.
>> Yes. It just all feeds in like this
moral panic is so convenient. It's so
convenient for big tech. Like the focus
is 100% on the users and regulating
speech which allows them to harvest more
and more data. None of it targets their
actual you know business model. And you
see that through meta funding these
front groups like the digital childhood
alliance or like you know just these
fake groups that like basically exist to
push again legislation that doesn't
really target the companies but to
target the companies it's it's it's a
more nuanced thing and people you know a
lot of these politicians can't even turn
their computer on and they don't they're
getting advice from Peter Teal. I have
well-meaning friends, right?
well-meaning friends in the sort of
nonprofit NGO sector that lose their
jobs in corporate whatever or lost their
job here and then the opportunity is to
start like a kind of and I know three or
four of them now sort of grifty
childprotecting
NGO
you know save the children they'll find
a couple of you know really smart young
high school students to come out and do
panels in DC at Brookings or somewhere
and basically penalty.
>> They all profit.
>> They all profit.
>> It makes me so mad because I the the
people fighting this are trans rights
organizations with no money. Groups like
Fight for the Future that got their
funding dropped because they fought the
Kids Online Safety Act. Again, something
that Elon Musk continues to boost. Like
the people that or or sex workers, it's
like it's it's no one. They have no
funding. They have no money. And then
they're going up against like you said
this nonprofit industrial comp complex
that is that is by the way enacting like
the Heritage Foundation's tech policy.
>> I know I know there was like it's like I
mean I wake up to this every decade in a
different way. Like when I look at like
as a college kid I look at Bill Clinton
and go oh wait a minute this is very
reanite. This isn't this isn't you know
and it just keeps happening. But these
folks, it is it is it it's like it is
out of almost Project 2025 in terms of
uh uh the way they understand tech. It's
like then the only one I could find
who's speaking our language is like the
Pope.
>> Yeah, I know. Which is so hilarious.
I know. That's so that's such a funny
like side arc that we have this like
amazing like American pope that like
somehow has more clarity like moral
clarity than like anyone in the US like
media even like
>> it's hilarious um especially as an Irish
Catholic but like I just
>> I don't know it makes me depressed and
it makes me depressed to see like the
media's complicity in it as you
mentioned like these media companies are
also owned by billionaire owners and you
can see the way that they have exerted
influence over the coverage like not
just at the Washington Post but a lot of
these outlets and I think that's
incredibly disappointing because we're
not getting this nuanced coverage of
technology that we deserve. And I I was
thinking of this response that Elena
Kagan, the justice made after um
Gonzalez v Google, which was this, you
know, big challenge to section 230 that
the Supreme Court chose not to hear back
in 2023. But she's like she makes a
joke. She's like, "Well, we're not
exactly the nine greatest experts about
the internet." Haha. And like everyone
in the press gy's like laughing and
she's like so maybe basically Congress
can figure it out. And I'm like okay
that's actually really disturbing
because the internet is like the most
disruptive like technology of our time.
It's like greatly affecting our like
political and economic ecosystem and
like the fact that you guys are the
Supreme Court and you're like laughing
like we don't really know about all that
stuff. like you you need to take it
seriously and like I they do obviously
they hear you know these big cases but
like I I think they fundamentally like
kind of don't take it seriously in a way
and like don't have an understanding of
it.
>> No. And government and policy makers
don't either. I mean back when I was
coming up it was I had friends who went
to work for Microsoft to write
legislation for Congress. Well, you know
um um our friend you know Dana Boyd,
brilliant person, right? She graduated
Berkeley and started got a job at
Microsoft. I'm like, "What are you doing
for Microsoft?" She goes, "Well, I'm
actually writing the internet kids
legislation like, oh, and you mail it to
them and then they they pretty much
print it up right in the law, you know,
and that's
>> from industry to to it's coming down
that way." But the even the regulation
the other way, like I know you've been
saying and and maybe I'll explain it in
in my way so you can explain why it's
wrong. Um, so section 230, you mentioned
that a couple of times. So section 230
as I understood it came up sort of back
back in the day when we had like email
and Usenet groups and all this stuff. We
were writing emails and posting things
online and the institutions that were
had the servers and sometimes it was
companies but mostly institutions
colleges whatever who own the servers on
which that stuff was being posted didn't
want to be responsible for what was
there you know like what if I say put up
a recipe that's poison or someone gets
killed or whatever and so section 230
was kind of originally about them not
having responsibility for that and Then
I thought social media companies took
advantage of it.
>> Well, okay, let's be clear because I I I
think that's like a what the reason that
it was founded, right, the original
case, I can't remember if it was the I
think it was the CompuServe one or the
Prodigy one. It was two, it was Compucer
and Prodigy, right? The two biggest
internet service providers, they both
hosted these little like AOL style
internet I'm sure you were on like
internet environments, right? Um and so
actually this whistleblower for the Wolf
of Wall Street, the guy that Jordan
Belelfford who ended up committing
scams, right? There was a whistleblower
that went on one of those forums and was
like, "Hey, this guy is committing
scams." Jordan Belelfford, the worst of
Wall Street sued, right, and was like,
"No, you you need to shut down like
CompuServe is responsible for, you know,
this content basically because you're
publishing it. It's defamatory of me.
>> This is a whistleblower, right?"
>> Um, and so they, so basically the courts
ruled like no because they weren't
taking any moderation. Comperve didn't
know the content that was on there. They
didn't moderate it in any way
>> and they certainly aren't publishers in
that case.
>> Exactly. And we don't want to treat them
as a newspaper because then there would
be no user generated content. Prodigy
did make an effort to moderate but be
and then that ruling determined that
because they moderated at all they would
be responsible to everything. So
obviously it created this perverse
incentive where it's like you either
don't moderate at all or you moderate
everything. So section 230 comes along
and says look if you are the speaker of
the content because the internet is not
like the real world like it's not like
the physical world where there is this
sort of like commons the only sort of
common spaces on the internet are
corporation corporate spaces basically
primarily or like spaces that like an
entity has to set up right it's there's
no physical world on the internet it's
only places that people have set up and
so in order to have any free speech
online, you cannot treat those spaces as
the speakers of the content, right?
>> You you should be responsible for your
own speech. Alex Jones, if he goes
online, he should be responsible for his
own speech. Now, I see how it got warped
on social media. And I I like I said, I
I have a lot of criticisms about the
social media companies, but attacking
section 230, which is a foundational
internet law and allows for us to like
leave a negative review about a
restaurant on on Yelp, like is not
something that we should mess with right
now, especially under the Trump
administration before we've done all the
other things. like 90% of the negative
effects of social media of like these
algorithms and outreach could be
achieved through like data privacy and
like all these other privacy
regulations, right? And like uh you know
regulating them in very different ways.
And so I don't think we need to attack
this like foundational law that protects
that that it primarily exists to protect
free speech online from from users. And
right now, sorry, last thing I say is
like ever since Fostessa, let's not
forget that the only reason Fostessesta
passed was because of Meta's, you know,
aggressive support of it. These these
now these big social media platforms
actually don't care if section 230 is
repealed because they have massive AI
systems that can moderate content at
scale. So now they're kind of like, oh,
actually, you can take that, you can
take that away because we can mass
moderate,
>> but they already mass moderate at scale.
I mean, that's what they've been doing
the whole time,
>> but they're not pre-screening every
single piece of content.
>> No, they're not screening at all.
They're they're I mean, the reason why I
don't think that 230 applies to them is
once you're using an algorithm to choose
what I get, you're a publisher and you
should be responsible for what you've
done.
>> There were always filtering mechanisms.
this idea that algorithms are new or
different or something. There have
always been different editorial
decisions that the even back in the
compervant prodigy days the the the
featured post or the there were always
mechanisms by which they were exerting
like quote unquote editorial control.
But ne but the most important thing is
like again I don't even want to hear
about section 230 until we regulate do
all the actual thoughtful regulation
that could target because what these
people bring up when you say why do you
want to repeal section 230 Jose Joseph
Gordon Levit on the hill the other day
right like he's talking about like
online radicalization and mis it's like
that's al I have problems with those
algorithms too we should have
transparency laws we should have privacy
laws we should have we should protect
their ability to exploit us that is the
that's the fundamental problem,
>> right? If we had privacy, then the
algorithms couldn't really they couldn't
track us the same way.
>> They don't have data on us,
>> right?
>> Yeah. And giving users more control over
their online experience, allowing users
to have things like I mean I I've dealt
with a lot of like online harassment or
whatever and and this is and it's it
drives me crazy because it's like we
should we all should have more power
over online experience. It took years
for Twitter to even add the like
limitations to who can reply to you, you
know? That's something these platforms
should should launch with like the
ability to block content like all of
this stuff your own algorithm you know
to tune whether how much violent how
much whatever you know
>> but if we remove section 230 we remove
all of those user controls as well so we
need to protect like at least if least
listen even if I can't get people to
protect section 230 which I think they
should do at that at least ignore it for
now until we get all this other stuff
done and then I promise you if there's
any problems we'll address it but like
the other thing that bothers me is like
yes are these check tech giants bad and
exploitative sure but why why is it only
them that are there's also a lot of I
write report on a lot of extremely um
dangerous you know like incel forums
extremist communities why are those not
being like focusing on big tech just
pushes people towards these more extreme
smaller places that I think if we had
privacy right we had a lot of this law
these laws like would fix it at every
scale it's the same reason people are
like protect the kids it's like well why
just protect the kids things
These these AR algorithms don't get
benign when you turn 19. Like we should
fix everyone's user experience.
>> Just want to take a moment to thank our
sponsor, everyone's Earth, maker of
these brand new puppies, Kobe Laundry
Buds. These are in place of detergent or
in place of those little plastic pods.
These are healthy, good for the world.
They're just like pills. You chuck it in
the washer, throw in the laundry, turn
it on, and you know, run a normal cycle
with just this. No laundry detergent, no
nothing else. No chemicals, no plastics,
no bad. Just put this in, and your
clothes get clean. The world is saved.
The babies can wear these clothes washed
in this stuff and not get all irritated
like they do from detergent. This
stuff's great. And then when you're done
with the bag, you just put it in the
landfill. It's that good. All right,
Kobe Laundry Buds. Go to kobeclean.com.
Put in the discount code team human just
from now till like March 15th. Put team
human and you get 31% off. It's our big
farewell to our loving sponsor of the
year, Kobe
everything. What you reminded me of is
for me my most um
emotionally charged
um experience of your career was that
the the
institutional newspapers you were
writing for didn't have your back.
>> Oh well, yeah.
>> In a profound way. Right. Now, for me,
the the reason part of the reason I was
happy you were at a big publication was
you're it's safer for you like like as a
freelancer like the one time I wrote
sort of bad stuff about 4chan, it oh my
god, it was really wasn't good for my
whole life. I mean, everything happened
and I had nobody. I'm just in my, you
know, in my apartment. I just got my
little kid, you know. I'm like, oh my
god. you know, um, if you're like at the
Times or at the Washington Post and you
venture into speaking about Gamergate or
what's going on, um,
where were they? Do you know?
>> It's not even what's so frustrating to
me, and it's not my editors. I have to
tell you, my editor, Mark Cybel, Pu
Wing, every single editor that I've ever
had has been phenomenal. It's the
bosses. It's the management people where
it what was so frustrating to me is it's
not even I don't even care if they issue
you know a statement or whatever like I
don't care about that. What I care is
that like I know how online attention
works and when somebody lies about you
online or when somebody when especially
when Fox News or like Tucker Carlson was
doing his like nightly segment on me for
a while like it you have to respond
aggressively. If you if you don't let
the person who's like don't respond in
any way or provide any counternarrative,
you create a vacuum where they dominate.
And a lot of this stuff is exacerbated
by people in the media. For instance, I
don't know, media columnist at NPR who
just personally hates me and is going to
happily write up, you know, what uh what
Tucker someone like Tucker Carlson would
say or like lies from some right-winger,
you know, and like launder that then
through the mainstream media back. Like
it's all very toxic. But like I think
what was so frustrating to me is like I
couldn't correct all of this stuff in
real time. So like something would come
out. It would be like a gross
misrepresentation
of you know whatever the sort of like
controversy of the time was and I would
be like hey I have the receipts to show
like this is not true. Like can I
respond? And and the bosses would be
like, "No, no, just" and it's like,
"Okay, so I'm taking the reputational
hit." And by the way, the only reason
they're attacking me is cuz I work at
this place, but I have to take this
reputational hit and I can't respond,
>> you know, because you're saying so. And
like it just eventually like I mean by
the time my editor retired like and the
Washington Post, like it just became too
much. I was just like, I want to be able
to respond. I want to be able like and
when I had editors that were supportive
like it was great, but the thing is it's
it's the boss. It's the management,
>> right? because they believe here's the
thing they they agree with those people
>> like we have the New York like
>> they do your editors don't because
they're like us but the bosses or
certainly the whoever the shareholder
board kind of people you know as soon as
it wasn't in family control anymore and
it wasn't about let's bring the news to
people right I mean so basically we go
all the way back to Gamergate and
leading to the election of Donald Trump
which is that that wait a minute, women
are women are scary and mean and and um
they're they're not letting boys be
boys. They're coming into the last
spaces that we have and trying to to to
change our behavior and make us feel bad
about ourselves. And anybody who writes
sympathetically about about those people
must be eliminated.
It was crazy what there's also just so
much misogyny. Like if you look at who
are the media reporters at these outlets
like Dylan Buyers, like I'll say him by
name, many many others, it's all men.
It's all it's almost all exclusively
men. And the way that they covered
specifically like when I got my job uh
when I left the Times to become a
columnist like you know I started like I
said as a blogger. I'm a millennial
blogger. There's a lot of other male
millennial bloggers, Ezra Klein, Matt
Glac, all these people that are like
even a couple years older than me, but
like generally like gener relationally
like my peers, they are never called
attention  They're never called
um you know the way that they would
write about me is like relentless
self-promoter whatever. I'm like, "Yeah,
I'm on social media. I cover social
media. I have a TikTok." Like, but why
why is that like gendered language never
never said towards men? And it was
always this sort of conflating me with
like the stuff that I cover, which is
like the influencer world. And like,
>> but you got it from both sides, though.
You're on the one hand, you're the the
the the whatever the the the the
influencer trolop commercial, whatever.
But on the other, you're the woke. Uh I
know.
>> You know what I mean? So, you got it's
So, you get both. It's like It's like
the media version of Madonna  is
like you're both woke and sold out. It's
like, well, you know. Yeah,
>> I know. And also like it's just been so
interesting too because like as I've
gone independent like I don't I don't
even have any advertisers like at all
because I don't I'm not like brand safe.
Like I just do everything myself. I I'm
100% supported by like people that
subscribe to me. But like I don't sell
out to do anything. I don't have any
speaking gigs. I don't do anything. Like
I which I would I would honestly like to
do more. I know I'm not gigs.
>> You can have speaking gigs,
>> but I'm not like a corporate I'm not
like a corporate I don't really I talk a
lot about like privacy and stuff that's
not I'm sure I could probably find some
if I put my heart into it. But I'm just
saying like I'm not like doing the like
sellout thing that I could be doing if I
wanted to like go hard and just make a
lot of money and just tell people what
they wanted to hear about like child
safety or the influencer world and talk
about like I'm a victim of online
harassment and that's why we need you
know KOSA or something like
>> yeah it has come around though. I just
got a speaking offer from Brazil to talk
about how can we make the how can we
make the internet more human again and
>> I know Brazil see they're the they're
the future.
>> I think there's like a bunch of cool
people. I love 404 media, which some of
my friends run at that. And like there's
just a lot of like cool independent
media people that I have like a lot of
solidarity with and I like I think that
hopefully like brands and companies will
realize that there's value in engaging
with people like us,
>> right? I mean, what I was hoping was was
you know things like um you know like
like user are are
placeholders for future collectives,
right? I mean, you don't plan to be the
only writer for user mag, do you?
>> I don't know. I mean, the newsletter is
only like 10% of my time because so like
making video content and I make
everything. I do everything myself.
>> There's all this stuff. There's all
these edits in there which makes it I
just record a I just talk to camera. You
like have actual stuff in there.
>> I edit it and then also put like
thumbnails. I write the des like I just
started a live streaming channel. So
like I think video content as a whole is
just made more time consuming and I
freelanced. I still like I still do
freelance sometimes for like traditional
media so it's a lot but I would love to
hire somebody to like you know like work
on it with me or like be my editorial
assistant. I just it's only been a year.
I've only been independent for a year
and two months. So
>> cuz I'm just wondering if as
independents we're better like forming
magazines of us you know collectives of
five 10 writers who are all
>> if not agreeing on things at least you
know coming somehow related. I like
collaboration. Yeah, I think it's good
to like band together and and push this
also push people to like challenge where
they get their news from and say like
look there are these alternative like
collectives and help like sort of
cross-pollinate that way,
>> right? Cuz I was thinking like I was
looking at the the tech billionaires
want us dead
>> meme, right? So it's one of your latest
videos.
>> That was my clickbait title. I was like,
should I do the clickbait title?
>> Of course. Of course. especially for
that. Um, and it's true. So, there's
that and you did that and then it was
like a few months ago there was, you
know, Astra Taylor and Naomi Klein did
that piece for the Times and then before
that I did my uh, you know, the survival
of the richest book. So, there's
>> which was I cited it in my video.
>> I know you did. I saw the cover and
everything. You So, we've been on this
and I've been on this this one since I
met those guys in 2018. you know, the
the the idea that they're not just
trying to escape from the causes of
their own effects, but they really are
ready to dispense with humanity. That
and they're saying it out loud that this
isn't conspiracy theory. This is what
they're saying that they are the
transhuman ones who get the wings and
get off the planet and we're the ones
who stay and at best squirm around in
the mud but probably just die in some
Mad Max radioactive horror. Um
God but so you're you're you agree that
these folks are or many of them any are
actually pro-extinction. Oh, I I mean
yes, only because like I've also covered
these people and I talked to people that
that believe in those things that are
not billionaires that follow these
ideologies and I mean somebody like Emil
Torres and and Tim and like others have
like really covered it as well like in
detail but I think fundamentally they
don't have solidarity or see themselves
as part of humanity broader humanity and
I think even if even if maybe some of
them don't like actively like want us
dead in the sense that if you ask them
they won't say like answer that terrible
Peter Teal answer with Ross doubt it
where he's like um I don't know if the
human race should continue like they
still hold these eugenic beliefs or they
still hold these like this idea that
like they are separate and that they are
a separate and I do think that like you
see this kind of thinking in Silicon
Valley but also in Washington DC like
when I worked as a political reporter
for two years like there's this idea
that like they're all in this bubble and
like they are all going to be sort of
separated from the like worst effects of
their policies and like what they're
enacting on the rest
the country or the world. And I think
that that's really dangerous thinking.
We don't want we want people that are in
power and legislating that like that
that have solidarity with broader
humanity and that like understand like
view themselves as like, you know, me
true members of the public.
>> Yeah. I mean, which is why you could
even look at, you know, you can look at
footage of um the January 6th thing and
it's like, yeah, they had to get to
safety, but the way that the senators or
whatever, it's like, oh, we're going
down into our underground bunker and
through our special passages. like we're
ready for that. We're ready for that,
you know, and there's copters waiting,
you know, once we get out, when we get
taken to, you know, the Air Force base,
you know, this this I mean, which is the
fantasy of, you know, 20 different shows
on streaming media now is the the the,
you know, not just the bunker fantasy,
but like a secret civilization
underground or on a different planet or
in a
>> well, they think they can buy their way
out of like whatever bad stuff is going
to happen to everyone, including climate
change and all this other stuff. And in
some ways they can buy themselves, you
know, sort of insulate themselves from
from a lot of the horrible things that
they're doing to the world, but but it's
bad. Like that's bad. And also like we
don't want that
>> system,
>> right? I mean, but it's been the model
they've had all along. It's like, you
know, talk about Brazil. You go to a
city like S. Paulo and there's this like
super wealthy little enclave in the
middle of a very poor city where, you
know, 30% of people are are hungry. And
it's like, and I guess they look at the
world as if there's just not enough
resources for everybody. So, this is the
way we already live and it's going to
get exacerbated when the  hits a
fan.
>> Yeah. But that's depressing. I don't
want to live in that world.
>> It's depressing and it's wrong. I think
I think and I guess it was because when
I watched your last video, which people
should look at the and I think it was
called tech billion the tech tech
billionaires want us dead. Um, and it
started out with the kind of the
original tech internet culture that I
was a part of in the, you know, late 80s
and early 90s. We had such positive
hippie dreams of it. And then I'm
wondering if some of those dreams were
so psychedelic and utopian and
abstracted that we took our eyes off the
ball of
the the social reality that was going
on. It's like in the in the I wrote this
novel Ecstasy Club about ravers and
there was a grateful dead girl who was
among them who was a social justice
warrior you know but cuz the dead was
still around at the beginning of the net
and she was one of them and she just
like a third of the way into the book
she disappears they don't know where she
is and she's just gone and then they
don't even make much of it and my point
was that the sort of we forgot the 19
it's like we left the 1960s values in
the car at the mall you know It's like
the and just went and got higher and
into 120 beats per minute ecstasy. And
maybe do you think that's part of the
problem that that that we've gotten
ourselves into this mess?
>> I think it's also just like capitalism
and money like came in. I I I'm so sad
that I wasn't like I I wish I was just
like 10 years older and could have like
experienced that internet before. Like I
I mean I had like I'm a millennial and
we had like Facebook but so it wasn't
the social media world that kids are
growing up with now but like
>> it would have been so cool to like
really I mean I had aim I guess in like
1999 but like I think that it's so
interesting for me to like go back and
read about that time because I'm like
was it always like was it always there?
I I think that it before the profit
stuff came in
>> right
>> it it wasn't as warped and I do think
the money just like if you look at the
timeline like changed so much of that.
>> Yeah. It was like Dungeons and Dragons
or something, you know? It was like too
small a thing for them to care about.
>> Yeah. Which you sort of saw that happen
with the influencer industry too and
like content creation where like now
it's so dystopian and they're just
trying to get I mean it's like
commoditize every single aspect of
yourself and put put it online and you
just need to upload more Tik Toks and
maybe that'll get you out of poverty.
And like there was this great piece by
Max Reed, who's one of my favorite
writers, about like basically how like
the American dream was sort of like
dying by the '9s and like the internet
and the influencer world sort of like
reinvigorated this idea of the American
dream and like anybody can make it and
like it's all about how hard you work
online and posting through it and stuff.
And I think about that a lot when I see
this stuff. And it's it's all in service
of the tech companies making millions of
dollars. I think just the media like
anytime people are like oh is the
influencer industry over like every
three years somebody writes that piece
and I don't think I just think like over
the past 20 years like or 25 probably
longer like the media is only getting
more digital and more distributed and
like there's more niches and there's
more like and also people are getting
more and more online so like the
audiences for some niche right like they
may like it's just bigger and bigger
because more people are online so the
audience like the sort of the baseline
audiences for a lot of things just grow
Right. And maybe it wouldn't be enough
people to have supported a a you know,
one of the three network sitcoms in, you
know, might not have been must see
Thursday night TV. But
>> yeah,
>> if you've got a million or two million
dieh hard followers, you know, and they
don't have to follow just you either.
Most of those people probably follow 20,
30, 40 people that that intensely,
>> which it is the like idea of like what
is that famous blog post which I think
is Andrea Horowits blog post. I hate to
cite it, but it's like the thousand true
fans idea. Yeah.
>> Or whatever.
>> Yeah. Which seems I mean sometimes
they're going to be right, you know,
Angie Sar. Sometimes they have to be
even if they're wrong about their their,
you know, optimistic vision of the
future of the the the crypto. I mean,
they're still talking about the
metaverse, aren't they?
>> I don't think they have. And I hate that
they call I hate that they call
themselves tech optimists because it's
like actually a very dystopian,
miserable version of the future that
they're promoting.
>> Right. Right. It's super it's super
super dark. But it's optimistic if like
you aspire to Qatar as your worldview,
you know, with all of it's a a resource
cursed place where data becomes the new
resource in what what amounts to a kind
of a Middle East eye oil company or oil
country.
>> Yeah.
So, but you do you do and in in end of
most of your pieces you get to um
what can we actually do about all this?
Um I mean you or at least the start you
know the start of it which is the
important thing you know if they want to
if they want to kill off humanity what
do we do? Do we do we seize their assets
you mentioned in one of yours that's
that's them fighting words
>> to do that.
>> Yeah. You don't want chat GPT to see to
to to see you saying that.
>> I know. I I think I mean I I think that
tech regulation is like fundamentally
broken and like I try to talk about this
stuff so that more people on the left
like care about tech policy. I think
like having reported on this stuff for a
while like the far right has cared so
much about tech policy and so much like
they they they have such an aggress like
tech policy is so core to their type of
authoritarianism that they're like
pushing which is like tech
authoritarianism and I think people on
the left like don't really have a
response to that and often they buy into
these moral panics and they don't talk
about it or they don't even really
understand how to like I mean the
antitrust stuff is a good example where
like nobody even covered that last year
aside from like these tech business
type. Well, Cory's Cory I would die for.
I love Cory, but Cory's one man and like
I think we need a lot more Cory's. We we
need like hundreds of Cory's, thousands,
>> as many as we can make, but there's just
not that many. Same with you. Like there
there's like there are some people and
they're amazing, but when you look at
that compared to like the right or like
these massive messaging machines that
these like fake stupid interest groups
have or whatever, like it's nothing,
>> right? And then the worst of the worst
is
at le weren't going to make money. We
weren't going to get super popular, but
at least
our perspective was considered cool.
>> It's like walk around the East Village
or Dime Square or something. It's like
you're a freaking lefty socialist
hippie. It's like like like that's the
uncool way to be. It's like, no, that's
at least we get that. If we don't get
the money, we should at least get to be
cool.
>> I think that's gonna come back.
>> Stop being so lame now that it's like
maxing out, I feel.
>> I hope. Uh, you know, you were you the
the the part that I liked the best and
it was almost throwaway in the last
video and then you mentioned you used
the word uh before was when you said um
the style of maximalism and it I just
paused. I stopped on that. So you you
you you were talking kind of about
cultural movements that we need cultural
movements that reenter humans and I'm
like oh good I'm doing that one. I can
go to sleep now. I'm I'm I'm I'm I'm
doing the thing. That was all good. I'm
like, "All right, I'm I'm on I'm on, you
know, the the train, the tailor train.
It's all good." Um, but then when you
were talking about that, you said, you
know, there's been a resurgence of kind
of maximalist style and then it really I
started thinking I mean I became like a
almost like a new models podcast person
for a minute like thinking about
cultural movements and art and all and I
got it that what you're suggesting is
that the kind of Spartan pottery barn,
you know, uh, uh, uh, minimalism of that
we've been living in, this kind of stark
Spartan reality is sort antihuman and
these and you I see them. I was just in
someone's loft space the other day. It's
like maximalist. There's just all this
stuff, all these collections, all the
these things from history. It's thick
and it was like, "Oh, that's kind of
what you mean that there's this texture,
this human thing in there."
>> Yeah. It's like a human element and it
and it has like humanity and personality
and like just a a sens like a human
sensibility to it. Not everything is
like optimized or designed Yeah. to like
disappear and be easy or whatever. It's
like I don't know. I love people that
have like those type I love those types
of spaces wherever they are. But like
you go to somebody's old home, right?
And they have like all this stuff like I
just I don't know. I was even watching
like Arrested Development season one
which is like from so long ago. But it's
so interesting to see that the changes
interior design and like it just
technology has become like everything
looking like an Apple store and
>> this bow house simplicity and yeah I
know what exactly
>> you're pushing that on everyone
>> right where what you what when you said
that even though it was like half a
sentence I started to think of like like
Gertude Stein living in the Al Gang
could you imagine piles of books and
cigarettes and bottles and perfumes. God
knows what she had.
>> I love that though. Like that is such a
human like a human is living in that
space, you know, and like that stuff is
like related to her life or her
interests or whatever,
>> right? As opposed to now we hide
everything's got to be in a little Marie
Condo little drawer, you know,
disappeared from from view.
>> Maybe I'm a slob and I'm coping here.
But I like
>> No, you look very neat. your your media
representation is
>> Yeah.
>> not maximalist.
>> I no I like but I like having things
that like mean something and and also
that are made by humans like that are
like my Colorado pillow that's needle
pointed or like things that somebody
made and I I think
>> that's hard to find is like supporting I
want people to support other human
beings also.
>> Yeah. And it can sound consumerrist and
you even mention it and it's not that oh
buy stuff that's made by people. It's
live in the world of of
we live in a world of things of stuff of
artifacts.
>> It's all disposable too. Like my dad's
um my family's works in construction and
like so much of like even building
practices have changed where it's all
like optimized and it's all like it's
houses are not built to last more than
30 years and stuff. And I just think
like there's a um I don't know like
there's something to like buying
something and like having it stay with
you or like doing something to your
house that like makes it more you that's
not just like cookie cutter. And I don't
know you know who's really good on this
is Brian Merchant. Um I don't know if
you ever read his stuff.
>> He wrote this book about the Leites
which is so good. Um
>> yeah he was on a couple months ago.
Yeah. It's wonderful. Oh, he's a a great
person. But like he he's changed my view
on a lot of stuff too where I used to be
like, "Oh, why do I need an analog
whatever?" And I'm like, "Wait, I kind
of like that."
>> Yeah. And it's not I mean it's weird.
It's not just style. It's also I mean
real materialism is not a bad thing. My
dad gave me his transistor radio and I
still have it that he bought in the 40s
or the 50s and it works and it's
precious. But to take care of your
things like an artist taking care of
their tools to respect the value of it
rather than everything being, you know,
tar and I'm going to or H&M I'm going to
throw it out,
>> you know, there's no vintage clothes
that are going to from our era that will
last to
>> No. Well, they'll last in landfills like
forever, but they're not even like
>> survive like Yeah. like four we going
being washed. So like Yeah. I I think I
just think like finding unique things
too that like you actually care about
that Yeah. that you want and it's not
just buying into this like fast not fast
fashion only but just like fast light
like the timu lifestyle kind of
>> right right which even the kids are
getting out of although I think there is
this drive this to reconnect to ground
to stuff to the the object world.
>> Yeah. It's like an exhaustion and it's a
lot and we're constantly just sold crap
and like especially when it comes to
technology like consumer tech like
everybody wants to sell you some new
gadget to optimize this and this and
like I think just trying to get off that
a little bit is is good.
>> Yeah. I mean people forget you know I
just starting a monologue on this the
real world is still bigger than the
digital world. It's still even with AI,
the real world is bigger than all the
servers and all the likes and all the
influencers combined. And I think people
are are and that's nothing against the
net cuz I'll still love the net and all
the things it does and all that, but our
I feel like our power to influence that
virtual world is back here in real
world. I also really like like human
digital spaces too that are that are
like cool places online that somebody
made that feel unique and special and
fun and like handcrafted kind of like I
don't know there's this movement called
like digital homesteading of like people
making their own websites and
communities again and I like I really
like that too.
>> Yeah, there's like a Neo Cities. I don't
know if you know that one. It's a really
simple HTML built. It's like, yeah, I
used to have a website and it was funky
and different, but everybody's website
was different. That's why you had your
own homepage. It's like, oh, how are you
going to organize it? Until we got all,
you know, suburban cookie cutter on on
Facebook, which was easier. It gave more
access. My parents could have their own
pages at that point, but you lose, you
know, and I guess
>> you lose like the human.
>> You want room for both, I suppose. you
know, and Facebook's not going to just
say, "Oh, you can put your own crazy
page here." It was like a zoned very
strict zoning laws in what your house
looks like in that world.
>> That's why I liked Tumblr cuz Tumblr you
could edit your you the feed always
looked consistent, but you could edit
your own themes on your own page. Maybe
this is a good way to a good thing to
close on, but as someone who was there
and who watches the media,
we're the closest thing to media writers
these days. I think it it seems to me
that the demise of the post is an
intentional
thing that it's not some business
decision that it's basically all of the
big tech billionaire or trillionaire
people are just offer making offerings
to the current administration and this
was no don't worry I'm not going to sell
the Washington Post to some lefty you
know I'm not going to sell it to a MDR
or someone I'm going to just end it as
it as the force it was.
>> Yeah, 100%. Like 100%. And I don't think
you install someone like Will Lewis if
you don't want that destruction to
happen because it was so intentional
what they did. And it's sad. I I don't
know. It's just sad because there are so
many talented people there. Um but I'm
not like I don't know. It's the problems
are so much bigger than just the post.
Um I think all of media has been gutted
obviously. So it's sort of
>> I mean maybe it'll be cool, you know, if
we can if we can encourage people to
fund independent media, people who are
really working like you, you know, who
are actually reporting and you know, I
was looking, you know, um Jud Leum is
doing some interesting stuff. Um my
friend, um Jonathan Larson does the
 news. They're Mhm.
>> people reporting, you know, and making
even MS now. I guess they're independent
now. They're no longer
>> Yeah. NBC. Yeah. They spun out.
>> Yeah. I I'm a I'm a believer in
independent media. That's like kind of
obviously I started that way. And like
that was always the promise of blogging,
which I was always very like that's what
I loved about being a blogger and why I
got into media to begin with. So I hope
it shakes out that way. I think the only
way it could not go that way is if all
of these bad tech laws pass and we can't
have independent media anymore because
the liability because suddenly, you
know, you have massive liability to
publish independently online and because
the platform, you know, because that
liability transfers and and now you're,
you know, now we have a a internet that
is similar to the internet in a lot more
authoritarian countries where the media
landscape is not great,
>> right? And it's really hard to get
mainstream media monopolies that have
already surrendered their agency to an
essentially authoritarian regime to
write stories, educating people on the
importance of maintaining internet law
that supports independent media.
>> Yeah, exactly. No, it's not going to
happen.
Yes.
>> So, it's up to us. It's up to us, right?
>> Yes. Well, you're doing the Lord's work.
So,
>> I'm doing the Lord's work. You're doing
>> of us
>> even more. Yeah. Yeah. But thank you.
Thank you for doing that. Thank you for
for keeping this torch alive. And
especially it is, you know, culture used
to be
it's kind of entertainment. It used to
be close to the entertainment section.
Now, culture is the human survival
section.
>> You know, it's where
>> it's where we're gonna it's where we can
can can foster and and and and replicate
the sensibilities, I think, that are
going to keep uh keep this project
going.
>> Yeah, 100%.
>> Well, thank you everybody. Go to to uh
um usermag.co
to find or just type Lorenzo. Just click
on whatever in the show notes. You know,
it's easy. It's easy. Put uh the get a
screen capture and put it in Google
image search and it'll probably find her
find her her YouTube.
>> You'll find some deranged Fox News
articles about me. I think that way.
>> Excellent. That's Everyone deserves a uh
anyone who hasn't gotten one good
episode with Fox isn't uh hasn't lived.
Thank you for being on Team Human and
thank you all for being on team Human.
You can support independent media.
That's what this counts as by going to
teamhum.fm and clicking on support. Join
us on Patreon. We're starting new things
for people, right? Cuz we want people to
join and not see the ads, but more
important to join. We love you. Uh, Team
Human is produced by Joshua Chapter and
edited by Luke Robert Mason. And I'm
Douglas Rushkoff. You've been on Team
Human, our last best hope for peeps. In
case you missed it, we are sponsored by
everyone's earth maker of these Kobe
laundry buds. It's a brand new product.
These are good for the world laundry
buds. No plastic, no polyinyl, no
horrible stuff. You put it in the washer
instead of anything else. Just put this
in and your laundry and wash them. This
will totally dissolve and then go out
into the Hudson or wherever your laundry
water goes and it won't kill the fish
and do all that bad stuff. It's all
good. All right. So, get this Kobe
laundry buds. Go to kobeclean.com.
Put the code team human in there and you
get 31% off your purchase. All right.
So, check it out. Kobe laundry buds. I
actually use these. All right. Be good.