language models cannot do addition. Um,
not really. I keep seeing claims that
they can and every time I see this
claim, I go again to chat GPT and so on
and check and they can't. And uh, what
they can do is learn patterns which work
a lot of the time, but you can always
trip them up by doing something like
okay, so if you ask chat GPT, what is a
bunch of eights plus a bunch of ones
with a two at the end? it will get the
correct answer because it will recognize
the trick. It'll say, "Ah, that's just
one and a bunch of zeros." It'll know
that you're trying to trick it. But if
now you change one of the eights to a
seven, now it has to actually know what
it's doing. It has to actually sort of
walk up, hit the seven, and stop sort of
propagating zeros. And it simply fails.
It uh it either chokes and makes up some
nonsense or it says it's one with a
bunch of zeros anyway. like it
definitely can't add in the in the the
basic way that that we know how to do
algorithmically that humans learn. And
so like really teasing apart on a very
basic uh level like Newton's three laws
of motion has it encapsulated it um
whether that's VO or Genie have these
models encapsulated the physics of that
100% accurately and right now they're
not they're kind of approximations and
they look um realistic when you just
casually look at them they're not
accurate enough yet to rely on for say
robotics
>> just because we can achieve some level
of moving the needle by hooking up a
really potent tool to a language model
doesn't mean that we shouldn't think
about what would the next generation of
these models look like and how can we
make them intrinsically better because
even if you have the best tool in the
world that is not going to save you if
you cannot predict the right inputs for
that tool. Even some of the current
frontier models uh they will as you
probably know perform hundreds of
billions of multiplications just to
produce a single token of output. Yet
they cannot reliably multiply even
relatively small numbers together
without failing. Right? So this is
something that to me hints at a great
misalignment between what we are
training these systems to do and how
we're building them and what we might
want to use them for downstream.
especially if we're doing reasoning or
if we're doing science. But it seems
like let's say an LLM if you teach it
properly you can just teach it to do
let's say addition up to some failure of
its memory just like with humans we
might forget a digit or we forget to
carry over or so you know we do the
algorithm wrong sometimes with some uh
probability up to that it can learn this
this procedure of adding longdigit uh
numbers you know it's is it neural is it
symbolic uh it's doing something some
algorithm something symbolic perhaps
uh but it's doing that with its neural
machinery and the neural machinery also
allows it to well first of all absorb
tons and tons of world knowledge and
deal with the vagueness of concepts
right the fact that that things don't
exactly want to fit your good old
fashioned AI symbolic theory most of the
time
>> we've all played with MCP servers we
know that we can hook tools up to these
things why not just call a calculator
Andrew argues that tool use isn't enough
right we still need to be thinking about
the actual architecture underneath it
still matters.
>> Internalizing things I think has a
chance to be a lot more stable. The
relationship between neural nets and
tools is somewhat complicated. I think
you can do a lot with it. You can do a
lot of interesting search but there are
a few disadvantages. One is you may have
to call the model a bunch of times
because it may get an answer but it may
not be the answer it was expecting. So
it might have to rethink things and go
back. Like imagine a situation where you
had some complex reasoning problem where
along the way you had to do a series of
little additions. You just had to sort
of okay so then this and then this and
then oh how many of these are there?
Okay. And then how many of these and so
on. And you it could be quite
complicated to kind of keep calling out
to a tool and then going back and then
calling out to a tool and then going
back and you know it seems like there
are big efficiency gains if you're able
to equip the model itself to just do
certain kinds of basic computation or
reasoning internally. So yeah, geometric
deep learning was a pretty interesting
episode uh and certainly a very exciting
period in my own research and uh and
what I've done together with the team.
Already in that very first episodes that
we did together with geometric deep
learning, there was a hint of discussion
about how geometric deep learning might
not necessarily be enough. It will
require us potentially to broaden our
lens on what we mean by geometric deep
learning. And this is something we're
already very actively thinking about. I
think one of our co-authors, Taco Cohen,
actually thought much more deeply about
this. Like I hinted at the fact that
groups which are the bread and butter of
geometric deep learning might not be
enough for uh fitting the concept of
aligning to computation which is my
personal motivation. Right? So for those
who are not familiar, geometric deep
learning uh fundamentally builds itself
on the concept of constructing neural
networks in a way that is what we call
equivariant to symmetry transformations.
So what this means in a nutshell is if I
transform my input in some way, I should
get predictable outputs with my neural
network if that transformation is
something that I find to be irrelevant.
One standard example is translations of
images. So if I have a picture of a cat
and I decide to shift it by a certain
number of pixels, it is still a picture
of a cat. That hasn't changed. I've just
changed the way I'm looking at that cat.
So I would like to build my model to be
what we call translation equivariant
such that when I do apply such a shift,
I will still get the same output that
this is indeed a cat. uh in a similar
manner graph machine learning which is
an area that I'm personally really
passionate about deals with extracting
useful representations of graph
structure data like molecules but uh
graphs have this inherent property that
uh there's many different ways you can
show them to the model and typically you
have to present them using some kind of
say adjacency matrix of nodes by nodes
but what happens if I decide to permute
the order in which I show you those
nodes so I permute the matrixes rows
rows and columns accordingly this is
still the same graph I would still want
to get exactly the same outputs on that
graph. Right? So I can build into my
models this notion of permutation
equivariance which guarantees that even
if I permute my nodes, I'm still going
to get predictable outputs and basically
identical outputs up to permutation for
those permuted graphs. And this is a
really important property because it
reduces almost exponentially basically
the amount of data you need to fit a
system like that to a satisfactory
amount of behavior. And it should come
as no surprise that transformers at
their heart are permutation equariant
models. Once you've put token
embeddings, position embeddings into
tokens, you can permute them all you
want. You'll get exactly the same
response. If you wanted to learn that
kind of symmetry with a simple MLP of
tokens that would have taken you
exponentially more data than the
trillions that we currently use to train
these models. So likely a data you
wouldn't be able to find. We looked at
geometric deep learning from a group
symmetry point of view which is a very
nice way to describe spatial
regularities and spatial symmetries but
it's not necessarily the best way to
talk about say invariance of generic
computation which you would find in
algorithms right it's like I have input
that satisfies certain preconditions I
want to say something about once I push
it through this function it should
satisfy certain post conditions this is
not the kind of thing we can very easily
express using the language of group
theory However, it is something that
perhaps we could express more nicely
using the language of category theory.
>> I do think that some very high level
priors uh are probably a good idea and
perhaps even necessary. In my PhD, I
worked a lot on building uh knowledge
about symmetries into neural networks.
And I think uh for for many problems,
you know, knowledge about symmetries is
something that uh first of all gives you
a lot of bang for the buck. You we know
from from physics already and now from
empirical results in in machine learning
that building these things into neural
networks or putting a constraint on your
physical theory based on symmetries
gives you a lot of information or it
really restricts the space of of
hypothesis and at the same time it
doesn't bias uh your model if indeed
your problem has this symmetry. So I
think that that that kind of that's the
kind of thing we should be be looking
for this kind of very high level
abstract prior not trying to encode you
know going back to the example I gave
just now the fact that light switches
make lights go on that we can figure out
from data from reading text on the
internet at scale uh from trial and
error uh learning in an interactive
environment perhaps the fact that there
is space like 3D space uh and that your
2D images are a projection of that maybe
that that
a useful prior
>> category theory is very much in the eye
of the beholder. Uh I think in the first
instance for me category theory uh
categories are a very mundane thing from
pure mathematics where I come from. Uh
and category theory means you know when
you study categories for their own sake
but everybody uses categories. The
question is what exactly are they? And I
really come from algebra and a lot of my
motivation comes from studying algebra.
And one way you can think about
categories is algebra with colors. So uh
you know we can imagine sort of typical
algebra. So for example, let's say we're
multiplying square matrices. I can sort
of think of each square matrix as a
little magnet and I just sort of hook
them up together and they just stick and
you kind of you know you get a bigger
and bigger magnet and and everything
makes sense. But now suppose I had
special magnets that had colors on each
side and I could only connect them if
the colors were the same. Uh and that
sounds a bit weird but it's exactly what
happens with non-square matrices. uh
when we uh multiply two matrices we we
have to follow a rule that they are not
allowed to be multiplied unless the
numbers match up. If I have an M byN
matrix and I want to multiply on the
left with an L byM matrix, I can do that
because the M's are the same, but
otherwise I I can't. There's a kind of
color violation. So, uh, the point is a
situation where we want to be able to
compose things, um, to to hook them up
together, uh, but we can't always do it.
That's basically what categories are
designed to cover. And, uh, I think the
the matrix example illustrates they're
not so mysterious. It's just when you
want to be talking about for example
many different sized vector spaces at
once as you often do in neural networks
because you have uh sort of hybrid
shapes of with uh you know uh dimensions
of of different sizes and so on. You end
up you end up wanting something where
you take this sort of partial
compositionality into account.
>> I think this the this um geometric deep
learning blueprint that we described
there can be generalized. Yeah. category
theory made a lot of things click for me
it or I'm hoping let's say that it will
allow us to generalize this methodology
of geometric deep learning and
equivariance to not just reason about
symmetries but far more general kinds of
structures and structure preserving maps
could it help there in the sense that
you know um we we imbue the models with
these geometrical prior and we think
these high resolution prior describe the
physical world that that we're in could
this category thinking allow us to
somehow bring all of those together in
some new way.
>> Well, you can certainly see how they're
all instances of the same thing. Uh so
those those things once you learn them
uh you they start coming back
everywhere. And what's very nice about
the category theoretic way of thinking
is that it's extremely systematic and it
tends to guide you in the right
direction because uh well the examples
I've given you already uh show that
right this this notion of equivariance
that's something that someone thinking
about groups and group representation
and so on will come up with and find to
be a very useful concept for
mathematical reasoning.
uh but it it falls out automatically if
you if you already know category theory
and you just define the categories of
relevance here this define your group as
a as a as a category for example then
you just follow the definitions you say
well okay so what is a funtor from my
category to the category of sets for
example okay it's it's mapping like this
that that gives you the definition of a
group representation and then you look
at what is a natural transformation
between such funtors you write out the
definition you find oh okay it's an
equarian app in this case. And so it
tends to produce meaningful definitions
that domain experts like in a
mathematical domain will have
independently come up with very often.
And so it uh it's uh it's for lazy
people who don't want to or uncreative
people. You know, you don't have to be
clever. You you just have to follow the
rules and be very systematic and outcome
these very natural definitions and a
kind of mathematics that just works very
nicely. everything fits together just
like with Lego pieces or something,
right? They always fit exactly. Uh yeah,
that allows you to build these elaborate
uh mathematical structures that that
have nice properties.
>> There's a historical analogy worth
keeping in mind. Before the periodic
table, before we understood protons and
electrons, practitioners of alchemy made
real advances, but without a principled
foundation. Deep learning today may be
in a similar position. We have powerful
empirical results, but we lack the
fundamental theory that would let us
derive new architectures rather than
just stumbling upon them. Categorical
deep learning is an attempt to find that
periodic table for neural networks. Deep
learning, despite its remarkable
success, is a field permeated by ad hoc
design choices. Neural network
architectures have all these knobs and
tweaks that we can't formally justify
just yet. There is no unifying framework
for deep learning. Um there is no
unifying framework that that would
explain the probabilistic perspective,
the neuroscience perspective and merely
just the gradient-based iterative
updating perspective. In fact, in the
future, we might look at deep learning
very differently. And our claim is that
category theory will become the unifying
deep learning framework.
>> But you seem to be making the argument
that the interpolative function space of
neural networks can model algorithms
more closely to real world problems.
potentially finding more efficient and
pragmatic solutions than those
classically proposed by computer
scientists. We are working in this
highdimensional space which is not
necessarily easily interpretable or
composable because you have no easy way
of saying for example in in theoretical
computer science if you want to compose
two algorithms you're working with them
in a very abstract space which means
that you know you can easily reason
about stitching the output of one to the
input of another whereas you cannot make
that easy of a claim about latent spaces
of two neural networks. Right? Geometric
deep learning is powerful, but it
assumes all transformations are
invertible. What happens when
computation destroys information?
Strictly speaking, I wasn't planning to
talk about any of that stuff at the
time. It was very much work in progress
and just kind of trapped in my head as a
collection of possible ideas, but not
something I remotely knew how to execute
on. Right? But, uh, I was very
passionate about algorithmic reasoning
at the time as well. I still am and I
still believe that like building machine
learning models that are capable to
align to classical computation is going
to be really really important to address
the shortcomings that are not so easily
plugged by just gathering a better data
set. Like fundamentally some of these
things are likely to be restricted to
not be able to easily generalize outside
of the distribution you've trained them
on. and especially for reasoning
problems that is the case. When you
think about all of the big scientific
advances that were done with large
language models, for example, up to this
date, I would argue most of the ones I'm
personally familiar with are a result of
a careful combination of a large
language model and an algorithmic
procedure in the background which
actually makes sure to give it
robustness properties. So think about
things like fun search uh like alpha
code, like alpha geometry. All of these
systems have discovered new knowledge in
computer science uh in competitive
programming in uh uh in even you know
geometry problems at the IMO but in all
cases you've hooked up a language model
to either a genetic algorithm or some
clustering mechanism or a tier prover
which all have very nice correctness
guarantees which then you know if you
can run this uh model for sufficiently
many times to kind of correct itself
using the algorithm you can end up with
really nice solutions. The problem with
geometric deep learning is that as I
said it talks about symmetries. So
permutations or circular shifts those
are generally things that have very
specific and rigid behaviors in
typically one of the things we assume
about symmetries is that they are
invertible. So basically that uh
whenever I permute nodes I can always
permute them back. I haven't lost any
information. And usually with images
when we do shifts we actually pad the
image with zeros to make sure that no
image data is lost and things like that.
So basically it always assumes that it's
still the same input. We haven't lost
any information. Now why is this a
problem for me who is really interested
in aligning models to classical
algorithmic computation? Well, as any
computer scientist will know, many
programs you write will delete some of
the data or destroy some of the data. So
that is no longer a symmetry. You cannot
invert it. Maybe one simple example is
other than just the you know naive
example of I'm going to take a list and
delete half of its elements for no
reason. Uh let's start with you know
path finding. So we talk a lot about
algorithms like Dystra or Bellman Ford
inside a computer science curriculum. In
short those are algorithms that starting
with a directed weighted graph predict
what are the shortest paths uh lengths
inside that graph. All right. Now, the
thing is there are many, many different
graphs with different weights that are
going to have exactly the same shortest
paths and potentially even the same
shortest path lengths.
However, those graphs are different. And
once you've applied the transformations
of Dystra's algorithm or Bman Ford
algorithm, you'll have lost the
information that is contained about the
graph in the final output of that
algorithm. Right? Because many different
graphs will be compressed to exactly the
same output. Right? So this is not an
operation I can describe using a
symmetry and then this journey gradually
like it took me a while to realize how
we can be formal about this how can we
try to put some theory on this and even
now down the line how can we build some
practical models using this and I was
fortunate enough to uh to start chatting
with Andrew who is my colleague at deep
mind uh who uh has a category theory
background and he's been thinking
himself about some of these problems in
the past. So uh it it was a great match
because together with him it it was a
long way but we managed to gradually
relax the constraints of what a group is
giving us. We first uh looked at
removing the invertability part which
led us to monoids and then we derived
some interesting theory and asynchrony
invariance in models using monoids and
uh now we're also looking into uh
removing the second constraint of groups
which is the requirement that every
single computation must compose with
every other piece of computation. As you
might also know in computer science you
cannot always do that. you must make the
output of your first function match the
input type of the second one otherwise
they can't compose. So this now leads us
to categories and uh well that's what
led us now to categorical deep learning
>> things like intentionality and planning
and system two and reasoning and stuff
like that. I think you're placing the
assumption that there's something
standard about that.
>> Yeah, exactly. I mean and to some extent
there is because for a lot of these
algorithms we have even proofs that they
will arrive at optimal solutions if you
give them enough time and put them in
the right context and I actually think
it's going to it should be a synergy
right because as you said with modern
largecale deep learning systems we
actually stand a chance to map really
complicated noisy real world scenarios
into a space where those algorithms
might become applicable right now the
main argument that uh maybe we are
trying to make in some part here is that
uh asking the model to both do that
translation and robustly invoke the
algorithm is likely a bit too much to
ask because among other things you've
said fixed computational budget that's
already one recipe for failure as inputs
get larger because as you know for
example multiplication as I mentioned is
an algorithm which is a is a problem for
which we don't really have a super
efficient algorithm yet the best known
one is n login and that one relies on
like
complicated number theoretic
constructions, let's say. So most people
know just the n squ quadratic algorithm
for multiplication. So the amount of
resources that you need to reliably
multiply two numbers will grow and
sometimes super linearly uh based on the
size of those two numbers and currently
uh our systems can cope with that
implicitly if you add things like chain
of thought which gives the model more
thinking time and so on. But
fundamentally all of those things are
patches that might help for a particular
class of problems but then fail
somewhere else just because of the
nature of how complicated the entire
space of computational problems is.
Right? So basically I believe in a
future where the neural network will
deal with the understanding of the world
with the translation of what's happening
in the world into some abstract space
which might just be high dimensional
embeddings by the way that's also
plausible and then there will be some
component that we have baked into the
system either through priors or through
very careful losses or even through
combining systems with tools which has
already proved really really useful that
will actually then execute that
computation in a way that we can reason
about it and I should stress by the
What I mean by reasoning is not 100%
accuracy on every single inputs. I find
that humans can reason and humans are
not 100% accurate on every single input
you give to them. Right? As as you can
see, if you ask me to multiply two
numbers that are like 50 digits long, I
will definitely make some failures if
you ask me to do that. But you know the
point is that like uh what I would like
is that uh a system understands the
amount of effort that needs to go into
doing some kind of computation and maybe
at least to give me some either an
estimate of how likely it is to make
mistakes or uh some notion even some
notion of I'm sorry the problem you've
asked me to do is too computationally
large for my capabilities. I would like
to just back off and not answer. Right?
Currently systems are not trained to do
that. They're trained to always try to
give you an answer. Right? which is very
different to to that. So basically uh
I'm fine with making mistakes but I
would really like some awareness of when
mistakes might happen and how big they
will be which when you apply algorithms
you often have that. So you can have
correctness guarantees as well as you
know convergence guarantees and things
like that. But you're probably thinking
why do we need to use such abstract
mathematics in the first place? Well,
this kind of structured thinking can
actually help us see what actually
matters.
>> To introduce the notion of structuralist
mathematics and then the best known
example of structure structuralist
mathematics category theory. I would
like to begin with the distinction
between analytic mathematics and
synthetic mathematics. And the usual two
examples that are given for this is the
geometry of Decart versus the geometry
of Uklit. For Decart, lines are solution
sets to equations. Whereas for Uklid,
lines are precisely that which is
stretched out between two points. What's
the essential distinction here? In
analytic mathematics, stuff is made of
stuff, right? There's always some
question of okay, I have to have some
common foundation from which everything
is built and all of my lemmas, theorems,
etc., everything eventually boils down
to a computation in that more basic
substance. On the other hand, in
synthetic mathematics, it's like I don't
need to go I don't need to know what
like the inside of a line is. That
doesn't matter. The point is I only
abstract what are the principles by
which I can make inference on lines and
their relationships to each other.
Right? The point is you get rid of
everything that is inaccessible to your
logic. Right? So you get rid of all of
this stuff that you might call detail,
but it's not even detail. It's noise. It
because it doesn't have any content for
that which you can know. Right? Right?
And so therefore it's completely
irrelevant. So synthetic mathematics
gets rid of all of that and focuses just
on how you can produce more knowledge.
Right? And so then to explain at least
what I mean by a structuralist
mathematics is I want a synthetic
mathematics of structure right what is
structure you know in the context of
machine learning we've got lots of
notion everyone says structure right the
best known and best studied example of
that structure is group actions right
all of geometric deep learning is about
group actions but that's only one that's
like one pin prick in the vault right
that's just like one thing right there
are lots of other things say that come
from theoretical computer science the
notion of thing things being lists or
you know things being trees all of these
other various like algebraic structures.
So you want like a single you know
language in which all of these various
kinds of structure can be described
elegantly. This is exactly why we appeal
to category theory
>> in in the simplest possible terms. What
do you mean by two categories?
>> Right. Right. So if we talk about a
category as as a a collection of things
and relationships between them these
relationships are encoded as as
something we call morphisms. These are
like generalized functions. These are
just arrows. We draw them as arrows.
>> Before we go any further, let's ground
what weight tying actually means.
Imagine an RNN processing a sentence
word by word. And at every time step, it
uses the same neural network cell, the
same weights to process each word. That
is weight timing, right? Forcing
multiple parts of a computation to share
identical parameters. In traditional
machine learning, we do just this,
right? We code it up, but there's no
formal theory explaining when this is
valid or what structure it preserves. I
know it sounds abstract, but it just
means that we can prove when weight
tying is correct and derive new
architectures where weight tying is
guaranteed to preserve the structure
that we actually care about. But often
if we focus on two two objects and look
at all the maps between them, all these
morphisms. So these are a set in a
category. There's a set of morphisms.
But now if you take the ethos of
category theory and and not just have a
set of things, but we try to relate that
set with some some ways between them. We
if you look at this set of morphisms
between two objects. Now if we add the
notion or or start describing the ways
these morphisms could be related the
properties they need to satisfy which is
also some kind of composition. Uh then
we get start getting at the notion of a
two category which is objects morphisms
but two morphisms as as ways of relating
them. Category theory talks about these
relationships between um objects, you
know, as morphisms. But what about
relationships between the morphisms,
>> right? Right. So the these are these
that we call two morphisms or two cells.
And these are the things we we use to
model um to model some aspects of neural
networks that we deem are important. We
shouldn't just think of them as
categories. They're not just maps. uh
but they have this high we can think of
them certainly like this but that that
does not encode a lot of the interesting
things we want to have about them and
this is I think the idea of higher
categories where you start modeling
something with purely categories and you
realize ah well all along I have been
forgetting about this other important
thing so you start putting more stuff
into your theory while still trying to
make it consistent and the particular
way we encode these hieromorphisms or
what they what we use them for I think
the most important thing is weight
sharing so we get a comprehensive theory
of how to do weightaring sharing in a
way that's that's not particularly tied
to smooth spaces, you know, vector
vector spaces that can it's it's one
that works for manifolds. It's also one
that works that we have now used, you
know, me and my collaborators uh in my
PhD that we have used to connect to game
theory where we talk about economic
agents that have some strategies and if
you want two agents to operate with the
same strategy, we do weight sharing
there. So there's all these different
fields where you can specify what these
are and the level of abstraction of a
two two cell is the one which really
gets to the essence of that without
having any specificity about the kind of
thing you're studying built in.
>> You could presumably just go to the
third order and to the fourth order. I
mean even with um with self attention
transformers they um model these two
tpples uh you know which is like a
second you know like a first order
relationship but you could have third
order fourth order and so on. Is is two
morphisms enough or should we go deeper
than that? Well, depending on who you
ask, you will get very opinionated
answers. But generally, you know, I it's
when I started learning category theory,
I was like, well, I'm never going to go
to two categories. That seems
complicated. Now, I say, I'm never going
to go higher than two categories because
that seems too complicated. But people
do three categories, infinity
categories. And and you can really start
building up these relationships higher
and higher and get this really
comprehensive theory that that becomes a
very different beast in some ways.
>> There is a school of thought that our
brain works in this way. So we think
using like the the these symbols and
these categories and so on and then
there's and then there's the notion of
the universe is a certain way and we
understand the universe with that kind
of interface. So it's almost like the
driver for this is here's an interface
here's how we think here's how the
universe works. Let's program computers
in that way.
>> That's that's that's a that's a big
question.
Uh it's it's
what what happens with these things is
that when we start adding more levels,
right, more is different. And that's the
thing we start seeing in higher
categories. When we add different kinds
of relationships and morphism, you start
seeing these things that can be perhaps
more most aptly described as emergent
effects, right? Because if you have two
things and you want to study their
behavior as a composite, well, you can
either study their behavior individually
and look at
>> the joint behavior or you can compose
the systems and look at the behavior of
the composite. And what we often found
is these are not the same. In many
compositional cases, these are
isomeorphic, but often there's a map
going one way but not the other. So you
have to track, you start to track since
this isn't an equality anymore, you have
to start tracking this higher self. But
now this itself might be a part of
another system that gives rise to this
plethora and levels and levels of
emergent effects. So that's one of the
problems with higher category theory is
that it's just so hard for us for with
our complexity of mind to do this. Um so
it's certainly an open question of what
is the best substrate how to encode
these things and people have done a lot
of work in in programming language
theory of encoding not just data
structures and and algorithms but but
type theories that that these algorithms
are hosted in in some categorical way.
People who believe in strong e emergence
think that there is no reductionism. But
even with basic weak emergence, the
analytical shortcut between the theories
at different scales are computationally
intractable. It's very difficult to go
between them. But we want to have some
kind of a theoretical framework that
captures the whole thing, right? You
know, captures the the the emergent
organization as well as what's going on
underneath. So, so this is one of the
goals that you could say is one of the
goals of category theory is to find some
fundamental abstractions that give rise
to these very simple principles. Often
when you look at some systems or some
phenomena, it's very complicated. But if
you're lucky enough and if you set up
the good foundations, it's always, oh
wait, it was very simple all along. I I
I looked at it the wrong way. So I don't
know what where this could go. But we
are certainly striving to make things as
compositional as as they could be. uh
and in many of these fields where we
have a pl plenty of experimental
evidence uh and lack of good theories
category theory has a very good uh
vantage point and just a lot of
practical benefit of let's stop and and
see what's the good vantage point here
>> does two morphisms allow us to think
about weight tying
>> absolutely so if we think about a
parametric morphism uh as as so it's a
map from A to B with a parametric B we
can of we often want to change the
parameter space we often want to say do
the weight tying which you know in
practice means we start from a smaller
weight space and copy the weights in
particular uh so a twoorphism in the two
category of parametric functions is is a
reparameterization so it's a it's a map
between two parametric morphisms that
that is somehow somehow coherent there's
some diagrams that have to be satisfied
but essentially they encode that one is
obtained by pre-omposing some weight
some form of weight tying but it doesn't
have to be just copying right that's the
thing we're finding uh it can it can be
arbitrary relationships between the
weights. So one of one of the things
that these two cells and two morphisms
allow us is to see this algebraic
structure encoded as relationships
between the weights. And then that goes
again into what category is about. It's
about finding relationships between
objects and this. So so absolutely.
>> So here's the key connection to
programming. In functional languages we
define data types like lists
recursively. A list is either empty or
it's an element followed by another
list. Categorically, this is an algebra
for an endo funtor. The structure map of
the algebra packages together all of the
constructors of the data type. And the
homorphism from this algebra is exactly
what programmers call a fold. A function
that consumes the list by recursively
applying some operation. So the
framework is describing the very
structure of recursive computation.
when you write code, you you uh
encounter syntax errors. You don't so
much encounter semantics errors. So the
syntax is really quite grounded in the
things that you're actually typing in
when you're when you're writing
something whether it's an ordinary
algorithm, whether it's a network
architecture uh etc. Uh the semantics is
much more about like how can programs
behave and you know one example of this
for u we have something like list types.
So lists are defined by a type
constructor. Given a type t you have
another type list of t. So what are the
semantics of lists? Well the semantics
of lists are really things that are
foldable sort of foldable types. So like
uh numbers with addition they're a sort
of foldable type. If I have a list of
numbers I can just add them to sort of
remove the list. Uh and now these these
foldable types mathematicians have a
very different name for them monoids uh
which are a more general kind of group.
But in any case like that's sort of the
the semantics of lists. And uh before I
say something about syntax, let me say
that our paper is really mostly
exploring things from the semantic
angle. Why is this? Uh it's because two
different syntaxes can describe the same
thing uh very easily. Uh you know we
could uh have a an arithmetic theory
where we have addition and we also have
negation or we could instead have
subtraction.
And you can describe the same things in
those two different languages, but the
languages really are different. They
give you the same semantics, but the
syntaxes are different. And so when
doing mathematical analysis, when
proving theorems, it's often really
beneficial to work uh from a semantic
point of view. But it's worth really
emphasizing that if you want to compare
this work to some other work that's done
on equivariance and so on, that work is
often being done from a syntactic angle.
So let's pause to state the central
claim of categorical deep learning. The
proposal is basically that a neural
network layer should be viewed as a
homorphism between two algebbras for the
same endofuncta. The endofuncta
describes the kind of computation a
network needs to respect. Be it a group
action, a list fold or an automaton
transition. And the algebbras describe
how that computation transforms the
specific data. The homorphism is then a
function that maps between these two
data representations while preserving
the computational structure. When this
homorphism is a group action, you
recover geometric deep learning. But the
framework itself is far more general.
>> So what is the syntax for example of of
the action of a group? It's really you
kind of say well I I want to just think
I have like one kind of thing and then
each group element takes that thing and
makes it sort of sends it back to
itself. So I have sort of a single type
and then each group action does
something to that type. So I might have
some points in the plane and my group
might be rotations and reflections that
move those points around, but I'm still
in the plane. But it turns out that this
one sorted syntax isn't enough to uh to
even capture uh basic type constructors
in in computer science. So for example,
lists, you cannot deal with the syntax
of lists using just a single sort. you
need a multi-orted syntax. So the the
way that you can do this is to say well
think of we have sort of uh zero tupils,
one tupil, two tupils etc. And then
given a k tupil I might be able to make
some other kind of tupil an l tupil by
taking elements of my kupil and making
them into some lists ls right uh so
that's that's a syntax in the same way
that group elements were a syntax and
it's it does have compositionality if I
uh have a way of packing things in uh
from a tupil into a bunch of lists then
I can pack those lists into other tupils
of lists. Um but it's clear that this is
first of all many sorted and then also
differs from the group case because all
of this is highly non-invertible, right?
There's um uh you you can't sort of by
packing things more and more and more
into lists eventually undo the lists,
right? You just get more lists. But we
basically construct a model for the
syntax. And in the case of groups, a
model in sets means a set acted on by
the group. Uh while for example, a model
in vector spaces would mean a vector
representation of the group. Um whereas
in the case of the syntax for lists, you
just get what I was calling before
foldable types or monoids. uh things
that are able to perform these syntactic
operations in the expected way. Like
there's just something uh where the
mathematical reasoning just works better
if you expand your universe of objects a
little bit even if you only care about
the original objects. So this is a
lesson that mathematicians have learned
many times and it's sort of why a lot of
people will prefer to work on the
semantic side
u at least in the first instance. It
turns out that there's something very
very basic in mathematics that we all
learned in elementary school um that has
sort of been overlooked in the design of
GNN's and that's the notion of a carry.
So what exactly is a carry? Well,
suppose that I am able to implement a
device, a a number wheel uh that can do
arithmetic modulo 10. So 0 through 9 on
it. And now I want to build a kind of
composite wheel that can do arithmetic
modulo 100. So what do I need to do? I
need sort of this little mechanism that
when it when the wheel goes from 9 to
zero, it turns the next wheel by one. uh
and this is very simple but it's
extremely at odds with the way that
GNN's have been conceived of in the past
because
in the past you generally you send the
whole state but there's no information
in the state the information is only in
the change of the state
but it's even worse than that even if
you sent the change in the state that's
not enough information because if I went
from 9 to zero is it because I added one
is it because I added 11 is it because I
subtracted nine it turns out that It's
quite uh it's quite subtle
to uh get this kind of thing to work in
the presence of gradient descent. So it
somehow is a very fundamental aspect of
how we assemble
more complicated computational
operations from simpler ones. I mean one
of the first things that you do if
you're describing a CPU is you have to
describe an adder.
This is already something that we're
struggling to do in in GNN terms. It
turns out that this behavior is easy to
get when you do discrete mathematics and
very complicated to get when you do
continuous mathematics.
Uh you can easily give this number wheel
example. Everybody understands it
because they know how to do addition.
But getting it to happen in a way such
that everything is continuous turns out
to be really interesting. Uh the
simplest examples of this phenomenon uh
don't occur until you're dealing with
three-dimensional manifolds. So you
would need to be thinking about things
in fourdimensional space. And the
simplest example that we know of is the
so-called hop vibration. This is a
situation where
uh you can decompose a three-dimensional
sphere. So that's a sphere in four
dimensions. Uh you can project it onto a
two-dimensional sphere so that all of
the pre-im images are one-dimensional
spheres or circles. And the
threedimensional sphere is very
different from the product of the one
and two dimensional spheres just the
same way that Z mod 100 is very
different from the product of Z mod 10
with Z mod 10.
uh and so this is something that I'm
personally very excited about right now
coming out of this asynchrony work is uh
are there ways to exploit this type of
geometric subtlety to create uh the
phenomenon of carrying and actually
properly model this aspect of
algorithmic reasoning and and start to
build actual CPUs in neural networks. So
their claim is quite straightforward at
the end of the day. Deep learning has
two languages constraints and
implementation and we lack a single
framework that cleanly links them
together. Categorical deep learning
produces the bridge right using a
universal algebra in a two category of
parametric maps. It recovers geometric
deep learning as a special case while
naturally expressing things like
recursion, weight tying and
non-invertible computation. Now if you
want the formal story go and read their
paper the link is in the description
especially the sections on par weight
tying and recovering uh geometric deep
learning. Um, cool. Thanks for watching.