Your Facebook page is incredibly dull.
You seem kind of like a vanity publisher. In 2020 you had some kind of algorithm automatically posting for you all the time, even though no one appeared interested. Now you are doing the same as everyone else and transitioning to ten or fifteen second clips.

No they are not as bad as all of the slop, fake AI generated crap that is flooding them. Literally I tried to turn off reels for years to no avail. I don't use twitter or instagram or tik tok because they are already too far gone. No I don't want to attend webinars as they seem like some kind of ridiculuous marketing ploy. I'm actively trying to avoid zoom calls or just sitting at a desktop all day, I don't want to feel like I work in a call center. 

Even though it is refreshing to see your optimism, it seems a little hackneyed and unsupported. I liked your assertion that AI will help people learn languages especially dead ones, although it seems a bit unfounded since the more likely outcome is that the trend will still be to invent attention sapping viral content generators with clips of aliens building the pyramids or workers pouring the bricks from cement since it fits better in a ten second video. Your content is encouraging but it seems unlikely to make much of a difference except make sure that you personally can pay the bills, but not everyone can become a motivational speaker. I wouldn't unless I was forced into it.

But if you'll look, pages with incredibly stupid stuff like AI generated Jesus lifting rocks off of people will be many orders of magnitude more popular. (Just look up Jesus Ist King on Facebook). Viral marketing techniques are just as likely to push us back into a kind of dark ages as entertainment, sports, gambling, and religious institutions learn to hijack it and weaponize it. 

Anyways I'm just complaining because I live so far the poverty line that anyone who looks like they can pay the bills seems incredibly privileged and myopic. Look up The Tyranny of Merit on YouTube. 

Anyways, I live in Canada, I am managing to stay optimistic although I am not sure I've ever had my basic needs met and it's been like 20 years since I saw a family doctor. 

Here is a podcast I did generate in Latin. Although it might only be interesting to me because I studied Latin and Greek in university more than twenty years ago, and have been studying physics, math and other difficult topics ever since. 

https://standardgalactic.github.io/library/projects/?track=latin

The essays on Arabic script (Embodied Constraint) and Nigerian Pidgin English are showing incredible promise. Although they still need a lot of work:

https://github.com/standardgalactic/

Anyways keep up the good work even though it looks like a losing battle. If I lived in London or near some kind of tech hub maybe I could personally make more money the way you do even though it doesn't look like it scales as a way for everyone. On the other hand, maybe being so resource constrained is making me have to innovate more.

I definitely am starting to feel the pressure, as I'm over forty and still am unsure if I'll ever be able to afford a home or a family and maybe I'm starting to step out of my comfort zone, pull out a few of the stops, and reduce my constant self handicapping and voluntary restraint. But I did have a few people try to destroy me with slander and libel so I retreated for good reasons which still seem relevant. I've also had enough people try to make me into a kind of cult leader that I'm wary of virality and populism per se.

Anyways, I think we would have a lot to discuss. If you need help with your tech platform or speech writing, I'd be happy to help and probably willing to work for free for a long time unless I really started to show value. I'm into long takeoffs and deceleration in general but this might just be precautionary and contingent on my not having enough resources to protect myself from bad actors. 

Sincerely yours, 
Nate 
