I just saw some one of the most insane, clueless, swarmy, tone deaf, infuriating posts from Mark Zuckerberg:

I just shared Meta's quarterly earnings report. We had strong business performance in 2025 and I'm looking forward to advancing personal superintelligence for people around the world in 2026. Here's the transcript of what I said on the call:

We ended 2025 strong with more than 3.5 billion people now using at least one of our apps every day. That includes more than 2 billion daily actives each on Facebook and WhatsApp -- and just shy of that on Instagram. Our business also performed very well thanks to record-breaking holiday demand and AI-driven performance gains.

We are now seeing a major AI acceleration. I expect 2026 to be a year where this wave accelerates even further on several fronts. We're starting to see agents really work. This will unlock the ability to build completely new products and transform how we work.

In '25 we rebuilt the foundations of our AI program. Over the coming months we're going to start shipping our new models and products. I expect our first models will be good but, more importantly, will show the rapid trajectory that we're on. And then I expect us to steadily push the frontier over the course of the year as we continue to release new models.

I'm very excited about the products we're building. Our vision is building personal superintelligence. We're starting to see the promise of AI that understands our personal context, including our history, our interests, our content, and our relationships. A lot of what makes agents valuable is the unique context that they can see, and we believe that Meta will be able to provide a uniquely personal experience.

We're also working on merging LLMs with the recommendation systems that power Facebook, Instagram, Threads, and our ads system. Our world class recommendation systems are already driving meaningful growth across our apps and ads business, but we think the current systems are primitive compared to what will be possible soon. Today our systems help people stay in touch with friends, understand the world, and find interesting and entertaining content. But soon, we'll be able to understand people's unique personal goals, and tailor feeds to show each person content that helps them improve their lives in the ways that they want. 

This also has implications for commerce. Our ads today help businesses find just the right very specific people who are interested in their products. New agentic shopping tools will allow people to find just the right very specific set of products from the businesses in our catalogue. We're focused on making these experiences work across both our feeds and across business messaging -- significantly increasing the capabilities of WhatsApp over time.

New kinds of content will soon be possible as well. People want to express themselves and experience the world in the most immersive and interactive ways possible. We started with text, and then moved to photos when we got phones with cameras, and then moved to video when mobile networks got fast enough. Soon we'll see an explosion of new media formats that are more immersive and interactive, and only possible because of advances in AI.

Our feeds will become more interactive overall. Today our apps feel like algorithms that recommend content. Soon, you'll open our apps and you'll have an AI that understands you, and also happens to be able to show you great content or even generate great personalized content for you. 

Glasses are the ultimate incarnation of this vision. They're going to be able to see what you see, hear what you hear, talk to you and help you as you go about your day, and even show you information or generate custom UI right there in your vision. Sales of our glasses more than tripled last year, and we think that they're some of the fastest growing consumer electronics in history. Billions of people wear glasses or contacts for vision correction. I think we're at a moment similar to when smartphones arrived, and it was clearly only a matter of time until all those flip phones became smartphones. It's hard to imagine a world in several years where most glasses aren't AI glasses.

For Reality Labs, we're directing most of our investment towards glasses and wearables going forward, while focusing on making Horizon a massive success on mobile and making VR a profitable ecosystem over the coming years. I expect Reality Labs losses this year to be similar to last year, and this will likely be the peak as we start to gradually reduce our losses going forward while continuing to execute on our vision.

As we plan for the future, we will continue to invest very significantly in infrastructure to train leading models and deliver personal superintelligence to billions of people and businesses around the world. 

I recently announced Meta Compute with the belief that being the most efficient at how we engineer, invest, and partner to build our infrastructure will become a strategic advantage. Dina Powell McCormick also joined us as President and Vice Chairman, and she will lead our efforts to partner with governments, sovereigns, and strategic capital partners to expand our long-term capacity, including ensuring positive economic impact in the communities that we operate in around the world. 

An important part of Meta Compute will be making long term investments in silicon and energy. We will continue working with key partners while advancing our own silicon program. We're architecting our systems so that we can be flexible in the systems we use, and we expect the cost per gigawatt to decrease significantly over time through optimizing both our technology and supply chain.

The last thing I want to mention is that I think 2026 is going to be the year that AI starts to dramatically change the way that we work. As we navigate this, our north star is building the best place for individuals to make a massive impact. So to do this, we're investing in AI-native tooling so individuals at Meta can get more done, we're elevating individual contributors, and flattening teams. We're starting to see projects that used to require big teams now be accomplished by a single very talented person. I want to make sure as many of these very talented people as possible choose Meta as the place they can make the greatest impact -- to deliver personalized products to billions of people around the world. And if we do this, then I think we'll get a lot more done and it's going to be a lot more fun.

Alright, that's everything I wanted to cover. This is going to be a big year for delivering personal superintelligence, accelerating our business, building infrastructure for the future, and shaping how our company will work going forward. As always, I'm grateful for all of the hard work of our teams and to all of you for being on this journey with us.

...

Then there was a porn like post zooming in on a women's crotch with a tiny patch over the genitals and some headline about hair, block and report. 
Then a bunch of reels in a row of babies delivering the US news about the white house clearly satirical becauss each baby was rolling their eyes or shrugging their shoulders. A dubbed post of some Columbian hip hopper saying we should never take a step without God. Then some child with a shaven head in a hospital gown looking depressed and saying in Spanish he wants to go to heaven, the mother starting to ask him why, but I'm trying to figure out how to mute the reels for the umpteenth time. More jumbled incoherent short clips of things moving fast and breaking. I go to clicking on the worst offenders to block or unfollow but the page refreshes and I see the headline "is this why Charlie kirk was murdered?" and then him rambling  repetitive and angrily about military industrial complex and Iran and Iraq and so on. More blocking. There is some clip about how a kindergarten teacher is arrested for trying to stop ice agents from entering to arrest a five year old and them saying they are just following orders. 

I switched back to my main page to see if I can see any local posts but they are interspersed with ads for raptors and blue Jay's despite never having had any interest in sports in my life. 

An add for a page with zero followers called
football passion

reddit.com
From the OpenAl community on Reddit: OpenAl just made a $200/year product free, and an entire industry is panicking

Daniel Kornev
8h:
Until earlier today, I could upload a zip archive and give it to ChatGPT for analysis
But now, no matter what archive I give to the system, it savs somethina like this:
I don't have your actual source for `my-archive.zip (your zip isn't accessible in my environment right now)
(it still tries to help given the prompt, but without accessing contents of the zip file it's quite useless
Did you notice this or is it just me?

A reminder that Facebook has been blocking news in my country for at least a year:
This content isn't available riaht now When this happens, it's usually because the owner

This post:
Ernest Davis
...
X
15h.
In the last few davs, I have been bombarded on FB with posts tellina a formulaic narrative, in breathless tones, of how Karoline Leavitt said somethina dismissive about celebrity C ---today C was Greta Thunberg, and Leavitt said "She's iust a 23 year old activist"; yesterday C was Itzhak Perlman and Leavitt said "He's iust a violinist", the day before I forget who C was and Leavitt said "He's just a comedian". In response, C stands up, delivers a one-sentence, completely devastating, comeback which, sad to say, the Al generating these is unable to actually come up with, thus rendering the entire anecdote completely lame, and then C walks out --- presumably C had been present at a White House press conference for some unexplained reason
What on earth are these preposterous stories intended to accomplish? And for which sins am I being targeted with them?

Then an add with white on black text with some kind of gambling sweepstakes. Patches of white on red text with some inane slogon and please go subscribe. The photo is of someone in an ugly tshirt with I heart Canadian beef and holding a fork with three cuts of steak on it in one hand and a plate with a piece of steak on it in the other. 

Canada Beef
CANADA BEEF
Sponsored.
Only a few more days to enter for a chance t... See more
Beer news VOu can teast on.
CANADIAN BEEF
D PREMIUM QUALITY GRAIN-FED CANADIAN BEEF
ENTER FOR A CHanCE TO WIn 1 of 100 I Canadian Beef T-shirts when you sign up for the Canada Beef Performs e-newsletter.
Learn more about Canada Beef's marketing activities funded by your check-off dollars. Subscribe to Canada Beef's monthly e-newsletter delivered directly to your inbox.
IC
CLICK HERE TO SUBSCRIBE canadabeef.ca/ canadabeefperforms
CANADIAN BEEF
No purchase necessary. Click here for full rules.
Canada Beef
Visit page

Which I immediately reported as violence and animal abuse then blocked the page

People you may know

Another ad for some editoring tool called cinefile with 14 likes. After each ad I block another one just as inane and hostile slides into its place. Another post large print, white on black text, just saying. 

A 5-year old being detained by ICE, waiting to be deported? Really now? For god's sake!

Anyways I was thinking how Facebook's feed has a memory that just keep refreshing so that I can't really go back to see what I just saw. It's seems like it's been trash like this for years although the page I was viewing from I made pretty recently. I was thinking Zuckerberg clearly isn't seeing this or he would be wanting to pluck out his eyes and he would not be able to say anything like that maybe he thinks everyone is just relaxing on their hundred million dollar yachts and loving him for bringing such progress.

Anyways there is no way to describe just how horrifying it is especially because this is not just some isolated or random websites but one of the largest juggernauts on earth and pouring billions of dollars into making it even more pervasive, which makes me feel like it's dumbing down and radicalizing a whole planet, and seemingly impossible to stop.

I'm wondering why people are giving him more money instead of getting angrysmashing their phones. I'm only not deleting it because I am trying to figure out how it works in order to develop an alternative. Every few days this week I've made a nice post with a beautiful photo of nature, or a sunset, or a heard of deer, but I get only a dozen engagements from a few of my closest friends who I have known for like a decade. Its getting more and more difficult to justify spending any time on it but it's not me I'm worried about but the fact that apparently billions of people are being subjected to this every day and being told that it's the only way to communicate.