How Artificial Superintelligence Might Wipe Out Our Entire Species with Nate Soares TGS 203
793
15,024 Views
Dec 3 2025
920 Hype points
Likes
The Great Simplification - with Nate Hagens
(Conversation recorded on November 11th. 2025
Technoloaical development has alwavs been a double-edged sword for humanity: the printing press increased the spread of misinformation, cars disrupted the fabric of our cities, and social media has made us increasingly polarized and lonely. But it has not been since the invention of the nuclear bomb that technology has presented such a severe existential risk to humanity - until now, with the possibility of Artificial Super Intelligence (ASI) on the horizon. Were ASI to come to fruition, it would be so powerful that it would outcompete human beings in everything - from scientific discovery to strategic warfare. What miaht happen to our species if we reach this point of sinaularitv, and how can we steer awav from the worst outcomes?

In this episode, Nate is ioined bv Nate Soares. an A safetv researcher and co-author of the book "If Anvone Builds It, Evervone Dies: Whv Superhuman Al Would Kill Us All." Together, thev discuss manv aspects of Al and ASI, including the dangerous unpredictability of continued ASI development, the "alignment problem," and the newest safety studies uncovering increasingly deceptive Al behavior. Soares also explores the need for global cooperation and oversight in Al development and the importance of public awareness and political action in addressing these existential risks.
How does ASI present an entirely different level of risk than the conventional artificial intelligence models that the public has alreadv become accustomed to? Whv do the leaders of the Al industry persist in their pursuits, despite acknowledging the extinction-level risks presented by continued ASI development? And will we be able to ioin together to create global guardrails against this shared threat, taking one small step toward a better future for humanity?