Hello. Yeah I know I look like a troll online, but I'm severely resource constrained as I live below the poverty line.

I am working on a new 3d programming language and operating system based on functional programming and merge algebra. I studied symbolic logic, propositional calculus, Greek, Latin, Spanish, psychology, linguistics, and philosophy in university. I am now learning Arabic.

I played bass in a local band and know how to play keyboard. I volunteered multiple times in Mexico and Cuba in orphanages and churches.

I taught Sunday school for like twenty years, do live painting at festivals, and can build a whole house from scratch, including plumbing and electrical. I have been doing retail installation and property management of repossessed houses online.

I know like a half dozen programming languages and can type about 80 words per minute in qwerty and 40 in Dvorak.

I am an expert in learning theory and have my system operating system in an alien language. I am concerned about intersubjectivity collapse and mental health issues.

I directed an art camp in Pennsylvania once where oversaw making about 6,000 crafts. I am prolific on GitHub although I'm still on the free tier and it's just a hobby as I've never made any money off programming. I wanted to apply when I saw that it was a stressful job because I'm always bored out of my skull. I listened to lectures while I work and in 2016-2017 did about 12 years worth of university lectures in a year an a half.

There is no one else who can do this job as well as I can although I'm super good with people I can also come across as a bit autistic and iconoclastic.

Yeah I try to run a little under the radar because I'm a little concerned I might be one of the world's smartest people and there is a bit of an anti-intelectual climate where I live. You should read Prisoner of power by the Strugatsky brothers, Macrolife by Zebrowski, and the sequels to Ender's Game. I was influenced by Alison Gopnik and the educational practitioner Torey Hayden. I read to children in priority neighbourhoods for like 7 years where we provided quality interventions based on the work of William Glasser which kind of prefigured the work of Karl Friston.

I've got like 22,000 projects underway and can work on an extremely limited budget. Anyways I am thinking it's a good job but I am also willing to work as a nanny or secretary.

Thank you for your consideration. 

https://github.com/standardgalactic/spherepop/commit/362f79723c56f519f4d3c9d85388942fbb45ceb7