Neuro-symbolic AI

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

￼139 revisions since 2020-12-22 (+49 minutes), 69 editors, 52 watchers, 6,920 pageviews (30 days), created by: Jarble (150,413) · See full page statistics

￼

This article contains weasel words: vague phrasing that often accompanies biased or unverifiable information. Such statements should be clarified or removed. (May 2024)

Part of a series onArtificial intelligence (AI)￼

Major goals

Approaches

Machine learning

Symbolic

Deep learning

Bayesian networks

Evolutionary algorithms

Hybrid intelligent systems

Systems integration

Open-source

AI data centers

Applications

Philosophy

History

Controversies

Glossary

v

t

e

Neuro-symbolic AI is an artificial intelligence paradigm that combines neural networks, particularly deep learning, with symbolic AI based on formal logic and knowledge representation. This integration serves to address the inherent limitations of the two approaches, resulting in AI systems that exhibit enhanced interpretability, robustness, and generalizability, while maintaining reasoning, learning, and cognitive modeling capabilities.[1][2] As argued by Leslie Valiant[3] and others,[4][5] the effective construction of rich computational cognitive models demands the combination of symbolic reasoning and efficient machine learning.

Gary Marcus argued, "We cannot construct rich cognitive models in an adequate, automated way without the triumvirate of hybrid architecture, rich prior knowledge, and sophisticated techniques for reasoning."[6] Further, "To build a robust, knowledge-driven approach to AI we must have the machinery of symbol manipulation in our toolkit. Too much of useful knowledge is abstract to make do without tools that represent and manipulate abstraction, and to date, the only known machinery that can manipulate such abstract knowledge reliably is the apparatus of symbol manipulation."[7]

Angelo Dalli,[8] Henry Kautz,[9] Francesca Rossi,[10] and Bart Selman[11] also argued for such a synthesis. Their arguments attempt to address the two kinds of thinking, as discussed in Daniel Kahneman's book Thinking, Fast and Slow. It describes cognition as encompassing two components: System 1 is fast, reflexive, intuitive, and unconscious. System 2 is slower, step-by-step, and explicit. System 1 is used for pattern recognition. System 2 handles planning, deduction, and deliberative thinking. In this view, deep learning best handles the first kind of cognition, while symbolic reasoning best handles the second kind. Both are necessary for the development of a robust and reliable AI system capable of learning, reasoning, and interacting with humans to accept advice and answer questions. Since the 1990s, dual-process models with explicit references to the two contrasting systems have been the focus of research in both the fields of AI and cognitive science by numerous researchers.[12]

In 2025, the adoption of neurosymbolic AI, an approach that integrates neural networks with symbolic reasoning, increased in response to the need to address hallucination issues in large language models.[13][14] For example, Amazon implemented Neurosymbolic AI in its Vulcan warehouse robots and Rufus shopping assistant to enhance accuracy and decision-making.[15]

Contents

1Approaches

2Artificial general intelligence

3History

4Research

5Implementations

6See also

7Citations

8References

9External links

Approaches

Approaches for integration are diverse.[16] Henry Kautz's taxonomy of neuro-symbolic architectures[17] follows, along with some examples:

Symbolic Neural symbolic is the current approach of many neural models in natural language processing, where words or subword tokens are the ultimate input and output of large language models. Examples include BERT, RoBERTa, and GPT-3.

Symbolic[Neural] is exemplified by AlphaGo, where symbolic techniques are used to invoke neural techniques. In this case, the symbolic approach is Monte Carlo tree search and the neural techniques learn how to evaluate game positions.

Neural | Symbolic uses a neural architecture to interpret perceptual data as symbols and relationships that are reasoned about symbolically. Neural-Concept Learner[18] is an example.

Neural: Symbolic → Neural relies on symbolic reasoning to generate or label training data that is subsequently learned by a deep learning model, e.g., to train a neural model for symbolic computation by using a Macsyma-like symbolic mathematics system to create or label examples.

NeuralSymbolic uses a neural net that is generated from symbolic rules. An example is the Neural Theorem Prover,[19] which constructs a neural network from an AND-OR proof tree generated from knowledge base rules and terms. Logic Tensor Networks[20] also fall into this category.

Neural[Symbolic] according to Kautz, this approach embeds true symbolic reasoning inside a neural network. These are tightly-coupled neural-symbolic systems, in which the logical inference rules are internal to the neural network. This way, the neural network internally computes the inference from the premises and learns to reason based on logical inference systems. Early work on connectionist modal and temporal logics by Garcez, Lamb, and Gabbay [21] is aligned with this approach.

These categories are not exhaustive, as they do not consider multi-agent systems. In 2005, Bader and Hitzler presented a more fine-grained categorization that took into account, e.g., whether the use of symbols included logic and, if so, whether the logic was propositional or first-order logic.[22] The 2005 categorization and Kautz's taxonomy above are compared and contrasted in a 2021 article.[17] Sepp Hochreiter argued that Graph Neural Networks "...are the predominant models of neural-symbolic computing"[23] since "[t]hey describe the properties of molecules, simulate social networks, or predict future states in physical and engineering applications with particle-particle interactions."[24]

Artificial general intelligence

Gary Marcus argues that "...hybrid architectures that combine learning and symbol manipulation are necessary for robust intelligence, but not sufficient",[25] and that there are

...four cognitive prerequisites for building robust artificial intelligence:

hybrid architectures that combine large-scale learning with the representational and computational powers of symbol manipulation,

large-scale knowledge bases—likely leveraging innate frameworks—that incorporate symbolic knowledge along with other forms of knowledge,

reasoning mechanisms capable of leveraging those knowledge bases in tractable ways, and

rich cognitive models that work together with those mechanisms and knowledge bases.[26]

This echoes earlier calls for hybrid models as early as the 1990s.[27][28]

History

Garcez and Lamb described research in this area as ongoing, at least since the 1990s.[29][30] During that period, the terms symbolic and sub-symbolic AI were popular.

A series of workshops on neuro-symbolic AI has been held annually since 2005 Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence.[31] In the early 1990s, an initial set of workshops on this topic were organized.[27]

Research

Key research questions remain,[32] such as:

What is the best way to integrate neural and symbolic architectures?

How should symbolic structures be represented within neural networks and extracted from them?

How should common-sense knowledge be learned and reasoned about?

How can abstract knowledge that is hard to encode logically be handled?

Implementations

Implementations of neuro-symbolic approaches include:

AllegroGraph: an integrated Knowledge Graph based platform for neuro-symbolic application development.[33][34][35]

Scallop: a language based on Datalog that supports differentiable logical and relational reasoning. Scallop can be integrated in Python and with a PyTorch learning module.[36]

Logic Tensor Networks: encode logical formulas as neural networks and simultaneously learn term encodings, term weights, and formula weights.

DeepProbLog: combines neural networks with the probabilistic reasoning of ProbLog.

Abductive Learning: integrates machine learning and logical reasoning in a balanced-loop via abductive reasoning, enabling them to work together in a mutually beneficial way.[37]

SymbolicAI: a compositional differentiable programming library.

Explainable Neural Networks (XNNs): combine neural networks with symbolic hypergraphs and trained using a mixture of backpropagation and symbolic learning called induction.[38]

See also

Symbolic AI

Connectionist AI

Hybrid intelligent systems

