Hello, thank you for your very thoughtful letter. I got nothing but good vibes off of it, and would be happy to meet, but of course I'm going to throw a few red flags and caveats at you first.

As you can probably tell from my Github, I am trying to give off a bit of a paranoid supergenius iconoclast vibe to fend off the weirdos. I'm going to suggest that we exchange a bit of correspondence first as I am pretty sure I live below the poverty line in my country and although my passport is probably still good, I haven't been able to travel for a bit.

My last trip was volunteering as a mason fixing a church kitchen in Cuba for five weeks in 2017. I also volunteered there like 15 years earlier for the same amount of time. I also went to Mexico for a few weeks in 2005 and a few months in like 2010 or so. The first time I volunteered in an orphanage. I visited Australia like three times, for around a month at a time. Part of me wonders how I could have been so naive and invincible feeling as I was in some dangerous places but didn't really feel very afraid as I had learned Spanish and could talk myself out of problems.

I started journaling when I was like 14 which was a bit of a discipline at first but eventually I realized I would fill up any notebook pretty quickly and that it looks like a bit maniacal to anyone else. Now I'm a bit worried where it might have gotten me, as I might be smarter  most people and generally this is not an asset. I had a bit of an unconventional education as I went to a private, self-directed school for my first five years and then was unschooled or homeschooled for five years, after which time I took two years of high school, grades 11 and 12, and then five years university, doing a degree of my own creation in psycholinguistics and philosophy, graduating in 2005. I worked for myself for the past decade or two, first mostly doing commissioned art projects and some times teachings it.

For example I directed an art program in Pennsylvania in 2010, which was both exciting and horrifying. I pay the bills now by flipping houses with my father taking about a year to demolish it and then rebuild it. I do everything from floors, roof, windows, and plumbing, and electrical although I'm not technically certified. The house in flipping now is like an hour outside of the city and should be finished in January sometime, maybe. I built a whole house from scratch for my aunt the year before last. I help my father with retail installation goods and property management for the banks for a dispatch company in Toronto. I have a brother who is a lawyer there but I don't really love big cities and even my city is starting to feel too big. My other brother took his life a few years ago due to a protracted struggle with borderline personality disorder, which is still maybe too difficult to discuss as we all had a very enriched childhood but he started struggling as a teenager.

I haven't had the best luck with romantic relationships as they all turned out to be a bit psychopathic or psychotic. It's maybe not a healthy society right now with the metacrisis and all. Covid wreaked havoc on a lot of relationships with society being shut down for a few years and with social media being so polarizing and politicized. I came to think that there wasn't any thing I could paint or discuss in public no matter how innocuous that wouldn't offend someone or radicalize them. Nevertheless, I remain an optimist that most problems can be solved and I might just be extremely cautious because I have no institutional or academic affiliation or backing.

It's my impression that most people are either insane or, if they are well adapted, hopelessly naive or privileged with some kind of extremely cushy job. The only calls I get right now are from some guy in Gambia who is constantly begging for 50$ for groceries or medical bills or rent.

I have a roommate David who moved down from Alberta and is helping me out with the flip and other small projects but he is a bit antitech and anti AI so I can't really discuss some of my projects, although I can find plenty to discuss against big tech and big industry. Else I'd offer for you to stay here if you visited else my folks have a spare room and there are probably lots of hotels. 

Anyways, I still am kind of bored out of my skull most of the time, so I'd love to see if there is something technical I could help you with, if I haven't scared you off. 

Nate
1 506 343-7493 


It might be better for you to meet my brother Enoch in Toronto first, he might be much more normal then me. I can try to connect you. Alternately my friend Tyson Ardo although he is much more uncouth and slightly more motivated, although less tech savvy. Alternatively, my friend Alison Gayton, the potter, as she is much more professional and less jaded. 