I did live painting at music festivals for like ten years probably, I was always able to sell enough art to make it worth it but it would be expensive to travel from festival to festival.

But there is big money in programming if I meet the right people.

I literally have done a lot of jobs I taught an art camp in Pennsylvania in the USA back in 2010 but travel is expensive.

But even that and artwork is a little degrading you are always doing stuff for people with more money then you, like I have never bought artwork it would mean I had disposable income, and I had to keep my prices pretty low so that I wouldn't only be making art for rich people.

Even the Nigerians I have met here seem like they have very expensive homes although they don't know how to fix anything when it breaks. They must work in tech or something where money is more available. The government also helps out new immigrants a lot in their first year. You have to prove you have some education and skills to even get considered we only bring in so many immigrants per year. 

We have good welfare here I met lots of people who made more money then me with no education and who have never worked. Like the government pays you if you have children or a disability.

I don't know if you have similar problems there. I make so little money I don't really ever have to pay taxes but the government doesn't really help small business owners or entrepreneurs it is very expensive here to buy or rent property very expensive for every kind of license. 

They call it a perverse incentive if you can make more money not working then by trying to do honest work there are a number of people who take advantage of the system. There isn't so much of an incentive to study or work hard. Or at least there is a lot of pressure to work for bigger companies.

You can see why taking over the world can be hard, I would have to figure out how to fix these issues. 

And then there is crime and mental health so really it would involve fixing flaws with infrastructure and education. 



