Paranoid Supergenius Iconoclast

Hello I'm an artist and home renovator living below the poverty line. You talked about how internet culture encouraged vulnerability online but that this has become dangerous. I'm not part of any dark forest community, and without any kind of academic or institutional backing.

Obviously, I'd like to be able to afford to buy groceries and maybe afford a family someday but I'm already like 42 and I've had enough people try to destroy my reputation and career just with libel and slander before the social media era to know there is no way to scale any of my art and projects unless I also could afford a shit ton of publicists, lawyers, secretaries, and security, when right now I don't even lock my doors and have no kind of retirement plan except maybe in my head. I can't go around promoting myself in any way because every single form art has been co-opted by advertising or politicized.

Individualism isn't exactly working here everyone has their own religion or family secrets I can't really integrate without rocking the boat I don't feel like it's safe unless goverments become less hostile to creativity I can't use the law to protect myself unless I could afford to protect myself. I feel like might actually dismantle religions in order to make it feel more safe literally I always get false accusations from jealous people and so if I ever have more resources or influence it would just get worse even though I try to be as innocuous as possible.

I'm worried I might be too intelligent to fit in anywhere it literally feels like I am constantly shadowbanning myself by refusing to post most of my ideas or waiting a few months before turning them from private to public. It seems to be a bit of an anti-intellectual climate out there it doesn't seem very safe to post any ideas although maybe I have already figured out but my timelines are too extended maybe I mean if I am too cautious I'll be 80 before I can support myself. 

Nate
1 506 343-7493 

Enter if you dare! 
https://standardgalactic.github.io/sitemap/


Source:
https://github.com/standardgalactic/sitemap/blob/main/index.html