Hello, I'm an artist and home renovator living below the poverty line in Canada. 

I was going to send you a pull request with my notes and AI summaries of your Github repository on self-aware networks, even though it's glitchy, full of hallucinations, formatting errors, and generally makes me looks kind of insane, and may even be counter productive to your goals.

Nevertheless I wanted to show that I am engaging with your ideas, as I've converged on some similar insights. I'll just send it to you directly.

Obviously, I don't think I'm insane or that it's useless, but generally, I can't avoid misinterpretations and I can't afford anything better then an old rebuilt computer, and can't afford subscriptions or plus plans as I've never made any money off technical or academic work, and can't afford time off or tuition fees to get further education or to travel - and haven't seen a family doctor in like twenty years. Probably I've been looking for a higher paying job for as long.

I probably act way too autistic and am too cancellable, although I would prefer to share anyways. Social media has become almost too toxic for me since everything seems politicized and inflammatory, and generally no one has any clue what I'm talking about unless I dumb it down a lot or just post paintings.

I can paint anything but I already found that even my most innocuous pieces offended some people, even before the AI art apocalypse, and so I stopped for now although it's an easy way to get likes and I never had any problem selling anything I made.

I'm flipping houses with my father but it's like a year or two between sales, and all the money goes back into tools and materials and paying minimum payment on my credit cards.

I do electrical and plumbing but can't exactly afford to get certification. I built a whole house for my aunt last fall from a blueprint we had made up from a sketch, but didn't make much because it wasn't for sale but she needed a place to live after a messy divorce. 

I've basically given up on the idea of ever affording a family, and my girlfriends turned out to be bipolar or psychopathic, and this set me back like a decade. 

I can't afford a dental plan, although my province just offered me something, even though my age bracket isn't covered, I qualify because I'm so poor. I'll have to check out if there are any hidden fees. There is no real tech sector in my city as it's blue collar industrial, the whole province is owned by one family - oil and paper tycoons, and is very religious.

I can't go around saying Jesus didn't exist, wouldn't eat meat, that Islam is likewise problematic, or else I'd be disowned by most of the people I've known, or crucified. I've already had people try to destroy my career and reputation with no resources and no influence, so I can't exactly go around promoting myself or my ideas very openly when I can't afford a lawyer and I don't lock my doors.

Nate
1 506 343-7493

Enter if you dare:
https://standardgalactic.github.io/sitemap/