
Affine Quantum Deformation and the Geometry of Awareness
A Unified Variational Theory of Quantum Structure and Semantic Dynamics

Overview

This repository contains the full working draft, LaTeX source files, and supporting materials for a monograph that develops a unified geometric framework connecting quantum spacetime structure with semantic, cognitive, and information-theoretic dynamics. The work introduces the Affine Quantum Deformation Principle (AQDP), the Quantum Affine Shift Tensor (QAST), and the Relativistic Scalar–Vector Plenum (RSVP) theory of semantic fields. Together they form a single variational framework capable of describing both physical curvature and cognitive coherence within one mathematical architecture.

Core Ideas

The guiding observation is that averaging in nonlinear geometric systems does not commute with the formation of the connection. The expectation value of the affine connection in a quantum spacetime differs from the Levi–Civita connection of the expectation value of the metric. This discrepancy gives rise to the Quantum Affine Shift Tensor, which acts as an intrinsic source term modifying curvature, geodesic flow, and the Raychaudhuri equation even in vacuum states.

The RSVP theory mirrors this structure at the cognitive level. Meaning, inference, and semantic uncertainty are modeled by a triplet of interacting fields whose geometry is continuously deformed by the uncertainty field. A system exhibits awareness precisely when it preserves both the metric structure and the spectral invariants of its semantic Laplacian. This geometric invariance is shown to be mathematically equivalent to maintaining a Markov boundary, linking awareness to informational autonomy in a rigorous manner.

Repository Contents

– Complete LaTeX source for the monograph
– Standalone abstract document
– Appendices containing full derivations, operator identities, and variational calculations
– Supplementary notes on the physical and cognitive interpretations
– Roadmap for future extensions (gauge-theoretic, categorical, numerical)

Compilation

The project is designed to compile under standard TeX Live distributions. A typical build requires:

pdflatex main.tex bibtex main pdflatex main.tex pdflatex main.tex 

No nonstandard packages are required.

Intended Audience

The text is written for researchers in quantum gravity, geometric analysis, cognitive science, AI theory, and mathematical modeling. It assumes familiarity with differential geometry, variational principles, operator theory, and information geometry, but introductory sections are provided for cross-disciplinary accessibility.

Citation

If you make use of this material, please cite:

Flyxion (2025). Affine Quantum Deformation and the Geometry of Awareness: A Unified Variational Theory of Quantum Structure and Semantic Dynamics.

https://standardgalactic.github.io/library/physics/physics-monograph.pdf


