Introducing people to Rick and Morty:

Some people are willing to give a show a pretty serious shot. If your friend or partner or family member or whoever is willing to watch ~6 episodes before giving up, then they should just start at the beginning. A 6-episode arc gets you through to Rick Potion #9 and by that point it'll be clear whether they're into it or not/by then the show has started to find its stride and has presented at least a handful of truly excellent moments.

However, if they're more impatient or more skeptical/hostile from the get go, such that you *only* have ~1 hour of their willingness to entertain the possibility, I think starting with the pilot is the wrong way to go.

I think you should start with s1e5, Meeseeks and Destroy.  It's:
a) solid but *not* amazing, i.e. you won't set people up for disappointment the way you would if you started with one of the best possible episodes and there was nowhere to go but down
b) the best outside-of-the-pilot introduction to the family members and their dynamic (e.g. explicitly tells you who's who, intros the marriage issues between Beth and Jerry, loops you in to the fact that Summer was born from a teenage pregnancy, etc.)
c) contains a decent dose of both the show's annoyingness (some people find Mr. Meeseeks hard to listen to) and the show's darkness (there's a violent assault scene that is ~ the darkest that the show gets; if someone needs to bail out because they can't handle that level of intensity, that's a good thing to learn right off the bat (even though most episodes are *not* that dark))

Following Meeseeks, I think the next place to go is your choice of either s2e6, The Ricks Must Be Crazy, or s3e4, Vindicators 3: The Return of Worldender. These are both solid, self-contained episodes that get a little more into the dynamic between Rick and Morty and have a healthy dose of the classic crazy sci-fi madness that is ~1/3 of the show's charm.

For your third showcase episode, you've got a bit of a wider fork; I lean toward s2e3, Auto Erotic Assimilation, or s4e2, The Old Man and the Seat, because these both do an excellent job of showcasing Rick's despair, which is an important note to see and understand pretty early on. However, there's also something to be said for leaning into more of the meta-aware narrative twist episodes that play around with genre conventions and so forth, so if your friend looks like they want something more heady and less of an emotional gut punch, go for one of:
- s4e1, Edge of Tomorty: Rick, Die, Repeat
- s2e1, A Rickle in Time
- s4e6, Never Ricking Morty (yeah, that's right, I said it; the story train episode is actually solid as a third one to watch).  

After those three, if they're *in,* you can pretty much just go back and start filling in the cracks wherever. If they're really vibing with it, go all the way back to the pilot; if they just want enough grounding in the backstory to make sure they didn't miss anything huge, start with s1e4, M. Night Shaym-aliens; if it seems like they want to hit only the highlights, take them to s1e6, Rick Potion #9 (and then the only other episodes they need from season 1 are 8 and 10, mmaaybe 11).

Season 2 is solid, but if you want to skip a few, episodes 5 and 8 can go.  For season 3 ... also 5 and 8? (Weird.) For season 4 ... idk, I love every episode in season 4 except episode 9, but I'll admit that 2, 3, and 4 are *controversial* and don't contain any crucial developments. 10 is not the strongest finale but it has important canonical moments.

Season 5 is basically just 1, 2, 8, 9, 10. I'd stay away from the rest except 3 and 7 are not *that* bad. **Do not** blame me if you watch 4 and 6. Not my fault.

S6: 1, 2, 7 > 3, 8 >> 4, 5, 6. 9 and 10 fine but skippable.

S7: 5 and 10 are the only truly great episodes, but 2, 3, 4, 6, and 9 are solid/"classic" and 1 and 7 are okay. 8 is just ... why. It's like not even an episode of the show.

Haven't watched S8. Hyped for it, saving it up.