
 Atomic Evidence 

   

 David    S.    Goodsell  
 Atomic Evidence 
 Seeing the Molecular Basis of Life    

 David  S.  Goodsell  
 The Scripps Research Institute 
and RCSB Protein Data Bank 
 La Jolla ,  California  
 USA   
 ISBN 978-3-319-32508-8    ISBN 978-3-319-32510-1 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2016943685 
 © Springer International Publishing Switzerland  2016 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the 
whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁ cally the rights of translation, reprinting, 
reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁ lms or in any other 
physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, 
computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter 
developed. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in 
this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁ c statement, that such 
names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for 
general use. 
 The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and 
information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. 
Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, 
with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have 
been made. 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 This Copernicus imprint is published by Springer Nature  
 The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland 

V
  Pref ace  
 Why do I need a new fl u shot each year? 
Should I be frightened by all the news 
about bacterial drug resistance? What 
about that new diet I just read about on the 
web? Biomolecular science is increasingly 
important in our everyday life, helping us 
answer questions like these, and giving us 
the knowledge to make critical choices 
about our diet, our health, and our well-
ness. How do fi refl ies light up? Why do 
plant and animal populations evolve over 
many generations? Biomolecular science 
also allows us to be curious, to look deeper 
into the natural world, and to be inspired 
by the complex inner workings of life. 
 In this book, I will take an evidence- based 
approach to current knowledge about the 
structure of biomolecules and their place 
in our lives, inviting us to explore how we 
know what we know and how current 
gaps in knowledge may infl uence our 
individual approach to the information. 
Th e book is separated into a series of short 
essays that present some of the founda-
tional concepts of biomolecular science, 
with many examples of the molecules that 
perform the basic functions of life. 
 Th is book builds on my work with the 
RCSB Protein Data Bank, where I write a 
column each month that highlights 
atomic structures from the PDB archive. 
It has been a tremendous gift  to have the 
opportunity to work on the Molecule of 
the Month, and I gratefully acknowledge 
Helen Berman, Stephen Burley, Christine 
Zardecki, and the entire RCSB team for 
their enthusiastic support over the past 
15 years. 
 Th e molecular stories in this book are sup-
ported by a monumental body of work by 
scientists around the world. Th roughout 
the book, I have included accession codes 
for structures at the PDB and EMData-
Bank. You can explore the structures 
directly at their websites (  www.pdb.org  
and   www.emdatabank.org  ). Th e database 
entries for each of these structures also 
include the primary journal publications 
that describe the detailed science support-
ing each structure. 
 David  S.  Goodsell 
 San Diego, CA, USA    

   

VII
 Contents 
 1 
 The Protein Data Bank ................................................................................................................ 
 1 
 2 
 Seeing Is Believing: Methods of Structure Solution ............................................... 
 5   
 3 
 Visualizing the Invisible World of Molecules ...............................................................  11 
 4 
  The Twists and Turns of DNA ..................................................................................................  17 
 5 
  The Central Dogma .......................................................................................................................  25 
 6 
 The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code .................................................................................  33 
 7 
 Evolution in Action ........................................................................................................................  41  
 8 
 How Evolution Shapes Proteins............................................................................................  51 
 9 
 The Universe of Protein Folds ................................................................................................  59 
 10 
 Order and Chaos in Protein Structure ..............................................................................  67   
11 
Molecular Electronics .................................................................................................................. 77
12 
Green Energy..................................................................................................................................... 83
13 
Peak Performance .......................................................................................................................... 89
 14 
 Cellular Signaling Networks ...................................................................................................  99 
15 
GPCRs Revealed............................................................................................................................... 107
 16 
  Signaling with Hormones .........................................................................................................  113 
 17 
 Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action 
and the Transition State .............................................................................................................  121   
 18 
 Seven Wonders of the World of Enzymes .......................................................................  129 
 19 
 Building Bodies ...............................................................................................................................  139 
 20 
 Coloring the Biological World ................................................................................................  149   
21 
Amazing Antibodies ..................................................................................................................... 155
22 
Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System .......................................... 163
23 
Reconstructing HIV ....................................................................................................................... 171 

1
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_1
 1  
 The Protein Data Bank  

2
1
 We're very lucky that today we can go to our computers and instantly 
start exploring a hundred thousand atomic structures of biomole-
cules. Th e structural biology community has spearheaded a com-
prehensive eff ort to make the results of biostructural research freely 
available to everyone. In 1971, a group of scientists at the Brookhaven 
National Laboratory started an archive of atomic structures, called 
the Protein Data Bank, as a way to make these structures available. 
Th e fi rst archive contained the seven protein structures that were 
available at the time. Today the archive has grown to over a hundred 
thousand entries and is managed by centers around the world: 
RCSB and BMRB in the USA, PDBe in Europe, and PDBj in Japan. 
Together, they have created online interfaces to this massive archive, 
providing tools to deposit, curate, fi nd, analyze, and visualize the 
structures. 
 Th is wasn't always the case, however. In the early days of struc-
tural science, many researchers chose to keep the primary results of 
their work, the atomic coordinates, secret. Instead of making these 
available, they published only pictures of their structures and 
descriptions of their own ideas about the structure and function. 
Arguably, this was justifi ed: because these structures require so 
much eff ort to solve, these researchers wanted to have the freedom 
to analyze them completely themselves. Many researchers, however, 
felt that this policy went against the spirit of science, where results 
are made available and may be used by the entire community to 
build a more complete picture of our world. And perhaps more 
importantly, results need to be made available to allow other 
researchers to check their authenticity and reproduce any scientifi c 
insights gained from them. 
 For this reason, with the support of many researchers, Fred 
Richards draft ed a letter in 1988 to the major government institutes 
funding science, requesting a policy that crystallographic data be 
made available, at least for all research supported by public funds. 
Th e eff ort was ultimately successful, and today, deposition of coor-
dinates and data in a public database is typically a mandatory con-
dition for funding of grants as well as for publication of results in 
many prominent journals. 
 Th e widespread availability of coordinates has transformed the 
study of molecular biology. Each structure is a window into a par-
ticular topic, allowing us to see the atomic details of biomolecular 
processes. But that is only the beginning. An entire fi eld of structure- 
based drug design has been built upon these structures, allowing 
the discovery of new pharmaceuticals to fi ght everything from HIV 
to depression. Comparison of many diff erent structures has led 
directly to new insights about the general principles for biomolecu-
lar structure and function and the evolution of these molecules, and 
these insights have blossomed into an entire fi eld of protein design 
and biotechnology. 
 Today, we can download atomic structures for nearly any bio-
logical molecule we would be interested in exploring, from tiny hor-
mones to huge viruses (. Fig.  1.1 ). Most of the illustrations in this 
book are created directly from atomic coordinates from the PDB or, 
in some cases, from the experimental data supporting the atomic 
 
Chapter 1 · The Protein Data Bank

3
1
 
.  Fig. 1.1   Selected structures from the Protein Data Bank. The Protein Data Bank archives atomic structures of 
biomolecules such a proteins, DNA, and RNA. A few familiar examples are shown here. Three small molecules are shown 
for size comparison: ( 1 ) water, ( 2 ) glucose, and ( 3 ) ATP. Proteins in the blood: ( 4 ) antibody, ( 5 ) insulin, and ( 6 ) ﬁ brinogen. 
Digestive enzymes: ( 7 ) lysozyme, ( 8 ) pepsin, and ( 9 ) amylase. A virus: ( 10 ) rhinovirus. Membrane-bound proteins: ( 11 ) ATP 
synthase, ( 12 ) adrenergic receptor and G-protein, ( 13 ) potassium ion channel, and ( 14 ) photosystem II. A few interesting 
proteins: ( 15 ) hemoglobin, ( 16 ) green ﬂ uorescent protein, ( 17 ) luciferase, and ( 18 ) ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase 
oxygenase. Molecules involved in protein synthesis: ( 19 ) ribosome, ( 20 ) transfer RNA, ( 21 ) aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, 
( 22 ) protein chaperone GroEL/GroES, and ( 23 ) ubiquitin. A few enzymes: ( 24 ) catalase, ( 25 ) nitrogenase, and ( 26 ) leucine 
aminopeptidase. Proteins that bind to DNA: ( 27 ) repair protein DNA photolyase, ( 28 ) topoisomerase, ( 29 ) RNA 
polymerase, ( 30 ) lac repressor, ( 31 ) catabolite gene activator protein, and ( 32 ) transcription factor complex. Iron storage 
protein ( 33 ) ferritin and three enzymes involved in sugar metabolism: ( 34 ) hexokinase, ( 35 ) phosphofructokinase, and 
( 36 ) pyruvate kinase (PDB entries 1igt, 2hiu, 1m1j, 2baf, 1lz1, 5pep, 1smd, 4rhv, 1e79, 1c17, 3sn6, 3lut, 1s5l, 4hhb, 1gﬂ , 
2d1s, 1rcx, 1j5e, 1jj2, 4tna, 1ﬀ y, 1aon, 1ubq, 1qqw, 1n2c, 1lap, 1tez, 1a36, 1tlf, 1efa, 1cgp, 1ais, 1hrs, 1dgk, 4pfk, 1a3w)  
 
Chapter 1 · The Protein Data Bank

4
1
structure. For each illustration, I have included the accession code 
for the data at the PDB.  With this information, you can easily 
explore the structure yourself using the tools at one of the PDB sites. 
Th e accession code also allows access to a variety of other informa-
tion about the structure, for instance, the scientists who determined 
the structures, journal articles about the structure, and links to 
other databases related to the structure. So if a particular topic cap-
tures your interest, make a visit to the PDB to explore the molecules 
in more detail! 
 
. Fig. 1.1 (continued)
 
Chapter 1 · The Protein Data Bank

5
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_2
 2  
 Seeing Is Believing: 
Methods of Structure 
Solution  

6
2
 Scientists are curious people. We're always asking questions and 
then trying to fi gure out ways to answer them. Th is is particularly 
tricky with molecular biology. Th ere's no direct way to see individ-
ual molecules, at least in atomic detail, so we're forced to use a 
bunch of specialized methods that probe diff erent aspects of the 
structure. Th en, from this information, we can build up an under-
standing of the molecule and create images of the molecule that are 
consistent with the data. Take, for instance, the ribosome (. 
Fig.  2.1 ). Researchers have been working for decades on this elusive 
subject, assembling information from many sources to build the 
detailed understanding we have today.
 All of the methods currently used to determine the atomic 
structures of molecules rely on observing many copies of molecule. 
For this reason, the fi rst step is to purify the molecule, separating it 
from its cellular context. Th is is a surprisingly big limitation with 
these studies, for several reasons. First, we can't really see how it is 
acting in the cell—we only observe how it behaves in an artifi cial, 
purifi ed state. Second, a variety of noncellular conditions are oft en 
necessary to stabilize the molecule in its purifi ed state. Fortunately, 
in the case of ribosomes, when they are purifi ed and mixed with the 
proper partners, they happily go about their task of building pro-
teins, so we have reasonable confi dence that they act similarly when 
they are in their normal environment in the cell. Finally, once we 
have a purifi ed (but still active) molecule, we can bring to bear the 
three major techniques for exploring biomolecular structure: 
 electron microscopy, x-ray crystallography, and nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. 
 Much of the seminal work on ribosome structure was per-
formed using electron microscopy. It is a satisfyingly visual method, 
capturing more or less directly an image of individual ribosomes. 
Early studies would spread ribosomes on a surface and stain them 
with heavy metals, gathering pictures of the outer shape of the mol-
ecules. Today, a fi eld of molecules are frozen in a thin layer of ice, 
and an image is captured. Computer analyses of these many mole-
cules, caught in diff erent orientations, are combined and aligned to 
create a three-dimensional map of the molecule. As I write this 
book, the fi eld of cryoelectron microscopy is undergoing a techni-
cal revolution, and for some large, well-behaved molecules, this 
process gives enough information to determine the location of each 
atom in the molecule. 
 Electron microscopy was used to discover all the basic features 
of ribosome structure and function: the shapes of the large and 
small subunits, the threading of messenger RNA between them and 
the location of the transfer RNA subsites, an exit tunnel out the 
back of the large subunit, association of ribosomes with protein 
transporters in the endoplasmic reticulum, and many other things. 
Today, researchers are using the detailed structures from cryo-EM 
to reveal piece by piece each step of protein synthesis and interac-
tions with the many molecules that assist with the process. 
 X-ray crystallography is the least ambiguous, but perhaps the 
most artifi cial, method for atomic structure determination. A very 
pure solution of the molecule is coaxed to form crystals using a 
 
Chapter 2 · Seeing Is Believing: Methods of Structure Solution

7
2
variety of unusual methods, such as concentrated solutions of salt 
or waxy polyethylene glycol. Th ese crystals are then subjected to an 
intense beam of x-rays, which is diff racted into a characteristic pat-
tern of spots by the many identically oriented copies of the mole-
cule inside the crystal. Finally, these spots are analyzed to generate 
a three-dimensional map of the location of all of the electrons in the 
molecule. From this, the location of each atom is determined, pro-
vided that the crystal and diff raction are of high enough quality. 
 Crystallography has revealed the inner secrets of the ribosome 
in glorious detail. For many years, researchers studied the individ-
ual proteins by crystallography, slowly building up a picture of the 
whole molecule. Th en, in 2000, three labs presented atomic struc-
tures of the intact ribosomal subunits. One major insight from 
these structures was the discovery that the ribosome is a ribozyme, 
with one particular nucleotide in the RNA catalyzing the protein- 
building reaction. Th e structures also revealed how the small sub-
unit positions the messenger RNA, the details of the tunnel where 
the newly synthesized protein exits from the construction site, and 
a host of other interesting details. 
 NMR spectroscopy captures biological molecules in a more cell- 
like environment. A solution of the purifi ed molecule is subjected 
to a radio fi eld, and a series of characteristic resonances are 
 
.  Fig. 2.1    Experimental views of a bacterial ribosome. The  upper image  
shows a 3D reconstruction from electron microscopy, with the small subunit in 
 green and the large subunit in  blue . The  lower image  is an atomic structure 
from x-ray crystallography and an NMR structure of a ﬂ exible protein stalk that 
is not observed in the crystal structure (PDB entries 4v4q and 1rqv, 
EMDataBank entry EMD1110)  
 
Chapter 2 · Seeing Is Believing: Methods of Structure Solution

8
2
 measured. By tailoring the types of fi elds, information is obtained 
on the local conformation of the molecular chain, and atoms that 
are close to one another may be identifi ed. Th is information is then 
used to create an atomic model of the molecule that is consistent 
with all the observations. Th e complexity of NMR spectra typically 
limits the method to smallish proteins and nucleic acids, at least if 
entire atomic structures are going to be determined, but NMR 
excels at study of fl exible molecules, which typically thwart struc-
ture determination by microscopy or crystallography. For instance, 
a recent structure of the L7/L12 stalk of the ribosome was solved by 
NMR methods, revealing how it changes conformations to organize 
the interaction of the ribosome with the many protein factors that 
guide each step of protein synthesis. 
 Th e structural biology community is currently very excited 
about the concept of "integrative" structural biology. Th e idea is to 
approach large and diffi  cult problems by throwing everything we 
have at it. Th is approach is opening many doors that were previ-
ously closed for study, particularly for large and fl exible assemblies. 
For instance, the integrative approach has been essential for all 
aspects of the study of the ribosome. Electron microscopy was used 
for years (and still is) to defi ne the overall shape and evolution of 
ribosomes and to discover all of the basic mechanisms of protein 
synthesis. Th e recent atomic structures have revealed the details of 
ribosomes and many aspects of the peptide-forming reaction and 
interaction with drugs. But the integration of EM and crystallogra-
phy is still essential for defi ning how the many protein helpers 
guide each of the steps and some of the more mobile aspects of the 
structure. 
 Th e underlying foundation of the scientifi c method tells us to 
question everything, and when we use the results of science, we 
always need to be critical. Do the experimental data support the 
structures or are we building them based on our biases or imagina-
tion? Are our discoveries about the function of the molecules based 
on what we have observed or on our preconceived notions? When 
we go to the PDB looking for a structure, we have to watch out for a 
few potential pitfalls. 
 Fortunately, the overall validity of structures in the PDB is not 
typically at question. Scientists are highly critical people, and there 
are usually at least two or three diff erent groups competing with one 
another on a particular topic. We continually question our own 
work and that of our competitors, making sure that the results are 
supported by evidence. Th e PDB site, as well, contains a variety of 
methods for validating structures and assessing the quality of the 
underlying data. For instance, the quality of crystallographic data is 
oft en measured by the resolution of the electron density maps, 
which determine how much detail can be seen. Structures in the 
PDB range from structures where every atom may be clearly seen to 
elusive structures where only the general shape is observed (. 
Fig.  2.2 ).
 Each of these experimental methods has distinct advantages but 
also characteristic weaknesses. For instance, x-ray crystallography 
is typically able to determine very exact positions of heavy atoms 
 
Chapter 2 · Seeing Is Believing: Methods of Structure Solution

9
2
(carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, etc.) in a protein molecule but rarely 
resolves the many tiny hydrogen atoms. For this reason, most of the 
structures in the PDB are missing their hydrogens, and if they are 
important for the study of the molecule, they need to be modeled 
based on the known geometry. NMR spectroscopy, on the other 
hand, observes the relative location of hydrogen atoms in a struc-
ture and infers much of the remaining structure based on the 
known chemical structure of the molecule. 
 Atomic structures are diffi  cult to determine, and researchers 
oft en have to do drastic things to the molecules they study (. Fig.  2.3 ). 
For instance, fl exible molecules are oft en cut into smaller, more 
rigid pieces, and each piece is studied separately. To understand the 
function of the whole protein, we then need to reassemble the 
pieces in the computer to model the entire assembly. Proteins are 
oft en engineered to make them easier to study, with strings of histi-
dine amino acids that are easy to purify or selenium atoms that have 
a distinctive signal in crystallographic experiments. In most cases, 
 
.  Fig. 2.2   Resolution of crystallographic electron density maps. Three electron density maps of DNA are shown here. 
At the  upper left is a very high-resolution structure, where every atom is resolved, and we can even see hints of 
hydrogen positions. At the  lower left is a more typical map, similar in resolution to most of the structures in the PDB. The 
overall shape of the bases and backbone, as well as a beautiful hydrated magnesium ion, is easily discernable, but 
individual atoms are not resolved. At the right is a low-resolution structure, which is suﬃ  cient to place the overall shape 
of the double helix, but not resolve the individual nucleotides (PDB entries 4hig, 196d, 3gbi, maps taken from the 
Uppsala EDS server)  
 
Chapter 2 · Seeing Is Believing: Methods of Structure Solution

10
2
these modifi cations don't seriously perturb the function of the pro-
tein, but this needs to be validated through experiment to make 
sure we're getting a biologically relevant view.
 Given the evidence-based approach of this book, I will show 
only the portions of the molecules that have been observed in 
experiment and use a schematic approach to show the portions that 
are inferred. Fortunately, science is a forever-growing fi eld, and sci-
entists continue to shed light into these currently shadowy areas. 
 
.  Fig. 2.3   Pitfalls of the PDB. ATP synthase ( left ) is a rotary motor with several moving parts. The whole assembly has 
not been crystallized yet, but structures have been obtained by cutting it into several more or less rigid pieces. 
G-protein-coupled receptors were an elusive target for many years, until researchers engineered a version with an entire 
lysozyme protein grafted into one loop. The lysozyme assists in the formation of crystals ( right ) (PDB entries 1c17, 1e79, 
1l2p, 2a7u, 2rh1)  
 
 
Chapter 2 · Seeing Is Believing: Methods of Structure Solution

11
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_3
 3  
 Visualizing the Invisible 
World of Molecules  

12
3
 In my career, I have had the great pleasure to be able to combine two 
of my interests: science and art. I started my studies at a serendipi-
tous time, when the fi eld of molecular visualization was just getting 
off  the ground. When I started my studies as a graduate student, 
computer graphics was brand new, and those of us who knew how 
to use the hardware, and how to write the soft ware to make it work, 
had a monopoly on the new technology. Scientists routinely came 
to us to create fi gures for papers, or movies for talks, or just to sit 
and explore their molecules. It was a wonderfully exciting time—we 
were making things up as we went, developing new methods for 
viewing molecules and trying to make them practical enough that 
we could use them in research (. Fig.  3.1 ).
   I'm happy to say that this has all changed now. Sophisticated 
computer graphics hardware is available on everybody's desktop, 
and even on our phones, and we have dozens of user-friendly 
molecular graphics programs to help us look at our molecules. 
Today, researchers produce most of their images themselves, 
 without needing me to act as middleman between them and their 
molecules (. Fig.  3.2 ).
 Computer graphics images are our primary way of exploring 
and understanding the structure of biological molecules, and the 
pictures we create are the evidence that we use to document our 
discoveries. So, it is critically important that we use visual methods 
that are accurate and capture relevant aspects of the molecule's 
structure and function. Over the years, researchers have developed 
a number of useful ways to create images of molecules based on the 
experimental atomic structures. Initially, these images were created 
by clever scientists, oft en with the help of an artist. Today, nearly all 
molecular images are created with computer graphics. Th is has the 
 
.  Fig. 3.1   Some experiments in molecular visualization.  Left : the Evans and Sutherland Multipicture System allowed 
interactive display of  dots and  lines and was widely used by crystallographers to interpret their experimental electron 
density maps. This image shows a cross section through DNA molecule, with  lines  to show the bonds between atoms 
and  dots to show the surface of the molecule.  Center : pen plotters were used to create illustrations for journal 
publications, where most ﬁ gures were printed in black and white. This illustration shows all of the sites of interaction 
between this DNA molecule and its neighbors in the crystal lattice. We often printed stereopairs like this to provide 
(with a little practice) a three-dimensional view.  Right : raster images, which are used for almost everything today, were 
quite slow when they were ﬁ rst developed. This illustration of DNA took almost an hour to calculate       
 
 
Chapter 3 · Visualizing the Invisible World of Molecules

13
3
great advantage of creating a picture directly from the experimental 
structure, so the image is true to the actual data. Th e artistry comes 
in when we design the best way to capture a particular aspect of our 
molecular subjects. 
 
.  Fig. 3.2   Modern molecular graphics programs. Dozens of eﬀ ective programs for molecular graphics are freely 
available to explore molecules on your computer.  Top : Python Molecular Viewer is a modular molecular graphics 
program with many sophisticated methods for displaying molecules, electron density maps, and other aspects of 
molecular structure.  Bottom : JSmol is the most popular method of embedding molecular graphics into web pages. 
For instance, it is used at the RCSB Protein Data Bank site to allow instant viewing of any of the structures stored in the 
archive, and as shown here, in the Molecule of the Month column at the RCSB site. Many of the illustrations in the book 
were created with these two programs  
 
Chapter 3 · Visualizing the Invisible World of Molecules

14
3
 When designing an image, we want to capture important 
 properties of the molecule in a way that is visually comprehensible. 
Atomic structures of biomolecules typically include a list of atoms, 
including where each atom is located in space and what type of 
atom it is (carbon, nitrogen, etc.). Th e details of the experiment may 
also include additional information, like how much it's moving 
around or how confi dent we are that it's located where we think it is. 
Th is is the basic information from the experiment. On top of this, 
we can add a bunch of chemical knowledge. For instance, the atoms 
are bonded together in a specifi c way, and proteins and nucleic 
acids are built of a characteristic set of standard building blocks. 
Th ere are also interesting properties of the atoms or the entire mol-
ecule, such as the charge of the atoms or their reactivity. All of these 
things may be captured in an image, if they are relevant to the story 
we want to tell. 
 Scientists and artists have experimented with many diff erent 
types of images over the years, to highlight these important aspects 
of their structures. Th ree basic types of representations—bond dia-
grams, spacefi lling diagrams, and cartoon diagrams—have turned 
out to be the most useful and popular, each capturing a diff erent 
aspect of the molecule (. Fig.  3.3 ). In this book, I will use diff erent 
variations of these three basic types, picking the representation that 
I think captures the molecule's property the best in each case. Most 
modern molecular graphics programs provide all three of these 
types of images, as well as a variety of options for customizing them 
for a particular subject.
 Th e workhorse of structural research is the bond diagram. In 
this representation, the bonds connecting each atom are drawn, 
sometimes as thin lines that are fast to display and other times as 
cylinders and balls to give more visual cues about how they are 
arranged in space. Bond diagrams show the chemical connectivity 
of the whole molecule, and with experience, many aspects of the 
structure may be understood from the image. A major limitation of 
these diagrams, however, is their complexity. Oft en, it is necessary 
 
.  Fig. 3.3   Visual representations of biomolecules. These three representations of myoglobin, capturing diﬀ erent 
aspects of the molecule, were created with JSmol at the RCSB PDB website.  Left : a bond diagram shows the atomic 
details of oxygen binding to iron. Thin bonds are used for the protein, and balls and sticks are used to show the heme, 
iron, oxygen, and an important histidine amino acid.  Center : a spaceﬁ lling diagram shows how the heme ﬁ ts in a 
form-ﬁ tting pocket.  Right : a cartoon diagram shows how the chain folds into a series of alpha helices that surround the 
heme (PDB entry 1mbo)       
 
 
Chapter 3 · Visualizing the Invisible World of Molecules

15
3
to view them interactively to allow us to rotate and explore them or, 
as I have done in the fi gure, to include only a close-up of one inter-
esting portion of the molecule. 
 To understand the overall shape and form of a molecule, and 
how it interacts with other molecules, we need a representation of 
the size of each atom. Linus Pauling developed a simple approach to 
this, by placing a sphere at each atom position with a size that 
encloses most of the electrons in the atom. Th ese spacefi lling dia-
grams are perfect for understanding the physical bulk of the mole-
cule, but they tend to hide all of the internal structure. Spacefi lling 
diagrams have always been my favorite way to draw molecules, 
because to me, they seem to capture how a molecule might look if 
we could actually see one. 
 Cartoon diagrams are used to simplify the complex structures 
of molecules, capturing a few important aspects of their structure. 
Two types of cartoons are particularly popular. For DNA, a ladder 
diagram was presented in the classic paper by Watson and Crick 
and has become the iconic way to represent the molecule. For pro-
teins, a similar approach was popularized by Jane Richardson, using 
a cartoon ribbon to schematize the folding of protein chains. Th ese 
protein cartoons revolutionized the way we think about proteins 
and their evolution by removing distracting detail and highlighting 
the underlying architecture of the chains. 
 We also have a lot of fl exibility in choice of colors, since most 
biological molecules are colorless and the colors are all made up for 
our benefi t. A few conventions have appeared over the years 
(. Fig.  3.4 ). For instance, the common scheme of coloring carbon 
black, oxygen red, and nitrogen blue is based on a scheme used in an 
early set of plastic models developed by Corey, Pauling, and Koltun 
and now has become a convention widely used by chemists and 
biologists. Protein chains are oft en colored with rainbow colors, 
helping us follow the chain from beginning to end. Oft en, each sub-
unit of a large complex will be given a diff erent color, allowing us to 
see how everything fi ts together. But if these common approaches 
aren't eff ective for highlighting what we're trying to show, we're 
mostly free to use whatever we think makes the point best.
 
.  Fig. 3.4   Common coloring conventions for proteins.  Left : hemoglobin is colored by atom type, based on the 
scheme developed by Linus Pauling.  Center : backbone diagrams often color individual chains diﬀ erently, to show 
how they assemble together.  Right : a rainbow scheme makes it easier to follow the chain from one end to the other 
(PDB entry 2hhb)       
 
Chapter 3 · Visualizing the Invisible World of Molecules

16
3
 Finally, a bit of a warning and a challenge. Many diff erent 
molecular graphics programs are freely available for exploring and 
studying molecular structures. Th ese programs provide an 
 incredible scope for creativity. Most oft en, the program designer 
has chosen a default representation that highlights some aspect of 
the structure (. Fig.  3.5 ). But there are also many menus, or  perhaps 
scripting  capabilities, that allow you to customize the picture to 
highlight the features of interest. With a little experience, you can be 
generating compelling images in no time. So jump in, play with 
some of these programs, and start picturing molecules yourself! 
 
.  Fig. 3.5   The danger of defaults. These images show a structure of DNA bound to a sequence-reading antibiotic, 
displayed using the default settings in several visualization methods available on the RCSB PDB website. From  left to 
right , the default static image at the PDB structure summary page, the JSmol default image, and the PV default image. 
All of these are great for getting a quick feeling for the structure, but with a small amount of work, you can customize 
the image to highlight features of interest. For instance, I created the image on the  right  in JSmol to highlight the 
perfect ﬁ t of the antibiotic ( blue ) within the narrow minor groove of the DNA (PDB entry 6bna)  
 
 
Chapter 3 · Visualizing the Invisible World of Molecules

17
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_4
 4  
 The Twists and Turns 
of DNA  

18
4
 I'm lucky to be able to say that I have looked at DNA fi rsthand—or 
as close as we can get to fi rsthand with current experimental tech-
niques. I did my graduate work with Richard Dickerson at UCLA, 
and at the time his lab was interested in sorting out the fi ne struc-
ture of the DNA helix. A previous graduate student had solved the 
structure of a short piece of DNA, 12 nucleotides long, revealing a 
complex inner structure to the double helix and an interesting 
interaction with the surrounding water. When I joined, the lab was 
exploring other pieces of DNA and also the interaction of DNA 
with drugs and proteins. 
 At the time, the basic structure of DNA was well known. Ladder 
diagrams were common in textbooks and the popular media, based 
largely on the fi gure that Watson and Crick included in their classic 
journal article on structure of the B-DNA double helix. Th e struc-
ture, famously determined using the experimental data collected by 
Rosalind Franklin, was a revelation, revealing how biological infor-
mation is stored and transmitted using a digital sequence of four 
nucleotides. 
 Of course, as an enthusiastic graduate student, I had to try to 
reproduce these results as I was (as yet unsuccessfully) trying to get 
my own pieces of DNA to crystallize. I purchased a small bottle of 
calf thymus DNA, mixed in some water and buff er, and pulled thin 
fi bers using a glass rod. Aft er mounting these in a jury-rigged 
receptacle built from a cut section of Eppendorf tube and two pieces 
of Mylar, I put the fi bers in our x-ray camera and took a few pic-
tures. Aft er a few refi nements to adjust the humidity of the cham-
ber, I was greeted by the familiar X-shaped diff raction pattern and 
strong diff raction along the direction of the fi ber. I had successfully 
followed in the footsteps of the giants. 
 And so, I went back to my real research. Th is type of fi ber dif-
fraction was perfect for determining the overall structure of the 
DNA double helix, but single crystals are needed to see the atomic 
details. So instead of using natural DNA from cells, we used small 
pieces of synthetic DNA, assembled nucleotide by nucleotide in 
the laboratory. Th e advantage of this approach is that the length of 
the DNA, and also the sequence of nucleotides, can be precisely 
controlled. 
 Th e fi rst atomic structures of B-form DNA were determined 
with a piece 12 base pairs long, with a palindromic sequence taken 
from the cleavage side of EcoRI, a bacterial restriction enzyme (pal-
indromic sequences are oft en used in these types of studies, since 
you only need to synthesize one strand, and then they all pair up 
with each other to form double helices). Several interesting things 
were revealed in this structure. First of all, the 12-base-pair helix 
was a bit more than a full turn of the double helix, so neighboring 
helices locked together rather than stacking on top of one another. 
Th is deformed the DNA, causing a large bend at one end. 
 True to the serendipitous nature of science, this was taken as a 
great benefi t instead of a defect and was used to launch an entire 
fi eld of study on DNA bending and fl exibility. Subsequent work 
on other DNA helices showed that these bends most oft en occur 
in places where they close down or open up the grooves of the 
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

19
4
DNA, rather than torquing the DNA base pairs along their long 
dimension. Later, the lab got to see unbent DNA by synthesizing 
pieces of DNA with ten base pairs instead of twelve. Th ese short 
pieces are exactly the right length to form one complete turn of 
the DNA helix. In the crystals, they all stack perfectly on top of 
one another, mimicking an unbroken DNA helix. Th e regularity 
of the helices within these crystals was also much improved, so 
the crystals diff ract x-rays beautifully, allowing location of each 
atom in the helix (. Fig.  4.1 ).
 I worked on several of these DNA structures during my gradu-
ate and postdoctoral work, and they were always a pleasure to solve. 
Amazingly, we could guess a lot about the structure aft er seeing the 
fi rst diff raction patterns. As with Rosalind Franklin's fi ber  diff raction 
patterns, the diff raction patterns of these little pieces of DNA show, 
if you squint a bit, the same X-shaped pattern and strong diff raction 
from the stacking of bases. So, once you get your fi rst x-ray picture, 
you can fi gure out how the DNA double helices are arranged in the 
crystal (. Fig.  4.2 ).
 Th ese short pieces of DNA have been instrumental in explor-
ing all aspects of DNA structure and function. Under normal cel-
lular conditions, the DNA helix prefers the classic B-helix 
structure, which has been observed in hundreds of structures of 
DNA by itself and in complexes with drugs and proteins. In spe-
cial cases, however, it shift s into diff erent shapes (. Fig.  4.3 ). For 
instance, when dehydrated with high concentrations of salt, DNA 
forms a chunkier helix similar to the form of RNA double helices, 
 
.  Fig. 4.1   Packing of DNA in crystals. B-form DNA has almost exactly 10 nucleotides per turn of the double helix. 
Early structures were determined using chains that were 12 nucleotides long, so they formed an odd crystal lattice with 
the ends of the chains overlapped. Later structures shortened the chain to 10 nucleotides, which stacked beautifully to 
simulate a long DNA double helix (PDB entries 1bna, 196d)  
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

20
4
termed the A-helix. Hybrid double helices, with one DNA strand 
and one RNA strand, also form this type of helix, for instance, 
when HIV is building a DNA strand with its reverse transcriptase. 
Some special sequences of DNA, for instance, DNA with alternat-
ing cytosine and guanine nucleotides, can be induced to form a 
helix with the opposite handedness, termed the Z-helix. It's still 
not known if this is an experimental oddity or if it actually plays a 
functional role in cells, for instance, helping to relieve stress in the 
double helix when it is pulled apart when being duplicated or cop-
ied. If you search around the PDB, you can also fi nd several exotic 
structures of DNA, such as odd X-shaped Holliday junctions 
formed during the process of recombination and tough quadru-
plex blocks of guanine bases that may seal off  the ends of chromo-
somes in telomeres.
 
.   Fig. 4.2   X-ray diﬀ raction of DNA. The x-ray diﬀ raction image at the  upper 
left  is from ﬁ bers of natural DNA, and the pattern at the  lower left  is from a 
crystal of a small piece of synthetic DNA. Both show the distinctive pattern of 
DNA diﬀ raction, with a strong signal above and below the center and an 
X-shaped feature closer to the center. The strong diﬀ raction is produced by the 
regular stacking of bases in the DNA helix ( horizontal lines at right ), and the 
X-shaped pattern is produced by the helical arrangement of the backbones 
( diagonal lines at right )  
 
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

21
4
 Atomic structures using short pieces of DNA have revealed the 
many ways that DNA interacts with other molecules. Just about 
every possible variation has been observed, binding around and 
inside the double helix. In my graduate work with Dickerson, the 
lab was interested in a class of drugs that bind using a noninvasive 
approach. Th ey snuggle into the narrower of the two grooves of the 
DNA, binding to the edges of the bases. Based on these structures, 
a series of DNA-reading molecules have been designed (dubbed 
"lexitropsins" by Dickerson), with modules that read the diff erent 
bases (. Fig.  4.4 ). Other DNA-binding drugs take a far more 
aggressive approach. Th ey contain a portion that looks very similar 
to a DNA base, and when they bind, they force their way between 
the bases. Several atomic structures have revealed the basis of this 
 
.  Fig. 4.3   A ,  B , and  Z DNA. Early crystallographic structures of the three 
forms are included at the  top , and idealized models are included at the  bottom  
(PDB entries 1ana, 1bna, 2dcg)  
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

22
4
intercalation. Th ese drugs are typically made as weapons by micro-
organisms—they're quite toxic, because they corrupt the copying 
and reading of DNA.
 Th e ways that proteins interact with DNA are even more com-
plex, twisting and bending and unwinding the double helix as nec-
essary (. Fig.  4.5 ). Many regulatory proteins approach the DNA 
and wrap arms around it, reading the edge of the bases to fi nd 
regions with the proper sequence. Th ey use all manner of shapes 
to do this—scissor-shaped pairs of helices, strings of little mod-
ules organized around zinc atoms, blocky domains that jam into 
the grooves, and fl exible arms that wrap around. In many cases, 
researchers have been forced to clip off  these DNA-reading por-
tions for study, since they are part of fl exible complexes that are 
diffi  cult to study.
   Proteins involved in DNA packaging are experts at bending 
DNA to fi t into small places. In the nuclei of our cells, DNA is 
wrapped twice around histone proteins to form compact nucleo-
somes. Long fl exible arms extend from the complex and help to 
regulate when the DNA needs to be released. In bacterial cells, a 
smaller protein, HU, bends the DNA. Both of these proteins interact 
mostly with the phosphate groups in the DNA backbone. Th is 
makes sense, since they are generic packaging tools, and don't need 
to pay attention to the sequence of bases in the DNA. 
 
.   Fig. 4.4   DNA-binding antibiotics. Lexitropsins bind in the narrow minor 
groove of the DNA, reading the edges of the bases, and actinomycin D 
intercalates between bases. In both cases, the structures were determined 
using short pieces of DNA (334d, 173d)  
 
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

23
4
 DNA repair proteins take an even more aggressive approach. 
Th ey scan along the DNA, and when they fi nd a problem, they 
wrench out the off ending base and repair it. In some cases, they cut 
the entire section out. In other cases, they fi t the corrupted base into 
a form-fi tting active site and repair it on the spot. Atomic structures 
using short DNA helices with odd bases have captured these repair 
proteins in action. 
 I remember well my very fi rst electron density map of one of 
these short pieces of DNA. I sat at the computer graphics screen and 
realized that I was actually seeing atoms. Although I'm no longer 
crystallizing DNA and solving structures myself, it is still possible to 
get this fi rsthand view of the structure of DNA. Most crystallogra-
phers deposit their primary experimental data—a list of how bright 
each spot is in the x-ray diff raction pattern—in the PDB archive. 
From this, it is fairly easy to generate an electron density map and 
take a personal tour of the atoms in a DNA helix. For instance, to 
create the pictures of the data shown in . Fig.  4.6 , I calculated the 
map at the free online Electron Density Server at Uppsala Universitet 
and visualized them with the free Python Molecular Viewer. 
 
.  Fig. 4.5   DNA-binding proteins. ( A ) Restriction endonuclease EcoRI, ( B ) 
DNA photolyase, ( C ) RNA polymerase, ( D ) lac repressor, ( E ) catabolite gene 
repressor protein, ( F ) TATA-binding protein and transcription factor IIb, ( G ) 
topoisomerase, ( H ) DNA helicase, ( I ) DNA polymerase, ( J ) nucleosome, ( K ) HU 
protein, and ( L ) single-stranded DNA-binding protein (PDB entries 1eri, 1tez, 
2e2i, 1lbh, 1efa, 1cgp, 1ais, 1a36, 4esv, 1tau, 1aoi, 1p51, 3a5u)  
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

24
4
 
.  Fig. 4.6   Tour of an electron density map. The  upper ﬁ gure  shows the hexagonal crystal lattice, with one DNA helix in 
red. Notice that there are large open channels between the helices, which are ﬁ lled with disordered water molecules 
that don't give a strong signal in the electron density. At  bottom left , a spine of water molecules ( small red spheres ) ﬁ ll 
the narrow minor groove. At bottom right is an AT base pair and a calcium ion ( purple ) surrounded by a coordination 
sphere of seven water molecules (PDB entry 158D)  
 
 
Chapter 4 · The Twists and Turns of DNA

25
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_5
 5  
 The Central Dogma  

26
5
 Th e fi rst thing we learn in molecular biology class is the central 
dogma, presented with almost religious fervor: DNA begets RNA 
begets protein. Th en, we're all properly mortifi ed when we learn of 
the heretical ways that viruses corrupt this natural fl ow of infor-
mation, building RNA from RNA or, even worse, DNA from 
RNA. Th e reverence we feel is well founded; when we look at the 
molecular machines of the central dogma, we are looking at the 
heart of what keeps us alive, and structural science is revealing 
that these molecular machines are truly wonders of the subcellu-
lar world. 
 DNA replication is the fi rst step: the enzyme DNA polymerase 
duplicates the information in a DNA strand to build a comple-
mentary DNA copy. DNA polymerase faces several challenges 
when performing this task. First, the copying must be accurate, 
since it needs to make an exact copy of the genetic information. 
Second, it needs to be highly processive, meaning that it can dupli-
cate huge stretches of DNA without needing to rest. Finally, the 
antiparallel orientation of the two strands causes a unique prob-
lem: if the replicative machinery moves only direction down the 
double helix while duplicating it, two diff erent methods need to be 
employed for the two strands, one going forward and one going 
backward. 
 Th e accuracy of DNA polymerase is a consequence of the 
enzyme itself. It employs several methods to ensure that only the 
proper nucleotides are used to build the new DNA strand. First, the 
form-fi tting active site is shaped to fi t only the proper base pairs as 
new nucleotides are added. Th en, a nearby proofreading site tests 
the match, and if it's not quite strong enough, it cuts out the off end-
ing nucleotide, making room to add another one. Th is combina-
tion of precise base pairing with proofreading allows DNA 
polymerase to duplicate our entire genome while only making a 
handful of errors. 
 Th e other two challenges—processivity and the antiparallel 
nature of DNA—are solved by including DNA polymerase in part 
of a large replisome complex (. Fig.  5.1 ). Th e replisome includes a 
helicase that separates the two strands, making the bases available 
for copying. One strand feeds directly into DNA polymerase. A cir-
cular clamp is attached to the polymerase, locking the strand in 
place and ensuring that long stretches may be duplicated without 
falling off . Th e other strand is trickier. Since it is in the opposite 
orientation, a large loop is unwound and replicated in pieces, which 
are connected up later. Th is requires additional machinery: a pri-
mase to build little RNA primers to get the new strands started, a 
loader to add new clamps and a DNA polymerase for each new 
strand, and a special protein to protect the loop of DNA when it is 
left  exposed.
 Atomic structures have been solved for many of the individ-
ual pieces of this replisome, revealing how they work, but the 
 
Chapter 5 · The Central Dogma

27
5
 
.  Fig. 5.1   Bacterial replisome. The replisome includes several proteins interconnected 
with ﬂ exible linkers. The DNA is shown in  blue , and the newly synthesized strands of DNA 
are in  white . Helicase ( 1 ) separates the two strands, and primase ( 2 ) builds a short piece 
of RNA ( green ) on one strand to act as a primer. The clamp loader ( 3 ) encircles the DNA 
strand with a sliding clamp ( 4 ), which improves the processivity of DNA polymerase ( 5 ). 
DNA synthesis by DNA polymerase on the leading strand ( 6 ) proceeds continuously, but 
it builds short segments on the lagging strand ( 7 ) since the lagging strand is oriented in 
the opposite direction. Single-stranded DNA-binding protein ( 8 ) protects the lagging 
strand, while the DNA copy is being made (image created in collaboration with Jacob 
Lewis and Nicholas Dixon, University of Wollongong)  
 
Chapter 5 · The Central Dogma

28
5
architecture of the whole complex is still a matter of controversy 
and study. The complex is held together by a set of flexible pro-
tein linkers that ensure that all the necessary pieces are nearby 
and ready to perform their tasks. The painting included here 
brings together information from several experimental sources, 
including crystal structures of the main proteins, protein 
sequences to estimate the length of the linkers, and electron 
micrographs to help determine how to connect everything 
together. 
 Th e second step in the central dogma is the transcription of 
DNA information into a strand of complementary RNA.  Th e 
major machine that performs this task, RNA polymerase II, also 
uses fl exible linkers to assist in its task. Th e main RNA-
polymerizing portion is a typical enzyme that unwinds the DNA, 
slots it into a DNA-fi tting groove, and adds new nucleotides one at 
a time (. Fig.  5.2 ). Many structures have been determined for this 
portion of the enzyme, capturing it at diff erent steps in the 
 transcription of RNA from DNA.  Sequence analyses of RNA 
 
.   Fig. 5.2    RNA polymerase. This structure of a yeast RNA polymerase ( blue ) 
includes two strands of DNA ( orange ) that have been opened up to form a 
transcription bubble and a short piece of RNA ( red ) being transcribed. A 
magnesium ion ( green ) assists with the addition of each new nucleotide to the 
growing RNA chain (PDB entry 5c4j)       
 
 
Chapter 5 · The Central Dogma

29
5
polymerase have revealed that it also includes a long, fl exible tail 
that acts a bait to capture a variety of enzymes that process the 
resulting strand of RNA, for instance, modifying the fi rst nucleo-
tide to form a resistant cap and adding a long string of adenine 
nucleotides to protect the other end.
 Th e fi nal step of the central dogma is the most complex, where 
the information in RNA is translated to build proteins. A combina-
tion of x-ray crystallography and electron microscopy has captured 
the ribosome in many steps of protein synthesis, starting with ini-
tiation of synthesis on a new messenger RNA strand to elongation 
of the new protein one amino acid at a time (. Fig.  5.3 ) and fi nally 
to termination when a stop codon is read. A constellation of pro-
teins and specialized RNA molecules are needed to prepare and 
deliver the amino acids needed for each step, and researchers have 
studied them one by one, fi lling out all the pieces to this biomolecu-
lar puzzle.
 One of my favorite structures captures an odd corner of the 
process of protein synthesis (. Fig.  5.4 ). Ribosomes occasionally 
get stalled when faulty messenger RNA molecules are read, for 
instance, for a messenger RNA that has broken and is thus is 
missing its stop codon. A special mechanism is used to rescue 
these stalled ribosomes when they get stuck at the end of the 
truncated chain. A strangely shaped RNA molecule mimics both 
a transfer RNA and a messenger RNA, restarting the process and 
cleaning up the mess.
 Biology is never as simple as we might like, and when Francis 
Crick codifi ed this central dogma in 1956, there was already an 
indication that the story was richer than this. At the time, they 
 
.  Fig. 5.3   Ribosomes in action. Three atomic structures capture ribosomes ( blue and green ) in the process of 
building a protein chain. Elongation factor Tu ( magenta ) delivers a new transfer RNA ( yellow ), pairing its anticodon with 
the messenger RNA ( red ) codon. The ribosome then catalyzes the formation of the peptide bond; the structure at the 
 center  includes two transfer RNA molecules with amino acids attached ( bright green ) and positioned in the catalytic 
site. Finally, elongation factor G ( magenta ) shifts everything by one codon (toward the  right in this illustration), opening 
a space for the next transfer RNA (PDB entries 4v5g, 4v5d, 4v5f)       
 
Chapter 5 · The Central Dogma

30
5
 
.   Fig. 5.4    Transfer-messenger RNA. Transfer-messenger RNA ( top ) includes a 
portion that mimics a transfer RNA ( red ) and a portion that mimics a 
messenger RNA ( magenta ), complete with a stop codon. It binds to stalled 
ribosomes ( bottom ), resuming synthesis using its own short message. 
Amazingly, this message encodes a small tag that is added to the end of the 
truncated protein, signaling to the cell that the protein is faulty and needs to 
be destroyed (PDB entries 3iyr, 4tna, 4v6t)  
knew that some viruses carry their genome in RNA and thus would 
need a machine to create a duplicate RNA strand from an RNA 
template. Additional study revealed that other viruses carry their 
genome in RNA but create a DNA copy once they get inside the cell 
and start wreaking havoc. Th ese retroviruses, such as HIV, use a 
reverse transcriptase enzyme to reverse the canonical information 
fl ow (. Fig.  5.5 ).
 Lest it seem that this heretical use of information is limited to 
viruses and other evil organisms, we only need to look to our own 
cells to fi nd an example of reversed information fl ow. Th e enzyme 
telomerase contains a small piece of RNA that it uses as a template 
to build long repeated sequences of DNA that protect the ends of 
 
 
Chapter 5 · The Central Dogma

31
5
 
.  Fig. 5.5   Reverse transcription. Bacterial DNA polymerase ( left ) and HIV 
reverse transcriptase ( right ) are both shaped like a hand, with ﬁ ngers and 
thumb that wrap around the nucleic acid strands. DNA polymerase performs 
the classic reaction, creating DNA using a DNA template, and reverse 
transcriptase performs the unusual reaction of creating DNA using a RNA 
template. Both structures were determined with short pieces of DNA ( orange ) 
and/or RNA ( red ) bound in the active site (PDB entries 1tau, 4pqu)  
each of our chromosomes. However, the use of protein as a template 
to reverse-translate other molecules is still largely forbidden, how-
ever. Th ere are special hard-wired cases, such as the synthesis of 
polyA tails or the construction of small peptide antibiotics, but no 
general methods for using protein chains as carriers of information 
have been found—at least yet.   
Chapter 5 · The Central Dogma

33
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_6
 6  
 The Secret of Life: 
The Genetic Code  

34
6
 DNA is bursting with information, and we're just now at a point in 
human history where we can take advantage of it. Th e genetic code, 
now that we understand it, is quite straightforward, at least in its 
basics: the 20 amino acids in proteins, as well as special instructions 
for starting and stopping, are encoded in a linear string of four types 
of DNA nucleotides. Once you know the sequence of the DNA, you 
know the sequence of the protein. Well, almost—there are still many 
oddities and exceptions that add much color and  diversity to life. 
But at the core, there is the genetic code of codons and anticodons. 
 Th e heart of information storage in living cells is the classic pair-
ing of nucleotides. In DNA, cytosine pairs with guanine and thy-
mine pairs with adenine, and in RNA, a small change is made, using 
uracil instead of thymine. When the fi rst atomic structures of DNA 
were solved, they perfectly confi rmed the pairing of bases proposed 
by Watson and Crick, and for the bulk of biological information 
transfer, these pairings do all the work. Our cellular machinery has 
evolved to work perfectly with these pairings as they manage our 
genetic information. 
 Th e classic A-T and G-C pairings are not the end of the story, 
however. As is oft en the case with biology, many variations have 
also evolved to add additional depth to this basic approach. For 
instance, if we look at the atomic structure of transfer RNA, we 
quickly fi nd some unusual things going on. Most of the bases form 
canonical base pairs, but a few odd pairings are needed to stabilize 
the functional L-shaped structure of the whole molecule. Oft en 
these odd pairings are enforced by modifying the base, so that the 
typical pairing is not even possible (. Fig.  6.1 ).
 
.  Fig. 6.1   Base pairing in transfer RNA. Transfer RNA is stabilized by many traditional base pairs, such as the two 
shown on the  left , but it has also evolved to incorporate unusual pairings to stabilize the structure. In the base pair at 
the  upper right , the adenine base has an extra methyl group, causing it to ﬂ ip in its interaction with the uracil. In the 
triplet at the  lower right , a normal A-U base pair is joined by a second adenine (PDB entry 1tra)       
 
 
Chapter 6 · The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code

35
6
   Mispairing of bases also plays an essential role during the syn-
thesis of proteins. Th e 20 amino acids in proteins are encoded by 
triplet codons in DNA, along with a few codons used to specify the 
end of a protein. Doing the math, we see that there are 64 possible 
codons, so there is some degeneracy to the code, and several dif-
ferent codons are used to specify the same amino acid. However, if 
we look inside the nucleus, we fi nd that there are only 20 or so 
types of transfer RNA that match up the appropriate amino acids 
with its codon. Th is requires some mismatching of the transfer 
RNA anticodon with all of these diff erent codons. Th is is accom-
plished by allowing some "wobble" in the third position of the 
codon, so that diff erent pairings are allowed. When the structures 
of ribosomes were solved, it was found that the fi rst two bases in 
the codon are tightly controlled by the ribosome, ensuring only 
the proper pairing, but the third position is looser, allowing some 
wobble (. Fig.  6.2 ).
 Th e story continues to build from the pairing and mispairing of 
bases: many additional levels of information are layered on top of 
this. One edge of each DNA base is involved in base pairing, but this 
leaves additional hydrogen-bonding groups exposed in the two 
grooves of the double helix. Th ese base edges are recognized by the 
many proteins that regulate the use of DNA information. Th ese pro-
teins reach into the grooves and feel for specifi c sequences of DNA 
(. Fig.  6.3 ). Researchers have searched unsuccessfully for a general 
code (something akin to the pairing of A with T and G with C) to 
understand how these are recognized. Rather, each protein seems to 
 
.  Fig. 6.2   Wobble in codon-anticodon pairing. Transfer RNA molecules (shown in  red ) are able to recognize several 
diﬀ erent codons by allowing some "wobble" on the third base. These two structures show the transfer RNA that encodes 
phenylalanine paired with the two codons that specify the phenylalanine, UUU and UUC. The traditional base pair is 
formed with UUC, and a wobble base pair is formed with UUU. The ribosome was also included in both of these 
structures, revealing that it surrounds the bases and monitors the base pairing. The ribosome is not shown here, for 
clarity (PDB entries 1ibl, 4v9d)  
 
Chapter 6 · The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code

36
6
use whatever it needs to recognize the base, oft en even trapping 
water molecules to help with the reading of bases.
 In my graduate work, I worked on a project that uses a similar 
approach to try to discover DNA-reading molecules that can be 
used as drugs for cancer therapy (. Fig.  6.4 ). Th ese molecules take 
a modular approach, adapted from a class of toxic DNA-reading 
molecules made by bacteria. Th ese molecules have small molecular 
units, 5 or 10 atoms each, that can read the edge of each base. Th e 
trick then is to synthesize custom molecules with these DNA- 
reading elements all strung in the right order to target the DNA 
sequence of choice. A series of atomic structures have been used to 
refi ne the designs, honing the recognition of each of the four DNA 
bases.
 Th e story doesn't stop there. Additional layers of "epigenetic" 
information are added on top of the typical genetic information 
encoded in the sequence of nucleotides. A simple example is found 
in many bacteria. Th ey contain two enzymes: one that adds methyl 
groups to the edge of bases in a particular base sequence and 
another that cuts any DNA that doesn't have these methylated 
bases. It turns out that this simple two-enzyme system is centrally 
important both to the bacterium, and now, to us. In the bacterium, 
this is a powerful mechanism to fi ght infection by viruses. Viruses 
inject their genetic material into the bacterium, but since it isn't 
labeled with the signature methyl groups, it is quickly destroyed. 
For us, these enzymes allow us to cut DNA selectively at one par-
ticular sequence of DNA, and building on this, they have spawned 
the entire fi eld of recombinant DNA biotechnology. By looking at 
 
.  Fig. 6.3   DNA recognition by proteins. The basic principles of DNA recognition by proteins were discovered in early 
structures of regulatory proteins from bacteriophages, such as the lambda repressor structure shown here (PDB entry 
1lmb)       
 
 
Chapter 6 · The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code

37
6
many bacteria, each with its own signature sequence, we have 
 gathered a collection of DNA scissors that allow us to cut and paste 
DNA sequences into custom-engineered genomes. Using these 
molecular tools, we're now able to engineer fast-growing organisms 
like bacteria and yeast to create useful molecules. For instance, 
most of the insulin used for treating diabetes is currently created 
this way. 
 Th e "epigenetic" information in our own cells, as you might 
expect, is even more complex. We also use modifi cations like meth-
ylation to mark our DNA, turning unneeded genes off  when neces-
sary. Packaging of DNA in nucleosomes is also used to put certain 
sequences in storage, and selective modifi cation of the nucleosomes 
determines how deep this storage is. 
 We've all inherited detailed instructions for building about 
20,000 diff erent proteins. Until recently, this information remained 
hidden, used every day by each of our cells, but not accessible for 
our own personal use. Th is changed with the availability of rapid 
gene-sequencing techniques, allowing us to take control of our own 
information. Genetic testing looks for specifi c mutations in our 
genes, so we can predict whether we will be susceptible to genetic 
diseases. For instance, mutations in the DNA repair protein BRCA2 
(. Figs.  6.5  and  6.6 ) have been linked to a higher incidence of breast 
cancer, so people who have these mutations are counseled to watch 
more carefully for warning signs and to reduce other risk factors.
 Genetic sequences have also been very useful for forensics, for 
identifying individuals from the traces of DNA that they leave at the 
scene of a crime. For this, we need to analyze tiny amounts of 
DNA. Th is is typically done by creating many duplicate copies of 
the DNA, so that there is enough to sequence and analyze. To assist 
 
.  Fig. 6.4   Sequence-reading molecules. The toxic bacterial antibiotic netropsin, shown on the  left in blue , reads A-T 
base pairs in DNA. As shown in the  center , it forms hydrogen bonds ( green lines ) with the base edges, positioning a 
carbon atom ( star ) near the A base. If this base were G instead, it would have an amino group (shown in  blue with the 
letter "N") that would clash with the netropsin carbon atom. Sequence-reading molecules are being designed by 
substituting this carbon atom for other atoms, such as nitrogen. Two of these designed molecules typically bind side by 
side in the DNA groove, as shown  on the right , each reading one of the bases in the base pairs (PDB entries 6bna, 365d)  
 
Chapter 6 · The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code

38
6
with this task, an inordinately useful enzyme was found in a bacte-
rium that lives in boiling hot springs (7 shown in Fig.   5.5 ). Th e 
DNA polymerase of this bacterium is highly stable and has evolved 
to work at high temperatures. Th is is perfect for the polymerase 
chain reaction, a technique used to create many copies of a desired 
DNA strand. Th e sample is mixed with the polymerase and a bunch 
of nucleotides, which creates a duplicate. Th en the whole thing is 
 
.  Fig. 6.5   DNA modiﬁ cation. In the  upper  structure, HhaI methylase is captured in the process of adding a methyl 
group to a short piece of DNA. The enzyme has ﬂ ipped the base out of the double helix and is using a cofactor ( in green ) 
to donate the methyl group. In the  lower  structures, EcoRV endonuclease is caught before and after its cleavage 
reaction. In the structure with cleaved DNA, the site of cleavage is shown with two  stars  (PDB entries 1mht, 1rva, 1rvc)  
 
.  Fig. 6.6    BRCA2. BRCA2 is a huge, ﬂ exible protein involved in DNA repair. Several structures of diﬀ erent portions of 
the protein were used to assemble this illustration of the protein bound to a single strand of DNA ( red ) and the repair 
protein Rad51 ( blue ) (PDB entries 1miu, 1n0w)  
 
 
 
Chapter 6 · The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code

39
6
heated up, separating the sample strand from the duplicated strand. 
Th en, the polymerase duplicates both of these. Repeated rounds of 
heating and replication create many identical copies of the 
DNA. Th e whole thing is made easier by using this heat-resistant 
polymerase, so you don't have to add new enzyme with each round. 
 Another great hope, building directly on our knowledge of the 
genetic code, is gene therapy: the ability to replace faulty genes in 
the cells of a patient, curing genetic diseases at their source. Once 
we've identifi ed the problem, synthesizing the corrected DNA is 
fairly straightforward, but the tricky part of this is fi nding a way to 
get the genes into the affl  icted cells. Today, this is primarily done by 
creating an engineered virus, such as adenovirus (. Fig.  6.7 ), that 
infects the cell and inserts the therapeutic DNA in the process. In 
this way, we're taking the reigns from evolution and taking personal 
charge of our own genetic information. 
 
.  Fig. 6.7   Adenovirus. Adenovirus is composed of an icosahedral protein coat ( blue ) with long ﬁ laments at the 
vertices ( green ). The ﬁ laments help the virus attach to the cells that it infects (PDB entries 1vsz, 1qiu)       
 
Chapter 6 · The Secret of Life: The Genetic Code

41
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_7
 7  
 Evolution in Action  

42
7
 I can safely say that evolution is a familiar thing to me. Aft er grow-
ing up with many visits to the museum and aft er gathering a small 
personal collection of fossil fi sh and insects trapped in amber, I can 
easily imagine a world very diff erent from ours, with dinosaurs 
roaming through a forest of giant ferns and giant dragonfl ies. With 
the help of ancient pot shards and stone knives, I can imagine hair-
ier versions of myself discovering fi re and hunting mammoths. I 
can even imagine tiny cells, newly minted, colonizing the early 
Earth and gradually, over millennia, fl ooding it with oxygen to cre-
ate the world we live in today. 
 We oft en take this type of historical view of evolution. Looking 
at the similarities and diff erences between living organisms and 
comparing them with fossil remains of ancient organisms, we 
reconstruct the gradual changing of life on Earth over millions of 
years (. Fig.  7.1 ). But evolution is continuing today, naturally and 
through our own intervention. You only need to visit a rose garden 
fi lled with huge blooms, or compare a wolf with the many diff erent 
breeds of dogs being walked in your local park, to see the results of 
human- driven evolution. Looking at the atomic structures of bio-
molecules, we can fi nd abundant evidence for the history of evolu-
tion, and we can also watch evolution in action today.  
 What is evolution? Evolution is a unique process that produces 
increasingly better organisms, but without the need for any intelli-
gent intervention. It's no wonder that the theory of evolution caused 
so much consternation when proposed by Charles Darwin, since it's 
so diff erent than anything in our familiar lives. It goes against our 
intuition, since we're used to planning and designing when we build 
things ourselves. But biological evolution takes a less directed, but 
highly successful, approach. 
 For evolution to work, a few things are needed. First, evolution 
requires a population of individuals that reproduce to create chil-
dren—evolution doesn't work on a single organism, but rather 
works over many generations. Next, a source of variation in the 
population is needed, with traits that are passed from parents to 
children. In natural evolution, this variation is random and happens 
through mutation of DNA. Finally, evolution requires a source of 
selection that favors the best individuals in the population. Given 
these things—selection of a population that has inheritable varia-
tions—the population will gradually change and improve as the 
best individuals dominate and the weaker ones lose out. 
 Darwin developed his theory of evolution aft er observing varia-
tion in populations, such as the natural variations in fi nches on the 
Galapagos Islands or the many types of pigeons bred by fanciers. 
Every time I work in the garden, I try to make similar connections 
between the shapes of the fl owers, fi guring out how the diff erences 
might have improved their competitiveness as they were evolving. 
Evolution is also fi rmly in my mind every time I pull weeds—I 
always feel like I'm selecting and evolving a breed of weeds that are 
best suited to elude me and my shovel. 
 Darwin observed these variations in populations of birds, but at 
the time, it wasn't known how the variation occurs or how it is 
passed to off spring. Th e discovery of DNA and genetic information 
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

43
7
was the missing piece of the puzzle for understanding the mecha-
nisms of biological evolution. Organisms gain variability through 
mutation of their DNA. Natural radioactivity from the  environment 
or errors in copying the DNA introduce small changes into the 
genome, which then cause small changes in the proteins that are 
encoded. In some cases, very small changes in the genome can 
have large eff ects in the form and behavior of the organism. Most 
cause problems, and scientists have uncovered countless examples 
of point mutations that corrupt the function of a protein and lead 
to a disease state or death. But in some cases, the mutation leads to 
an improved form of a protein, and a competitive benefi t for the 
organism. 
 Th e classic example is sickle cell anemia, which surprisingly is 
both a loss-of-function mutation and a benefi cial mutation. A 
single mutation in the gene for hemoglobin, which changes a 
small alanine to a larger leucine, has wide ranging eff ects. It cre-
ates a small sticky spot on the protein, which causes it to form long 
fi laments under some conditions. Th ese fi laments distort the 
blood cells and cause life-threatening circulatory problems. But at 
the same time, the fi laments inhibit infection by the parasites that 
cause malaria, so the mutation also provides a selective advantage 
in areas where malaria is a danger, for people that only carry one 
gene for the mutated protein. Structures are available for both the 
unmutated form and the mutated form of hemoglobin, revealing 
how this tiny mutation can induce the formation of fi bers (. 
Fig.  7.2 ).
 
.  Fig. 7.1   Mammoth hemoglobin. Researchers have reconstructed a 
hemoglobin molecule from an extinct mammoth, based on DNA gathered 
from frozen animals. As you might expect, it is very similar to hemoglobin from 
living elephants, but has a few changes (shown in  red ) that make it more 
eﬃ  cient in the cold climate where the mammoth lived (PDB entry 3vrf)       
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

44
7
 Most of evolution occurs over millennia, as individuals with 
useful traits reproduce and dominate populations. For instance, the 
sickle cell gene probably arose about 10,000 years ago, at the time 
when humans fi rst developed agriculture and started to live in com-
munities and thus were more susceptible to infestations of mosqui-
toes. Since then, the mutation has persisted in populations where it 
provides a benefi t. However, in some cases, we can watch evolution 
in action. For instance, when people infected with HIV are treated 
with a single drug, such as AZT or a protease inhibitor, the levels of 
virus in the blood drop rapidly as viral growth is halted. But then, in 
a matter of days, the levels of virus rise rapidly. When we look at 
these viruses, we fi nd that they are a new form, with mutations that 
make them resistant to the drug. 
 HIV evolves quickly because it reproduces quickly, has a huge 
population of individuals, and mutates rapidly. Th ere is also a very 
strong selection pressure, since the immune system constantly 
attacks the virus and the medical community fi ghts it with antiviral 
drugs. Structural biology has shown us both the mechanism for this 
rapid mutation and the advantages of this rapid evolution for fi ght-
ing this selection pressure. 
 
.   Fig. 7.2   Sickle cell 
hemoglobin. The crystal 
structure of sickle cell 
hemoglobin shows how one 
small mutation causes the 
protein to form ﬁ bers. The site 
of the mutation is on the 
surface of the protein and forms 
a sticky spot that associates 
with neighboring molecules 
(PDB entry 2hbs)  
 
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

45
7
 Th e high rate of mutation is caused by reverse transcriptase 
(see . Fig.   5.5 ), the enzyme that copies the genetic information of 
the virus when it infects a cell. When HIV infects a new cell, it car-
ries its genetic information in a short strand of RNA, which 
includes enough information to encode its handful of essential 
proteins. Inside the cell, reverse transcriptase makes a DNA copy 
of the RNA genome, which is then inserted into the cell's own 
DNA genome, where it directs the formation of many new copies 
of the virus. Th is enzyme is far more prone to making errors than 
the cell's polymerases, which incorporate proofreading methods to 
improve their accuracy. 
 When treatment with an antiviral drug begins, this error-prone 
reverse transcriptase ensures that many mutated forms of the virus 
are already circulating within the population and are quickly 
selected if they show some resistance to the drug. In a matter of 
days, they dominate the population, and the drug becomes useless. 
Further mutation selects even more resistant forms. Today, the 
most eff ective mode of treatment is to provide a cocktail of drugs 
that attack several HIV proteins at once, playing the odds that there 
are no viruses in the population that have drug-resistant mutations 
in several genes at once. 
 Th is process was directly observed in the laboratory, revealing 
the atomic details of an evolving population. Viruses were grown in 
a culture of cells and subjected to increasing amounts of an experi-
mental anti-HIV drug. Gradually, over a few weeks, mutant forms 
of the virus dominated the population. Th e fi rst mutation appeared 
in the active site. It reduces the size of one amino acid, weakening 
the binding of the drug but also weakening the function of the 
enzyme in the viral life cycle. Other mutant forms then were 
selected in the population. Two additional mutations modify the 
mobility of fl aps that cover the enzyme active site and help to 
restore the enzyme's function, and three additional mutations bur-
ied deep inside the protein further tune the activity of the mutant 
form, ultimately yielding an active enzyme that is resistant to the 
drug (.  Fig.  7.3 ).
 Evolution of resistance is also very common in other cases 
where antibiotics are used to fi ght an organism. A few short years 
aft er the discovery of penicillin, bacteria had already evolved mul-
tiple diff erent ways to fi ght antibiotics: by destroying the drug 
directly, by changing the target of the drug, or by pumping the drug 
out of the cell before it can do any damage. To make things even 
worse, bacteria have ways of sharing these resistant proteins with 
other bacteria, by exchanging small circles of DNA that encode the 
information for building them. Consequently, bacterial drug resis-
tance is currently one of the major challenges facing the medical 
community, and structural biologists are busy characterizing new 
targets for the creation of antibiotic drugs. 
 Fast or slow, evolution has shaped the form of the biological 
world. Much of the early history of biology was involved in classify-
ing the diverse organisms living on the Earth and creating a "Tree 
of Life" that relates organisms that are very similar and those that 
are more diff erent. Th e theory of evolution provided a way of 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

46
7
understanding this tree as a family tree, representing the rise of 
organisms from common ancestors. Much of this work was done 
using the visible characteristics of the organisms: for instance, by 
comparing the number of legs, we fi nd that a fl y is more closely 
related to a grasshopper than it is to a spider. 
 Molecular biology allows us to look at this family tree in a much 
more quantitative way. We can compare the proteins in diff erent 
organisms, and the DNA that encodes them, and estimate how 
much time it took for the changes to build up. To do this for many 
diff erent organisms, we need to choose a protein that is essential for 
all of them, that resists change. Th e classic example is cytochrome c, 
a central protein in energy metabolism. By looking at the similarity 
of this protein across organisms, we can build up lineage of our 
closest and most distant relatives in the biosphere (. Fig.  7.4 ).
 Th ey may not have called it "evolution," but humankind has fi d-
dled with evolution for millennia, using selection to breed bigger and 
better and tastier plants and animals. Th is is evolution in the classic 
sense. Breeders are the force of selection, culling out the weakest of 
the herd and allowing the desirable individuals to dominate. 
 
.  Fig. 7.3   HIV resistance mutation. Four structures of HIV protease follow the evolution of drug resistance. The 
enzyme is composed of two identical chains, so each mutation (shown in  red ) shows up in two places, on each half of 
the complex. The drug (shown in  blue ) binds in a tunnel-shaped active site, gripped by two ﬂ aps that close over the top 
(PDB entries 2az8, 2az9, 2azb, 2azc)  
 
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

47
7
Th roughout this process, the breeders rely on random variations to 
explore the evolutionary landscape, gradually selecting individuals 
with better and better traits. 
 More recently, scientists have started using evolution in the test 
tube to discover molecules with new functions. For instance, SELEX 
(selective evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment) is a 
remarkably eff ective way to discover novel RNA and DNA mole-
cules with highly complex functions. Th e concept is based on natu-
ral evolution. A large population of RNA molecules is synthesized 
with random sequences. Th en, these are added to the target, the best 
ones bind, and all the rest are washed away and discarded. Th ese 
RNA molecules are then duplicated, and added to the target again, 
under conditions that only allow the best to bind. Aft er several more 
rounds of duplication and selection, the best molecules are found. 
Th is technique has been used, for instance, to fi nd molecules that 
bind to thrombin, which may be useful for treating blood clotting 
diseases (. Fig.  7.5 ).
  As understanding of biological evolution and biomolecular 
structure has grown, scientists have also tried their hand at intelli-
gent design. Taking a modular approach to design, scientists have 
started with existing pieces from natural biomolecules and then 
reconnected them in novel ways. Th is approach has been used to 
design a tetrahedral cage built of protein, by linking together pieces 
 
.  Fig. 7.4   Cytochrome C evolution. A family tree of our ancient ancestors may be created by counting up the 
numbers of changes in the proteins found in modern organisms, identifying our close relatives and our distant relations. 
Cytochrome c is shown here. Our molecule is in  pink , with the bound heme group in  bright red . Amino acids that have 
changed to chemically similar amino acids are shown in  lighter pink in the cytochrome c proteins from other organisms, 
and amino acids that change to entirely diﬀ erent amino acids are in  white (PDB entries 3zcf, 2b4z, 1hrc, 1cyc, 1ycc)  
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

48
7
that associate with known geometries (Fig.  7.5 ). Scientists have also 
built chimeric molecules that combine functions. For instance, 
antibody molecules have been tethered to deadly toxins to create 
new cancer therapies. Th e antibody binds specifi cally to cancer 
cells, allowing the toxin to kill it. 
 Of course, in any discussion of biological evolution, we naturally 
fi nd our imagination drift ing back to the very beginning. People are 
great speculators, and when it comes to events that happened in the 
distant past, there are as many theories as there are scientists. Th e 
origin of life is one of these topics that promote much  discussion 
and much disagreement. Many scientists have worked to gather evi-
dence for processes that could have generated life based solely on 
the molecules and conditions that were present on the early Earth. 
 Many lines of evidence have pointed to RNA as being the fi rst 
"living" molecule on the Earth. Experiments in the laboratory have 
shown that RNA molecules can be artifi cially evolved to perform 
reactions or make copies of themselves. Th ese may represent some 
of the fi rst steps toward life. Scientists have also looked at the exist-
ing molecules in cells for clues. Th e most provocative piece of infor-
mation came when the structure of ribosome was solved. All living 
things rely on ribosomes, indicating that they must have been pres-
ent in the earliest cells. Looking closely at the active site of the ribo-
some, where new proteins are built, the structure reveals that the 
machinery is composed of RNA, and a particular RNA base per-
forms the reaction (. Fig.  7.6 ). Th is, along with the central role 
played by RNA in all aspects of protein synthesis, has been taken as 
evidence for an "RNA World," where self-replicating RNA mole-
cules evolved and discovered the basic processes of life. 
 
.  Fig. 7.5   Designer molecules. Scientists have used artiﬁ cial evolution to discover small RNA molecules ( aptamers ) 
that bind selectively to thrombin, an enzyme involved in blood clotting. A modular approach was used to design the 
protein cage, by linking together existing proteins that form dimers and trimers (PDB entries 1hut, 4i7y, 3vdx)  
 
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

49
7
 
.  Fig. 7.6   Active site of the ribosome. This structure includes a ribosome with the tips 
of two transfer RNA molecules ( magenta and blue spheres ) bound in the protein-building 
site. The ribosome nucleotide shown in  red  catalyzes the reaction (PDB entry 2wdl)       
 
Chapter 7 · Evolution in Action

51
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_8
 8  
 How Evolution Shapes 
Proteins  

52
8
 Just yesterday, I was walking to my car from the lab and I found a 
stick insect on the sidewalk. I picked him up to return him back to 
the greenery. As I was coaxing him onto my hand, he suddenly 
folded up his long, spindly legs and turned into, well, a stick. 
Evolution is an odd, meandering process, which oft en produces 
unexpectedly magical results. Th ere's much evidence for this in our 
everyday world: you only need to look around. Here in my California 
garden, I have found caterpillars shaped exactly like bird droppings. 
We have katydids that look exactly like leaves. I've seen a moth that 
looks exactly like a bumblebee and a hand-sized moth with such 
perfect camoufl age that it disappears completely when it lands on 
the trunk of a tree. 
 All of these natural wonders have been shaped by evolution. 
Because of natural selection, they are the best at what they do, 
hiding from predators or scaring them off . Th eir ancestors were 
the most successful, ultimately surviving where their less per-
fectly shaped ancestors perished. In the same way, evolution has 
shaped the proteins in cells. Proteins are constructed in many 
strange and elaborate shapes and evolved to optimize their many 
diverse functions. 
 Th e mechanisms of evolution impose some specifi c constraints 
on the way proteins evolve. Evolution at the molecular scale is 
tricky. In order for a mutant protein to be successful, it has to per-
form its job continuously and help keep the cell alive. So, cells with 
harmful mutations, and faulty proteins, rapidly die. Th is means that 
legacy is a key limitation of biological evolution: every step along 
the way must build on a successful predecessor. Th is legacy is easily 
seen by looking at any protein. Chemists tell us that amino acids 
can be made in two similar varieties, a left -handed form and a right- 
handed form. However, all natural proteins, with the exception of a 
few odd antibiotics created by the occasional microorganism, are 
composed of amino acids with only one of these two possible hand-
ednesses (7 see Fig.   10.3 ). 
 Th e other handedness would work equally well. Th is was shown 
in an amazing experiment from the laboratory of Steve Kent, where 
they chemically synthesized a protein from scratch, entirely from 
amino acids with the opposite hand. Th e structure was a perfect 
mirror image of the natural protein, and it worked perfectly well on 
substrates that also had a mirrored conformation. So, the current 
ubiquitous handedness is a fossil from the earliest forms of life, and 
we've been stuck with it ever since. 
 So how can a protein ever mutate and change if it must be con-
tinually active? One of the common mechanisms is to build a 
backup copy through gene duplication. Th e gene for the protein is 
copied and inserted into the genome. Th en, one copy is able to 
mutate and diverge, while the other remains the same and contin-
ues to perform its job. When you look at protein structures, exam-
ples of gene duplication show up everywhere. By comparing the 
location of these diff erent copies in the genomes of diff erent organ-
isms, it has become apparent that our entire genome has been 
duplicated several times, followed by a period where most of the 
duplicate genes are weeded out. We only need to look at our most 
 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

53
8
familiar protein, hemoglobin, to see an example of this. Our genome 
includes several very similar proteins, presumably all created by 
duplication from an original ancestor protein. Th ese include the 
two chains of hemoglobin, a few diff erent forms of hemoglobin 
optimized for use before birth, myoglobin, and two more recently 
discovered forms with as-yet unknown function: cytoglobin and 
neuroglobin (. Fig.  8.1 ).
 Th e ease of gene duplication has led to a modular approach to 
the evolution of proteins. Looking at the proteins in modern cells, 
most are composed of compact domains. Comparing diff erent pro-
teins, we fi nd that these domains are reused over and over again in 
new functional contexts. Some domains are particularly successful 
and have been pressed to service in many diff erent proteins. For 
instance, a domain that binds to the cofactor NAD, fi rst discovered 
by Michael Rossman and named for him, shows up in many diff er-
ent proteins that use the cofactor in their function (. Fig.  8.2 ). In 
other cases, a similar domain may be repeated multiple times in a 
single protein. For instance, the giant protein titin, which acts like a 
 
.  Fig. 8.1   Gene duplication in human globins. All of these proteins are encoded in the human genome, and all are 
thought to have evolved from a common ancestor protein. The structures are colored to show their diﬀ erences from the 
hemoglobin beta chain, with unchanging amino acids in  red , mutations to similar amino acids in  pink , and mutations to 
entirely diﬀ erent amino acids in  white . Notice that the regions that stay the same are primarily clustered around the 
oxygen-carrying heme group and buried deep inside the protein (PDB entries 1hho, 1fdh, 3rgk, 1ut0, 1oj6)       
 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

54
8
 
.  Fig. 8.2   Modular domains in proteins. The "Rossman" domain ( top ) specializes in binding to the cofactor NAD and is 
found in many diﬀ erent enzymes. Three examples are shown here; in each case, the Rossman domain is connected to a 
diﬀ erent domain that deﬁ nes how the NAD is used in the reaction. Titin ( bottom ) is composed of many domains that 
form a long, ﬂ exible band. This structure includes only four domains in the center of the protein (PDB entries 3gpd, 1i10, 
1htb, 3b43)  
 
 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

55
8
long elastic band that controls the stretching of muscle fi bers, is 
composed of several hundred similar domains all strung in a row, 
like beads on a string.
 By looking at the many organisms in biosphere, evolutionary 
biologists have discovered fascinating patterns in the way that life 
has evolved. For instance,  divergent evolution is a process where a 
population of organisms is split, and they gradually evolve new 
traits. A familiar example is our hand—it developed from the front 
feet of a distant mousy ancestor. If we look at our extended family of 
mammals, this same limb has evolved to form hooves and fl ippers. 
 Convergent evolution , on the other hand, is just the opposite. Th is is 
when two diff erent populations have a similar selection pressure 
and evolve traits that are similar. Eyes are a perfect example—being 
able to see is a great advantage, and light-sensing eyes have evolved 
independently in insects, octopuses, and humans. 
 Examples of divergent and convergent evolution are every-
where at the molecular scale. My favorite examples are found in 
the serine protease digestive enzymes. Th ese enzymes all use a 
similar triplet of amino acids to perform their protein-cutting 
reaction. A serine interacts directly with the target protein chain, 
and a neighboring histidine and aspartate are perfectly posi-
tioned to activate it for the reaction. Looking at our digestive 
enzymes, we can fi nd three very similar serine proteases—tryp-
sin, chymotrypsin, and elastase—that evolved from a common 
ancestor protein and then diverged to attack diff erent protein 
sequences (. Fig.  8.3 ). If we cast our net a bit wider, we can fi nd 
many other protein-cutting enzymes that use the same arrange-
ment of serine-histidine-aspartate but have entirely diff erent 
foldings of the protein chain (. Fig.  8.4 ). Th ese are examples of 
convergent evolution, where a similar active site evolved within a 
diff erent protein framework.
 Th ere are even examples of molecular mimicry, reminiscent of 
the way that stick insects and bark-colored moths rely on mimicry 
for protection. Our immune system is one of the most powerful 
selective pressures for pathogenic organisms, and these pathogens 
have evolved many ways of mimicking our own molecules to make 
them invisible to the immune system. For instance, many viruses, 
such as HIV and infl uenza, coat their surface proteins with sugar 
chains, the same sugar chains that decorate all of our normal cell 
surface proteins. Th e unique portions of the viral proteins, which are 
essential for fi nding and infecting cells, are shielded behind this cam-
oufl age of humanlike sugars, so our immune system can't fi nd them. 
 Th e bacteriophage T7 has a particularly striking example of 
molecular mimicry, creating a protein that mimics DNA.  Many 
bacteria have a defensive system that marks their own DNA genome 
with methyl groups and then cuts any invading viral DNA that isn't 
marked with the methyls (7 see Fig.   6.5 ). T7 phages circumvent 
these defenses by building a protein that looks exactly like DNA, 
which binds to the defensive enzyme that normally cuts up the 
phage's DNA (. Fig.  8.5 ). Once again, evolution has stumbled into 
the perfect molecule to solve the problem. 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

56
8
 
.  Fig. 8.3   Divergent evolution of serine proteases. These three enzymes cut protein chains using a similar active site 
that includes a serine, histidine, and aspartate (shown in shades of  purple ). They evolved from a common ancestor and 
then diverged to cut diﬀ erent proteins. Chymotrypsin has a large pocket next to the reactive serine (seen here above 
and to the right of the  purple serine), so it preferentially digests protein chains next to large amino acids. Trypsin has 
evolved a negatively charged group at the bottom of this pocket, so it has a taste for positively charged protein targets. 
Elastase has a much smaller pocket, so it prefers small amino acids (PDB entries 2cha, 2ptn, 3est)  
 
 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

57
8
 
.  Fig. 8.4   Convergent evolution of serine proteases. These four enzymes use the same catalytic triad of serine ( dark 
magenta ), histidine ( lighter magenta ), and aspartate ( lightest magenta ) to perform their protein-cutting reactions. As you 
can see from the ribbon diagrams, however, the protein chains are entirely diﬀ erent, providing evidence that they 
evolved separately and converged on the same active site machinery. Their functions are also quite diﬀ erent: elastase 
and subtilisin cut in the middle of protein chains, carboxypeptidase Y clips chains from the end, and aspartyl 
dipeptidase breaks very small peptide chains (PDB entries 3est, 1scn, 1wpx, 1fye)  
 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

58
8
 
.  Fig. 8.5   DNA mimic. The protein ocr (short for "overcome classical restriction") protects bacteriophages from the 
defenses of the bacteria it infects. These structures show how ocr mimics DNA to block EcoKI (shown in shades of  blue ), 
a defensive enzyme that normally cuts infecting phage DNA. EcoKI surrounds the DNA, as shown in the  upper left image . 
The image at  upper right has one subunit removed to show the DNA inside. The complex with ocr is shown at the 
 bottom . Notice how the shape of ocr matches the DNA double helix, and the negatively charged amino acids (in  bright 
red ) mimic the phosphate groups (in  red and yellow ) on the DNA (PDB entries 2y7h, 2y7c)  
 
 
Chapter 8 · How Evolution Shapes Proteins

59
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_9
 9  
 The Universe of Protein 
Folds  

60
9
 When I was applying for graduate school, a crystallographer lent 
me her copy of Jane Richardson's 1971 article, "Protein Anatomy." 
And thus began, as it has for many scientists, an ongoing  fascination 
with the ways that protein chains fold. Her article is a perfect com-
bination of art and science, bringing to life a complex but endlessly 
intriguing subject. Th e paper marks a cornerstone moment in the 
study of protein structure—the time when enough structures of dif-
ferent proteins had been solved to start developing an understand-
ing of the general principles that are involved in folding a random, 
tangled chain into a beautifully ordered, functional protein. 
 Everything that is needed to fold up a protein is encoded in the 
protein chain, in the order of amino acids. But strangely, to under-
stand the way that proteins fold, we need to look not at the protein, 
but rather to the water that surrounds it. Two aspects of the interac-
tion of proteins with water drive the folded shape of a protein. Th ese 
principles were apparent in the very fi rst structure of a protein and 
have been observed in every structure since then (. Fig.  9.1 ).
 First of all, we need to look at the protein backbone. It is built of 
peptide subunits that are relatively rigid, so they can only adopt a 
few stable conformations. Th ese peptide units also interact favor-
ably with water, forming hydrogen bonds, so we're going to pay a 
penalty if we try to bury them inside a protein. Th e two major struc-
tures seen inside proteins - alpha helices and beta sheets - are ways 
for protein chains to replace all their water hydrogen bonds with 
protein-protein hydrogen bonds, while keeping within the con-
straints of the allowable conformations that protein backbones can 
adopt (. Fig.  9.2 ). Alpha helices fold the chain into a helix, with 
each peptide unit forming hydrogen bonds with a peptide a few 
steps along the chain. Beta sheets, on the other hand, align the 
chains side by side, forming all possible hydrogen bonds between 
 
.  Fig. 9.1   Basic principles of protein folding. The ﬁ rst structure of a protein revealed two basic principles of protein 
folding: ( left ) the peptide chain forms many hydrogen bonds ( green ) to form a scaﬀ old of secondary structure, ( right ) 
carbon-rich amino acids ( blue ) are packed mostly in the interior, and charged amino acids ( red ) are displayed on the 
surface, in contact with water (PDB entry 1mbn)  
 
 
Chapter 9 · The Universe of Protein Folds

61
9
chains. Th ese two types of structures form the building blocks for 
the overall fold of the protein chain.
   Second, the side chains of the amino acids, which are diff er-
ent for each of the 20 amino acids, direct the folding of the chain 
into a particular globular structure. Carbon-rich amino acids 
shed their unfavorable interactions with water, driving the fold-
ing to place them in the interior of the protein. Charged amino 
acids and amino acids that form hydrogen bonds largely stay on 
the surface, interacting with the surrounding water. Many other 
additional properties tune and shape the fold. For instance, a 
bond may be formed between sulfur atoms in cysteine amino 
acids, gluing portions of the chain together. Positive and negative 
charges interact favorably with one another, and repulsion of 
identical charges directs folding away from some possible folds. 
Specifi c hydrogen bonds between some amino acids may favor a 
 
.  Fig. 9.2   Protein secondary structure. Alpha helices and beta sheets provide most of the secondary structure for 
proteins. Two other types of helices are rarely seen: 3 10  helices are wound more tightly than alpha helices, and pi helices 
are looser (taken from PDB entries 2viu, 2g8c, 3sbn, 1fuo)  
 
Chapter 9 · The Universe of Protein Folds

62
9
particular conformation of a loop. All these forces all contribute 
to stabilization of the fi nal fold. 
 Looking at the many structures that had been determined, Jane 
Richardson found that they fell into a few large classes. Some were 
composed primarily of alpha helices, others were composed of 
beta sheets rolled into barrels or sandwiched on top of one another, 
and others had layers of alpha helices stacked on a central beta 
sheet. Scientists being scientists, this began a widespread eff ort to 
develop rigorous classifi cation schemes. Of course, the soft  nature 
of biology resists this type of formal classifi cation, but in spite of 
the many variations, two popular classifi cation schemes have 
 
.  Fig. 9.3   Protein folds. A few common protein folds are shown here, using the cartoon representation popularized 
by Jane Richardson. In each, the alpha helices are shown in  magenta , the beta sheets in  yellow , and the connecting 
loops in  white  (PDB entries 2ccy, 1mbn, 1lrv, 1ppr, 1cem, 1fbr, 1vie, 1prn, 4bcl, 1stm, 1hcd, 1jpc, 1rie, 1got, 1air, 1ndd, 
1tim, 1kvd, 1fua, 2dnj)       
 
 
Chapter 9 · The Universe of Protein Folds

63
9
gained prominence, SCOP and CATH, that codify the ways that 
proteins can fold (. Fig.  9.3 ).
 This understanding of protein folding is a foundational piece 
of information, particularly if we want to design new proteins 
ourselves. In search of this understanding, the scientific com-
munity launched an effort at the turn of this century, termed 
structural genomics, to determine structures for all possible 
folds. At the time, proteins with new folding patterns were being 
discovered right and left, so structural biologists decided to take 
a more systematic approach to this grand challenge. The genome 
of an organism or set of organisms was analyzed using the best 
prediction tools. Then, proteins of interest were identified, 
which were predicted to be quite different than anything cur-
rently known. A sophisticated structure determination pipeline 
was then brought to bear to solve thousands of these structures. 
The new structures help improve the prediction methods, and 
the whole effort iteratively cranks out structures that fill in the 
gaps in knowledge. 
 Several of these large eff orts were set up around the world, and 
the eff ort was a complete success. Looking at the number of new 
folding patterns that are deposited in the PDB, we see a large num-
ber around this time, and then they fall off  aft er a few years, pre-
sumably as the universe of stable protein folds is eff ectively covered 
(. Fig.  9.4 ). One of the side eff ects of the eff ort is an explosion of 
structures for "domains of unknown function." Th ese structures 
were determined based on this goal of fi nding new folds, and the 
research community is now faced with the challenge of fi guring out 
what they do in the life of the cell.
 
.  Fig. 9.4   New protein folds deposited each year in the PDB. The Protein Structure Initiative, started in 2000, had the 
goal of determining all of the ways that natural proteins fold. It achieved its goal in about 10 years of work, as shown in 
this graph of the number of unique protein folds as classiﬁ ed by two popular methods of analyzing protein folds  
 
Chapter 9 · The Universe of Protein Folds

64
9
  Scientists being scientists, we also want to make use of our 
information once we have it. If we truly understand the rules of 
protein folding, we should be able to design entirely new proteins 
that fold up into custom shapes. But of course biology is never is 
simple as it seems, and the fi eld of de novo protein design has gone 
through many fi ts and starts, but is now quite successful. 
 One of the major problems that protein designers faced 
 immediately is the "negative design" problem. Most of the rules for 
protein folding were discovered by looking at folded protein 
 structures, so focus has been on the features that stabilize proteins, 
such as a strong hydrophobic core and strategic placement of salt 
bridges and hydrogen bonds. But it turns out that it is also critically 
important to make sure that the chain only has a single stable folded 
conformation. So, during design, we also need to test out all the 
possible competing folds and make sure that they are "not" stable. 
Evolution does this negative design naturally—organisms with pro-
teins that adopt lots of nonfunctional folds quickly die out, leaving 
only those with correctly folding proteins. Scientists with their 
computers, on the other hand, need to test out all these unwanted 
possibilities manually, one by one. 
 Th is work started out small and has continued to grow 
(. Fig.  9.5 ). Th e fi rst protein with an entirely designed sequence 
was created in Stephen Mayo's laboratory in 1997. Th ey started with 
a known protein fold, with two beta strands and an alpha helix, and 
tested the many possible arrangements of diff erent amino acids to 
fi nd the best. It worked, and a structure was determined by NMR 
spectroscopy to confi rm the designed folding pattern. Th e next big 
 milestone was the design of a protein with an entirely new fold, 
never (at least so far) observed in nature. In 2003, David Baker's 
laboratory developed a design method that iterates between opti-
mizing the sequence for a given fold and optimizing the predicted 
structure for this fold. Th e result was a small protein that is extremely 
stable, as seen in a crystallographic structure. Th is successful design 
is strong evidence that our current understanding of protein folding 
is on the right track. 
 
Chapter 9 · The Universe of Protein Folds

65
9
 
.  Fig. 9.5   Designed proteins. Designed proteins FSD-1 and Top7 both build on the basic principles of protein folding, 
with a scaﬀ old of secondary structure (as seen in the ribbon diagrams at the  top ) and a partitioning of charged amino 
acids ( red in the lower images ) on the surface and carbon-rich amino acids ( blue ) in the interior (PDB entries 1fsd, 1qys)  
 
Chapter 9 · The Universe of Protein Folds

67
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_10
 10  
 Order and Chaos 
in Protein Structure  

68
10
 Our understanding is oft en shaped by the things that we can actually 
see. Science is bursting with examples of this. Galileo's crude tele-
scope gave a blurry image of Saturn, so he thought it had two large 
moons like our own moon. But the better telescope used decades 
later by Huygens revealed them to be something entirely new: the 
rings of Saturn. Th e fi rst microscopes changed the way we thought 
about disease by revealing pathogenic organisms, launching the 
eff ort to fi nd eff ective antibiotics. New techniques of seeing oft en 
lead to new insights. Th is is certainly the case with structural biology. 
Kendrew's crystallographic structure of myoglobin opened a whole 
new world of understanding, revealing the atomic details of biology. 
 In some cases, however, the things that we can see may limit our 
view. A perfect example has occurred in the structural biology com-
munity, quite ironically caused by the wonderful success of x-ray 
crystallography. To determine a crystallographic structure, we have 
to have a sample that can be crystallized. So, this usually means that 
the proteins need to be rigid bricks that can stack perfectly into a 
crystal lattice. Because of this, most of us now think of all proteins 
as being just like that very fi rst myoglobin structure—a perfectly 
folded chain forming a functional globular protein. 
 Many proteins have this type of perfect order, as evidenced by the 
hundred thousand structures in the PDB. Th is order reaches glorious 
heights with addition of symmetry. Sometimes a single protein chain 
just isn't enough to build the structure that is needed. Oft en, larger 
structures are built using many copies of a protein, which then associ-
ate to form a larger assembly. In some cases, these are point group sym-
metries that create a closed complex with an exactly defi ned number of 
subunits (. Fig.  10.1 ). In other cases, these include translational sym-
metries, creating, for instance, helical complexes that span entire cells.
 As more and more structures have become available, it is apparent 
that multi-subunit proteins are most oft en symmetrical. Th is makes 
sense for many reasons. Since they are all in identical, symmetrical 
 
.  Fig. 10.1   Symmetrical assemblies. Sliding clamps used in DNA replication have evolved to encircle DNA, but a 
bacterial clamp ( left ) and a human clamp ( right ) achieve this function using assemblies with two diﬀ erent symmetries 
(PDB entries 1axc, 2pol)  
 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

69
10
locations, they all have the same surfaces for interaction—basically, 
one type of subunit is all that is needed. Th is is easier to evolve and 
more economical to build. Also, symmetrical complexes, or at least 
those based on point groups, are self-limiting—they form a defi ned 
complex, not an open-ended aggregate. Aggregates are a great danger 
to cells, since they clog everything up. So, when we look to the PDB, 
we fi nd that nearly all complexes are symmetrical. 
 Ironically, highly symmetrical fi laments are oft en some of the 
most diffi  cult subjects to study with crystallography. Th e reason for 
this is that fi laments are oft en built with perfect helical symmetry, 
but the symmetry is rarely exactly what is needed to build a crystal 
lattice. For instance, actin fi laments have about 13 subunits in 6 turns 
of the helix, which doesn't fi t nicely into the two-, three-, four-, and 
sixfold symmetries that are compatible with crystals (. Fig.  10.2 ). So, 
 
.  Fig. 10.2   Actin structures. Crystallographic structures of actin are typically 
determined in complexes with an actin-binding protein, such as gelsolin shown 
on the  left . Structures of the ﬁ lament are obtained by ﬁ tting these types of struc-
tures into reconstructions from electron microscopy, as shown on the  right  (PDB 
entries 1yvn, 3j8j) 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

70
10
these fi laments are oft en studied using an integrative approach. Th e 
symmetry of the fi lament is studied using electron microscopy, and 
the atomic details are determined using a single subunit. Th en, the 
two pieces of information are combined to create an atomic model of 
the whole fi lament.
 Th ere are also a few types of symmetry that are largely forbidden 
in biological molecules. Th ese involve mirrors. In our familiar 
world, we have right and left  shoes and right turn and left  turn 
arrows, but these are not typically found with proteins and nucleic 
acids. Amino acids and nucleotides have a specifi c handedness, 
which is used to build nearly all proteins and nucleic acids. Of 
course, there are exceptions: a few odd bacteria build small antibi-
otics with amino acids of the opposite hand (. Fig.  10.3 ). Th ese are 
particularly useful because the cell's defenses have evolved to digest 
normal amino acids, so these fl ipped ones are more resistant.
 X-ray crystallography has shaped the way we see proteins, and 
only now are we discovering that they are built with a much richer 
palette than what we have previously seen. Many of the earliest 
structures of proteins were these types of small, stable, globular 
 
.  Fig. 10.3   Handedness of amino acids. Cyclosporin, a cyclic peptide made 
by fungi, contains a pair of alanines with opposite handedness (PDB entry 1cya) 
 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

71
10
proteins, but problems cropped up quite quickly. For instance, 
when researchers wanted to explore the structure of antibodies, 
they proved very diffi  cult to crystallize. Th is is because antibodies 
are composed of several functional domains, connected by fl exible 
tethers. To get an atomic view of antibodies, scientists simply 
chopped them up and solved structures of the stable pieces. More 
recently, a few lucky researchers have managed to coax entire anti-
bodies into a crystal lattice, trapping them in one frozen conforma-
tion (. Fig.  10.4 ).
 Th ese types of fl exible tethers are very common in proteins that 
need to adapt to diff erent scenarios. Antibodies have two or more 
fl exible arms that bend and fl ex to adapt to the location of antigens 
on their targets. Th e huge titin protein is composed of hundreds of 
small stable domains connected by fl exible hinges, acting like a 
huge rubber band that stabilizes muscle contraction (7 see Fig.   8.2 ). 
Th ese fl exible segments are built of a characteristic complement of 
amino acids: they have lots of proline and glycine, which form kinks 
in the chain that resist folding into stable globules, and lots of amino 
acids that interact strongly with water. 
 
.  Fig. 10.4   Antibody linkers. Flexible linkers connect the diﬀ erent functional domains of antibodies. These linkers 
contain many proline amino acids ( green ) that kink the chain and keep it from adopting a folded structure. The linker 
also includes several cysteine amino acids (with sulfur shown here in  yellow ), which form cross-links that connect the 
antibody chains (PDB entry 1igt)  
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

72
10
 Th e structures of icosahedral viruses also revealed a need for a 
diff erent type of fl exibility. Th ese viruses surround their genome 
with a symmetrical protein coat, which delivers the genome to the 
cells they infect. Small viruses with tiny genomes can use a perfectly 
symmetrical shell with icosahedral symmetry, but other viruses 
need more space. It's not really practical, however, to make a bigger 
subunit or to use several diff erent subunits, since viruses only have 
a limited amount of space in their genome to encode proteins. 
Instead, they employ quasisymmetry. 
 In the classic conception of quasisymmetry, proposed by 
Caspar and Klug in 1962, many copies of a viral protein form a 
huge spherical coat, with each subunit in almost, but not quite per-
fect, symmetrical arrangements with its neighbors. Small deforma-
tions in the protein make it all possible. Th is has been observed in 
numerous structures of diff erent viruses, allowing the construction 
of a wide range of capsids with diff erent sizes. Th e symmetry of 
these capsids is defi ned by a "triangulation number," which speci-
fi es the number of unique subunit conformations that are needed 
in the tiling. A perfectly icosahedral capsid is T=1, a larger T=3 
capsid has three unique conformations, and so on (. Fig.  10.5 ). 
Each of these positions has similar interactions with its neighbors, 
but not perfectly identical (. Fig.  10.6 ).
 Evolution blindly explores every possibility, and as more and 
more structures of viral capsids have been studied, numerous 
exceptions to classic quasisymmetry have been found (. Fig.  10.7 ). 
For instance, bluetongue virus is built of 120 subunits, which adopt 
two very diff erent environments. Th e whole thing is reminiscent of 
an Escher tiling, with a shape that is just right to lock together and 
 
.  Fig. 10.5   Viral quasisymmetry. Quasisymmetry is used to construct viral capsids of diﬀ erent sizes. Satellite tobacco 
necrosis virus is composed of 60 subunits in perfect T=1 icosahedral symmetry. Tobacco bushy stunt virus is composed 
of 180 subunits in T=3 quasisymmetry: 60 form the ﬁ vefold vertices ( colored red ), and the remaining 120 form a ring of 
six centered on the threefold axes (colored  orange and yellow ). Similarly, the  Nudaurelia capensis omega virus has 240 
subunits in T=4 quasisymmetry, and bacteriophage HK97 has 420 subunits in T=7 quasisymmetry (PDB entries 2buk, 
2tbv, 1ohf, 1ohg)  
 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

73
10
completely cover the sphere. Simian virus 40 has an overall tiling 
similar to a classic T=7 quasisymmetry. However, the whole struc-
ture is built of pentamers, which normally can only occupy the fi ve-
fold symmetric vertices of the icosahedron. Th e trick is that each 
subunit has long, fl exible arms that reach over and interact with 
whichever neighbor happens to be closest.
 More recently, it has become apparent that many proteins do 
away with any folded structure at all. For instance, unstructured 
 
.  Fig. 10.6   Protein deformations in quasisymmetry. Quasisymmetry 
requires small deformations in the subunits to accommodate the slightly 
diﬀ erent neighborhoods of the diﬀ erent positions in the capsid. Tobacco 
bushy stunt virus achieves this by building a subunit composed of two 
domains. The central domain here associates to form a dimer, and then the 
other domain ﬂ exes slightly to form the diﬀ erent interactions with neighbors 
(PDB entry 2tbv)  
 
.  Fig. 10.7   Exceptions to quasisymmetry. Many exceptions to the classic 
concept of quasisymmetry have been discovered. Bluetongue virus ( left ) is 
composed of 120 subunits, which occupy two quite diﬀ erent positions ( red and 
orange ). Simian virus 40 ( right ) is similar to the T=7 capsid of HK97 but has a 
pentamer of subunits at the positions normally occupied by six subunits in a 
classic T=7 quasisymmetry (PDB entries 2btv, 1sva)  
 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

74
10
regions are widely used in cellular signaling. Many signaling pro-
teins have an unstructured tail that is recognized by a form-fi tting 
groove in a target protein. Th is has many great advantages: a single 
tail can adapt itself to many similar grooves in diff erent proteins 
(perhaps with diff erent affi  nities), and the interaction can be highly 
specifi c but rather weak, allowing the chain to interact with its tar-
get, but quickly separate when its job is fi nished. 
 Th e CBP protein is a perfect example of how all of these features 
come to play (. Fig.  10.8 ). It acts as an integrator of signaling infor-
mation, interacting with many molecules and deciding if transcrip-
tion will begin. It is composed of one long chain. Several regions in 
this chain fold into defi ned structures, and they are separated by 
stretches that are fl exible and unstructured. Th e folded domains 
themselves interact with the unstructured portions of other mole-
cules.
 As you can imagine, these unstructured proteins are quite diffi  -
cult to study, since they never sit still long enough to get a good 
look. One common approach is to study only the part that binds to 
its target—so we're essentially looking at the structured state of an 
unstructured protein (. Fig.  10.9 ). NMR spectroscopy can also give 
information on the range of conformations that are accessible to an 
unstructured chain, giving us some idea of their mobility.
 Structural scientists are still trying to extend their reach into 
these many diff erent areas of protein structure, developing meth-
ods to characterize modes that are not amenable to x-ray crystal-
lography. One of the challenging current topics is the study of 
amyloids. Th ese are examples of what happens when protein 
sequences are taken out of context. Take, for instance, the amyloid 
precursor protein, which plays an important role in Alzheimer's 
disease (. Fig.  10.10 ). Normally it is a stably folded membrane pro-
tein. But if it is clipped, one of the peptides aggregates to form rigid 
fi bers that clog up the function of neurons.
 
.  Fig. 10.8   CBP protein. The modular CBP protein has been studied by crystallography and NMR spectroscopy by 
cutting it into pieces and including only small pieces of the interacting proteins ( green ) (PDB entries 1l8c, 1kdx, 1jsp, 
3biy, 2ka6, 1kbh)  
 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

75
10
 
.  Fig. 10.9   Proteins with unstructured tails. NMR was used to study two initiation factor proteins with unstructured 
tails. When they form a complex, a portion of the tail (highlighted in  turquoise ) of eIF4E binds in a groove in eIF4G ( red ), 
adopting a deﬁ ned structure (PDB entries 1ap8, 1rf8)  
 Th ese fi brils have been very diffi  cult to study at the atomic level, 
because they oft en have many similar, but diff erent forms, and lack 
the order or periodicity to form crystals. Scientists have used a vari-
ety of methods to probe their structure, combining NMR studies, 
which can provide information on the local conformation of the 
chain and portions that are close to one another, with electron 
microscopy, which gives an understanding of the overall form of 
the fi bril and the way that the protein chains are stacked within it. 
By using this type of integrated approach, throwing every technique 
we have at a diffi  cult problem, we're able to expand our conception 
of what proteins are, and how they balance order and chaos as they 
go about their jobs. 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

76
10
 
.  Fig. 10.10   Amyloid ﬁ bers. Amyloid-beta precursor protein, shown on the left, is normally found in the membrane 
of nerve cells. The cell's processing proteins cut it into diﬀ erent pieces, creating a small peptide (shown in  green ) in some 
cases. This peptide can refold to form long amyloid ﬁ bers, as shown on the  right,  that contribute to the nerve problems 
in Alzheimer's disease (PDB entries 1mwp, 1owt, 1rw6, 1iyt, 2m4j)  
 
 
Chapter 10 · Order and Chaos in Protein Structure

77
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_11
 11  
 Molecular Electronics  

78
11
  Cells have evolved countless systems to keep their houses in 
order—systems for plumbing, systems for heating, and systems for 
recycling—so perhaps we shouldn't be surprised that they are also 
master electricians. In our familiar world, our houses are wired with 
copper, and the fl ow of electricity is controlled with switches and 
electrical components. Huge numbers of electrons hop from atom 
to atom through these wires, powering our lights and appliances. 
Cells, however, take a more personal approach to electricity. Unlike 
electronics in our familiar world, cells manage their electricity one 
electron at a time. 
 Electrons are slippery beasts, and cells need special tools to 
manage them. Th ey typically use two approaches (. Fig.  11.1 ). Th e 
fi rst is to use a metal ion to capture the electron. Looking to the 
structures of proteins, we see many variations on this theme. By 
employing diff erent ions, and in diff erent states, the affi  nity of the 
ion for electrons is tailored for the particular task. Iron ions are very 
common. In some cases, the ion is immobilized in the center of a 
large heme group. In other cases, several iron ions are held in a 
small cluster with sulfur atoms. Additional ions are also used in 
special cases. For instance, copper ions are used in the the photo-
synthetic protein plastocyanin, giving it a beautiful bluish color.
 Alternatively, some proteins use small organic molecules to 
carry electrons. Th ese molecules typically have large ring systems 
that can adopt diff erent charged states, capturing electrons and 
releasing them, oft en capturing and releasing protons at the same 
time. In our bodies, these carrier molecules are oft en created from 
vitamins like niacin and ribofl avin, since our cells don't have the 
ability to construct them from scratch. 
 In some cases, cells need to move electrons over large distances, 
so they employ small carrier proteins. Th ese proteins shelter their 
electron-carrying metal ion or cofactor and shuttle it from location 
to location. In other cases, electron-carrying cofactors are arranged 
in large proteins in chains, forming a nanowire that transmits elec-
trons from one site to another. Remarkably, the electrons move 
along these chains, and from the carrier proteins to the chain, by 
 
.  Fig. 11.1   Electron carriers. Soluble electron transport proteins use many tools to transport electrons. Cytochrome c 
uses an iron ion held in heme and ferredoxin uses a cluster of iron and sulfur. Plastocyanin has a copper ion and 
ﬂ avodoxin uses ﬂ avin molecule (PDB entries 3cyt, 1a70, 5pcy, 1ag9)  
 
 
Chapter 11 · Molecular Electronics

79
11
quantum mechanical tunneling. Th e position of each electron is 
fuzzy—most of the time it's near the atom nucleus, but there is a 
small chance that it will be found at a distance from the nucleus, a 
chance that gets less and less probable over longer distances. 
Looking for clues in the structures of proteins with electron trans-
port chains, we fi nd that a distance of about 14 nanometers is the 
maximum distance where this tunneling occurs at functional rates. 
 Both of these types of electron transport are exemplifi ed in a 
structure of cytochrome c with one of its metabolic partners, cyto-
chrome bc1 (. Fig.  11.2 ). Cytochrome bc1 is a large membrane-
bound protein that uses a fl ow of electrons to pump protons across 
the membrane. It has a string of iron atoms, held in heme and iron- 
sulfur clusters, that electrons fl ow through to power the pump. 
When the electron reaches the end, it is delivered to its fi nal desti-
nation by cytochrome c, a small carrier protein with a heme group 
at its center. Th e complex shows that the cytochrome c docking site 
positions its heme group right next to one of the hemes in cyto-
chrome bc1, allowing an electron to tunnel across the gap.
 Th e electricity that powers our homes is largely (at least for 
now) obtained by the burning of fossil fuels, and the heat is used to 
power generators. Cells take a much more delicate approach to 
obtain their electrical energy. Early evolution of life, reactive mole-
cules were common in the environment, and the earliest cells 
tapped them for energy. We can look to exotic bacteria living on the 
Earth today to get a feeling for what is must have been like then. For 
instance, some of these bacteria use hydrogen gas as their raw 
 
.  Fig. 11.2   Cytochrome bc1 and cytochrome c. This complex includes the small soluble protein cytochrome c 
( red backbone ) and the large membrane-bound protein cytochrome bc1 ( blue backbone ). The complex brings the heme 
groups of the proteins in close proximity, allowing an electron to tunnel from one to the other (PDB entry 1kyo)  
 
Chapter 11 · Molecular Electronics

80
11
 material, splitting it and extracting the electrons. Th eir electrical 
tools can be quite exotic. Th e one shown in . Fig.  11.3 uses a pair of 
iron ions surrounded by cyanide and carbon monoxide and a com-
pound with two sulfur atoms. Together, they grip the tiny hydrogen 
molecule and split it into two unequal halves: a hydride ion (a pro-
ton and two electrons) and a proton. Th en, the two electrons are 
stripped off  the hydride ion and transferred down a string of cofac-
tors to an electron carrier.
   Today, we obtain our electrons from food molecules, ultimately 
shuttling them to the oxygen we breathe and using them to power 
our cells in the process. Food molecules are broken down and the 
electrons are transferred to the small carrier molecule NAD. Th is 
shuttles them to the respiratory electron transport chain, where 
they are used to charge an electrochemical battery that builds 
ATP.  Atomic structures have revealed the complex circuitry of 
 carriers and nanowires that carry this life-powering current 
(. Fig.  11.4 ). Recent research has revealed that this respiratory 
chain forms a large complex, bringing three large electron-transfer-
ring protein complexes together for maximal effi  ciency. A recent 
electron microscope structure reveals the complex from cow mito-
chondria, showing a very compact supercomplex. Th is may be par-
ticularly important to reduce leakage of electrons. Occasional 
electrons escape from the chain, hopping directly onto an oxygen 
molecule to form toxic superoxide radicals that can wreak havoc in 
the cell by damaging proteins and DNA.  Fortunately we have 
 
.  Fig. 11.3    Hydrogenase. This atomic structure was determined by a combination of NMR spectroscopy and structural 
modeling and captures the transfer of electrons from hydrogenase ( blue backbone ) to a cytochrome ( red backbone ). The 
hydrogen-splitting site has a usual cofactor (in atomic spheres at the  left ) with two iron ions, cyanide and carbon 
monoxide, and a small sulfur-containing molecule. The electrons that are released from the reaction jump through three 
iron-sulfur clusters ( at center ) and end up in the heme group of the cytochrome ( at right ) (PDB entry 1e08)       
 
 
Chapter 11 · Molecular Electronics

81
11
another set of metalloproteins, superoxide dismutases, that detoxify 
these dangerous molecules.
   Electrons are also needed for many chemical tasks. Th ese are 
cases where the properties of the molecule need to be changed by 
adding electrons or removing them (. Fig.  11.5 ). For example, 
superoxide dismutase detoxifi es oxygen using a copper and zinc ion 
to extract the electron and add it back to another superoxide mol-
ecule, creating a less dangerous molecule of hydrogen peroxide. 
Xanthine oxidoreductase takes a more typical approach. It binds to 
an electron carrier cofactor and transfers these electrons to the 
active site, where they are used to make purine bases more soluble, 
so they can be easily removed from the body.
 Th is continual fl ow of electrons powers the entire biosphere. It 
is needed for everything we do: to fuel biochemical processes, to 
power motion, and to assist in metabolic reactions that construct, 
assemble, and recycle our molecular building blocks. Th e ultimate 
source of nearly all of this electrical energy is solar, captured by 
plants and feeding the rest of the living world.   
 
.  Fig. 11.4   Respiratory supercomplex. Electron microscopy has been used to study a supercomplex of the three large 
protein complexes involved in respiratory electron transport. As electrons ﬂ ow from cofactor to cofactor, they power 
the pumping of protons across the membrane, charging an electrochemical battery (PDB entry 2ybb)       
 
Chapter 11 · Molecular Electronics

82
11
 
.  Fig. 11.5   Metalloenzymes. Superoxide dismutase ( top ) uses a copper ion and a zinc ion to extract electrons from a 
destructive superoxide radical, and xanthine oxidoreductase ( bottom ) shuttles electrons from a ﬂ avin cofactor 
(in  spheres near the  top ) through two iron-sulfur clusters to a complicated molybdenum cofactor (in  spheres near the 
 bottom ), where it performs a reaction that converts purine bases into soluble waste products that can be excreted 
(PDB entries 2sod, 1fo4)  
 
 
Chapter 11 · Molecular Electronics

83
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_12
 12  
 Green Energy  

84
12
 Plants are the very defi nition of green energy. Th ey are powered by 
sunlight and grow using a few common resources in the environ-
ment. Th ey are infi nitely renewable, returning everything to the 
environment when they die. And they do all this using molecules 
that color our world in beautiful shades of green and red and yellow. 
Structural biologists are looking to plants for hints about how they 
live so gracefully, with the hopes that we can somehow incorporate 
these principles into our own management of energy resources. 
 At the center of the green energy of plants is a green molecule: 
chlorophyll. It is a small organic molecule with a magnesium ion at 
its center, which has the special property that it absorbs light and 
uses it to energize an electron. Th ese energetic electrons can then be 
passed down a chain of electron carriers, which are wired to power 
energy-requiring tasks, in particular, to charge up an electrochemi-
cal battery. Structures of these molecules have revealed a multitude 
of amazing aspects to the process. 
 All the action occurs inside huge protein complexes, called pho-
tosystems, that hold the chlorophyll and other molecules in exactly 
the right orientations. At the center is a special pair of chlorophyll 
molecules, the ones that ultimately spit out the energetic electron 
and are later restored by stripping a less-energetic electron out of 
water. Surrounding this are a host of other brightly colored mole-
cules that absorb light and transfer the energy inward to this central 
pair. 
 Th e most advanced methods for crystallography are currently 
being used to watch this process in action. In these methods, tiny 
crystals of the photosystem are subjected to a very powerful beam 
from an x-ray laser—so powerful that it destroys the crystal in the 
process. But before it does, x-rays are diff racted by the crystal and 
measured, capturing one view of the crystal. Th is is repeated for 
thousands of tiny crystals, randomly building up a full data set of 
the diff raction pattern from diff erent angles. One of the advantages 
of the method is that it is very fast, capturing a defi ned moment. So, 
researchers can illuminate the crystal and then determine a struc-
ture at defi ned times aft er the photon is absorbed. 
 Th e results are quite subtle (. Fig.  12.1 ). Most of the protein and 
its associated cofactors stay in exactly the same places as light is 
absorbed. But a strategically placed tyrosine amino acid changes 
position slightly, shift ing toward the chlorophyll molecules that 
absorb the light. Spectroscopic studies of this protein have revealed 
that this tyrosine loses its hydroxyl hydrogen, gaining a negative 
charge. Although the hydrogens are not seen in the crystallographic 
experiment, the motion is evidence of this change, as the negatively 
charged form of the tyrosine moves toward the positively charged 
chlorophyll and helps mediate the fl ow of electrons through the 
chain of cofactors.
 Th ere are many other amazing aspects to the process. For 
instance, many photosystems are surrounded by a fi eld of antenna 
proteins, themselves fi lled with light-absorbing molecules like chlo-
rophyll and carotene (. Fig.  12.2 ). Th ese all work diligently to absorb 
photons and then transfer the energy from molecule to molecule 
until it reaches the special pair at the center of the photosystem.
 
Chapter 12 · Green Energy

85
12
 Th e machinery for stripping electrons out of water has also been 
revealed in atomic structures. Th ese electrons are needed to replace 
the ones that are sent down the electron transfer chain, producing 
the oxygen that we all breathe in the process. Th e action occurs at a 
complex cofactor composed of four manganese ions and a calcium 
ion. Th e structures have revealed the arrangement of ions in the 
cofactor, but researchers are still sorting out how it captures water 
and produces oxygen (. Fig.  12.3 ).
 Looking inside plant cells, we fi nd that they have vast arrays of 
these photosystems, all surrounded by their fi elds of antennas. Th ey 
are arranged in disk-shaped compartments (termed grana), which 
allow them to build up a gradient of protons as they perform their 
light-driven pumping operation (. Fig.  12.4 ). Th e energy of this 
gradient is ultimately used to power the creation of sugar molecules, 
which fuel the entire biosphere. Th e process of building sugar 
involves many enzymes, but one plays a key role: ribulose bisphos-
phate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO).
 RuBisCO (. Fig.  12.5 ) is the enzyme that captures carbon diox-
ide and fi xes it into a molecule that can be used by the cell to build 
sugar. Ironically, this enzyme is one of the least effi  cient enzymes in 
cells. Th is is due in part to the similarity between carbon dioxide 
and oxygen molecules. As refl ected in the name of the enzyme, it 
performs two competing reactions: a carboxylase reaction that fi xes 
carbon dioxide and an oxygenase reaction that creates a toxic side 
 
.  Fig. 12.1   Bacterial photosystem. Two structures of a bacterial photosystem were determined, before and after it 
had absorbed a photon of light. The photosystem is shown on the  left . Light is absorbed by a special pair of chlorophyll 
molecules ( green ) at the center, and then electrons are transported down (shown with an  arrow ), ultimately reaching a 
quinone ( orange ). The electrons are replenished from the top through a string of hemes ( red ). As shown on the right, the 
two structures were quite similar, except for the motion of a key tyrosine amino acid, shown in  blue . The change was 
taken as evidence that the tyrosine loses its hydrogen atom in the light-activated state (the  lower  of the two in the 
ﬁ gure), gaining a negative charge and moving closer to the special pair of chlorophylls (PDB entries 2x5u, 2x5v)  
 
Chapter 12 · Green Energy

86
12
 
.   Fig. 12.3    Oxygen-evolving center. The oxygen-evolving center of 
photosystem II includes four manganese ions ( purple ) and a calcium ion 
( green ), all stitched together with oxygen and water ( red ). The oxygen atom 
marked "O" is thought to be in the position where the reaction occurs, and the 
position marked "W" may be a water molecule ready to be inserted into the 
reaction (PDB entry 4ub6)  
 
.  Fig. 12.2    Antenna proteins. Photosynthetic reaction centers (shown in  darkest green in the  center of each complex) 
are often surrounded by a core antenna complex (in  medium green and pink ) and peripheral antenna proteins ( lightest 
green and pink ). Photosystem II (with the oxygen-evolving center in  red and purple ) is associated with the 
light-harvesting protein LHCII and other proteins (not shown here). Photosystem I has several light-harvesting subunits 
that associate with main core to form the supercomplex shown here. The simple reaction center from a photosynthetic 
bacterium ( lower right ) is surrounded by light-harvesting complex LH1 and associates loosely with LH2 (PDB entries 
4ub6, 2bhw, 4y28, 1pyh, 2fkw)  
 
 
 
Chapter 12 · Green Energy

87
12
 
.  Fig. 12.4   Chloroplast. This cross section through a chloroplast shows the two-layered membrane at the  top  and the 
stacked grana  below . The photosynthetic electron transport chain is embedded in the membranes of the grana: ( 1 ) 
photosystem II, ( 2 ) light-harvesting complex II, ( 3 ) plastoquinone, ( 4 ) cytochrome b6f, ( 5 ) plastocyanin, ( 6 ) photosystem 
I, ( 7 ) ferredoxin, ( 8 ) ferredoxin reductase, and ( 9 ) ATP synthase. Many RuBisCO enzymes ( 10 ) are found in the soluble 
space along with the machinery to synthesize and manage the chloroplast       
 
Chapter 12 · Green Energy

88
12
product. Th e plant cell then needs to clean up all these side prod-
ucts. It must all be worth the eff ort, however, because RuBisCO has 
been estimated to be the most plentiful enzyme on the Earth.
 Today, we think of plants as being the greenest of green energy, 
but this was not always the case. In the early evolution of life, pho-
tosynthetic organisms were the major polluters on Earth, so much 
so that they changed the basic characteristics of the environment. 
Th e earliest organisms used other forms of energy to power their 
process, grabbing readily available reactive molecules in the envi-
ronment. But obviously photosynthesis was a more successful evo-
lutionary innovation, and the oxygen released by these early 
organisms fi lled the skies and gradually poisoned all of the 
 competitors. 
 
.   Fig. 12.5   RuBisCO. RuBisCO is a huge enzyme complex composed of eight 
copies of two diﬀ erent chains (shown in  green and blue ). A transition-state 
analogue of the reaction is shown in the active sites in  red (PDB entry 1rlc)  
 
 
Chapter 12 · Green Energy

89
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_13
 13  
 Peak Performance  

90
13
 Diet and exercise are a continual topic of discussion in my circle of 
friends, and the discussion is a free mixture of science, pseudosci-
ence, and sheer wishful thinking. Again and again, when I look to 
experts for advice, it all comes down to a logical balance of physical 
exercise and the amount of food. We need to burn up the amount of 
food that we eat, or if we're dieting, use up more food than we eat. 
But the subject is tricky, of course, because everybody wants a 
shortcut to health, and even the slightest scientifi c provenance can 
support the newest craze. 
 Personally, I've gone on several diets. Th e most successful, in 
terms of weight loss, was a low-sugar diet. Th e biochemical logic 
behind this is a bit convoluted and seeks to change the way that 
your body deals with food. In a typical high-carb diet, sugar is 
stored as glycogen, and there's always plenty of it around to convert 
back into glucose to feed hungry cells. In the low-carb diet, this 
glycogen runs out, and fats need to be broken down instead. 
Researchers are still arguing about it all: whether it works, whether 
it's dangerous, or whether it makes any diff erence in the long run. I 
had great results with it, but the cynical part of me still feels that the 
reason it worked so well was that it was so diffi  cult to fi nd low-sugar 
foods in our supermarket, so I ended up looking much more care-
fully at what I ate. 
 Structural biologists have looked at many of the enzymes 
involved in the storage and release of glucose in glycogen. Glycogen 
phosphorylase is a central player in this story. It is the enzyme that 
releases glucose when needed. Since this is a critical role, it is highly 
regulated, to make sure that it is only active at the appropriate times. 
Structures of the enzyme reveal many interesting aspects to this 
regulation (. Figs.  13.1 and  13.2 ). Th e enzyme is a dimer, with two 
protein subunits, each with its own active site for clipping off  glu-
cose from the glycogen chain. Each subunit also has a second site 
that binds to glycogen—this tethers the enzyme to the glycogen 
granule and has been termed the "storage site."
 If we fl ip the enzyme over, some of the regulatory machinery is 
on the backside. Th is includes a serine amino acid that is phosphor-
ylated based on signals from hormones. For instance, adrenaline 
triggers phosphorylation of the enzyme, turning it on and giving us 
a burst of extra sugar to respond to whatever dangers we're encoun-
tering. Insulin, on the other hand, leads to removal of the phos-
phate, turning the enzyme off  and shift ing to storage of glucose 
instead. Th e enzyme is also regulated by the level of ATP in the cell. 
When the cell needs energy, AMP is more plentiful, and it binds in 
a cleft  between the subunits and controls the fl exing of the molecule 
between active and inactive states. 
 Th e biochemistry behind low-fat diets, on the other hand, 
makes perfect sense to me. Gram for gram, fats provide more 
energy than sugars: 9 calories per gram for fat and 4 for carbohy-
drates. Th is makes them the perfect energy-rich molecule to store 
energy in cells (probably the reason they taste so good!). Th is also 
means that we're going to have to exercise more if our diet is full of 
fats. Structural biologists have explored many of the enzymes 
involved in synthesis of fatty acids and their breakdown. Since 
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

91
13
fatty acids have long strings of carbon atoms, they are broken 
down bit by bit by four enzymes, which release two-carbon units 
and connect them to the carrier molecule coenzyme A.  In our 
mitochondria, three of these enzymes are associated into a multi-
enzyme complex that allows the fatty acid to transfer directly from 
site to site during the reactions. Th e structure of a similar complex 
from bacteria has been studied by crystallography, uncovering 
some of the atomic details of how the fatty acids and other 
 necessary cofactors all bind to perform the progressive breakdown 
(. Fig.  13.3 ).
 
.  Fig. 13.1   Glycogen phosphorylase. Glycogen phosphorylase is a dimeric enzyme that includes an active site that 
clips glucose from glycogen (with a nucleotide bound in the site in this structure, shown  in red ) and a storage site that 
tethers the enzyme to the glycogen granule. Regulatory sites are seen on the backside of the enzyme, including a serine 
that is phosphorylated ( in green ) and an allosteric site for binding nucleotides ( in red ) (PDB entry 6gpb)  
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

92
13
 
.  Fig. 13.3   Fatty acid metabolism. This structure of a bacterial beta-oxidation multienzyme complex captures several 
pieces of the story. The complex includes three diﬀ erent enzymes, with two copies of each. Two are found in the 
subunits shown in  blue , with NAD ( pink ) and a fatty-acid-like molecule ( gray ) bound in the active sites. The other 
enzyme ( green ) performs the ﬁ nal step of attaching a piece of the fatty acid to the carrier molecule coenzyme A 
( magenta ) (PDB entry 1wdk)  
 
.  Fig. 13.2   Glycogen phosphorylase regulation. Glycogen phosphorylase is an allosteric enzyme that shifts shape 
between an inactive and an active form (PDB entries 8gpb, 1gpa)       
 
 
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

93
13
 Sometimes we need a bit of help keeping to our diets, and sci-
ence has come to the rescue. For instance, a number of sweet com-
pounds have been discovered that can replace some of the calories 
in sugar. Th ese molecules bind to the sweet receptor in our tongue 
and trick us into thinking we've eaten some sugar. When this recep-
tor normally binds to sugar, it changes shape and sends a signal off  
to the brain telling us we've eaten something enjoyable. An atomic 
structure is not available for this receptor, but a similar receptor that 
binds to glutamate has been studied. It is composed of two parts. It 
has a classic GPCR that crosses the cell membrane, activating the 
signaling machinery inside the cell (see Chap.   15  for more informa-
tion on GPCRs). On the outside, there is a two-domain portion that 
closes around sugar (and sweeteners like aspartame) when it fi nds 
it, passing the signal on to the GPCR portion. Since the whole 
structure is so fl exible, it has been studied in parts by crystallogra-
phy (. Fig.  13.4 ).
   Several supersweet proteins have also been discovered in nature, 
which are thousands of times sweeter than common table sugar. 
When scientists fi rst started studying these proteins, they assumed 
that the proteins would have a little extension, a "sweet fi nger," that 
would extend into the sugar-binding site of the receptor. Th ey tried 
clipping off  pieces of the protein to see if they could fi nd pieces that 
worked just as well as the whole protein. Unfortunately, this was not 
successful. So the current theory about how they work assumes that 
 
.  Fig. 13.4   Supersweet proteins. Supersweet proteins like monellin, thaumatin, and brazzein, as well as sweeteners 
like aspartame, bind to the sweet taste receptor, which is similar to the glutamate receptor shown in  blue  (PDB entries 
3mon, 1thv, 2brz, 2e4z, 4or2)  
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

94
13
the whole protein binds in the cleft  between the receptor domains 
acting like a wedge to create the sweet-tasting conformation 
changes. Scientists are now using mutations to dissect the interac-
tion, trying to determine which portions are most important. Some 
even sweeter versions of the proteins have been discovered, and 
researchers have discovered ways to make them more attractive for 
use in cooking. For instance, the two chains of monellin fall apart 
when it is heated and the molecule loses its sweetness, but an engi-
neered single-chain version is much more stable. 
 I also went through a phase where I was a bit of a gym rat, trying 
to build up some muscle. I got a personal trainer, who promptly 
prescribed a course of supplements. Th ese included a daily multivi-
tamin (which I still take), lots of protein in the form of shakes, and 
a creatine supplement. Th e protein is easy to understand—my body 
needs the building blocks to build new muscle. My trainer was 
pushing whey proteins at the time. Th is is a collection of small, sol-
uble proteins from milk, left  over when all the stuff  needed to make 
cheese is taken out. Th ese have been found to be rich in essential 
amino acids—the amino acids that our body can't make by itself. 
Th ree of these get the most press in the context of the gym: the 
branched chain amino acids leucine, isoleucine, and valine. Studies 
have found that supplementing the diet with these amino acids can 
stimulate muscle growth, so proteins that have more of them (like 
whey proteins) are popular for protein supplements (. Fig.  13.5 ).
 Th e multivitamin makes perfect sense as well—these are needed 
for many of the molecular machines that control metabolism. 
 
.  Fig. 13.5   Whey proteins. Whey proteins are rich in essential amino acids ( magenta ), particularly the branched 
amino acids ( red ) (PDB entries 1beb, 1hfz, 3v03)  
 
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

95
13
A multivitamin ensures that all of these are in top shape. Structural 
biology has allowed us to see many of these vitamins in action. Th e 
B vitamins, in particular, are used to build many specialized chemi-
cal tools that are needed by enzymes. Th e one shown in . Fig.  13.6 
is an unusual molecule, vitamin B12 or cobalamin, which has an 
atom of cobalt at its center. Our cells can't make it on their own, but 
bacteria in our gut do, so we have a set of machinery for gathering 
it and delivering it into our cells. It is essential for the action of two 
enzymes, involved in energy metabolism and regeneration of the 
amino acid methionine. Th is might not seem critical, but if vitamin 
B12 is missing from the diet (or we are unable to absorb it), it causes 
many complications as molecules downstream in metabolism are 
also impacted. Much the same is true for other vitamins, so it always 
pays to make sure that we're getting enough in our diet, or if neces-
sary, in that multivitamin with breakfast.
 Th e creatine prescribed by my trainer, however, is a bit more 
problematic. Creatine is a small molecule that is obtained in the diet 
or is constructed in cells from the amino acids arginine and glycine. 
It forms a very unstable bond with phosphate groups and is used as 
a way to shuttle energy around cells, in particular, around muscle 
cells. ATP is made in large quantities in the mitochondria, and the 
enzyme creatine kinase builds phosphocreatine using up the 
ATP. Th is phosphocreatine then travels out to the working part of 
the muscle, and a diff erent form of creatine kinase performs the 
opposite reaction, creating ATP to power muscle contraction. So 
the logic is obvious: if we supplement our muscle cells with creatine, 
 
.  Fig. 13.6   Vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 is collected by the intrinsic factor protein, which then binds to the cubam 
receptor and is imported into our cells. It is used by two essential enzymes: one that is involved in the regeneration of 
the amino acid methionine and the one shown here, which is involved in energy metabolism (PDB entries 3kq4, 2xiq)  
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

96
13
we can potentially build up a larger storehouse of energy and per-
form better in endurance sports that require large bursts of energy. 
Th e science has been ambiguous, however: some studies see 
improvements in strength and stamina, others don't. I did notice a 
remarkably quick gain in muscle mass when I started taking it, but 
that, I unfortunately later learned, was primarily due to retention of 
water (. Fig.  13.7 ).
 For people with bigger goals in mind, such as professional body 
builders, there is abundant science available to help reach any goal 
we'd like to obtain. For instance, the growth of muscle is highly reg-
ulated in our bodies by a network of anabolic hormones, such as 
testosterone, and these are easily tweaked by dosing with extra 
amounts. Structural biology has revealed how these work: they bind 
to a receptor in the cell nucleus, activating the genes that control 
both "androgenic" properties related to male characteristics and 
"anabolic" properties related to the synthesis of protein in muscle, 
formation of blood cells, and the emotional and physical aspects of 
sexual function. 
 Th e use of these types of steroid hormones is quite eff ective for 
improving athletic performance but has been deemed unsports-
manlike by most athletic organizations. Th is has lead to a chemical 
arms race as competitive athletes look for an edge, and sports 
 offi  cials develop ways to test athletes to ensure a clean competition. 
Th e molecule shown here (. Fig.  13.8 ) is the designer steroid 
 tetrahydrogestrinone (THG), created by the nutritional supple-
ment company Bay Area Laboratory Cooperative (BALCO), which 
 
.  Fig. 13.7   Creatine kinase. Creatine kinase in cytoplasm is a dimer of subunits, but the mitochondrial version of the 
enzyme can also form huge octameric complexes (PDB entries 2crk, 1qk1)  
 
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

97
13
played a central part in a doping scandal in 2003 when this 
 previously "undetectable" steroid came to light.
 So today, I take a simple approach to my own peak performance, 
based in equal part on science and on personal preference. As I 
write this, I'm currently on yet another diet, trying to shed a few 
pounds gained over my holiday celebrations. I'm choosing not to 
jump into a fad diet, as entertaining as they can be, and instead I'm 
taking the simple approach: smaller portions and more exercise. 
Science has helped me with some diet juices, to reduce my sugar 
intake. I've cut out the nutritional supplements, but I still take a 
multivitamin in spite of probably getting everything I need in my 
meals. It may not be a miracle cure, but I'm certain it will get the job 
done.  
 
.  Fig. 13.8   Steroid receptor. This model of the anabolic steroid receptor includes structures of the steroid-binding 
domain, shown with the designer steroid THG, and the DNA-binding portion bound to a short piece of DNA. The 
receptor also includes another large domain that has not been studied at the atomic level yet (PDB entries 2amb, 1r4i)       
 
Chapter 13 · Peak Performance

99
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_14
 14  
 Cellular Signaling 
Networks  

100
14
 
.  Fig. 14.1    Signaling pathway for VEGF. This diagram is taken from the KEGG Pathway Database (  http://www.
genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html  ), a popular online database for signaling networks in cells. As you can see, the binding 
of VEGF activates many interconnecting signaling pathways that lead to a variety of cellular changes. The picture is even 
more complex than this, because all of the  dotted lines on the  right side  of the diagram represent dozens of other 
proteins that change or cause changes based on the signal       
 I probably shouldn't admit this, but I always dread writing about 
cellular signaling. It's a fascinating topic, but it's always fabulously 
complex. Th e stories are never straightforward. I'd like to write 
 simple, understandable stories, like: "Bob sent Mary an invitation to 
a party, so she went." Cellular signaling stories, on the other hand, 
end up more like: "Bob sent Mary an invitation to a party, but Sam 
cut off  the bottom of it so she couldn't read the date, but Sally showed 
Mary her invitation, but there was a power failure and Mary couldn't 
read it, but Sean brought a fl ashlight, so she ended up going." 
 Let me show you what I mean. A few years ago, I had the oppor-
tunity to work with a team of students to develop a picture of signal-
ing during the development of blood vessels, as part of Tim 
Herman's CREST project at the Milwaukee School of Engineering. 
Th e growth factor VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) is 
released by cells that aren't getting enough oxygen, and it promotes 
the development of new blood vessels in the vicinity. Th is action is 
essential for the development of the circulatory system in embryos 
and for adding new blood vessels to compensate for injured or 
blocked ones. VEGF also plays an important role in disease. For 
instance, cancer cells oft en make a lot of VEGF to build blood ves-
sels in a growing tumor. Many processes are stimulated by VEGF, 
including cell division, migration, and remodeling of the connec-
tions between cells (. Fig.  14.1 ).
 Th e fi rst step of VEGF signaling is fairly straightforward. VEGF 
is released into the blood and circulates to its target cells and then 
 
 
Chapter 14 · Cellular Signaling Networks

101
14
somehow has to relay its signal inside the cell. Th is task is accom-
plished by a specifi c receptor for VEGF, which is found in the mem-
brane of the target cell. Th e mechanism of signal transduction is a 
matter of simple arithmetic: 1 + 1 = 2. Normally the receptor pro-
teins fl oat around separately in the membrane and are in the "off " 
state. When VEGF binds, it brings together two receptor molecules, 
forming an active dimer that triggers a signal inside the cell. 
 Th is dimerization mechanism was revealed in crystallographic 
structures of the receptor. Th e mechanism was fi rst discovered in a 
structure of the receptor for human growth factor, and later struc-
tures for the VEGF receptor showed a similar mechanism. Th ese 
receptors all have a similar modular structure. Th ere is a large 
domain on the outside of the cell that binds to the soluble factor, 
connected to a short segment that crosses the membrane and, on the 
inside, a domain that triggers the signal inside the cell. Th e whole 
thing is rather fl exible, so scientists oft en determine the structure in 
parts (. Fig.  14.2 ). If we allow ourselves a bit of latitude to mix and 
match pieces from several similar forms of the receptor, we can build 
up a rather complete picture of the whole thing.
 Th e portion on the inside of the cell is a protein kinase domain. 
Protein kinases are enzymes that add phosphate groups to protein 
chains. When two VEGF receptors are brought together, these 
kinases fi rst modify each other, making them more active, and then 
they start adding phosphates to other proteins in the signaling net-
work. Th is launches the signal inside the cell. 
 Th e VEGF receptor exemplifi es several of the functional fea-
tures needed for an eff ective signaling protein. First, they need to be 
able to turn on and off  quickly, so they can respond to the minute- 
by- minute needs of the cell. Th e association and separation of the 
two receptors provide these two states. At the same time, the signal 
we need is a strong signal that's not too subtle, but it still needs to be 
reversible. Phosphate groups are perfect for this. Th ey carry a strong 
negative charge, so they are easily recognizable by other proteins in 
the signaling network. But at the same time, they are easy to add 
and remove by employing specifi c kinases and phosphatases, so the 
signal may be turned on and off  quickly and effi  ciently. 
 Looking at the pathway diagram, we can see that many other 
modes of signaling are also used. Calcium is released in some cases, 
which binds to proteins and modulates their activity. Th e gas nitric 
oxide is produced in other legs of the network. It diff uses to nearby 
cells and causes its changes there. Like phosphorylation, these 
small, mobile molecules are easily recognizable, sending a strong 
signal that may be quickly quenched by gathering up or metaboliz-
ing the molecules when the signal is fi nished. 
 Activation by phosphorylation is essential in the next leg of 
the signaling network, where the signal is amplifi ed and delivered 
to appropriate places within the cell. Activation of the VEGF 
receptor has many eff ects in the cell. One is the stimulation of a 
variety of genes involved in cell growth. A cascade of kinases, one 
phosphorylating the next, amplifi es the signal, ultimately deliver-
ing into the nucleus. A variety of helper proteins tune the process. 
Atomic structures have revealed that many of these kinases have a 
Chapter 14 · Cellular Signaling Networks

102
14
distinctive two-lobed structure, trapping the ATP that donates the 
phosphate inside. Structures of the last kinase in this cascade, 
ERK2, show that the phosphorylation remodels the active site, 
making it over a thousand times more active in the reaction 
(. Fig.  14.3 ).
 Once the activated kinase gets into the nucleus, the message is 
transferred to regulatory proteins that are expert in controlling the 
genome. Th is is where things get really complex, since many diff er-
ent genes need to be activated, and it's not always the same genes in 
diff erent types of cells. When I was developing the story with the 
students, we decided to show C-fos and Jun. C-fos is phosphory-
lated by the signaling kinase, stimulating it to associate with Jun, 
which together bind to specifi c sites in the genome. It binds as part 
of an enhanceosome, which integrates signals from many diff erent 
transcription factors, together deciding if the gene will be expressed 
or not. 
 Transcription factors come in many sizes and shapes. Atomic 
structures have revealed that they typically are composed of two 
 
.   Fig. 14.2   VEGF receptor. Atomic 
structures of several portions of the 
receptor have been determined, 
including the portion that binds to 
VEGF (at the  top , with VEGF in  red ), a 
small domain near the membrane, the 
portion that crosses the membrane, and 
the kinase domains on the inside (PDB 
entries 2x1x, 3kvq, 2m59, 4ase)  
 
Chapter 14 · Cellular Signaling Networks

103
14
 
.  Fig. 14.3   ERK2 and DUSP5. ERK2 is a kinase that adds phosphate groups 
to transcription factors and is itself activated by phosphorylation. The two 
structures on the  left  show how addition of phosphates tightens up the active 
site. DUSP5 reverses the signal by removing phosphate groups. The image on 
the  right  is built from two atomic structures: a crystallographic structure of the 
catalytic domain and an NMR structure of a domain involved in substrate 
recognition (note that this domain looks a bit diﬀ erent in the illustration, since 
it includes all the hydrogen atoms). The catalytic domain includes sulfate 
groups bound in the active site. An acidic amino acid (shown here in  bright 
magenta ) performs the cleavage reaction (PDB entries 1erk, 2erk, 2g6z, 1hzm)       
parts: one part receives the signal and responds to it, and the other 
recognizes the appropriate sequence of DNA in the genome. Very 
oft en, as with the cell surface receptors, scientists determine struc-
tures of these two portions separately. In the case of C-fos and Jun, 
only the DNA-binding portions have been determined, and we have 
to infer the rest from the sequences of the proteins. A related com-
plex is found as part of the enhanceosome for the interferon-beta 
gene, as seen on the left -hand side of . Fig.  14.4 .
 Finally, a specifi c phosphatase enzyme, DUSP5, removes the 
phosphate from the last kinase in the signaling cascade, shutting the 
whole process down. It's also a fl exible protein and has been studied 
in parts. A crystallographic structure revealed a dimeric structure 
for the catalytic domain, which includes a small loop that hugs the 
phosphate group and perfectly positioned acid group that clips it 
off . Th e protein also includes another domain involved in recogni-
tion of the proteins that it dephosphorylates. A domain from a sim-
ilar protein is shown in . Fig.  14.3 , since the DUSP5 domain has 
not been studied yet. 
 I worked with the CREST team to bring this information 
together into a picture of the whole process. Th e students chased 
down UniProt entries and atomic structures, along with electron 
micrographs of vascular cells, fi lling out all the structural details. 
 
Chapter 14 · Cellular Signaling Networks

104
14
We decided to show two processes stimulated by VEGF: remodel-
ing of cellular adhesion sites and the actin cytoskeleton and expres-
sion of genes. . Fig.  14.5 includes two details from the painting. In 
spite of the complexity of this image, it only captures a few small 
aspects of VEGF signaling.
 Th ere is nothing quite like the study of signaling networks to 
convince us of the random process of evolution and its eff ectiveness 
as a design process. When looking at enzymes like lysozyme or 
trypsin, I see the cell as a fi nely honed machine, with every protein 
optimized over millennia for perfect function. When looking at cell 
signaling networks, however, I see the cell as an old jury-rigged 
automobile, barely held together with bailing wire and duct tape. I 
can just imagine generation aft er generation of changes, randomly 
adding a new kinase here or a backup phosphatase there, slowly 
tuning the fl ow of information. As a result, our cells are fi lled with 
thousands of receptors, kinases, phosphatases, and transcription 
factors and a host of other signaling proteins that together decide 
how to respond to our world minute by minute and year aft er year. 
 
.   Fig. 14.4    Enhanceosome. This illustration of an enhanceosome is cobbled 
together from several diﬀ erent structures, each determining a portion of the 
whole assembly. Missing pieces are shown schematically with  circles (PDB 
entries 1t2k, 2pi0, 2o6g, 2o61, 1qwt)  
 
 
Chapter 14 · Cellular Signaling Networks

105
14
 
.  Fig. 14.5   VEGF in action. VEGF ( 1 ) signaling starts at the cell membrane, where it brings together two VEGF 
receptors ( 2 ), activating the kinase domains inside the cell and activating several signaling pathways in the cell. C-src ( 3 ) 
is phosphorylated, causing it to open up and phosphorylate cadherins ( 4 ) in adherens junctions between cells. This 
releases alpha-catenin ( 5 ), which dimerizes and bundles actin ﬁ laments ( 6 ). In another pathway, receptor dimerization 
launches a cascade of activation reactions through PLC-gamma ( 7 ), PKC ( 8 ), Raf-1 ( 9 ), MEK ( 10 ), and ultimately ERK2 ( 11 ). 
Activated ERK2 ( 11 ) is transported into the nucleus, where it phosphorylates C-fos ( 12 ), causing it to form a heterodimer 
with Jun ( 13 ). This then acts as part of an enhancer to promote transcription of genes needed for blood vessel growth, 
binding to transcription mediator ( 14 ) and ultimately starting transcription by RNA polymerase ( 15 ). Finally, DUSP5 ( 16 ) 
terminates the process by removing the phosphates from ERK2  
 
Chapter 14 · Cellular Signaling Networks

107
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_15
 15  
 GPCRs Revealed  

108
15
          In the past decade or so, there has been a quiet revolution in the 
fi eld of cell signaling. An elusive target fi nally yielded its secrets: in 
2007, the fi rst atomic structure of a GPCR was determined. GPCRs 
(G-protein-coupled receptors) sit in the membranes of cells 
throughout our bodies and pass messages inside to G proteins. 
Th ey've been a particularly hard nut to crack because they are 
smallish proteins, most of which is buried in the membrane. Th e 
small bits that extend on either side of the membrane don't provide 
much leverage for forming crystals, so they eluded crystallography 
for many years. 
 Th e fi rst glimpses of GPCRs were obtaining using a similar pro-
tein, bacteriorhodopsin, made by bacteria that live in high- 
temperature brine pools. Bacteriorhodopsin forms beautiful arrays 
in the membrane of these bacteria, making it a perfect candidate for 
study by electron diff raction. Richard Henderson and Nigel Unwin 
worked for years to improve, step by step, the structures of bacteri-
orhodopsin. At fi rst, they could only see the major feature: a bundle 
of parallel alpha helices that cross the membrane. With more work, 
they fi nally revealed the atomic details, including the loops that 
connect the helices, chromophore bound inside that captures light, 
and even amino acids involved in pumping protons across the 
membrane powered by light energy (. Fig.  15.1 ).
 Th e big advance that opened the door to GPCR atomic structure 
came from protein engineering. Th e trick was to create a chimeric 
protein that substitutes one of the GPCR loops with a small, stable 
protein. Th is acts like a handle, helping to coax the slippery 
membrane- crossing portion of the molecule into crystals. 
Crystallographers oft en use antibodies in the same way. Antibodies 
stick to the target protein and help link them together into crystals. 
Indeed, parallel structures of the GPCR that recognized adrenaline 
were solved in both of these ways—as a chimera with lysozyme 
(. Fig.  15.2 ) and as a complex with an antibody.
 Many amazing structures followed these breakthrough 
 structures, building on the method. For instance, many additional 
structures of the adrenergic receptor have revealed the structural 
basis of signaling. One of the big mysteries has been the way that 
GPCRs pass their signal from the outside to the inside of the mem-
brane. By comparing an inactive conformation, frozen in place by 
an inhibitor that blocks signaling, with an active form bound to a G 
protein, we see that a few of the helices shift  and bend, propagating 
a signal through the protein and across the membrane. One helix in 
particular bends at its center, forming a convenient pocket for the 
binding of the G protein (. Fig.  15.3 ).
 Additional structures have revealed a diverse collection of 
GPCRs, receiving all manner of signals and passing them into the 
cell (. Fig.  15.4 ). Opsin receives the tiniest of signals—a single pho-
ton—ultimately launching a cascade of signals that tells the brain 
that it has seen light. Th e serotonin receptor is one of the cogs in the 
process of thought—it recognizes signals from the neurotransmit-
ter serotonin and passes the message into a nerve cell. CXCR4 
mediates signals passed between cells in the immune system and 
has the unfortunate distinction of being one of the proteins 
 
Chapter 15 · GPCRs Revealed

109
15
 recognized by infecting HIV virions. Glucagon receptor helps mon-
itor the level of glucose in the blood and tells cells to take appropri-
ate action.
   Atomic structures of these GPCRs reveal that they are all built 
around the same infrastructure of parallel alpha helices, but they 
are customized for their particular signaling task. Opsin needs a 
special chromophore to recognize its signal. Serotonin receptor has 
a tiny binding site that perfectly fi ts the neurotransmitter. CXCR4 
forms dimers that help to modulate its signaling. Glucagon receptor 
has a large domain that encloses the hormone. Each new structure 
brings a new surprise to extend the remarkable structural palette of 
this class of molecules. 
 So what is all the fuss about GPCRs—why is everyone so excited 
by these structures? It turns out that GPCRs are the targets of many 
important drugs, and atomic structures have revealed how these 
 
.  Fig. 15.1   The structure of bacteriorhodopsin was solved after many years of work, studying two-dimensional 
crystals of the protein using electron diﬀ raction. The crystal lattice is shown at the  top , with the proteins in  purple and 
the surrounding lipids in the membrane in  dark red . At the  bottom , a cartoon shows the characteristic bundle of seven 
alpha helices, with the light-capturing chromophore in  magenta (PDB entry 2brd)  
 
Chapter 15 · GPCRs Revealed

110
15
 
.  Fig. 15.3   GPCR signaling. The motions involved in GPCR signaling were revealed in two structures of the adrenergic 
receptor: an inactive conformation (in  blue at left ) bound to an inhibitor ( green ) and an active conformation ( in red at 
left ) in the process of activating a G protein (shown on the  right ). The major change is a large swinging motion of one of 
the helices that propagates the message from the adrenaline-binding site to the G protein (PDB entries 3sn6, 2rh1)  
 
.  Fig. 15.2   Adrenergic receptor. The adrenergic receptor was engineered to substitute one small loop with an entire 
molecule of lysozyme, which has many charged amino acids ( bright blue and red on the right ) on its surface. The portion 
of the receptor that spans the membrane (shown with the  gray bar ) is coated with carbon-rich amino acids (shown with 
 white spheres on the right ) (PDB entry 2rh1)  
 
 
 
Chapter 15 · GPCRs Revealed

111
15
work and opened new avenues for improving them. For instance, 
the most widely used psychoactive compound, caff eine, acts 
through a GPCR to stimulate cells and give us that special boost 
from our morning cup of coff ee (. Fig.  15.5 ). It blocks the action of 
the adenosine receptor by perfectly mimicking the normal activator 
of the receptor. Today, scientists are using these new structures of 
GPCRs to design new treatments. With more careful targeting of 
the adenosine receptor, we are fi nding ways to help people with 
Parkinson's disease. By blocking the histamine receptor, we can 
manage allergies. By targeting the opioid receptor, we can help 
manage pain. And the list goes on. Th ese central receptors are 
becoming ever more central to the way we manage our health. 
 
.  Fig. 15.4   GPCRs. GPCRs come in all shapes and sizes. Opsin binds to retinal and senses light in our retinas. 
Serotonin receptor senses the levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin in the brain. CXCR4 senses the level of 
chemokines and acts as a dimer. Glucagon receptor has an extra domain that closes around the top of the small peptide 
hormone glucagon (PDB entries 1f88, 4iar, 3odu, 1gcn, 4ers, 4l6r)  
 
.  Fig. 15.5   Adenosine receptor and caﬀ eine. Caﬀ eine blocks the adenosine receptor, a GPCR that plays a role in the 
level of metabolism. These two structures capture the adenosine receptor doing its normal job ( on the right ) and after it 
is blocked by caﬀ eine (PDB entries 2ydo, 3rfm)  
 
 
Chapter 15 · GPCRs Revealed

113
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_16
 16  
 Signaling with Hormones  

114
16
 Failure to communicate is rarely a good thing. At a personal level, it 
can ruin a relationship; at a national level, it can lead to war and 
strife. Th e same is true in our own bodies. Diseases like diabetes are 
the direct result of failure to communicate. Our bodies are very big, 
and our cells are very small, so they need to talk to one another to 
make sure that everyone is working towards the same goals. But 
when this communication breaks down, it causes deadly problems. 
 Cells throughout the body communicate by passing hormones 
to each other, which act like little molecular letters with a single 
encoded instruction. Th ese messages come in many shapes and 
sizes. Some, such as human growth hormone and glucagon, are 
small proteins. Others, such as the thyroid hormones, are small 
organic molecules, occasionally with odd atoms like iodine. Some 
are even smaller, such as the gas nitric oxide that is used for control-
ling the state of the circulatory system. 
 Insulin is probably the most familiar of these messages, due to 
its connection with the current rise of diabetes in the western world. 
When special cells in the pancreas sense that glucose levels are get-
ting high, maybe aft er a carb-heavy meal, they build insulin and 
drop it into the bloodstream. It travels to cells throughout the body, 
binding to dedicated receptors on cell surfaces. Th is triggers a 
change in the cells, and they shift  their duties to the uptake and stor-
age of glucose in the form of glycogen (. Fig.  16.1 ).
   Atomic structures have revealed many of the details of this pro-
cess, but there are still some mysteries. Insulin itself is a tiny protein, 
composed of two chains, termed the A-chain and B-chain. Crystal 
structures revealed that it forms a beautiful hexamer when zinc ions 
are around, which turn out to be important for storage of the 
 molecule before release (. Fig.  16.2 ). Many decades of structural 
research have also shown that the insulin fold is quite dynamic. In 
particular, one end of the B-chain adopts a range of diff erent confor-
mations that are important for the signaling.
 You might wonder how this tiny protein stays folded up into the 
proper shape. Most proteins are considerably larger and have more 
amino acids that can help to stabilize the whole protein. Many small 
proteins, such as insulin, are stabilized by the addition of disulfi de 
bridges. Th ese are bonds formed between two cysteine amino acids 
in the chain, and they form extra connections that help glue the 
whole structure. Insulin includes three of these linkages. Another 
puzzle is how it gets to this folded structure—it would be tricky for 
two tiny chains to come together and form exactly the right folded 
structure, with exactly the right disulfi de linkages. Th is puzzle was 
solved when the sequence of the insulin gene was determined. 
Insulin is actually built as a larger protein, termed proinsulin, which 
folds up into the appropriate structure. Th en, the extra bits are 
clipped off  to create the active protein (. Fig.  16.3 ).
 Th e insulin receptor is a huge protein complex with many mov-
ing parts (. Fig.  16.4 ). Since it is so fl exible, structural biologists 
have chopped it into functional pieces and studied each one sepa-
rately. Th e insulin-binding portion, which is displayed on the outer 
surface of the cell, is composed of two L-shaped domains that gather 
insulin. Th is propagates a signal to the smaller kinase domains on 
 
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones

115
16
 
.  Fig. 16.1   Insulin in action. This illustration shows two consequences of insulin. Insulin ( 1 ) binds to its receptor ( 2 ) on 
the surface of the cell, activating a cascade of signaling molecules ( 3 ) inside the cell. These activate glycogen-building 
enzymes ( 4 ) and also stimulate the transport of vesicles with glucose transporters ( 5 ) to the cell surface. Together, they 
take glucose ( white dots ) into the cell from the blood and store it in large glycogen ( 6 ) molecules  
 
.  Fig. 16.2   Insulin. Insulin forms a stable hexamer ( left ) when it is stored in the pancreas, which disassembles into 
active monomers ( right ) when it is delivered to the blood. Each insulin monomer is composed of two chains (colored 
 blue and green ) that are linked together with several disulﬁ de linkages ( yellow ) (PDB entry 1trz)  
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones
 
 

116
16
the interior of the cell membrane, bringing them together so that 
they can activate each other. Th ese kinases then launch the signal 
inside the cell by adding phosphate groups to signaling proteins.
 Th e kinase domain in the insulin receptor is itself activated by 
adding phosphoryl groups. Presumably when insulin binds, it brings 
the two kinases closer, so they can activate each other. Two structures 
have captured this activation (. Fig.  16.5 ). In the inactive conforma-
tion, a loop in the protein, which contains three key tyrosine amino 
acids, nestles in the active site of the protein, blocking it. When these 
tyrosines are phosphorylated, the whole loop pops free, exposing the 
active site and allowing it to add phosphoryl groups to tyrosines on 
other proteins. As seen in these structures, kinases are typically very 
mobile enzymes that open and close around their targets. Th ey need 
to do this because the reaction needs to be sheltered from water. Th ey 
close around a molecule of ATP and their target protein chain and 
then transfer a phosphate from the ATP to the protein. If there's too 
much water around, it could circumvent the process, breaking off  the 
phosphate before it can be transferred to the desired location.
 As you might imagine, hormones are of great interest to the 
medical community. Slight problems with the signaling network 
can cause severe problems with health, and insulin is no exception. 
Diabetes is caused, in part, when insulin signaling is corrupted, 
leading to chronic high levels of glucose in the blood. Over time, 
this leads to life-threatening complications. For instance, glucose 
and molecules that are made from it are mildly reactive, and they 
slowly attach themselves to sensitive amino acids in proteins, form-
ing a weak connection. Over time, however, these attached sugars 
 
.  Fig. 16.3   Proinsulin and insulin. Insulin is synthesized in cells as a longer protein, called proinsulin, which is then 
clipped to form the active protein (PDB entries 2kqp, 4ins)       
 
 
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones

117
16
 
.  Fig. 16.4   Insulin receptor. These illustrations of the insulin receptor are constructed from several atomic structures 
of the individual parts. The inactive form is shown on the  left , with the insulin-binding portion at the  top and the kinase 
domains at the  bottom . When insulin ( red ) binds, it is thought to bring the kinase domains together so that they can 
activate each other (PDB entries 3loh, 2mfr, 1irk, 3w14)  
 
.  Fig. 16.5   Kinase domain of the insulin receptor. The kinase domains are activated when three tyrosines ( green ) are 
phosphorylated ( yellow and  red in the  right image ). This opens up the active site, allowing ATP ( magenta ) to bind. The 
active structure on the right also includes a small piece of a signaling protein ( red ), with a tyrosine ready to be 
phosphorylated by the ATP (PDB entries 1irk, 1ir3)  
 
 
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones

118
16
transform into strongly attached analogues that corrupt the func-
tion of the protein. Th e immune system is not happy about these 
problems and launches an infl ammatory response. If this gets bad 
enough, it can lead to the terrible complications of diabetes. Doctors 
oft en look at a patient's hemoglobin to assess this damage, by 
analyzing the amount of sugar that has been attached to it. An 
atomic structure has captured one of the glycated hemoglobins 
(. Fig.  16.6 ).
 Remarkably, researchers discovered a century ago that we may 
reverse these problems by simply replacing the missing hormone. 
Human insulin was very hard to come by at the time (it needed to 
be purifi ed from human cadavers), but they found that the very 
similar insulin from livestock worked just as well. Today, human 
insulin is constructed using engineered bacteria or yeast that build 
large quantities of recombinant insulin identical to the one we nor-
mally make. Using this insulin, diabetic patients can manage their 
own blood glucose levels. But because insulin is a protein, it must be 
injected, since it would be quickly digested if taken orally. 
 Researchers are currently taking insulin treatment to the next 
step, building on the results from structural biology. A large quan-
tity of insulin is released aft er each meal, telling the body to store 
the sugar that is teeming through the blood. But low levels of insu-
lin are also secreted throughout the day and night, working with the 
complementary hormone glucagon to ensure that there is always 
just the right amount of sugar available to power cells throughout 
the body. When insulin is injected, it has an immediate eff ect, but 
this wears off  within a few hours. Soon aft er the discovery of insulin 
treatment, researchers began searching for ways to mimic the more 
long-term, basal eff ects of insulin. Th is is where the atomic struc-
tures came to the rescue. 
 
.  Fig. 16.6   Glycated hemoglobin. This structure of hemoglobin has a sugar attached to a lysine amino acid deep 
inside the protein (PDB entry 3b75)  
 
 
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones

119
16
 Th e trick to creating a long-lasting insulin is the same trick we 
use to make other long-lasting drugs: we create a form that slowly 
dissolves, releasing the active hormone slowly over time. Th e fi rst 
approach was very traditional: they mixed insulin with the fi sh 
 protein protamine and a little zinc, creating a complex composed of 
insulin hexamers in a gluey aggregate that falls apart slowly when 
injected. Th e atomic structures allowed researchers to fi nd more 
sophisticated ways that employ only the protein itself. One success-
ful approach is to connect long hydrocarbon chains to the insulin 
chains (. Fig.  16.7 ). Th ese chains reach out and interact with neigh-
boring insulin hexamers, promoting the formation of aggregates 
that dissolve more slowly. Th ey also interact with the fatty acid car-
rying protein albumin in the blood, further sequestering them and 
slowing release. In this way, these "designer" insulins continue to 
have an eff ect over many hours.
 Researchers have also developed designer insulins that act more 
quickly than regular insulin, for use immediately aft er meals. Th e 
trick with these is just the opposite of slow-acting insulins: we need 
 
.  Fig. 16.7   Designer insulins. Insulins with special properties have been engineered. Slow-acting insulin Degludec 
( top ) adds a hydrocarbon ( pink ) that links neighboring hexamers, and fast-acting insulin Aspart ( bottom ) changes one 
amino acid to a charged aspartate ( red ) that destabilizes the hexamer (PDB entries 4ajx, 4gbc)       
 
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones

120
16
to make the insulin hexamer fall apart quickly. One approach is to 
change one amino acid from a neutral amino acid to a charged 
aspartate. Th is destabilizes the interface between the insulin mono-
mers by several hundredfold, but doesn't aff ect the hormone's bind-
ing to the insulin receptor. A combination of these designer insulins, 
some fast acting and some slow acting, now allows patients to join 
in their body's dialogue about glucose levels, deciding when glucose 
needs to be stored and when it is needed for energy. 
 
Chapter 16 · Signaling with Hormones

121
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_17
 17  
 Single-Molecule 
Chemistry: Enzyme Action 
and the Transition State  

122
17
 Life is control. Th e trick to staying alive is to control your environ-
ment. Living cells need to take the resources available around them 
and change them into the molecules that they need. To do this, cells 
build thousands of types of specialized proteins called  enzymes . 
Each one performs a specifi c chemical reaction needed for living. 
Some break molecules into pieces; others connect molecules 
together. Some change the shape of molecules, and others change 
the chemical properties of molecules. Some capture energy in their 
reactions; others require energy to perform a particularly diffi  cult 
reaction. All of these diff erent enzymes work together to perform 
the many chemical tasks needed in the cell. 
 Th e growth of medical science has made enzymes a familiar 
part of our own life. Most drugs are small molecules that bind to 
particular enzymes and block their action. For instance, if you take 
an aspirin, you are blocking the enzyme cyclooxygenase, an enzyme 
involved in the construction of molecules that deliver pain signals. 
Antibiotics like penicillin attack essential enzymes in pathogenic 
bacteria, blocking their action and crippling the bacteria (. Fig.  17.1 ). 
Th ese drugs are highly specifi c tools that we can use to target specifi c 
enzymes involved in health and disease.
 Much of the research of structural biology has been focused on 
exploring the atomic secrets of enzymes. Enzymes are particularly 
amenable to study, since they are oft en stable, soluble proteins and 
may be coaxed with clever experiments to perform their atom-sized 
jobs while we are watching, so there is a vast amount of information 
 
.   Fig. 17.1    Penicillin and bacterial enzymes. The enzyme shown here, 
d-alanyl-d-alanine peptidase, performs an essential reaction for the 
construction of the protective cell wall surrounding many types of bacteria. 
Penicillin, shown here in  red , blocks the machinery of this enzyme, ultimately 
killing the cell (PDB entry 1pwc)       
 
 
Chapter 17 · Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action and the Transition State

123
17
available about how they are constructed and how they perform 
their reactions. 
 In 1965, D.C. Phillips solved the structure of lysozyme, giving us 
the fi rst look at how enzymes work. Th e structure revealed a form- 
fi tting active site, perfectly shaped to bind to its target, a bacterial 
carbohydrate chain. Th is structure confi rmed the basic theory of 
enzyme action: enzymes stabilize the transition state of an enzyme 
reaction. A chemical reaction typically begins with a stable "sub-
strate" and ends up with a stable "product"—in the case of  lysozyme, 
the substrate is a carbohydrate chain and the product is a cleaved 
chain. In the course of this reaction, however, the molecules must 
pass through a number of less stable intermediate states, termed 
"transition states." Th e enzyme's major job is to streamline the path 
through these transition states, guiding the reaction effi  ciently from 
substrates to products. 
 The structure of lysozyme showed many ways that enzymes 
do this. A key concept is that enzymes make sure that everything 
is in the right place at the right time. For the lysozyme cleavage 
reaction, this includes several things. It has a form-fitting groove 
that grips the intended substrate, making sure that the enzyme 
only acts where it is supposed to act. But the groove isn't a com-
fortable fit. It grabs the two ends of the chain and torques the 
center, causing one of the sugar rings to distort into a less-stable 
conformation that is more amenable to the reaction (. Fig.  17.2 ). 
Then, specific amino acids around the target bond deliver a 
water molecule and orchestrate the chemical steps of the cleav-
age reaction.
 
.  Fig. 17.2   Lysozyme mechanism. This structure captures lysozyme in the 
middle of its reaction. The structure includes a small fragment of the normal 
bacterial cell wall, with two sugars ( in yellow and green ) and a short peptide 
chain (extending oﬀ  to the  left ). The sugar in the front ( in green ) is in the typical 
chair shape, which is quite stable. The sugar in the back ( in yellow ) is being 
attacked by an acidic group in the enzyme ( in red ) and has been distorted into 
an unstable shape that is needed to form the transition state of the reaction 
(PDB entry 148l)  
 
Chapter 17 · Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action and the Transition State

124
17
 One of the challenges of studying enzymes is that they perform 
their reactions so quickly, so it's hard to observe their structures in 
action. Researchers have gotten around this problem by throwing a 
monkey wrench in the system, which halts the enzyme at one step 
and allows us to see what's happening. Th ey construct molecules 
that are similar to the normal substrate of the enzyme but with a few 
atoms changed into particularly nonreactive analogues. Th e trick is 
to fi nd molecules that are similar enough that the function and 
shape of the enzyme is similar to the natural one, but diff erent 
enough that they don't just get caught up in the reaction. 
 In this way, researchers have been able to observe the many 
steps in a chemical reaction. For instance, several analogue mol-
ecules were used to study the enzymatic reaction of HGPRT, an 
enzyme involved in the synthesis of nucleotides. It normally takes 
a phosphate-activated sugar molecule and attaches a guanine 
base to it, releasing GMP for use in building DNA. Researchers 
got a look at how the two starting molecules are bound to the 
enzyme by using a nonreactive molecule similar to guanine and a 
look at the fi nal product by using a molecule with a nonreactive 
sugar (. Fig.  17.3 ).
 Molecules that mimic the transition state are useful for studying 
the action of enzymes, but they're even more useful as drugs. For 
instance, several HIV drugs mimic the transition state of an essen-
tial enzyme made by the virus: HIV protease. Th e reaction involves 
a water molecule that is activated by two acidic amino acids in the 
enzyme. Th is is added to the protein chain that is cut, forming a 
transition state that has the water attached. Th is then breaks apart 
to fi nish the reaction. Th e drugs mimic this process by creating a 
molecule that looks like the protein chain with the water attached 
(. Fig.  17.4 ). As these drugs have been optimized for better clinical 
properties, the protein portion has been modifi ed and looks quite 
diff erent than typical protein chains. But the attached analogue of 
 
.  Fig. 17.3   HGPRT active site. Three snapshots of HGPRT capture the enzyme with its starting substrates ( left ), after 
guanine has been added to the sugar to form GMP, releasing pyrophosphate ( center ), and a form with just the GMP 
product bound ( right ). Notice that a loop in the enzyme ( green ) has opened up in the ﬁ nal structure, but the release 
of GMP is still the slowest part of the whole process (PDB entries 1d6n, 1bzy, 1hmp)  
 
 
Chapter 17 · Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action and the Transition State

125
17
water is found in all of these drugs, where it interacts with the two 
catalytic amino acids.
 Th is type of rational drug design is one of the most direct 
approaches to using structural information and taking control of our 
own molecules. Th e goal is to fi nd a specifi c small molecule to block 
the action of a biological molecule. Th e approach has been successful 
in numerous systems, creating therapeutic drugs for everything 
from cancer to blood pressure. Th is is oft en a meandering process, 
making changes one by one to improve the drug. For instance, the 
 
.  Fig. 17.4   HIV protease inhibitors. Three structures show some of the logic 
for design of drugs that block HIV protease. The enzyme is shown at the top, 
with a small peptide bound in the active site. Two acidic groups (turquoise) 
catalyze the cleavage reaction at the center of the peptide, activating a 
carbonyl group ( red ). Below this, three molecules are shown. At the  top is the 
same peptide, with the carbonyl oxygen shown with a  star . One of the early 
inhibitors was a symmetrical analogue of the transition state that has the 
oxygen changed to a noncleavable hydroxyl. Later developments lead to 
eﬀ ective drugs like saquinavir, which are smaller and bind much more tightly 
to the enzyme (PDB entries 1kj4, 9hvp, 1hxb)  
 
Chapter 17 · Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action and the Transition State

126
17
antileukemia drug Gleevec was designed in several rational steps 
(. Fig.  17.5 ). Th e target of the drug is a protein tyrosine kinase called 
ABL, which has a mutated form in the leukemia cells. Th e drug 
design eff ort began with a small compound that binds to a related 
kinase, PKC. Addition of another ring enhanced this compound's 
activity against cells. Addition of an amide group at the other end 
made the compound active against ABL. Th en, addition of a single 
methyl group surprisingly abolished the activity against PKC, mak-
ing the drug more specifi c for the desired target. Finally, an addi-
tional group was hung off  of one end to make the whole thing more 
soluble, so it would be useful as an oral drug.
 Scientists have also used this understanding of enzymes and their 
transition states in a clever way: to create new enzymes using the 
immune system. Th e immune system has the ability to build anti-
bodies that bind to nearly any type of molecule. So scientists have 
used these types of transition state analog molecules to immunize 
animals, coaxing their immune system to create antibodies that bind 
tightly to the molecules. Since this is one defi nition of an enzyme—a 
protein that binds to reaction transition states—these "abzymes" 
oft en show enzymatic activity. Th e one shown in . Fig.  17.6 was cre-
ated using a transition state molecule that mimics the breakdown of 
cocaine, and consequently, we have a brand-new enzyme that will 
detoxify the drug in the bloodstream.  
 
.   Fig. 17.5   Rational design of Gleevec. The antileukemia drug Gleevec was 
designed based on the structure of a protein tyrosine kinase (shown on the 
 left , with the drug in  green ). A series of reﬁ nements were made during the 
design process, ultimately yielding a drug that is speciﬁ c for the targeted 
protein and has good properties for use as a drug (PDB entry 1iep)       
 
 
Chapter 17 · Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action and the Transition State

127
17
 
.  Fig. 17.6   Cocaine catalytic antibody. Three structures capture a catalytic antibody at diﬀ erent steps in its reaction: 
binding to cocaine and a water molecule, the transition state where the water has been attached to cocaine, and the 
cleaved cocaine products. Two amino acids that catalyze the reaction are shown in turquoise (PDB entries 2ajv, 2ajx, 
2ajy)  
 
Chapter 17 · Single-Molecule Chemistry: Enzyme Action and the Transition State

129
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_18
 18  
 Seven Wonders 
of the World of Enzymes  

130
18
 Th e enzymes in our cells perform a bewildering variety of tasks. 
Some of these tasks, such as the cleavage reaction performed by 
lysozyme, are simple enough that a standard protein, composed of 
the normal 20 amino acids, will suffi  ce. In other cases, however, the 
reaction may be too diffi  cult, or too sensitive to the surrounding 
environment, or too dangerous to the cell to be performed by a 
typical enzyme, and cells have evolved many wondrous specializa-
tions in their enzymes to perform these tasks as needed. In this 
chapter, I have selected seven aspects of enzyme action that I fi nd 
most amazing. But you only need to look to Nature to fi nd many 
additional wonders. 
 One: Perfect Enzymes 
 Some enzymes are amazingly fast, so fast in fact that they perform 
their reactions faster than molecules can get to them. Th e diff usion 
of molecules through the watery cell environment is fast, but only 
so fast. Th is sets an interesting upper limit on the evolution of 
enzyme function—there's no need to improve the function further, 
because the enzyme is already perfect enough in the context that it 
performs its job. 
 Scientists have found several examples of these "perfect" 
enzymes. Most perform very simple tasks that require the capture 
of a single molecule, followed by a small chemical change. Carbonic 
anhydrase is a perfect example. It is important for solubilizing car-
bon dioxide in the blood. Th roughout your body, it combines car-
bon dioxide and water to form carbonic acid and bicarbonate, 
which are both very soluble. Th en, in the lungs, it oversees the 
reverse process and releases the carbon dioxide when we breathe 
out. Th is reaction can occur naturally without the enzyme, but the 
enzyme allows more control, speeding up the reaction in the desired 
place by a million times. 
 But the evolution of enzymes hasn't stopped there. A study of 
the enzyme superoxide dismutase found that it performs its reac-
tion even faster than might be expected. Th e structure of superox-
ide dismutase revealed that this enzyme gives its target an extra 
boost. It has a strongly charged patch around the active site, which 
forms a funnel that draws the oppositely charged radical molecule 
into the right place (. Fig.  18.1 ).
 Two: Induced Fit 
 As more and more structures of enzymes have been determined, it 
has become increasingly apparent that they are dynamic machines. 
Some enzymes are virtually rigid, with a cleft  on one side that binds 
to molecules and catalyzes the reaction. Other enzymes, however, 
change their shape to accommodate their substrates, in a process 
that was dubbed "induced fi t" by the scientists studying the process. 
Th is motion may be a small rearrangement of amino acids to grip 
the substrate molecule more tightly, or in some cases, the entire 
 
Chapter 18 · Seven Wonders of the World of Enzymes

131
18
 
.  Fig. 18.1   Substrate steering by superoxide dismutase. Superoxide 
dismutase speeds up an already fast reaction by drawing its substrate 
superoxide into its active site. In the upper illustration, a metal ion in the active 
site is shown in  green . The lower illustration shows the electrostatic potential 
around the enzyme, showing a large positively charged region around the 
active site ( in blue ). This attracts the negatively charged superoxide radical 
(PDB entry 2sod)       
enzyme will open up and close around its substrate, creating a 
form-fi tting pocket that completely surrounds it. 
 Th e structure of hexokinase, the enzyme that performs the 
fi rst step in the breakdown of glucose, was the fi rst enzyme struc-
ture where induced fi t was observed. It was captured in two states: 
an open state and a closed state bound to glucose. In the years 
since then, many structures have shown that this is a common 
approach used by many kinases, such as phosphoglycerate kinase 
(. Fig.  18.2 ), and other enzymes that use ATP in their reactions. 
Th ese enzymes all capture ATP and a target molecule and transfer 
a phosphate from the ATP to the target. Th e transition state of this 
reaction is sensitive to water, which would cause the phosphate to 
be released without being added to the target. So, these kinase 
enzymes surround their reaction, excluding any interfering water 
molecules.
 
Two: Induced Fit

132
18
 Three: Form-Fitting Active Sites 
 One of the great advantages of an enzyme active site that surrounds 
a set of reactants is that it allows very tight control over the shape of 
products that are formed. Th is allows enzymes to be highly specifi c, 
performing one reaction quickly and effi  ciently, while leaving all 
the other molecules in the cell alone. 
 When enzymes were fi rst being studied, researchers were puz-
zled by their stereospecifi city. For instance, they found that the 
enzyme aconitase was able to distinguish between two seemingly 
identical acid groups in citric acid, always acting on only one of the 
two. Th eoretical work on this enzyme lead to the three-point 
hypothesis for stereochemistry—the citrate molecule would land on 
the surface of the enzyme, and it would recognize three diff erent 
groups, orienting the molecule properly. Th e structure revealed that 
this is a simplifi cation, and the enzyme actually surrounds the entire 
molecule, recognizing it from top and bottom and right and left . 
 Looking at the many structures of enzymes that have been deter-
mined, we fi nd that this is a general feature: enzymes recognize their 
substrates by touch. Th e active site has exactly the right shape and 
chemical characteristics to fi t the substrate, or more specifi cally, the 
transition state. My favorite example of this form- fi tting chemistry 
is the enzyme lanosterol synthase. Th is enzyme performs an amaz-
ing series of cyclization reactions, converting a long snaky molecule 
into a chunky cholesterol-like molecule (. Fig.  18.3 ).
 Four: Allostery 
 Cells are fi lled with enzymes, all performing their individual jobs 
quickly and effi  ciently. Some of these enzymes perform their reac-
tions reversibly, performing a particular reaction and the opposite 
 
.   Fig. 18.2   Kinase-induced ﬁ t. Phosphoglycerate kinase has two large 
domains connected by a ﬂ exible hinge. The two structures show how it closes 
around its substrates when it catalyzes its reaction (PDB entries 2xe6, 2wzb)       
 
 
Chapter 18 · Seven Wonders of the World of Enzymes

133
18
reaction equally well. Of course, if all of the enzymes in the cell did 
this, the result would be chaos, and nothing would get done. To solve 
this problem, cells include many enzymes that perform one reaction 
preferentially and may be turned on and off  according to need. 
 One of the key ways that enzymes are regulated is through a 
change in shape, termed "allostery." Th e enzyme has two (or more) 
states that are active and inactive. Th e switch between the two states 
is controlled by another site on the enzyme, which binds to a regula-
tory molecule. Atomic structures have revealed the nature of these 
allosteric motions, capturing many enzymes in both their active 
and inactive states (. Fig.  18.4 ).
 
.  Fig. 18.3   Lanosterol synthase active site. Two structures capture the enzyme lanosterol synthase before and after 
its reaction. A cascade of cyclization reactions converts an oxidosqualene molecule ( left ) into a lanosterol molecule 
( right ) (PDB entries 1ump, 1w6k)  
 
.  Fig. 18.4    Allostery in pyruvate kinase. Pyruvate kinase, a molecule 
involved in energy production, ﬂ exes into an active state ( right ) when it binds 
to molecules that signal the need for energy (PDB entries 1e0u, 1a3w)       
 
 
 Four: Allostery

134
18
 Enzymes may also be regulated by making physical changes that 
turn them on or off  (. Fig.  18.5 ). In some cases, these changes are 
temporary and may be changed according to need. For instance, 
phosphate groups are oft en added to turn kinases on and off  in sig-
naling processes. Th ese modifi cations, since the phosphate carries a 
strong negative charge, make a substantial change to the properties 
of the enzyme. In other cases, the modifi cation is more drastic and 
permanent. For instance, many digestive enzymes are built as pro-
tein chains that are longer than necessary. Th e extra bits inactivate 
the enzyme and make it safe to build and deliver to the digestive 
tract. Once in the proper place, the extra bits are clipped off  and the 
active enzyme launches into its job of destruction.
 Five: Substrate Channeling 
 Some chemical reactions require the formation of toxic intermedi-
ates, or highly reactive intermediates that would quickly be 
destroyed in the watery environment of the cell. As we saw before, 
 
.   Fig. 18.5   Regulation by modiﬁ cation. The oncogene protein Src ( upper ) 
closes up into an inactive shape when a key tyrosine is phosphorylated, and 
the digestive enzyme pepsin ( lower ) is activated by removing a piece from its 
inactive precursor pepsinogen (PDB entries 2src, 3psg, 5pep)  
 
 
Chapter 18 · Seven Wonders of the World of Enzymes

135
18
some enzymes completely surround the molecules as the reaction 
is catalyzed. In even more complex tasks, several enzymes are 
brought together, and they pass intermediates directly one to the 
next, making sure that the intermediate doesn't stray off  and get 
into trouble. 
 Tryptophan synthase is one of the classic examples. It is a 
complex composed of two enzymes that perform two sequential 
steps in the construction of the amino acid tryptophan. Th e com-
plex has a narrow tunnel that connects the two enzymes, deliv-
ering the toxic intermediate indole directly from one active site 
to the next (. Fig.  18.6 ). A huge enzyme complex involved in the 
breakdown of sugar takes an entirely diff erent approach. It uses a 
fl exible arm to transfer its substrates from one place to the next 
(. Fig.  18.7 ).
    Researchers have speculated for years about even higher levels of 
organization. For instance, we could imagine forming a huge com-
plex with all of the enzymes of glycolysis together, to streamline the 
breakdown of sugar. Th e evidence for these "glycosomes" is compel-
ling but not conclusive. But other cases have strong evidence, for 
instance, a supercomplex of the respiratory electron transport pro-
teins (7 see Fig.   11.4 )  
 
.  Fig. 18.6   Substrate tunneling. A cross section of tryptophan synthase shows the tunnel ( red stars ) that delivers 
indole from one active site to the next. The two enzymes are shown in  blue and  green , with substrate molecules in  red 
spheres  (PDB entry 1beu)   
 
 Five: Substrate Channeling

136
18
 
.  Fig. 18.7   Substrate transfer. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex includes many parts connected by ﬂ exible linkers. 
At the center is a cubic core that organizes the whole complex. Small domains have a special lipoic acid group added 
( magenta ) that carries the substrate molecules from enzyme to enzyme around the outside. Only a few of these 
enzymes are shown in the illustration—in reality, the entire complex is surrounded by them (PDB entries 1eaa, 1lac, 
1w85, 1ebd)  
 Six: Chemical Cofactors 
 Most enzymes are made of protein, so they have a limited set of 
chemical tools that they can bring to bear during a chemical reac-
tion. Of the twenty natural amino acids, only a few are reactive, and 
cells play a lot of tricks to make them work. For instance, enzymes 
will oft en increase the reactivity of a key amino acid by pairing it 
 
 
Chapter 18 · Seven Wonders of the World of Enzymes

137
18
with a charged amino acid, or one that can tweak its chemical state 
appropriately. Th e classic example of this is the serine proteases. 
Th ey use a serine amino acid in the reaction, which attacks the pro-
tein chains that are cut by the enzyme. A chain of a histidine and an 
aspartate activate this amino acid, making it much easier to transfer 
a hydrogen to the molecule being attacked (7 see Figs.   8.3 and   8.4  ). 
 Some reactions, on the other hand, are too diffi  cult for the 20 
natural amino acids and need special chemical tools. Looking to 
nature, these tools abound. Many of them are small organic mole-
cules evolved to perform a specifi c task. For instance, ATP is perfect 
for carrying phosphates, and NAD is perfect for carrying electrons. 
Molecules built from the B vitamins specialize in carrying carbon 
atoms and other small groups, and transferring them to other mol-
ecules. SAM performs a similar task for sulfur. 
 In other cases, even more chemical creativity is needed, and 
specifi c metal ions are employed. In some cases, the enzyme just 
needs something to bind strongly to a charged group. In other cases, 
the strong charges are needed to force a particularly diffi  cult reac-
tion. For instance, the enzyme that fi xes nitrogen, converting gas-
eous nitrogen in biologically useful ammonia, performs this 
incredibly diffi  cult reaction using a complex cluster of exotic metals 
(. Fig.  18.8 ).
 
.  Fig. 18.8   Metal cofactors in nitrogenase. In the enzyme nitrogenase, 
several complex metal complexes provide electrons for the diﬃ  cult reaction 
of splitting nitrogen to form ammonia. Iron is shown in  brown , sulfur in  yellow , 
and a single atom of molybdenum is in  red . The small molecule in  white and 
 red helps to stabilize the unusual molybdenum atom (PDB entry 1n2c)       
 
Six: Chemical Cofactors

138
18
 Seven: Ribozymes 
 Proteins aren't the only molecules that can catalyze chemical reac-
tions in cells—they're just the most creative. Scientists have also 
discovered that RNA is used to build catalytic molecules, termed 
ribozymes. Th e most famous one, of course, is the ribosome, which 
uses an adenine base to catalyze the addition of amino acids to a 
growing protein chain (7 see Fig.   7.6 ). Other common examples are 
RNA molecules that can cleave other RNA molecules, or them-
selves. Th ese RNA molecules fold into complex shapes reminiscent 
of the globular structures of enzymes. Th ey're particularly good for 
these tasks because they have built-in machinery for recognizing 
the target RNA sequence, since they can use typical base pairing to 
bind to it. Th ey usually employ metal ions to perform the actual 
reaction. 
 A tiny ribozyme has been the object of much of the study, serv-
ing as a convenient model for the action of ribozymes. It is termed 
the "Hammerhead" ribozyme, since chemical diagrams look like a 
hammer, and it was fi rst found in plant pathogens, where they are 
involved in self-splicing of the RNA genome, and similar ones have 
been found in many organisms. Researchers whittled away at this 
natural ribosome, ultimately fi nding a "minimal" version of it that 
performs the self-cleavage reaction with only two short RNA 
strands (. Fig.  18.9 ). 
 
.   Fig. 18.9   Ribozyme. Two structures of a minimal hammerhead ribozyme, 
composed of two short RNA strands, capture the molecule before and after the 
cleavage reaction. A small active site is formed on one strand ( magenta ) that 
helps to catalyze the reaction (PDB entry 488d)       
 
 
Chapter 18 · Seven Wonders of the World of Enzymes

139
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_19
 19  
 Building Bodies  

140
19
 Molecular biology and cell biology study the same subjects—living 
cells—but they approach it from opposite angles. Molecular biolo-
gists take a bottom-up approach. Th ey look very closely at the 
 components of cells and then try to fi t all these individual puzzle 
pieces together into a coherent image. Cell biologists, on the other 
hand, oft en take a top-down approach. Th ey observe whole cells 
and then try to ferret out what the individual molecules are doing. 
Th ese two approaches are gradually merging, as molecular biolo-
gists work with larger and larger assemblies, and cell biologists 
develop ever more powerful methods of microscopy to probe fi ner 
and fi ner details. Together, they are building a detailed image of 
how cells, and our whole bodies, work. 
 Th e power of this complementary approach is particularly 
apparent when we look at the infrastructure of the cell. Th ink of the 
complex infrastructure that supports our familiar lives. We have 
houses that protect us and allow us to compartmentalize our many 
tasks. We also have a complex infrastructure of delivery that gets us 
the resources we need and takes away the waste. Finally, there is a 
rich infrastructure of communication, bringing us information 
about our day-to-day life at home and work, and information about 
the world as a whole. Cells, and entire organisms, rely on a similar 
infrastructure to hold everything in place and orchestrate the many 
processes of living. 
 Th e infrastructure of the cell has been remarkably diffi  cult to 
study at the atomic level. Th ere are several reasons for this. Th e 
physical infrastructure is large, heterogenous, and fl exible, so it 
doesn't conform well to the strictures of the available methods for 
structure determination. Also, much of this infrastructure is built 
around membranes made of lipids, which are slippery at best. So 
structural biologists have had to play all sorts of clever games with 
these molecules to get a close look at them, working hand in hand 
with cell biologists to see how they all fi t together. 
 Take, for instance, the cytoskeleton. Th ere is a network of fi la-
ments inside each cell that defi nes the cell shape and manages trans-
port of resources from place to place. Micrographs of cells have 
revealed that these fi laments come primarily in three sizes: narrow 
actin fi laments, medium-sized intermediate fi laments, and wide 
microtubules, all arranged in a tangled web. Structural biologists 
have found ways to get detailed structures of actin fi laments and 
microtubules, through a combination of atomic methods and elec-
tron microscopy, but researchers are still piecing together the details 
of intermediate fi laments like vimentin (. Fig.  19.1 ). Th ey are com-
posed of protein chains that form long alpha helices, which then 
coil around a neighbor to form a sturdy protein rod. Th ese then 
stack side-by-side and end-to-end to form the fi lament. Atomic 
structures have been determined for portions of the helical coils, 
and then results from electron microscopy are used to model how 
these coils fi t together.
 A diverse collection of molecules are involved with modeling 
and remodeling the fi laments in the cytoskeleton. Th ese include 
molecules that connect one fi lament to its neighbors and molecules 
that guide the assembly of fi laments during cell growth, movement, 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

141
19
and division. One of the remarkable machines is a protein that sits 
at the end of actin fi laments and delivers new subunits to the end, 
guiding growth of the fi lament. It is a fl exible protein with several 
functional parts connected by fl exible linkers. It has been studied at 
the atomic level, but in parts, looking at the actin-binding and regu-
latory domains separately and then cobbling everything together 
for a complete view (. Fig.  19.2 ).
 Th e outer wall of the cell and the walls around all its internal 
rooms are largely composed of membranes made of lipids. Lipid 
membranes are wonderfully dynamic structures, with the individ-
ual molecules in constant motion, fl owing past one another but still 
forming a waterproof barrier. Th e membrane structure is mostly 
what we see in classic cellular electron microscopy, because the 
membranes pick up the heavy metal stains used to enhance the con-
trast. Membranes have been studied by a variety of biophysical 
methods, quantifying how the thickness and fl uidity changes based 
on the composition of diff erent types of lipids. An atomic view, 
however, has been hard to pin down, given the dynamic nature of 
the membrane. Computer simulations, however, have given us a 
hint of how they might look (. Fig.  19.3 ).
 Of course, a wall with no doors or windows is only good as a 
prison, so the cell needs ways to get materials and information 
across its membranes. It does this with proteins that span the mem-
brane, forming pores and channels and signal transducers. Th ese 
have been remarkably diffi  cult to study, because of the environment 
they have evolved to occupy. Th ese proteins typically have a belt of 
carbon-rich amino acids around their middle, which interacts 
beautifully with the carbon-rich interior of the membrane 
(. Fig.  19.4 ). Th is causes problems for study, however, because it 
makes them fi nicky and insoluble when they are purifi ed. Structural 
biologists have used many methods to coax them into crystals, 
including engineered forms with convenient handles, coating them 
with antibodies, coating them with detergent, and anything else they 
 
.  Fig. 19.1   Cytoskeletal ﬁ laments. Cytoskeletal ﬁ laments actin ( top ), vimentin ( center ), and microtubule ( bottom ) 
(PDB entries 1m8q, 1gk7, 3uf1, 3trt, 1gk4, 1tub)  
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

142
19
can think of (. Fig.  19.5 ). Using these techniques, atomic structures 
for hundreds of these molecules are currently available.
 Th ese structures have revealed many of the secrets of transport 
across membranes. One of the most remarkable stories is the potas-
sium channel, which posed a molecular mystery. In experiments, 
the channel was shown to pass potassium ions freely across the 
membrane, but it somehow managed to block the fl ow of sodium 
ions, which are smaller than potassium. So obviously, it is not sim-
ply a size fi lter. Th e atomic structure revealed that water plays a key 
role (. Fig.  19.6 ). Th e ions are normally associated with a charac-
teristic shell of water ions when free in solution. Th e channel has 
evolved to strip these water ions away, selecting only the shape of 
the waters that are found around a potassium ion and not the diff er-
ent shape of waters around a sodium ion.
 Membranes are dynamic barriers, and the cell takes advantage of 
this by building small, closed vesicles for delivery of cargo from site 
to site. Th ese vesicles are created by pinching off  a section of 
 
.   Fig. 19.2   Formin. Formin ( yellow ) assembles an actin ﬁ lament ( blue ) by 
adding actin molecules one at a time with the help of proﬁ lin ( green ). The 
regulatory subunit of formin ( at the top ) binds to GTP-binding proteins such as 
CDC42 ( pink ). The ﬂ exible linkers of formin were not seen in the crystallographic 
structures and are shown here with  dots  (PDB entries 1y64, 2w4u, 3chw, 3eg5)  
 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

143
19
 
.  Fig. 19.3    Lipid bilayer. This model of a lipid bilayer was generated using 
computer simulation in the laboratory of Klaus Schulten. The two layers of lipids 
are seen in the  center , with their carbon-rich tails ( gray ) pointing inwards and 
charged groups ( red, yellow and blue ) exposed to water molecules on each side  
 
.  Fig. 19.4   Membrane proteins. Membrane-spanning proteins are encircled with a belt of carbon-rich amino acids 
that interact with the carbon-rich interior of the membrane. In this illustration, charged atoms are bright  red  and  blue  
and are mostly outside the membrane, and carbon-rich regions are in  white . The three proteins are a photosynthetic 
reaction center ( left ), an ion pump ( center ), and P-glycoprotein ( right ), a protein that pumps toxic molecules out of our 
cells (PDB entries 1prc, 1su4, 3g61)  
 membrane to form a closed sphere. Electron micrographs of the 
inner surfaces of cells revealed little dome-shaped protein assem-
blies with a characteristic geodesic texture, which were caught in the 
act of building these vesicles to pull nutrients into the cell. A three 
armed molecule called clathrin forms these assemblies and provides 
the force to bud the vesicle. A recent cryo-EM structure has  captured 
 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

144
19
a very small clathrin coat in almost atomic detail, showing how the 
arms interdigitate and embrace the vesicle inside (. Fig.  19.7 ).
 Cells in our bodies also need infrastructure to hold them together 
as building blocks of a larger body. At a local level, cells have many 
ways of connecting their neighbors. For instance, cells are tied 
together and communicate with each other through gap junctions, 
formed of a closely packed arrangement of hundreds or thousands 
of connexon proteins. Th ese connexons form a narrow pore that 
connects the cytoplasm of the two cells, allowing small molecules 
like ions and nucleotides to pass back and forth (. Fig.  19.8 ). 
Researchers have found that this fl ow of molecules stops when the 
cell is damaged, however. Damage oft en leads to release of calcium 
from internal storehouses, and these calcium ions bind to the con-
nexons. It has been thought for many years that this causes a confor-
mational change in the connexon, closing up the pore. A recent 
structure, however, shows that the calcium-bound pore is wide 
open, similar to the normal state of the pore. Based on this structure, 
researchers now think that all of these calcium ions may form an 
 
.   Fig. 19.5   Structure determination of adrenergic receptor. This structure of 
the adrenergic receptor shows some of the tricks that researchers need to use 
to study membrane-bound proteins. Lipid molecules like cholesterol and 
palmitate (turquoise) were used to stabilize the membrane-spanning portion, 
and the protein chain was engineered as a chimera with lysozyme ( green ) to 
add more water-soluble bulk to the protein (PDB entry 2rh1)  
 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

145
19
electrostatic barrier that inhibits the fl ow of positive ions like potas-
sium through the pore.
 Our bodies also need a larger infrastructure to tie everything 
together. Th is is built of many very large molecules that together 
form networks that support tissues and organs. Collagen is one of 
the major structural components of these networks. It is composed 
 
.  Fig. 19.6   Potassium channel. This structure of a potassium channel reveals 
the basis for its speciﬁ city. A potassium ion ( blue ) surrounded by water 
molecules ( red spheres ) is waiting in a vestibule at the  bottom . The channel 
forces it to release the waters but replaces them with a perfect arrangement of 
oxygen atoms from the protein chain as the ions pass single ﬁ le through the 
channel. On the other side of the membrane (at the  top here), the ions pick up 
a new shell of waters (PDB entry 1k4c)       
 
.  Fig. 19.7   Clathrin. Cryoelectron microscopy was used to capture the 
structure of a particularly small and regular assembly of clathrin (PDB entry 1xi4) 
 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

146
19
of three protein strands that form a characteristic triple helix. Early 
work on collagen proposed this structure based on the unusual 
amino acid sequence, which has a triplet repeat that includes a gly-
cine and a proline. Models of this helix proposed that the glycine is 
needed to fi t in a tight space between strands in the helix, and the 
prolines are needed to form periodic kinks that keep the whole 
structure tightly together. Th e structure is far too large to be studied 
by crystallography or NMR spectroscopy, but structural biologists 
have solved this problem by chopping it into manageable pieces. 
Several atomic structures of these pieces are available in the PDB, 
revealing the atomic details of the triple helix (. Fig.  19.9 ).
  For many years, I have been trying to integrate this diverse infor-
mation from structural biology and from cell biology to build up 
a coherent picture of the cell and its internal molecular processes 
(. Fig.  19.10 ). I am continually amazed, as I create these pictures, by 
the complexity of the cellular infrastructure. When I research a new 
topic, I always look carefully at each molecule. If it is in a particular 
place, I then look for information on molecules that hold it there. And 
 
.   Fig. 19.8   Gap junction. Connexons are arranged in an approximately 
hexagonal lattice to form gap junctions. The cell membranes are shown 
schematically in  gray , and calcium ions are shown in  red  (PDB entry 5er7)  
 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

147
19
 
.  Fig. 19.9    Collagen. Atomic structures have been determined for small pieces of the collagen triple helix, as shown 
at the  top . The characteristic glycines are shown with spheres and starred near the  left side , and the many ﬁ ve-membered 
rings are prolines or hydroxyprolines that kink the chain and direct it back towards the  center  of the triple helix 
(PDB entry 1cag)  
 
.  Fig. 19.10   Painting of a nerve synapse. This painting shows a cross section through a glutamatergic nerve synapse. 
Remarkably, all of this complex infrastructure is needed to ensure that small neurotransmitter molecules ( yellow dots ) 
are released at the proper time, delivering a signal to receptors on the surface of the lower cell. The infrastructure 
includes vesicles that hold neurotransmitters, proteins that store the vesicles and deliver them to the surface of the cell 
at the appropriate time, and proteins that manage the fusion of the vesicles with the cell surface to release the 
neurotransmitters. There is also an infrastructure for holding the two cells together and arranging the receptors in the 
proper place. On top of this, there is a complex regulatory infrastructure that modulates the activity of the synapse, 
creating complex behaviors such as memory  
 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

148
19
then, on top of that, I search for information on the regulatory infra-
structure that makes sure it's there at the right time. Science is revealing 
how truly complex and integrated all of this infrastructure is, ensuring 
that we're at top performance, from molecules to cells to entire bodies. 
 
Chapter 19 · Building Bodies

149
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_20
 20  
 Coloring the Biological 
World  

150
20
  One enzyme has arguably caused more human strife than any other, 
the enzyme tyrosinase. Th e one shown here is from bacteria 
(. Fig.  20.1 ), but the one in our cells is similar but is bound to 
 membranes. It performs an interesting reaction: it oxidizes the 
amino acid tyrosine, which then forms huge aggregates called mela-
nin which strongly absorb light, looking dark brown or black. Cells 
in our skin have special compartments that make this melanin to 
help protect us from the dangerous eff ects of sunlight. Th erein lies 
the problem. Human populations around the world have evolved 
cells that make diff erent amounts and types of melanin, driven 
largely by their historical exposure to sunlight. Th is has yielded a 
beautiful diversity in skin color, ranging from clear white to darkest 
black and everything in between. Similar molecules give hair its 
shades of blonde, red, brown, and black. Unfortunately, human 
society has never been good with diff erences, and this highly visible 
consequence of a single enzyme has helped to fuel many of our cur-
rent societal challenges.
 We're not at all unique in this variation of color, or in the strife 
it can cause. Th e biological world is fi lled with colors, which have 
evolved to provide a variety of selective advantages. Th ese include 
colors that help hide and colors meant specifi cally to be seen. Some 
colors are a consequence of the selective absorption of other colors, 
and some colors are a consequence of light actually created by the 
cell. 
 Th e most common color in our biological world is green—the 
ever-present green of plants. Ironically, this green light is left over 
light—light that the plant can't use. Th e chlorophyll used by plant 
cells to capture the energy in light absorbs red and blue light 
strongly, leaving the greenish hues. Th e color is caused by the large, 
fl at ring of atoms, termed a porphyrin, which has many atoms that 
share electrons and can absorb the energy from visible light 
(. Fig.  20.1 ). Th ese chlorophyll molecules are held inside special 
 
.  Fig. 20.1   Tyrosinase. These two structures capture tyrosinase before and after it performs its reaction of converting 
tyrosine to L-DOPA (PDB entries 4p6r, 4p6s)  
 
 
Chapter 20 · Coloring the Biological World

151
20
 proteins that hold them in huge arrays, ready to soak up as much 
light as possible (7 see Figs.   12.1 and   12.2  ). 
 To assist chlorophyll, plants also build molecules that absorb 
other colors. For instance, beta-carotene absorbs blue and green 
light, and thus looks orange. Looking at the photosynthetic machin-
ery, these molecules are arrayed with chlorophyll in many plants. 
Plants are also masters of color generation for decoration. Th ey 
build all manner of colorful molecules to decorate their fl owers. Th e 
evolutionary goal for these, amazingly, is to look pretty, at least 
pretty to the insects that pollinate them. 
 Other colors in our own bodies are a consequence of the metal 
ions we need for life. Th e bright red of blood is the most familiar. It 
is caused by the iron ion that is held within a heme (. Fig.  20.2 ). As 
with chlorophyll, the color is a consequence of the delocalized elec-
trons in the porphyrin ring. Trillions of these molecules fi ll every 
red blood cell, soaking up oxygen and blue and green and yellow 
light. Similarly, proteins such as cytochromes, as indicated by their 
names, have the side eff ect of producing color. Other organisms use 
diff erent metal ions in these tasks, so their blood may be diff erent 
colors. For instance, hemocyanin from insects uses a copper ion 
and is blue green.
 Colored molecules are also ideal for sensing light. Cells in our 
retinas use a particularly useful molecule, called, quite logically, 
retinal. Like porphyrins, it has atoms with delocalized electrons that 
absorb visible light. But when they do, they induce a change in the 
shape of the molecule. Th is is perfect for sensing light. Th e retinal is 
 
.  Fig. 20.2   Porphyrins. Porphyrins provide much of the color in our natural world. They are composed of a ﬂ at ring of 
atoms that capture a metal ion in the center. The colors depend on the speciﬁ c arrangement of atoms in the ring and 
the type of metal ion at the center (from PDB entries 1s5l, 2hhb)       
 
Chapter 20 · Coloring the Biological World

152
20
embedded in a protein, opsin, and the shape change triggers a 
change in the protein, which amplifi es the signal by passing it on to 
many downstream signaling proteins (. Fig.  20.3 ).
 Amazing color eff ects are generated by specialized organisms 
using fl uorescence. Fluorescent molecules absorb light and then 
reradiate it with a diff erent color. Oft en they absorb ultraviolet light 
and then emit colored light. You're probably familiar with this with 
the neon bright paints that fl uoresce under black lights. Fluorescent 
proteins, such as GFP (green fl uorescent protein) have become a 
mainstay of research in cell biology. Th ese small proteins, originally 
discovered in jellyfi sh and corals, have now been engineered in 
every color of the rainbow (. Fig.  20.4 ). Th ey are used to tag pro-
teins in cells, allowing researchers to track them as they move from 
place to place. Atomic structures have revealed how GFP performs 
its job. It has two amino acids locked away inside the protein, which 
react with themselves when the protein folds up. Th is forms a new 
chromophore that has the perfect characteristics for absorbing UV 
light and reradiated colors. Other organisms have proteins that 
make similar chromophores, but by tuning the characteristics of the 
surrounding amino acids, the color is changed from green to red or 
 
.  Fig. 20.3   Rhodopsin. Retinal ( magenta ) changes shape when it absorbs a photon, triggering the protein opsin 
( white ) to launch a signal to the brain (PDB entries 1u19, 3pqr)       
 
 
Chapter 20 · Coloring the Biological World

153
20
to yellow. Scientists have jumped on this possibility and further 
modifi ed the molecules so that we now have a full rainbow of fl uo-
rescent proteins to use in as tags in scientifi c experiments.
  For instance, researchers commonly attach GFP (green fl uores-
cent protein) to other proteins, like the proteins that form the 
 cytoskeleton, to create a probe that lights up the proteins inside liv-
ing cells. Th e structures of the proteins are an essential step in the 
process, to ensure that the place that GFP is connected will not cor-
rupt the function of the protein being studied. In an exciting twist 
on this, scientists have attached a calcium-binding protein to GFP, 
creating a glowing calcium sensor that may be used to track the 
level of calcium in living cells (. Fig.  20.5 ).
   But I save the best for last: some organisms have evolved ways to 
make their own light. Th e most familiar, of course, are fi refl ies. Th ey 
use a protein called luciferase to emit cool greenish light (. Fig.  20.6 ). 
Th e creation of light is an energetic process, so it needs to be pow-
ered. Atomic structures have revealed that the chromophore forms a 
highly strained shape when it interacts with oxygen, consuming 
ATP in the process. When this oxygenated molecule breaks,  releasing 
carbon dioxide, the energy released is enough to release a photon of 
light.    
 
.  Fig. 20.4   Fluorescent proteins. The chromophore of GFP ( left ) forms spontaneously when a new bond ( dotted  
 turquoise  here) forms between three successive amino acids in the chain. Biotechnology researchers have made small 
changes to the chromophore and the amino acids that surround it to create ﬂ uorescent proteins with all the colors of 
the rainbow ( right ) (PDB entries 1ema, 3m24, 2q57, 4ar7, 2y0g, 1huy, 2h5o, 2h5q)  
 
Chapter 20 · Coloring the Biological World

154
20
 
.  Fig. 20.5   Fluorescent calcium sensor. The engineered calcium sensor GCaMP2 includes a circularly permuted green 
ﬂ uorescent protein ( green ), attached to calmodulin ( magenta , with calcium ions in  yellow ) and a short chain from 
myosin ( blue ). The calmodulin portion changes shape when it binds to calcium, changing the ﬂ uorescence of the GFP 
portion (PDB entry 3evr)  
 
.  Fig. 20.6   Luciferase. The chromophore luciferin is shown in the center, surrounded by the luciferase protein 
(PDB entry 2d1s)       
 
 
 
Chapter 20 · Coloring the Biological World

155
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_21
 21  
 Amazing Antibodies  

156
21
 As I write this chapter, antibodies are much on our minds due to 
controversies about vaccination. Th is is a pity, since vaccines are 
one of the true wonders of medical science. By challenging our 
 bodies with a weakened form of a deadly pathogen, we can prime 
our defenses, making us resistant to infection throughout the rest of 
our life. Because of this, we no longer fear polio, or smallpox, or 
measles, or a host of other deadly viruses (. Fig.  21.1 ). For most of 
us, this gives us much peace of mind for ourselves and our children. 
Unfortunately, a feared connection with autism, widely popularized 
but with no scientifi c support, has frightened some people enough 
that they forego this protection, putting themselves at greater risk 
and, if the numbers grow too large, the entire population along with 
them.
 Th e key to antibodies is their selectivity. Each type of antibody 
binds to a diff erent target, such as a virus or a bacterial protein. 
When researchers started solving structures of proteins, antibodies 
were on their short list of most wanted structures, to reveal the basis 
of this incredible recognition ability. Genetic studies had revealed 
that the amino acid sequence of diff erent antibodies are mostly 
much the same, except that there are six small regions that show 
many changes, termed "hypervariable loops." Th e atomic structure 
 
.  Fig. 21.1   Poliovirus neutralized by antibodies. This cryoEM structure includes the viral capsid ( red and orange ) and 
the virus-binding portion of the antibodies ( blue ). Since the resolution of the experiment was not suﬃ  cient to resolve 
individual atoms, the structure includes only a single atom for each amino acid, which are represented here with a 
larger sphere than is normally used for atomic images (PDB entry 3j3p)       
 
 
Chapter 21 · Amazing Antibodies

157
21
revealed that the antibody chains fold into a well-ordered structure 
with two parallel beta sheets, and all of these hypervariable regions 
are arrayed at one end, there they form loops that together sur-
round the binding site. 
 Flexibility is also a key component of antibody action. Antibodies 
typically have two or more binding sites in a particular complex, 
allowing them to make multiple connections on the surface of a 
pathogenic organism. To make this even more effi  cient, the connec-
tors holding these binding sites are fl exible, allowing them to 
accommodate to diff erent types of surfaces. Th is, however, makes 
antibodies diffi  cult to study. Th e classic Y-shaped antibody has been 
observed by electron microscopy, but most atomic structures have 
been solved using fragments of antibodies, which are more-or-less 
rigid. An atomic structure had to wait until a lucky researcher found 
a crystal form that trapped the fl exible antibody in one particular 
frozen pose (. Fig.  21.2 ).
   We now have structures of hundreds of antibodies, bound to 
many diff erent types of targets. Th ese structures reveal the secrets of 
antibody recognition. By genetically mixing and matching seg-
ments of these hypervariable loops, they are able to recognize 
almost anything. Structures in the PDB include antibodies that bind 
to small molecules like cocaine or steroids, to soluble and 
membrane- bound proteins, to RNA, to DNA, and to entire viruses. 
For instance, structures have been determined for three diff erent 
antibodies that all recognize the same protein but in diff erent ways 
(. Fig.  21.3 ). Atomic structures have also captured the process of 
antibody affi  nity maturation, where antibodies are tuned by the 
immune system to improve their binding ability (. Fig.  21.4 ).
 
.  Fig. 21.2   Antibody structures. Many atomic structures of antibodies have been solved by breaking the molecule 
into stable fragments. Two early structures are shown here at the  left : an antigen-binding Fab fragment that binds to the 
small molecule phosphocholine and the Fc fragment that is similar (or "constant") in many antibodies. A handful of 
crystallographic structures of entire antibodies have also been determined, such as the one shown here on the  right , 
capturing the ﬂ exible antibody in one particular pose (PDB entries 1mcp, 1fc1, 1igt)       
 
Chapter 21 · Amazing Antibodies

158
21
 
.  Fig. 21.3   Anti-lysozyme antibodies. These three antibodies all recognize lysozyme (shown with a  rainbow-colored 
cartoon ), but they bind to diﬀ erent sides of the molecule. Notice that the binding sites are quite diﬀ erent on the 
antibodies: the one on the  left  has a cluster of positively charged amino acids ( in bright blue ), the one in the  center  has 
more negatively charged amino acids ( in bright red ), and the one on the  right  is largely uncharged ( white and pastel 
colors ) (PDB entries 1fdl, 1yqv, 3hfm)  
 
.  Fig. 21.4   Antibody maturation. The immune system tunes antibodies by making small changes to improve binding 
to the target. The antibody on the  left  recognizes lysozyme ( green ) and is from the initial response to the protein and 
binds fairly weakly. The antibody on the  right  has been optimized by aﬃ  nity maturation and binds a thousand times 
more tightly. Sites of mutation ( red ) are scattered through the antibody chains, together making a better ﬁ t to lysozyme 
(PDB entries 1mlc, 1p2c)  
 
 
 
Chapter 21 · Amazing Antibodies

159
21
 Th e binding of antibodies is so tight and specifi c that antibodies 
have become indispensable scientifi c tools (. Fig.  21.5 ). Antibodies 
are widely used in biological testing, for instance, in tests for preg-
nancy or HIV infection. Researchers have attached fl uorescent mol-
ecules to antibodies and then used them to track molecules in living 
cells. Th ey are also widely used by crystallographers. Antibodies are 
oft en bound to particularly recalcitrant proteins, providing a sturdy 
handle to help crystallization.
 Recently, unusual antibodies have been discovered in camels 
and sharks and have revolutionized the practical applications of 
antibodies (. Fig.  21.6 ). Th ese have binding sites that are composed 
of a single chain, unlike the two chains needed to form a typical 
antibody binding site, and have been dubbed "nanobodies." Th is is a 
boon for research, because these nanobodies are easier to engineer 
and synthesize, and they are starting to fi ll some of the jobs previ-
ously used by traditional antibody molecules from rabbits or goats.
 Th e evolution of antibodies and the immune system by our dis-
tant ancestors protected them from perils in their environment, but 
this quickly led to an evolutionary arms race with our attackers. 
Viruses, bacteria, and parasites have all evolved methods to fi ght 
back, evading our defenses, and the immune system has evolved in 
turn to fi ght these. We can see an example of this happening today 
with one of our greatest perils: HIV. 
 HIV is a particularly insidious virus that infects the cells of the 
immune system, slowly and relentlessly disabling it. One of the rea-
sons that HIV is so eff ective is that, from the outside, it looks like a 
tiny human cell. Th is makes it diffi  cult for antibodies to recognize 
 
.  Fig. 21.5    Antibodies in science. Antibodies are used in many medical and scientiﬁ c applications. The structure on 
the  left  shows two small fragments of antibodies bound to human chorionic gonadotropin. These types of antibodies are 
used in pregnancy tests, since the hormone is prevalent during pregnancy. Other tests, such as the commonly used test 
for HIV infection, use an antibody to recognize the unique shape of another antibody—the one that is built by the 
immune system to ﬁ ght the virus (shown in the  center ). Antibodies are also used by structural scientists to assist in the 
crystallization of diﬃ  cult systems, such as the small ion channel shown in  green  on the  right  (PDB entries 1qfw, 1iai, 1k4c)  
 
Chapter 21 · Amazing Antibodies

160
21
that something is wrong. Viruses only need one thing on their sur-
faces: a machine to recognize susceptible cells and force their way 
inside. Everything else can be hidden away inside, invisible to the 
immune system. In HIV, this machine is called envelope glycopro-
tein, and its trick for survival is revealed in its name. It is covered 
with sugar chains that are the same as the sugar chains on our cell 
surface proteins. Th ese form a protective coat of camoufl age that 
hides the virus from the immune system. 
 However, the immune system is extremely resourceful, and 
shuffl  ing and hypermutation can create many, many diff erent types 
of antibodies in short order. Several types of antibodies have been 
observed in patients that are eff ective for neutralizing HIV. Th ey use 
some amazing tricks, including long fi ngers to reach through the 
sugar coat and probe the underlying HIV protein and the linking of 
several antibodies in tandem to create a complex that binds to the 
sugars themselves (. Fig.  21.7 ). Unfortunately, it typically takes a 
long time for these antibodies to be created by the immune system, 
and the virus has already taken a strong hold by the time they are 
being produced. One hope for anti-HIV vaccines would be to try to 
elicit these broadly neutralizing antibodies earlier in the infection.
 Vaccines have changed our lives, but some targets have remained 
elusive. Infl uenza is a classic example. It changes so rapidly that our 
complement of antibodies quickly goes out of date and is ineff ective 
against the newest strains or even old strains that haven't been seen 
 
.  Fig. 21.6   Antibody structures. As shown on the  left , most antibodies are composed of two heavy chains ( in blue ) 
and two light chains ( in green ). The smaller antibodies made by camels and sharks are composed of two copies of a 
single chain, as shown on the  right  (PDB entry 1mel)  
 
 
Chapter 21 · Amazing Antibodies

161
21
for many, many years. Th is is why we need a new infl uenza shot 
each year—the medical establishment makes an educated guess 
about which strains will pose a danger and protects us with a vac-
cine against it. And then our antibodies get to work, patrolling 
through our bodies and protecting us from invaders. 
 
.  Fig. 21.7   HIV envelope glycoprotein and antibodies. The Fab portions of two broadly neutralizing antibodies ( blue ) 
show unusual ways to recognize HIV envelope glycoprotein ( yellow and red ), which is protected by a coat of 
carbohydrates ( orange ). The one on the  left  has a long ﬁ nger that pushes through the carbohydrates to reach the 
protein, and the one on the  right  is domain swapped, producing two tandem binding sites that recognize the 
carbohydrates directly (PDB entries 1nco, 1op5)  
 
Chapter 21 · Amazing Antibodies

163
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_22
 22  
 Attack and Defense: 
Weapons of the Immune 
System  

164
22
 I don't think of myself as being particularly germophobic. I wash 
my hands regularly but not obsessively, and I keep the kitchen and 
bathroom reasonably disinfected. Sometimes, however, I can 
understand our society's growing obsession with germs. Based on 
what I hear on the news, a pandemic oft en seems just around the 
corner. 
 Make no mistake: we are constantly under attack. Bacteria are 
everywhere, they reproduce at blinding speed, and they're continu-
ally trying to gain a toehold in our food and on our exposed sur-
faces. Viruses are easily transmitted from person to person, and 
they quickly set up shop in our cells and start churning out more 
viruses. In recent history, we have become aware of this ever- present 
danger, and careful attention to sanitation has helped fi ght back the 
hoards of attackers. But many still get through, and it is left  to our 
own bodies to resist. 
 Fortunately we have a very full arsenal of defenses against these 
attacks. Th ese foes have been present in our environment since the 
dawn of mankind and have imposed a heavy selection pressure on 
human populations. As a result, the human race has evolved many 
ways of fi ghting them. Together these make up our immune system, 
which stands guard in our defense. Many of the tools of the immune 
system are hardwired to attack our most common foes. Th ese com-
prise the innate immune system, which protects us from old ene-
mies. Th is works hand in hand with the adaptive immune system, 
centered around antibodies, which is more fl exible and takes care of 
our newer enemies. 
 Th e innate immune system includes many weapons that attack 
invaders at their weak points. For instance, the fi rst one that was 
discovered was lysozyme, famously discovered by accident by 
Alexander Fleming. It is secreted in bodily fl uids, for instance, it is 
the most prevalent protein in tears. Its job is to seek out bacterial 
cells and cut up their cell walls. When it was discovered, it was 
hoped that it would be the "magic bullet" to kill bacteria and fi ght 
infectious disease. But since it is a protein, it is diffi  cult to adminis-
ter as a drug, and a true medical magic bullet had to wait until the 
discovery of antibiotics like penicillin. However, the characteristics 
of lysozyme have made it one of the most popular molecular lab rats 
of structural science: it is small and stable, which allows it to survive 
the harsh conditions outside the cell and stay dangerously active 
while performing its job or while being studied by scientists. Many 
important discoveries have been made using lysozyme as the test 
subject. Th ese include the fi rst atomic structure of an enzyme 
(7 see Fig.   17.2 ) and detailed work on protein folding and stability 
by study of hundreds of atomic structures of lysozyme mutants. 
 Other proteins take a similar approach, attacking weak points of 
the invading organisms. For instance, bacteria are surrounded by a 
typical lipid membrane, which must remain continuous and closed 
to support the proper environment inside the cell. We make a vari-
ety of antimicrobial peptides that attack this membrane. Atomic 
structures of dermcidin have revealed how it creates a hole through 
the membrane, allowing ions to enter and exit freely (. Fig.  22.1 ). 
Th e structures have also revealed a major puzzle posed by these 
 
Chapter 22 · Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System

165
22
 
.  Fig. 22.1   Antibacterial proteins. Siderocalin gathers up the siderophores, 
such as enterobactin, that bacteria use to gather iron, starving them of this 
essential nutrient. Dermcidin punches holes through the bacterial cell 
membrane. The picture on the  right  has two subunits removed to show the 
tunnel through the center, which is lined with charged amino acids ( bright red 
and blue ) (PDB entries 3cmp, 2ymk)  
 defensive proteins: how do they keep from doing the same thing to 
our own membranes? Th e structures reveal that they are coated 
with positively charged amino acids, which recognize the negatively 
charged phospholipids that are common in bacterial membranes. 
Our own cells have more lipids that are neutral and thus are not as 
susceptible to attack.
   Iron ions are another weak point in bacteria that is targeted by 
the innate immune system. Iron is a precious commodity in our 
bodies. We have a lot of iron, but we keep it locked up inside pro-
teins like hemoglobin. Th is leaves very little free iron for infecting 
bacteria to use for their own metalloproteins. One type of bacteria, 
the one that causes Lyme disease, has evolved a particularly draco-
nian solution to this challenge: all of the proteins in its genome that 
 
Chapter 22 · Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System

166
22
normally require iron have been replaced by proteins that use other 
metals or no metals at all. Most other bacteria, however, need to 
fi nd a way to gather up these rare iron ions for their own use. 
 Th is has lead to an evolutionary battle between our cells and 
bacterial invaders. Bacteria build unusual small molecules, termed 
siderophores, with a big appetite for iron. Th ey release these sidero-
phores into the environment and then gather them up aft er they 
have captured individual iron atoms (. Fig.  22.1 ). In response, our 
ancestors evolved proteins that grab siderophores, termed sidero-
calins, and sequester them before the bacteria get a chance. In 
response to this, some bacteria have then evolved "stealth" sidero-
phores that can gather iron but are not recognized by siderocalins. 
And so the battle continues...and scientists are following every step 
with atomic structures. 
 Our immune system also builds a more elaborate system for 
attacking bacteria, termed the complement system. When antibod-
ies (such as star-shaped immunoglobulin M) fi nd a bacterium, the 
complement C1 protein binds to them and launches a cascade of 
response that leads to the creation of a membrane attack complex 
that pierces the bacterial cell wall. Th ese proteins are large and fl ex-
ible and thus have been diffi  cult to study. Atomic structures have 
been determined for many of the functional parts of the molecules, 
such as the antibody-recognizing arms of C1q, but electron micros-
copy has proven to be the best way to study the entire system in 
action (. Fig.  22.2 ).
 Viruses are much more slippery and require a diff erent set of 
weapons for defense. Th ese look for the unusual aspects of viruses 
and attack them there. For instance, many viruses have genomes 
composed of double-stranded RNA, which is rarely found in cells. 
So, if a cell notices that there is double-stranded RNA in the cyto-
plasm, it knows that something must be wrong. Plant and animal 
cells have a sophisticated system for recognizing and silencing 
RNA (. Fig.  22.3 ). Th e system starts with a protein that breaks the 
RNA into small, recognizable pieces, called dicer. Th ese little 
 
.   Fig. 22.2    Complement C1. An electron micrograph reconstruction of 
complement C1 and an antibody is shown on the  left , and the scientists' 
interpretation, based on atomic structures of individual domains of 
the proteins, is shown on the  right , with complement C1q in  blue , other 
C1 proteins in  magenta , and immunoglobulin M in  green (Figures were 
generated on the EMDataBank website for entry EMDB2507)  
 
 
Chapter 22 · Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System

167
22
 
.  Fig. 22.3   Small interfering RNA. Atomic structures have shown that the large active site of the protein dicer is 
exactly the right size to cut double-stranded RNA into perfectly sized pieces, using several metal ions ( left ). These small 
interfering RNA molecules are then bound by argonaute and used to recognize and destroy RNA that matches the 
sequence ( center ). Some viruses circumvent this protection by creating proteins that sequester siRNA before it can ﬁ nd 
the viral RNA ( right ) (PDB entries 2f8s, 2ﬄ  , 4w5o, 1r9f)  
pieces, called small interfering RNA (siRNA), then activate RNA-
digesting proteins called argonaute. It strips away one strand of the 
siRNA and then looks for other RNA that matches the remaining 
strand. In our cells, this system is mainly used to silence specifi c 
messenger RNA molecules when they are no longer needed to 
build the proteins they encode. But in plant and insect cells, and 
perhaps also in ours, siRNA also provides an eff ective way to rec-
ognize and destroy any viral RNA that is being made. Of course, 
viruses evolve quickly, and they have discovered ways to circum-
vent this system, by building proteins that hide the siRNA before it 
can activate argonaute.
 Bacteria also face the same problem of fi ghting off  viruses and 
have evolved an elegant system that remembers viruses that have 
attacked the population in the past (. Fig.  22.4 ). When they are 
attacked, they harvest small pieces of viral DNA and package it in 
their own genome in a distinctive region called "clustered regularly 
interspaced short palindromic repeats" or CRISPR for short. A col-
lection of Cas proteins then uses this library of stored information 
to monitor any nucleic acids that are in the cell, keeping vigilant 
watch for a repeated attack by this same virus. Th e Cas system 
includes proteins that process RNA made from the CRISPR library 
and other proteins that display it and launch into action when they 
fi nd any DNA that matches it. Th ese proteins are showing great 
promise for medicine, since they are powerful tools to breaking 
DNA at very specifi c sequences inside a living cell. Recently, these 
have been used to engineer a potential cure for HIV infection, by 
introducing a specifi c Cas protein into infected cells that will cut up 
any HIV DNA.
 
Chapter 22 · Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System

168
22
 Medical science has allowed us to play other direct roles in our 
own immune response. As described in the previous chapter, vac-
cines allow us to prime our adaptive immune system for future 
attack, by mobilizing the appropriate cells to build protective anti-
bodies. When we take antihistamines, we're slowing down another 
arm of the immune system: infl ammation. When a trouble zone is 
sensed, histamine and other molecules tell the body to make the 
area more accessible to immune cells in the blood, so they can 
assess the problem and fi gure out how to solve it. Th is system occa-
sionally gets a bit too aggressive and can cause dangerous problems, 
so we take antihistamines or anti-infl ammatories to calm every-
thing down. Atomic structures have been invaluable for character-
izing the many molecules involved in the infl ammatory response 
and designing new drugs that allow us to keep it in control 
(. Fig.  22.5 ). I certainly benefi t from this research every spring, as I 
try to convince my own immune system that dust and pollen don't 
really pose a life-threatening danger. 
 
.  Fig. 22.4   CRISPR and Cas. Cas9 uses CRISPR RNA ( red ) to recognize viral DNA ( yellow ) and then it breaks it into 
pieces. Engineered versions of Cas9 are now being developed to destroy integrated HIV in infected cells (PDB entry 4un3) 
 
 
Chapter 22 · Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System

169
22
 
.  Fig. 22.5   Histamine receptor. The histamine receptor is the target of 
antihistamine drugs, such as the ﬁ rst-generation drug doxepin. Unfortunately, 
the drug also binds to other receptor proteins, which leads to side eﬀ ects like 
drowsiness. By using atomic structures like this, researchers are designing new 
drugs that block only the histamine receptor (PDB entry 3rze)  
 
Chapter 22 · Attack and Defense: Weapons of the Immune System

171
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016
D.S. Goodsell, Atomic Evidence, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-32510-1_23
 23  
 Reconstructing HIV  

172
23
 We're at a very exciting place in the study of molecular biology. 
Using the highly successful deconstructive approach of science, we 
understand many pieces of the puzzle, and we're starting to put 
them all together to reveal the overall picture. I have spent much of 
this book talking about these individual pieces, each fascinating in 
their own right. But things get really exciting, and challenging, 
when we start to put it all together. 
 As part of the AIDS-Related Structural Biology Program sup-
ported by the NIH, I put together a series of illustrations to capture 
the current understanding of HIV and its life cycle. Th e goal of 
these illustrations is to integrate what is known: structures of the 
pieces, how they fi t together, and how they orchestrate infection 
and reproduction of the virus. HIV is arguably the best understood 
of any organism, but there are still many mysteries yet to be solved. 
A second goal of these illustrations is to identify these gray areas. 
 I started the story at the point of infection (. Fig.  23.1 ). Th e 
surface of the virus is studded with several copies of the envelope 
glycoprotein. Its job is to fi nd appropriate cells and then force the 
viral genome inside. It has been known for some time that this pro-
tein recognizes key proteins on the cells of our immune system, 
which is why HIV primarily attacks them. Th e primary target is 
CD4, a protein that normally assists in recognition of pathogens by 
the immune system. Th en, the glycoprotein makes a secondary 
interaction with CCR5 and similar GPCR proteins, which triggers 
the transition that leads to fusion of the virus with the cell.
   I've tried to capture several aspects of this process in the paint-
ing. Evidence from fl uorescence microscopy indicates that the 
envelope glycoproteins are mostly clustered on one side of the virus, 
so I've included several attaching at one time. Atomic structures 
have been determined for portions of the glycoprotein and its com-
plexes with receptors and antibodies, but oft en these are solved aft er 
engineering out particularly fl exible loops and chopping off  most of 
the protective coat of polysaccharides. Th e details of the portions on 
the inside of the virus are still a matter of some speculation—I've 
drawn them based on results from spectroscopy that see the tails as 
short helices that lie on the inner surface of the membrane. Th ere 
have also been some controversial results on the portions that cross 
the membrane—some results from EM see them all as a single stalk, 
others see a tripod structure. 
 Once the virus gets inside the cell, it quickly gets to work. Th e 
fi rst task is performed by the enzyme reverse transcriptase, which 
creates a DNA copy of the viral genome, which is carried in two 
RNA strands in the infectious form of the virus (. Fig.  23.2 ). 
Current understanding of the virus sees this happening inside a 
more-or- less intact capsid, which presumably protects the viral 
RNA strands from RNA-cutting enzymes in the cell. Th e whole 
thing is transported to the nucleus, and the capsid falls apart at 
some point along the journey. Th ere are also many interesting wrin-
kles to the process. For instance, a human transfer RNA is used as a 
primer to get the process started, and the viral nucleocapsid pro-
tein, which is present in many copies bound to the RNA, assists 
with keeping everything unfolded and ready to be copied into DNA.
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

173
23
 Th e picture also includes several ways that the virus protects 
itself. Th e capsid is dotted with a cellular protein, cyclophilin A. It 
blocks the binding of a cellular antivirus protein that works by coat-
ing the capsid and stopping it from releasing the viral DNA. Th e 
virus also injects the protein Vif, which attacks the cellular protein 
APOBEC. APOBEC normally modifi es bases on viral RNA, inacti-
vating it before it can be used to build new viruses. 
 Th e fi rst big advances in the fi ght against HIV were achieved in 
the late 1980s, using the classic deconstructive approach of molecu-
lar biology on reverse transcriptase and the two other viral enzymes 
encoded in its genome. Th ese viral enzymes are attractive targets for 
drug therapy because they play essential roles in the viral life cycle, 
and there is abundant precedent for creating inhibitors to block 
enzymes like these. So they were purifi ed, crystallized, and studied 
 
.  Fig. 23.1   Infection by HIV. HIV is shown at the  top  and a target cell is shown at the  bottom  in blues. HIV envelope 
protein ( 1 ) has bound to the receptor CD4 ( 2 ) and then to coreceptor CCR5 ( 3 ), causing a change in conformation that 
inserts fusion peptides into the cellular membrane. This ultimately leads to fusion of the virus with the cell membrane       
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

174
23
at atomic resolution. Th e structures of these enzymes allowed the 
discovery of the eff ective anti-HIV drugs in current use. 
 Reverse transcriptase inhibitors are key weapons in the front line 
of battle against HIV. Two approaches have proven eff ective. Th e fi rst 
attacks the enzyme at its central machinery. Drugs like AZT look like 
typical nucleotides, but when they are added to the growing viral 
DNA by the enzyme, they terminate the chain and stop the virus 
from propagating. Structures have captured the process in motion, 
seeing both the binding of AZT and the DNA chain aft er it is termi-
nated. Th e second approach attacks reverse transcriptase from the 
opposite side. Structures of the enzyme revealed a deep pocket in the 
enzyme. When this is fi lled with a drug, such as nevirapine, it freezes 
the essential motions of the enzyme, blocking its function. 
 
.  Fig. 23.2   Reverse transcription. After the capsid has entered the cell, reverse transcriptase ( 1 ) creates a DNA copy 
( green ) of the HIV RNA genome ( yellow ), using a cellular transfer RNA ( 2 ) as a primer. HIV nucleocapsid protein ( 3 ) acts as 
a chaperone to unfold the RNA secondary structure. The ribonuclease activity of RT removes the viral RNA after the DNA 
strand is created. Interaction of HIV Vif ( 4 ) with cellular APOBEC ( 5 ) is also shown  
 
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

175
23
 Once a DNA copy of the viral genome is made by reverse tran-
scriptase, it is transported into the nucleus and HIV integrase 
splices it into the cell's own DNA (. Fig.  23.3 ). Th is is the secret 
weapon of HIV, and one of the reasons it has been so hard to eradi-
cate. Th is copy stays hidden in the cell's DNA, so infected cells are 
virtually invisible to our intrinsic protective systems and can lie 
dormant for many years. Th e search for an HIV cure (rather than a 
treatment) has focused on ways to attack this integrated viral DNA, 
either by coaxing dormant infected cells out in the open or using 
molecular weapons to get inside these infected cells and destroy the 
viral DNA.
 Th is process of integration is one of the least understood steps of 
the viral life cycle, and researchers are busy at work studying it. Th e 
 
.  Fig. 23.3   Integration of the viral DNA. Uncoating of the viral capsid (shown at the  top ) and interaction with nuclear 
pore proteins such as Nup358 ( 1 ) releases the viral DNA ( 2 ). The DNA enters the nucleus through the nuclear pore 
(shown in  purple ) and is spliced into the cellular genome by the enzyme HIV integrase ( 3 ). Cellular protein LEDGF ( 4 ) is 
important for localization of the site of integration at DNA in nucleosomes ( 5 )  
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

176
23
process of import into the nucleus is not well understood, so I have 
kept it very simple in the painting. It almost certainly involves many 
other proteins to assist with the import, which are not shown. 
Additional cellular proteins are also needed to assist with the actual 
integration. I have shown one here that has been well studied, 
termed LEDGF/p75. It directs the site of integration toward DNA 
wrapped around nucleosomes, targeting integration into cellular 
chromosomes. 
 Once the HIV DNA is integrated into the cell's genome, the 
virus co-opts the cell's own transcription machinery to build new 
viral RNA (. Fig.  23.4 ). Th e virus faces a big hurdle for this: the cell 
has a very complex system that regulates the transcription of RNA, 
and the virus needs to hijack this to make its own RNA. It does this 
 
.  Fig. 23.4   Transcription of viral RNA. HIV Tat protein ( 1 ), bound to the TAR RNA stem-loop structure, binds to the 
P-TEFb complex ( 2 ), activating transcription by RNA polymerase ( 3 ). The illustration also shows HIV Rev ( 4 ) bound to the 
Rev response element and CRM1 (5), a cellular protein involved in transport through the nuclear pore       
 
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

177
23
by inserting one small protein into the process, Tat. Transcription 
normally has a checkpoint and RNA polymerase stalls soon aft er it 
starts if it doesn't get the right signals to continue. Tat short-circuits 
these controls and gives the signal to go.
 Th e painting also includes a viral protein involved in getting the 
viral RNA out of the nucleus. Th is protein, Nef, needs to bridge 
between the viral RNA and the cellular proteins that guide mole-
cules through the nuclear pore. In the painting, I have drawn this 
based on a "jellyfi sh" model of the protein. Other researchers, how-
ever, see it as being a bit more compact than this. 
 Viral genomes are typically very compact, and they need to fi t a 
lot of information in a small space. Th e HIV genome is no excep-
tion. One example of this is seen when the viral RNA is used to 
build viral proteins (. Fig.  23.5 ). Th e virus builds its major proteins 
 
.  Fig. 23.5   Construction of viral proteins. The HIV Gag polyprotein ( 1 , shown in  red ) is built from the HIV RNA genome 
(in  yellow ) by cellular ribosomes ( 2 ). A short hairpin loop in the genome ( 3 ) induces a frameshift roughly 5% of the time, 
producing the longer Gag-Pol protein ( 4 )  
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

178
23
in two forms, using the cell's own ribosomes to do the job. Th e 
smaller viral protein, called Gag, includes the proteins that direct 
the budding of the virus and ultimately form the structure of the 
mature virus. About one in twenty times, however, a longer protein 
is made, termed Gag-Pol, that includes these same proteins but with 
the three HIV enzymes added to the end. All of this is encoded in 
one long gene in the viral RNA, but at the end of portion that 
encodes Gag, there is a special sequence that forms a little hairpin 
loop. Th is loop is just strong enough to stall the cell's ribosomes as 
they are creating the protein, and most of the time it falls off , mak-
ing the shorter Gag protein. Occasionally, however, it manages to 
read through the loop and create the longer Gag-Pol protein.
 Th e Gag and Gag-Pol proteins assemble on the inner surface of 
the cell membrane, guiding the process of budding that produces 
new viruses (. Fig.  23.6 ). Th is requires the assistance of many of the 
cell's own molecules to orchestrate the assembly, budding and 
pinching off  of the virus. Th is interplay of viral proteins and cellular 
proteins is currently a major topic of study in the HIV biology com-
munity, as we try to understand the process and look for weak 
points that can lead to new treatments and cures. Many of the 
details still need to be resolved. I have included a few aspects in the 
illustration. Th e end of the viral RNA has a complex structure that 
dimerizes (to ensure that two copies of the genome end up in the 
virus) and captures the cellular transfer RNA that will prime reverse 
transcription, as well as the Tat protein that will promote transcrip-
tion. Cyclophilin A is captured and will end up on the surface of the 
capsid, and as the whole thing buds out, bystanding cellular pro-
teins are swept up in the membrane and in the interior of the virus.
 Th e fi nal step of the life cycle is maturation, converting the 
newly budded immature form of the virus into the infectious 
mature form (. Fig.  23.7 ). Th is process is orchestrated by a small 
viral enzyme: HIV protease. It cuts the Gag and Gag-Pol proteins 
into their functional pieces. Th e timing of this is critical. Some of 
the cuts need to be made fi rst to ensure that everything assembles in 
the proper order. I have drawn the painting at two stages. Th e lower 
virus is just getting started, and the fi rst cut is separating the struc-
tural proteins from the portions bound to the viral genome. Th e 
upper virus is at the very end of the process. All of the proteins have 
been processed, and they are assembling into the distinctive cone- 
shaped capsid surrounded by a spherical membrane envelope.
 HIV protease is one of the major targets for drug therapy. To 
discover these drugs, scientists started with molecules that look 
very much like the viral proteins that the enzyme cuts. Th en, they 
tinkered and tweaked these molecules until a version was found that 
binds strongly to the enzyme but has usable properties that allow it 
to be taken as a drug (7 see Fig.   17.4 ). Th is process has been ongo-
ing, continually improving the drugs and adding to our arsenal in 
the fi ght against AIDS. As I write this chapter, there are close to a 
thousand structures of HIV protease, capturing it in its many guises. 
 Currently, the most eff ective treatment plans combine these 
protease inhibitor drugs with drugs that bind reverse transcriptase 
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

179
23
and, increasingly, additional drugs that attack integrase or other 
steps in the life cycle. Th is is our primary defense against viral drug 
resistance. By hitting the virus hard at multiple places, it is much 
more diffi  cult for the viral population to evolve resistant forms. 
 Based on this understanding of the viral life cycle, we hope to 
discover new ways to cure HIV-infected people and to create vac-
cines to protect people from infection. One of the exciting advances 
in the search for a vaccine has been a better understanding of the 
ways that the immune system recognizes the virus. It turns out that 
the immune system can build eff ective antibodies against HIV, but 
they are quite unusual and diffi  cult to develop and typically appear 
aft er the virus has taken a strong hold in the body (. Fig.  23.8 ). 
 
.  Fig. 23.6   Virus budding. HIV Gag protein ( 1 ) and Gag-Pol ( 2 ) form arrays on the cell surface, capturing two copies of 
HIV genome (in  yellow ), which dimerize through a speciﬁ c sequence ( 3 ) and bind to a cellular transfer RNA ( 4 ) that will 
act as primer for reverse transcription. Viral proteins Vpr ( 5 ) and Vif ( 6 ) are also incorporated. Several cellular proteins of 
the ESCRT system ( 7 ) are involved in the process of budding  
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

180
23
Th ese "broadly neutralizing" antibodies use unusual methods to 
 recognize the slippery virus (7 see Fig.   21.7 ).
   I have spent many years taking an artistic approach to this 
 challenge of integrative biology, creating paintings of the so-called 
mesoscale between atomic structure of molecules and the 
 ultrastructure of cells and their internal compartments. Th is is an 
exciting scale level to explore, since it's largely (at least until 
recently) invisible to experimental observation. Th e goal is to 
 create an illustration of a signifi cant portion of a cell, showing all of 
the molecules in the proper place, size, and concentration. When I 
started creating these pictures in the 1990s, there was just barely 
 
.  Fig. 23.7    Maturation of HIV. This illustration shows an immature viron in the process of maturation at  bottom right  
and a nearly-mature virion at  upper left . HIV protease ( 1 ) is cleaving the Gag and Gag-Pol proteins into functional 
proteins  
 
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

181
23
enough information to support them. Today, however, biological 
information has exploded. And, access to information is incredibly 
easy through resources like the PDB, UniProt, and PubMed. Th is 
type of mesoscale modeling is currently transitioning, in my labo-
ratory and in many others, from an artistic, descriptive approach to 
a more quantitative approach. Th e idea is to create computational 
methods, such as our program cellPACK, that integrate diverse 
information from molecular and cellular biology into a three-
dimensional view of HIV (. Fig.  23.9 ), a portion of a cell, or 
indeed, an entire living cell.    
 
.  Fig. 23.8   Broadly neutralizing antibodies attack HIV. HIV is shown at  lower right , with viral proteins in  red and 
magenta , and viral RNA in  yellow . Blood plasma is shown at the  top and left side . Several broadly neutralizing antibodies 
( 1 ) are binding to HIV envelope glycoprotein ( 2 ). Other viral proteins include matrix ( 3 ), capsid ( 4 ), reverse transcriptase 
( 5 ), integrase ( 6 ), protease ( 7 ), Vif ( 8 ), and Tat ( 9 )  
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

182
23
 
.  Fig. 23.9   Three-dimensional model of HIV. The cellPACK program (http://www.cellpack.org) was used to create a 
three-dimensional model of HIV and blood plasma based on atomic structures and models of the individual molecules. 
Image created by Mathieu Le Muzic and Ivan Viola from a model created by Ludovic Autin, Graham Johnson, and Arthur 
Olson  
 
 
Chapter 23 · Reconstructing HIV

