
Embodiment and the 
Inner Life

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Embodiment and 
the Inner Life 
Cognition and 
Consciousness in the 
Space of Possible Minds
Murray Shanahan
Professor of Cognitive Robotics 
Department of Computing
Imperial College London, UK

1
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With offices in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Oxford University Press, 2010
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2010
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose the same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by Glyph International, Bangalore, India
Printed in Great Britain
on acid-free paper by
MPG Biddles Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall and King's Lynn, Norfolk
ISBN 978-0-19-922655-9
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

'We move from silence into silence, and there is a brief stir between, 
every person's attempt to make a meaning of life and time'.
George Mackay Brown, For the Islands I Sing

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface
This text is the outcome of over three decades of reflection on the mind and 
the brain. Hardly a day has gone by since my early teens when I haven't thought 
about what makes humans and animals tick, how our brains work, and how it 
might be possible to build artefacts that behave like us. Yet the disciplines that 
address these questions are surprisingly immature even today. So the present 
work is highly speculative, and the critical reader will find plenty to gripe at. So 
I must appeal for a certain degree of charity and open-mindedness. An over-
arching theory of cognition and the brain that can be shot down is better than 
no overarching theory at all—as long as it is well-informed, up-to-date, and 
carefully thought through. And of course, it is always possible that aspects of 
the theory are right.
I have debts of gratitude to many people. Academics from a variety of fields 
have been kind enough to respond to my unsolicited emails prodding them for 
details or clarifications of their work. To attempt to thank each one individu-
ally would be to risk embarrassing omissions. So I hereby offer my generic 
thanks. Certain colleagues I must single out, however. Bernie Baars has been 
unfailingly generous with his time, his insight, and his support. His influence 
permeates my thinking, as will become obvious. Igor Aleksander has been 
similarly magnanimous, offering me valuable advice and help during a diffi-
cult intellectual transition, as I set aside much of the work on which I had built 
my academic reputation while my amateur's interest in consciousness began 
to infuse (some might say infect) my professional life. My thanks also to many 
other people with whom I have had useful, and often inspiring, discussions on 
the subject matter of the book, particularly Ron Chrisley, Nicky Clayton, Owen 
Holland, Adrian Moore, Richard Newcombe, Anil Seth, and Aaron Sloman. 
I apologize to any friends I have forgotten. Finally, my thanks to Imperial 
College for giving me the freedom to pursue my somewhat unconventional 
interests.
To my wife and children I must apologize. During the years of my writing 
this book they have been forced to put up with an especially distracted hus-
band/father, and all in all they have coped rather well. Still, I won't deny that 
without them I would have finished the book more quickly. But my life would 
have been so much impoverished. Lastly, on the advice of my sensible friends 
I will resist the temptation to thank Tooty, our cat. But his faithful presence 

PREFACE
viii
throughout this project, usually in my rocking chair, is hereby duly recorded. 
He is looking at me now as I write, disapprovingly. I know what that look 
means. It says: 'You must not allow anthropomorphism to cloud your scien-
tific judgement'.
Murray Shanahan
North Norfolk and South Kensington
December 2009

Contents
 
 Introduction 1
 
1 The post-reflective inner view 7
1.1 The supposed dualism of inner and outer 7
1.2 Introducing the private language remarks 10
1.3 How philosophers talk 13
1.4 Doing battle with the interlocutor 16
1.5 Philosophical zombies 20
1.6 The subjectivity of exotic life forms 24
1.7 Thought experiments with peculiar scientists 26
1.8 The subject adrift in time 30
1.9 The proper silence of first philosophy 34
 
2 Cognition and embodiment 41
2.1 On having no body 41
2.2 The biological roots of cognition 43
2.3 The sensorimotor loop 48
2.4 Behaviour selection 51
2.5 The human edge 54
2.6 Founding concepts 58
2.7 Counting and infinity 60
2.8 The space of possible minds 64
 
3 Probing the internal 67
3.1 The conscious/unconscious distinction 67
3.2 Being on autopilot 69
3.3 Introspective report 71
3.4 Catching ourselves unawares 77
3.5 The omnipotent psychologist 80
3.6 Novelty and flexibility 85
3.7 Accounting for the conscious condition 89
 
4 Broadcast and the network 95
4.1 The elements of global workspace theory 95
4.2 Parallel specialist brain processes 98
4.3 Neural computation 102
4.4 Coalitions of coupled processes 106

CONTENTS
x
4.5 Integration and the conscious condition 112
4.6 Influence and information 115
4.7 The right connections 118
4.8 The anatomy of a global workspace 122
 
5 Neurodynamics 131
5.1 From connectivity to behaviour 131
5.2 Dynamics in focus 137
5.3 Wandering among the attractors 141
5.4 Dynamical complexity 144
5.5 Fireflies of the mind 149
5.6 Evident coherence 154
 
6 The inner life 159
6.1 The simulation hypothesis 159
6.2 Simulation through a global workspace 165
6.3 Open-ended affordance 168
6.4 Conceptual blending 171
6.5 Cognitive fluidity and the frame problem 174
6.6 Space, time, and memory 180
6.7 Remembering and reconstructing 183
6.8 Talking to ourselves 187
 
 Bibliography 193
 
 Index 211

Introduction
Why does death concern us? Other animals are naturally fearful in the face of 
danger. But humans have a special relationship with death. Irrespective of 
religious inclination, most of us are, at some time in our lives, exercised by the 
possibility of our own extinction, a possibility that other animals cannot fully 
entertain. Unlike the rest of the animal kingdom, we can imagine such an 
event. We can reflect on the possibility, and we can acquire beliefs about it. But 
what exactly is it that death threatens to extinguish? A common sort of answer 
would be that it threatens to extinguish consciousness. As in a dreamless sleep, 
in death (perhaps) I will experience nothing. Or rather, as death unlike sleep 
is (allegedly) a permanent condition, there will no longer be a consciously 
experiencing 'I'.
Here's another taxing question. Why does the joy or the suffering of our 
fellow creatures matter? If an inanimate object such as a brick or a television is 
abused in some way or other, we may feel distaste or displeasure, but we do not 
feel compassion. Yet when a fellow creature squeals in pain, we feel sorry for it. 
Or if we are indifferent, our indifference itself is noteworthy in a way that it is 
not in the context of a shattered brick. But what exactly distinguishes the brick 
from the animal here? A common sort of answer would be that an animal pos-
sesses consciousness whereas a brick does not. An animal's life is a succession 
of conscious experiences, and it is the character of those experiences—good or 
bad—that matters. The story of a brick, on the other hand, makes no mention 
of such things.
We need not endorse the precise wording of these answers—any choice of 
words would be open to philosophical critique—in order to accept their gen-
eral tone. Consciousness is not a philosopher's invention. It is central to our 
humanity. It is what we care about most. The elemental facts of birth and 
death, of suffering and joy, serve to dramatize the concept of consciousness to 
the point of undeniability, if not to bring it within the sphere of definability. 
The aim of the present book—or rather the aim of the larger intellectual project 
of which the book forms a small part—is to account for this fundamental of the 
human predicament in scientific terms. That the Universe contains conscious 
creatures is a curiosity and a wonder, and the scientific understanding we seek 
must explain this wonder, must explain how it is possible. The challenge is not 
so much to explain how this came about, historically speaking, but rather to 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
2
explain what it is that allows conscious creatures to stand out, in the way they 
do, against the backdrop of the physical Universe. 
Here is another curiosity, another wonder in need of a scientific account. 
Not only does our consciousness possess an ever-changing character, joyful or 
wretched in turns, it also has content. Our conscious thoughts are about things. 
The things they can be about include not only the furniture of the everyday 
world, but also abstractions such as numbers, electrons, musical genres, and 
political beliefs. Most remarkably, our conscious thoughts can be about our 
own consciousness, its character, its content, its temporal limits, and its place 
in the Universe. It is this capacity for reflection that so exquisitely and poign-
antly shapes the human predicament.
Now, it will be obvious to anyone with the slightest education in philosophy 
that the earlier paragraphs allude to two of its deepest and longest standing 
difficulties, namely the mind-body problem and the problem of intentional-
ity. But the opening chapter of the present book belongs to the relatively 
youthful tradition of trying, not to solve such problems, but to dissolve them. 
According to this way of thinking, which was inaugurated by Wittgenstein, a 
fog of metaphysical confusion is liable to obscure a proper view of mind. We 
cannot hope to find the desired scientific explanations amid this fog, forever 
wandering from one ism to another (dualism, materialism, cognitivism, ...). 
Yet to emerge from the fog is to return to a kind of prelapsarian state, a state 
before philosophy, which is also a state after philosophy. This post-reflective 
condition is hard to attain, and requires sustained, personal confrontation 
with philosophy itself, working through its founding concepts—language, 
meaning, truth, mind, experience, and so on. 
Although the book is best seen as a whole, it's quite possible for one reader 
to accept the philosophy and reject the science, while another reader rejects the 
philosophy and accepts the science. (The possibility of rejecting both goes 
without saying.) Not everyone with a scientific interest in the mind is so exer-
cised by philosophy as to become mired in metaphysics. Those who are not so 
mired—and indeed those who are but find a continentally inflected approach 
unsatisfactory or pretentious—may safely ignore the exclusively philosophical 
portion of the book (Chapter 1), and proceed directly to the material that takes 
for granted a license to investigate consciousness and cognition using the sci-
entific method (Chapter 2 onwards). In an important sense, those who are 
untroubled by philosophy's largest questions, and who are able to do science 
without those questions sneaking up behind them, are privileged. They are in 
much the same position as the post-reflective philosopher. Both characters 
maintain a kind of silence in the presence of philosophy's demons, and each is 
duly empowered to make progress on the scientific front. 

INTRODUCTION
3
This is not to say progress can be made without an appropriate conceptual 
framework. According to the argument of the book, the right conceptual 
framework must be built around the fact of our embodiment (Chapter 2). 
Cognition has arisen because it beneficially modulates a creature's behaviour. 
That is to say, it helps the creature to survive, to thrive, and to procreate, and 
to do this it intervenes in the sensorimotor loop by means of which the crea-
ture interacts with its physical and social environments. Cognition's trick is to 
open out the space of what the environment affords the creature beyond what 
is immediately apparent. For a cognitively well-endowed creature, that space 
of possibilities—the space of potential affordances—is combinatorially struc-
tured, which is to say the possibilities for action can be assembled and 
re-assembled in arbitrarily many ways. Moreover, the space of potential 
affordances is open-ended. The enculturated creature, especially, can invent. 
The open-endedness of the space of possible affordances and its combinatorial 
structure commend its exploration, and this is cognition's forte. 
Now, what of consciousness? Another feature of the right conceptual frame-
work, according to this book, is a contrastive approach to consciousness. 
Rather than consciousness 'in itself' (whatever that might mean), the initial 
object of study should be the contrast between two conditions, the conscious 
and the unconscious, in circumstances as closely matched as possible. This 
conscious/unconscious distinction is (so very nearly) within empirical grasp. 
However, a number of strange temporal phenomena and near paradoxes (such 
as colour phi and the Sperling effect) make it hard to design experimental 
paradigms in which the distinction is incontrovertible. Chapter 3, in lieu of 
fully operationalizing the distinction, resorts to a science fiction scenario in 
which an idealized contrastive data set is constructed for a human subject in 
an ecological setting. The proposed experimental paradigm is not practically 
realizable, but it serves as a yardstick. 
With an empirically meaningful target in view, albeit an idealized one, we 
can advance towards a 'theory of consciousness'. The primary influence on the 
ideas presented in Chapter 4 is Baars's notion of a global workspace architec-
ture, which comprises a set of parallel specialist processes that compete and 
co-operate in a struggle for system-wide influence. According to the theory, 
the distinction between the unconscious and conscious conditions aligns with 
the difference between localized processing and processing mediated by the 
global workspace. In the conscious condition, so the argument goes, a kind of 
cognitive and behavioural integration is achieved, thanks to the global work-
space, whereby the whole person (or animal), including the full resources of 
their brain, is brought to bear on the ongoing situation. A corollary of this is 
that the full space of possible affordances, open-ended and combinatorially 
structured, becomes amenable to exploration. 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
4
The burden of the work from there on is to give substance to this thesis in 
various ways. Details of the architecture need to be filled in, and relevant 
notions of process and computation have to be spelled out. The concept of 
'integration' is clarified in terms of influence and information—two concepts 
that themselves stand in need of elucidation. But the real challenge is to map 
the architecture onto the brain. In the spirit of a commitment to understand 
the space of possible minds, not merely the human, or even the biological, this 
proceeds in two stages. The first, and most important, stage maps the abstract 
global workspace architecture into a more concrete, but biology-free, descrip-
tion in terms of connectivity and dynamics. The second stage is to map the 
connectivity and dynamics onto real biology. For didactic purposes, the two 
stages are sometimes interleaved, but they are conceptually distinct. 
As far as connectivity is concerned, a network having small-world proper-
ties, hierarchically modular organization, and a prominent connective core is 
proposed as a plausible substrate for the requisite communications infrastruc-
ture. According to the proposal, the connective core is the counterpart to the 
global workspace. In the conscious condition, influence and information fun-
nel into the connective core from the whole network, and fan out from it to the 
whole network. In a sense, the connective core is a bottleneck that enforces a 
form of serial processing. But the serial procession of broadcast states it pro-
duces is the result of sifting and blending the results of massively many parallel 
processes working behind the scenes. 
To complement these ideas from the theory of networks, dynamical systems 
theorists have furnished the mathematicians, physicists, and computer 
scientists of the early 21st century with a splendid collection of conceptual 
exotica—metastability, chaos, chaotic itinerancy, self-organized criticality, 
complexity, and the balance of integration and segregation. Many researchers 
have articulated the intuition that one or more of these concepts is central to 
understanding cognition, consciousness, or the brain, providing more or less 
evidence or argument to back up their claims. But to date, no one has convinc-
ingly blended any subset of these ingredients into a satisfying whole, a frame-
work with real explanatory potential. It would be rash to suggest the present 
material (Chapter 5) achieves this goal. However, taken together, Chapters 4 
and 5 do offer a joined-up theory in which many of these elements have a vital 
role, affirming the intuitions of their respective advocates. 
At the heart of the theory is an account of the way coalitions of coupled 
processes come together and break apart. Each coalition is an attractor of the 
system, and the system wanders from one attractor to the next, lingering awhile 
in each one. An important aspect of this account is its treatment of the contrast 
between repertoires of coalitions that are limited to the tried-and-tested and 

INTRODUCTION
5
repertoires of coalitions that are open-ended. The central claim is that the 
global workspace facilitates the requisite open-endedness, which in turn allows 
the system to realize the potential of an open-ended space of affordances by 
exposing it to whole new vistas of possibility. The global workspace does this 
by being at once the locus of broadcast, from where influence and information 
are disseminated throughout the system, and the medium by which arbitrary 
couplings of processes (alerted by broadcast to their potential relevance to the 
ongoing situation) can be established. 
One major thesis of the book, then, is that the connectivity and dynamics of 
the global neuronal workspace underwrite cognitive prowess. But an extra 
element is required if a creature endowed with a global workspace is not to be 
confined to the here and now, if it is to have an inner life that stretches back 
into its past and reaches forward into its possible futures. The required extra 
element, according to the present theory, is an internally closed sensorimotor 
loop that can simulate interaction with the environment. An internal simula-
tion, in the intended sense, is not some sort of movie that is played in the head. 
Rather, it involves mutually coupled activation within sensory and motor 
brain regions in the absence of external stimulation and without the produc-
tion of external motor output. A further major thesis of the book is that the 
inner life of a human being arises from the combination of a global neuronal 
workspace with such an internal sensorimotor loop. 
The closing chapter of the book is devoted to this idea and its ramifications. 
Thanks to its internal sensorimotor loop, the brain of a cognitively well-
endowed animal is able to rehearse possible courses of action off-line, and to 
assess their likely impact from an affective point of view without actually car-
rying them out, in effect causing previously hidden portions of the space of 
affordances to be exposed. Moreover, thanks to its global workspace, the brain 
of such an animal is able, not only to explore the space of affordances circum-
scribed by tried-and-tested coalitions of sensory and motor processes, but also 
to find novel ways of blending together those processes, expanding its reper-
toire of coalitions and thereby opening up new vistas of affordance. Far from 
being the exclusive province of celebrated artists or inventors, the stance of this 
chapter, following the work of Fauconnier and Turner, is that a multitude of 
tiny creative leaps of this sort enables every child to acquire, blend upon blend 
and layer upon layer, the rich stock of concepts it needs to function in society. 
The concluding sections of the book deal with three topics: working mem-
ory, episodic memory, and inner speech. It's noteworthy that each of these 
facets of mental activity is associated with consciousness. Not only do they 
modulate behaviour, they also contribute to the inner life of a human being. 
In the present framework, this is no surprise because each is explained in terms 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
6
of the exercise of an internal sensorimotor loop whose operation is mediated 
by a global workspace. Three specific hypotheses are explored—first that work-
ing memory locates the subject in space, second that episodic memory situates 
the subject in time, and third that inner speech places the subject in a reflective 
relation to itself. Despite appearances, this is not a philosophical investigation 
into the nature of the subject. These are empirical claims, grounded in 
the neurodynamics of integration and internal sensorimotor activity. In the 
final paragraphs, the book returns to its point of departure with the observa-
tion that self-referential inner speech (thinking about thoughts) foreshadows 
philosophy.

Chapter 1
The post-reflective inner view
In this chapter we open hostilities with those traditionally philosophical ways 
of thinking about ourselves that lead to dualism—a metaphysical division 
between the public, external world and our private inner lives—and conse-
quently to the sense that we are forbidden from truly investigating ourselves 
using the scientific method. Recruiting Wittgenstein as our ally in a confronta-
tion with the most treasured categories of traditional philosophy—truth, 
meaning, experience, existence, identity, and so on—we progress towards a 
kind of silence on metaphysical matters. Along the way, a number of 
well-known arguments and thought experiments in the philosophy of con-
sciousness are revisited.
1.1 The supposed dualism of inner and outer
In the Meditations, having cast into doubt the existence of sky and earth, of 
bodies and other minds, Descartes finally asks whether he might even be 
deceived about his own existence, and concludes that this, at least, is impossi-
ble since 'the proposition: I am, I exist, is necessarily true every time I express 
it or conceive of it in my mind'.1 Pursuing the ramifications of this simple but 
incendiary argument—the cogito, as it is traditionally called—Descartes finds 
that he has, metaphysically speaking, severed the connection between his mind 
and his body and has lost touch with the world. In his earlier Discourse on 
Method, the whole troubling series of thoughts is compressed into a single 
short passage.
Then, examining attentively what I was, and seeing that I could pretend that I had no 
body and that there was no world or place that I was in, but that I could not, for all 
that, pretend that I did not exist ... I thereby concluded that I was a substance, of 
which the whole essence or nature consists in thinking, and which, in order to exist, 
needs no place and depends on no material thing ...2
1 Descartes (1641/1968), p. 103.
2 Descartes (1637/1968), p. 54.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
8
It has become customary, in contemporary cognitive science, to blame 
Descartes for almost everything. The celebrated passage above inaugurated 
'Cartesian dualism', a by-word for a position now widely considered so silly 
that reduction to it is tantamount to refutation. The 'Cartesian theatre' is 
Dennett's label for a supposedly naive view of consciousness that he is con-
cerned to debunk.3 According to Damasio, 'Descartes' error' (one among so 
many) was to divorce human reason from the animal passions.4 Wheeler 
attributes the failings of 'orthodox' cognitive science to its commitment to 
'Cartesian psychology'.5
Broadly speaking, the stance we shall adopt here is sympathetic to the 
specific 'anti-Cartesian' views just listed. However, the radical challenge of the 
cogito is not at all easy to dismiss. The argument encapsulated in the quoted 
passage is of the utmost depth and difficulty, and the image of mind it impresses 
on us is impossible to ignore. So it's hardly surprising that we find powerful 
echoes of it in the contemporary philosophical debate about the nature of 
consciousness, specifically in arguments that seek to limit the scope of scien-
tific enquiry by establishing an inviolable metaphysical barrier between subject 
and object, between inner and outer.
For example, a survey of contemporary arguments purporting to establish 
various types of fundamental inner/outer divide is at the heart of Chalmers' 
influential book The Conscious Mind, leading him to distinguish what he calls 
the easy problem of consciousness from the hard problem.
[A lot of writing] addresses the 'easy' problem of consciousness: How does the brain 
process environmental stimulation? How does it integrate information? How do 
we produce reports on internal states? These are important questions, but to answer 
them is not to solve the hard problem: Why is all this processing accompanied by an 
experienced inner life?6
Though couched in contemporary terms, Chalmers' distinction bears the 
same hallmark as Descartes' reflection. In both cases, a wedge is driven between 
inner and outer. For Descartes, body and place (outer) are divided from 
thought (inner), whereas for Chalmers, the information processing taking 
place in the brain (outer) is divided from phenomenal experience (inner). Of 
course, there is a sense in which information processing occurring in the brain 
is 'inner' relative to the goings on in the 'outer' environment. But this is not the 
3 Dennett (1991).
4 Damasio (1995).
5 Wheeler (2005).
6 Chalmers (1996), pp. xi-xii.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
9
sense of 'inner' at stake here. The inner life of a human being comprises 
thoughts, feelings, perceptions, sensations, and so on.
The mark of the inner is that it is supposedly private. A person's inner life is 
his or her own, and—we are inclined to say—no one has closer acquaintance 
with it than the person in question. By contrast, the outer is public. It is every-
body's, and we all have access to it, at least in principle. If I announce that I am 
feeling happy today, it's not for you or anyone else to argue with me, whereas 
if I claim the Moon is made of green cheese then you have the right to chal-
lenge my claim with an empirical investigation. My happiness is in here, 
whereas the Moon is out there. We might say that the former is a subjective 
matter, nobody's business but my own, whereas the objective nature of the latter 
can be studied by anyone with the appropriate means.
In everyday speech we deploy commonplace distinctions between inner and 
outer, between private and public, or between subjective and objective, with-
out taking a metaphysical stand. But the wedge Descartes and his present-day 
counterparts attempt to drive between inner and outer is resoundingly meta-
physical. It divides inner from outer so completely that we are left with a pro-
found mystery. What is the relationship between inner and outer? How do 
they interact? How do events in the inner realm influence physical activity in 
the brain and affect overt behaviour? Conversely, how do events in the outer 
world penetrate the inner, and give rise to private, subjective experience? 
Assuming such interactions occur, as surely they must, how can we accom-
modate them within a scientific understanding of Nature and the physical laws 
that are presumed to govern it? However well a scientific theory explains the 
relationships among the merely outer phenomena of human behaviour, 
human psychology, and human neurophysiology, it seems the inner, private 
realm of subjective experience must remain forever beyond its grasp.
Hence we arrive at the sort of impasse characterized by Chalmers as the hard 
problem. It's perfectly natural to arrive at this position, and there is no straight-
forward route around it. Simply to deny metaphysical weight to the inner/
outer divide without properly engaging with it is to bury one's head in the 
intellectual sand. Nor is it sufficient simply to launch surface attacks on 
the arguments that purport to establish the division, the cogito being among 
the most profoundly rooted. Rather, our confrontation with inner/outer dual-
ism must take place at a much deeper level, at the level of the very foundations 
of philosophy itself. To put it bluntly, we must learn to do without the habit of 
metaphysical thinking.
What is meant here by 'metaphysical thinking'? Metaphysics, as we shall 
construe it, is the study of fundamental abstractions, such as mind, truth, real-
ity, meaning, thought, and consciousness. Its ambition is to reveal the essence 
of these things, where a thing's essence is that without which it would not be 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
10
what it is, that which distinguishes it from everything else. A sure indicator of 
metaphysical thinking is the conviction that fundamental abstractions are, in 
some sense, a matter of objective necessity, so metaphysics can proceed by 
reasoned argument alone. Thought is computation. Truth is correspondence. 
Meaning is use. Consciousness is a physical process. These and all similar 
claims, wherein an innocent little copula is invested with overwhelming sig-
nificance, betray metaphysical thinking. Moreover, to deny claims of this sort 
is equally a sign of metaphysical thinking. Likewise, materialism, functional-
ism, behaviourism, physicalism, dualism, idealism, Platonism, antirealism, 
verificationism—all these are metaphysical doctrines, as are their negations. 
All are symptoms of metaphysical thinking, and all must be discarded.
1.2 Introducing the private language remarks
The proposed assault is clearly audacious, so it's fortunate that we have a 
powerful ally, namely Wittgenstein. The relevant portion of Wittgenstein's 
oeuvre is not the early philosophy that found concise and careful expression in 
the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus,7 but rather the style of critical thinking 
characteristic of his later period and exemplified by the posthumously pub-
lished Philosophical Investigations.8 Our initial focus will be a much-discussed 
series of remarks at the heart of the Investigations concerning sensations, how 
we talk about them, and the extent to which it makes sense to speak of them as 
private.9 Taken together, these remarks are usually referred to as 'the private 
language argument'. However, as we shall see, despite appearances, they don't 
really constitute an argument in the conventional philosophical sense. Rather, 
their purpose is to help break the habit of dualistic thinking at a level beneath 
that of traditional philosophical discourse. If this is successful, the intuitions 
that motivated the distinction between the easy problem and the hard problem 
of consciousness will lose their hold over us.
Bearing this agenda in mind, let's now take a look at the private language 
remarks. Here are the passages in which Wittgenstein introduces the notion of 
a private language. First, he invites us to consider some related ideas.
A human being can encourage himself, give himself orders, obey, blame, and punish 
himself; he can ask himself a question and answer it. We could even imagine human 
beings who spoke only in monologue; who accompanied their activities by talking to 
themselves.10
 7 Wittgenstein (1921/1961).
 8 Wittgenstein (1958).
 9 Wittgenstein (1958), §243, §§256-258.
10 Wittgenstein (1958), §243.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
11
The idea of such a monologue is unproblematic. This is not the sort of 
private language under consideration. Indeed, much of the Philosophical 
Investigations is written as a sort of inner monologue, in which Wittgenstein—
often using the voice of an imaginary interlocutor—asks questions of himself 
and then answers them. No, the sort of private language at issue here is some-
thing quite different.
But could we also imagine a language in which a person could write down or give vocal 
expression to his inner experiences - his feelings, moods, and the rest - for his private 
use? - Well, can't we do so in our ordinary language? - But that is not what I mean. 
The individual words of this language are to refer to what can only be known to the 
person speaking; to his immediate private sensations. So another person cannot 
understand the language.11
Suppose a subject inspects a set of colour samples and claims to enjoy two 
different colour sensations. Even though they all look identical to the rest of 
humanity, the subject insists that, for her, some patches evoke one colour 
sensation whereas the others elicit a quite different experience. Suppose the 
subject elects to label her two sensations of colour 'S1' and 'S2'. Now imagine 
that a scientific investigation establishes a real difference in the spectra reflected 
by the various patches, a difference that correlates perfectly with the subject's 
claims. In this case, an objective distinction between the two labels has been 
found, and this means 'S1' and 'S2' are not part of a private language. The 
subject turns out to have been labelling something public all along. Suppose 
instead that no scientific test can distinguish the colours themselves, but that 
some neurological difference of state can be found, through fMRI or some 
future brain scanning technique, that correlates perfectly with the subject's use 
of the two labels. Once again, the potentially private language has ended up in 
the public sphere. If 'S1' and 'S2' were words in a genuinely private language 
then no scientific investigation would, in principle, be capable of supplying an 
objective test that correlated with the subject's labelling. This is the notion of 
privacy at issue.
Having circumscribed the idea of such a language, Wittgenstein muses on a 
hypothetical process by which its vocabulary might be developed. He asks us to 
imagine a diary in which he records all the days on which he has a certain sen-
sation. To do this he invents a symbol, say 'S'. In his diary he marks each day 
on which he has the sensation in question with this symbol. Now, Wittgenstein 
asks, how would he know whether he was marking the diary correctly? How 
could he ever be sure that he was using the symbol 'S' for the same sensation 
on different occasions? If the sensation is truly 'private', what criterion for 
correctness could there possibly be? Marking the diary, Wittgenstein contends, 
11 Wittgenstein (1958), §243.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
12
is nothing but an empty ceremony, like the left hand giving the right hand 
money: 'One would like to say: whatever is going to seem right to me is right. 
And that only means that here we can't talk about right'.12
One way to arrive at a proper understanding of these remarks, and at an 
appreciation of their full force, is to begin with a provisional exegesis—couched 
in somewhat traditional philosophical terms—which can then be revised into 
a more radical interpretation. Provisionally then, we can characterize these 
remarks as an attack on the possibility of establishing identity criteria for pri-
vate inner sensations. This, of course, puts enormous pressure on the very 
concept of a private inner sensation. Pressure is applied by casting doubt on 
the notion that the same word could reliably be ascribed to the same sensation 
twice. The very definition of a private inner sensation is intended to entail that 
there can be no external, objective arbiter of reliability here. If no coherent 
identity criteria can be found for private inner sensations, then their ontologi-
cal status becomes very precarious, and arguments that are based on them are 
duly discredited. So what we apparently have is a conventional, though power-
ful, argument for a conventional, though damaging, metaphysical proposition. 
The proposition states that there is no such thing as a private sensation. The 
argument hinges on identity criteria, but appeals to language on the assump-
tion that anything that exists can be named (a relic, perhaps, of the verification 
principle discerned by many philosophers in Wittgenstein's earlier work in the 
Tractatus).
On this provisional reading, there is plenty of scope for mounting a defence 
of the concept of private inner sensation. We might call into question, for 
example, the assumption that a public criterion of success is necessary for a 
word to latch onto its referent. We might even be so bold as to appeal to an 
external arbiter that transcends the public/private distinction in play—the 
mind of God, perhaps, or some higher metaphysical reality. We might chal-
lenge the role of language in the argument. But even if we dismiss all such 
counter-attacks, even if we accept the conventional conclusion of the private 
language remarks on this provisional reading, we end up not with a resolution 
of the philosophical problem, but instead with a profound dilemma. For the 
opposing intuitions of dualistically minded philosophers such as Descartes 
and his intellectual descendants retain all their original potency. The provi-
sional reading of the private language remarks merely brings about a standoff. 
It is a useful stepping stone, but we must go deeper.
12 Wittgenstein (1958), §258.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
13
1.3 How philosophers talk
For a more complete understanding of the private language remarks, we need 
to situate them within the overall project of the Philosophical Investigations. 
Wittgenstein's purpose, in a nutshell, is to persuade the philosophically 
inclined to give up the habit of thinking metaphysically, and to show that 
nothing is sacrificed in the process. He does this by demonstrating over and 
again that a claim or a question couched in metaphysically loaded language 
can be met with a response expressed in non-metaphysical language. These 
demonstrations do not supply answers. Rather, each one is a provocation—an 
invitation to renounce one little piece of metaphysics or another, an invitation 
whose very mode of presentation makes it evident that nothing is really lost in 
the renunciation.
The private language remarks are one such demonstration, for the case of 
inner experience. That is to say, they offer a challenge to language that is meta-
physically loaded with the inner/outer distinction, yet they themselves are 
couched in language that is metaphysics-free. But the difficulty in coming to 
terms with the Investigations is that individual passages make only incomplete 
sense before the habit of metaphysical thinking has actually been broken. 
So, although the private language remarks have some power on their own, 
and although they may be of some help in breaking the metaphysical habit, 
they actually arise from a deeper wellspring of silence on metaphysical topics. 
Ultimately it is that wellspring of silence that we need to tap if we are to be 
able to cope with the most intransigent manifestations of dualistic thinking, 
such as Descartes' cogito. But this wellspring of silence on metaphysical 
subjects lies beneath the edifice of traditional Western philosophy, and 
the only way to reach it is to undermine the foundations of that ancient and 
well-guarded citadel.
So where should we start to dig? Which is more fundamental—mind, 
language, or world; thought, meaning, or reality; consciousness, knowledge, 
or being? Of course, the question itself is poorly framed, and already betrays 
too much metaphysics. But one thing seems clear. There is no philosophy 
without language. Philosophy surely cannot begin before speech and writing. 
So an effective way to treat the whole complex of symptoms from which the 
philosophically afflicted suffer is perhaps to begin with language itself. 
Accordingly, the opening pages of the Philosophical Investigations deal with 
language, confronting the temptation to think metaphysically about meaning. 
This quickly leads Wittgenstein to a view of philosophy that is intimately 
bound up with the extraordinary way philosophers talk.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
14
The first remark in the Investigations is a comment on a passage in Augustine's 
Confessions in which he speculates on the process by which he acquired 
language as a child.13 Wittgenstein writes,
[Augustine's] words give us a particular picture of the essence of human language. 
It is this: the individual words in language name objects - sentences are combinations 
of such names. - In this picture of language we find the roots of the following idea: 
Every word has a meaning. This meaning is correlated with the word. It is the object 
for which the word stands.14
Wittgenstein begins his challenge to this received 'picture of the essence of 
human language' by telling a kind of story, albeit a rather dull one. He asks us 
to imagine a shopkeeper and a customer, and describes a severely stylized 
exchange between them. The customer presents the shopkeeper with a piece of 
paper. The words 'FIVE RED APPLES' are written on it. The shopkeeper 
responds by opening a drawer marked 'APPLES' and looking up the word 
'RED' in a book containing colour samples. Then, he counts out five fruits 
from the drawer—saying out loud the numerals as he goes until he reaches 
'FIVE', and carefully matching the colour sample for 'RED' with each apple he 
takes out. Eventually the customer receives the goods, and presumably departs 
with an air of satisfaction.
'But how does [the shopkeeper] know where and how he is to look up the word "red" 
and what he is to do with the word "five"?'- Well I assume that he acts as I describe. 
Explanations come to an end somewhere. - But what is the meaning of the word 
'five'? - No such thing was in question here, only how the word 'five' is used.15
In this short commentary on his little story, Wittgenstein presents an 
alternative to thinking metaphysically about language and meaning and to 
speaking of them in metaphysical terms. He is not proposing that 'meaning is 
use', as a naive reading might suggest. That too would be a metaphysical claim. 
Rather, he is exhorting us to replace questions about meaning with questions 
about use. As his treatment of the shopping scenario makes plain, any description 
13 In the passage Wittgenstein quotes (Confessions, I, 8) Augustine writes: 'So, by hearing 
words arranged in various phrases and constantly repeated, I gradually pieced together 
what they stood for, and when my tongue had mastered the pronunciations, I began to 
express my wishes by means of them' (Augustine, 398/1961, p.29). A comparable view 
was articulated by Aristotle as long ago as 350 B.C.E: 'Spoken words are the symbols of 
mental experience and written words are the symbols of spoken words. Just as all men 
have not the same writing, so all men have not the same speech sounds, but the mental 
experiences, which these directly symbolize, are the same for all, as also are those things 
of which our experiences are the images' (Aristotle, 350 B.C/1941).
14 Wittgenstein (1958), §1.
15 Wittgenstein (1958), §1.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
15
of language in use will implicate its worldly role in human affairs. The scene is 
one of interaction between two people. The interaction involves not only signs 
and symbols, but also physical objects—apples, drawers, pieces of paper, and 
so on. So an account of the episode that omitted the words, the people, or the 
apples, would be useless.
The treatment of language we find at the beginning of the Investigations is 
exemplary of Wittgenstein's overall method. Wittgenstein is addressing the 
philosophically inclined, who are apt to enquire into the 'nature' or 'essence' 
of meaning—almost as if it were some kind of stuff, something 'out there', so 
to speak, that is amenable to rational investigation. This is metaphysical think-
ing. But Wittgenstein advises us to set aside the vexing question, with its taint 
of metaphysics, of what a word like 'five' means. Instead he simply offers a 
description of the way the word 'five' is used, a description that emphasizes its 
place in the hustle and bustle of daily human activity. There is no presentation 
of propositions and arguments in the style of traditional philosophy, no 
attempt to define the concept of number or pin down the nature of mathemat-
ical reality. Yet (we can imagine Wittgenstein saying) what has been left out of 
the description?
In a sense that will be elaborated more fully at the end of the chapter, lan-
guage itself flows from the same wellspring of silence on metaphysical topics 
that is hinted at here. So even metaphysical thinking originates in this silence, 
including the deeply entrenched dualism that hampers contemporary attempts 
to acquire a scientific understanding of the mind. Its means of expression are 
found in the harmless language of everyday human affairs, and it erupts when 
certain ordinary words and phrases are used in extraordinary ways, exceeding 
their remit and giving rise to disquietude. Wittgenstein's strategy for neutral-
izing this insidious effect is to remind us of how these words and phrases are 
commonly used.
When philosophers use a word - 'knowledge', 'being', 'object', 'I', 'proposition', 
'name' - and try to grasp the essence of the thing, one must always ask oneself: is the 
word ever actually used in this way in the language-game which is its original home? -
What we do is to bring words back from their metaphysical to their everyday use.16
So the treatment of language we find at the beginning of the Investigations 
has a twofold effect. First, it sanctions a strategy for tackling metaphysical 
thinking, which is to bring language back to its original home. Second, it sup-
plies an exemplar of this approach for the case of meaning itself. It is not an 
argument for a new style of philosophy. Indeed, to level such an argument—at 
16 Wittgenstein (1958), §116.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
16
least to do so with serious as opposed to ironic or deconstructive intent—
would be a concession to the old way of thinking. Ultimately it stands only as 
an invitation, like a Zen master's finger pointing at the Moon.17
1.4 Doing battle with the interlocutor
In case it seems we are straying too far from the advertised concerns of this 
book, let's be clear that this excursion into Wittgenstein's thought is absolutely 
necessary. Whether explicitly or implicitly, contemporary debate on con-
sciousness remains heavily under the influence of dualism, and the failure to 
escape from its grip is attributable to a lack of appreciation of the critical 
resources made available by such writers as Wittgenstein.18 But Wittgenstein's 
thinking cannot be assimilated piecemeal. It has to be taken in as a whole. To 
benefit from his radical approach to consciousness, sensation, experience, and 
subjectivity, it is necessary to understand the stance he takes towards language 
and meaning, because from this he derives his overall attitude towards the sort 
of metaphysical thinking that dualism exemplifies. Accordingly, we must per-
severe a little longer in our exploration of the Philosophical Investigations, in 
order to fully apprehend its relevance.
Two thousand five hundred years of philosophical tradition will not 
succumb to a handful of trite aphorisms about the way we use words. So the 
invitation to a new way of thinking that inaugurates the Philosophical 
Investigations is unlikely to be taken up by many professional philosophers, 
least of all by those in the Western analytic tradition. They are far more likely 
to fixate on the Zen master's finger than to look at the Moon. (Scholars 
impressed by the finger's vigour may even choose to devote their lives to its 
study.) But, fortunately for the philosophically inclined who are troubled 
(rather than excited) by their metaphysical urges, and who are open to funda-
mental change, Wittgenstein goes on to present a sustained engagement 
with traditional philosophy in which the numerous twists and turns of the 
philosophical mind are anticipated and given their due.
These turns of mind find expression in the voice of an imaginary interlocutor, 
a very important character in Wittgenstein's later writings. Sometimes the 
interlocutor sounds like an ordinary person veering unsuspectingly towards 
metaphysical thinking, sometimes it seems to represent a sophisticated phi-
losopher in the conventional mould, and sometimes the interlocutor is an alter 
17 The parallels between Zen Buddhism and Wittgenstein's later philosophy are many 
and deep, and have been noted by several authors, including Fann (1969, Chapter 10), 
Canfield (1975, pp. 383-408), and Phillips (1993, Chapter 12).
18 Eilan (2002) and Shanahan (2005) are rare exceptions.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
17
ego of Wittgenstein himself. The Investigations, together with the rest of 
Wittgenstein's later oeuvre, is a collection of exchanges with the interlocutor 
on a multitude of philosophical topics—meaning, reference, logic, mathemat-
ics, representation, knowledge, certainty, thought, sensation, and so on. The 
result is not a body of doctrine but a compilation of case studies in philosophy, 
like a collection of Zen k¯oans, whose aim is not to instil belief but to guide the 
student away from the dark forest of metaphysics and back onto the path of 
clarity, to 'show the fly the way out of the bottle'.19
Here is an instructive example, in which the interlocutor's voice, because it 
articulates thoughts that are so close to his own, merges with Wittgenstein's 
itself. It is of particular interest to us because it relates to artificial intelligence 
and the possibility of machine consciousness, topics that are not centre-stage 
in our present discussion, but which will be revisited later.
Could a machine think? - Could it be in pain? - Well, is the human body to be called 
such a machine? It surely comes as close as possible to being such a machine.
But a machine surely cannot think! - Is that an empirical statement? No. We only say 
of a human being and what is like one that it thinks. We also say it of dolls and no 
doubt of spirits too. Look at the word 'to think' as a tool.20
Wittgenstein, here as ever, is working through his own thoughts on a par-
ticular matter. He asks whether a machine could think. Then he pauses, and 
moves to a seemingly more daring possibility—that a machine could feel pain. 
He notes that there is a sense in which the body is such a machine. And we 
might stop there. But this is not the end of the matter, because Wittgenstein 
(or his interlocutor) exclaims that a machine surely cannot think. This is not 
an empirical statement, but a consequence of the way we use the word 'think'. 
The punch line is a familiar reminder that even difficult words—words with 
philosophical import—must be considered in relation to their everyday use. 
That is to say, we must ask what they are for.
The exercise of interpreting these passages is helpful because it trains us not 
to mis-read the rest of Wittgenstein's later writings. In particular, it is impor-
tant to see that he is not making a claim about the a priori limits of artificial 
intelligence research. The declamation 'A machine surely cannot think!' should 
not be lifted out of its context and taken as an item of doctrine. It is the inter-
locutor speaking, even though the sentence is not enclosed in quotation marks, 
and it is only a waypoint in the exchange. (The punch line—the only sentence 
19 Wittgensetin (1958), §309.
20 Wittgensetin (1958), §§359-360. Compare §281: '... only of a living human being and 
what resembles (behaves like) a living human being can one say: it ... is conscious or 
unconscious.'

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
18
that carries anything like a stamp of final authority—is several sentences away.) 
It is immediately followed by the gloss, 'we only say of a human being and what 
is like one that it thinks'. The point is to steer the philosophically inclined away 
from the metaphysical chasm that opens up when they ask whether a machine 
could think. Finally, because the metaphysical temptations will return, per-
haps in a different guise and in relation to a different topic, the take-home 
message is delivered: words are best thought of as tools.
Attending sympathetically to the interlocutor—on topic after topic, in one 
exchange after another—is like watching a tennis player trying to defeat a brick 
wall. Whatever metaphysically loaded argument the interlocutor propels at 
Wittgenstein, a metaphysics-free response just bounces right back, sometimes 
in the form of a rhetorical question, often using a striking metaphor. Whatever 
clever angles the interlocutor tries, however powerful his shots and whatever 
spin they carry, the brick wall always has a reply, each time as if to say, 'given 
up yet?' The overall effect is gradual attrition. The interlocutor is slowly ground 
down. Whatever his initial stance, eventual defeat by his own hand is inevita-
ble. In the end, even for the most tenaciously philosophical reader, it becomes 
possible to discern a kind of post-reflective condition, wherein metaphysical 
thinking no longer arises.
There is no final, authoritative voice in the Investigations, and no sharp 
division between Wittgenstein himself and the interlocutor. Although the last 
word is always given to the post-reflective voice, and it is always metaphysically 
neutral, we never encounter an author who is himself a fully enlightened, per-
fectly post-reflective thinker, a finished product. Rather we meet a philosopher 
who is perpetually deflecting his own metaphysical tendencies, who has to 
engage them afresh every time. Our challenge as readers is to learn the same 
skill, to learn how to do battle with our own internal interlocutor, the devil on 
our shoulder who whispers philosophy in our ear. Wittgenstein's talent as a 
teacher is to show us that the devil can be defeated, that metaphysical thinking 
can, in this way, be transcended.
Because of their bearing on the topic of consciousness, our especial interest 
here is the private language remarks. With a better appreciation of the overall 
scope of the Investigations, we can now revisit them. Recall that Wittgenstein 
asks us to consider a hypothetical procedure for filling out the vocabulary of 
the putative private language. He proposes to keep a diary, and to mark the 
diary with the symbol 'S' whenever he experiences a particular sensation. The 
'S' is a label for his private, inner experience. It is not a symbol, like the words 
we all use every day, that could be used to convey something about the sensa-
tion to another person. Nobody else can understand this language. But then 
how could Wittgenstein be sure that he was marking his diary correctly? What 
does 'correct' even mean in such a case? In particular, what guarantee could 

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
19
there be that the symbol 'S' was being used for the same sensation on different 
occasions? What criteria of sameness could there be?
Now, where have these reflections left us? Have we arrived at the conclusion 
that the sensation itself does not exist? Certainly not! Drawing conclusions is 
contrary to the spirit of Wittgenstein's later philosophy. The whole purpose of 
the Investigations is to break the habit of metaphysical thinking, not to generate 
more metaphysics. Rather, Wittgenstein says, the sensation itself
is not a something, but not a nothing either! The conclusion was only that a nothing 
would serve just as well as a something about which nothing can be said.21
The private language remarks promote a radically new stance towards phi-
losophy, an entirely different way of thinking and talking, a post-reflective 
way. Hence, when the interlocutor responds to the private language remarks 
with a metaphysically loaded challenge—'You're a behaviourist. You are 
saying the sensation itself is a nothing'—Wittgenstein archly replies 'not a 
something, not a nothing', showing by example how to counter a metaphysi-
cally loaded challenge with a metaphysics-free response. However—and this is 
very important—the response truly engages with the challenge, and shows 
respect for its depth. The private language remarks refer to one of the corner-
stones of metaphysics—identity—but without ever resorting to metaphysical 
talk themselves. The post-reflective philosopher turns the tables on the philo-
sophically inclined thinker, provoking him on a sensitive subject at the very 
heart of metaphysics, not by demanding identity criteria but by making him 
feel uncomfortable for being unable to supply them.
The interlocutor's discomfort is only temporary, however. He is the repre-
sentative of metaphysical disquietude in all of us—especially the philosophi-
cally inclined—and he does not fold so easily. He can handle a little discomfort, 
and knows of many other angles from which to approach the metaphysical 
traps and holes to which he feels so powerfully drawn. Wittgenstein's task is to 
anticipate as many of these angles as possible, and to counter each one of them. 
Hence the texture of the Investigations, its numerous thought experiments and 
cameo exchanges, tackling the same topics over and again in a variety of ways. 
For example, consider the 'beetle in the box', one of Wittgenstein's most arresting 
metaphors.
Suppose everyone had a box with something in it: we call it a 'beetle'. No one can look 
into anyone else's box, and everyone says he knows what a beetle is only by looking at 
his beetle. - Here it would be quite possible for everyone to have something different 
in his box. One might even imagine such a thing constantly changing.22
21 Wittgenstein (1958), §304.
22 Wittgenstein (1958), §293.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
20
The beetle in the box is, of course, analogous to a private, inner experience. 
Wittgenstein is addressing the same reflective inclinations here as in the diary 
thought experiment, and he does so with the same critical intention, the same 
hope that the interlocutor will renounce metaphysics, and will re-emerge from 
its other side in a post-reflective condition.
But suppose the word 'beetle' had a use in these people's language? - If so it would not 
be used as the name of a thing. The thing in the box has no place in the language-game 
at all; not even as a something: for the box might be empty. - No, one can 'divide 
through' by the thing in the box; it cancels out, whatever it is. 23
The contents of the box is not a something, but not a nothing either. 
Wittgenstein is pointing out the futility of pushing ordinary language into 
metaphysical territory. Words like 'pain', 'sensation', 'experience', and so on 
have an everyday use. Our compulsion to extend this use in ways that lead to 
puzzling questions is natural, but ultimately pointless, because the problems 
that are thrown up in this way have no real substance. We only end up 
with pretend uses for the words, and when we realize this, our compulsion is 
lessened.
1.5 Philosophical zombies
Let's take stock. Thanks to Wittgenstein, we are now acquainted with a kind of 
post-reflective stance towards philosophy. Our review of his later work has 
been brief, and we have only studied a handful of his most celebrated remarks. 
So it should not be forgotten that their aim is not to convey a body of doctrine 
(for which a small number of critical passages might provide a useful sum-
mary), but rather to effect a change of attitude. This change is brought 
about through the exercise of a certain skill, which the post-reflective thinker 
learns to emulate and practise on himself. This is the ability to offer up a non-
metaphysical riposte to a metaphysical thought—not by using mere trickery or 
clever words, but acknowledging the full weight of the original thought while 
undermining it with a metaphysically neutral reply. The remarks we have cho-
sen to study are representative, and are pertinent to our particular enquiry. But 
the philosophically inclined can only attain a truly post-reflective condition 
through repeated exposure to this method, by repeated practice of the skill.
Nevertheless, we are now in a position to respond to the philosophical 
literature on consciousness from a post-reflective vantage point. In due course 
we'll return to the Cartesian cogito. But let's start with the philosophical concept 
23 Wittgenstein (1958), §293.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
21
of a 'zombie'.24 A person's zombie twin, in the contemporary literature, is 
physically identical to that person, cell for cell and particle for particle, down 
to the very finest sub-atomic detail. But there is a crucial difference between 
the zombie twin and the real person. Unlike the real person, the zombie twin 
enjoys no conscious experience whatsoever. It is not like anything to be the zom-
bie. For the zombie, the lights are out, so to speak. There is no one at home.
According to the so-called zombie argument—revitalized and popularized by 
Chalmers—since we can imagine such a zombie twin, since it is logically pos-
sible to have all those physical properties without consciousness, no merely 
physical description of a human being, of their brain, body, and environment, 
however complete and precise, could ever entail the presence of consciousness.25 
A limit is thereby set to the scope of any scientific theory of consciousness. 
Although a scientific theory might be able to explain many or all of the psycho-
logical and behavioural properties we associate with consciousness, it can 
never approach the holy grail of phenomenal experience. It can never explain 
why it is like something to be a human being whereas it is not like anything to 
be a brick. So a yawning 'explanatory gap' seems to exist between the physical 
world and phenomenal consciousness. Scientific investigation is apparently 
restricted to the outer manifestations of a private, inner realm, and it can never 
approach consciousness itself.
So the argument goes. There are many ways to attack it. We might deny the 
purported conceivability of a zombie, the coherence of the concept. We might 
accept the concept of a zombie, but deny the presupposed strong connection 
between conceivability and ontology. (Perhaps we can imagine not only things 
that do not exist but also things that could not exist.) We could embark on a 
lengthy investigation of the logical relations among imaginability, conceivabil-
ity, possibility, and various notions of existence. But all of this would be to 
work at the level of metaphysics, which, strange as it sounds, is to remain on 
the mere surface of the matter. Instead, let's play with the idea of a zombie for 
a while—not with a view to establishing firm conclusions, but in order to 
uncover some of the curious questions it throws up.
One vital thing is supposed to be missing from the zombie (or perhaps we 
should say for the zombie). As Chalmers puts it, 'all is dark inside'. So let's say 
that what is lacking in the zombie is an 'inner light'. We don't need to say any-
thing about the nature of the inner light. This is just our name for what is sup-
posed to be absent from zombies. Now, if we can imagine X's zombie twin, a 
creature who is physically identical to X but who lacks an inner light, then can 
24 Kirk (1974, 2005); Chalmers (1996).
25 Chalmers (1996), pp. 94-99.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
22
we not equally imagine the inner light of the real X being switched off for a day 
or two and then being switched back on again? X's friends and loved ones 
notice no change in her behaviour during her temporary zombiehood, so have 
no inkling of the tragedy, if tragedy it is, that has befallen her. Now, when X's 
inner light is restored, will she know that anything unusual has happened 
to her?26
Well, let's suppose that she does. Will she tell us about it when we ask her? 
Recall that her behaviour after the episode of absence, including all the things 
she says, will be identical to that of her normal twin, whose inner light is per-
manently switched on. So her reply to the question will be the same as her 
twin's. But if she knows she has had an episode of phenomenal absence then 
her twin is presumably equally aware of not having had such an episode. 
So whichever reply we hear—whether the twins (in unison) report nothing 
untoward or whether they (in unison) report a gap in their phenomenal 
consciousness—one or other of them is mysteriously incapable of articulating 
what they know about their inner light.
On the other hand, if she has no awareness of what has transpired, then how 
can any of us be sure—even from the inside, even from the supposedly privi-
leged, first-personal perspective—that this is not happening to us in ordinary 
life all the time? Perhaps I can indeed be certain that the inner light is on right 
now. But for all I know it might never have been on in the past, even a moment 
ago. This is not a statement of scepticism about memory. For I may be able to 
accurately recall and recount what has happened to me—to my body, that is to 
say—and even to provide a totally convincing description of my past thought 
processes. But, for all I know, everything I remember might have happened 
while my inner light was off. Now here is a disturbing thought: If that were 
true, why would it matter?
Here is a variant of Wittgenstein's diary thought experiment, using the inner 
light in place of private, inner sensation. Suppose I decide to try to discover 
whether and when I suffer from zombie episodes, episodes of phenomenal 
absence. So I keep a diary, and I write 'L' in the diary on those days when my 
inner light is switched on. Later, I tell myself, I will be able to look back through 
the diary and, seeing an 'L', be sure that I was phenomenally present on that 
day, that all was not dark inside. Well, how could I trust any previous occur-
rences of 'L' marked in my diary, even if (contra Wittgenstein) I were capable 
of unilaterally identifying when my private, inner light was on? After all, 
if I was phenomenally absent on that day—away with the zombies, so to 
26 See Güzeldere (1997), pp. 43-44.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
23
speak—I would have written an 'L' in my diary even in my zombie state. So the 
'L' can tell me nothing. It seems to have no use even in a private language.
Here is another puzzle. How do we know that an inner light is the kind of 
thing that is simply either on or off? In addition to zombies (and part-time 
zombies), can we not imagine half-zombies? A half-zombie is also physically 
and behaviourally identical to his normal twin (and indeed to his zombie 
twin). It is like something to be a half-zombie, but not much. The being-
likeness of a half-zombie is, perhaps, analogous to that of a chicken, or a fish. 
The inner light is on, but dimmed somewhat. However, unlike a chicken, who 
behaves in a way that suggests a much-dimmed inner light, and who has a 
modest brain to match, the half-zombie behaves exactly like a normal human 
being and has a fully functional, human-rated brain. Surely such a thing can be 
imagined. But then how can we distinguish between a full inner light and a half 
inner light? That is to say, how could we distinguish these things even theo-
retically, in order to make further philosophical progress? There seems to be 
no place for us to lodge a rational hook into the concept of an inner light, no 
way to reel it close enough in to formulate an argument as to whether or not it 
admits of degree.
The inner light is, of course, just the same as the beetle in Wittgenstein's box, 
except now the box contains a 'firefly' (shedding the inner light of true phe-
nomenal experience). Everyone says they have one, but no one knows what a 
'firefly' is except by looking into their own box. So it's possible that all the 
boxes contain something quite different. Some fireflies might glow more 
brightly than others. Some boxes might even be empty. Some boxes might be 
empty on some days but not on others, or glow more brightly on some days 
than others. None of this makes the slightest difference to how people use the 
word 'firefly'. So the word 'firefly' cannot be a name for the contents of the 
box, because the firefly itself—the inner light—has no place in the language-
game whatsoever. It divides through, whatever it is.
So have we arrived at the conclusion that there is no such thing as an inner 
light, that there being something it is like to be something is no different from 
there being nothing it is like to be something? Not at all! Our error—albeit a 
natural and forgivable one—was to indulge in metaphysical thinking in the 
first place, and to avow such a conclusion would only be to repeat the error. 
The conclusion of the zombie argument is not wrong. But it is not right either. 
Metaphysical thinking—dualistic thinking—starts with the very first attempt 
to describe a zombie, and the ensuing discussion is saturated with it from start 
to finish. A suitably critical foray into the absurd world of the philosophical 
zombie should nudge us towards a post-reflective view of the inner, a condi-
tion wherein metaphysical talk loses its power to impress, wherein we feel less 
attracted to questions that previously seemed deep because we know how to 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
24
think through them, exposing the emptiness of the language used to conjure 
them in our heads, but without resorting to further metaphysics. However, to 
attain such a state is no easy thing. It requires work.
1.6 The subjectivity of exotic life forms
Even for those among the philosophically inclined who feel burdened by their 
inclinations, who are drawn to the idea of reaching a post-reflective condition, 
it's not possible simply to withdraw from abstract, rational thought. For the 
supposedly slain monster of dualism has a way of persistently re-surfacing in 
different guises, like Grendel with an endless supply of mothers. To work 
through one line of dualistic thinking, undermining its foundations by reject-
ing its language, is not enough to acquire the means to work through every line 
of dualistic thinking in the same way. This is why the Philosophical Investigations 
and the rest of Wittgenstein's later writing is a compendium of case studies.
In our own compendium of case studies, our attention now turns to Nagel's 
well-known essay on subjectivity and to the question posed by its magnificent 
title 'What is it like to be a bat?'.27 The point of the title is that a bat is a crea-
ture quite unlike a human being. Humans run, walk, and sit on sofas, whereas 
bats fly and dangle upside-down in holes. Mostly confined to the ground by 
gravity, humans navigate a world of more or less two dimensions, whereas 
bats have the freedom of all three. To negotiate their flattened world humans 
use their eyesight, whereas the visually impaired bat employs echolocation. 
Also, bats eat flies, which is uncommon in human beings. Someone who enjoys 
hang-gliding knows what it is like to fly, and a blind person who can 'hear' the 
walls of a room by tapping a white stick on the floor knows what it is like to use 
echolocation. Such people may be in a better position than the rest of us to 
understand what it is like to be a bat. But surely no human being, however 
prosthetically enhanced, could ever really know what it is like, could know 
what it is like for a bat to be a bat, so to speak, and no amount of scientific 
investigation can change this.
According to Nagel, this thought suggests an insurmountable obstacle to the 
provision of an objective, scientific theory of consciousness, because 'every 
subjective phenomenon is essentially connected with a single point of view, and 
it seems inevitable that an objective, physical theory will abandon that point of 
view'.28 How could the subjective experience of a bat be described except from 
a bat's point of view? Much the same point might be made for humans 
alone, without appealing to bats or other strange forms of life. An objective, 
27 Nagel (1974).
28 Nagel (1974), p. 437.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
25
scientific theory of human consciousness would have to abandon the 
subjective point of view, something that is surely essential to conscious experi-
ence. But confined to humans, this 'subjective point of view' sounds little 
different from the elusive 'inner light' discussed in the previous section, 
a notion that in itself no longer has much of a grip on us. However, Nagel has 
found a new means of provoking us, of arousing our philosophical anxieties. 
Using exotic life-forms, he can evoke once more the dualistic picture of 
a metaphysical chasm between inner and outer.
Consider the octopus. The octopus displays many behavioural attributes 
associated with intelligence, and it seems reasonable to assume it is like some-
thing to be an octopus. Yet the octopus belongs to the class of cephalopods, 
who sit on a branch of the phylogenetic tree that split from our own before 
evolution settled on the basic pattern of neuroanatomy common to all verte-
brates. The central nervous system of an octopus, which includes separate 
mini-brains for each of its eight tentacles, doesn't even have a thalamus. So we 
lack the potential handle on its subjective experience that a familiar underlying 
neuroanatomical blueprint might provide. And if we allow our imaginations 
to roam further into the realm of exotic life forms, we might wonder how we 
could ever know what it was like to be an extraterrestrial that evolved on a dif-
ferent planet, or a putatively conscious robot whose internal workings were 
engineered without reference to biological precedent.29
But let's stay with bats and see if we can unpack Nagel's reflections. At their 
core is a commonsense distinction between subject and object. To know that a 
bat has wings is not the same as actually to have wings, and to know that a bat 
navigates by echolocation is certainly no help in the dark. However diligently 
I study aerodynamics I will never sprout wings, and no amount of expertise in 
acoustics will enable my tongue to emit ultrasonic clicks. These are hardly 
profound observations. However it is surely like something to be a bat, in the 
way it is like something to be human. So, remarkably, for a bat, unlike an air-
craft, it is like something to have wings. Now, I know what it's like to be a 
human being with two legs. But I could never know what it's like to be a bat 
with wings. And to know something is surely to have knowledge of some thing, 
which means to be in possession of certain facts. So it looks as if we have discov-
ered a whole new realm of facts. Let's call them phenomenological facts. And 
doesn't the example of the bat show that the phenomenological facts about a 
sufficiently exotic form of life are, in principle, inaccessible to us?
But this is all smoke and mirrors. We started out with a perfectly harmless 
distinction between subject and object. Then we contaminated it with the 
29 See McFarland (2008).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
26
already discredited distinction between inner and outer, lending it a spurious 
air of metaphysical mystery. And finally, to reinforce the effect, we introduced 
epistemology and insidiously shifted from one use of the word 'know' to 
another. All we have really done is take an elegant and useful locution—the 
phrase 'like something to be'—and serially abuse it until it yields metaphysics. 
The conjuring trick needs to be exposed and the harm it has done reversed, so 
that we can return to the path of post-reflective tranquillity. When we say: 
'However much I know about bats, I will never know what it's like to be a bat', 
we have said no more than the following. It is like something to be human, and 
it is like something to be a bat. But humans and bats are very different, and 
I am a human not a bat. What is missing from this description?
But if nothing is missing from this metaphysically inert reformulation then 
what is the answer to Nagel's original question? Does the question of what it is 
like to be a bat have no answer at all? Surely it is like something to be a bat, and 
it seems fair to wonder what it is like. If confronted with an extraterrestrial 
creature, would we not be curious what it was like to be that creature? And if 
we built a robot in the laboratory that behaved like a human, would we not 
want to know if it were capable of suffering, whether we had ethical responsi-
bilities towards it? Surely there are facts of the matter here, regardless of 
whether we can discover them. But the answer to Nagel's challenge, and the 
reply to all these questions, is that nothing is hidden.30 That is to say, nothing is 
metaphysically hidden. Of course, you may dissemble and keep your thoughts 
from me. And we may be prevented by time and space from encountering 
extraterrestrials. But these senses of hidden are no more mysterious than a ball 
under a magician's cup. If further investigation were feasible, all would be 
revealed. However ignorant we are of octopuses, aliens, and robots, nothing 
about them is truly hidden from us, that is to say on the other side of a meta-
physical veil.
1.7 Thought experiments with peculiar scientists
To sharpen the point, let's conduct another thought experiment. Imagine a 
perfect mechanical scientist—a machine whose internal workings bear no 
resemblance to our own, but which is capable of acquiring knowledge, acting 
on it, communicating it, and so on. The mechanical scientist can build perfect 
theories of the brain, of psychology, and of physics, and it can hold a normal 
conversation about these theories that impresses the world's leading experts. 
But there is nothing it is like to be that mechanical scientist. It is just a knowl-
edge cruncher. As with the philosophical zombie, there is no one at home, and 
30 Wittgenstein (1958), §435.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
27
all is dark inside. Whether a machine with this combination of attributes is 
empirically possible is not at issue here. As with all such thought experiments, 
what matters is the impact the imaginative excursion has on the way we think 
and talk about the relevant concepts. Now, what could the mechanical scientist 
possibly say about what it is like to be a human being, or a bat, or anything 
else? Indeed, how could it know that it was like anything to be anything? What 
inkling could it have that the universe contained consciousness at all?
Well, it does not follow from the fact that a certain property does not hold of 
a person, that the person in question cannot understand properties of that 
sort. A doctor can treat a patient for a disease from which she has never suf-
fered herself, and discuss such diseases with similarly blessed colleagues. A car 
mechanic can replace the spark plugs in an engine even though he lacks an 
engine himself, and can teach an apprentice to do the same. Likewise, the 
mechanical scientist is no more handicapped than a human scientist when it 
comes to finding an empirical theory of human consciousness, of what it is like 
to be human. We might remark that it will never 'know' what it is like to be 
human in the way that we do. But what more does this amount to than the 
empty observation that it will never be human? The insidious word 'know' 
here misleads us into metaphysical thinking. In what useful or interesting 
sense could it follow that we know more than the mechanical scientist solely 
because of certain things we are that the mechanical scientist is not?
Is there perhaps a danger here of trivializing the sense of 'know' in knowing 
what it is like to be something? To know what it is like to be something is surely 
more than simply to be that thing. Someone who knows what it is like to eat 
pheasant, for example, can also communicate something of the experience to 
others. And a person who knows what it is like to make love to their spouse can 
also imagine what it might be like to make love to their neighbour. Much of 
this, surely, is barred to the mechanical scientist. Whereas the mechanical sci-
entist may, through judiciously chosen sentences, be able to evoke in a human 
feelings it does not itself enjoy, the most skilled human poet is powerless to 
evoke feelings of any sort at all in the mechanical scientist. Very well, but there 
is nothing in this more nuanced treatment of the word 'know' capable of rein-
stating the original argument. What is barred to the mechanical scientist is so 
because of certain facts that do not hold for it, and this is no barrier to its 
understanding facts of that sort. Nowhere here do we find a new kind of fact.
The mechanical scientist is a conceptual relative of another peculiar imaginary 
scientist, namely Mary, who plays the leading role in the so-called knowledge 
argument, another attempt to establish a form of dualism.31 Mary, who lives in 
31 Jackson (1982); Ludlow, et al. (2004).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
28
a future when our knowledge of neuroscience is total, has a complete grasp of 
the physics, neurophysiology, and psychology of colour vision. However, Mary 
herself has never seen any colour other than black, white, or grey, as she has 
grown up and lived all her life in a specially constructed monochrome room. 
Now consider what happens when she leaves the room for the first time to see 
the world in its full colourful glory. None of her expertise in colour vision, so 
the argument goes, will diminish the shock and pleasure of seeing colours 
for the first time. When she sees red for the first time, she learns something. 
She discovers what it is like to see red. As, according to the thought experi-
ment, she was in possession of all the objective, physical facts beforehand, this 
entails that what she has learned is not an objective physical fact. So it must be 
an altogether different kind of fact, something that is beyond the reach of 
objective scientific enquiry.
But the appropriate question to ask is not what Mary learns when she sees 
red for the first time, but what it is about her that changes. On one level, we 
might say, what happens is this. Mary exclaims. She smiles. In due course she 
becomes able to pick out the red objects among others. She becomes able to 
recall the colours of objects she has seen, and to report them to others. She 
might learn to paint. On another level, we might say, what changes is some-
thing like the following. Light of a particular wavelength hits her retina for the 
first time, and sets off a cascade of neural events. These put her brain into a 
state it has never been in before. As a result of this, and in combination with 
further ensuing events, her behavioural repertoire is duly enlarged. Whichever 
way you look at it, certain objective properties that had never previously been 
applicable to Mary become applicable, and this happens regardless of whatever 
previous understanding she may or may not have had of properties of that 
sort. Likewise, there are many properties that will never be applicable to a 
human being but this in no way limits the scope of a human scientific enquiry 
into properties of that kind.
The final hypothetical scientist we shall consider is perhaps the most pecu-
liar of all. Imagine an extraterrestrial whose scientific understanding of the 
human being is as full and sophisticated as the mechanical scientist's. However, 
the extraterrestrial scientist does not speak any human language. Indeed, the 
extraterrestrial is physiologically and behaviourally so alien that all attempts to 
establish communication with it have failed. Of course, the extraterrestrial 
has an excellent theory of human language, explaining the strange noises and 
marks humans are prone to make and the role those noises and marks play in 
human society. But the theory is expressed in the scientific language of the 
extraterrestrial and deployed for its own inscrutable ends. The extraterrestrial 
scientist either cannot or will not make use of that theory to open a channel of 

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
29
communication with the human race. Finally, it is not like anything to be the 
extraterrestrial scientist. Somehow, evolution on the extraterrestrial's planet 
managed to produce intelligence without consciousness.
In essence, then, the extraterrestrial scientist is very much like the mechani-
cal scientist, except that its theories are supposedly incomprehensible to us. 
The one point of contact that we had with the mechanical scientist, namely a 
shared language, is absent. Because the mechanical scientist is inducted into 
our language and society, it can present its theory of human consciousness in 
human terms. So even though it is not like anything to be the mechanical sci-
entist, it can answer questions about why it is like something to be human (and 
indeed why it is like nothing to be the mechanical scientist itself ). The resources 
to do this come with the language, are part of the package, so to speak. But the 
extraterrestrial scientist is in a less favourable position. So whereas the mechan-
ical scientist might be in a position to develop a scientific theory of conscious-
ness, the extraterrestrial scientist surely is not. Something will always be missing 
from its objectively flawless theories, namely subjectivity, which it not only 
lacks, but cannot even talk about. Does this not then entail that the set of 
objectively describable facts about the universe does not encompass all the 
facts about the universe? The chasm of dualism gapes open once more.
Now, what exactly is supposed to prevent the extraterrestrial scientist from 
developing a full theory of human consciousness? Nothing is hidden, so how is 
the extraterrestrial scientist not in the same position as the mechanical scien-
tist? Everything is available to it. So where in setting up the thought experiment 
did we go astray? At what point did we begin to indulge in metaphysical think-
ing? The science fiction looks impeccable. As with the mechanical scientist, it 
begs the question of the empirical possibility of intelligence without conscious-
ness. But notwithstanding this, our imaginations are not overly stretched by 
the proposed creature. No, the mistake was to announce that the extraterres-
trial theory omitted something that was included in the human theory, and 
then to take for granted the notion that the omitted something might be part 
of some fundamental reality. Yet the omitted something is nothing more than 
the dubious 'inner light' that is lacking in the philosophical zombie.
In conventional philosophical terms, we would characterize the extraterres-
trial and human theories as having incompatible 'ontologies'. But what does 
that mean? All we have here are two different forms of life, two different 
languages, two different kinds of activity, and nowhere in this two-ness is a 
metaphysical division exposed. Sometimes scientific communities use words 
in highly distinctive ways ('molecule', 'gene', 'wave', and so on). If a scientist 
points out that these are the things that 'exist' according to her theory, then 
this is just the right way to talk given the practices of the scientific community, 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
30
practices that are especially rigorous and that demand a strong empirical 
sanction for using words in that sort of way. But for anyone—scientist, phil-
osopher, or layperson—to go a step further and claim that the 'fundamental 
nature' of reality is revealed by a scientific theory is to make a dangerous and 
unnecessary metaphysical move. So talk of the superiority of one theory's 
ontology over another's that appeals to some altogether hidden order of 
reality—such as the realm of private, inner experience—is doubly misplaced.
1.8 The subject adrift in time
Having confronted a series of arguments like those in the preceding compila-
tion, and having safely deflected them all without resorting to metaphysical 
thinking, the philosophically inclined individual may perhaps think she has 
attained a sufficient degree of post-reflective composure to wrestle with 
Descartes' cogito. But she would be wrong. For despite the passage of 350 years, 
the cogito remains the most potent weapon of dualism. Although we have 
repelled several of its most talked-about contemporary successors, the cogito 
itself will not submit so easily. The Cartesian thought is clearly a threat to the 
condition of post-reflective quietude we have been cultivating. It is a meta-
physical argument with an overtly dualistic conclusion. But in contrast to 
the metaphysical stirrings engendered by zombies, exotic life forms, peculiar 
scientists, and so on, no suitable metaphysics-free response to the cogito is 
suggested by the private language remarks.
The power of the cogito derives from its parsimony. Each of the contempo-
rary arguments we have examined trades on our acceptance of a problematic 
relationship between the physical world and the sensations, feelings, thoughts, 
and so on that occupy the conscious mind. That is to say, each of these argu-
ments depends on the distinction between inner and outer. The private lan-
guage remarks do their remedial work by using the inner/outer distinction 
against itself, causing the supposedly problematic relationship to vanish. But 
the cogito relies on no such distinction. It doesn't need the physical world. 
It doesn't need sensations or feelings. All it calls upon for its argument to work 
is the naked, thinking subject.
The cogito continues to bewitch us because it's hard not to embrace the 
conception of the subject that it conjures with, a conception whose essence is 
'self-presence'. When a philosopher avows that the proposition 'I am thinking' 
is necessarily true each time she entertains it, the thought in question is essen-
tially reflexive. It is a thought about itself, and it evokes a thinking subject that 
is present to itself. Moreover, this self-present subject is also self-sufficient, and 
this is evident from the meagre resources required to evoke it. Floating free of 
the material world, the self-present subject's existence presupposes nothing 

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
31
but the self-present subject itself, its own presence to itself. It is this notion of 
the Cartesian subject—self-present and self-sufficient—that leads to a renewed 
irruption of the dualistic impulse. How could the material world accommo-
date such a thing? Surely no objective scientific theory of consciousness could 
ever hope to answer this question.32
When the method of doubt is spent, the hard, indestructible nucleus of this 
self-sufficient subject is all that is left. But in this barren wasteland where ordi-
nary life is forgotten and the philosopher is left with nothing but the purity of 
her own self-given, self-present consciousness, an all-consuming ogre lurks—
Time. Self-given subjectivity, if the concept is to be given any credence, must 
be amenable to preservation for later reflection. There can be no mere instant 
of self-presence. A moment of self-presence that left no trace of itself behind 
would be just a chimera, no better than a nothing.33 So the Cartesian philoso-
pher is obliged to address the following question. How is a fleeting moment in 
the 'flow of consciousness'34 saved from annihilation the instant it comes into 
being? How is it preserved for later re-appropriation by the flow? As Husserl 
wrote,
... all experiences flow away. Consciousness is a perpetual Heraclitean flux; what has 
just been given sinks into the abyss of the phenomenological past and then is gone 
forever. Nothing can return and be given in identity a second time.35
James expressed a similar thought.
Let any one try, I will not say to arrest, but to notice or attend to, the present moment 
of time. One of the most baffling experiences occurs. Where is it, this present? It has 
melted in our grasp, fled ere we could touch it, gone in the instant of becoming.36
32 For an overview of standard responses to the cogito, see Williams (1978), Chapter 3.
33 A related point is made by Derrida (1967/1973, Chapters 4 & 5), commenting on Husserl 
(1911/1991). According to Zahavi (2005, p.70), Derrida's reflections have the 'disturbing 
implication that consciousness appears to itself, not as it is, but as it has just been' which 
suggests 'a blind spot in the core of subjectivity'. From the present standpoint, this 
thought is liberating not disturbing.
34 The phrases 'flow of consciousness' and 'lived experience' are frequently used by scholars 
and translators of Husserl. James's notion of the 'stream of consciousness' (1890/1950, 
p. 239) is comparable.
35 Husserl (1911/1991), p. 360. Husserl's way of saving the subject from the abyss of the phe-
nomenological past is to elaborate a theory of the structure of inner time-consciousness, 
according to which our awareness in the present moment has three components - (immedi-
ate) primal impression, (backward looking) retention, and (forward looking) protention.
36 James (1890/1950), vol. 1, p. 608. See also Andersen & Grush (2009), who exhume a 
number of relevant influences on James and Husserl.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
32
Indeed the present is always gone. But some trace of it must linger if the 
conscious moment is to be given to the subject for later reflection. For the 
philosopher who adheres to the doctrine of self-sufficiency, who believes that 
her self-present, self-given consciousness does not depend for its being on 
world, society, or (public) language, all that can be preserved of a conscious 
experience after it has receded into the phenomenological past is what con-
sciousness can clasp to itself, what it can offer to itself for later re-appropriation. 
Without recourse to any form of external recording, lacking any means of 
repository in the world, this is all that can endure of consciousness, and all that 
can endure for consciousness, in its pure, self-present, self-sufficiency.
Of course, for the idea of preservation to make sense, there has to be some-
thing to preserve in the first place. Let's call whatever it is that must be pre-
served for later reflection, or what is at least amenable to preservation for the 
very idea of self-presence to make sense, the original conscious experience. Now, 
for the philosophical champion of self-sufficiency the following question 
requires an answer. What criterion could be used to measure the original con-
scious experience against whatever trace of itself it leaves behind? What crite-
rion could be used to assess the fidelity of the trace, and thereby to distinguish 
successful preservation from a mere sham? As the trace in question belongs to 
consciousness alone, this criterion cannot appeal to any outward behaviour 
that the original conscious experience might have given rise to at the time. Nor 
can it appeal to any aspect of whatever neurological activity that might have 
accompanied the original conscious experience. Bodies and brains are in the 
world and have thus been discarded by the method of doubt.
The only possible criterion for measuring the original conscious experience 
against the trace within which it is allegedly preserved for the self-sufficient 
conscious subject would be a strictly private one. (By now it should be clear 
that the strategy we are pursuing echoes Wittgenstein's private language 
remarks.) Only from the point of view of the subject would it be possible to 
assess the trace of a conscious experience against the original of which it is sup-
posed to be a record. But from the subject's point of view, the original experi-
ence is always gone, and the trace is all that is left of it. So what could possibly 
distinguish a veridical trace from a false one? Indeed how, using nothing but 
private criteria, could any distinction be drawn between a later reflection 
wherein the original conscious experience has been faithfully restored and a 
later reflection wherein the original conscious experience is radically compro-
mised yet seems like it has been faithfully restored?
Very well. Perhaps no such criteria are to be had, and the idea of a trustworthy 
trace is suspect. But surely for the cogito to establish the self-sufficiency of the 
conscious subject, any trace will do. It does not have to be trustworthy. It just 
has to be a thread that joins the past of the conscious subject—the immediate 

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
33
past will suffice—to the present of that same subject. Yet what distinction 
could be drawn, calling only on the resources that are available within the sub-
ject's sphere of privacy, between a genuine trace and the mere impression of a 
trace? What sense can be made of the distinction between a trace that really 
does connect the past of a conscious subject to its present, and the instantane-
ous flashing into being of a phantom trace that connects nothing to nothing 
and belongs to a subject that is equally ephemeral?
These rhetorical questions are not an expression of scepticism about mem-
ory (much as the rhetorical question at the heart of the private language 
remarks is not an expression of scepticism about memory). The issue here 
is not how we could ever know that a private, self-given trace of the original 
experience was trustworthy or genuine. Rather, the issue is what it could even 
mean for such a trace to be trustworthy or genuine. So, is the conclusion that 
the subject is radically divided from itself by time? Have we shown that self-
awareness is at best flawed and at worst just an illusion? Not at all. To affirm 
any such thing would be implicitly to approve the terms of a metaphysical 
debate on self-presence when we would prefer to wash our hands of it alto-
gether. The conclusion, rather, is this. When the concept of self-sufficient 
subjectivity—a concept that we are tempted by thanks to the cogito—is sub-
mitted to critical examination, it is found wanting. And this is enough to quell 
the resurgent threat of dualism.
We're almost done with Descartes and the cogito. But not quite. Because the 
denouement we are moving towards is conveniently characterized by 
comparison and contrast with the project of the Meditations, which opens as 
follows.
I had to undertake seriously once in my life to rid myself of all the opinions I had 
adopted up to then, and to begin again from the foundations, if I wished to establish 
something firm and constant in the sciences.37
A similar quest for foundations motivates the present chapter. But the foun-
dations we are unearthing are not those Descartes believed he had found when 
doubt had run its course. Towards the end of his life, Wittgenstein wrote a 
series of remarks that were posthumously published as On Certainty. Many of 
these remarks engage directly with the sceptical elements of the cogito (although 
he never names Descartes explicitly), and it is here that we find the clearest 
allusions in the literature to the position we are approaching.
If you tried to doubt everything you would not get as far as doubting anything. The 
game of doubting itself presupposes certainty.38
37 Descartes (1641/1968), p. 95.
38 Wittgenstein (1969), §115.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
34
My life consists in my being content to accept many things.39
Doubt itself rests only on what is beyond doubt.40
Wittgenstein is gesturing at what is simply taken for granted in our lives, 
such as our shared world, our language, each other. These things (which we 
should not call 'things') form a necessary backdrop to the expression of the 
sceptical propositions on which the argument of the cogito rests. In other 
words, its conclusion denies the conditions necessary for its formulation. 
When we dig beneath the cogito, when we uproot it, only then do we expose a 
true foundation, the common source of language, reason, and science. All are 
seen to originate in a kind of silence, what we might call the fundamental 
starting point. This is the everyday silence on philosophical matters that comes 
before metaphysical anxiety, a silence that we can hope to re-inhabit by enter-
ing a post-reflective condition. Within the silence of the fundamental starting 
point, which precedes the cogito both conceptually and chronologically, sub-
ject and object are not divided. We might say that it manifests an ineffable 
harmony between mind, world, and language, a harmony that underwrites our 
being at home in the world. But to say this would be to violate the very silence 
in question.
1.9 The proper silence of first philosophy
We have come to this pass because we are interested in some very large 
questions. What is a human being? What am I? And we have alighted on two 
subsidiary questions. First, what is the nature of the conscious subject? Second, 
what are the limits of empirical enquiry? In the context of the cogito these two 
subsidiary questions are subtly but intimately entwined, because the Cartesian 
invocation of the naked subject threatens to prescribe a limit to the scientific 
study of consciousness. Science, in this conception, is condemned never to 
touch the secret inner plasm of consciousness itself. It can only fumble with its 
outer manifestations. The danger is that when we pull up the metaphysical 
roots of this way of thinking, removing the limitations it imposes, we will exca-
vate the foundations of scientific enquiry itself. This is a very real danger 
because, before we can complete our project, before we are reduced to the 
silence of the fundamental starting point, we will be forced to use arguments 
that could be misconstrued as leading to a position that conflicts with both 
common sense and the ideals of rational investigation.
So it's important to see reduction to post-reflective silence not as a philo-
sophical terminus, but rather as the discovery of a true first philosophy, not as 
39 Wittgenstein (1969), §344.
40 Wittgenstein (1969), §519.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
35
justifying a destructive or nihilistic standpoint from which reason and truth 
can excusably be degraded, but rather as a temporary resting place from which 
to reinstate our commonsense license to talk to each other about the world and 
our engagement with it, and to accord (more or less) the usual privilege to 
such concepts as truth, reason, and objective reality. To be reduced to post-
reflective silence is, in a manner of speaking, to die to philosophy. But from the 
silence of this fundamental starting point we can be reborn into philosophy, 
and the project of gaining a greater understanding of our inner lives can be 
safely revisited.
But we're not quite there yet. Nothing less than the wholesale overthrow of 
metaphysics will fulfil our quest. We have confronted the concept of meaning 
and the concept of subjective experience. But no single set of foundational 
concepts exists, small in number and the same for every enquirer, whose frac-
ture indisputably revokes metaphysics.41 The dam, if it cracks at all, will crack 
differently for each thinker. Putting the concepts of meaning and conscious-
ness under pressure greatly weakens the whole edifice. But for those brought 
up in the analytic tradition, a number of obvious additional targets are salient. 
These include the concept of truth, and indeed the very concept of a concept 
itself. There is a problem with analytic philosophy's concept of a 'concept' to 
the extent that it aspires to denote something self-identical, singular, and fixed, 
because our critique commends the view that the way we use a word is, by 
nature, irreducibly dependent on context, subject to polysemic variation across 
the membership of a community, and open to never-ending revision and 
alteration over time.42 What could it mean to 'clarify' a concept on this 
construal? On what could the process of clarification possibly hope to 
converge? Against what standard could clarificatory progress be measured? 
When challenged to clarify the concept of a 'concept', analytic philosophy is 
dumbfounded.43
41 Quine repudiates the quest for foundations. Borrowing a metaphor from Neurath, Quine 
(1960, pp. 3-4) famously likens both philosophy and science to 'a boat which, if we are to 
rebuild it, we must rebuild plank by plank while staying afloat in it. ... Our boat stays 
afloat because at each alteration we keep the bulk of it intact as a going concern'. Quine 
(1969, pp. 126-127) claims that 'there is no external vantage point [away from the boat], 
no first philosophy'. But in the silence that is proper to a true first philosophy, there is 
neither boat nor sea.
42 Consider Wittgenstein's treatment of the word 'game', for example (Wittgenstein, 1958, 
§§66-68): '[The use of the word] is not everywhere circumscribed by rules'. For Derrida 
too, the potential for 'grafting' words into new chains of signification entails that no 
amount of context can fully enclose a concept (Derrida, 1982, p. 317).
43 For a relevant treatment of the aims and limitations of conceptual analysis, see Moore 
(2001). We shall revisit the concept of a concept in Chapter 2.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
36
What about the concept of truth? Surely this is inviolable. Surely its sanctity 
must be preserved at all costs. Well, even the golden light of truth must take its 
place in the great embroidered cloth of our language games. But this is not an 
affront to common sense. We are properly inclined to say that mathematical 
theorems are true irrespective of whether anybody ever proves them, and that 
there are empirical facts about the universe that hold whether or not science 
ever reveals them to us. Of course, we don't want to deny such things. But if we 
agree that questions about meaning should be met with descriptions of the way 
words are used, then we're obliged to apply this principle to the language of 
philosophy. When asked what truth is, what more are we asking than what the 
word 'truth' means, and how could we do better than to reply with a description 
of the ways words like 'truth' are used?
Consider the definition of truth in Aristotle's Metaphysics.
To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while to say of what 
is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true.44
Our interest here is not scholarly, so we're not concerned with what Aristotle 
actually intended. But this well-known pronouncement is a useful foil. We 
might take Aristotle to have articulated a worthless platitude. But it's more 
interesting if we take him to be stating something troublemaking, specifically 
that what we say can be overlaid on what is the case—on Reality, if you will—
and the match between the two duly assessed. This is troublemaking because it 
is liable to rouse the dormant beast of metaphysics. For if we accept this notion, 
we're obliged to address some nasty questions. What is Reality, and how is 
what we say to be measured against it? Yet if we deny the notion we seem to be 
denying Truth and Reality altogether. So Aristotle's statement is either empty, 
or it is intolerably problematic.
If we refused to engage with metaphysics in the first place we would obvi-
ously avoid these difficulties. But those of a philosophical inclination are 
unlikely to find satisfaction while the big questions are left hanging in the air. 
On the contrary, the only way to become convinced that nothing is lost when 
metaphysics is jettisoned is to engage with it thoroughly, but to do so without 
becoming immersed in it. The standard repertoire of philosophical questions 
about the character of mind, language, and reality is insistent. But our response 
to it must have a neutralizing effect. Most importantly, we should never 
attempt to 'reach beyond the language-game', so to speak. That is to say, we 
should make no appeal to anything outside the activities of groups of users of a 
common language.
44 Aristotle (350 B.C./1924), 1011b25.

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
37
Yet how can we tolerate the apparent tension between, on the one hand, 
high-sounding talk of the objectivity of mathematics and, on the other, com-
monplace descriptions of the ways we use words like 'true', 'correct', 'valid', 
and so on? Surely we are in danger, with the latter, of naively equating truth 
with mere agreement. The dissenter will point out that no amount of agree-
ment that, say, π equals 3.2 would make it so. But no attempt has been made 
to equate or identify truth with anything. No metaphysical claim has been 
advanced about what truth is. There is no conflict here among competing 
metaphysical positions, and no tension arises. It is part of the language game of 
mathematics (so to speak) to agree that mathematical truth is more than mere 
agreement and is sanctioned only by proof. Moreover, it is part of the language 
game of everyday truth that on certain topics (such as medicine, or indeed 
mathematics) we defer to experts, whereas in other matters we defer to those 
who are simply better placed to know something than ourselves, such as the 
witnesses to a crime. In short, only a hopelessly inadequate description of the 
way we use a word like 'true' would reduce it to mere agreement.
To clarify matters, let's consider the pragmatist's conception of truth, which 
on first examination might seem compatible with the present project. 
According to Peirce, for example,
[t]he opinion which is fated to be ultimately agreed to by all who investigate, is what 
we mean by the truth, and the object represented in this opinion is the real.45
Of course, it would not be 'true' according to Peirce's carefully phrased 
definition that π equals 3.2 even if everyone agreed that it did, because he 
charges us to investigate, and nothing that would count as a proper investigation 
could legitimize such a proposition. So far, then, the pragmatist's conception 
seems allied to our own reflections. But Peirce's characterization invites a 
string of other critical questions. What is it about an opinion that makes it 
fated to be agreed upon? When exactly is ultimate agreement reached? To rise 
to the bait, to seek answers to these questions, as a contemporary philosopher 
with pragmatist leanings might, would be to make a mistake. Our goal here is 
neither to define truth nor to construct a theory. The only aim is to break the 
habit of metaphysical thinking.
Now, suppose someone were to claim that there is something deep and 
important in common between, say, truth in mathematics, truth in science, 
and truth in everyday life. The use of the same cluster of words in these differ-
ent contexts is more than coincidence. There is an underlying concept here—
Truth. A logician, taking up the baton, might point out that the tautologies of 
predicate calculus remain valid whatever the subject matter. So we are free to 
45 Peirce (1878).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
38
combine mathematical, empirical, and even ethical and aesthetic propositions 
in any way we choose, and remain confident in our ability to reason correctly 
with the results. Suppose we were challenged to account for this seemingly 
remarkable fact. Well, what is there to account for? What more is there to say? 
The logician has said everything a logician can say, and we should resist the 
temptation to embellish her words with further metaphysical pronouncements. 
(As to whether logic, propositions, tautologies, and so on play a significant role 
in ordinary life, well that's another matter altogether.)
The offence of metaphysics is the attempt to exceed the language game, to 
get at what is hidden, what lies beneath, to anchor the conceptual apparatus of 
philosophy (experience, truth, reality, and so on) in a firmament outside the 
language game. But it can only do this by appealing to something that is, so to 
speak, further in than the language game, namely the authority of the con-
scious subject, or to something further out than the language game, such as the 
Platonic heaven. But we have already disabused ourselves of these notions. So, 
do mathematics, empirical science, and honest everyday speech ever articulate 
truths that obtain independently of our minds? It would be improper to answer 
yes, and perverse to answer no. The fault lies in the question, which presents an 
illusory dilemma. To grasp either horn of the dilemma would be to indulge in 
metaphysical thinking. Instead we should offer the sort of response furnished 
earlier, whose aim is not to supply a philosophically satisfactory account of 
Truth and Reality or any such thing, but rather to displace the need for such an 
account—to gesture, that is to say, at silence.46
Yet how can the privileged status of science survive such an assault? If truth 
is characterized merely in terms of what we say, then on what grounds can one 
form of enquiry claim authority over another? Well first, no characterization 
of truth has been put forward. Instead, the aim is to dispel the feeling that truth 
stands in need of such a characterization. Second, to speak of the grounds for 
privilege is inappropriate. Certain practices simply assume authority over oth-
ers in the right circumstances, thanks to their manifest success (and the powers 
of persuasion this success confers on their advocates). It would be disingenu-
ous to pretend not to feel the need for a metaphysical explanation of why this 
is so, yet we must resist the temptation to supply one all the same. It is inherent 
46 The position we have arrived at, as well as the strategy for getting there, bears comparison 
with the thinking of the 2nd century Indian philosopher N¯ag¯arjuna (2nd Century/1995): 
'To say "it is" is to grasp for permanence. To say "it is not" is to adopt the view of nihil-
ism' (15:10). N¯ag¯arjuna's writing influenced the development of Zen Buddhism, and has 
drawn contemporary comparison with both Wittgenstein and Derrida (Kasulis, 1981, 
especially Chapter 2; Loy, 1992; Garfield & Priest, 2003).

THE POST-REFLECTIVE INNER VIEW
39
in the language game of truth to say that truth is more than just a language 
game, and there we must let the matter rest.
Finally, in philosophy, 'one gets to the point where one would like just to 
emit an inarticulate sound'.47 We see that the very moment we open our 
mouths to speak or lift our pens to write, we have already gone wrong. In the 
end, only a kind of silence can serve as a proper starting point, as the first 
philosophy that Descartes was seeking. What is meant here by 'silence' is not 
literally the absence of speech, but rather a silence in the presence of certain 
questions, questions that lead to metaphysical reflection. Yet this is not the 
silence of an infant or an animal in the face of such questions. Nor is it the 
silence of an adult human who is simply not philosophically inclined (although 
it has something in common with that kind of silence). Rather, it is a silence 
that can come only after reflection, a silence to which a person is reduced by 
sustained confrontation with metaphysical questions.
At the same time, the silence we are reaching for here is prior to the language 
of philosophy. It is the original source from which the language of philosophy 
springs. Indeed, it is the source from which all language springs.48 As such, it is 
an end that contains the seeds of a new beginning. What gives depth to the 
post-reflective condition is what comes after it. Although the silence of the 
pre-reflective child also carries the seeds of future thought, she faces a future of 
reflective anxiety. In post-reflective silence, everything remains available to be 
said. Yet philosophy has been given peace, and the path back to silence is always 
open.
In the proper silence of first philosophy everything important remains 
the same. The daily round of human affairs continues.49 Everyday human 
language is untouched. As Wittgenstein affirms,
Philosophy may in no way interfere with the actual use of language; it can in the end 
only describe it. For it cannot give it any foundation either. It leaves everything as 
it is.50
47 Wittgenstein (1958), §261.
48 Caputo (1983, p. 675), while discussing Rorty's (1979) reading of Heidegger, also refers 
to 'the silence from which all language springs'. His meaning appears close to what is 
intended here.
49 The idea of a post-reflective silence that 'leaves everything as it is' is reminiscent of 
certain motifs in the literature of Zen Buddhism, where a Zen master often responds to a 
student who remains on the reflective level (asking for instruction, say) by directly exhib-
iting the post-reflective condition, wherein the absence of philosophical difficulties is 
manifest in the commonplace activities of ordinary life (Aitken, 1991).
50 Wittgenstein (1958), §124. Of course, when Wittgenstein says philosophy here he means 
philosophy 'done right'—that is to say philosophy as it is done in the Philosophical 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
40
The post-reflective stance is not an end to thinking. After all, it concerns 
only philosophy. Other forms of intellectual chatter go on as before. Moreover, 
the enlightened, post-reflective philosopher retains an important role, because 
she can guide the metaphysically afflicted towards the silence to which she 
herself always remains oriented. This role is especially relevant to the scientific 
study of consciousness. Like any nascent field, the scientific study of con-
sciousness has to innovate to establish its methods and theoretical vocabulary. 
But there is an understandable tendency for its investigators to plunder every-
day psychological language, and then to stray unwittingly into metaphysical 
territory they are ill equipped to traverse.51 The challenge for the enlightened, 
post-reflective philosopher is to recognize when the exotic deployment of 
everyday folk-psychological terms such as 'thought' and 'consciousness' is a 
preliminary form of conceptual innovation, or an innocent rhetorical device 
to make difficult ideas accessible to a wider audience, and when it constitutes 
a dangerous foray into metaphysics.
The philosopher's job is made especially tricky because the ambitious scien-
tist is always in quest of the deepest possible theory. Deep theories use abstract 
concepts and express overarching principles, and sometimes it's difficult to 
separate scientific theorizing at the highest level from metaphysical thinking. 
Nevertheless, these things are quite distinct. The theoretical musings of a cir-
cumspect researcher deal always in abstractions that are amenable to ground-
ing in scientific practice and can thereby be legitimized empirically as well as 
rationally. In short, the careful scientist can always be brought back to the 
fundamental starting point. It is in this spirit that we shall now proceed to sift 
for a set of principles and abstractions to underpin a scientific understanding 
of cognition and its relation to our inner lives.
Investigations, not necessarily philosophy as it was (and is) typically done. Indeed, 
conventional philosophy is the one thing Wittgenstein does not want to leave as it is. 
There is a point of contact here with Heidegger, which is plainest to see with the aid of the 
commentary by Dreyfus (1991): 'Being and Time seeks to show that everyday human 
activity ... can disclose the world' (p. 58). Heidegger and Wittgenstein also agree, accord-
ing to Drefyus, that 'the lack of an ultimate ground ... is not an abyss. Counting on the 
shared agreement in our practices, we can do anything we want to do: understand the 
world, understand each other, have language, have families, have science, etc.' (p. 156).
51 See Bennett & Hacker (2003).

Chapter 2
Cognition and embodiment
This chapter offers a characterization of cognition that assigns crucial impor-
tance to the fact of an animal's embodiment. Embodiment helps to explain 
what cognition is for and how it exercises its influence, as well as underpinning 
a scientifically respectable account of concepts, the building blocks of thought. 
A central role for cognition, in this view, is to enable the exploration, either 
on-line (through interaction with the world) or off-line (through internal 
operations), of an animal's space of affordances. The intellectual prowess of 
humans and other cognitive high achievers is reflected in the resulting ability 
not only to deal flexibly with novel situations, but also to open up whole new 
regions of affordance.
2.1 On having no body
When a person sits quietly in an armchair, stares blankly out of the window, 
and just thinks—about a loved one perhaps, or tomorrow's chores, or 
poetry, or philosophy—the body seems to play little part in what goes on. 
The heart beats, oxygen is drawn into the lungs, food is digested, and so on. 
But while these metabolic operations might be empirically necessary for 
thought—a sufficient blood supply to the brain being required to fuel its 
electrochemical activity—they hardly seem to be logically necessary. That is to 
say, we can imagine thought going on in their absence—in a computer per-
haps, or a brain in a vat, or even some otherworldly spirit. Moreover, thought 
requires no immediate sensory input and does not immediately give rise to 
behaviour. It might involve the recollection of past experiences (of kissing, 
washing up, reading, and such like), and it might bring about various inten-
tions (to kiss someone, to wash up, to read something, and so on), but at the 
time of the unfolding of a thought, the body seems to be, conceptually speak-
ing, superfluous.
Spurred on by this line of reasoning, a philosopher of mind (herself com-
fortably seated in an armchair) might be motivated to produce an account of 
thought as a disembodied process, essentially a matter of computation, the 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
42
manipulation of symbolic representations according to syntactic rules.1 
Similarly enthused, a computer scientist might attempt to build a system that 
emulates human thought processes, which, when installed on a desktop com-
puter, would be capable of convincingly human-like conversation, as well as 
being unbeatable at chess. Indeed, agendas of these sorts were pursued by a 
great many philosophers of mind, artificial intelligence researchers, and other 
cognitive scientists in the 20th century. But towards the end of the century, this 
style of research came increasingly under attack from those who believed that 
embodiment and cognition go hand-in-hand.2
Before enlarging on this theme, an important distinction needs to be drawn 
between thought and cognition.3 Our immediate concern is thought in 
humans, and human thought, as the term is used here, is necessarily conscious. 
We can report what we are thinking and recall what we have thought in the 
past, albeit fallibly, and when our thought processes lead first to resolution and 
subsequently to action, we say that the action in question is deliberate, that we 
have exercised our will. By contrast, many attempts to characterize cognition 
from the standpoint of empirical psychology make no mention of conscious-
ness at all. Cognition might (conventionally) be described as, say, a combined 
process of gathering information from the senses, storing it, processing it, and 
using what has been gathered, stored, and processed to guide behaviour. 
According to such a characterization, a cognitive process may be conscious, or 
it may not. Likewise, it's commonplace in philosophy of mind to gloss over the 
conscious/unconscious distinction altogether—to speak, for example, of a 
mental state without declaring whether the mental state in question is con-
scious or not. But throughout this book, we shall strive to keep this distinction 
to the fore. 
In the next few sections, we'll review three lines of argument that purport to 
establish an intimate link between cognition and embodiment. These argu-
ments are derived from the following three questions. First, what is cognition 
for? Second, how does cognition exert an influence? Third, what are the build-
ing blocks of thought? The first two questions, being couched in terms of 
'cognition' rather than 'thought', are correspondingly neutral on the matter of 
consciousness. The third question, which concerns thought, by implication 
1 There are clear echoes of the cogito here. But the context is empirical cognitive science not 
philosophy. Cognitive scientists and AI researchers can (rightly or wrongly) downplay the 
importance of the body without adopting a metaphysical stance.
2 Brooks (1991); Clark (1997).
3 Contemporary scientific usage has strayed from the Latin root of the word 'cognition', 
which is cognoscere, to know (rather than cogitare, to think). 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
43
also concerns consciousness. The pro-embodiment lobby—and we shall count 
ourselves among their number—takes comfort from the fact that there are 
convincing answers to each of these questions that assign a central role to the 
body and its worldly interactions. What is cognition for? Crudely speaking, 
it improves an organism's ability to preserve, sustain, and reproduce itself. 
How does cognition exert an influence? In broad terms, it is incorporated 
into an organism's sensorimotor loop and thereby perturbs its behaviour. 
What are the building blocks of thought? The building blocks of thought 
are concepts, and all concepts are ultimately founded on the set of sensorimo-
tor skills we exercise in our ordinary commerce with the physical and social 
environments. 
2.2 The biological roots of cognition
Let's now examine the proposition that the purpose of cognition, as it is found 
in Nature, is to help an organism to sustain and preserve itself and to perpetu-
ate its genes. Of course, there is a strict and important sense in which cogni-
tion, biologically realized, has no purpose. It is the product of an evolutionary 
process that has neither goal nor direction, and as such cognition takes its 
place alongside such marvels as the flowers of an orchid, the song of the whale, 
and the tail of the peacock, as well as such horrors as bowel cancer, deadly 
nightshade, and the jaws of the great white shark. So when we speak of the 
purpose of cognition, of what it is for, we are speaking elliptically of its role 
in determining the evolutionary fitness of an animal, and the teleological 
overtones of the phrase are to be ignored.
The notion of evolutionary fitness only makes sense relative to a particular 
ecological niche. It is no discredit to a pathogenic bacterium that its cognitive 
capacities are lacking, because within its microbial niche advantage is con-
ferred by other attributes, such as the ability to migrate easily from one host to 
another and to multiply rapidly while under attack from the host's immune 
system. Moreover, fitness within a given niche is a complex business. Although 
straightforward attributes such as speed, size, or strength are often contribu-
tory, the matter is complicated by phenomena such as symbiosis and sexual 
selection, which permit peculiar forms of specialization within an ecosystem. 
Consider the way the long, curving beak of a single species of hummingbird 
can co-evolve with a uniquely shaped nectar-bearing flower, or how the com-
plex song of the male nightingale has evolved concurrently with the discrimi-
nating powers of the female nightingale's auditory system. 
Notwithstanding its relativity to ecological niche, the fitness of an organism 
(or a population), is a function of its ability to preserve and sustain itself and 
to perpetuate its genes. So when we say that human beings occupy an ecological 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
44
niche that favours cognitive prowess, we are claiming that cognition subserves 
these things. But in what way does cognition subserve these things? Our provi-
sional assumption will be that cognition helps an animal decide what to do when 
the possibilities afforded it by the environment are combinatorially structured. It 
helps by exploring the space of affordances. This can be done either 'on-line'—
through play, with the aid of training, and so on—or 'off-line'—that is to say 
by means of purely internal operations. The thoroughness with which an ani-
mal can explore a combinatorial space and reveal its hidden affordances is a 
measure of its cognitive prowess. Much of the rest of this chapter is devoted to 
making this formulation clear. What are the possibilities afforded an animal by 
its environment? What does it mean for this set of possibilities to be combina-
torially structured, and how does exploring it help the animal? 
The concept of an affordance was introduced by Gibson, for whom '[t]he 
affordances of the environment are what it offers the animal, what it provides 
or furnishes, either for good or for ill'.4 Crucially, what the environment 
affords an animal depends on the animal's capabilities. A drainpipe affords a 
rat a way up to the roof of a house, but all it affords a dog is a convenient place 
to leave a scent marker. For a human its affordances are abundant. The drain-
pipe might be detached and used as a makeshift didgeridoo, sawn in half and 
installed as a gutter, or made into a traditional game for the village fete. 
Moreover, what the environment affords is dependent not just on the physical 
capacities of an animal, but also on its psychological propensities, which in 
humans are a function of upbringing, education, and cultural background. For 
a Palaeolithic toolmaker, the affordances of a pile of flints are many and com-
plex, whereas for a 21st century computer programmer, they are negligible. 
Even for a given individual, there is an important distinction between what 
the environment transparently affords and its merely potential affordances. For 
example, consider the following task, which has been used to study tool-use in 
a variety of animals, including macaque monkeys.5 A pellet of food is placed 
within sight of the monkey, but out of reach. However, within reach of the 
monkey is a small rake. With several days of training, the macaque can be 
taught to use the rake as a tool to pull the pellet close enough to be grasped. 
Now, there is a sense in which, even prior to training, the environment (includ-
ing both pellet and rake) affords the monkey the means to satisfy its hunger, as 
4 Gibson (1979), p.127. Convincing neuroscientific support for Gibson's conception was 
obtained by Grèzes and Decety (2001), who showed that motor regions are activated by 
the perception of 'meaningful' objects (ones with familiar uses) but significantly less so by 
the perception of non-objects (meaningless blobs). 
5 Maravita & Iriki (2004); Povinelli (2000); Santos et al. (2006); Taylor, et al. (2009). 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
45
it is physically capable of obtaining the pellet (using the rake) and psychologi-
cally predisposed to do so. But this affordance is not apparent to the monkey. 
It is merely a potential affordance. After training, this potential affordance 
becomes transparent. 
Of course, to count even as a potential affordance, a possibility has to be 
discoverable. Consider a burglar standing in front of a safe with a combination 
lock, and suppose he is ignorant of the combination. In principle, the environ-
ment affords the burglar the possibility of turning the dial to the right sequence 
of digits and opening the safe. But it is not possible, even in principle, for the 
burglar to work out the right sequence just by thinking hard enough. By con-
trast, the rake's potential as a tool for retrieving food pellets, though hidden in 
the combinatorial space of possibilities, is a discoverable affordance for an 
animal capable of grasping a rake. Cognition exposes such potential 
affordances - affordances that are discoverable but concealed in the combina-
torial space of possible actions and outcomes—and makes them apparent. By 
making apparent potential affordances that would otherwise have remained 
hidden, cognition reveals to an animal opportunities and threats that it would 
otherwise have missed, and thereby increases its evolutionary fitness. 
Now, what is meant by a combinatorially structured set of affordances? 
Mathematics and computer science often deal with combinatorial sets—sets of 
structures composed of parts that can be arranged in many different ways 
according to a systematic set of rules. For example, a simple set of grammati-
cally correct sentences in English can be defined in the following way. A sen-
tence is a noun phrase followed by a verb phrase. A noun phrase is an adjective 
followed by a proper name. A verb phrase is a verb followed by a noun phrase. 
The adjectives are 'pretty', 'funny', and 'silly'. The proper names are 'John', 
'Mary', and 'Paul'. Finally, the verbs are 'loves' and 'hugs'. Examples of gram-
matical sentences according to this definition are 'Pretty Mary loves funny 
John' and 'Silly Paul hugs funny Mary'. With negligible effort it can be seen 
that the definition admits 162 possible sentences in total. This is a small set, but 
only eight components were required to define it. It's obvious that even with 
such a simple grammar, the number of possible sentences increases dramati-
cally with the number of nouns, verbs, and adjectives. Rapid growth in the 
cardinality of a set when plotted against the size of its description is character-
istic of combinatorial structure. Moreover, if recursive definitions are allowed, 
an infinite combinatorial set of sentences is straightforward to define. 
Combinatorially structured sets are ubiquitous in mathematics and compu-
ter science. They include, for example, the set of sentences of first-order pred-
icate calculus, and the set of syntactically correct computer programmes in the 
language C. According to Chomsky, the productivity of human language—that 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
46
is to say our theoretical capacity to generate and understand an infinite number 
of sentences—is a consequence of its underlying combinatorial structure.6 In 
a similar vein, Fodor and Pylyshyn draw attention to the systematicity of human 
mental states. If a person is capable of entertaining the thought (or holding the 
belief ) that, say, John loves Mary, then they should also be capable of enter-
taining the thought (or holding the belief ) that Mary loves John. Likewise, the 
ability to draw inferences from the former proposition should go hand-in-
hand with the ability to draw inferences from the latter proposition.7 Fodor 
and Pylyshyn's general point is that a hallmark of human cognition is the abil-
ity to handle combinatorial structure, and the point is compelling whether or 
not we endorse the computational theory of mind to which they adhere. 
The sense in which certain mathematical objects are combinatorially struc-
tured is precise and formal. The notion that such mathematical objects might 
serve as theoretical approximations to certain real-world phenomena, such as 
the utterances of a natural language, is unobjectionable. But the claim that 
there is combinatorial structure in what the environment affords an animal 
stands in need of clarification. (For now, we'll confine our clarificatory efforts 
to affordances in the physical sphere, as opposed to the social or cultural 
spheres.) In particular, combinatorial structure in mathematics is a feature of 
discrete domains—that is to say domains that comprise countable sets of dis-
tinct objects. Yet the real world of space, time, and matter is continuous, not 
discrete. So the question arises of how the continuous world presented to an 
animal's senses is to be conceptualized in discrete terms. 
The world as it appears to an animal, what von Uexküll calls its Umwelt, is a 
product of its particular needs, concerns, and capabilities.8 These vary from 
species to species, from individual to individual, and are subject to alteration 
throughout an animal's lifetime as it adapts and learns. An animal's Umwelt is 
reflected in what we might (cautiously) call the 'categorical scheme' superim-
posed on the physical world by its perceptual apparatus. Under each animal's 
categorical scheme, certain discrete objects and certain spatial relations among 
those objects stand out against the backdrop of the rest of the world. Where an 
urban human sees only a homogenous mass of foliage, a goat beside a hedge 
sees a mosaic of edible and unpalatable leaves. Similarly, under each animal's 
categorical scheme, certain discrete events and temporal relations among those 
events stand out from the ongoing flux. While a dog pricks up his ears at every 
rustle and crackle in a nearby flowerbed, barely noticing the babble of human 
6 Chomsky (1957).
7 Fodor & Pylyshyn (1988). 
8 Von Uexküll (1957). 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
47
voices, the little girl on the swing beside him hears only the sound of her name 
followed by the words 'ice cream'. 
Under a sufficiently rich categorical scheme, combinatorial structure 
emerges. If an animal's categorical scheme allows it to discriminate scenes in 
which object A is to the left of object B then, in general, it should allow the 
animal to discriminate scenes in which object B is to the left of object A. If its 
categorical scheme allows it to recognize that event C was followed by event D, 
then, in general, it should allow the animal to recognize that D was followed 
by C. The combinatorial structure the world discloses to suitably endowed 
animals is mirrored in the combinatorial structure of the set of options for 
action available to those animals. If an animal can place A to the left of B, then, 
in general, it can place B to the left of A. If it can perform action C before action 
D, then, in general, it can perform D before C. (We say 'in general' here 
because, of course, there are physical constraints and laws that forbid certain 
relations among objects and events while insisting upon others.) 
So, for some animals, a combinatorial tree of possibilities perpetually 
branches out from the present situation into the future, according to what the 
environment potentially affords (Fig. 2.1). Because of its size and complexity, 
only a few branches of this tree can be anticipated by evolution, and the reper-
toire of behaviours an animal is born with reflects this limitation. Thanks to 
learning and adaptation, the animal moulds and expands this repertoire while 
it is alive. But not even a lifetime of experience can equip it with a tailored 
Fig. 2.1 A combinatorially structured space of possible affordances. The bricks can be 
assembled into structures of endless complexity by applying a small number of rules. 
But as the possibility of using an assembly of bricks as a missile illustrates, the space 
of possible affordances for a human being is open-ended.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
48
response for every contingency. The tree of possibilities will always contain 
hidden surprises. So in order to take the fullest advantage of what the environ-
ment affords, it is profitable for the animal to explore this combinatorially struc-
tured space on the fly, making forays into it on a situation-by-situation basis, 
hopefully to bring out potential affordances that would otherwise have remained 
concealed. This is what cognition does, and this is how it benefits an animal 
and promotes the perpetuation of its genes. Or to place the emphasis differ-
ently, this is what makes the cognitively endowed animal a viable phenotype. 
2.3 The sensorimotor loop
With the role that cognition plays in boosting the evolutionary fitness of an 
animal firmly established, we can probe more deeply the second in our series 
of three questions. How does cognition exert an influence? The proposal under 
the spotlight is that the only way for cognition to exert an influence and ben-
efit an animal (or the population to which it belongs) is by perturbing and 
contributing to the dynamics of that animal's sensorimotor loop. To bring out 
the implications of this proposition we will assess the extent to which cogni-
tion is still comprehensible when sensorimotor considerations are down-
played. To this end, it's instructive to look not only at natural cognition but 
also at attempts by artificial intelligence (AI) researchers to replicate human 
cognitive skills with computers and robots.
In the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s many AI systems were developed whose core 
was a process operating along the following lines. Having received as input a 
symbolic description of some problem, the process would embark on a lengthy 
computation without further input from the user or the world, finally present-
ing the symbolic description of a proposed solution as its output.9 Such a proc-
ess can straightforwardly be incorporated into an interactive system, such as a 
chess-playing programme where turns have to be taken with an opponent. 
This is done simply by embedding it into a loop that repeatedly obtains input 
(the opponent's move), carries out the required computation (searches for a 
good move of its own), then presents the corresponding output (the move it has 
found), maintaining between iterations whatever record of internal state it 
requires (such as the board position). Robots too can be programmed this way. 
Such a robot repeatedly senses its environment, plans its next action, then exe-
cutes that action, while maintaining as accurate a model of the world as possible. 
The core process here—the part with a cognitive flavour—is the planner.10
 9 This research programme was inaugurated by McCarthy (1959a), whose fictional 
'advice-taker' programme may be considered the forerunner of all such systems. 
10 The prototype for all such robots was Shakey (Nilsson, 1984). 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
49
All such work proceeds under the assumption that cognition can be treated 
as a black box that is given an input of finite length, performs a computation 
that terminates in finite time, and then produces an output of finite length. By 
way of contrast consider homeostasis, the closed-loop control system that 
maintains the body's internal milieu. If the water level in the blood is too high, 
for example, this is detected in the brain by the hypothalamus, which instructs 
the pituitary gland to decrease production of a certain hormone. This in turn 
causes the kidneys to absorb more water from the bloodstream producing 
more urine, which is why pubs have busy toilets. Conversely, if the water level 
is too low, the hypothalamus tells the pituitary gland to secrete more of the 
same hormone, which inhibits absorption of water by the kidneys. Under nor-
mal circumstances and in the absence of pathology, this maintains the water 
level in the blood within just the right range for effective metabolism. 
When these homeostatic processes terminate, it is not because they have 
computed some final output. On the contrary, it is because the parameters of 
the body's internal milieu have strayed outside tolerable bounds or because the 
body's integrity has been catastrophically violated, that is to say when the 
organism dies. A normally operating homeostatic process is non-terminating. 
If we had to specify its correct operation, we would not be able to appeal to the 
functional relationship between the finite input and the finite output of a finite 
computation, even if this computation were embedded in a loop. Rather, we 
would employ the language of control theory to describe the system's ability to 
bring the required parameters back to within certain bounds in a given time 
following a sufficiently bounded perturbation. 
This does not entail that such a system is not amenable to description in 
computational terms. Although early mathematical treatments of computa-
tion, drawing on the ideas of Turing and Church, were confined to terminating 
processes, modern computer science has a wealth of theoretical tools for 
describing interaction, concurrency, and non-terminating processes.11 This is 
not the point. Neither does it entail that conventional computation cannot be 
used to implement a closed-loop control system. Indeed controllers built out 
of microprocessors are ubiquitous in modern technology. This is not the point 
either. The point, rather, is that we cannot grasp the character of such a process 
unless we see it as part of a sensorimotor loop dynamically coupled to the 
external environment, and we cannot make sense of its behaviour unless we 
examine it over an extended period of time. 
Homeostasis is best conceived as a perpetual process. But the point also 
applies to more goal-directed forms of closed-loop control, processes that do 
11 The seminal work is that of Milner (1980) and Hoare (1985).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
50
terminate, usually with certain conditions fulfilled. As an example, consider 
the robot model of cricket phonotaxis—the female cricket's ability to locate a 
male cricket by walking in the direction of its mating call—developed by Webb 
and her colleagues.12 Unless the male happens to be directly ahead of the 
female, its call will arrive at the female's left and right ears at slightly different 
times. In Webb's model, the signals from each ear propagate via neurons in the 
cricket's auditory system to their counterparts on one or other side of its motor 
system. But one signal, left or right, will arrive at its destination slightly sooner 
than the other, and the neurons are so arranged that the winner of this race 
inhibits the effect of its rival. So the legs on one side of the cricket's body will 
be activated more vigorously than those on the other, causing the cricket to 
orient itself towards its potential lover. 
The role of feedback here is to facilitate repeated corrections to the system's 
trajectory to compensate for sensor noise, motor play, and unexpected envi-
ronmental perturbations. Robustness in the presence of these uncertainties is 
essential and unachievable without constant sensory input. Again, such a proc-
ess can only be understood in the context of a sensorimotor loop operating 
over an extended period within an environment. Isolated from the environ-
ment and from the feedback the environment supplies, the process is incom-
prehensible. Likewise, if the behaviour of the process is observed over too short 
a period of time, its essential self-correcting character is indiscernible. 
The contention here is that these considerations also apply to cognition. 
Cognition is best viewed not, as early AI researchers thought, in terms of a 
problem-solving module that, mathematically speaking, computes a finite 
output sentence from a finite input sentence and then terminates. Rather, it 
should be understood as part of a feedback control process, extended in time 
and dynamically coupled with the environment, a process that continuously 
adjusts its output according to its input in order to maintain an animal's well-
being and fulfil its needs and desires. But many different feedback-based con-
trol loops contribute to an animal's behaviour, and not all of these deserve to 
be seen in a cognitive light. Indeed, our contention was that cognition comes 
into its own for an animal confronted with a combinatorially structured set of 
affordances. The advantage it confers is to reveal opportunities and threats 
that, to the cognitively less well-endowed, remain hidden in the space of com-
binatorial possibilities. The question is how this is done in the context of a 
feedback control loop. 
12 Reeve & Webb (2002). For details of the likely mechanisms at work in real crickets see 
Hedwig (2006). 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
51
2.4 Behaviour selection
To answer this question, we'll make use of a general framework for character-
izing behaviour that originated in the field of ethology and was subsequently 
elaborated by roboticists.13 (Roboticists influenced by ethology typically come 
from a school of thinking opposed to the way cognition is conceived by classi-
cal AI.) According to this framework, the overall behaviour of an animal (or 
robot) is the outcome of a perpetual process of selection from a repertoire of 
more simple behaviours (Fig. 2.2). Each behaviour in this repertoire is a 
response to some or other cue in the animal's internal or external environ-
ment. Each behaviour is to a large extent pre-programmed and fixed, and each 
involves the execution of a number of component actions. To illustrate the 
idea, let's think about chickens (free-range, of course).
A chicken's natural repertoire of behaviours includes foraging, feeding, 
laying, fleeing, dustbathing, roosting, and so on. Consider feeding. This behav-
iour is induced by the combination of an internal deficit (hunger) and an 
external cue (the appearance of a farmer at a gate, say, which is associated with 
the arrival of food). The behaviour itself can be divided into two phases—
approach and consumption. The approach phase involves its own miniature 
control loop, wherein the chicken uses visual feedback to guide it towards the 
farmer. This is terminated when the food is attained, and is followed by the 
consumption phase. The consumption phase involves repetitive pecking at 
13 McFarland & Bösser (1993). 
Fig. 2.2 A behaviour-based architecture. Separate processes, each one spanning sensa-
tion and action, are responsible for distinct behaviours. Each behaviour is triggered by 
a combination of external cues and internal deficits. When more than one behaviour is 
triggered, the competition is resolved by a selection mechanism.
Muscles
Senses
Behaviour 1
Behaviour 2
Behaviour 3
Behaviour
selection

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
52
grains, and is terminated by satiation or when the food runs out. Each of the 
behaviours in the chicken's repertoire might be similarly specified. 
A day in the life of a chicken can be characterized as a patchwork of distinct 
episodes of behaviour, each one taken from this repertoire. In general, more 
than one of the behaviours in its repertoire is applicable at any given moment, 
so the chicken is faced with the continual problem of choosing between them. 
This is known as the behaviour selection problem (or action selection problem), 
and a variety of neural mechanisms for tackling it have been hypothesized.14 
Certain principles that any proposed mechanism should respect are obvious. 
In general, the competition between behaviours will be settled according to 
some function of the strengths of external cues and the levels of internal deficit. 
Nevertheless, it must be possible for some behaviours to take priority over oth-
ers when the occasion demands. If a potential predator appears, even a hungry 
chicken must abandon its food and flee. Furthermore, effective switching 
between behaviours requires hysteresis. If a chicken is both thirsty and hungry, 
it is not a good policy to drink a little, run to the feeding trough, eat a little, run 
to the water dispenser, drink a little, and so on. Rather, there should be a degree 
of commitment to a behaviour once it has been initiated. 
According to this conception, the overall behaviour of an animal, on a times-
cale of hours or days, is seen to be regulated by a large feedback control loop in 
much the same way that its behaviour on a timescale of seconds is governed by 
various smaller, tighter feedback control loops. The small control loops, such 
as those involved in locomotion towards a target or reaching for an object, 
make rapid adjustments to the current motor output in reaction to immediate 
sensory input, on a millisecond-by-millisecond basis. By contrast, the large 
feedback loop makes infrequent adjustments, and several tens of seconds 
might elapse between one and the next. Rather than modifying immediate 
motor output, these adjustments take the form of switchings between behav-
iours in response to relatively major events in the animal's life involving 
sensory cues and metabolic thresholds. The overall effect is to maintain 
the integrity and well-being of the animal and to fulfil its needs in the face of 
constant change within both its external environment and its internal milieu. 
Almost every behaviour in an animal's repertoire can plausibly be cast as a 
response to the perception of something that affords something to the animal. 
However, it's not always appropriate to describe a behaviour as a response to 
14 Redgrave, et al. (1999); Cisek (2007); Houk, et al. (2007); Humphries, et al. (2007). Cisek 
(2007) appeals to the concept of affordance in a way that is compatible with the present 
account. 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
53
the perception that the environment affords it something. The latter wording 
implies a level of sophistication not implied by the former. A patch of dusty 
ground affords a chicken the possibility of cleansing its plumage, and this, 
in evolutionary terms, is why the perception of a patch of dusty ground can 
trigger dustbathing.15 But there is no need here for the chicken's brain to dis-
criminate between means (dustbathing) and end (improvement in plumage 
condition), because the unfortunate chicken has only one means to that par-
ticular end in its behavioural repertoire. So there is no useful sense in which 
the chicken can be said to perceive that the patch of dusty ground affords an 
opportunity for plumage cleansing. It simply dustbathes when it sees dust. 
In this respect dustbathing contrasts with feeding. A full grain-trough affords 
a chicken relief from hunger, and this is why, thanks to what the chicken has 
learned, the sound of pouring grain triggers a dash for the trough. But the 
trough is not the only way the environment makes food available to the 
chicken. There are multiple means to the same end, and to exploit this, 
the chicken's behaviour has to be sensitive to the difference between means 
and end, between approaching the grain-trough and the relief of hunger. 
(A minimal sign of such sensitivity in an animal is the capacity to extend its 
behavioural repertoire with new ways to achieve a desirable outcome, or flex-
ibly to adapt its old ways.) In this sense, the chicken can be said to perceive that 
the trough affords food, whereas it does not perceive that dust affords cleaner 
plumage. It's only this stricter sense of affordance that's relevant here. 
Now, recall our provisional characterization of cognition, according to 
which it helps an animal decide what to do when faced with a combinatorially 
structured set of affordances. We are at last in a position to see how this role 
can be accommodated within the animal's sensorimotor loop. Simply put, 
cognition perpetually updates the repertoire of behaviours an animal can 
choose from with potential affordances that were previously concealed in the 
space of possibilities. So as not to interfere with the animal's ability to respond 
in a timely fashion to ongoing events in a fast-changing world, it must operate 
in parallel with other, more primitive mechanisms. If, thanks to whatever 
internal dynamics it is founded on, cognition discovers a behaviour (an action 
or a series of actions) with a salient expected outcome (desirable or undesira-
ble), and does so in time for it to be taken into consideration by the behaviour 
selection process, then so much the better. If it does not, no harm is done, and 
the animal behaves as it would have done anyway. 
15 Olsson & Keeling (2005). 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
54
2.5 The human edge
We have attempted to pin down what cognition is for in evolutionary terms, and 
to account for its influence in behavioural terms. Our treatment has ranged over 
a spectrum of cognitive abilities, including those of non-human animals. To 
address the third of our questions about cognition—the question of the building 
blocks of thought—we'll have to focus more narrowly on the human case. But 
first we shall pause to consider what, if anything, is special about the human 
animal, by examining a series of examples of behaviour displaying increasing 
levels of cognitive prowess, culminating with a showcase of human ingenuity.
We'll begin with avian nest-building, which seems cognitively demanding 
on first acquaintance, but turns out to be only modestly so. Let's consider a 
particularly gifted species, namely the village weaver (Ploceus cucullatus).16 Its 
nest-building procedure involves several component behaviours, including 
the attachment of initial material to a branch, the selection and carriage of 
plant matter for inclusion in the walls, and the weaving of individual threads 
into the fabric of the nest. Having established an initial ring of woven grass 
suspended from a branch, the male village weaver builds up the walls of its nest 
chamber by repeatedly threading strands of grass through the structure until a 
near-spherical shape is achieved. The weaving of even a single strip of grass 
into the nest is a complex operation. The bird must press the end into the nest 
wall with its beak, release it, then grasp the end again from a slightly different 
location and pull it back out, as if it were using a needle and thread, then repeat 
this process, moving in a circle inside the partially built nest, until the whole 
strand is woven in. The exquisite structure that results might easily be taken for 
the product of intentionally thought-out design, planned and executed, it 
would seem, with considerable help from cognition. However, as Hansell 
points out, such a nest can be woven 'using a fairly limited repertoire of stere-
otyped movements'.17
Now let's consider an Olduwan flint-knapper from the Lower Palaeolithic 
(early stone age) period (beginning approximately 2.5 million years ago).18 An 
Olduwan blade is manufactured by repeatedly striking a hammer stone held in 
one hand against a flint core held in the other. The process only takes a few 
minutes. Every successful strike causes a flake of material to be sheared from 
the core, and by this means the knapper gradually sculpts the flint into a desired 
overall shape, then trims and sharpens its edges. Each separate strike requires 
the knapper to select a suitable site on the flint surface, which involves a visual 
16 Hansell (2000), Chapter 4.
17 Hansell (2000), p. 84. See also Hansell (2007). 
18 Wynn (2002); Stout & Chaminade (2007).

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
55
examination while turning the core. This is followed by the application of the 
hammer stone to that site with such a force and at such an angle that a flake of 
material is removed and the flint core is brought closer to a useful shape. The 
final tool might easily be taken for the product of deliberate and careful design. 
But there is little evidence that this is the case.19 Again, a limited repertoire of 
stereotypical actions is sufficient for the task. Despite their flashy perform-
ances, neither the nest-builder nor the early stone-age flint-knapper is an 
obvious cognitive high-flier. 
Moving the dial 2 million years forwards to the Upper Palaeolithic (late 
stone age), we encounter an altogether more sophisticated knapper. An Upper 
Palaeolithic handaxe has a comparatively regular, symmetrical shape and a 
carefully finished edge. Its production requires the removal of a large number 
of flakes of different sizes, and the manufacturing process has several distinct 
stages. A compelling case can be made that to sculpt these more refined tools 
requires a degree of spatial cognition, goal-directed action, and planning.20 
Furthermore, the late stone-age tool-maker sits at the cusp of a dramatic 
expansion of human culture and technology. We would like to understand the 
cognitive foundations for this. And arguably, what sets this modern human 
tool-maker apart from the avian nest-builder is not discernible in any estab-
lished behaviour, even one that incorporates goal-directed actions and plan-
ning. Rather, it is the capacity to innovate, to invent new forms of behaviour.21 
To illustrate this, let's advance the dial another 50,000 years or so and, instead 
of an Upper Palaeolithic flint-knapper, consider a 21st century city-dweller 
preparing a meal in her kitchen, a figure we can more easily relate to. 
Suppose our cook needs to add tomatoes to a saucepan. She has a tin of 
tomatoes, but the tin-opener seems to have gone missing. Perhaps it has been 
incorporated into one of the children's games. She conducts a search of the 
playroom, but fails to find it there. Well, one of the neighbours is sure to have 
a tin-opener she can borrow. She rings the doorbells of two neighbours, but 
no one is home. So she resolves to open the tin by other means. (The dish 
would be a failure without tomatoes.) She retrieves her toolbox, which con-
tains a common assortment of tools. First she pierces the top of the tin using 
an awl and a hammer. But the resulting hole is tiny. So she enlarges it with a 
screwdriver, again using the hammer to apply enough force to penetrate the 
tin. Now the fissure is large enough to take the head of a small pair of pliers. 
Using the pliers she prises up the lid, widening the aperture until she seems to 
19 Stout & Chaminade (2007).
20 Wynn (2002).
21 Mithen (1996); Coolidge & Wynn (2009). 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
56
have gained access to the tin's contents. However, the opening is still quite 
small, and when she up-ends the tin over the saucepan the tomatoes remain 
lodged inside. So she finds a tea-spoon and, holding it the wrong way round, 
pokes it into the tin. Using the handle of the tea-spoon to mash the tomatoes 
she eventually breaks them into pieces small enough to fall through the opening 
she has made and into the saucepan. 
This is a most impressive performance, in which formidable cognitive 
powers are on display. There is clearly no explanation for it in terms of a small 
repertoire of stereotyped actions. Rather, the cook has carried out several nar-
rowly focused explorations of the combinatorial structure of possibilities for 
action afforded by her environment—partly through experiment and partly 
through internal operations whose character we need not specify for now. 
If the lost tin-opener were a familiar situation, and if our subject had previ-
ously resorted to household tools to open tins, then it would be a less remark-
able exhibition. In that case, exploration would not be required because 
the relevant unorthodox affordances of the household toolbox would not be 
hidden in the space of combinatorial possibilities. They would be transparent. 
But we are assuming this is not the case. 
To explore the space of affordances would be infeasible without a degree of 
mastery of the causal relations that structure that space. Thanks to this mas-
tery, innovative possibilities are properly entertained, yet resources are not 
wasted on the plain ridiculous. The awl is worth considering as a means of 
access to the tin because it can make a hole in a solid object, the sort of aperture 
through which a non-rigid body of matter might pass. But the possibility of, 
say, phoning the police to ask where the tin-opener might be, or of using a 
sponge to pierce the tin, is not even worth considering. In traditional episte-
mological terms, the cook's mastery of the causal structure of her environ-
ment's affordances might perhaps be said to include both procedural and 
declarative knowledge, both the knowledge how to use an awl to make a hole 
and the knowledge that an awl can be used to make a hole. But the umbrella 
term 'mastery' is better here because it allows us to sidestep epistemological 
discussions. 
Human-level mastery of the causal relations that structure the space of 
affordances seems to come with fewer 'blindspots' than we find in other ani-
mals. Recall the task of retrieving food with a rake. Chimpanzees easily learn to 
use a rake to obtain food that is out of reach. But using an extension of this 
paradigm, Povinelli provided evidence of the limitations of a chimpanzee's 
understanding of the physics of everyday objects.22 In Povinelli's modified 
22 Povinelli (2000); Penn & Povinelli (2007). However, it has been shown that chimpanzees 
and gorillas can solve equivalent problems when the experimental set-up is modified 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
57
experiment, the chimpanzee was presented with a table divided into two paral-
lel sections, each containing a rake and a food item (a peanut). However, one 
of the sections included a shallow but visible trench between the peanut and 
the chimpanzee that was guaranteed to intercept and trap the nut before it 
could come within reach. In this and a number of variations on the same 
experiment, the chimpanzees demonstrated no overall preference for one rake 
over the other, suggesting a certain inability to anticipate the inevitable and 
unwanted consequence of drawing a peanut towards a trench. 
How might an animal possess true mastery of the causal relations that struc-
ture the space of its potential affordances, a level of mastery that is not unduly 
marred by such blindspots? According to the hypothesis we shall pursue, this 
requires a generic facility for integrating distinct domains of expertise. On a 
coarse scale, these domains span the physical, psychological, and social aspects 
of the animal's Umwelt. On a finer scale, we find sub-domains within these 
broad regions of expertise. Within the domain of everyday physics, for exam-
ple, an animal may or may not have expertise in the effects of gravity, the qual-
ities of different materials, or the kinematic properties of various shapes. These 
sub-domains are ultimately grounded in sensorimotor skills, which can be 
thought of as micro-domains of proficiency, such as putting-things-in-holes, 
or poking-things-with-sticks. The sort of generic facility in question ensures 
integration across all of these, and would allow an animal to explore a region 
of the tree of affordances that included both pulling-with-a-stick actions and 
falling-in-a-hole events. 
So, getting back to the Upper Palaeolithic tool-maker, established skills such 
as flint-knapping are perhaps less cognitively significant than the capacity to 
draw on and integrate multiple distinct regions of understanding, blending 
their elements together. Arguably this quality, which Mithen calls cognitive 
fluidity, was crucial in enabling our early ancestors to adapt to change, and to 
progress.23 When stone tools ceased to be viable or competitive, they were able 
to develop new technologies and to adopt different ways of life. Likewise, this 
sort of integrative capacity enabled our cook to cope with the novelty of a lost 
tin-opener, and to bring her combined expertise in the psychological, social, 
and physical domains (the children, the neighbours, and the toolbox) to bear 
on the problem. Chapter 4 will propose a substrate for a generic integrative 
facility of this kind, namely a global workspace architecture, the heart of 
which is a broadcast mechanism that allows localized processes to exert global 
(Martin-Ordas, et al., 2008). Rooks and crows are not only able to solve such problems, 
but can also transfer their acquired expertise to different tasks (Seed, et al., 2006; Taylor, 
et al., 2009). 
23 Mithen (1996).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
58
influence on the brain. Not only is the integrative provision of this architecture 
hypothesized to underpin the conscious condition, it is also proposed as the 
means by which conceptual blends are effected, enabling concepts of increasing 
abstraction to be layered one upon another. 
2.6 Founding concepts
Thought, which constitutes a large portion of a person's inner life, is here 
conceived of as serially unfolding conscious cognition.24 What then are the 
building blocks of thought? Concepts are the building blocks of thought. But 
what are concepts, and how are they acquired? Our special concern for the 
time being is with abstract concepts, such as those of infinity or electrical 
charge, things that are outside the purview of non-human animals. Although 
the treatment on offer here allows for the ascription of certain kinds of concept 
to non-human animals,25 the issue at hand is that the quintessentially human 
facility with abstraction suggests that cognition might not, after all, be confined 
to the earthly subject matter of biological imperatives, that the conceptual 
reach of humans may extend to loftier realms.
But in the post-reflective condition, we are no longer tempted by philo-
sophical doctrines that conjure up metaphysical divisions, and we are disin-
clined to locate concepts anywhere other than right here. Metaphorically 
speaking, their home is neither 'further in' than the everyday world we all share 
nor 'further out'—neither inside our heads nor in some non-physical reality. 
So it's not necessary to adopt a metaphysical stance to tackle the question of 
how it is that we come to do the things we do and think the things we think, 
and to comprehend the role concepts play in all this. These are questions about 
our shared world—a world of which possessors of concepts form a part and in 
which they wholly dwell. Such questions can be tackled by a worldly investiga-
tion, an empirical investigation. 
Moreover, the attitude towards meaning that goes with our post-reflective 
stance encourages us not to ask the metaphysically loaded question of what a 
concept is, but rather to investigate how words like 'concept' are used. Indeed, 
when we ordinarily say that someone 'possesses a concept' (no doubt using a 
more natural turn of phrase) we do so for a purpose, as part of our daily lives, 
perhaps to help a third party to understand that person, and so to interact with 
her better or more reliably to anticipate her next move. Sometimes, perhaps, 
24 There are other facets to a person's inner life, of course. Not every image, memory, or 
fantasy is usefully construed in terms of the exploration of a combinatorially structured 
space of possible affordances. 
25 Such ascriptions are controversial, as we shall see. 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
59
what we say is best thought of as elucidating a person's inner life. Sometimes 
what we say is best thought of as elucidating her outward behaviour. Either 
way, the word 'concept' is just a useful tool. The concept of a concept, we 
might usefully say, is just a useful tool. 
Consolidating everyday usage, a fruitful way to prosecute an empirical inves-
tigation of how we do the things we do and think the things we think is to 
assume that to acquire a concept is to master a systematic set of skills, and that 
to acquire an abstract concept is to layer a systematic set of thinking and talk-
ing skills on top of a foundation of more basic sensorimotor skills. To think, 
then, is to exercise these skills, not to sojourn in a mythical plane of pure rea-
son. So even when we say—with perfect propriety—that a thought (or a belief ) 
is about the prime numbers, for example, or about Ohm's law, there is a sense 
in which that thought (or belief ) remains securely founded in the everyday 
world. 
We shall further explore this idea shortly. But first, we must escape the charge 
of trivially equating truth with consensus.26 Specifically, we want to sanction 
the difference between the proper grasp of a concept and a faulty one, between 
the correct application of a concept and its misapplication. After all, if we allow 
rampant relativism to overwhelm us there will be no distinguishing these 
things and, as a consequence, no distinguishing truth from falsehood. 
Epistemological mayhem will ensue (and perhaps civilized society will col-
lapse). Very well. But nothing has been said that would undermine these 
important notions. It goes without saying that we sometimes accuse a person 
of not having understood a concept right. If someone has misunderstood a 
concept—that of a prime number, say—then he is liable to be put right when 
he claims that 15 is prime, and is owed an explanation of why he is wrong. 
Likewise, if a student fails to grasp what is meant by, say, capacitance, then of 
course we will correct her when she plots a distorted graph of current against time. 
To slip up in any of these ways is not yet to have mastered the relevant skill. 
But who is to say it is not the maverick who has got the concept right, and 
the majority who are in the wrong? Well, insofar as they share a common foun-
dation for making judgements, the maverick should be no less able to persuade 
the majority than the other way around. It is the nature of a language game to 
have methods and conventions for settling disputes—methods and conven-
tions that sometimes involve consulting the world, as in a scientific experi-
ment, and sometimes involve following carefully formalized procedures, as in 
mathematics—and the majority is no less subject to their rule than the indi-
vidual. Sometimes in difficult cases, when the dust settles, new ways of talking 
26 See Wittgenstein (1958), §§241-242, as well as the discussion in Chapter 1. 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
60
and new ways of resolving disputes will have found their way into a language 
game. But these shifts in and adjustments to our common foundations are also 
part of the cut and thrust of ordinary life. 
But surely our concepts must measure up against reality. Does the post-
reflective stance entail a denial that, say, mathematical ideas have any reality 
independent of the human mind? No, not that either. Questions of the reality, 
or otherwise, of the concepts of mathematics are the residue of an abandoned 
mode of thought. We are interested, as scientists, in the processes and mecha-
nisms by which abstract concepts are acquired and exercised. In consideration 
of these mechanisms, although it serves us to continue to speak, in the natural 
idiom, of a certain thought as being about the integers or about the laws of 
physics, it serves us equally to speak of those concepts as being founded on our 
sensorimotor interaction with the environment. If pressed on the question of 
what such thoughts are really about, metaphysically speaking, we decline 
politely (unless we have the talent to offer therapy, in the style of Wittgenstein, 
and our inquisitor is minded to receive it). Yet in keeping counsel, the truly 
post-reflective thinker has neither ducked her intellectual responsibilities nor 
gone into denial over her innermost philosophical urges. In the proper silence 
of first philosophy, nothing is left unsaid. There are no secrets whose revelation 
is left pending. 
2.7 Counting and infinity
To get a flavour of the sort of empirical account we should hope for, let's 
consider how a system of mathematical concepts might be layered onto a 
foundation of sensorimotor skills. The sketch here will be very brief. But it 
draws on the work of Lakoff and Núñez, who offer a thorough, book-length 
treatment along similar lines.27 First, how might a child acquire the concept of 
a positive integer, which is surely at the lowest level of mathematical abstrac-
tion? Here's a speculative description of a possible developmental path. 
It begins with counting. The child is taught to say the numbers from one to ten 
out loud. This might be done by teaching her to recite a nursery rhyme in 
which the numbers occur in order, such as 'One, two, three, four, five, once 
I caught a fish alive. Six, seven, eight, nine, ten, then I let it go again'. From here 
it's a small step to being able to recite the numbers on their own.
27 Lakoff & Núñez (2000). See also Dehaene (1997). The present endorsement of Lakoff & 
Núñez (2000) does not extend to their philosophy of mathematics, however. By denying 
that 'mathematics exists outside us' (Chapter 15), they accept the terms of a metaphysical 
debate that we are here concerned to avoid altogether. 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
61
Building on this ability, the child is next taught to point to each member of 
a group of objects in turn while reciting the series of numbers she has learned, 
matching the rhythm of the finger movements to the rhythm of the chant. 
There are some subtleties here, but a parent or teacher will be on hand for 
guidance. In particular, the child must learn not to point to any object more 
than once, and not to omit any object in the group. To begin with, the objects 
can be arranged in a line within her field of view, to make it easier to conform 
to these constraints. With words of encouragement or gentle admonishment 
as appropriate, she soon learns the proper procedure. With this skill in place, 
the child is in a position to answer questions about quantity. How many 
biscuits are on the plate? She points and counts and offers the final word in the 
recited sequence as her answer. A useful skill has been acquired. It helps to 
ensure fairness in the distribution of chocolate among siblings. 
By itself, though, this trick does not qualify as a systematic set of skills. 
Like the ape who has learned to use a rake to obtain food, but is fooled by 
a simple trap, the child may not yet be adept at variations of the basic counting 
scenario—counting by taking objects one at a time from a container, for 
example—or be able to generalize her skill to other kinds of problems. 
Moreover, at this stage she lacks a whole cluster of related skills, such as the 
ability to add and subtract numbers, without which any ascription to her of the 
concept of an integer would have to be qualified. Thankfully, ordinary dis-
course is more nuanced than the examples typically found in the philosophical 
literature. If asked by a concerned parent whether a child has 'acquired the 
concept of an integer', a primary school teacher—after a moment's pause at 
the odd phrasing of the question—might report that the child can count, can 
compare numbers, and can add and subtract, but has yet to understand that 
adding X to Y always yields the same answer as adding Y to X. 
With the aid of more props and the scaffolding talents of a good teacher, the 
child's repertoire of arithmetic skills is soon enlarged and consolidated to the 
point where she is able to perform mental arithmetic, and to apply her under-
standing to novel classroom problems. This requires the ability to map from 
patterns of concrete sensorimotor activity to patterns of abstract thought, 
which Lakoff and Núñez relate to the human capacity for metaphor making. 
A thorough account of this or a similar mechanism would be pertinent. But 
such details do not concern us right now. Our only concern at present is to 
show that the human facility with abstract concepts does not lend credibility to 
the idea that the mind can 'float free' of the body. To press the point, let's 
extend our attention to a more abstract concept, namely infinity. How might 
the concept of infinity be founded on a sensorimotor substrate? 
The concept of infinity does seem to be strictly the provenance of humans. 
Some non-human animals are able to determine the number of objects in a 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
62
group and can be trained to offer answers to questions about quantity.28 But 
no animal can demonstrate its understanding by pointing to or picking up an 
infinity. Infinity is something that can only be thought about or talked about. 
So to have mastered the concept of infinity is to possess a thinking and talking 
skill rather than a manual or physical skill. It entails the ability to discuss such 
issues as how many integers there are or how many fractions lie between zero 
and one. How might such a thinking and talking skill be acquired? Consider 
the following fragment of dialogue, in which an imaginary pupil is introduced 
to the concept of infinity by his teacher. 
TEACHER: What's the biggest number you can think of?
PUPIL: A million. No! A billion.
TEACHER: Can you think of a number bigger than a billion?
PUPIL: A billion times a billion!
TEACHER: But if you add one to that you'll get an even bigger number.
PUPIL: Yes ...
TEACHER: In fact, however big a number you think of, you can always add one to it. 
 Isn't that right? And that would give you an even bigger number.
PUPIL: You could keep on adding one forever, and never stop. 
TEACHER: Yes! You can add an infinite number of ones.
It is not the aim here to offer a plausible piece of developmental psychology, 
but rather to highlight that there's no need to step outside the ordinary world 
of everyday physical activity to answer questions about the source and charac-
ter of abstract thought.29 In this instance, the teacher presents the concept of 
infinity through the idea of a process that has no end. It's always possible to 
add one to an integer, however large that integer is. So this process of incre-
mentation can continue forever. The teacher's instruction builds on her pupil's 
ability to count, a sensorimotor skill that is already in place. The idea of count-
ing forever is new to him, but this too has a sensorimotor foundation. For sure, 
many sensorimotor operations associated with counting are bounded by ter-
minating conditions. The process of removing marbles one by one from a 
bag will come to an end when the bag is empty. But other operations, such as 
tapping a finger on a desk, need never come to an end. 
Of course, the pupil cannot in fact tap on the desk forever. To grasp such an 
idea requires the capability, not to carry out an endless sequence of actions, but 
to imagine the perpetual exercise of the relevant sensorimotor skill. A process 
that, in the imagination, never ends is just one that, in the imagination, can 
always be continued, which is the case if it consists of actions whose execution 
28 Dehaene (1997), Chapter 1. 
29 Monaghan (2001). 

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
63
brings about their own preconditions. After a finger has been lifted and brought 
back down onto the desk, it is in just the right position to be lifted again. Now, 
each finger-tap on a desk is much like the last. But in counting a set of objects, 
every touch of the finger is accompanied by the pronouncement of a unique 
name, the next number in the series. So to imagine the business of counting 
going on forever requires the ability to imagine a new, nameable thing, with-
out having to actually name it. Plenty of metaphorical props, building on the 
ability inwardly to rehearse sequences of actions in the real world, are available 
to the teacher to nudge a child towards such an understanding. For example, 
he might be told to imagine a series of fence-posts that goes on forever, and to 
envisage painting them one by one. Because each fence-post is distinct from all 
those that precede it, he will always arrive at a fence-post that is unpainted. 
A good deal more will be said about the workings of the imagination in 
Chapter 6. For now it suffices to give notice that the imagination will be under-
stood in terms of a mechanism for internally rehearsing trajectories through 
sensorimotor space, that is to say for simulating interaction with the environ-
ment. Because talking is no less a form of sensorimotor activity than walking, 
whistling a tune, or cooking a meal, the imagination so conceived is also the 
locus of inner speech, and indeed of thinking generally. The interplay, gov-
erned by learned associations, between various different sorts of internally 
simulated sensorimotor activity—counting, painting fence-posts, talking 
about numbers—is what allows the rehearsal of a series of actions, and the 
resulting sense that this series is always open to continuation, to issue in verbal 
pronouncements about infinity. The teacher's instruction puts in place a new 
matrix of associations between certain patterns of perpetually iterable action 
and certain patterns of talking, and the upshot is the augmentation of the 
pupil's repertoire of thinking and talking skills with the ability to think and 
talk about infinite processes. 
Before abandoning the infinite, some parting remarks are in order on the 
phenomenology of grappling with abstraction. The whole thrust of the forego-
ing remarks is against the tendency to speak as if, in conscious thought, we can 
become temporary travellers in some ethereal plane of mathematics or logic. 
Our aim has been to dissolve the image of disembodied consciousness at play 
in the realm of pure ideas. But suppose that someone in the grip of such a 
conception were to challenge the view that abstract concepts have a sensori-
motor foundation by pointing out that it doesn't feel that way.30 When we 
think a mathematical thought, sensorimotor interaction doesn't feature in the 
phenomenology. 
30 Penrose trades heavily on such intuitions in The Emperor's New Mind (1999). 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
64
Well, introspective verbal report is a primary source of data in the scientific 
study of consciousness, and it is not to be dismissed. It is most useful when it 
correlates with outward events, such as the presentation of a visual stimulus or 
a pharmacological intervention. But the notion that the conscious subject has 
a privileged viewpoint on the origin and character of the concepts with which 
it thinks is vulnerable to the critical reflections on privacy and authority that 
led to the post-reflective condition. There should be no need to revisit the 
relevant critical material here. Suffice to say, such a notion appeals to the 
metaphysically fissile inner/outer distinction that was disabled by the private 
language remarks, and it resurrects the suspect idea of a solitary inner world 
wherein meaning is underwritten. 
2.8 The space of possible minds
To recap, we have examined what cognition is for, how it exerts an influence, 
and what the building blocks of thought are, and in each case we unearthed a 
significant link between cognition and embodiment. A question we might now 
be tempted to ask is whether any of these links amounts to a necessary condi-
tion for cognition, or whether the connection with embodiment is merely 
empirical and contingent. But there is no need to address the issue of necessity. 
We simply have to note the connections, and we shall allow them to inform 
our research programme. Cognition, that is to say, will be understood from the 
standpoint of embodiment. No formal opinion is required on the possibility 
or otherwise of disembodied spirits or artificially intelligent programmes 
resident in cyberspace.31 But such fantasies will not intrude on our enquiries.
On the other hand, in choosing to understand cognition from the stand-
point of embodiment we have not prejudiced our reflections against the pos-
sibility of cognitively endowed robots or intelligent extrabiological life forms. 
On the contrary, our remit should include as much as we can comprehend of 
what Sloman evocatively calls the space of possible minds.32 In Chapter 1 it was 
emphasized that deep science seeks overarching principles, while retaining 
empirical legitimacy and remaining grounded in scientific practice. Our inves-
tigation has to proceed from cognition and consciousness as it is found in 
humans and (perhaps) certain other animals, the only exemplars we have. But 
our ambition must be to abstract away from those exemplars to a set of gov-
erning principles—principles of organization, dynamics, or architecture - 
whose application is more general, much as Darwin was able to articulate a 
theoretical foundation that not only underpins our understanding of all life 
31 In fact, the conception of embodiment in play here does not rule out the possibility of a 
virtual body inhabiting some virtual reality.
32 Sloman (1984).

COGNITION AND EMBODIMENT
65
on Earth, but to which extraterrestrial life (should it exist) must surely also 
conform, as does the operation of a genetic algorithm in a computer.33
The principles of organization, dynamics, and architecture we shall alight on 
in the coming pages entail no particular commitment to a biological substrate. 
But for some authors, such as Thompson, 'life and mind share a set of basic 
organizational properties, and the organizational properties distinctive of 
mind are an enriched version of those fundamental to life'.34 According to this 
way of thinking, an organism perpetually constitutes its own identity through 
metabolic exchange of matter and energy with the environment so as to main-
tain the boundary between self and non-self. At the same time this process of 
autopoiesis both brings forth a domain of concern, wherein features of the 
environment acquire significance according to their relevance to the organ-
ism's well-being and perpetuation, and opens up a spatial and temporal 
horizon for the organism. A domain of concern and a spatiotemporal horizon 
are seen as prerequisites for lived experience. 
The set of organizational principles derived here, by contrast, is founded on 
an empirical account of the distinction between conscious and unconscious 
aspects of behaviour, both of which conditions arise in the everyday life of a 
human being. There is no reason to suppose that the dynamical signature of 
the conscious condition could not be realized in a system having the right con-
nective topology and implemented on a digital computer. If suitably embodied 
(as a humanoid robot, say), there is no reason to suppose that such a system 
could not interact with us and our environment in such a way that our attitude 
towards it would be the attitude we take towards our peers and equals.35 Such 
an artefact would surely have to be very life-like indeed. It would, no doubt, 
have its own domain of concern and display self-oriented purpose. But in the 
realm of possibility, metabolism is not a prerequisite for these features. 
In short, we should like to situate consciousness as we know it within the larger 
picture of consciousness as it could be,36 and the possibility of artificial 
consciousness—of man-made artefacts with an inner life—is implicit here.37
33 Holland (1975). 
34 Thompson (2007), p.128. Thompson's inspirations and allies in this matter include Jonas 
(1966) and Maturana & Varela (1980).
35 See Wittgenstein (1958), p.178: 'My attitude towards him is an attitude towards a soul. 
I am not of the opinion that he has a soul'.
36 This phrase echoes the ambitions of the field of Artificial Life, whose founders sought to locate 
'life-as-we-know-it within the larger picture of life-as-it-could-be' (Langton, 1989, p.1).
37 Haikonen (2003); Holland (2003); Aleksander (2005); Gamez (2008). See also Shanahan 
(2006) and the discussion of that work by Bringsjord (2007). If the prospect of artificial 
consciousness starts to look realistic it may be necessary to invoke Metzinger's pro-
scription: 'we should ban all attempts to create (or even risk the creation of ) [artificial 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
66
If artificial consciousness resides in a remote, and possibly non-existent, 
region of the space of possible minds, then animal consciousness—that is to 
say consciousness in non-human animals—should be less controversial. 
Indeed, the presumption of animal consciousness is enshrined in UK law. The 
2006 Animal Welfare Act makes it an offence for a person to cause unnecessary 
suffering to a domestic animal. Although the act does not define what is meant 
by 'suffering', the very idea of an animal's suffering only makes sense if it is like 
something to be that animal, if the animal can experience pain, hunger, thirst, 
and so on. Yet the idea of animal consciousness is notoriously resistant to a 
scientific treatment.38 The difficulty, of course, is that animals cannot tell us 
what they are thinking. The cautious researcher might accept that animals 
have feelings, in some sense, even that animals can communicate those feelings 
(by whimpering or wagging their tails, say), yet profess scepticism over whether 
a non-human animal can properly be said to think, and then compound that 
scepticism with doubt about whether there is any scientific way to settle the 
question if the animal's behaviour is all there is to go on. 
The philosophical debate here hinges on the role of language. A philosopher 
might grant that animals are capable of suffering—that they experience pain, 
hunger, and so on—yet deny them thought, properly speaking, on the grounds 
that, lacking language, they lack concepts and the means to involve concepts 
in a rational process of deciding how to act or what to believe.39 One form 
of riposte is that, although we cannot interrogate an animal over the reasons 
for its choices, nor elicit a verbal report of what an animal perceives or how it 
feels, it may still be appropriate to speak of its having wordless reasons for its 
actions or of thinking without language.40 But at this stage, there is no need for 
us to take sides in this debate. The recommended approach here is to take 
ourselves as a yardstick. First we need to establish a scientific framework for 
understanding the conscious/unconscious distinction in humans. This frame-
work should incorporate both behavioural and neurological indices. Then 
we can extrapolate from the human case and apply the principles we have 
uncovered to non-human animals.41
consciousness] from serious academic research' on the grounds that otherwise 'we might 
dramatically increase the amount of suffering, misery, and confusion on the planet' 
(Metzinger, 2003, pp. 620-622).
38 Griffin (2001).
39 Davidson (1982) is representative of this stance. See also McDowell (1994): a 'mere animal 
does not weigh reasons and decide what to do [and] the milieu it lives in can be no more 
than a succession of problems and opportunities, constituted as such by [immediate] 
biological imperatives' (p.115).
40 Bermúdez (2003); Hurley (2006). 
41 This is also the approach advocated by Edelman & Seth (2009).

Chapter 3
Probing the internal
This chapter looks at the challenge of operationalizing the conscious/
unconscious distinction. The strategy is to distinguish consciously mediated 
behaviour from automatic behaviour, taking introspective report as a gold 
standard while granting its limitations. Particular attention is given to certain 
distinctive phenomena, such as the Sperling effect, that make it difficult to 
devise practical experimental paradigms for contrasting conscious and uncon-
scious conditions. A thought experiment involving an imaginary psychologist 
with extraordinary powers is used to characterize an idealized (and unattain-
able) contrastive data set. Finally, a number of cognitive and behavioural 
correlates of reportability are hypothesized, touching on flexibility, inner 
rehearsal, and memory.
3.1 The conscious/unconscious distinction
Although the word 'consciousness' makes regular informal appearances 
throughout this book, it would not be proper to characterize our aim as 
'explaining consciousness'. Rather than trying to explain an amorphous some-
thing or other that no one can define clearly in the first place, our initial 
explanatory target is a distinction, the conscious/unconscious distinction. 
Some of what goes on around us we are conscious of. But some of what goes 
on influences our behaviour unconsciously. Similarly, some of what we do we 
do consciously, but some of what we do we do unconsciously. Our task is to 
understand the nature of these contrasts, and to begin to account for them 
scientifically. Let's begin with an everyday example.
Suppose someone sets out to brush her teeth. Usually there's a tube of tooth-
paste on the shelf. But even when it has run out, there's often a new tube in the 
medicine cabinet. Clearly there is a significant difference between the implicit 
and unconscious belief that there is toothpaste when it is there on the shelf as 
usual, and the conscious thought that there is toothpaste (in the medicine 
cabinet) although none is visible on the shelf. In the former case, the tooth-
brushing subject habitually and unthinkingly retrieves the tube from its resting 
place. But in the latter case, she must respond to an unexpected situation aris-
ing in the middle of a routine operation. The absence of toothpaste in its usual 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
68
place intrudes on what it's like to be that subject. The thought that there is 
toothpaste after all, because there is a new tube in the medicine cabinet, might 
result in an immediate verbal report (to a yawning partner), or be committed 
to memory and offered up later (as pillow talk, perhaps). The thought might 
elicit an emotional response (irritation at having to go to the medicine cabinet), 
and give rise to deliberate action (a short journey across the bathroom).
But if the toothpaste is in its usual place, none of this occurs. The tooth-
brusher locates the tube visually among the clutter of the shelf, reaches out, 
and grasps it, automatically taking account of its orientation and adjusting for 
its shape (slightly more squeezed and folded than yesterday). It's surely appro-
priate to say that she believes the toothpaste is on the shelf, that the tube is not 
empty, and so on. How else could she have completed her toilette? Yet after her 
ritual ablutions she is unable to recall anything about the action of picking it 
up. Not only is she unable to say where the tube was in relation to the various 
other objects on the shelf, report how full the tube is, or recall what brand of 
toothpaste she used, she confesses that she cannot remember picking up the 
tube at all, although she doesn't deny having done so. In short, the act of 
retrieving the tube of toothpaste made a negligible contribution to what it was 
like for her during the pertinent 5 minutes of her life. 
This little cameo has introduced several themes that we shall return to in the 
ensuing discussions. Our waking life is a patchwork of activities that are in part 
automatic and in part consciously mediated. Activities such as making toast, 
driving to work, playing table tennis, or logging on to a computer are pre-
dominantly habitual, whereas others such as learning to play a board game, 
composing a letter, or navigating by map, require considerable conscious 
intervention. Some activities, such as composing a letter, will always demand 
consciousness. Others, such as driving or playing a video game, demand atten-
tion and concentration from a novice, but become increasingly automatic with 
practice. But as the teeth-cleaning example illustrates, even a habitual task has 
recourse to consciousness when something goes wrong, when the conditions 
for its normal execution are violated. When we respond to a familiar situation 
with habitual or automatic behaviour, the details are hard to recall afterwards. 
But novel circumstances, and tasks that command our full attention, are more 
memorable and their performance is more easily described later. 
It's time to put some cards on the table, and to make plain an important 
thesis on which the argument of this book rests. The contrast between auto-
matic and consciously mediated behaviour, as just drawn, is a foundation 
stone of our approach to the conscious/unconscious distinction, and the 
rationale for this is the following working hypothesis. Consciously mediated 
behaviour may be slower and more effortful than automatic behaviour, but it is 
cognitively efficacious under a variety of special circumstances—in situations 

PROBING THE INTERNAL
69
that are novel, for example. Special circumstances such as these requisition a 
global communications infrastructure in the brain that underlies the inner life 
of a human being. This communications infrastructure, which we shall call the 
global workspace after Baars,1 receives information from, and disseminates 
information to, numerous parallel processes operating on multiple levels, and 
thereby integrates their otherwise segregated activity. 
According to the proposal to be pursued, the integrative facility supplied by 
a global workspace gives rise to the conscious condition in general, a richly 
empowering condition in which a whole battery of cognitive faculties is con-
currently engaged—learning, working memory, episodic memory, language, 
and so on. Perhaps it's not clear that a contrast inspired by such mundane 
exemplars as cleaning teeth will do justice to the rich pageantry of human 
inner life. What of internal speech, of dreams, or meditation? What of a chess 
master contemplating his next move, or a silent mourner at a graveside? But 
the claim is that even the most subtle aspects of our inner lives are realized by 
internal mechanisms built on top of firmware that has evolved to marshal the 
numerous distributed processing resources of the brain and to organize their 
combined activity into an effective response to the ongoing situation. This is 
the fundamental role of the conscious mode, the way in which it subserves 
cognition and the chief reason it has survival value. 
Some effort is now required to make this standpoint more precise, and to see 
how we might validate and enlarge on it. First, we need to clarify and opera-
tionalize the concept of automaticity and the associated contrast with 
consciously mediated behaviour. Second, we must conceive experimental 
methods that will distinguish the kinds of behaviour associated with these two 
conditions. Third, we need to develop the means to understand the internal 
workings that underpin the behavioural distinctions duly drawn, and to do so 
under the auspices of a theory broad enough to cover more of the space of pos-
sible minds than has been actualized so far in the natural history of this planet. 
This will motivate us to take an architectural, systems-level view, and to 
embrace the language of dynamical systems. 
3.2 Being on autopilot
Let's characterize a subject's behaviour as automatic to the extent that she is 
not conscious of the sensorimotor activity that constitutes it.2 This is largely 
1 Baars (1988; 1997; 2002).
2 Automaticity is characterized and indexed in a number of ways in the mainstream 
psychology literature. For a review see Moors & De Houwer (2006), and for an overview 
of the topic see Schneider (2009). Unconventionally, the present definition builds in the 
contrast with consciously mediated behaviour.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
70
a terminological manoeuvre, as attaining a clear view of the conscious/
unconscious distinction is itself work in progress. But it's a useful manoeuvre. 
For example, it's clear that automaticity so characterized has varying degrees. 
A long behavioural episode comprises many distinct sensory and motor events, 
and a person may be conscious of some (such as seeing toothpaste in the cup-
board) but not others (such as picking up a tooth brush). Moreover, a single 
sensory or motor event may comprise a number of sensory or motor sub-
events, some of which might be conscious whereas others are unconscious. 
When she picks up the new tube of toothpaste, our subject may be conscious 
of its brand but not of its orientation on the shelf, even though the latter has 
guided her reach and determined the grip she has used.
Although this characterization of automaticity places emphasis on sensory 
events that influence behaviour notwithstanding that the subject is not conscious 
of them, the sensory events in question are not subliminal. Subliminal effects 
occur when a stimulus is presented for too brief a period to be reportable—
perhaps for a few tens of milliseconds—in spite of which it still has a measur-
able influence on behaviour. Subliminal effects have been exploited in a variety 
of experimental paradigms, such as visual masking with priming, whose aim is 
to shed light on the conscious/unconscious distinction.3 However, although 
subliminal effects may sometimes arise in Nature, they are surely a rare occur-
rence, and it's not clear how much insight is to be gained into the conscious/
unconscious distinction by using them to exemplify the unconscious condi-
tion. As Bargh and Morsella put it, 'assessing the unconscious in terms of 
processing subliminal stimuli is analogous to evaluating the intelligence of a 
fish based on its behavior out of water'.4
Thus far we can concur with Bargh. None of the pertinent sensory events in 
the teeth-cleaning scenario, whether the subject is conscious of them or not, 
involves a presentation brief enough to elicit a subliminal effect. However, we 
will not follow Bargh in his shift of emphasis away from the study of sensory 
events of which a subject is not conscious, and onto the study of the uncon-
scious influences on behaviour of stimuli that the subject is perfectly conscious 
of.5 Such influences have been shown to arise, for example, when a social 
stereotype is activated that biases a subject's subsequent behaviour in ways that 
he fails to report when asked to explain the reasons for his choices.6 This is, of 
course, an important research area. But it's not the right starting point for the 
3 Kim & Blake (2005); Breitmeyer & Öˇgmen (2006).
4 Bargh & Morsella (2008), p.74.
5 Bargh & Chartrand (1999); Bargh & Morsella (2008).
6 Bargh & Morsella (2008).

PROBING THE INTERNAL
71
present project. We shall be concerned to supply an account of the conscious/
unconscious distinction that could, in principle, be applied to prelinguistic 
infants and non-human animals. These are creatures that (presumably) lack 
any conscious awareness of the reasons for their behaviour despite (presuma-
bly) being conscious of many of the sensory and motor events that contribute 
to it. So our initial focus must be consciousness (or the lack of consciousness) 
of the sensory and motor events themselves. 
Very well. But how is this notion of automaticity to be operationalized? Are 
there methods for empirically establishing the extent to which a given behav-
ioural episode is automatic or consciously mediated? If our subjects are adult 
humans, then the obvious answer is that all we need to do is ask them. Indeed, 
verbal report is taken to be the most reliable indicator of the conscious condi-
tion, a kind of gold standard, by many researchers engaged in the scientific 
study of consciousness. So all we need to do, it would seem, is detain our sub-
jects for interview as soon as possible after the behavioural episode of interest, 
and to question them in detail about what they experienced and how they 
acted during the relevant period. However, this approach is beset with difficul-
ties, and to get a sufficient grip on the relevant issues requires a standalone 
discussion. 
3.3 Introspective report
For the sake of variety, let's bring out a new example—weeding a vegetable 
patch. A gardener has to discriminate weeds from planted seedlings, digging 
up only the former and discarding them onto a compost pile. Suppose we find 
him absorbed in his task. We watch as he selects an unwanted specimen for 
removal, sparing several lettuce seedlings nearby. He casts the weed aside, and 
at that point we interrupt him with some questions. (He is forbidden to look 
down at the vegetable patch to find the answers.) Roughly how tall was the 
plant he just dug up? What shape were its leaves? How many lettuce seedlings 
were there nearby? Did he dig the roots out from the left or the right? Perhaps 
his answers lack conviction. Some are accurate, but some are just guesses, and 
some are plain wrong. He wasn't really paying attention to what he was doing 
just then, he tells us. In fact, he was thinking about his tax return. Now, what 
do the gardener's honest answers tell us about his inner life? What, in general, 
do a person's verbal reports tell us about what it is like to be that person?
There is no doubt that there are cases in which introspective report is an 
excellent indicator of conscious experience, both its presence and its absence. 
Consider the credence given to verbal pain reports. If a patient says he feels 
nothing in a certain part of his body—thanks to the administration of a local 
anaesthetic, for example—the doctor does not dispute with him. It's perfectly 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
72
ethical then for the surgeon to apply the scalpel. Equally persuasive are cases of 
verifiable introspective report. For example, consider a hearing test in which 
tones of various frequencies are played at random times to a subject wearing 
headphones, who is instructed to raise her hand whenever she hears one. 
(Introspective report does not have to be verbal, as this example demonstrates.) 
Because the test administrator knows when a tone is presented in the head-
phones, there is independent verification of the introspective report repre-
sented by a raised hand. A raised hand that coincides with the presentation of 
a tone indicates that the subject is conscious of the tone, that the tone is con-
tributing to what it is like to be that subject at that moment. Of course, this 
paradigm would fail if the subject were exposed to some other cue—a view of 
the administrator's hand on the switch, for example—that allowed her to work 
out when a tone was being played. But under laboratory conditions the means 
to cheat can be excluded. 
The utility of other types of introspective report for establishing what a sub-
ject is and is not conscious of is more controversial, even assuming laboratory 
conditions. There are two distinct issues at hand. First, we need to examine the 
usefulness of introspective report for establishing the presence of conscious 
experience, in trickier cases than pain or a hearing test. Second, we need to 
consider what introspective report—or the lack of introspective report—can 
tell us about the absence of conscious experience, again in the tricky cases. We 
also need to consider both retrospective and concurrent introspective reports. 
Let's begin with retrospective report. The obvious difficulty with a delayed 
introspective report is that its veracity can be compromised by the medium of 
memory. Even a short delay between a sensory or motor event and the corre-
sponding report opens up the possibility of corruption. 
The gardener is a case in point. He states not only that he does not recall 
what shape the leaves were on the plant he just dug up, but also that he did not 
notice at the time. Yet his behaviour showed sensitivity to leaf shape, because 
he pulled up only weeds, leaving the lettuce seedlings unscathed. Maybe he was 
fleetingly conscious of the leaf shape. Maybe it contributed to what it was like 
to be the gardener for half a second or so, but the experience of seeing the 
leaves left no trace in his memory. Or perhaps a memory of this conscious 
event was indeed laid down, but faded so rapidly that by the time he came to 
ponder the matter it had disappeared altogether. Or perhaps the very act of 
verbally recalling the previous few seconds eroded the memory of those few 
seconds, so that certain details were lost. How can we distinguish these possi-
bilities from each other, given that each one results in the same incomplete and 
potentially inaccurate retrospective report from the gardener? 
This potential for confusion is no mere theoretical fancy. A celebrated exper-
iment demonstrating just such an ambiguity under laboratory conditions was 

PROBING THE INTERNAL
73
reported by Sperling in the early 1960s, and its interpretation is still controver-
sial today.7 In Sperling's two-part experiment, subjects were briefly shown a 
grid comprising three rows of four letters each.8 In the first condition, after the 
grid was removed the subjects were asked to recall as much of it as possible. In 
the second condition, immediately after the removal of the grid subjects were 
presented with a tone whose pitch could be either high, middle, or low, and 
their task was to recall the four letters in the row corresponding to the tone—
high for the first row, middle for the second, and low for the third. In the first 
condition, subjects were only able to recall on average 4.3 out of the 12 letters. 
But in the second condition, they were able to recall on average 3.0 of the 
4 letters in the requested row, despite not knowing in advance which row this 
would be. This led Sperling to postulate a short-term 'iconic' memory that 
retains the image of the grid for long enough to enable any given row to be read 
off, but which degrades too easily to allow the whole grid to be recalled. 
The question that exercises students of consciousness today is this.9 Is the 
subject of the Sperling experiment at any point conscious of all 12 letters in the 
grid? If he is, then how come he is able to report only a fraction of them? But if 
he is not, how come he is able to report the majority of any given row? 
According to Block, the Sperling experiment is evidence that 'phenomenology 
overflows access', which is to say that a person can have an experience—such 
as that of seeing the whole grid—to which her cognitive faculties, including 
those that underlie verbal report, are denied (full) access.10 Regardless of 
whether we agree with this, and whether or not we accept Block's distinction 
between phenomenological and access consciousness, the Sperling experiment 
shows that the possibility of a conscious experience that is too fragile for full 
report is more than just a sceptic's plaything. It is one of several perfectly 
reasonable explanations of the Sperling effect. 
According to the most obvious interpretation of the Sperling experiment, it 
is the very act of providing an introspective report that interferes with memory 
in a way that compromises the ability to report further. Perhaps the subject 
consciously sees the whole grid of letters with perfect clarity, but the memory 
of that experience is so delicate that to evoke it is partially to destroy it. 
  7 Sperling (1960). A more recent experiment that raises similar issues is reported by 
Landman, et al. (2003), and discussed by Lamme (2003) and Block (2007). For a first-
personal description of such effects outside the laboratory setting, see Blackmore 
(2009).
  8 In fact Sperling's paper describes a larger series of experiments, only two of which are 
related here.
  9 Block (1995). See also Bayne & Chalmers (2003), Shanahan (2005), and Block (2007).
10 Block (1995).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
74
To adapt a simile from James, it is rather like catching a snowflake in order to 
discover its structure, only to have it melt in the palm before the inspection is 
complete.11 But a more radical interpretation is suggested by Dennett's 
critique of the relationship between consciousness and report.12 Perhaps it is 
the very act of soliciting a report after the presentation of the grid that makes 
conscious what would otherwise have remained unconscious, namely the 
contents of a specific row. 
At first, this possibility seems to make no sense. How could the act of soliciting 
a report after the event affect whether or not that event was conscious at the 
time of the event? But Dennett argues that 'what we are conscious of during a 
particular time period is not defined independently of the probes we use to 
precipitate a narrative about that period' and 'since these narratives are under 
continual revision, there is no single narrative that counts as the canonical 
version'.13 In other words, there is no fact of the matter about what a subject is 
conscious of at any given time. Different answers can be obtained depending 
on when and how a report was solicited. On this account, there is nothing 
definitive to be said about what the Sperling subject was conscious of at the 
time of the initial presentation of letters. 
The most potent example Dennett uses to bolster this position is not the 
Sperling experiment, but the so-called colour phi effect demonstrated in 
the mid-1970s by Kolers and von Grünau.14 The basis of their experiment is 
the well-known phenomenon—thanks to which animation is convincing—of 
apparent motion when two or more images depicting an object a short dis-
tance apart are presented in rapid succession. In the Kolers and von Grünau 
experiment, the images in question are of coloured dots. When both dots are 
the same colour—green, say—subjects report seeing a moving green dot. But 
when the dots are different colours—green at time T1 then red at time T2, 
say—subjects typically report a moving dot that changes colour abruptly half 
way through its motion. An interesting question then arises. What was the 
subject conscious of just before T2? According to the subject's report, the dot 
seemed red at that time, having already apparently changed colour. But the 
subject could not possibly have experienced a red dot before T2 because at that 
time the second (red) dot had yet to be presented. Indeed, it might have turned 
out green. Dennett's counter-intuitive answer to the question is that there is 
11 James (1890/1950), vol. 1, p. 244.
12 Dennett (1991).
13 Dennett (1991), p. 136.
14 Kolers & von Grünau (1976). A related illusion is the so-called cutaneous rabbit (Geldard 
& Sherrick (1972)).

PROBING THE INTERNAL
75
no answer. There is no such thing as what the subject was conscious of just 
before T2.15
With events on longer timescales, we might try to circumvent these difficulties 
by banishing retrospective report altogether, and insisting that our experimen-
tal paradigms use concurrent introspective report, perhaps using the method of 
'protocol analysis' advocated by Ericsson.16 As Ericsson argues, eliminating 
the delay between thought and report mitigates unwanted interference effects, 
and is helpful for obtaining reliable first-person descriptions of the thinking 
processes used in tasks such as mental arithmetic. And in a clinical setting, 
concurrent introspective report of symptoms such as pain or fatigue is useful 
for patient monitoring.17 But these methods are inapplicable to the problem of 
operationalizing the distinction between automatic and consciously mediated 
behaviour. This is because the delivery of a running commentary during an 
episode of behaviour will force sensory and motor events to be brought to con-
sciousness that would otherwise have remained unconscious. To vary a simile 
used by O'Regan and Nöe,18 trying to use concurrent report to detect an uncon-
scious sensory or motor event is like trying to find out whether a refrigerator 
light is off by opening the door. Or, to use another of James's figures, it is like 
'trying to turn up the gas quickly enough to see how the darkness looks'.19
Despite its drawbacks then, it seems we must make the best of retrospective 
report. One way to mitigate its drawbacks is to solicit a response at just the 
right time. This should be long enough after the event both to eliminate 
the Sperling effect and to render the colour phi phenomenon unambiguous 
(the second dot has to appear before a report is offered), but not so long that 
significant corruption in memory is possible (Fig. 3.1).20 To be more precise, 
we might posit two kinds of memory trace—a sensory trace and an episodic 
trace—which fade at different rates after a stimulus has disappeared.21 To leave 
an episodic trace, and thereby permit report, is a hallmark of the conscious 
condition. Although the sensory trace of an unattended stimulus persists it can 
still participate in the conscious condition if attention is drawn to the stimulus 
15 Dennett (1991), pp.120-126.
16 Ericsson (2006). See also Ericsson & Simon (1993).
17 Stone & Shiffman (2002).
18 O'Regan & Nöe (2001), p. 947. Also see Thomas (1999), p.219.
19 James (1890/1950), vol. 1, p. 244.
20 See Carman's (2007) discussion of the colour phi experiment and Dennett's interpreta-
tion of it (especially pp. 104-105).
21 Sperling's 'iconic memory' is one type of sensory trace. The present concept is neutral 
with respect to sensory modality.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
76
after its presentation, precipitating the start of a retrospective episodic trace. 
But after a sufficient delay (δ1+ δ2, where δ1 is the minimum time required for 
any participation in the conscious condition), the sensory trace fades out, and 
only the episodic trace remains. This is the ideal time to solicit an introspective 
report, assuming no intervening events (such as masking stimuli).22
This proposal entails no particular stand on the question of whether or not 
there really is such a 'thing' as what a subject is conscious of at any given point 
in time, independently of our ability to measure it. To take such a stand, 
whether a denial or an affirmation, would be to stray into metaphysics. From 
a subject's point of view, it is only necessary to remark on how things seem, 
and from the standpoint of science the most that can be expected is an expla-
nation of the best data it is possible to acquire, where what is best is what is 
deemed so by a self-critical community of scientists. What we are then left with 
is near-immediate retrospective report that, in its summary of the preceding 
moments of a subject's inner life, tends to run together periods shorter than a 
few tens of milliseconds. 
22 Appropriate values for δ1 and δ2 depend on the stimulus in question. Small values would 
suffice in the case of the Sperling experiment. But for the example of retrospectively 
counting chimes that go unnoticed until the third or fourth strike (Dennett, 1991, p.137), 
a longer period might be necessary.
Time
Episodic trace
Sensory trace
Event
Report
Quality
δ1
δ2
Fig. 3.1 The reporting sweetspot. The ideal time to solicit an introspective report for 
an event is long enough after the event for any sensory trace to have faded, but not 
so long that whatever episodic trace there may have been has also faded or become 
corrupted.

PROBING THE INTERNAL
77
3.4 Catching ourselves unawares
Its limitations notwithstanding, from a subjective, first-personal standpoint, 
verbal report authoritatively annunciates conscious experience. We take very 
seriously what we say (or could say) to each other, and indeed what we say (or 
could say) silently to ourselves, about our inner lives—and quite rightly so. If 
I say I can or cannot see, hear, or feel something, if I say I am happy or sad, 
excited or confused, then I do not expect to be greeted with full-on scepticism. 
To be sure, my confidence is sometimes misplaced, especially so in the sphere 
of affect. Consider the red-faced father who shouts at his children, 'I am NOT 
angry!', or the recently retired businessman who confesses, 'I never realized 
how unhappy I was in my job'.23 Moreover, as the Sperling and colour phi 
experiments show, whatever I say will have limited temporal resolution. 
Nevertheless, from my point of view, what I have to say about my own inner 
life carries weight. This is the first-personal human perspective. It is from this 
perspective that things matter, that there are such things as suffering and joy, 
and that suffering and joy bear significance.
In short, introspective report can be thought of as a 'window' on the inner 
life—a window made of impure glass, we might say, but a window nevertheless—
and in general we take at face value people's pronouncements about how 
things are for them. On this basis, we can investigate the presence of conscious 
experience by soliciting carefully timed verbal reports. However, convincing 
evidence of the absence of conscious experience, of what is not part of a sub-
ject's inner life, is harder to come by. On the one hand, the inability to produce 
a retrospective verbal report of a sensory or motor event does not warrant the 
conclusion that the event in question has not contributed to the subject's inner 
life, because it is hard to tell the difference retrospectively between something 
that never existed and something whose existence was too fragile to persist.24 
In the terminology of Merikle and Reingold, retrospective verbal report may 
be an exclusive indicator of certain types of conscious awareness, but it does 
23 Lambie & Marcel (2002).
24 Such ambiguities have led to controversy over the existence and detectability of uncon-
scious perception. Merikle, et al. (2001) overview experimental paradigms for detecting 
perception without conscious awareness, Snodgrass, et al. (2004) propose a further para-
digm, and Eredyi (2004) emphasizes the need to take account of timing issues in such 
experiments. Yet Reingold (2004) questions the validity of these experimental methods, 
reiterating the criticisms of Reingold & Merikle (1988). Holender and Duscherer (2004) 
go further and question the very existence of unconscious perception. Dehaene, et al. 
(2006) clarify the issue from a neuroscience perspective. But the context for all this 
discussion is subliminal perception in the laboratory. None of these authors considers 
automaticity in an ecological setting, which is the present emphasis.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
78
not seem to be an exhaustive one.25 On the other hand, attempts to generate 
concurrent verbal reports of unconscious (yet supraliminal) sensory and motor 
events are inherently self-defeating. Yet without some means of detecting these 
things we will be hard pressed to operationalize the conscious/unconscious 
distinction by drawing a contrast between automaticity and consciously 
mediated behaviour. 
Of course, absence of evidence is not evidence of absence—unless we have 
looked very hard in all the right places. If a verbal report is solicited from a 
subject soon after the events she is expected to report on, and if nothing occurs 
in the mean time to compromise her memory, then her inability retrospec-
tively to describe some facet of the ongoing situation that manifestly influ-
enced her behaviour can surely be taken as some evidence of automaticity in 
the sensorimotor arc that mediated that influence. Such inferences are widely 
used to gauge 'situational awareness' during occupations such as driving.26 But 
science proceeds best through the accumulation of evidence from multiple 
sources, and thankfully we can supplement failure of retrospective report with 
other indices of unconscious sensorimotor activity. 
One promising approach is to exploit a widely accepted feature of con-
sciousness, namely its limited capacity.27 Crudely put, it seems that there 
cannot be more than a very few distinct objects of consciousness at any one 
time. Exercising this hypothesis requires caution.—Perhaps it fails if the objects 
in question are presented in different modalities. Perhaps we can rapidly inter-
leave consciousness of one object with consciousness of another object.—But 
if we accept the limited capacity hypothesis in some form, and if it can be 
shown thereby that at some time during the performance of a task the subject's 
conscious capacity is fully taken up with task-unrelated thought, then it can 
plausibly be argued that the subject has no conscious awareness of ongoing 
task-related sensorimotor activity at that time. 
One method for achieving this is by means of what we shall term cognitive 
masking. The method here is to occupy the subject with a distractor task, for 
example by engaging her in conversation or giving her exercises in mental 
arithmetic. At certain times, and in some respects, we should expect a reduc-
tion in the level of performance of the primary task under these conditions. 
But at other times and in other respects, the subject's performance might not 
degrade, and this would be an indicator of automaticity.28 For example, in 
25 Reingold & Merikle (1988).
26 Strayer & Drews (2007); Ma & Kaber (2005).
27 Baars (1988), Chapter 1.
28 This is an example of a dual-task paradigm. Dual-task studies have been used to investi-
gate the related idea of a central bottleneck in human cognitive processing (Pashler, 1984; 

PROBING THE INTERNAL
79
normal traffic conditions, a driver may be perfectly adept at maintaining her 
lane and keeping her distance from the car in front while conversing on a 
mobile phone. On the other hand, a driver conversing on a mobile phone 
might fail to notice something unexpected, such as a drunken pedestrian stray-
ing into the road, and be unable to react quickly enough to avoid an accident. 
(We shall encounter a different but related use of cognitive masking shortly.) 
Another potential method for identifying automaticity by exploiting the 
capacity limitations of consciousness is to use thought sampling to identify 
periods of mind wandering. In this paradigm, the subject goes about her daily 
business equipped with a bleeper. The bleeper sounds at random intervals dur-
ing the day, and as soon as it does the subject must stop what she is doing and 
record an immediate report of what she is thinking about at that moment.29 
Clearly this procedure is open to abuse and vulnerable to distortion of various 
sorts. But with suitably motivated and trained subjects, thought sampling is 
believed to be capable of detecting episodes during which the mind wanders 
and the subject becomes absorbed by thoughts that are irrelevant to her ongo-
ing activity.30 Insofar as this ongoing activity is oriented towards completing 
some task, and to the extent that there is no significant degradation in the per-
formance of that task, it is reasonable to assume that these episodes of mind 
wandering are coincident with episodes of automaticity. 
Of course, in each of these cases of alleged automaticity we would also expect 
the subject to be unable to offer a retrospective report about the pertinent 
aspects of her activity, and in this way we gain two vectors that converge on the 
same phenomenological hole. Moreover, we should aim to gather consistent 
results across a significant population. The early 20th-century demise of intro-
spectionism as a respectable scientific methodology was partly due to the 
apparent irreconcilability of divergent first-personal accounts of certain sub-
jective phenomena, such as 'imageless thought'.31 By contrast, the reason that 
subjective phenomena such as the Müller-Lyer illusion remain acceptable as 
valid data in psychology is that they are consistently reported by large popula-
tions. Likewise, a robust conscious/unconscious distinction made on the basis 
of verbal report will only be acceptable if an experimenter can replicate the 
Ruthruff, et al., 2001; Lien, et al., 2006). The relevant literature rarely discusses the 
conscious/unconscious distinction, but an obvious hypothesis is that the limited capacity 
of consciousness and the central bottleneck are manifestations of the same underlying 
architecture.
29 Stone & Shiffman (2002); Hurlburt & Akhter (2006).
30 Smallwood & Schooler (2007).
31 Costall (2006).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
80
production/non-production of similar reports in comparable circumstances 
for significantly numerous sets of subjects. 
3.5 The omnipotent psychologist
We are now in a position to pay another visit to our gardener. But we shall 
make him the victim of a thought experiment. Let us imagine what the find-
ings might be of an experimental psychologist who is blessed with a certain 
kind of omnipotence. Thanks to some unspecified miracle—an especially large 
research grant perhaps—she has the capability to turn back time and replay 
the same episode of behaviour as often as she likes, making a different inter-
vention on each occasion. Here is our gardener bending towards a weed. The 
species is unfamiliar, but it is certainly no lettuce. He plunges his trowel into 
the soil, prises up the unwanted plant, and discards it. Very soon after the 
rejected plant has disappeared from the gardener's field of view, the psycholo-
gist interrupts his work and subjects him to a short interview. What leaf-shape 
did that plant have? How many petals were on its flower?
With the answers duly noted, the psychologist presses the rewind button. 
The weed leaps from the compost pile and flies back into the ground. The 
gardener's trowel retreats from the soil, and the gardener himself is restored to 
an upright posture. Now the psychologist replays the scene up to the moment 
she interrupted him last time. But in this trial, when she arrests the gardener's 
progress, she poses a different set of questions. Where on the trowel handle 
was the tip of his thumb when its tip broke the soil's surface? Did the blade 
meet any resistance, from stones or other obstructions, or did it slide straight 
in? Where on the weed did he grasp it—by the leaves, or by the stalk? Again the 
psychologist makes due note. 
Unlike a real psychologist, the omnipotent psychologist can repeat this 
procedure as often as she likes, varying the time of her interventions and the 
set of interview questions at will, compiling a catalogue of evidence as she goes 
along for which sensory and motor events have impacted on the gardener's 
consciousness and which (apparently) have not. For the gardener, the inter-
vention is unexpected every time, the questions unanticipated. Moreover, each 
intervention can be made independent of every other. On the first trial, the 
psychologist might query the gardener's recall of the leaf-shape. Then, for the 
second trial, she can rewind and replay and query his recall of the petal count 
at exactly the same instant, knowing that the report elicited by the second 
request will be untainted by the corrupting influence of the first. 
As well as soliciting different reports at multiple times for the same behav-
ioural episode, the omnipotent psychologist can vary her experimental 
paradigm. For example, she might use the thought sampling method to look 

PROBING THE INTERNAL
81
out for periods of mind wandering. Suppose the gardener is not quizzed 
directly about the weed he has just pulled, but is instead asked simply to 
describe his thoughts, and suppose he tells the psychologist that he was think-
ing about his tax return. Specifically, he was wondering whether the cost of a 
recently purchased piece of equipment was tax deductible. Now, in a real 
experiment, whatever conscious awareness the gardener might have had of the 
appearance of the last weed he pulled, this is liable to have decayed by the time 
he has finished recounting his financial ruminations. So little could be con-
cluded from his inability to provide a subsequent report about leaf-shape or 
petal count. But our omnipotent psychologist is in a better position. She can 
simply replay the scenario, and this time ask the gardener directly about the 
weed in order to confirm the evidence of automaticity already gained by 
thought sampling. 
Using her god-like powers, our imaginary psychologist is in a position to 
build up a detailed picture of what goes through the gardener's mind as he 
tends his vegetable patch and, most importantly for our present agenda, which 
route is taken as it goes through—the conscious route or the unconscious. To 
visualize what's going on, let's suppose she builds an interactive chart on her 
computer, with time laid out from left to right. The chart is initially populated 
with information gathered by observing the gardener's behaviour without 
intervention. Every motor event, and every sensory stimulus that influences 
the gardener's behaviour, appears on the chart as a blue horizontal bar whose 
length corresponds to the duration of the event in question. Often, distinct 
sensory and motor events are concurrent—sighting a weed, hearing a bird, 
grasping the trowel, and so on, can all occur together—and these are separated 
vertically on the chart, resulting in a stripy appearance (Fig. 3.2).
Now the experiment begins in earnest. The psychologist makes a series of 
interventions, and further coloured bars are overlaid on the chart representing 
what the subject reports. Whenever the subject reports an experience that 
matches what observably took place, a faint purple stripe is overlaid on the 
chart, frequently over the top of an existing blue stripe representing the same 
event. Reports of sensory or motor events that do not correspond to what 
is observable appear as red stripes. Having sensibly automated the rewind-
replay-interview procedure, the psychologist can recline in her chair and 
watch as the data floods in and the chart fills with colour. As more verbal 
reports come in, many of them pertaining to the same stimulus but obtained 
at different times, there is an increasing build-up of ever-deepening purple 
stripes. The less of a blue hue a stripe has and the more purple it appears, the 
more confident the psychologist can be that it signifies an event of which her 
subject is conscious. However, much of the chart remains blue, and as more 
data come in, the absence of evidence of consciousness indicated by these 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
82
stubbornly blue stripes starts to look increasingly like evidence of the absence 
of consciousness. 
At the end of the experiment, the chart is a patchwork of blue, purple, and 
red. Using its interactive facilities, the psychologist can now select any event on 
the chart and zoom in on it. Suppose she chooses a moment several minutes 
into experimental time, when the gardener puts down his trowel in order to 
look at his watch. She zooms in on the put-down-trowel event, which appears 
blue (unconscious) on the large-scale chart. When opened up, this event, 
which lasts approximately 1.5 seconds, turns out to comprise several distinct 
arm, hand, head, and eye movements mediated by several distinct visual, hap-
tic, and audio stimuli (the position of the ground, the edge of the trowel, the 
feel of the trowel handle, and so on). This appears as another patchwork of 
colours. It is mostly blue (unconscious), but the psychologist spies an isolated 
little streak of purple, a conscious sensory event. On further inspection, the 
stimulus turns out to be a strange clang audible when the trowel touches the 
ground. There is a short bar of pure red parallel to the streak of purple—a brief 
moment of illusion. The clang sounds to the gardener like metal on metal. He 
responds to this with a tiny flick of his eyes. He fleetingly sees the true cause of 
Grabs trowel
Inserts trowel
Itch
Grasps weed
Time (seconds)
0
Hears bird
Sees weed
Feels stalk
Saccade
Hand movement
Sees handle
Feels handle
Joint pain
Notices
orchid
8
6
4
2
Fig. 3.2 An idealized data set showing conscious and unconscious sensory and motor 
events in an ecological (i.e. non-laboratory) setting. Verifiable conscious events are 
shown in magenta, unverifiable conscious events are shown in red, and verifiable 
unconscious events are shown in blue. Zooming in on an event shows up finer detail - a 
predominantly unconscious event might have many sub-events, some of which are 
partly conscious. The conscious condition is established (according to the thought 
experiment) by repeated interventions and elicitations of verbal report for the same 
replayed episode. (See Plate 1).

PROBING THE INTERNAL
83
the noise, just a stone—another small streak of purple on the chart—and his 
gaze moves on. 
The imaginary chart now spread out before our fictional psychologist 
represents a fundamental form of contrastive data set, wherein conditions of 
reportable and unreportable sensorimotor activities are laid out (Fig. 3.3). Of 
course, it is an idealization, a piece of science fantasy. In reality, no single epi-
sode in a subject's life can be scrutinized so closely, especially not in a natural, 
'ecological' setting, and psychologists must rely on successive trials with differ-
ent subjects to build up the best picture possible. (Obviously, to compile a 
truly thorough compendium of data, the fictional psychologist too must study 
many subjects, and many scenarios for each subject.) But the thought experi-
ment helps to make precise the proposed distinction between automaticity and 
consciously mediated behaviour, the possibility of replay mitigating many of 
the methodological problems of introspective report. 
Now let's suppose the omnipotent psychologist embarks on a new phase of 
her research programme. The purpose of this second phase is to determine 
how the conscious condition influences the gardener's behaviour, over and 
Fig. 3.3 Part of an idealized contrastive data set. According to the thought experi-
ment, the psychologist is able to replay the same episode many times with different 
interventions, in order to compare closely matched variants with conscious and uncon-
scious versions of the same sensory or motor event. In this example, the psychologist 
uses cognitive masking (a distracting mental arithmetic task) to render a sensory event 
unconscious that would otherwise have been conscious. The behavioural consequences 
of the distinction are then open to study. (See Plate 2).
Grasps weed
Time (seconds)
Sees weed
Feels stalk
Notices orchid
Puts trowel
down
Leans over
orchid
Sees flower
Sees petals
Sees orchid
11
9
7
6
4
11
9
7
Pulls orchid
Grasps orchid
Listens to psychologist
Solves maths problem

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
84
above enabling him to make verbal reports. To establish this, she uses a cognitive 
masking paradigm, once again exploiting her unusual powers. For each stimu-
lus of which the gardener is conscious according to the chart, the psychologist 
replays the relevant episode in the gardener's life yet again. But this time she 
devises an intervention that causes her subject to be occupied with an addi-
tional, cognitively demanding task at the time of presentation of the stimulus 
in question. This task could involve mental arithmetic, or everyday conversa-
tion, for example. By adjusting the timing and difficulty of the task appropri-
ately, there should be many cases in which the psychologist is able to achieve 
the effect that the gardener is no longer able to report the stimulus—as deter-
mined by further replays, using the method already described—even though it 
is clear that his behaviour has been influenced by it. 
For example, suppose a rare orchid has by chance seeded in the vegetable 
patch. The gardener spots the unusual specimen when his weeding brings him 
close to it, and he responds by stopping, looking more closely, then lovingly 
digging it up and setting it aside for replanting elsewhere. On the psycholo-
gist's chart, this episode is streaked with purple. In other words, when verbal 
reports about this episode were solicited at various times on successive replays, 
the gardener had a good deal to say, much of which closely matched what was 
objectively measurable. He could report the condition of the orchid's flowers, 
its approximate height, its position with respect to the plants around it, and so 
on. (He could not have had prior knowledge of any of these facts, so the psy-
chologist is confident of the relationship between the reports and the stimu-
lus.) Now, in the second phase of experimentation, the psychologist gives the 
gardener a piece of simple mental arithmetic to do just before he arrives at the 
orchid. Sure enough (let us suppose), if timed just right, this additional task is 
sufficient to prevent the production of most of the usual verbal report, and this 
is taken to indicate a lack of conscious awareness of the unusual plant. 
Now the question is this. What difference does the cognitively masked 
condition make to the gardener's behaviour? One possible outcome is that the 
gardener will fail to notice anything unusual, and treat the orchid as if it were 
a weed. If this occurs, it's clear that the gardener has still, in some sense, seen 
the orchid. Otherwise he would not have inserted his trowel into the earth at 
its base, nor could he have picked it up in his fingers. But the fact that it's an 
orchid has seemingly failed to penetrate his consciousness, and his response to 
the stimulus of the flower is automatic. As a result he has missed an opportu-
nity, and the psychologist has acquired one small example of the contrast 
between consciously mediated and automatic behaviour in otherwise closely 
matched circumstances. 
It's worth noting that cognitive masking can be used in different ways. 
Earlier we saw that it can be used to support the hypothesized absence of 

PROBING THE INTERNAL
85
conscious awareness. If performance on a task in a cognitively masked condition 
is comparable to that in the unmasked condition then, under the assumption 
that a cognitively demanding task occupies the limited capacity of conscious-
ness, it can be concluded that behaviour in the unmasked condition is not 
consciously mediated. Now we are seeing it used in a different way, namely to 
contrast consciously mediated and automatic behaviour in otherwise matched 
conditions. If performance on a task is poorer in the cognitively masked condi-
tion than in the normal, unmasked condition then, under the assumption that 
there is no separate limited capacity central bottleneck that could be dissoci-
ated from the limited capacity of consciousness, it can be surmised that con-
scious mediation is required for effective performance on the task in question. 
Different scenarios will be more or less susceptible to manipulations of the 
sort just envisaged. If the gardener pricks himself on a thorn, then no amount 
of absorption in mental arithmetic is likely to eliminate the disagreeable sensa-
tion. Likewise, if the gardener breaks his trowel, then the intrusion of this event 
into his consciousness is inevitable, because he simply cannot continue with-
out addressing the crisis. Moreover, even in cases where a reportable stimulus 
can be rendered unreportable, there might be no behavioural difference 
between the two conditions. The gardener might be consciously aware of the 
unexpected sound of his trowel hitting metal, but carry on weeding without 
bothering to look for buried treasure. However, the most interesting cases are 
those in which the extinction of a conscious stimulus through cognitive mask-
ing goes hand-in-hand with a behavioural change, as in the orchid example. 
The question such cases raise is this. What, if anything, do they all have in 
common? An answer to this question would clarify the sense in which the con-
scious condition is cognitively efficacious, and show us how this is manifest in 
behaviour that better subserves a subject's goals and needs. 
3.6 Novelty and flexibility
An idea often mooted in the literature is that the conscious condition facili-
tates flexibility of behaviour, whereas automatic behaviour is rigid and stereo-
typic and therefore less able to handle the unfamiliar.32 So perhaps the 
cognitively masked condition, when it affects behaviour at all, will give rise to 
less flexible behaviour. But what is meant by flexibility here? What makes one 
motor response stereotypic and inflexible whereas another is not? To answer 
32 The link between consciousness and flexibility is frequently alluded to in Baars (1988), 
for example, and Searle (1992, Chapter 4) discusses the connection in the context of 
automaticity in epileptic patients during seizure. The topic of flexible cognition is dis-
cussed at length in Carruthers (2006), although the issue of consciousness is not to the 
fore in his treatment.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
86
this question, let's revisit the scale we encountered in Chapter 2, according to 
which the capacity to innovate in the face of novelty is a sign of cognitive prow-
ess. At the low end of the scale we have the humble chicken who, though per-
haps more adaptable than an industrial robot messily executing its usual 
motions even though the plastic parts it was designed to assemble have been 
substituted with cream cakes, nevertheless lacks the ability to innovate in the 
face of opportunity or adversity. To thrive in the ecological niche into which it 
has evolved, the chicken has no need of a sensorimotor loop that makes espe-
cially fine discriminations. A limited repertoire of simple behaviours is suffi-
cient for it, and switching effectively between them requires only the recognition 
of simple cues. The world does not disclose to the chicken a combinatorially 
structured space of affordances, and the chicken lacks the means to explore 
such a space.
Further along the scale we find cognitively well-endowed non-human 
animals, such as the corvid family, which includes crows and rooks. The clev-
erness of these birds is apparent from their performance on the trap-tube test, 
a benchmark experimental paradigm devised by animal cognition researchers 
(Fig. 3.4).33 The trap tube in question is a transparent cylinder at the centre of 
which an item of food is placed, visible to the animal but inaccessible without 
the aid of a tool. A stick or plunger is provided, and using this tool the animal 
can pull the food item towards one or other end of the tube. But there's an 
additional difficulty. At one end of the tube, a trap is interposed between the 
food and the exit. If the animal chooses to pull from the wrong end the food 
will fall into the trap and be lost. (A similar set-up involving rakes and a table 
with a trench (a trap table) was described in Chapter 2.) Although there is 
33 Seed, et al., (2006); Taylor, et al. (2009).
Fig. 3.4 The trap-tube test and a variation. In both versions of the test, a food item is 
lodged in the middle of a plunger inside a transparent tube. To pass the basic test 
(left), an animal must pull the plunger to the left so that the food passes over the false 
trap and pops out. If the animal pulls to the right, the food falls into the trap and is 
lost. In the variation (right), the animal must pull the plunger to the right so that the 
food item falls out of the hole. No associatively learned rule is sufficient to allow an 
animal to pass the variation on first presentation.

PROBING THE INTERNAL
87
some variance in individual performance, many crows and rooks learn to pull 
out the food, avoiding the end with the trap.34
However, this can be achieved through trial-and-error and associative learning. 
What truly impresses is the crow's ability to apply what it has learned to previ-
ously unseen variations of the test, variations that would confound an associa-
tive rule based on a simple visual cue. For example, as Taylor, et al. have shown, 
in a population of crows, certain individuals are capable of transferring what 
they have learned on the trap tube to a trap table, which has no visual features 
in common with the trap tube yet shares the relevant spatial and causal prop-
erties.35 Rooks, crows, and other corvids have evolved a variety of behaviours 
that is more complex than the chicken's—including tool-use and food-caching, 
for example—and a larger, more richly structured set of affordances is availa-
ble to them as a result.36 Moreover, they seem to have the cognitive capacity to 
explore this space of possibilities through a combination of experiment 
and insight, and so to expose whole regions of affordance that were previously 
hidden from them. 
In general, a situation (or a particular stimulus in the context of a situation) 
invites flexibility when an animal's innate, habitual, or previously learned 
responses prevent it from best prosecuting its interests in that situation. If an 
animal repeatedly offers the same unfavourable response in such circum-
stances then its behaviour can be classed as inflexible. For example, a chicken 
that reacts to the sight of food through the perspex of the trap tube by repeat-
edly pecking the exterior of the apparatus will not gain any reward. On the 
other hand, if such a situation inaugurates a period of exploration of the space 
of potential action—an exploration whereby hidden affordances are revealed, 
either on-line through exploration and play, or off-line by means of some 
internal process—then the animal may exhibit a response that better promotes 
its well-being. Hence the talented crow, after a period of trial and error, learns 
to pull the food out of the tube, avoiding the trap. Whereas the chicken's 
behaviour is inflexible, the crow manages to adapt to the novelty of the 
circumstances. 
So the crow's behaviour is adaptive. We might think of it as more flexible 
than the chicken's. But real flexibility, as we shall use the term, involves more 
34 Seed, et al. (2006) and Tebbich, et al. (2007) tested rooks, and Taylor, et al. (2009) tested 
crows.
35 Taylor, et al. (2009).
36 In the experiment reported by Seed, et al. (2006), an individual rook (Guillem) passed the 
variation of the trap tube shown on the right of Fig. 4.4 on first presentation. This is 
especially remarkable, as rooks are not known to use tools in the wild. However, captive 
rooks have been shown to be proficient tool-users (Bird & Emery, 2009).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
88
than just the re-tuning of an existing behaviour, more than just a new marriage 
of cue to response.37 Real flexibility is innovative, and transcends an animal's 
existing behavioural repertoire. It arises, for example, when the animal com-
bines the elements of its existing repertoire in new ways. A hint of real flexibil-
ity, in this sense, is detectable in the rook or crow that succeeds in transferring 
its success at the standard trap tube to a novel variation. The bird has done 
more than merely adapt an existing behaviour using trial and error, more than 
just marry a cue with a response. Its behavioural repertoire has properly 
expanded, perhaps drawing on both its tool-use expertise and its food-caching 
expertise in order to foresee the consequences of using the plunger (which is 
like a twig) to push the food item into a hole (which is like a cache site). Human 
beings enjoy unparalleled flexibility, an ability to blend the elements of their 
behavioural repertoire in ways that open up whole new regions of affordance, 
and then to blend with the newly blended repertoire itself. 
So the human is the point of reference at the high end of the cognitive scale. 
Recall the resourceful cook in the kitchen, who had to open a can of tomatoes 
using a variety of household tools instead of a tin opener. The word 'resourceful' 
is apt, because the cook's achievement was to marshal the numerous resources 
of past experience and apply them to a challenge she had never faced before, 
somehow selecting from a wide repertoire of skills and expertise a novel yet 
appropriate combination of actions to achieve her aim. Such innovation is the 
epitome of flexibility. The space of affordances that opened out before the 
cook was combinatorially structured. The behavioural possibilities could have 
been re-ordered and recombined in an indefinite number of ways, and the 
human has the capacity to explore this space both on-line, by interacting with 
the environment, and off-line, by rehearsing the outcomes of actions without 
performing them. Moreover, the space of human affordances is open-ended. 
The set of behaviours that can be combined and recombined is not prescribed 
in advance. It is forever being made and remade thanks to the productivity of 
human invention, and transmitted through the medium of human culture. 
If the field of psychology were able to compile the sort of idealized, ecologi-
cally situated contrastive data set envisioned in the thought experiment 
described earlier, it seems likely that it would show severely degraded performance 
37 The term 'flexibility' is often used in a more liberal sense that encompasses mere adaptivity. 
For example, the Wisconsin card-sorting task, which is often characterized as a test of 
flexibility in cognition, assesses the ability to adapt to changing rules (Berg, 1948). 
Similarly, the classic experimental work of Schneider and Shiffrin (1977) is often charac-
terized as showing that automaticity compromises flexibility, but again the paradigm 
used only assesses adaptivity in the present sense. (Of course, automaticity is even more 
likely to compromise flexibility in the more demanding sense being used here.)

PROBING THE INTERNAL
89
in the cognitively masked condition compared to the consciously mediated 
condition in tasks that demand flexibility in the sense defined. Existing experi-
mental evidence backs this up. It has been shown, for example, that drivers 
engaged in telephone conversations have poorer situational awareness of traf-
fic conditions than those who are not distracted by any such task.38 They are 
more likely to fail to respond to unexpected events pertinent to their journey, 
such as road signs relevant to their route, and are less likely to be able to report 
such events when questioned immediately after driving. Although the link to 
the conscious/unconscious distinction in these and similar experiments is 
open to challenge, the evidence they supply is broadly supportive of the 
hypothesis that the conscious condition facilitates flexibility. 
3.7 Accounting for the conscious condition
If every instance of consciously mediated behaviour could be characterized in 
terms of flexibility in the presence of novelty, we would have a simple answer 
to our earlier question of what distinguishes the conscious condition from the 
automatic condition in behavioural terms. However, this is surely not the case. 
To see this, we need only consider examples of human behaviour that is medi-
ated by thinking. Suppose a pupil is asked to divide 129 by 30 without the aid 
of pencil and paper. The pupil might approach the task in a number of differ-
ent ways, depending on how he was taught and his preferred method. But he 
will certainly have to carry out several mental operations in sequence before 
offering an answer, such as first dividing 120 by 30, committing the intermedi-
ate result to memory, then working on the sub-problem of dividing 9 by 30. 
Similarly, consider a chess player contemplating her next move. Suppose she 
considers it advantageous to advance her rook, but she must check out the 
consequences of doing so. The move might entice her opponent's bishop out 
to threaten her knight. But the knight is protected by the rook. Aha! The chess-
player quickly realizes her mistake. In the imagined scenario the rook will no 
longer be there to protect the knight. So she thinks again.
In both cases, there is reportability. If our psychologist conducts an inter-
view with either of these subjects, they will be able to describe their reasoning 
processes.39 The pupil is likely to be able to break down her thoughts into two 
or three specific episodes, and the chess-player is likely to be able to describe 
38 Strayer & Drews (2007); Ma & Kaber (2005).
39 Alternatively, they could be asked to think out loud while performing their tasks (Ericsson 
& Simon, 1993; Ericsson, et al., 2006). Of course, the omnipotent psychologist is in a 
position to try out both retrospective and concurrent reports on the same occasion, and 
to compare the results.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
90
the moves she has rehearsed and rejected, specifying the order in which she 
mentally tried them out. We need not concern ourselves here with the ques-
tion of the accuracy of such introspective reports (lacking, as they do, any 
external means of verification). No one would dispute with the bare claim, 
made by both the pupil and the chess-player, that they had thought through 
the problems facing them. In both cases, we have consciously mediated behav-
iour. In both cases, it is hard to imagine how the same results could have been 
achieved without conscious involvement. Yet in neither case is flexibility a 
hallmark of the behaviour in question. Rather, we are inclined to characterize 
both in terms of internal processes. The pupil's success is the outcome of a 
(familiar) mental procedure, whereas the chess-player's move is the result of 
inwardly rehearsing different (familiar) possibilities and weighing them against 
each other. 
So we now appear to have two independent candidate indices of the con-
scious condition, in addition to the gold standard of reportability—enhanced 
flexibility in the face of novelty, and the ability inwardly to execute a sequence 
of problem-solving steps. Further possible indices of consciousness are not 
hard to imagine. Suppose a person is cleaning his house. He pushes the vac-
uum cleaner back and forth, periodically stopping to remove a stray object 
from the floor. But his mind is elsewhere. He's thinking about where to go on 
holiday. So when he picks up his glasses case and puts it on top of the bookcase, 
he does so distractedly. Later, when he needs his glasses, he has no recollection 
of where he put them. By contrast, if he is being especially mindful while 
cleaning—perhaps our psychologist has rewound time and asked him to name 
each object as he picks it off the floor—then he is more likely to notice the 
glasses case, and more likely to know where it is when he needs his glasses 
several hours afterwards. It's clear that the visual stimulus of the glasses case 
influences behaviour in both cases. Moreover (let's suppose), our psychologist 
finds non-reportability in the distracted case and reportability in the mindful 
case, so she is onto another contrastive data set. But the behavioural correlate 
of the conscious condition here has nothing to do with either flexibility or 
mental problem solving. It seems to have to do with the ability to lay down 
memories of a certain type. 
In short, there is no single cognitive or behavioural correlate of the 
conscious as opposed to the unconscious condition. In these examples, besides 
enabling introspective report, it sometimes enhances flexibility in unfamiliar 
circumstances, sometimes accompanies a sequence of internal problem-
solving steps, and sometimes facilitates memory. The chapters to come will 
support the contention that, properly to account for the conscious condition, 
it is a mistake to confine theoretical consideration to the cognitive or 
behavioural levels. Without neglecting these, we should also be looking at the 

PROBING THE INTERNAL
91
brain mechanisms that underlie consciously mediated behaviour. The claim we 
shall promote here is that the hallmark of the conscious condition is that it 
integrates the activity of brain processes that would otherwise be insulated 
from each other's influence. But as a prelude to an account of this sort, a few 
paragraphs are in order on the very concept of a brain process, as brain processes 
will feature prominently in the architectural explanation to come. 
The formation of a star, the life cycle of a frog, and the construction of a 
house could each be described as a process. However, a mental process is some-
thing special. As Wittgenstein pointed out, inner processes 'stand in need of 
outward criteria'.40 In everyday life we talk about each other's inner lives as 
freely as we talk of bricks, or cars, or pets—'Kerry is happy' is no more peculiar 
a sentence than 'Liam is holding a frog'—and we get by perfectly well without 
raising questions of outward criteria. But when neuroscientists or psycholo-
gists talk of the mind's internal workings—whether they speak of mental proc-
esses, cognitive processes, or brain processes—they are in each instance 
speaking of things whose existence and characteristics are inferred in complex 
ways from experimental data. Scientific conventions for talking about the 
inner life are very different from those of everyday speech, and philosophers of 
mind worry about the exact relations between them, applying such labels as 
reductionism, eliminativism, and so on. But there is no need for these labels 
here. What matters to us is the actual practices of working scientists, how they 
resolve their differences, and how they achieve consensus. 
For example, consider the Stroop test, in which a subject is presented with a 
series of colour words (RED, GREEN, YELLOW, and so on), in coloured fonts. 
The task is to name the font colour (not to read the word). When the font 
colour conflicts with the word itself (the word GREEN is presented in a red 
font, say), a subject's response time typically goes down and their error rate 
goes up.41 This classic experimental paradigm permits a psychologist to argue 
coherently that insofar as there are distinct processes in the brain for handling 
colour and for dealing with the semantics of written words, their operations 
must interfere with each other. But fellow psychologists are at liberty to ques-
tion this interpretation, devising extensions to and variations of the test to 
support their own views. Likewise, the much debated mental rotation experi-
ments of Shepard and Metzler—in which the length of time subjects took to 
verify that one figure was a rotational variant of another was shown to be pro-
portional to the length of the rotation—supported the tentative conclusion 
40 Wittgenstein (1958), §580.
41 Stroop (1935); Macleod (1991).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
92
that gradual processes of inward mental rotation were taking place, a hypothesis 
that is open to refinement and refutation by further experiment.42
In this way, thanks to rather than in spite of its controversies and conflicts, 
psychology has the potential to converge on an agreed inventory of inner proc-
esses and their characteristics, an agenda that is furthered by neuroscience, 
especially with the advent of in vivo recording methods such as EEG and scan-
ning technology such as fMRI. As an example, consider the elucidation in the 
1980s and 1990s of two parallel streams of visual processing, the dorsal and 
ventral.43 Behavioural studies on patients with visual impairments suggested a 
dissociation between two kinds of deficit. Visual agnosia patients are compro-
mised in their ability to verbally identify objects or to report differences in 
their shapes and proportions. Despite this, some visual agnosia patients retain 
the ability to grasp and manipulate an object in ways that depend on the 
object's shape. This suggests that perhaps distinct visual systems (processing 
streams) are responsible for recognizing form and for guiding hand move-
ment, and that one system can be damaged while the other remains intact. 
Though compelling, this dual-systems hypothesis would be easy to challenge 
if supported by behavioural studies alone. However, it is buttressed by a variety 
of findings in neuroscience. For example, Ungerleider and Mishkin compared 
monkeys with inferotemporal (IT) cortical lesions to monkeys with posterior 
parietal (PP) lesions.44 Echoing the behavioural studies with human patients, 
the monkeys with IT damage were impaired at tasks involving object recogni-
tion whereas those with PP lesions were impaired at reaching and grasping 
tasks requiring sensitivity to form in visual cues. With the aid of results such as 
these, the dual-systems hypothesis was reinforced, and augmented with neuro-
anatomical detail. Two distinct visual processing pathways had apparently 
been identified—a ventral stream carrying information pertaining to the shape 
and type of an attended object, and a dorsal stream bearing information relat-
ing to the way to grasp and handle an object. Using fMRI, these results were 
subsequently confirmed in visually impaired human patients.45 Nevertheless, 
the basic hypothesis of two visual streams has benefited from subsequent 
debate, and has undergone development and refinement as a result.46
In short, contemporary behavioural and brain sciences are methodologically 
entitled to make claims about inner processes. They do so with a legitimacy 
and authority that we gratefully inherit when we attempt to pin down the 
42 Shepard & Metzler (1971).
43 Ungerleider & Mishkin (1982); Goodale & Milner (1992); Milner & Goodale (2006).
44 Ungerleider & Mishkin (1982).
45 Milner & Goodale (2006), Chapter 8.
46 Milner & Goodale (2008).

PROBING THE INTERNAL
93
contrast between conscious and unconscious mental activity. However, the 
ambition of the present book is not to supply piecemeal interpretations of 
a growing compendium of empirical data, but (rashly perhaps) to offer an 
overarching theory. A central tenet of this theory is that cognition and con-
sciousness are intimately connected. Moreover, as argued in the previous 
chapter, cognition is essentially related to embodiment. Attempting to under-
stand cognition without comprehending its situation within a sensorimotor 
loop and its immersion in the environment is like trying to clap with only one 
hand. So our investigation will proceed at the architectural level. Mindful of 
the availability of relevant and useful empirical findings that are interpreted in 
terms of isolated mental processes, our descriptions will be of whole systems, 
systems that are embodied and embedded in the environment. The aim is to 
understand how these systems are organized, how their component processes 
interact, and how their orchestrated activity issues in behaviour that is perti-
nent to an organism's well-being and life goals, and within this context to 
study the conscious/unconscious distinction.47
We should be wary of construing processes as neatly bounded computa-
tional units, and take care not to characterize cognitive architecture in terms of 
an ordered flow of information through the system from input to output, 
passing through various intermediate stages of processing on the way. Although 
this way of thinking has its uses, we should be cautious of the pitfalls of this 
kind of boxology. The connectivity of the biological brain is densely recurrent, 
and it makes little sense to think of information as flowing through the brain 
in one direction, from input to output. Rather, as Lamme and Roelfsema dem-
onstrated for the case of the ventral visual stream, waves of activation can 
move back and forth between multiple regions until the activity in those 
regions settles into a temporary state of mutual equilibrium.48 These so-called 
metastable states are easily disrupted by new stimuli or, more generally, by 
activity in the numerous other regions to which they are connected. A poten-
tially productive way to conceive of the performance of the whole system is in 
terms of a fluctuating series of these metastable states, a series whose order and 
membership is tightly constrained by the environment to which the system is 
coupled via the body whose actions it controls.49 When, in the material to 
come, we present an architectural blueprint, this is a better picture to have in 
mind for the system's dynamics than that of a large-scale, well-engineered 
piece of computer software.
47 It should be obvious from this description that the 'phrenological' style of theorizing 
criticized by Uttal (2001) is also repudiated here.
48 Lamme & Roelfsema (2000).
49 Kelso (1995); Bressler & Kelso (2001); Werner (2007).

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 4
Broadcast and the network
This chapter introduces the global workspace architecture, and pins down 
certain concepts essential to its presentation, notably those of a process, com-
putation, influence, and information. The chapter then moves from a high-
level, abstract account of the architecture to a more detailed characterization 
closer to the biological brain. With the global neuronal workspace conceptual-
ized as a communications infrastructure, the scene is set for its description in 
network terms. A specific brand of hierarchically modular small-world net-
work is hypothesized to facilitate the required combination of broadcast and 
competition, and empirical evidence that human brain structural connectivity 
conforms to this topology is reviewed.
4.1 The elements of global workspace theory
Where do we stand? Having engaged with, and worked through, our meta-
physical inclinations, we emerged with a license to investigate consciousness 
empirically. Then, with the fact of our embodiment brought to the fore, we 
developed a characterization of cognition in terms of the exploration and 
opening out of an animal's space of possible affordances. Returning to phe-
nomenology, we took a critical look at experimental methods for studying the 
conscious/unconscious distinction. The conclusion was that no overarching 
set of principles governing the distinction is likely to emerge at the purely 
behavioural level, and that the most promising basis for a successful account 
would combine an architectural framework with a dynamical systems perspec-
tive, while drawing on the insights of both psychology and neuroscience. 
The aim of this chapter is to advance a proposal along such lines, one that 
simultaneously gels with the view of embodied cognition arrived at earlier.
The chief inspiration for the proposal is the global workspace theory of Baars.1 
The heart of this theory is a specific information processing architecture, the 
major components of which are a set of parallel specialist processes and a 
global workspace (Fig. 4.1). Computation in the architecture proceeds through 
1 Baars (1988; 1997; 2002).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
96
a series of episodes of broadcast, during which information in the global work-
space is disseminated to the whole cohort of parallel specialists, punctuated by 
bursts of competition, during which processes—or co-operating consortia of 
processes—attempt to influence the global workspace to the exclusion of their 
rivals. The central tenets of global workspace theory are that 1) the brains of 
humans and certain other animals conform to this architectural blueprint, and 
2) the conscious/unconscious distinction mirrors the division between process-
ing that is mediated by the global workspace and processing that is localized 
within the specialists A major attraction of the theory is that it supports the 
intuition that the conscious condition promotes flexibility in the face of 
novelty, because the blend of broadcast and competition at its core fosters 
integration among otherwise segregated brain processes.
One element of Baars's original presentation that plays a less prominent part 
here is the idea of a context, 'a system that shapes conscious experience without 
itself being conscious at that time', which encompasses 'currently unconscious 
expectations ... and currently unconscious intentions that shape voluntary 
actions'.2 Here we shall assume that the influence of context is subsumed 
within the general melee of parallel unconscious processing. When we unex-
pectedly encounter a friend on the street, when we walk through the front door 
of our home, when we arrive at an unfamiliar railway station—upon the occur-
rence of each such event a particular set of processes becomes active, priming 
2 Baars (1988), p. 138.
Parallel
Specialist Processes
Global Workspace
Fig. 4.1 The global workspace architecture. The overall dynamics alternates periods of 
competition (left) and broadcast (right). Parallel specialist processes (or coalitions of 
processes) compete to influence the global workspace, whose state is broadcast back 
to the whole cohort of parallel specialists.

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
97
a collection of expectations and habits that goes together with the context in 
question. This set of processes remains active, modulating the activity of other 
processes, until the context changes. 
Global workspace theory owes its pedigree to work in Artificial Intelligence.3 
Baars was inspired, in particular, by so-called blackboard architectures,4 where 
the global workspace is analogous to the blackboard. Blackboard architectures, 
in turn, resemble the pandemonium architecture of Selfridge, in which a crowd 
of competing demons, each with its own specialist task, all shout to gain the 
attention of a decision-making super-demon, who is only influenced by 
the loudest of them.5 In the printed commentary to Selfridge's 1959 paper, 
John McCarthy, progenitor of the field of Artificial Intelligence, presciently 
anticipated the main tenets of global workspace theory, commenting on
the advantages of the pandemonium model as an actual model of conscious behav-
iour. In observing a brain, one should make a distinction between that aspect of the 
behaviour which is available consciously, and those behaviours, no doubt equally 
important, but which proceed unconsciously. If one conceives of the brain as a pande-
monium - a collection of demons - perhaps what is going on within the demons can 
be regarded as the unconscious part of thought, and what the demons are publicly 
shouting for each other to hear, as the conscious part of thought.6
The central ideas of global workspace theory can be conveyed in a single 
paragraph. But the concepts deployed in the summary earlier merit closer 
scrutiny. What is a 'process' in the context of the theory, and when is a process 
a 'specialist'? What sort of entity is the putative 'global workspace'? What kind 
of 'information' is traded among the processes and passes through the global 
workspace? In what sense does 'computation' take place in the architecture? 
Each of these concepts in turn will now be further elucidated, beginning with 
that of a process. 
3 In Franklin & Graesser (1999) we find an AI system based on the global workspace 
architecture, and the chain of influences comes full circle.
4 Nii (1986).
5 Selfridge (1959).
6 McCarthy (1959b). In September 2006, I reminded McCarthy of his comment, presenting 
him with a photocopy of the relevant page from the Teddington proceedings and pointing 
out its affinity to global workspace theory. He had no recollection of his remarks (almost 
half a century earlier), but quipped that he stood by them, because he had only said 
'perhaps' that is what goes on. Nevertheless, he folded my photocopied sheet and put it in 
his pocket.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
98
4.2 Parallel specialist brain processes
A warning was issued at the close of the previous chapter. A process in the 
brain should not be thought of as a neatly bounded computational unit with 
clearly defined inputs and outputs. How, then, are the processes of the global 
workspace architecture characterized? How are they individuated? Well, let's 
explore a similar but unrelated question. Consider the people moving around 
a department store on a busy shopping day. How should we define a group 
within this crowd? How are groups individuated, that we may better under-
stand the organization of the crowd? From a bird's-eye view, an observer might 
pick out the collection of people around one of the cash desks. There is a 
marked congregation here, surely a candidate for a group.
But the constituents of this group (if it is to be called a 'group') are not stable. 
Individuals and small collections of people are constantly breaking away from 
the cash-desk crowd while others are coalescing with it. Smaller collections of 
people—families, posses of friends—might be candidates for groups too. (Is 
an individual a special case of a group?) Zooming out, we might aggregate all 
the people within the shoe department, and designate them a group on a larger 
scale. Similarly, we can view all the shoppers on the same storey of the building 
as a larger group still. But then what about the people on the escalators who are 
moving between floors? Which large-scale group do they belong to? Perhaps 
they constitute distinct groups of their own. And what of that child loitering 
halfway between haberdashery, where his mother is browsing, and the toy 
department next door? Perhaps he belongs to two groups simultaneously, or 
to neither. 
As far as their individuation is concerned, processes in the brain are like 
groups in a department store. There is no ultimate answer to how either con-
cept should be defined or individuated. The concept of a brain process is a 
human invention, and we import it into our scientific ontology insofar as it 
helps us come to terms with the complexity of what is a very large system of 
richly interacting components. Accordingly, brain processes can be identified 
at many levels of organization. A process might be realized by hundreds of 
neurons (a small patch of visual cortex that responds to motion, say), by hun-
dreds of thousands of neurons (such as the set of neuronal assemblies, distrib-
uted across several cortical areas, that respond to a particular face by smiling), 
or by hundreds of millions of neurons (the set of brain regions implicated in 
working memory function, for example). But because evolution is not an engi-
neer, the brain is not structured as a strict hierarchy, and there is nothing to 
prevent the constituents of one process from contributing to another. 
Generally speaking, then, processes are resident in the brain at multiple 
scales, and their boundaries are fluid, indistinct, and overlapping. So the fol-
lowing question arises. Which of these highly numerous multi-scale, fluid, 

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
99
indistinct, overlapping, spatially distributed processes constitutes the global 
workspace architecture's set of parallel specialists? Are there, perhaps, just a 
handful of such specialists at the highest level of brain organization? Or are 
there tens of thousands of them, busily going about their business in the serv-
ice of a larger whole like ants in a colony? Indeed, what is meant by a 'specialist' 
process? A process might possess a narrow domain of expertise, but one that is 
applicable in many types of situation, such as recognizing faces or parsing 
speech. A process might realize a learned motor skill whose applicability is 
restricted to particular contexts, such as peeling fruit or tying shoelaces. 
A process might have a specific, but large and important, functional role, such 
as visual pattern recognition, episodic recall, or affective judgement. Which of 
these senses of specialization is pertinent to the proposed architecture? 
In order to answer these questions, let's return to the ethologically inspired 
architectural sketch of Chapter 2 (see Fig. 2.2). According to this sketch, 
a simple animal (or a biologically inspired robot) is endowed with a certain 
repertoire of behaviours, such as foraging, mating, grooming, courtship, and 
so on. Each behaviour is triggered by a combination of internal deficit and 
external cue, and contention between behaviours is resolved by a competitive 
selection mechanism. Each competing behaviour is represented as a distinct 
process, as is behaviour selection. One option for a hypothetical global work-
space architecture would be to identify the set of parallel specialists with a set 
of behaviours. The remit of each process would then be to realize a single 
highly specific form of behaviour, and the span of its responsibilities would 
reach all the way from sensory input to motor output. 
However, this would be a poor choice. This is because, for the theory to live 
up to its billing, there ought be competition for influence on the global work-
space before the distribution of information to the cohort of processes respon-
sible for different behaviours. To see this, we need only consider any of a 
variety of phenomena in humans wherein our conscious experience of a given 
stimulus alternates between two (or more) possibilities. For example, in the 
paradigm of binocular rivalry, different images are simultaneously presented 
to each of a subject's eyes—a vertical grating to the left eye and a horizontal 
grating to the right, say.7 What subjects typically report seeing is not the criss-
cross pattern of both gratings overlaid on each other. Rather, they see one pat-
tern to the exclusion of the other. Moreover, which of the two patterns they see 
at any given time is not fixed, but typically flips every few seconds, then flips 
back. Ambiguous images—images that can be interpreted in more than one 
way, but in only one way at a time—give rise to a related effect. For instance, 
7 Kim & Blake (2005).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
100
the Necker cube can be interpreted as resting above the viewer's horizon or 
below it, and a subject can usually alter the interpretation at will.8
Such examples suggest that, in addition to the competition that takes place 
among different behaviours, there must be competition at the input end of the 
path between sensation and action. Indeed, all phenomena of attention lend 
support to this proposition. Top-down attention, as manifest in our ability to 
close out all but the conversation we are listening to at a noisy party,9 bottom-
up attention, which is at work when pertinent visual stimuli 'pop out' of a 
scene at us,10 and inattentional blindness, wherein our awareness is so taken 
up with one aspect of a situation that we fail to notice certain events even if 
they are out of the ordinary11—all are evidence of competition for access to 
consciousness among processes that operate at the sensory level rather than 
the motor level.12
On the other hand, there is much to be said for preserving the sensorimotor 
emphasis of a behaviour-based architecture. According to the stance of 
Chapter 2, cognition is to be understood in terms of its role in embodied inter-
action with the environment, and its proper locale is the sensorimotor loop by 
means of which the embodied agent is coupled to that environment. So, inso-
far as the conscious condition is cognitively efficacious, an account of it that 
pays due respect to its sensorimotor effects is called for. Moreover, according 
to the contrastive approach of Chapter 3, the conscious/unconscious distinc-
tion is elucidated in terms of the subject's awareness of the sensory and motor 
events which her behaviour comprises. For sure, a theory that adhered strictly 
to sensation and action would proffer an inadequate portrait of human inner 
life, the outer signs of which are often more subtle than a twitching of muscles 
in reaction to a sensorial display. Yet the sensorimotor loop is the only founda-
tion on which a more complete account can be built. 
As a step towards accommodating the parallel specialists of a global work-
space architecture within a sensorimotor perspective, the behaviour-based 
architecture might be decomposed in such a way that distinct sensory and 
motor processes show up (Fig. 4.2). In addition to effecting the requisite 
separation between input and output processes, this more refined view of 
the architecture makes explicit the possibility that two motor processes, 
 8 Kim & Blake (2005).
 9 Cherry (1953). This is known as the 'cocktail party effect'.
10 Treisman & Gelade (1980).
11 Mack & Rock (1998); Simons & Chabris (1999).
12 For an overview of many of the phenomena listed here and their relationship to the 
scientific study of consciousness, see Koch (2004), especially Chapter 9.

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
101
though belonging to different behaviours, might be influenced by the same 
sensory process. Moreover, a sensory process may fuse information from mul-
tiple modalities (the visual and haptic senses, say), although some behaviours 
may depend on one modality only. As depicted in Fig. 4.2, the information 
flow between sensory and motor processes is bidirectional, which allows for 
motor-sensory influences such as top-down attention and expectation. 
The decomposition of the behaviour-based architecture into separate input 
and output processes suggests a viable delineation of parallel specialists for the 
global workspace blueprint. The revised blueprint (Fig. 4.3) retains a sensori-
motor foundation while permitting competition and broadcast mid-way along 
the sensorimotor arc. That the architecture also underwrites a possible distinc-
tion between automatic and consciously mediated behaviour should be clear 
from the diagram. Automatic behaviour, comprising sensory and motor events 
of which the subject has no conscious awareness, is mediated by direct connec-
tions between sensory and motor processes without exercising any influence 
on the global workspace, that is to say without giving rise to the broadcast of 
information about its component sensory and motor events. On the other 
hand, the possibility of competitive access to, and brain-wide broadcast from, 
the global workspace, is independently apparent in both the input and output 
halves of the architecture. This, according to global workspace theory, entails 
an independent possibility of conscious awareness for both sensory and motor 
events. 
We have arrived at a good first approximation to a plausible architecture. 
However, the present characterization is somewhat abstract. In the next couple 
of sections, we shall refine it further, hopefully averting some misconceptions 
along the way. For example, the architecture presents too sharp a division 
Modality 1
Muscles
Modality 2
Sensory
Process 1
Motor process 1
Motor process 2
Motor process 3
Behaviour
selection
Sensory
Process 2
Fig. 4.2 The behaviour-based architecture with separate sensory and motor processes. 
Modalities 1 and 2 could be vision and touch, for example. The same input process 
can influence more than one motor process, and information from multiple modalities 
can be fused by the same sensory process. Note that information flows both ways 
between sensory and motor processes.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
102
between input and output processes, and despite the deployment of bidirec-
tional arrows between sensory and motor processes, it remains suggestive of 
a serial pipeline of computation. Information apparently flows through the 
system stage by sequential stage, and the imposition of a few backward steps to 
implement top-down effects does little to mitigate this impression. In the next 
section, we review the concept of computation in the brain. This will lead to a 
more nuanced treatment of the architecture's dynamics, in which the concept 
of coupling plays a crucial part. 
4.3 Neural computation
The brain is not a computer.13 That is to say, there is almost nothing about its 
operation, whether at the level of abstract principle or of underlying substrate, 
that resembles that of the everyday device we use to send email, to browse the 
Internet, to store and display photos, to play music, and so on. To begin with, 
the brain is embodied, whereas an ordinary computer—that is to say a con-
ventional computer running familiar applications—is disembodied. The 
brain's 'job' is to control a body and direct its interactions with the physical 
and social environment. An ordinary computer, by contrast, does not have to 
navigate the physical environment or manipulate the rich variety of objects it 
13 For a relevant discussion on this theme, see Edelman & Tononi (2000), pp. 47-50.
Fig. 4.3 The global workspace architecture with separate sensory and motor proc-
esses, and accommodated within a sensorimotor loop. Direct connections between 
input and output processes permit behaviour without conscious awareness, whereas 
the conscious condition is mediated by the global workspace.
Input Processes
Global Workspace
Output Processes

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
103
contains, and its severely limited interface with physical reality is through its 
connection to various static peripherals.
Beside this radical difference of function, there are several fundamental 
differences in organization. First, the architecture of a conventional computer 
comprises an active central processor and a passive memory, whereas in the 
brain there is no such division. Second, the behaviour of a computer running 
a familiar application is governed by a set of explicitly coded instructions writ-
ten by a team of software engineers. The brain's dynamics, by contrast, is not 
programmed but is partly the product of evolution and partly the outcome of 
adaptation to the environment it finds itself in. Third, the ordinary computer 
of today is (largely) a serial machine that carries out one operation at a time, 
whereas the brain is inherently a massively parallel system.14
In addition to the differences in function and organization already cited, 
there are mathematical considerations that separate brains from conventional 
computers. In particular, an everyday computer is a digital device, whereas the 
brain is an analogue system. A complete description of the instantaneous state 
of a computer is possible using a finite set of binary (or natural) numbers, 
abstracting away from the details of its physical instantiation. The brain, on 
the other hand, is an analogue system. The membrane potential of a neuron 
(to pick just one physical property) is a continuous quantity, and its exact 
value is pertinent to predicting the neuron's behaviour. Theoretically speak-
ing, a complete description of the instantaneous state of a brain is only possible 
using a set of real numbers—numbers drawn from the continuum, that is. 
This locates the brain outside the realm of conventional computation from a 
mathematical point of view, where the realm of conventional computation is 
defined by the set of functions that can be realized by a Turing machine.15
A related point is that ordinary computers are (predominantly) synchro-
nous devices, whereas the brain's operation is asynchronous. That is to say, the 
entire state of a computer advances to its successor when and only when the 
computer's centralized clock ticks, so that all its internal events line up in time 
like a row of soldiers. But events in the brain, such as neuron firings, do not 
keep time in this orderly way. Although synchronized neural activity is com-
monplace, there is no centralized clock in the brain to maintain overall tempo-
ral discipline. In general, an electrical spike can be emitted by a neuron at any 
14 In fact, there is an increasing trend towards parallelism in contemporary computer engi-
neering, with multi-core processors and highly parallel dedicated graphics processing 
being the norm. Nevertheless, the parallelism of the biological brain is of an altogether 
different order and dynamical sophistication.
15 Siegelmann (2003).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
104
time, where time, of course, is another continuous variable. From a mathemat-
ical point of view, this property alone could be enough to push the dynamics 
of the brain beyond the class of Turing computable functions. 
So the brain is very unlike a computer. On the other hand, a computer can 
be programmed to be very like a brain. For a start, a computer can have an 
embodied function just as a brain does. It can be programmed to direct the 
actions of a robot through feedback based control, its input drawn from a 
variety of sensors, such as cameras or haptic devices, and its output driving 
effectors such as arms, legs, or drive-wheels. With respect to its organization, a 
computer can be programmed to implement a virtual machine whose princi-
ples of operation are entirely different from its own. For example, there are 
many types of parallel computer architecture, all of which can be emulated on 
a strictly serial machine using time slicing. The serial computer, so to speak, 
pretends to be each parallel processor for a short time, doing a little of the work 
of each in turn. If the serial processor is fast enough, it's impossible to distin-
guish an emulated parallel computation from the real thing. 
One sort of virtual machine that a conventional computer can implement is 
a network of artificial neurons. The more biologically faithful the artificial 
neurons are, the narrower the gap becomes between the virtual machine and 
the brain. Using the differential equations proposed by Hodgkin and Huxley 
in the 1950s, for example, the spiking behaviour of real neurons can be mod-
elled very accurately.16 Moreover, a simulated network of Hodgkin-Huxley 
neurons can be supplemented with a Hebbian learning rule, such as spike-
timing dependent plasticity (STDP), leading to a dynamical system that, like 
the brain, is not programmed but is open to adaptation to its environment.17 
Although the real computer this dynamical system is implemented on is con-
ventionally organized in terms of an active central processor and a passive 
memory, this is invisible at the level of the virtual neural substrate, whose 
organization, given the computational power to simulate a sufficient number 
of neurons, can be made to mimic that of a biological brain. 
Of course, no virtual machine can transcend the computational limits of the 
real machine that is its host. A conventional computer can only ever imper-
fectly model asynchronous events in a system of continuous variables. But this 
mathematical limitation may be less significant than it at first seems. Consider 
any dynamical system of continuous variables. Although it is not possible 
to represent any state (including the initial state) of the system exactly in a 
conventional digital computer, it is possible to represent it to an arbitrary 
16 See Izhikevich (2007) for an overview of the Hodgkin-Huxley model and its descendants.
17 Song, et al. (2000); Caporale & Yang (2008).

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
105
degree of precision. Likewise, although it's not possible to simulate an exact 
trajectory through the system's state space on a conventional computer, it is 
possible, over any given interval, to simulate it to an arbitrary degree of preci-
sion. So, unless the system in question is chaotic, this means that a simulation 
in a digital computer can, in theory, be made to match, state for state, its 
continuous counterpart up to any degree of precision required. 
If the system is chaotic—that is to say if a difference in its initial conditions, 
however small, is amplified over time and becomes arbitrarily large in the 
limit—then things are not quite so simple. In the chaotic case, because the 
initial state of the continuous system cannot be represented exactly in a digital 
computer, imprecisions in the simulation become ever larger over time. 
However, it is still often possible to simulate typical trajectories through the 
system, and to extract their statistical properties. So the extent to which the 
limitations of digital computation are a handicap when it comes to making 
conventional computers brain-like depends on the role of chaos in neuro-
dynamics. That networks of neurons do indeed exhibit chaotic dynamics is 
highly likely, as Freeman argued in the 1980s for the example of the olfactory 
bulb.18 But it may be the case that functionally equivalent effects—functionally 
equivalent for the purposes of behaviour and cognition—can be produced in 
a discrete system that merely simulates such chaotic dynamics. 
In sum, although the brain is not like a conventional computer running 
familiar applications, a conventional computer running the right programme 
can be made very brain-like. Moreover, neural networks can be made to carry 
out computation. It has been proved that networks of neurons conforming to 
a variety of mathematical descriptions, including biologically realistic spiking 
models, can realize any Turing computable function.19 Indeed, it has been 
shown that, with continuously valued synaptic weights, networks of certain 
types of neuron can also compute functions that are impossible to realize on a 
Turing machine.20 Nevertheless, we still have not answered an important 
question. Is it appropriate to describe the operation of the brain in computa-
tional terms? 
The brain's dissimilarity from a conventional computer running familiar 
applications is irrelevant to this question, of course, because we have a more 
general, more theoretical sense of the concept of computation in mind. We 
know that neurons can compute. But this too is an irrelevant observation, 
because it does not entail that mass neuronal activity in the brain is usefully 
18 Skarda & Freeman (1987).
19 Siegelmann & Sontag (1995); Maass (1996); Carnell & Richardson (2007).
20 Siegelmann (2003).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
106
thought of in terms of computation. Moreover, our interest in this question 
pertains most closely to the architectural blueprint we have sketched out. How 
should we think of the parallel, specialist processes of the global workspace 
architecture? Are they computational processes? Or are they better characterized 
in some other way? 
The issue is not metaphysical. We are not in pursuit of a claim of the form 
'cognition is X' where X might be 'computation'. Such philosophically insidi-
ous uses of the existential copula are to be banished. We are simply looking for 
a theoretical vocabulary that has descriptive and explanatory value. From the 
standpoint of the next section, the behaviour of a set of brain processes is best 
characterized in terms of their mutual coupling, the trajectories they follow 
through their combined state space, and the attractors they fall into within that 
state space. As we shall see, the coupling between processes can be character-
ized in terms of their influence on one another, which will allow a particular 
concept of information to be incorporated into the explanatory framework. 
In the light of the earlier discussion, what results might be called a computa-
tional description. But the allusion would not be to the traditional idea of 
transforming input representations into output representations, and a less 
conventional paradigm of computation would be in play. 
4.4 Coalitions of coupled processes
In Chapter 2 we encountered several reasons to favour the foundation of a 
theory of cognition on the concept of sensorimotor coupling with the environ-
ment. An animal's behaviour is a perpetual response to what its environment 
affords, and the benefit of cognition is to reveal to the animal affordances that 
were previously hidden. It would not be possible to understand either an ani-
mal's behaviour or the processes that gave rise to that behaviour if we observed 
the animal in isolation from its environment. The twitchings of a dog's nose 
make no sense without the scent-marked lamppost it is investigating. The 
manipulations of a squirrel's paws are meaningless in the absence of the nut it 
is peeling. In such performances, the internal dynamics of the animal's brain 
are locked in an ongoing embrace with the dynamics of its body and the outer 
environment. Here we will not only reinforce these intuitions in the context of 
the global workspace architecture's embodied situation, but will extend them 
to the internal relations among the brain processes that comprise the global 
workspace architecture's parallel specialists.
In its present draft, the architectural blueprint we have arrived at (Fig. 4.3) 
superimposes competition and broadcast (Fig. 4.1) on a behaviour-based 
architecture that includes distinct input and output processes (Fig. 4.2). Let's 
focus on the behaviour-based aspect of the architecture first, ignoring the 

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
107
global workspace, and review the role played by the concept of coupling in our 
understanding of it. Consider a kingfisher perched delicately on a reed hanging 
over a stream. The reed bends and sways in the gentle breeze, and the king-
fisher's blue-gold body bobs up and down with the rhythm. But its head 
remains stationary. As if fixed by an invisible bolt, it hangs motionless in space 
while the rest of the bird moves, a perfectly stable platform for viewing the 
riverside scene. 
The kingfisher's achievement can be modelled as a pair of mutually coupled 
dynamical systems, one representing the relevant portion of the kingfisher's 
brain, and the other representing its body. The configuration of its body, 
including the head, is perturbed by the motion of the reed, which causes its 
vestibular system to signal its brain accordingly. Thanks to a closed loop con-
trol mechanism called the vestibulocollic reflex, these sensory signals modu-
late the neural activation that governs the kingfisher's neck muscles in such a 
way that when the rest of the bird's body rises, its head drops, and when the 
rest of its body drops, its neck stretches. Similar compensatory movements, 
regulated by vestibular feedback, maintain a fixed head position in the 
horizontal plane.21
It's tempting to think of the relationship between the kingfisher's brain and 
its body in terms of a staged pipeline of information flow. Indeed it's hard not 
to describe it in words that invite such an interpretation. But when we speak of 
the vestibular system sending signals to the brain, and of the brain's response 
to these signals, the sense of temporal and causal ordering these phrases con-
jure up is misleading. There is little explanatory benefit in attempting to isolate 
a discrete chain of events that begins with the vestibular signal, is mediated by 
the transmission of messages, and leads to a motor response. Rather, there is a 
continuous reciprocal relationship between two coupled dynamical systems 
that is best described by a set of differential equations in which neither system 
has temporal or causal precedence (Fig. 4.4, left). These guarantee that a 
certain parameter (head position) is kept within certain bounds (almost 
stationary) despite external perturbation (the motion of the reed). 
It's not just to the relationship between brain, body, and environment that 
these considerations apply. The relations among processes within the nervous 
system are often best characterized in dynamical systems terms too. For exam-
ple, the rhythmic motor activity that underlies locomotion in a wide variety of 
species has been shown to result from the interplay of sets of coupled neural 
oscillators located in the spinal cord.22 Bipedal locomotion can be achieved 
21 Zeigler (1993).
22 See the review by Ijspeert (2008).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
108
with a set of six coupled oscillators, one per leg joint.23 Each oscillator has a 
natural frequency, which it adopts in the absence of external influence. When 
coupled, the oscillators entrain to each other. Oscillators assigned to opposite 
legs are connected in such a way as to synchronize in anti-phase. The whole 
system exhibits oscillatory behaviour whether limbs are attached or not, and is 
an example of what is known as a 'central pattern generator'.24
With the attachment of limbs, a further layer of coupling is introduced, with 
the body and the environment. Suitably tuned, the whole system exhibits 
robust walking behaviour in spite of disturbances such as variation in terrain 
or load. As with the kingfisher's head, there is no useful sense in which the 
internal relations among the oscillators, or the relationship between the oscil-
lators, the legs, and the ground, can be described in terms of chains of discrete 
events mediated by the passage of information. Rather, these continuous recip-
rocal relationships are most easily captured by a set of differential equations 
that describes the ongoing balancing act of keeping several parameters within 
acceptable bounds so that the animal (or robot) continues moving forward 
without falling over. 
Now let's reconsider the elements of the behaviour-based architecture. 
Recall that, in the context of global workspace theory, we provisionally 
separated input processes from output processes, for the compelling reason 
that there is manifest rivalry between sensory possibilities prior to behaviour 
23 Taga, et al. (1991).
24 Ijspeert (2008). See also Yuste, et al. (2005), who propose endogenous pattern generation 
as a fundamental principle of cortical operation.
Fig. 4.4 External and internal coupling. The brain is dynamically coupled to the body 
and the environment (left). Neither partner in this continuous, reciprocal relationship 
is causally or temporally prior. Processes within the brain can be dynamically coupled 
in a similar way (right).
Brain
Body/environment
Body/environment
Brain

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
109
selection, as the existence of mechanisms of attention testifies. Our contention 
shall be that these input and output processes are coupled internally in much 
the same way that, considered as a single system, they in turn are coupled to 
the body and the environment (Fig. 4.4, right). The relationship between these 
processes is, like that between the coupled oscillators that govern locomotion, 
continuous and reciprocal, and there is no clear temporal or causal precedence 
between them. 
Think of a dog out on a walk in the countryside. Tail wagging excitedly, the 
dog eschews the centre of the path followed by his owner. Rather, he flits from 
stump to clump, from rock to puddle, head down and nose flicking here and 
there, exploring a world of scent. Here we have a combination of sensory and 
motor processes working closely as a team. Suppose the faint perfume of a rat's 
carcass reaches the dog's nose. This is the start of a chemical gradient leading to 
the dead rat itself. The dog ascends this chemical gradient with two lopes and a 
slight motion of the head, using olfactory feedback to guide his trajectory. 
Numerous brain processes cooperate during this brief behavioural episode. 
The dog's snout is constantly in motion, and while exploring a scent he sniffs 
several times a second to make wafts of air pass over chemical receptors in his 
nose. As a result of these motor processes, the olfactory bulb is stimulated, a 
sensory process that generates a unique spatio-temporal pattern of neural acti-
vation for each category of smell.25 This pattern influences the motor activity 
that governs where the dog goes. His head moves as he snuffles, and his four 
legs produce a varying gait depending on the speed of locomotion, which in 
turn depends on whether he has found the source of an enticing scent, is pro-
ceeding towards one, or is seeking out a new object of interest. For the dura-
tion of the behaviour, this coalition of processes is active and its members are 
continuously, reciprocally engaged. When the behaviour ends, the coalition 
breaks apart. Its component processes cease to operate in concert, and many or 
all of them become quiescent. 
Now we can take a fresh look at behaviour selection. As recognized by many 
ethologists and biologically inspired roboticists, if input and output processes 
are dynamically coupled, then the unit of selection is not a motor process but 
a combination of sensory and motor processes. (Indeed, this is the rationale 
for using the term 'behaviour selection' rather than 'action selection' here, 
although the latter term is often used in the literature.) Arriving at the rat's 
corpse, the dog begins to investigate, his snout roving over the carrion surface 
like the gaze of an art-lover moving over a sculpture. Then he hears the 
familiar bark of another dog, and his attention is drawn from the dead rodent. 
25 Skarda & Freeman (1987); Freeman (1999), Chapter 4.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
110
He looks up. It's a neighbour's spaniel with whom he is on intimate terms. 
Abandoning the rat, he strides towards his friend. 
Here we see the outcome of a competition among coalitions of processes, in 
which one winner is superseded by another. In dynamical systems terms, the 
coalition of active processes realizing olfactory exploration can be regarded as 
an attractor in a very large neural state space. But the continuing existence of 
this attractor depends on the presence of a sensory cue (here emanating from 
the dead rat), which exceeds all its rivals in salience. When a contending 
stimulus arrives, namely the bark of another dog, the attractor landscape alters. 
If the contender is sufficiently salient, a phase shift occurs, wherein the old 
attractor disappears and is supplanted by its competitor. The upshot is that a 
new coalition of active sensory and motor processes forms and displaces the 
old one, a coalition that, in this case, realizes social behaviour. Over time, we 
find an ever-changing pattern of active processes reflecting an ever-shifting 
attractor landscape (Fig. 4.5). Stable coalitions form, linger for a while, then 
dissolve. In the periods of transition from one stable coalition to another there 
is upheaval, while rival attractors compete, until one of them emerges victori-
ous and a new group of active processes crystallizes and becomes dominant. 
So far, our neurodynamical description has made no reference to a global 
workspace. Indeed, a behaviour-based architecture can function perfectly well 
Fig. 4.5 The dynamics of behaviour selection. In response to a sensory cue, a dynam-
ically coupled coalition of active (hashed) input and output processes forms, corre-
sponding to an attractor of the neural state space (A). When a new cue arrives, the 
attractor landscape shifts, the old coalition breaks up, and a new one with different 
constituents forms (B).
Input Processes
Output Processes
Input Processes
Output Processes
A
B

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
111
without one. But a limitation of the unenhanced behaviour-based architecture 
is the rigidity of the behavioural repertoire it can support. Each possible 
coalition of processes is effectively a specialist, realizing a single, stereotyped 
sensorimotor programme tailored to a particular purpose. Every coalition 
that forms represents a tried-and-tested combination of processes, where 
'tried-and-tested' means either innate or acquired through learning by rein-
forcement. Although the same input process might be able to participate in 
different active coalitions at different times, the set of combinations of proc-
esses that constitute viable coalitions is closed, not open-ended. In a strictly 
behaviour-based architecture, the set of partners with which a process can 
dynamically couple is fixed by the evolutionary or developmental context 
within which it originated. As a consequence, the repertoire of behaviours in 
such an architecture is also limited to the tried-and-tested. 
According to the theory in favour here, increased flexibility is enabled if the 
influence of every process is allowed to permeate the whole system. Previously 
unseen process coalitions are then able to form, permitting a blending together of 
established sensorimotor patterns and thereby generating novel behaviour. This 
is where global workspace theory re-enters the picture. For the idea of a global 
workspace, though originally cast in architectural terms, is comfortably recast in 
terms of a communications infrastructure that achieves the required dynamics by 
allowing localized neuronal activity to exercise widespread influence. Indeed, 
unless recast this way, the putative workspace might be mistaken for a dedicated 
brain region, something akin to the Cartesian Theatre ridiculed by Dennett, a 
place in the brain where 'it all comes together and consciousness happens'.26
The most likely substrate for the sort of connective infrastructure that would 
realize such a global neuronal workspace, as Dehaene and colleagues call it,27 is 
the web of long-range white matter pathways linking geographically separate 
cortical and sub-cortical regions. We shall return to the issue of neuroanatomy 
in due course, and we'll see how the brain's connectivity promotes the kind of 
neurodynamics required for systemic broadcast and open-ended coalition 
formation. In the mean time, equipped with a clearer conception of the 
dynamical milieu within which a global workspace would function, and guided 
by the just introduced notion that the global workspace operates by dissemi-
nating influence, we can articulate the idea, much alluded to already, that the 
conscious condition is integrative. 
26 Dennett (1991), p. 39.
27 Dehaene, et al. (1998); Dehaene & Naccache (2001). Biologically realistic computer models 
of aspects of the proposed global neuronal workspace are described by Dehaene, et al. 
(1998; 2003), Dehaene & Changeux (2005), and Shanahan (2008a).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
112
4.5 Integration and the conscious condition
Authors frequently argue for some form of intimate relationship between 
consciousness and integration, at the cognitive level,28 at the neurological 
level,29 or at the more abstract level of information theory.30 How is integra-
tion to be construed in the context of global workspace theory? How does a 
global workspace realize integration, so construed? How does integration, so 
realized, subserve cognition, and how does it relate to phenomenology? The 
essential insight that answers each of these questions is this. Perfect integration 
occurs when the being as a whole is brought to bear on the ongoing situation. 
According to our scientific understanding, the 'being as a whole'—the com-
plete person, we might say, or the complete animal—is a living brain, embod-
ied and ecologically situated. Insofar as the brain is understood as a system of 
processes, the 'being as a whole' includes the whole system with its full cohort 
of processes. When the whole system, the brain with all its resources, bears 
on the ongoing situation, the response it offers is an integrated response. 
We might venture to say it is the response of a unified subject. The conscious 
condition, thanks to the global workspace, promotes integration in this sense.
If the whole system is brought to bear on the ongoing situation then various 
conditions conducive to cognition—conducive, therefore, to an animal's sur-
vival and well-being—will be met. For example, the system's full cohort of 
processes will be eligible to participate in the competition to determine its 
response. Moreover, every process in the full cohort will have the opportunity 
to contribute to the overall coherence of the system's response. Also, the vari-
ous ways in which the ongoing situation might exercise deferred influence on 
the system's behaviour—through motor or declarative learning, for example, 
or through working memory or through episodic memory—will be simulta-
neously enabled. 
Violations of these enabling conditions are apparent during lapses of attention. 
When a person absentmindedly pulls out his own front door key when arriv-
ing at the house of a friend,31 habit has prevented the possibility of knocking 
on the door from taking part in the competition to determine his actions. 
When a distracted amateur plumber removes the U-bend from her sink and 
makes a mess on the floor by pouring its contents down the very same sink, her 
distraction has denied the process that would have predicted this outcome its 
28 Baars (1988; 1997).
29 Varela, et al. (2001).
30 Tononi, et al. (1998); Tononi (2008); Balduzzi & Tononi (2008). See also the review by 
Seth, et al. (2008).
31 This example is lifted from James (1890/1950, vol. 1, p. 115).

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
113
powers of veto. When someone tidying a room while thinking of his plans for 
the following day unconsciously moves his spectacles onto a shelf, and is later 
unable to recall their whereabouts, inattention to the task at hand has disabled 
the memory processes that would otherwise have come to his aid. In each of 
these cases we are outside the conscious condition. What is brought to bear on 
the ongoing situation is less than the whole system, and in a sense what we 
encounter is less than the complete person. 
To offer an integrated response, wherein the whole system is brought to bear 
on the ongoing situation, all potentially relevant processes in the system must 
be subject to the influence of that situation, and the system's response to it 
must take account of the activity of all potentially relevant processes. Dennett 
has likened the conscious condition to 'fame in the brain'32 and his metaphor 
is compatible with the present conception. First, it conveys the idea that the 
major distinction between the conscious and unconscious processing of a 
sensory event is the difference between merely local and fully global influence. 
A consciously perceived stimulus is 'famous' in the brain because, so to speak, 
'everyone has heard about it'—all the potentially relevant brain processes, 
whatever their provenance—working memory, episodic memory, language, 
affect, and so on. 
Second, Dennett's metaphor alludes to the fact that the conscious condition 
can only be ascribed to an event in retrospect, in much the same way that a 
noteworthy achievement (such as an archaeological discovery) can only be 
considered famous when news of it gets around and people start talking about 
it, writing about it, and so on. Something could occur after the event in ques-
tion that prevents it from becoming famous (the sensory event is masked, the 
archaeologist dies before revealing his finds to the world), so only hindsight 
can make the proper judgement.33 In a similar vein, system-wide influence is a 
property that can only be attributed retrospectively. Time has to elapse before 
any potential influence can be realized, and if events intervene it might never 
be realized. 
Moreover, even if every process that is potentially relevant to the ongoing 
situation is subject to its influence, and even if the system's response to that 
situation takes account of the activity of every such process, only a fraction of 
those processes will ever actually have an effect on its outward behaviour. But 
this raises an interesting question. Do those processes that are potentially rel-
evant to the ongoing situation, subject to its influence, and duly taken account 
32 Dennett (2001).
33 The metaphor of fame is not perfect. There is only a short, limited window for a sensory 
event to make it to consciousness, whereas achievements like archaeological discoveries 
can become famous decades after they take place.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
114
of, but that never actually perturb the system's outward behaviour in the smallest 
degree, nevertheless contribute to a person's phenomenology? After all, we 
seem to be claiming that their involvement is constitutive of the conscious 
condition, so contribute they surely must. Yet it's hard to see what difference 
it would make if they were simply deleted. Does it really count as fame if lots of 
people hear of an achievement, but nobody talks about it, writes about it, or 
even thinks about it, ever again? 
To sharpen the point, let's consider a scenario, of the sort much loved by 
philosophers, in which a person sees a patch of red. Perhaps she is standing 
before a painting by Rothko, her gaze fixed on a tiny portion of the canvas. The 
sight of the red patch, especially within the larger context of a gallery visit, 
engages a large repertoire of potential responses. It might cause her to turn 
away in boredom, or to step back and view the canvas from further away. 
It might remind her of menstrual blood, or of a traffic light. Later, the image 
lodged in her mind, she might photograph the sunset, or read more about 
modern art. But only a tiny minority of the processes that have the potential to 
influence her behaviour actually get to exercise that influence. Not only does 
she not in fact turn away in boredom (her companion is an admirer of Rothko), 
the idea never even occurs to her. The relevant processes make no contribution 
to her behaviour, and we might ask what difference it would make to her 
phenomenology if they were absent altogether. 
Yet according to Tononi's 'information integration' theory, not only do 
relevant but ineffectual processes contribute to phenomenology, even wholly 
irrelevant processes make a contribution.34 One of the reasons our art lover 
enjoys a rich experience of colour in her moment of reverie—unlike, say, a 
red-sensitive photodiode sited in front of the same painted patch—is that her 
brain can discriminate this situation from a multitude of others, and has a 
huge and delicately nuanced repertoire of responses to match. In seeing this 
particular shade of red, she is also, as it were, seeing not-crimson, not-scarlet, 
and so on, and her repertoire of potential responses is sensitive to these differ-
ences. (Her experience is surely richer, thanks to her capacity to discriminate 
these shades, than that of someone who cannot tell one shade of red from 
another.) On a coarser level, her brain can discriminate a glimpse of Rothko 
from the sound of thunder, the taste of strawberries, a tingling in the feet, and 
so on, and offers a distinctive range of responses for each sensation. All this, so 
the argument goes, is included in the totality of experiencing the red patch. 
Is it possible to accommodate this holistic intuition with the theory under 
development here? What does the present claim—the claim that the conscious 
34 Tononi (2008); Balduzzi & Tononi (2008).

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
115
condition enables the system as a whole to be brought to bear on the ongoing 
situation—tell us about phenomenology? To begin with, we must reject the 
overly metaphysical conception of consciousness that insists on a precisely 
definable content to a subject's consciousness at any given time, and that the 
question of that content always has an answer. Instead, we must accept that 
there is something of the refrigerator light illusion about our inner lives.35 
Whenever we ask ourselves whether we are aware of what a stimulus is not, 
whether we are aware of the possibility of responding to it in a particular way, 
or whether we are aware of a given association with it, lo and behold these 
things are before us. But it is the very act of asking the question that brings 
them forth. It seems as if the full range of possibility is present to consciousness 
all at once, indeed as if this plenitude is constitutive of the conscious condition. 
But this is misleading. A feeling of plenitude is not a plenitude of feeling. 
If anything can instructively be said to be 'constitutive' of the conscious 
condition, it is the means by which the illusion is realized, the mechanism that 
switches on the light whenever the refrigerator door is opened, so to speak. 
That is to say, it is the means by which all those possibilities for thought or 
action are made available even when they are not actualized. According to the 
present proposal, in a system that comprises numerous interacting processes, 
this is achieved by a connective infrastructure that enables a process or coali-
tion of processes to have a systemic influence on the whole, while the system as 
a whole can exercise influence on each of its constituent processes.36 This is 
what we are calling the global workspace. The conscious condition is integra-
tive thanks to the existence of this infrastructure, and it is thanks to this infra-
structure that, in the conscious condition, the whole person is brought to bear 
on the situation at hand, whether confronting a dangerous predator, fashioning 
a tool, or reflecting on what it means to be human. 
4.6 Influence and information
The pertinent question to ask next is what sort of connective infrastructure is 
best suited to disseminating influence in the way we have envisaged. That is to 
say, what is the topology of the network linking together the system's compo-
nent processes? But in order to address this question, we need to be more 
precise about what is meant by 'influence', and how it relates to connectivity. 
To begin with, the concept of the influence one system (or process) has on 
35 We already encountered this metaphor in Section 3.3, but its use here is somewhat 
different.
36 This is an example of what Wheeler (2005, Chapter 10), after Clark (1997, Chapter 8), 
calls 'continuous reciprocal causation'.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
116
another should be contrasted with the idea of a message one system (or process) 
might send to another. The latter term is deliberately not used here because it 
has semantic overtones that are absent from the former term.37 To understand 
this choice, let's rejoin the art-lover standing before the Rothko canvas, 
absorbed in her awareness of a red patch.
Now, it's tempting to speak here of the 'content' of her consciousness during 
the episode in question, content in which redness figures large. After all, isn't 
she supposed to be conscious of red? Surely our theory ought to account for 
this 'of', for the intentionality of consciousness, in other words. But it would be 
a mistake to succumb to this way of thinking. There is no need to accept (or to 
reject) the philosophically difficult notion of 'content' in order to account for 
the conscious condition. According to global workspace theory, the red patch 
participates in the art-lover's conscious condition and contributes to her inner 
life because the whole system that comprises her living brain, embodied and 
ecologically situated, is open to influence by the sensory processes that are 
responding to the red visual stimulus, and reciprocally, the system as a whole 
is able to influence the various motor processes that govern her potential 
responses, now or later, to that visual stimulus. Nothing pertinent is omitted 
from this initial characterization. 
However, elsewhere we have spoken informally of the traffic of information 
around the global workspace architecture. Is it not the case that the term 
'information' alludes to semantics in the same way as the rejected term 
'message'? Well, as we shall now see, the term 'information' helps to enrich the 
concept of influence, and its usage can be clarified while keeping the potential 
for philosophical controversy to a manageable level. According to Bateson's 
useful aphorism, information is 'a difference that makes a difference'.38 The 
first sense of 'difference' here—the difference that does the making rather than 
the difference that is made—is that of a distinction. The simplest possible 
distinction is a binary one, the distinction between Yes and No or between 0 
and 1. This is a notion that sits well with Shannon's mathematical theory 
(which quantifies the amount of information in a signal in terms of bits).39
The second sense of 'difference'—the difference that is made—is causal, and 
relates directly to the notion of influence we have been employing. A signal 
carried in a wire that goes nowhere and is connected to nothing is without 
influence, like a 'flower born to blush unseen'. It is a difference that makes no 
difference. On the other hand, a train of spikes that issues from the primary 
37 This is not so in computer science, where the term 'message' is more neutral.
38 Bateson (1972), p. 459.
39 Shannon & Weaver (1949).

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
117
visual cortex of a driver's brain and causes him to put his foot on the brake is a 
difference that makes a difference. In what follows, we shall say that there is a 
(direct) connection from a process A to a process B if A can influence B with-
out the mediation of any third process. The simplest way one process can 
influence another is to switch it on or off, to make it active or inactive. But in 
general, A's influence on B is more subtle. Process A might modulate B's activ-
ity by degrees, or it might nudge it into any one of a large repertoire of attrac-
tors or metastable states. In these cases, the connection between A and B 
conveys more than a single bit. It is a channel for information in the sense just 
characterized, a channel for a range of distinct signals that can make a range of 
differences to B's activity. 
Recall the team of coupled sensory and motor processes at work in the brain 
of the dog on a country walk. The signals passing from his olfactory cortex to 
his motor areas convey a great deal of information. A hint of dog-scent here, 
the moist grass, the hawthorn blossom, a waft of carrion there—each of these 
has its own characteristic signature, its own combination of spatial and tempo-
ral features, reflecting the range of distinctions the signals can bear. Moreover, 
distinctive signals can exercise distinctive influences. The scent of another dog 
makes him look up, the waft of carrion determines the direction of his stride. 
Dynamically speaking, what we have is a system of coupled processes. But the 
coupling is usefully thought of as effected by the exchange of information, as 
long as we are careful not to taint our conception of information with semantics. 
We previously characterized the conscious condition in terms of the recip-
rocal influence between the system as a whole and its constituent processes. 
Now, with the notion of influence upgraded to accommodate the exchange of 
information, we can do justice to the phenomenological platitude that our 
consciousness is richly contentful, without becoming mired in the sort of 
philosophical controversy that an overly metaphysical attitude towards that 
observation brings about. The next step in this direction is to extend the 
enriched idea of one process's influence on another to that of its influence (or 
potential influence) over multiple processes, and by extension to its influence 
over the whole system of processes of which it is a part. According to our 
enriched conception, the systemic influence in question will be mediated by 
the transmission of information, and this is as much explanation as we need of 
the fact that the conscious condition is rich. 
So far so good. But there's a problem. Surely, we might say, in this conscious 
condition, the same information is broadcast to every recipient process. If a 
person experiences, say, a tickling sensation, then what the conscious condi-
tion simultaneously enables that person to talk about, act on, remember, and 
so on, is surely, in each case, that tickling sensation. But what meaning can we 
attach to this 'same'? What are the identity criteria for information, under 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
118
our construal? We might venture an answer that appeals to the identity of the 
signals sent to all the processes. The information is the same because the 
signals are the same. But this would be a mistake. There is no reason to sup-
pose that a brain area sends the same signals to all the other brain areas to 
which it is connected. Moreover, our original conception of influence was 
pleasingly neutral, and even the enriched version presupposes nothing more 
than signals that are capable of conveying a variety of distinctions. It would be 
good to preserve this neutrality as we extend the idea to multiple simultaneous 
influences. 
The important thing to remember here is that there is no meaning in the 
signal itself, only spatiotemporal structure. What matters is the way the signal 
is received, how that spatiotemporal structure affects the activity of the receiv-
ing process. The urge to impose semantics on signals is what tempts us to think 
we need to establish identity criteria for the information that mediates the 
influence of one process on another. But we must not be seduced by the work-
space metaphor into thinking of processes as homunculi that speak and hear 
and stand in need of a lingua franca. If a process A influences two other process 
B and C then the nature of this influence can be thought of as mediated by 
information if 1) a variety of signals can pass from A to B and from A to C, and 
2) the responses of B and C are sensitive to this variety. We might expect a 
given pattern of activation in A to influence B the same way on one occasion as 
on another, and equally to influence C the same way on one occasion as 
another. But, the signals going to B and C from A do not have to be the same. 
There is no need for further stipulations. The specific structure of the signals 
drops out of the equation. All that counts, for characterizing the conscious 
condition, is the various influences they have. 
4.7 The right connections
With the relevant senses of influence and information duly clarified, we can 
address the question of connective infrastructure. The appropriate technical 
vocabulary for this job comes from the study of complex networks, and a short 
introduction to the relevant mathematical concepts will be needed before we 
can proceed. A network is a set of nodes joined by arcs. We shall deem a node 
to be a brain process at the lowest level of organization that is explanatorily 
pertinent. There's no need to commit to exactly where the lowest pertinent 
level lies, but it is clearly above that of the individual neuron and below that of 
a brain region. An arc is a connection between processes, that is to say a chan-
nel that mediates the direct influence of one process on another, a channel for 
information, suitably construed. To simplify the presentation, we'll assume 
that arcs are undirected and unweighted, even though the influence between 
processes sometimes goes one way only and in general admits of degree. 

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
119
The formal concepts to be deployed are easily generalized to the directed and 
the weighted cases.
Just as brain processes can be identified at many levels of organization, from 
handfuls of neurons to large-scale cortical structures, so connections between 
brain processes can be identified at many levels of organization. But as proc-
esses are to nodes, so connections are to arcs, which is to say an arc in the 
network is deemed to be a connection at the lowest explanatorily pertinent 
level of organization. We need not take a stand on the underlying mechanism 
of connection. A physical pathway—a fibre tract—between two brain regions 
is evidence of a connection. But the existence of a physical pathway is no guar-
antee that it mediates influence. Correlated activity, as evinced by fMRI data, 
is a more direct index of active influence, but it is no indicator of potential 
influence. However, these empirical difficulties can be set aside in the present 
discussion.40
A feature common to many complex networks, both natural and man-made, 
is the small-world property. As we shall see, small-world connectivity also pro-
motes the kind of integrative dynamics we are interested in here. Intuitively, a 
network is small-world if 1) it is densely connected at a local level, 2) it is 
sparsely connected at a global level, and 3) it is (typically) possible to move 
from any given node to any other given node in just a few hops. The link struc-
ture of the world wide web enjoys this property, as do human social networks 
(hence the phrase 'six degrees of separation'—six being the average number of 
steps in the global social network allegedly required to connect any two people 
anywhere in the world). 
The small-world property was given a precise mathematical characterization 
by Watts and Strogatz in the 1990s.41 Consider a network G comprising a set 
of nodes and arcs. The path length between any pair of nodes in G is the number 
of arcs in the shortest path between those nodes, and G's mean path length is 
the path length averaged over every pair of nodes in G. The clustering coefficient 
of a node P in G is the fraction of the set of all pairs of immediate neighbours 
of P that are joined by an arc, and the clustering coefficient of the whole network 
G is the clustering coefficient averaged over the set of all nodes in G. A small-
world network is one that is sparsely connected overall, but has a low mean 
path length and a high clustering coefficient. More precisely, its mean 
path length should be close to that of a comparable random network, but its 
clustering coefficient should be significantly higher, where a 'comparable 
40 See Bassett & Bullmore (2006) and Bullmore & Sporns (2009) for surveys of established 
structural and functional connectivity findings - the latter paper in particular for a 
discussion of the extent to which they match.
41 Watts & Strogatz (1998).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
120
random network' is one with the same number of nodes and arcs, but where 
the arcs are randomly assigned with uniform probability. 
As well as providing this formal characterization, Watts and Strogatz 
described a method for constructing small-world networks which is an aid to 
both mathematical study and intuitive understanding. Their procedure is as 
follows (Fig. 4.6, left). First, a 'ring lattice' is constructed, that is to say a set of 
nodes arranged in a circle, each of which is joined by an arc to all of its neigh-
bours that are k nodes or fewer away. Then, each of these arcs is 'rewired' with 
probability p. To rewire an arc means to unfasten one of its ends and reconnect 
it to a random node anywhere in the ring. Even if p is small, the few rewirings 
that result are sufficient to confer the small-world property on the network. To 
see this, consider the effect of a single long-range rewiring on the ring lattice. 
This will have negligible impact on the network's overall clustering coefficient, 
as it only reduces the clustering coefficient for a single node. Yet by introduc-
ing the possibility of making a giant hop across the network, it will reduce the 
shortest path between many pairs of nodes, in some cases significantly. 
Certain attributes of a small-world network should be apparent from this 
exemplar, attributes that are potentially beneficial whatever real-world system 
the network represents. A low mean path length promotes the rapid global 
spread of indirect influence, and a high clustering coefficient is a prerequisite 
for localized activity, whereas sparse overall connectivity is required to keep 
Fig. 4.6 Two kinds of small-world network. Left: a network constructed using the 
Watts-Strogatz procedure. Starting with a ring lattice, a number of long-range rewir-
ings are made. Each rewired connection provides a shortcut across the lattice, reducing 
the average path length without significantly reducing the overall clustering coefficient. 
Right: a modular small-world network. A number of densely intra-connected modules are 
connected to each other with a sparse set of inter-module links.
Modules
Long-range
connections

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
121
down wiring cost. However, the network topology generated by the Watts-
Strogatz procedure is only one of many that exhibit small-world properties, 
and the homogeneous connectivity of its underlying lattice structure is not 
well suited to our present enquiries. 
A different kind of small-world network is shown on the right of Fig. 4.6. 
This network can be constructed in two phases.42 First, a set of nodes is parti-
tioned into distinct clusters (or 'modules' or 'communities'), such that each 
cluster is densely interconnected but isolated from all other clusters. This 
(disconnected) network will have a high clustering coefficient, despite the 
isolation of the clusters, thanks to the internal connectivity of the clusters 
alone. Second, the clusters are connected to each other with just a few ran-
domly chosen cluster-to-cluster connections. These will be sufficient to guar-
antee a short average path length in the network, and to confer the small-world 
property on it. The result is a small-world network with modular or community 
structure.43
Not all modular networks have the small-world property. Here's a counter-
example. Imagine a set of modules arranged in a line, like a string of pearls, so 
that each module is externally connected only to its neighbours. Suppose there 
are N modules (N pearls on the string). Then, for all pairs of nodes, the average 
number of trans-modular hops required to get from one node to the other is 
N/2. So it's easy to construct a network that has a high mean path length, 
because we can make N as large as we like without compromising the net-
work's modular structure. However, many modular networks do inherit the 
small-world property. Consider any modular network G, and imagine extract-
ing a higher-level network H, whose nodes are the modules of G, such that 
there is an arc between two nodes P1 and P2 in H if and only if there is an arc 
between a member of P1 and a member of P2 in G. Now, if H has a low mean 
path length and each of the modules in G is a small-world network, then G 
itself is a small-world network. Less formally, for a modular network to be 
small world, it should be possible, on average, to go from any module to any 
module in just a few hops. 
If many paths from nodes in one module to nodes in another pass through 
the same intermediate node then that node is known as a connector hub. Using 
the method outlined earlier, there is no statistical reason connector hubs 
should emerge, and there are none in the example network on the right of 
Fig. 4.6. By contrast, the network on the right of Fig. 4.7 has a connector hub 
in each module. Non-local traffic in the network is obliged to pass through the 
42 The method described here is that of Shanahan (2008b).
43 Girvan & Newman (2002); Newman (2006); Müller-Linow, et al. (2008).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
122
connector hubs, which can be likened to major junctions in a road network. 
By extracting the hub nodes and their interconnections from the rest of 
the network (the junctions plus the motorways), we isolate its connective core 
(Fig. 4.7, right). The connective core of the human brain's structural network 
will be a major focus of interest in the material to come. 
A further refinement of modular structure allows for hierarchical organiza-
tion. Fig. 4.8 shows three levels of hierarchy, but obviously this can be extended 
to any number. In a hierarchically modular network, hub nodes within a 
module—that is to say nodes that join sub-modules to each other—are known 
as provincial hubs. Like flat modular networks, hierarchically modular 
networks have the small-world property if their inter-module connectivity 
meets the right conditions. Dense local connections ensure a high clustering 
coefficient. But in a network with hub nodes, a short path between any two 
nodes exists involving a few hops—out of a sub-module to the nearest provin-
cial hub, then to a connector hub and across to the destination module, and 
finally to the target node via another provincial hub. The story is the same if 
additional levels feature. Thanks to the hierarchical structure, mean path 
length increases logarithmically as node count goes up. 
4.8 The anatomy of a global workspace
Recall that we were seeking a connective infrastructure that would support a 
particular kind of integrative dynamics. It should enable a process or coalition 
Fig. 4.7 A modular small-world network with connector hubs. Connector hubs (out-
lined in bold) are nodes that have high trans-modular connectivity. The 'connective 
core' is the connector hubs plus the arcs joining them.
Modules
Connector
hubs
Connective core

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
123
of processes to exercise influence on the whole system, and at the same time it 
should enable the system as a whole to influence each of its component proc-
esses. We now have a clearer language for framing relevant empirical ques-
tions. In particular, we should be on the lookout for brain networks with a 
short mean path length, one of the three defining characteristics of a small-
world network, as this is conducive to the efficient system-wide propagation of 
influence and information. Sparse overall connectivity, another defining char-
acteristic of a small-world network, can be taken for granted. This is because 
any network in which connections are costly is bound to be sparsely connected 
(unless it contains trivially few nodes). The wiring costs of an animal's nervous 
system are numerous, and include the space needed to house it and the energy 
required both to use it and carry it around.44
What about the third defining characteristic of a small-world network, 
namely a high clustering coefficient? Well, the expectation of clustered 
connectivity is implicit in the very idea of the brain as a system comprising 
processes at multiple levels of organization. To see this, consider what it means 
to be a process in such a system. Although, according to the theory we are 
pursuing, a process must be amenable to the influence of the system of which 
44 Striedter (2005), Chapter 7; Bassett & Bullmore (2006).
Fig. 4.8 A small-world network with three levels of hierarchical modular organization. 
Ellipses are drawn around modules to emphasize their hierarchical structure.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
124
it is a part, the notion of a process as an identifiable, separate entity entails a 
countervailing tendency to behave independently from the rest of the system. 
This balance of integrated and segregated activity should be apparent at 
every level of organization. Processes at the lowest level of organization are the 
nodes of our network, so they behave independently by definition. But if a 
process is constituted by a large number of sub-processes, then, to be capable 
of independent behaviour, that set of sub-processes must be significantly more 
tightly coupled internally than externally. That is to say, the channels of influ-
ence among sub-processes belonging to the same process at a higher level of 
organization should be more densely interconnected than the connections 
among sub-processes belonging to different processes at that higher level of 
organization. It follows directly from this, not only that the communications 
infrastructure we're looking for should have the small-world property, but also 
that it should be hierarchically modular. 
The next item on the agenda is the relevant empirical data. Is there evidence 
for the existence of a communications network in the brain with the right 
topological properties? The answer is yes. The literature is extensive. It begins 
with Watts and Strogatz, who proved that the nervous system of the nematode 
worm C.elegans is a small-world network.45 Despite its small size, this network 
even exhibits a degree of modularity.46 But more significantly for our investi-
gation, the brains of mammals have been shown to enjoy the small-world 
property at multiple scales. At the low end of the scale, the neuron-to-neuron 
connectivity of a small patch of cortex is small-world.47 However, it is the 
region-to-region connectivity of the mammalian brain as a whole that is most 
interesting in the present context.48
To get to grips with the details requires a short review of the relevant neuro-
anatomy. The cerebral hemispheres of the mammalian brain comprise both 
grey matter and white matter. The grey matter of the cortical surface is a con-
voluted, laminated sheet of neurons connected by local, short-range dendritic 
and axonal fibres. The cortical sheet can be subdivided into numerous distinct 
45 Watts & Strogatz (1998).
46 Reigl, et al. (2004).
47 Sporns & Zwi (2004) proved that networks built according to empirical data collected by 
Braitenberg & Shüz (1998) and Hellwig (2000) are small world. Moreover, Shefi, et al. 
(2002) reported that neurons cultured in vitro tend to self-organize into small-world 
networks. A similar effect has been demonstrated in computer models (Rubinov, 
et al., 2009).
48 Sporns & Zwi (2004) used connectivity matrices acquired by Felleman & Van Essen 
(1991), Scannell & Young (1993) and others to demonstrate the small-world property for 
macaque and cat cortex.

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
125
regions on the basis of anatomical and histologically identifiable boundaries. 
The white matter, on the other hand, contains no neurons, but comprises 
dense bundles of long-range axonal connections joining distant brain regions. 
These long, white matter axons are coated with a sheath of myelin, which gives 
them a lighter appearance under the scalpel than the surrounding grey matter. 
This myelin sheath ensures that electrical spikes travel much faster in the white 
matter than in the short, unmyelinated axons of the grey matter, permitting 
rapid communication even between remote cortical regions.49
There are three major classes of human white matter connection.50 First, the 
corpus callosum carries traffic between the two cerebral hemispheres. Second, 
the corona radiata relays signals to cortex from the thalamus and back to the 
thalamus from cortex (Fig. 4.9, right). Third, several fibre tracts directly con-
nect remote parts of cortex to each other (Fig. 4.9, left). The major cortico-
cortical tracts include the superior longitudinal fasciculus, which bridges the 
occipital and frontal lobes, the inferior longitudinal fasciculus, which bridges 
the occipital and temporal lobes, the superior and inferior fronto-occipital 
fasciculi, which (obviously) join the occipital and frontal lobes, and finally the 
49 See Schmahmann & Pandya (2006) for a comprehensive overview of the history of the 
study of white matter in neuroscience, and for a detailed tracer study of white matter 
anatomy in the rhesus monkey. For a view of human white matter functionality, see 
Fields (2008).
50 Wakana, et al. (2004).
Fig. 4.9 White matter tracts (loosely based on Wakana, et al. (2004)). Direct cortico-
cortical pathways provide rich connectivity between the frontal, temporal, and occipital 
lobes, and are a likely substrate for a global neuronal workspace (left). Thalamocortical 
pathways relay traffic to and from different parts of cortex, and may also play a role 
in the putative workspace (right). (The thalamus is not shown, but is behind the basal 
ganglia.)
Superior
fronto-occipital
fasciculus
Superior longitudinal fasciculus
Inferior longitudinal
fasciculus
Corona radiata
Basal ganglia
Inferior
fronto-occipital
fasciculus
Uncinate
fasciculus

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
126
uncinate fasciculus, which arches between the temporal and frontal lobes. 
Taken together with numerous smaller tracts, all this constitutes a significant 
amount of wiring with the potential to link all parts of the brain together in a 
single wide-area network, a kind of pan-cortical web. 
Using white matter connectivity matrices established by traditional neuro-
anatomical methods, it has been shown that the cortices of cats and macaques 
are small-world networks.51 For humans, diffusion-based imaging techniques 
enable neuroscientists to build detailed white matter atlases in vivo, and the 
topological properties of the resulting connectivity matrices are then open to 
analysis. Not only do they exhibit the expected small-world properties, they 
also manifest a modular organization.52 In one study, by Hagmann and col-
leagues, six modules were revealed with clear anatomical loci, each comprising 
some subset of 66 anatomical sub-regions. Connections between sub-regions 
were weighted according to the density of fibres connecting them (averaged 
over several subjects), and the resulting network was partitioned into highly 
clustered sub-networks. The set of modules found comprised a frontal module 
for each hemisphere, a mainly posterior module in each hemisphere that 
included a small number of more frontal sub-regions, a bilateral posterior 
medial module, and a central bilateral module (Fig. 4.10).53
In the same study, a set of 12 connector hubs were also identified, and these 
were found to lie along a medial cortical axis running from front to rear and 
comprising many of the most highly weighted arcs in the network (Fig. 4.11, 
left). An amendment to the definition of a network's 'connective core' that 
51 Sporns & Zwi (2004); Bassett & Bullmore (2006).
52 Hagmann, et al. (2008); Iturria-Medina, et al. (2008); Gong, et al. (2009); Bullmore & 
Sporns (2009). Prior to the structural connectivity results reported in those papers, 
Eguíluz, et al. (2005) revealed a network of functional brain connections, using fMRI, 
that conform to the power law characteristic of a scale-free, small-world network, and 
Achard, et al. (2006) provided a connectivity map of the associated cortical hub nodes. 
Preliminary results on human structural connectivity were obtained by He, et al. (2007), 
who correlated measures of cortical thickness to establish the likely presence of a white 
matter pathway. Chen, et al. (2008) used the same method to establish modularity. 
Hierarchically modular structure has been uncovered in functional connectivity studies 
(Ferrarini, et al. (2009)). For a detailed overview of these and similar findings, see Sporns 
(2010).
53 Hagmann, et al. (2008). This study leaves out certain important sub-cortical structures, 
so must be considered provisional. Notable omissions include the thalamus, which is 
accorded a significant role in cortico-cortical communication by Sherman and Guillery 
(2005), the basal ganglia, which play an important part in cortical competition according 
to Redgrave, et al. (1999), and the amygdala. The first two structures were included in the 
study of Iturria-Medina, et al. (2008), who found that the putamen (part of the basal 
ganglia) had a significant connective role.

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
127
takes account of weighted arcs can be used to characterize this medial axis.54 
Let G be a weighted modular network with hub nodes (such as the one we have 
here). A node is included in G's connective core either if it is one of G's hub 
nodes or if it is connected to one of G's hub nodes by an arc whose weight is 
above a given threshold θ. There is an arc between two nodes in G's connective 
core if there is an arc between those nodes in G whose weight is above θ. Now, 
having had a glimpse, thanks to neuroscience, of what may be the human 
brain's connective core, we can advance a two-part hypothesis about the pos-
sible anatomical locus of a global neuronal workspace. 
The hypothesis is that 1) the brain embeds a network with a pronounced 
connective core that is capable of globally disseminating the influence of a 
process or coalition of processes, and 2) only one coalition of processes at a 
54 In the course of identifying the brain's 'structural core', Hagmann, et al. computed the 
network's 'connectivity backbone', defined as the maximal spanning tree (maximizing 
arc weight) plus a set of arcs whose weights exceeded a given threshold (Hidalgo, et al., 
2007). The 'connective core', according to the present definition, is a subset of the 
'connectivity backbone' defined by Hagmann, et al.
Fig. 4.10 Structural connectivity in the human brain (adapted from Hagmann, et al. 
(2008)). Each node corresponds to a cortical sub-region. Nodes are grouped into 
six colour-coded modules, where a module is a set of nodes that is more densely 
interconnected internally than externally. The blue lines are among the most promi-
nent connections within and between modules. Note the pronounced medial axis. 
Connector hubs are outlined in bold. (See Plate 3).
Front
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
128
time can take over the connective core, to the exclusion of its rivals. It should 
be clear that, in general, the connective core of a network is topologically well-
placed to act as a medium of both broadcast and competition (Fig. 4.11, right). 
A network with a marked connective core has an inherently radial structure. 
Influence and information funnels in from the periphery and fans out again 
from the centre. Moreover, the connective core acts as a bottleneck, which 
enforces competition. Even allowing for a filigree of minor connections over-
laid on the network's major arteries, the bulk of long-range network traffic is 
likely to traverse the core, whose capacity is limited. Note, however, that lesions 
to parts of the connective core, although likely to compromise its functional-
ity, are not always catastrophic (i.e., causing coma or loss of consciousness), 
because there are typically multiple pathways between any two nodes. 
The connective core revealed in the Hagmann study and depicted in Fig. 4.10 
is broadly consistent with several other structural connectivity studies in which 
human white matter connectivity was established using diffusion-based imaging 
then analysed in terms of network theory.55 Small-world properties are a 
55 Iturria-Medina, et al. (2008); Gong, et al. (2009).
Fig. 4.11 The brain's connective core as the possible locus of a global neuronal work-
space. The 'connective core' of a modular network comprises its connector hubs and 
the major arcs associated with them. There is evidence that human cortex has a con-
nective core that runs along its medial axis (left). The connective core of a hierarchi-
cally modular network is topologically well placed to realize both broadcast (because 
influence funnels into and fans out from the centre) and competition (because it acts 
as a limited capacity bottleneck). So it is an ideal candidate for the anatomical locus 
of a global workspace (right). Note that the modules are indicative only, and that the 
modules on the right do not map directly to those on the left. (See Plate 4).
Global
workspace

BROADCAST AND THE NETWORK
129
robust finding, and topologically central sets of hub nodes and arcs are invariably 
found. Moreover, certain sub-regions along the medial cortical axis feature 
prominently in each of these studies. One such region is the precuneus, which 
is one of the most richly and centrally connected sub-regions of cortex. Notably, 
the precuneus has also been implicated by functional imaging studies in a wide 
range of high-level cognitive tasks, involving mental imagery, episodic mem-
ory retrieval, and first-personal perspective taking.56 Cavanna and Trimble 
venture to comment that 'converging evidence therefore suggests that the 
precuneus may be involved in the integration of multiple neural systems 
producing a conscious self-percept'.57
The precuneus, along with portions of posterior cingulate cortex, medial 
frontal cortex, and inferior temporal cortex, is also a component of the brain's 
default mode network. This is a set of brain regions whose activity is low during 
task performance, but which exhibit correlated activity when the subject is rest-
ing and is not performing a cognitively demanding task.58 Under these condi-
tions the subject's mind is free to wander, and the brain's dynamics is 
predominantly internally driven and spontaneous.59 The brain's default mode 
network is complemented by a cognitive control network, a set of regions—including 
portions of prefrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, and several parietal 
regions—that exhibit correlated activity during novel or unfamiliar tasks that 
require attention and control.60 The members of both these functional net-
works have high global functional connectivity, which is consistent with their 
participation in the conscious condition according to the present theory.61 
Indeed, they appear to represent two distinct modes of conscious activity. 
Process coalitions that are active during mind wandering or task independent 
thought draw their membership from the regions of the default mode network, 
whereas process coalitions that form to deal with difficult or novel situations 
draw their membership from the regions of the cognitive control network.62
56 Cavanna & Trimble (2006); Buckner & Carroll (2007); Spreng, et al. (2008).
57 Cavanna & Trimble (2006), p. 579. What they mean by 'a conscious self-percept' is not 
entirely clear.
58 Raichle, et al. (2001); Greicius, et al. (2003); Damoiseaux & Greicius (2009); van den 
Heuvel, et al. (2009); Raichle (2010); Vanhaudenhuyse, et al. (2010). However, see also 
Margulies, et al. (2009), whose findings are based on a detailed anatomical subdivision of 
the precuneus.
59 Mason, et al. (2007).
60 Fox, et al. (2005); Cole & Schneider (2007).
61 Cole, et al. (2010).
62 There's no reason to suppose there are only two such modes. A more complete list 
might include dreaming, meditation, mystical experience, and other altered states of 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
130
All these data are highly suggestive. It may be the case that the human brain's 
connective core runs along the medial cortical axis (perhaps also taking in 
certain key sub-cortical structures that were excluded from the Hagmann 
study), and the precuneus may well be an especially significant component of 
the connective core. But it would be imprudent to assign too much impor-
tance to any single structure. The global workspace architecture is, more than 
anything else, a distributed architecture. The conscious/unconscious distinc-
tion it underwrites plays on the contrast between systemic and localized influ-
ences. So it is inherent in the theory that no single structure is the locus of the 
conscious condition. It would be equally unwise to load too much weight on a 
specific structural connectivity matrix, especially when the techniques for pro-
ducing these matrices are still relatively new. Moreover, structural connectivity 
is best understood in the context of functional networks, such as the default 
mode network and the cognitive control network. For sure, a functional con-
nection can only exist if the structural connections are there to support it. Yet 
functional connections can exist where there are only indirect structural links, 
and a direct structural connection might have a negligible functional role. 
In due course, the human connectome (the underlying blueprint for human 
brain structural and functional connectivity) will be thoroughly mapped. But 
it's imperative that we abstract away from such empirical specifics if we are to 
arrive at a deep understanding of the conscious/unconscious distinction and 
the various properties of those two conditions. As discussed in Chapter 3, cor-
vids exhibit many of the cognitive attributes associated with the conscious con-
dition, such as the apparent ability to combine expertise from different domains 
to solve unfamiliar variants of a problem. Yet avian neuroanatomy presents a 
very different organization to that of the mammal.63 Rather than stratified like 
the cortex of a mammal, the homologous portion of the avian brain is nucle-
ated. Similarly, there is plentiful evidence for high-level cognition in the octo-
pus, whose neuroanatomy diverges even further from that of a primate.64 
Currently there are no whole brain connectivity studies for birds or octopuses 
comparable to those recently carried out with humans. But there is no reason to 
expect detailed correspondences. Rather, whatever the species, we should be on 
the lookout for the right topological profile—a hierarchically modular organi-
zation with small-world properties and a pronounced connective core.
consciousness. As James (1902/1985) wrote: '... our normal waking consciousness, 
rational consciousness as we call it, is but one special type of consciousness, whilst all 
about it, parted from it by the filmiest of screens, there lie potential forms of consciousness 
entirely different. ... No account of the universe in its totality can be final which leaves 
these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded' (p. 388).
63 Emery & Clayton (2005); Güntürkün (2005).
64 Edelman, et al. (2005); Edelman & Seth (2009).

Chapter 5
Neurodynamics
To complement the previous chapter's focus on connectivity, this chapter 
looks at global workspace dynamics. The challenge is to pin down the dynam-
ical signature of the conscious condition against a backdrop of the continual 
formation and break-up of coalitions of coupled brain process. The character-
istic of this signature is episodic broadcast punctuated by bursts of competi-
tion, where the competition in question is between rival process coalitions for 
control of the global workspace. But the key to the conscious condition, and 
the reason it subserves integration, is that it facilitates the generation of an 
open-ended repertoire of process coalitions thanks to the brain's connective 
topology. The chapter concludes with a short survey of empirical work favour-
ing synchronous oscillation as the neural mechanism of coalition formation 
and the exchange of information among coalition members.
5.1 From connectivity to behaviour
Our purview here is the space of possible minds. What we seek is a theory that 
embraces human, corvid, and octopus, a theory that would even apply, in 
principle, to an extraterrestrial or an intelligent robot. In this chapter we return 
to the issue of dynamics, initially without committing to the low-level biological 
details, although the chapter concludes with an overview of some relevant 
neuroscientific evidence. Recall the earlier characterization of behaviour selec-
tion as the formation of coalitions of coupled input and output processes that 
are in turn coupled with the environment. Having established the empirical 
plausibility of a broadcast mechanism in the brain, we are in a position to 
accommodate the idea of broadcast within the dynamics of coalition forma-
tion and break-up. Most importantly, with a means of disseminating influence 
and information in place, the repertoire of possible coalitions is no longer 
limited to the merely tried and tested.
To illustrate this enhanced dynamics of coalitions in flux, let's imagine our-
selves in the company of a commuter who has just arrived at Victoria Station 
in London, and is walking with the crowd across the station foyer. The com-
muter is on autopilot. This is the same journey he undertakes every day of his 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
132
working life. Every sight and sound along the way is familiar —pigeons poking 
at discarded scraps, announcements on the public address system, people in 
bright tee-shirts handing out leaflets —and he notices none of it. His actions 
are entirely habitual. Without thought, he adjusts his trajectory so that he 
passes to the left of a newspaper kiosk rather than the right, because it's less 
crowded there. At one point he brushes another commuter coming in the 
opposite direction and offers a quick apology. With hundreds of others he 
arrives at a set of steps and descends into the Underground.
If the omnipotent psychologist from Chapter 3 detains the commuter at this 
point and subjects him to interview, she will find him unable to report very 
much about his journey from the train to the Underground station. (Thanks 
to her special powers, she can command his attention, unlike the pusher of 
leaflets.) No, he says, he cannot recall which side of the newspaper kiosk he 
passed. In fact he doesn't know what newspaper kiosk she means. Nor does he 
remember apologizing to anyone about anything. There are always people 
handing out leaflets, but he doesn't remember speeding up to avoid one today, 
however bright her tee shirt was. The commuter by now is becoming impa-
tient. He has a report to finish. So the omnipotent psychologist rewinds time, 
and replays the scene up to the moment the commuter sidesteps the newspa-
per kiosk. She intends to disrupt his journey. 
This time, the crowd on the other side of the kiosk is uncharacteristically 
large and static. Something is clearly afoot. Slowing down, the commuter real-
izes that the Underground station is shut and that no one is being allowed 
down to the platforms because of some unspecified emergency. The commuter 
is irritated. He has a report to finish. What a waste of his precious time! The 
commuter considers his options. Should he wait? Or should he get a coffee 
somewhere and work on his laptop until the situation goes back to normal. 
While he's ruminating, someone pushes a leaflet towards him. She is rather 
attractive, he notices, and she is wearing a very bright tee shirt. He takes the 
leaflet, which is offering him cheap coffee. This clinches the decision. He opts 
for the coffee shop, and proceeds towards it, leaflet in hand. 
In the coffee shop, just as the commuter is about to get his laptop out, the 
omnipotent psychologist conducts her interview. Yes, of course he remembers 
the large crowd outside the Underground station. The station was closed. Yes, 
he can describe the person who handed him the leaflet. It was a young woman 
with dark hair. Her tee shirt was bright yellow with a company slogan on it. 
Now, if the psychologist would excuse him, he has a report to finish. 
Back in her laboratory, the omnipotent psychologist can review events. 
Thanks to a recent grant, her equipment has been upgraded. As before, through 
repeated replays and interventions of different sorts, she has been able to build 

NEURODYNAMICS
133
up a contrastive data set showing which of the sensory and motor events that 
contributed to the commuter's behaviour were conscious and which were 
unconscious (see Chapter 3). But now she also has a view of her subject's brain 
processes. As events unfold, she can see the extent to which each brain process 
is active, identify coalitions of coupled processes, and sample the traffic of 
information through the connective core. 
Let's assume the psychologist (with our enthusiastic endorsement) has 
adopted the architectural blueprint in Fig. 5.1, which accords with the hypoth-
esis that the brain's processes are organized as a hierarchically modular net-
work whose connective core is the global workspace. (See also Fig. 4.11 (right)). 
A basic tenet of the theory is that behaviour, cognition, and the conscious con-
dition can only be understood in terms of anatomically distributed coalitions of 
brain processes. But despite their anatomical distribution, coalitions are 
assumed to draw their membership from a small number of regionally defined 
super-modules that can also be given crude functional labels. So, at the top-
most level of organization, we have five super-modules: a sensory module, 
Fig. 5.1 A speculative functional decomposition that broadly conforms both to 
known anatomical divisions and to the modular structure revealed by Hagmann, et al. 
(2008). The lateralization prominent in the Hagmann study has been ignored, and a 
further module has been assumed that corresponds to the sub-cortical structures 
absent from their study (see Iturria-Medina, et al. (2008)). (Compare Friston (2003), 
Fig. 1.)
Global
workspace
Affect
Episodic
memory
Working
memory
Motor
Sensory

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
134
a motor module, an affect module,1 an episodic memory module, and a work-
ing memory module. Rough anatomical assignments for these modules might 
be as follows: sensory module → occipito-temporal regions; motor module → 
fronto-parietal regions; affect module → sub-cortical structures including the 
amygdala and basal ganglia, plus orbito-frontal cortex; episodic memory → 
medial regions including entorhinal cortex and the hippocampus; working 
memory → prefrontal cortex. However, these assignments are not to be taken 
too seriously. Real networks, especially very large ones, have too much rich 
and subtle structure to be rendered so simply. 
Now, when she inspects the commuter's brain, the psychologist will witness 
competitive, episodic coalition formation and break-up, plus the systemic 
broadcast of the influence of some (but not all) of the winning coalitions. 
Fig. 5.2 presents a representative series of snapshots based on the blueprint of 
Fig. 5.1. Each module includes a number of processes. Processes with common 
colours belong to the same coalition. The intensity of the colour indicates how 
active the process is. When the influence of one coalition begins to dominate 
the connective core—when that coalition wins access to the global work-
space—the central circle takes on the corresponding colour. The outlying 
modules then take on that colour as the pattern of activation in the connective 
core starts to exercise systemic influence. 
What the psychologist sees is a mixture of conscious and unconscious infor-
mation processing. In Snapshot 1, three coalitions have formed, two of which 
(green and blue) are competing to control the global workspace. The third 
coalition (red) is not in competition with any others, and is not making a bid 
to access the workspace. This is the sort of picture the psychologist might see 
when the commuter is mid-way across the station foyer and nothing out of the 
ordinary has yet occurred. His behaviour is automatic. The coalition of red 
processes is guiding his actions. One of its member processes is keeping an eye 
on the usual landmarks in the scene that guide him towards the Underground 
station—the line of shops to the right, the departures board overhead, the 
Underground logo in the distance. Another process senses the ground every 
time he takes a step. Yet another process is keeping track of nearby people and 
their movements, while another process makes small adjustments to his trajec-
tory to avoid collisions. The whole set of processes is mutually coupled 
and working smoothly in concert. The coalition is in turn coupled with the 
1 The role of affect in the present architecture is critical, and the subject of emotion demands 
a far lengthier treatment than given here. For a detailed overview of the relevant neuro-
science, see Rolls (2005). (In the same book, Rolls also advances a theory of consciousness 
that emphasizes language and higher-order thought in a way that the present theory does 
not. But his treatment of emotion appears compatible with the present theory too.)

NEURODYNAMICS
135
environment, and the upshot is the commuter's habitual journey across 
the station. 
At the same time, the commuter has a report to complete. At the back of his 
mind, this irritating piece of unfinished business is nagging at him. This is the 
blue coalition, whose constituent processes compose draft sentences, generate 
fragments of imagery for the figures, or recall parts of the report that have 
already been written. (It would be no surprise if many members of this coali-
tion were drawn from regions associated with the brain's default mode net-
work.) But the blue coalition is losing out to the green coalition, which is also 
trying to compose sentences and generate imagery. For the commuter had a 
disagreement with his wife over the breakfast table, and the words that were 
exchanged keep coming back to him, along with look of anger in her face. The 
green coalition triumphs, and in Snapshot 2 we see that its influence has 
Fig. 5.2 The dynamics of competitive coalition formation and broadcast in the context 
of a modular network with a connective core (the global workspace). The figure 
shows a series of snapshots from top left to bottom right. Epochs of broadcast are 
punctuated by episodes of competition during which rival coalitions attempt to 
form. The winning coalition stabilizes and gains access to the global workspace (in the 
centre of each snapshot), from where its influence is disseminated to the whole 
system. This disrupts the dominant coalition and instigates a new competitive episode. 
(See Plate 5).
Red, green, and blue coalitions
form. Green and blue compete
Green wins access to the
workspace. Red is also active
The influence of the green
coalition is broadcast
Processes respond, and
a new competition ensues
This time the winner is
the magenta coalition
Now magenta's influence
is disseminated
1
2
3
4
5
6

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
136
invaded the connective core, the global workspace, excluding its rivals. 
By Snapshot 3, its influence has percolated outwards and can be seen through-
out the brain. However, all this while the red coalition is still active, working in 
the background to keep the commuter walking (distractedly) towards the 
Underground. 
The consequences of broadcasting the green coalition's influence are consid-
erable. It has no immediate impact on the commuter's behaviour. He's still 
making his way across the station. But all the resources of his brain can now be 
brought to bear on the deferred problem of his domestic dispute. As recollec-
tive memory processes reconstruct the breakfast scene and language processes 
construct imaginary dialogue, both past and future, affective processes are 
colouring his mood, and will inform the response of other processes. He is 
regretful. His words were harsh. He entertains the possibility of apology, and 
feels better. The words form in his head. He resolves to phone home when he 
gets to the office. His resolution is fixed, and the very words he intends to use 
are retained by working memory processes, along with a trace in episodic 
memory of the whole sequence of internal events. All this is possible despite 
the absence of direct connections between the relevant processes, thanks to 
the systemic dissemination of influence and information via the global 
workspace. 
A number of new and important themes are introduced at the end of this 
brief tale. We have so far taken only a preliminary step towards a proper 
account of internal speech, mental imagery, and the wider pageant of human 
inner life in terms of global workspace theory. We'll return to these topics in 
the next chapter. In the mean time, let's suppose the commuter's soul-searching 
has all taken place by Snapshot 4. No doubt numerous other steps will have 
occurred, each involving its own admixture of localized and system-wide 
processing. But we shall ignore these. In Snapshot 4, other processes are clam-
ouring for attention (and 'attention', in its technical sense, is precisely the right 
word here).2 The light blue and yellow coalitions are remnants of processing 
pertaining to his domestic dispute. But the magenta coalition has arisen in 
2 Everyone knows what James said everyone knows attention is, namely 'the taking posses-
sion of the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultaneously 
possible objects or trains of thought' (James, 1890/1950, vol. 1, pp. 403-404). Under the 
present conception, it is inappropriate to speak of attention as if it were a dedicated facil-
ity whose mechanisms could be isolated from the rest of the brain's dynamics. Everything 
that influences the competition for dominance of the connective core contributes to atten-
tion in James's informal sense, and there is no more technical sense in which the term 
deserves currency.

NEURODYNAMICS
137
response to an unexpected contingency. His way is about to be blocked. There 
is a crowd outside the entrance to the Underground. 
The commuter is now no longer able to proceed on autopilot. The familiar 
routines encoded in the tried-and-tested red coalition are inapplicable to the 
current situation. The magenta coalition, whose members include the visual 
process that has recognized the crowd and the motor process that is slowing 
the commuter's stride, easily takes over the global workspace (Snapshot 5), 
and its influence soon permeates the whole system (Snapshot 6). This will 
inaugurate a further competition among potential coalitions (whose member-
ship might well be drawn from regions associated with the brain's cognitive 
control network), which will not only alight on a course of action tailored for 
this novel situation, thus immediately impacting on behaviour, but will also 
lay down traces in both working memory and episodic memory, enabling the 
commuter later to issue a verbal report of the incident to the psychologist. 
We have been examining just one among many possible variants of this 
episode, but in our science fiction scenario the omnipotent psychologist builds 
up a densely layered contrastive data set by replaying the same scene over and 
over again, making a range of different interventions. In addition to contrast-
ing behaviour in the conscious and unconscious conditions, she can now 
contrast the internal brain dynamics that accompanies them. It's clear what 
she should expect according to the theory being championed here. In the 
unconscious condition, sensory and motor events should be accompanied by 
localized processing that impacts on behaviour but has little or no influence on 
the connective core. In the conscious condition, sensory and motor events 
should correlate with active process coalitions that dominate the connective 
core and thereby disseminate their influence throughout the brain. 
5.2 Dynamics in focus
By now, a picture should be emerging of the sort of dynamics predicted by the 
theory being put forward. It results from the interplay of coalition formation, 
break-up, and broadcast. The overall effect resembles a stadium full of noisy 
football supporters.3 During a lull, several different chants may be initiated in 
different parts of the home crowd. Each chant recruits singers from nearby, 
and each becomes louder as it spreads around the stand. Soon the chants are in 
competition. One is a particular favourite, and as more and more supporters 
join in, the others fade away until the whole stadium is singing with one voice. 
But this condition is only temporary. The supporters soon tire of the same song. 
3 Of course 'football' means soccer, not the game played in North America where the sort of 
tribal behaviour described here is perhaps less common.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
138
There is another lull, and alternatives vie for popularity. Or perhaps events on 
the field intervene, causing widespread cheers or boos. 
On the football stand, as in the brain, we see a mixture of spontaneous 
dynamics and external perturbation. We also see episodes of broadcast punc-
tuated by bursts of competition among rival coalitions. (The medium of open 
air is not quite the same as that of a modular, small-world network with con-
nector hubs, but both support a combination of local and global interactions.) 
A similar regime is posited in Edelman and Tononi's dynamic core hypothesis.4 
The 'dynamic core' is a 'distributed functional cluster' of groups of neurons.5 
The groups of neurons in question correspond to brain processes in the present 
account, and the distributed functional cluster corresponds to a coalition. The 
'dynamic core' is dynamic because its composition constantly varies and its 
membership is determined by competition, in much the same way that access 
to our connective core (a structural rather than functional construct) is deter-
mined by competition among rival coalitions. Edelman and Tononi liken 
the dynamic core to a tangle of coupled springs.6 A perturbation to any one 
spring quickly reverberates through the whole. (Elsewhere, they compare it to 
a 'riotous parliament' and contrast this to Baars's theatre analogy.)7
This blizzard of metaphors is all very entertaining (football crowds, theatres, 
riotous parliaments). But to effect a proper comparison between different 
accounts they need to be put on a firmer, that is to say more rigorous, footing. 
In mathematical terms, such systems can be characterized in terms of attrac-
tors. Recall that an attractor of a dynamical system is a stable point or set of 
points in its state space to which the system converges. There are three types of 
attractor—point attractors, limit cycles, and chaotic attractors. Think of a ball 
revolving around the inside of a cone. If the ball's energy is decreasing, then it 
eventually falls to the bottom of the cone and remains there forever. This is a 
point attractor. If the ball's energy remains constant (the cone is frictionless) 
and it turns around the inside of the cone at the same height forever, then it is 
in a limit cycle. If the ball's energy gently fluctuates (for reasons unknown), and 
its overall trajectory is confined to a narrow band, but divergent trajectories 
issue from nearby points within that band, then (a few details notwithstanding) 
it is in a chaotic attractor. If a system is in an attractor, of any type, then it is 
insensitive to modest perturbations, always returning to the attracting state. 
4 Edelman & Tononi (2000). See also Seth & Baars (2005).
5 Edelman & Tononi (2000), pp.143-144.
6 Edelman & Tononi (2000), p.172.
7 Edelman & Tononi (2000), pp.245-246. In fact, as the present section hopefully makes 
clear, global workspace theory and the dynamic core hypothesis are not incompatible.

NEURODYNAMICS
139
The collection of a system's attractors along with their surrounding basins of 
attraction are called its attractor landscape. Like a real landscape, we can think 
of an attractor landscape as comprising hills and valleys, where the valleys are 
the attractors (and the hills are 'repellors'). Imagine a giant ball rolling around 
in such a landscape. Depending on where the ball starts off, it will eventually 
end up in one valley or another. In this metaphor, the attractor landscape is a 
convoluted two-dimensional surface, representing a two-dimensional state 
space. But in general, the state space of a complex system can have many more 
than two dimensions. This is certainly the case with the sort of system we are 
envisaging here. If we suppose that the state of each brain process (including 
its level of activity) is a single dimension, then the system as a whole has as 
many dimensions as it has processes (active or dormant). Similarly, in the 
football stadium metaphor, the state of each supporter (his current chant, not 
his level of inebriation) might be considered a single dimension. But the con-
cepts of an attractor and an attractor landscape are the same for state spaces 
with very many dimensions as for those with just two. 
One way to see competition in a dynamical system is in terms of the oppos-
ing pull of various attractors. In the present case, if the repertoire of coalitions 
were fixed, then we might elect to make the level of activity of each coalition a 
dimension in the pertinent state space. In this case, the giant ball rolling around 
the attractor landscape would feel the pull towards several valleys at once—
several coalitions—the level of activity in rival coalitions waxing and waning, 
until eventually the system settles into one, the winning coalition. Matters are 
made considerably more complicated by the requirement for open-ended coa-
lition formation. This entails that every viable combination of processes is a 
potential attractor, and the forces tugging at the giant ball are therefore all the 
more subtle. But the basic picture is the same—for one coalition to become 
dominant, excluding its rivals, is for the system to succumb to the pull of the 
corresponding attractor. 
However, this basic picture is incomplete. First, it must be elaborated to 
allow for the co-existence of coalitions that are not in competition with each 
other (as we saw in Snapshot 2 of Fig. 5.2). This is not much of a problem, 
as the system's state space can simply be partitioned into subsets that are 
effectively independent. Second, and more significantly, we have to face up to 
the fact that the system never actually resides in the same state for very long. 
Like Odysseus, its fate is to wander restlessly among the attractors, none of 
which has sufficient pull to become its permanent home.8 The triumph of one 
8 Of course, Odysseus got home in the end, whereas the brain is restless until it goes into 
coma or dies. No metaphor is perfect.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
140
coalition may usher in a period of relative calm, as the system remains in, or 
close to, the same state for a while. But this is only a temporary condition. 
Before long, thanks either to evoked dynamics (external perturbation) or to 
spontaneous (internal) activity, the system will shift away from the 'attractor' 
that previously held it captive, so that the resulting dynamics, like a bird's life, 
'seems to be made of an alternation of flights and perchings'.9
These two cases—external perturbation and spontaneous activity—need to 
be treated differently. When then the system is perturbed by some external 
influence, such as the sight of a crowd outside the Underground station, its 
attractor landscape alters. It is as if some god-like being had grasped the land-
scape by one corner and tugged at it so that its folds are re-arranged. Some 
valleys become hills and some hills become valleys. The giant ball begins to roll 
once more, pulled towards this slope and pushed away from that, until it finds 
its way in due course to a new low point. However, if the system's move away 
from a region of state space where it previously lingered is solely due to internal 
activity, then it's incorrect to speak of the attractor landscape changing. Rather, 
we must acknowledge that the 'attractors' in question are not true attractors. 
They are so-called quasi-attractors, that is to say regions of state space in which 
the system dwells for statistically significant periods without being trapped in 
them permanently.10 The system is then said to exhibit metastability, and while 
it resides in a quasi-attractor it is said to be in a metastable state.11
Thanks to its ecological situation, the dynamics of the living brain is neither 
wholly spontaneous nor wholly evoked, but a blend of the two. This entails 
that even evoked dynamics is best thought of in terms of quasi-attractors rather 
than true attractors. What takes place when a stimulus is received is then a 
reshaping of the associated quasi-attractor landscape, and the brain's state is 
always metastable. As argued by Kelso and others, a metastable system, because 
it never completely relaxes into a stable condition and is more easily nudged 
away from an attracting region of its state space, is well placed to respond rap-
idly and fluidly to the ongoing situation. In short, metastability is a necessity 
for the machinations of off-line cognition, and a benefit when responding to 
incoming stimuli.12
 9 James (1890/1950, vol. 1, p. 243). James uses the metaphor of the bird to evoke phenom-
enology rather than neurodynamics. But the neurodynamics we are here trying to evoke 
surely underlies the phenomenology that James was alluding to. For a neurodynamical 
account compatible with the present story, see Gros (2009).
10 Amit (1989), Chapter 5; Haken (2006).
11 Kelso (1995); Bressler & Kelso (2001); Werner (2007).
12 Kelso (1995); Bressler & Kelso (2001). Bressler & Kelso write: 'metastable dynamics ... 
endow cognitive functions with the capacity for rapid and fluid change, without ever 
relaxing into stable states' (p.34).

NEURODYNAMICS
141
However, metastability is not enough in itself. A system that flips back and 
forth between two attractors (we'll drop the 'quasi-' prefix from now on and 
take it as read), tarrying awhile in each but never settling down, is metastable, 
but uninterestingly so. A brain capable of a large repertoire of responses, each 
tailored to the subtleties of the ongoing situation for the animal, requires a 
non-trivial repertoire of attractors. Indeed, as the attractors in question are 
brain-wide coalitions of processes, whose composition is open-ended not just 
tried and tested, this repertoire is more than non-trivial. It is exponentially 
large.13 So the question arises of how the system is to navigate among them. 
We shall address this question in two stages. First, we'll point out some likely 
characteristics of the trajectory a system will follow as it moves among the 
attractors. Second, we'll identify the likely mechanism by means of which this 
trajectory is realized. 
5.3 Wandering among the attractors
For reasons to be spelled out shortly, the system's movement from attractor to 
attractor is likely to be a form of chaotic itinerancy.14 To visualize the concept 
of chaotic itinerancy, rather than a ball in a cone, imagine a fly (the state of the 
system) temporarily trapped in a tube (an attractor). The fly buzzes around 
inside the tube until by chance its erratic trajectory takes it to the rim and it 
escapes. Having escaped, its trajectory, though still erratic, is no longer con-
fined by the tube, so it gets to explore the whole room. But now suppose the 
room contains numerous other tubes (other attractors). Before long it will find 
itself trapped once again, in a different tube. Over time, the fly will visit many 
different tubes, in no particular order, sometimes revisiting the same tube 
more than once, spending a little while in each one. The fly's trajectory is 
chaotic (hard to predict) both when it's in a tube and when it's free. But it is 
more chaotic (even harder to predict) when it is free than when it is in a tube.
This notion of degrees of chaos can be made mathematically precise in terms 
of Lyapunov exponents, which quantify the rate of divergence (or convergence) 
of trajectories issuing from nearby points in a system's state space. The notion 
can be given an intuitive gloss using the fly example. Within a tube, trajectories 
emanating from nearby points diverge over time. But they remain confined to 
the tube (until the moment of the fly's escape), so their rate of divergence is 
not great. Trajectories emanating from nearby points in free space, on the 
other hand, are not so constrained and diverge much more dramatically, 
13 In other words, it scales exponentially with the number of brain processes. Assuming 
the brain processes are themselves numerous then, even allowing for the various incom-
patibilities that rule out most combinations, the number of possible coalitions will be 
astronomical.
14 Kaneko & Tsuda (2003).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
142
a condition that persists until the fly becomes trapped in a tube once more. 
It is characteristic of a chaotically itinerant system, such as our fly, that it has a 
fluctuating Lyapunov exponent.15 Within an attractor, the Lyapunov expo-
nent is close to zero, but when the system is in transit between attractors its 
Lyapunov exponent is much higher.16
Not every system with a large repertoire of metastable states is chaotically 
itinerant. Such a system might visit each of its (numerous) attractors in a peri-
odic and orderly fashion which is unaffected by small perturbations. So why 
might the system we are interested in exhibit chaotic itinerancy? One reason is 
that when an animal is at rest, pausing, or performing an undemanding task, 
the dynamics of its brain can support an elevation in spontaneous activity. 
Chaotic itinerancy is one way—perhaps the only way in a biological rather 
than silicon substrate—to take advantage of this and to effect an off-line explo-
ration of the space of possible affordances. To see this, recall that a combinato-
rial tree of possibilities branches out from every situation the animal might find 
itself in (Fig. 2.1). In order to search this tree effectively, it must be possible 
both to foresee the outcome of several actions or behaviours chained together 
and to investigate multiple possibilities branching away from a single state. 
Although this allows for a degree of parallelism, the chaining together of hypo-
thetical actions necessitates a certain amount of serial processing. 
The dynamical regime presently under discussion exhibits just the right 
combination of serial and parallel processing for the job. The procession of 
attractor states whose influence is disseminated by the global workspace is 
serial, yet each state-to-state transition results from the sifting and blending of 
massively many parallel computations.17 However, to search through a combi-
natorially structured space of behavioural sequences, the system must be capa-
ble of revisiting a state it has already seen and generating a different successor. 
In a conventional computer this can be achieved by maintaining a data struc-
ture called a stack, which keeps a record of unexplored alternatives. Brains do 
not have stacks. However, if the dynamics of generating the successor to the 
15 Sauer (2003).
16 For this to make sense, we must consider finite-time Lyapunov exponents rather than the 
Lyapunov exponent in the limit (Abarbanel, et al., 1991; Sauer, 2003; Tsuda & Umemura, 
2003).
17 For an insightful discussion of the issue of serial versus parallel processing in relation to 
consciousness, see Dennett (1991), pp. 209-226. Sackur & Dehaene (2009) present neu-
roscientific evidence for such a combination of serial and parallel processing in a simple 
arithmetic task, and supply an interpretation of their results in terms of global workspace 
theory. Their findings suggest a degree of pipelining, wherein serial operations partly 
overlap. This is consistent with the present discussion.

NEURODYNAMICS
143
current attractor is sensitive to small perturbations—if it is chaotic in other 
words—then a stack is not needed. In a dynamically rich milieu, the same 
attractor will have different successors on different occasions, and search is 
made possible.18
So the advantages of being able to carry out off-line forays into the space of 
possible affordances, thereby exposing affordances that were previously 
hidden from the animal, favour chaotic itinerancy. Very well. But there are 
important questions still to be asked about the statistical properties of the sys-
tem's wandering trajectory. For example, how long should we expect it to 
dwell in each attractor compared to the time it spends wandering between 
them? Some chaotically itinerant trajectories feature long transients between 
fleeting attractor visits. But this would be disadvantageous to an animal who 
needs to take action quickly, and for whom behaviour selection depends 
on the establishment of a winning coalition. So rapid transitions between 
attractors are in order. So much is obvious. 
A trickier question is this. What does the probability matrix for transitions 
from attractor to attractor look like? We have already established that it should 
comprise more than just ones and zeros, because attractors have non-unique 
successors. The simplest distribution would be uniform—whatever attractor 
the system is in, every other attractor has an equal chance of becoming its suc-
cessor. But this is not a plausible answer. The tree of affordances is highly 
structured. Only certain actions and behaviours are possible in any given situ-
ation, and this guarantees a zero for most cells in the probability matrix. But 
what about the rest? An enormous number of actions and behaviours are pos-
sible in most situations. Imagine someone turning up for work at the office. 
She arrives at her desk, puts down her coat, and she is faced with a choice. She 
could do something commonplace, like fetching a cup of coffee or switching on 
her computer. But she could do something unusual, like deliberately tipping a 
cup of coffee into the computer or dancing a jig on her desk. 
On the one hand, it would be wasteful to spend much time exploring exotic 
regions of the tree of affordances, regions filled with unlikely events and point-
less actions. On the other hand, only stereotyped behaviour will result if 
off-line exploration is confined to the commonplace. For an animal capable of 
invention, of opening up new vistas of affordance, a balance must be struck. 
Most of the time its brain must go down familiar paths in the attractor land-
scape. Considering that many such paths emanate from most attractors, this 
still leaves much to explore. But sometimes its brain should follow a faint 
path, and sometimes it should open up a path where there was none before. 
18 Nara & Davis (1992); Tani (1996).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
144
We should not be surprised, then, if the probability matrix for transitions 
among attractors contained a large spread of numbers.19 (Of course, the very act 
of exploration is liable to alter the matrix, further complicating the picture.) 
The emphasis of this discussion has been off-line exploration. But the set of 
issues that arises is similar when the space of affordances is subject to on-line 
exploration, that is to say when the animal playfully interacts with the environ-
ment and thereby reveals affordances that were not apparent to it beforehand. 
The attractors then in question are not the product of internal coupling only, 
but arise from the brain's coupling with the body and its environment and the 
resulting interplay of internal and external dynamics. Recall the kingfisher 
bobbing on the reed, but imagine an infant with a box of new toys. As in the 
off-line case, to effect a useful exploration, the system must be capable of visit-
ing the same attractor more than once, and moving on to a different successor 
on each occasion, so chaotic itinerancy is to be expected. Following Ikegami, 
we might term this embodied chaotic itinerancy, noting that the interplay of 
on-line activity and off-line exploration is itself likely to follow a complex, 
itinerant pattern.20
5.4 Dynamical complexity
Now, if the attractor landscape in question were simple, we might let the matter 
rest there. However, recall that for the cognitive high-fliers of the animal king-
dom (humans and perhaps others), the space of possible affordances is not 
only combinatorially structured but also open-ended. The set of potential 
actions or behaviours that are executable in a situation and meaningful for the 
animal is neither fixed in advance nor bounded. In terms of the dynamics we 
are investigating this goes hand-in-hand with the open-endedness of the rep-
ertoire of process coalitions that are eligible to respond to that situation. So the 
following question arises. What sort of mechanism is capable, not merely of 
selecting from ranks of known attractors, but of surveying an endless pano-
rama of combinatorial possibility and actually engendering just those very few 
coalitions that might be worthy successors to the incumbent attractor, and 
then choosing the best among them as its heir?21
Drawing on their empirical findings with rabbit olfaction, Skarda and 
Freeman (in a classic 1987 paper) conjectured that 'chaotic activity provides a 
way of exercising neurons that is guaranteed not to lead to cyclic entrainment 
19 For an example of chaotic itinerancy with this property, see Dias, et al. (2008).
20 Ikegami (2007).
21 As we shall see in the next chapter, this question relates to the so-called frame problem.

NEURODYNAMICS
145
[and] allows rapid and unbiased access to every limit cycle attractor'.22 
Their conjecture, originally formulated with specific brain regions in mind, 
might be generalized to the dynamics of the whole brain, and applied both to 
spontaneous and evoked activity.23 According to a generalized conjecture, the 
chaotic nature of the spontaneous activity forming the backdrop to an incom-
ing stimulus would grant rapid access to the system's full repertoire of coali-
tions. This would facilitate not merely swift and appropriate behaviour 
selection, but also the immediate assembly of novel behaviours tailored to 
meet the situation at hand, as well as ensuring that off-line exploration of the 
space of affordances was open-ended. 
As we have already conceded that nearby trajectories in the transitional 
phase between attractors can diverge quickly enough to yield different succes-
sors on different occasions, then if the generalized Skarda-Freeman conjecture 
is true, perhaps no more needs to be said. Chaos will confer easy access to every 
attractor, to the full repertoire of process coalitions. Unfortunately though, 
irrespective of whether Skarda and Freeman's original conjecture is true, the 
generalized version surely is not (which is no discredit to them, of course). 
Chaotic dynamics may help, but it is not enough. To restate the difficulty, 
what we seek is a mechanism that can bring into existence coalitions that have 
never been generated by the system before, as well as overseeing a competition 
among them. 
The conjecture to be defended here (which in fact sits comfortably with 
Freeman's more recent work)24 is that it is not chaos that confers access to the 
full repertoire of coalitions, but dynamical complexity, wherein a balance is 
struck between the antagonistic forces of segregation and integration.25 Now, 
the term 'integration' has already been given a special meaning, so we must 
take care to distinguish it from the present sense of dynamical integration, 
which is a different, though intimately related concept. In the former sense, 
integration is achieved when the whole subject (including the full resources of 
that subject's brain) is brought to bear on the ongoing situation. Integration in 
22 Skarda & Freeman (1987). The point has been reaffirmed by many other authors since 
the Skarda & Freeman paper (eg: Rabinovich & Abarbanel (1998); Dias, et al. (2008)). 
See also the review by Korn & Faure (2003). The hypothesis has also been vindicated in 
modelling work, such as Torres, et al. (2008).
23 See the remarks of Tsuda (2001; 2009), for example.
24 Freeman embraces the concept of chaotic itinerancy, which is compatible with his EEG 
findings (Freeman, 2003; 2006). See also the overview in Kozma & Freeman (2009).
25 Tononi, et al. (1998); Seth, et al. (2008); Shanahan (2008b). As discussed in these papers, 
several mathematically precise measures have been proposed for quantifying dynamical 
complexity.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
146
this cognitive/behavioural sense is subserved by integration in the latter, 
dynamical sense, which arises when the activity of each of the system's parts is 
under the influence of the system as a whole. But the former concept only 
makes sense in the context of a behaving animal, whereas the latter concept 
can be applied to any dynamical system of interacting components. 
Why is a balance of segregated and integrated activity important in the 
present context? Well, the need for segregation should be uncontroversial. In a 
system that comprises multiple components, such as an architecture compris-
ing many parallel specialists, each of the components must be free to go about 
its own, independent business. If there were no segregation of activity, and 
every part of the system did the same thing, then there would be no parallel-
ism, no specialists (and no need for separate components). Such a system 
would be maximally integrated, but it would be paralysed, its state frozen. 
In a system that is overly segregated, on the other hand, each part goes about 
its business oblivious to the activity of all the other parts. In such a system it 
would be impossible for a previously unseen coalition to form, wherein the 
expertise of one specialist is blended with the expertise of another with whom 
it had never before co-operated, because the specialists in question would be 
unable to exercise any influence on each other. A system is dynamically inte-
grated when the activity of its parts is influenced by the activity of the whole, 
and it is dynamically complex when this influence is not too great, when the 
activity of its parts is not dictated by the activity of the whole. Only when the 
route the system takes through its attractor landscape is governed by such a 
balance of segregated and integrated activity, when there is a two-way flow of 
influence and information between the parts of the system and the whole, is it 
possible for arbitrary coalitions to emerge. 
It has been argued, notably by Bak and Chialvo, that the brain should exist 
in a critical state, poised at the edge of a phase transition from order to disorder.26 
As Chialvo points out, certain systems that are known to fit this description, 
such as the 2D Ising model of ferromagnetism, generate a large repertoire of 
metastable states when (and only when) they are at the critical point. Moreover, 
in the Ising model, the ordered condition is highly segregated whereas the 
disordered condition is highly integrated, in the very sense at issue. So at the 
critical point, when integration and segregation are in balance, we have dynam-
ical complexity. Given the striking similarities then, it makes sense to ask 
whether the dynamics we are trying to pin down here is also critical, that is to 
say on the edge of a phase transition. 
26 Bak (1997); Chialvo (2004; 2008); Fraiman, et al. (2009). Turing (1950) anticipated the 
thought in his seminal paper in the journal Mind.

NEURODYNAMICS
147
The answer appears to be yes, but not trivially so. For the idea of criticality to 
be applicable, there need to be two qualitatively distinct conditions (for example, 
solid and liquid) such that the transition from one to the other, brought about 
by continuous change in some variable (such as temperature), is abrupt. 
Nothing we have said about our system so far is suggestive of this abruptness. 
For sure, we have the requisite opposed regimes—highly segregated and highly 
integrated. But could the transition from one to the other not be gradual rather 
than sudden? Well, evidence from computer models of modular neural 
networks, where the continuously varied parameter governs the density of 
intra-modular connections, suggests otherwise.27 The onset of integration in 
this model is very sudden, and the decline into too much integration, though 
slower, is also very rapid. Similarly, in a related model of synchronous oscilla-
tors organized into a modular network, the ability to generate a large reper-
toire of synchronized coalitions occurs only in a narrow parameter range 
bracketed by overly segregated and overly integrated regimes.28 Both computer 
models mimic the connectivity and the dynamics we have been investigating, 
so we can tentatively conclude that it too is poised at a phase transition, and 
add criticality to the list of significant properties we are compiling.29
Work with computer models suggests that the promotion of dynamical 
complexity is a generic property of modular small-world networks.30 This 
makes intuitive sense. It seems natural for segregation to result from a high 
clustering coefficient, and for integration to result from a short mean path 
length. This appears to be the case whether or not the modular small-world 
network in question has connector hubs and a pronounced connective core. 
But when the network does have a pronounced connective core, as we are pro-
posing here, there are further implications. Specifically, the two-way flow of 
influence and information that mediates the transition from one attractor to 
the next has to be channelled through it. This entails that the connective core 
is not only the locus of broadcast, but also the arena for competition among 
competing attractors and the medium of coupling among coalition members. 
In a system capable of generating an open-ended repertoire of attractors, 
this is exactly what we should expect. How else could two processes that have 
27 Shanahan (2008b).
28 Shanahan (2010). A similar phenomenon is demonstrated by Kitzbichler, et al. (2009), 
following the work of Kuramoto (1984, Chapter 5), though not in the context of modular 
small-world connectivity.
29 However, it is less clear what can be said about various other phenomena that are 
frequently discussed in the context of criticality, such as self-organization and the 
prevalence of power laws.
30 Sporns, et al. (2000); Shanahan (2008b).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
148
never co-operated before, between which there are no pre-existing dedicated 
pathways, establish a coupling except via an open-access, public communica-
tions infrastructure, which is exactly what the connective core is? The connec-
tive core has to be the medium of coupling. Moreover, as it has a limited 
capacity, there is bound to be competition for its narrow bandwidth. Not every 
pair of processes that attempts to establish a coupling via the connective core 
will succeed. Not every process that attempts to join a coalition can be accepted. 
A winning coalition crystallizes when a dominant set of couplings emerges and 
their rivals melt away. In short, the fight to establish (novel) couplings is the 
competition for access to the connective core, to be victorious in this fight is to 
take up the connective core's limited capacity, and domination of the connective 
core is broadcast (Fig. 5.3).31
One final piece is required to complete the jigsaw puzzle. In the dynamical 
regime we are targeting, the balance of segregated and integrated activity is not 
static when viewed at fine timescale. If we imagine a thin line of perfect bal-
ance, dividing order from disorder (high integration from high segregation), 
then an itinerant trajectory from one metastable state to another, from one 
dominant global coalition to another, corresponds to a periodic wobble from 
31 This is not to imply that the connective core is the only medium by which two processes 
can become coupled. It is assumed that a web of direct connections also exists, that allows 
coalitions to form without implicating the connective core. But it follows from the present 
proposal that such direct connections lack the configurability necessary to support novel 
coalitions.
Fig. 5.3 Competing for the global workspace. The global workspace is not only the 
locus of broadcast, but also the arena for competition between rival coalitions (central 
colours) and the medium of coupling for the members of those coalitions (arrow 
colours). Here we see a contest between the red and green coalitions. Initially the 
green coalition is dominant. But the red coalition manages to recruit a former member 
of the green coalition, and begins to supplant it in the workspace. (See Plate 6).

NEURODYNAMICS
149
one side of the line to the other. When one coalition is dominant, and its 
pattern of activation is being globally broadcast, the system is temporarily 
resident in a small margin lying on the integration side of the line. But the 
system drifts back over the line into the more segregated region during the 
upheaval that precedes a new coalition becoming dominant. In other words, 
the system repeatedly makes phase transitions from order to disorder, from 
integration to segregation, and back again, albeit remaining forever close to 
the dividing line between the two.32
To summarize, complexity, in the sense of a balance of integrated and 
segregated activity, is a signature of the dynamical milieu within which the 
competitive formation of arbitrary coalitions drawn from an open-ended rep-
ertoire is possible. The important point, of course, is that the global workspace 
architecture promotes dynamical complexity. Or rather, the network topology 
we have advocated as the substrate for a global workspace architecture pro-
motes dynamical complexity. In fact, we are now in a position to formulate a 
fairly precise hypothesis: A small-world, modular network with a pronounced 
connective core can support a dynamical milieu that 1) promotes complexity, a 
(fluctuating) balance of integrated and segregated activity, facilitating chaotic 
itinerancy among an open-ended repertoire of metastable states (each comprising 
a coalition of coupled processes), and 2) is characterized by episodes of broadcast 
punctuated with bursts of competition. In Chapter 4, we saw that the structural 
connectivity of the human brain conforms to the required topological pre-
scription. It now remains to provide some evidence that the human brain also 
conforms to the hypothesized dynamical description. 
5.5 Fireflies of the mind
Although the brain is frequently alluded to in the preceding presentation, 
there is nothing in the basic theory that is specific to biology. A theory couched 
in terms of network topology and dynamical systems is surely closer to biology 
than the more abstract style of architectural description that opened Chapter 4. 
But in principle, its component processes could be realized not only by famil-
iar forms of neural wetware, but also by some barely imaginable product of 
extraterrestrial evolution, or by artificially manufactured circuitry, analogue 
or digital. This is as it should be if our sights are set on a high-level theory 
expressed in terms of deep principles. In computer science terms, what we 
have provided is analogous to the specification of a virtual machine amenable 
32 In a similar vein, Glazebrook and Wallace (2009) characterize broadcast from a global 
workspace in terms of a phase transition wherein a 'giant component' emerges, that is to 
say a dominant network of interactions among processes.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
150
to hardware or wetware implementation in any number of ways.33 Nevertheless, 
the biological brain is our touchstone, the only source we have of empirical 
data that could support or discredit our hypotheses. So, in this section and the 
next, we survey findings supportive of the foregoing dynamical description, 
and suggestive of the possibility that synchronous neural oscillation is the 
low-level mechanism that instantiates it in the human brain.34
Synchronization is a commonplace phenomenon in Nature.35 One of the 
most enchanting examples is the firefly.36 At night, in many Southeast Asian 
countries, entire swarms of male fireflies distributed about the branches of a 
tree will sometimes flash rhythmically and simultaneously, keeping perfect 
time with each other. If a barrier is interposed between two fireflies, so that 
they cannot see each other's (or anyone else's) displays, their flashes will desyn-
chronize, indicating that the processes involved are mutually coupled. Like a 
tree laden with fireflies, some of whom can see each other and some of whom 
cannot, the brain throbs and pulses with electrical rhythms at various frequen-
cies, and many of these rhythms are synchronized.37
Although various brain rhythms have been known about since the 1940s 
thanks to EEG technology, it was the 1980s work of Singer and colleagues on 
the visual cortex of the cat that brought about the discovery of synchronized 
gamma-band oscillations.38 (The gamma band ranges from 30 to 70 Hz.) In a 
sense, the presence of synchronous oscillation in the brain is hardly surprising. 
When large numbers of dynamically interacting components are connected 
together, the emergence of all sorts of rhythmic patterns is almost unavoidable. 
Think of a tree waving in the wind. The tips of the branches wave back and 
forth in a periodic fashion. Some of them synchronize for a while, especially if 
they share common branches, then desynchronize. Individual leaves flutter 
rhythmically at higher frequencies. The whole bough rocks to and fro at a low 
frequency. This is all very pleasant to watch on a breezy day, but it tells us 
nothing of significance about the biology of the tree. 
The question, then, is whether synchronous oscillations in the brain are any 
different. Are they merely an intriguing emergent phenomenon, or do they 
33 Sloman & Chrisley (2003).
34 Long-range coherent oscillation was first posited as a means for realizing a global neuronal 
workspace by Deheane, Changeux, and colleagues (Dehaene, et al. (1998); Dehaene & 
Naccache (2001)).
35 Pikovsky, et al. (2001).
36 Buck (1938).
37 Buzsáki (2006).
38 Gray, et al. (1989).

NEURODYNAMICS
151
have a functional role? A popular line of enquiry in the 1990s was inspired by 
the hypothesis that neural synchrony addresses the so-called binding prob-
lem.39 The binding problem, in the sense intended here, is highlighted when 
an animal simultaneously perceives multiple relations among stimuli. For 
example, suppose a subject is looking at a screen containing both a red circle 
and a blue triangle. It is reasonable to assume that the redness of the circle will 
excite a set of neurons specialized for recognizing red, and the blueness of the 
triangle will excite the corresponding set of blue neurons. At the same time, the 
roundness of the circle will excite a set of neurons specialized for recognizing 
round shapes and the presence of the triangle will excite the corresponding 
triangle neurons. If all these neurons are active at once, the puzzle is to under-
stand how redness is associated with (bound to) the circle and not to the trian-
gle, whereas blueness is associated with the triangle and not to the circle. 
According to the 'binding by synchrony' hypothesis, two or more features 
are associated with each other when the relevant neural populations fire in 
synchrony. Conversely, features do not become associated when they are not 
supposed to be, even when they are all perceptually present, because the rele-
vant neural populations fire out of phase with each other. In our example, the 
red neurons would fire in synchrony with the circle neurons and the blue neu-
rons would fire in synchrony with the triangle neurons, but the former pair of 
neural populations would fire out of synchrony with the latter pair of neural 
populations. Because the oscillations in question are fast, it's possible to time-
slice rapidly between one relational percept and the other, enabling both to be 
processed 'simultaneously', in much the same way that multi-tasking 
is achieved on a computer using a single processor without the user (who 
operates at a slower timescale) being aware of it. 
The binding by synchrony hypothesis enjoys a degree of empirical support, 
and postulates a clear functional role for synchronization. But a different, 
though compatible, functional role is posited by the 'communication through 
coherence' hypothesis, advanced by Fries, and this is what really interests 
us here (Fig. 5.4, left).40 The essence of this hypothesis is that the selective 
passage of information between two groups of neurons is facilitated if 1) there 
is synchronous oscillation within each group, and 2) this synchronous activity 
is coherent (phase-locked) between the two groups.41 The reasons for this 
39 Singer & Gray (1995); Von der Malsburg (1995).
40 Fries (2005; 2009).
41 Coherence is a more liberal notion than synchrony. Two periodic systems are coherent if 
they maintain a stable phase relationship. They are synchronous if they are in phase. In 
fact, we shall mostly be concerned here with synchronous oscillations. But we shall follow 
the naming convention used by Fries.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
152
are twofold. The first reason is this. Suppose A is a sending group of neurons 
and B is a receiving group. A pattern of spikes sent from A is more likely to 
make any given neuron in B fire if those spikes are closely timed, quickly ratch-
eting up the membrane potential of the receiving neuron, than if they are 
spread out giving the membrane potential time to slip back between incoming 
spikes. If A is characterized by synchronous activity, then the spikes it sends 
out will be concentrated in peaks of activity, and will have a correspondingly 
greater impact on their targets. 
The second reason concerns the receiving population, and assumes that the 
synchrony in B is due to a rhythmic alternation between periods of excitability 
and periods of inhibition.42 In effect, this regular inhibitory activity modulates 
the gain of B's excitatory population, ensuring that it is most sensitive to 
incoming spikes during the inhibitory troughs. By contrast, during peaks of 
inhibition, its gain is low, and B is effectively desensitized to input. The com-
bination of these two periodic effects—the greater influence of a synchronized 
42 Relevant neuronal mechanisms are described by Hasentraub, et al. (2005) and Dupret, 
et al. (2008).
A
B
C
A-B channel
open
B-C channel
closed
Fig. 5.4 Left: The basis of the 'communication through coherence' hypothesis (adapted 
from Fries (2009)). Populations A and B exhibit coherent oscillations with a phase 
relationship that allows information to pass between them in both directions. No such 
channel is open between populations B and C, however, because A's spikes are timed 
to arrive when C is least excitable. Right: Coalition formation through coherent oscil-
lation in the context of the global workspace architecture. There is traffic of informa-
tion among the three red populations, which have formed a dominant coalition. The 
green and blue populations are unable to communicate because they are out of 
phase. The cyan and magenta population is not synchronous, and is unable to join any 
coalition. (See Plate 7).

NEURODYNAMICS
153
sending population and the increased sensitivity of a synchronized receiving 
population—enables the rhythmic opening and closing of a channel allowing 
the transmission of information from A to B. 
However, for this to occur, the phase relationship between the two popula-
tions has to be right. Specifically, spikes have to arrive at the receiving population 
during an inhibitory trough. If the conduction delay is small enough com-
pared to the cycle time of the oscillations in question, it suffices for the two 
populations to be nearly in phase. Indeed, if this is the case, the channel that is 
opened up in peaks of (excitatory) activity allows for two-way communication—
the transmission of information from A to B and from B to A. Note that the 
mechanism described is capable of closing a channel of communication 
between two internally synchronized populations as well as opening one. To 
open a channel the synchronous activity in one population needs to be in 
phase, or nearly in phase, with the synchronous activity in the other. To close 
a channel, it suffices to disrupt this phase relationship. 
Now, the (putative) phenomenon of communication through coherence is 
of particular interest in the context of a global workspace architecture because 
it suggests a precise neural mechanism both for the competitive establishment 
of coalitions of brain processes, and for the global dissemination of the 
winning coalition's influence (Fig. 5.4, right). First, it posits a reconfigurable 
network of switchable channels, which is sufficient to sustain arbitrary coali-
tions of neural groups coupled through the mutual exchange of influence and 
information. Second, as Fries explains, it proposes a means to realize a winner-
takes-all competition between two neural populations for influence on a 
third.43 Suppose neural groups A and B supply converging input to a third 
group C. A and B can compete to influence C if, despite being internally syn-
chronized, they are out of phase with each other. Group C will tend to entrain 
to either A or B, but will be unable to entrain to both. Any preference it shows 
for one group over another—possibly thanks to a closer initial phase relation-
ship to one than another, or because one is less synchronous than the other—
will quickly be amplified, ensuring that the influence of one group dominates 
while that of the other is excluded. 
Thanks to this winner-takes-all mechanism, nascent coalitions could com-
petitively bid to recruit groups of neurons into their membership, at the same 
time as competing for influence on any neutral target groups, including those 
sited in the connective core of the brain's structural network. As they are richly 
interconnected, it's reasonable to suppose that these groups would tend to 
entrain to each other. So any coalition that wins control of a dominant set of 
43 Fries (2009).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
154
these groups would be well placed to take over the connective core altogether. 
The consequence of such a takeover is that the winning coalition would get to 
disseminate its influence throughout the brain (according to the proposal of 
Section 4.8). Now the very same trick of exploiting coherence to gate the flow 
of influence and information between processes becomes the means of dis-
semination. Driven by the connective core into coherent oscillation with the 
winning coalition, outlying processes would become receptive to whatever 
pattern of activation that coalition wishes to deliver to them. 
However, no coalition could remain in the ascendant for long. Although 
re-entrant pathways in the connective core will promote reverberation, ena-
bling self-sustaining patterns of activation (attractors) to linger there for some 
time after the excitation that initiated them has faded, in due course some rival 
pattern, initiated either by an incoming stimulus or by one of the very outlying 
processes that was stimulated by the connective core's present pattern, will 
inevitably nudge the core out of its old attractor and into a new one. Over a 
longer time period, if this story is right, we would expect to see episodes of 
broadcast punctuated by bursts of competition, resulting in a chaotically itin-
erant series of visits to different attractors. This is a speculative description. But 
it does suggest that the hypothesized mechanism of cortical communication 
through coherence would be capable of supporting the sort of global work-
space dynamics we have envisioned. 
5.6 Evident coherence
So is there any empirical evidence of such a mechanism at work, producing the 
hypothesized dynamics? Preliminary evidence in favour of the communica-
tion through coherence hypothesis has been obtained by Womelsdorf and 
colleagues.44 Using data gathered by intracranial recording in the visual corti-
ces of awake cats and monkeys, they showed that gamma-band power (the 
prevalence of gamma oscillations) was better correlated between groups of 
neurons that had a close phase relationship than between those that did not. 
Moreover, they showed that increased correlation in gamma-band power 
between well-correlated groups was preceded by increased phase coherence, 
suggesting causal precedence between the former and the latter. Both results 
are supportive of the hypothesis.
But what evidence is there of the distinctive dynamics proposed here? If the 
present proposal is on the mark, we should expect to find evidence of long-
range synchronization, not just synchronization within a single region such as 
visual cortex. In fact, evidence of such a phenomenon has been accumulating 
44 Womelsdorf, et al. (2007).

NEURODYNAMICS
155
for a number of years. Varela and colleagues supplied the earliest result.45 They 
gathered EEG data from subjects who were presented with very high contrast 
black-and-white images of faces. The type of image in question is easy to rec-
ognize as a face when presented in an upright orientation, but appears mean-
ingless when presented upside-down. Thirty electrodes were placed across 
each subject's scalp, and the EEG data for the face-perceived (upright) condi-
tion was compared with that for the meaningless-image (inverted) condition. 
In particular, the phase synchrony between pairs of electrodes was measured, 
using wavelet filtering. The electrical activity at the sites of two electrodes was 
considered synchronous if the phase lag between the corresponding signals 
remained constant throughout all trials. 
In the face-perceived condition, averaged over trials, electrodes, and subjects, 
phase synchrony rose significantly to a peak approximately 250 ms after pres-
entation of the stimulus, then fell sharply to a trough at approximately 500 ms, 
then rose again to a new plateau at around 800 ms.46 By contrast, in the mean-
ingless-image condition, phase synchrony remained close to zero until around 
600 ms after presentation of the stimulus when it began to rise, reaching a 
plateau at around 800 ms. The authors speculated that the alternation between 
coherence and decoherence denoted 'a transition between two distinct cognitive 
acts ... punctuated by a transient stage of undoing the preceding synchrony 
and allowing for the emergence of a new ensemble'.47
Similar results were reported by Freeman and colleagues, based on two sets 
of EEG experiments, one with rabbits and cats and another with humans.48 
In the animal experiments, high-density arrays of electrodes were placed 
intracranially on several cortical regions—visual, auditory, somatomotor, and 
entorhinal. Subjects were trained to discriminate two auditory and two visual 
conditioned stimuli, one with reinforcement and one without in each case. 
The EEG data obtained showed that the overall level of intercortical synchrony 
was significantly higher than that of a 'shuffled' control signal. However, this 
intercortical synchrony was not spread evenly over time. Rather, it was divided 
into epochs of high synchrony punctuated by peaks of decoherence.49
45 Rodriguez, et al. (1999); Varela, et al. (2001).
46 See Fig. 2 on p. 431 of Rodriguez, et al. (1999).
47 Rodriguez, et al. (1999), p. 432.
48 Freeman & Rogers (2003).
49 The intervals between synchronization peaks varied across trials, but the peaks tended to 
be more frequent in cats than in rabbits, who also displayed less intercortical synchroni-
zation overall. See fig. 2 on p. 2872 of (Freeman & Rogers, 2003).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
156
In the human experiments, a curvilinear array of 64 electrodes was placed on 
each subject's forehead, and EEG data was collected while the subject was in a 
state of relaxation, first with eyes closed then with eyes open. The results were 
similar to those in the animal experiment. The phase difference of each of the 
64 signals was plotted, and this revealed epochs of coherence lasting 100-200 
ms punctuated by brief peaks of decoherence occurring almost simultaneously 
across multiple, distant electrode sites.50 The rate of recurrence of phase stabi-
lization was, perhaps surprisingly, faster in humans than in cats or rabbits. 
When subjects' eyes were closed and they were asked to relax, the recurrence 
rates tended to be in the alpha range (7-12 Hz), and when they opened their 
eyes, this shifted to the theta range (3 -7 Hz).51 Freeman interprets these find-
ings as evidence that neocortex processes information in a series of movie-like 
frames that denote 'recurring episodes of exchange and sharing of perceptual 
information among multiple sensory cortices'.52
Further evidence of long-range gamma-band synchrony in humans was 
obtained by Doesburg and colleagues. In their first experiment, EEG data were 
gathered from subjects participating in a visual attention task.53 The task 
involved the presentation of stimuli either to the left or the right half of the 
visual field while the subject's gaze was fixed on the centre. Their results showed 
an increase in gamma synchrony between visual areas contralateral to the 
presented stimulus and several widely distributed cortical regions. Moreover, 
echoing the findings of Varela's and Freeman's groups, they found that 
episodes of synchrony were punctuated by periods of desynchronization, 
and that this modulation of gamma synchrony occurred at a frequency in the 
theta range. 
50 See fig.12 on p. 2879 of Freeman & Rogers (2003).
51 In Freeman (2004a; 2004b), EEG data from an earlier experiment are revisited in the light 
of these discoveries. The original data were collected from small square arrays of 64 elec-
trodes attached to the primary sensory cortices of rabbits trained to respond to a variety 
of visual, auditory, and tactile stimuli (Barrie, et al. 1996). When re-analysed using newly 
defined indices of temporal synchrony and spatial stability, the data revealed a similar 
pattern of episodic activity, featuring epochs of high coherence separated by peaks of 
instability.
52 Freeman (2004a), p. 2077. See also the figure in electronic-only attachment 6 to that 
paper. The idea is expanded on in Freeman (2006). In a similar vein, Llinás and his 
colleagues have conjectured that 'consciousness is a non-continuous event determined by 
synchronous activity in the thalamocortical system' (Llinás, et al., 1998, p. 1845).
53 Doesburg, et al. (2008).

NEURODYNAMICS
157
A second study elicited similar findings with a binocular rivalry paradigm.54 
Recall that the phenomenon of binocular rivalry occurs when different images 
are presented to each eye. Subjects report seeing one or other of the images 
(not both at once), but which image they see changes every second or so. 
Doesburg and colleagues collected EEG data from 59 electrodes across the 
cranium from subjects who reported which of the two images they were expe-
riencing with button presses. Their analysis revealed that button presses, indi-
cating the onset of a change of percept, were preceded by increased local 
gamma-band activity in widely separated cortical areas (including the pre-
cuneus), most notably in prefrontal and parietal regions, and that there was 
significant long-range synchronization of these oscillations. Moreover, they 
found that long-range gamma synchrony preceding a button press waxed and 
waned at intervals corresponding to the theta band. Explicitly evoking global 
workspace theory as an explanatory framework for their findings, they pro-
pose that the transient formation of large-scale neural coalitions is the basis for 
conscious experience.55
Compatible views are expressed by Gaillard, Dehaene and colleagues, who 
report the findings of a study using a visual masking paradigm.56 Their study 
compared a conscious (unmasked) condition, wherein a word is presented to 
the subject long enough to be reportable, with an unconscious (masked) con-
dition, wherein a word is presented too briefly to be reportable but for long 
enough to elicit priming effects. Because their subjects were neurosurgical 
patients, they were able to make intracranial EEG recordings, which enjoy a 
higher signal-to-noise ratio than the more common extracranial set-up. 
In the unmasked condition, they saw a period of elevated gamma activation 
(averaged over 147 electrodes) beginning some 200 ms after the presentation 
of the word and lasting for around 200 ms, an effect that was lacking in the 
masked condition. They also found an increase in long-range synchrony 
during the same period, in the masked condition only, but in the beta band 
(13-30Hz) rather than the gamma band. Appealing to global workspace the-
ory, the authors of the study interpret their findings as supportive of the 
54 Doesburg, et al. (2009).
55 They claim that their findings support the view that 'consciousness emerges as a product 
of large-scale brain integration implemented by synchronization of relevant neural popu-
lations in the gamma band. We interpret this as reflecting the selective integration of 
information represented in relevant cortical regions into a large scale assembly that con-
stitutes a global workspace for consciousness. Periodic activation of, and integration 
within, this network would thus correspond to the formation of a new large scale assembly 
defining conscious contents ...' (Doesburg, et al. (2009), p.7).
56 Gaillard, et al. (2009).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
158
hypothesis that, in the conscious condition, a brain-scale reverberating state is 
ignited enabling an 'assembly of workspace neurons [to] distribute its contents 
to a great variety of other brain processors, thus making this information 
globally available'.57
To summarize, data from studies using a variety of experimental paradigms 
are suggestive of a distinctive increase in gamma synchrony during conscious 
perception, as well as long-range coherence (in the gamma or beta bands) 
between neural populations that are remote from each other. Although the 
evidence is sparse and preliminary, and is open to alternative interpretation, it 
is consistent with the proposal that there is widespread dissemination of influ-
ence and information during the conscious condition mediated by long-range 
neural synchrony. Moreover, there is also evidence (subject to the same cave-
ats) that the conscious condition waxes and wanes at a frequency within the 
theta range, and that this correlates with an attendant fluctuation in both local 
synchrony and long-range coherence. All of this fits perfectly with the descrip-
tion of global workspace dynamics we have been promoting, on the assumption 
that what holds a coalition of brain processes together is synchronous oscilla-
tion, as postulated by the communication through coherence hypothesis.
57 Gaillard, et al. (2009), p. 0473.

Chapter 6
The inner life
This chapter is dedicated to exploring the implications of the theoretical 
foundations laid down in Chapters 3 to 5. The focus of Chapter 3 was the 
conscious/unconscious distinction in the context of immediate perception 
and action. But a person's thoughts and feelings can stretch back into the past, 
can reach forward into the future, and can roam worlds of pure imagination. 
The neurodynamical account of Chapters 4 and 5 paved the way for a scientific 
approach of these issues by accommodating both externally driven and spon-
taneously driven activity within the global workspace. It's the latter that con-
cerns us now. The chapter argues that an internal sensorimotor loop operating 
through the global workspace can account for foresight and planning, as well 
as episodic memory and other facets of the imagination. Along the way, certain 
theoretical positions in adjacent fields are appropriated, notably the view that 
conceptual blending is the foundation of abstract thought.
6.1 The simulation hypothesis
The material in Chapters 3 to 5 is intended, first and foremost, to establish an 
empirical basis for the distinction between consciously and unconsciously 
mediated behaviour. It is in the context of behaviour that the scientist gains the 
firmest grip on the conscious/unconscious distinction. But what does the the-
ory have to say about thoughts and feelings that unfold internally, about those 
things that make up the inner life of a human being? In the global workspace 
architecture, according to the dynamics proposed in Chapters 4 and 5, the 
transition from one coalition of brain processes to the next is partially moti-
vated by external perturbation (counting both incoming stimuli, such as the 
sight of a predator or the smell of food, and bodily sensations such as thirst, 
pain, or sexual desire). But the proposal also emphasizes internally driven 
activity, and allows for the spontaneous transition from one attractor to 
another. It's surely here, in the swirls and eddies of spontaneous activity, that 
we shall find the neuronal basis of thought that does not immediately issue 
in action.
The viewpoint to be developed here is based on the simulation hypothesis, 
according to which conscious thought can be accounted for in terms of simulated 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
160
interaction with the world.1 The obvious benefit of internal simulation is that 
it allows an animal to rehearse its actions without the risks or costs that come 
with actual performance. From a neuroscience perspective, the central tenet of 
the hypothesis is that the brain's sensory and motor circuitry is capable of 
operating in an off-line mode, resulting in an internally closed sensorimotor 
loop (Fig. 6.1). Hesslow breaks this down into three assumptions.2 First, the 
brain can generate motor-cortical activity without the production of overt 
movement. Second, the brain can generate sensory-cortical activity without 
the presence of external stimuli. Third, associative mechanisms exist whereby 
1 Hesslow (1994; 2002); Cotterill (1998). (We shall take care to avoid the claim that 
conscious thought is simulated interaction with the environment, with its philosophically 
provocative use of the word 'is'.) Near relatives of the simulation hypothesis have been 
articulated by other authors. It was anticipated by Craik (1943), for example, who consid-
ers the hypothesis that the brain 'imitates or models external processes' (p. 53). More 
recently, related ideas have been advanced by Grush (2004), and Barsalou (1999; 2009), 
among others. The present proposal is what Grush would call an 'emulation theory'.
2 Hesslow (2002).
Fig. 6.1 The blueprint for an internally closed sensorimotor loop. Motor-cortical areas 
are assumed to be capable of generating activity that does not result in overt move-
ment, and sensory-cortical areas are assumed to be capable of generating activity in 
the absence of an external stimulus. Finally, an internal loop realized by associative 
mechanisms ensures that internal motor activity elicits an internal sensory response. 
The upshot is an inner loop whose activity mimics that of the outer loop that is closed 
via the world.
Motor
cortex
WORLD
Internal
sensorimotor loop
Sensory
cortex
Association
cortex

THE INNER LIFE
161
internal motor activity can loop back and cause sensory activity resembling 
that elicited by actual behaviour.
A more liberal formulation of the simulation hypothesis is obtained if we 
relax the requirement that the very same circuitry is activated during both 
simulated and real interactions with the environment, and admit the possibil-
ity that some or all of this circuitry is instead replicated to obtain an internal-
ized sensorimotor system that operates in parallel with the outer loop. 
According to this formulation, the circuitry underlying simulated interaction 
only shares a blueprint with the circuitry underlying real interaction, and may 
or may not share any amount of wetware. At one end of the spectrum of pos-
sibilities allowed for by the liberal version of the simulation hypothesis, we 
have what we might term the reuse version, which insists on maximal wetware 
overlap. At the other end, we have what we might term the replication version, 
which insists on zero wetware overlap. In between we have a continuous range 
of intermediate possibilities. 
One advantage of the replication version over the reuse version is that it 
allows for the dissociation of imagery and perception. It has been shown that 
brain lesions can compromise a subject's perceptual capacities while their 
visual imagery remains intact.3 Another advantage is that it helps to account 
for what Nichols and Stich call cognitive quarantine, the ability to keep fantasy 
and reality separate.4 If there is commonality of design but negligible actual 
overlap between the machinery of the inner loop and the outer loop then this 
separation needs little further explanation. The disadvantage of the replication 
version is that it makes it hard to explain apparent breakdowns of cognitive 
quarantine, as in the auditory hallucinations of schizophrenic patients. 
Fortunately, we need only embrace the hypothesis in its most liberal guise to 
proceed. 
Evidence that favours the simulation hypothesis, liberally construed, has 
been obtained using various paradigms. First, studies using chronometric 
methods based on the mental rotation experiments pioneered by Shepard and 
Metzler support the thesis that the mechanisms underlying imagined spatial 
operations are temporally constrained in the same way as their physical 
counterparts.5 Second, imaging studies reveal substantial overlap between the 
regions of the brain that are active during the performance of a task in actual 
and imagined conditions. For example, in one fMRI motor imagery study, 
researchers examined fronto-parietal activation in pianists, who were asked 
3 Bartolomeo (2008).
4 Nichols & Stich (2000). Nichols and Stich are primarily concerned with pretend play.
5 For example, see Borst & Kosslyn (2008).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
162
both to imagine playing a certain piece, and actually to play it (on a silent 
keyboard).6 They found significant overlap between the regions displaying 
increased activation in the two conditions. Similar findings have been reported 
in fMRI visual imagery studies.7
The simulation hypothesis covers not only interaction with the physical 
environment, but also interaction with the social environment. The ability to 
rehearse an encounter with a peer is no less beneficial than the ability to 
rehearse the manipulation of an object. However, the behaviour of another 
animal is not governed by simple physics like the behaviour of an inanimate 
object. Instead, it depends on what the other animal wants and what it knows. 
If it is hungry and has seen food, for example, it will move towards that food. 
Indeed it will do so even if it has to move uphill, in defiance of gravity, which 
clearly marks its behaviour out from that of a rock. On the other hand, if the 
animal has not seen the food it will go about other business, and it's advanta-
geous to a rival to be able predict this difference.8
One way to internally simulate the behaviour of another animal is to take its 
perspective, to imagine being 'in its shoes', and then to carry out an egocentric 
rehearsal. This can be regarded as the social aspect of the simulation hypothesis. 
The proposal that our understanding of others is the result of such an ability is 
known as the simulation theory of mind-reading, and it stands in opposition to 
the so-called theory theory which posits a more classically representational 
substrate.9 The discovery in monkeys of so-called mirror neurons, which are 
active both when the monkey performs a particular action and when it wit-
nesses another monkey perform the same action, is evidence of the sort of over-
lap in brain areas that the social aspect of the simulation hypothesis predicts.10
Hopefully the claim that the brain engages in 'simulated interaction with the 
environment' is by now fairly clear. But little of what we have so far said obvi-
ously concerns consciousness. What exactly is the simulation hypothesis 
claiming about the inner life, about phenomenology, and what are the grounds 
for that claim? By way of counterpoint, let's briefly consider the mental imagery 
debate between Kosslyn and Pylyshyn.11 The battleground here is the 
 6 Meister, et al. (2004). The keyboard was silent because all metal components had to be 
removed from it so that it could be used inside the MRI scanner.
 7 See Ganis, et al. (2004), for example.
 8 For example, a series of experiments by Hare, et al. (2001) show that a chimpanzee's 
behaviour is sensitive to what it has seen that a rival has seen.
 9 Gordon (1986).
10 Decety & Grèzes (2006); Galesse (2007).
11 This debate has been ongoing for decades. See Kosslyn (1981) versus Pylyshyn (1981) for 
an early skirmish. More recently we have Pylyshyn (2003) versus Kosslyn, et al. (2003).

THE INNER LIFE
163
supposed 'format' of the 'representations that give rise to the experience' of 
visual imagery. Drawing on neuroscientific evidence of the sort cited earlier, 
Kosslyn ventures that these representations are, in a specific sense, picture-
like. Pylyshyn dismisses this. Making a sharp distinction between the conscious 
experience and the mechanisms that might underlie it, he argues that 'far from 
supporting the picture theory, the results of imagery experiments tell us nothing 
about the format of images'.12
It's important to see that the simulation hypothesis, in the way it has been 
characterized here, does not take sides in this debate. It entails nothing about 
the 'format of the representations' underlying mental imagery, or about the 
'format' of the presumed images themselves. It speaks only of simulated inter-
action, and makes no mention of representations or their alleged format. 
It does make the assumption that similar neurological mechanisms underlie 
both actual and simulated interactions with the world, and its chief claim is 
that conscious thought arises from the latter. But it says nothing about what 
those mechanisms might be. Moreover, there is no implication that the neuro-
dynamics of simulated interaction faithfully reproduces the neurodynamics of 
real interaction. On the contrary, we might expect substantial differences to 
show up between sensorimotor activity that is externally caused and sensori-
motor activity that is internally driven. And if conscious thought really arises 
from the latter, it will be no surprise if subjects (under careful interrogation) 
report their experiences of imagery, rehearsal, and inner speech to be fragmen-
tary, hazy, and so on. 
Our aim now is to defend the claim that conscious thought arises from 
simulated interaction with the environment, and the strategy will be first to 
reconcile the proposed internal sensorimotor loop with the global workspace 
architecture, and second to extrapolate global workspace theory's account of 
the conscious/unconscious distinction for overt sensory and motor events to 
the case of internally generated sensorimotor activity. We'll return to the first 
issue shortly. In the mean time, we need to establish the methodological cred-
ibility of the second goal. In particular, how could the scientist get a sufficient 
grip on the phenomenology of thinking to verify the extrapolated account 
empirically? What are the measurable, objective correlates of conscious thought 
if it does not issue in action? 
In the case of external stimulation, introspective reports can be verified 
by marrying them with observable events. A subject who reports hearing a 
tone through headphones when and only when there is in fact a tone can be 
considered to be providing a reliable window into his consciousness. No such 
12 Pylyshyn (2003), p. 117.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
164
paradigm is available to a scientist who wants to study conscious thought (not 
even the omnipotent psychologist). Other paradigms are at her disposal, 
though. A subject can be shown a drawing and shortly afterwards told to imag-
ine it, or asked to learn a piano piece and then to imagine playing it (if he is a 
pianist, that is), or instructed to learn a passage of text and then to recite it 
inwardly and silently. In each case, the hope is that exercise of the imagination 
will reliably correlate with neurological markers obtained from whatever imag-
ing and/or recording methods are available. 
For these paradigms to work, it must be taken for granted that the subject 
carries out the experimenter's instructions faithfully, and that the subject's 
conscious, inner life is perturbed accordingly. But there are no unconscious 
influences on behaviour, because there is no behaviour, so the target for the 
scientist now is not a conscious/unconscious distinction as it was before. 
Rather, the aim is to extrapolate from the theory already established. This 
theory (we are supposing) will have identified the brain's global neuronal 
workspace and confirmed that reportable sensory and motor events match up 
with significant workspace activation, whereas unreportable events that never-
theless influence behaviour match up with local activity that fails to impact on 
the workspace. The theory will also have established mappings between partic-
ular workspace patterns and the sensory and motor events they correspond to. 
Now, each way of exercising the imagination will be expected to correlate 
with a distinctive pattern of workspace activation, confirming the role of the 
workspace in consciousness even in the absence of outward behaviour. 
Moreover, to the extent that the patterns in question resemble those of the cor-
responding sensory and motor events, support will be lent to the simulation 
hypothesis. It will then be a reasonable step to extrapolate from patterns of 
workspace activation that correlate with observable sensory and motor events, 
and patterns of workspace activation that correlate with cues that are assumed 
to elicit related sensorimotor imagery, to spontaneously evolving patterns of 
workspace activation of the same kind, the presumed neurological signature of 
unfolding conscious thought. 
The sceptic at this point might question whether the scientist can really con-
clude anything at all about the subjective, inner life of her subject from these 
objective markers. After all, the inner life is private. But the sceptic would be in 
the grip of dualism. Nothing is hidden. The subject is not in a metaphysically 
privileged position with respect to his inner life compared to fellow inhabit-
ants of his shared world—the scientist, say, who can observe his brain and 
record what he says. There is no better theory than one that accounts for what-
ever is public, for whatever is manifest in the world, whether through language 
or through neurological phenomena that can be detected and measured with 
a scientific instrument. Is something left unaccounted for by such a theory? 

THE INNER LIFE
165
Or is nothing left unaccounted for? This is not a dichotomy we should care to 
address. We need only remind ourselves that a nothing would serve as well as 
a something about which nothing can be said. 
6.2 Simulation through a global workspace
The question now is how to accommodate an internally closed sensorimotor 
loop within the global workspace architecture.13 This is necessary to extend the 
reach of global workspace theory, and to fulfil a prerequisite for the research 
programme envisioned in the previous section. The basic move is to equate the 
activity of the inner sensorimotor loop with the spontaneous, internally driven 
movement from attractor to attractor posited in the previous chapter. Or, to 
put it another way, the challenge is to see how this spontaneous activity 
might be modulated and shaped in such a way as to realize internally simulated 
interaction with the world.
Thankfully this is a fairly straightforward job. There is ample connectivity 
within the network topology already proposed to allow influence and informa-
tion to circulate continuously between sensory and motor areas via the con-
nective core (Fig. 6.2). To see how this might work, let's consider what might 
take place in the brain of an animal—a rook or a crow, perhaps, but there's no 
need to specify—who is confronted with a simplified version of the trap-tube 
apparatus (Fig. 6.3). There's a food item lodged inside the transparent tube, 
and a plunger that can be pulled left or right to move it. But there's no trap, 
only a bung in one end of the tube, which means that the animal has to pull the 
plunger to the right rather than the left to gain the reward. An animal that had 
already learned this task through trial and error would be able to obtain the 
food without unduly exercising its cognitive faculties. But let's suppose the 
animal has never seen the apparatus before, and resorts to internal rehearsal to 
anticipate the outcome of its actions prior to actually carrying them out.
The animal's first glimpse of the tube and its contents results in sensory-
cortical activity (Fig. 6.3, left).14 This pattern of activation achieves global 
13 The marriage of these two architectural elements was described in Shanahan (2006), 
which presents a computer model conforming to both global workspace theory and the 
simulation hypothesis. The resulting blueprint is similar to the one drawn up by 
Carruthers (2006), although Carruthers assigns a more significant role to language in his 
proposal.
14 The pictorial icons used to indicate activity in sensory and motor cortex in Fig. 6.3 should 
not be taken to imply anything about the character of that activity. No commitment to 
picture-like representations is intended. What arises in the sensory and motor regions 
shown is a spatiotemporal pattern of neural activation, and exactly how this codes 
sensory and motor information is left as an open question.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
166
Fig. 6.2 Accommodating an internal sensorimotor loop within the global workspace 
architecture. The architecture's connectivity permits the continuous circulation of 
influence and information between sensory and motor areas through the global 
workspace, without overt behaviour. Direct connections (not mediated by the global 
workspace) are also present.
Sensory
cortex
Motor
cortex
Global
workspace
WORLD
Fig. 6.3 Internal rehearsal through the global workspace. Left: the animal sees the 
tube with the food item lodged inside, and (the influence of) this visual stimulus is 
broadcast via the global workspace. Right: A sensorimotor coalition involving pulling 
to the right dominates the workspace. But it doesn't result in overt action. Rather, it 
causes sensory-cortical activity corresponding to the expected outcome of the action.
Sensory
Motor
Sensory
Motor
Affect

THE INNER LIFE
167
influence thanks to the workspace, reaching (among other brain regions) 
motor cortex. (A more familiar stimulus might never have made it to the 
workspace, and elicited a habitual motor-cortical response by a more direct 
route. But this is a novel situation.) Two rival motor processes respond to the 
broadcast, corresponding to the immediate affordances of the plunger, namely 
pull left and pull right. A competition between these processes ensues. The 
pull-right process wins and, together with the sensory process responding to 
the visual stimulus, forms a coalition that dominates the workspace (Fig. 6.3, 
right). In other circumstances, this might result immediately in motor output. 
But in this instance, the motor-cortical activity remains internal, and elicits an 
internalized sensory-cortical response resembling the activity that would arise 
if the animal had actually performed the action. A subsequent snapshot of the 
architecture might show the influence of this internally generated sensory-
cortical activity being disseminated via the workspace, and this in turn might 
elicit an affective response to the expected outcome. In this case, the outcome 
is good, the affective response would be positive, and the animal would be 
motivated actually to execute the rehearsed action. 
It should be clear that this example conforms to the dynamical description 
of the previous chapter. Coalitions of sensory and motor processes are the 
(quasi-) attractors of the system, and for the system to realize an internally 
closed sensorimotor loop, these processes must be detached from the outside 
world. The system is itinerant, visiting a series of attractors corresponding to 
waypoints along a trajectory through sensorimotor space. One coalition 
(attractor) will dominate the workspace for a while. Then, without external 
perturbation, thanks to the system's internal dynamics only, this coalition will 
break up, and a new one will take over the workspace. The transitions from 
one attractor to another, from one sensorimotor waypoint to another, are 
governed by associations formed during actual behaviour. An association, in 
this light, is nothing more than the tendency for one pattern of activation to 
follow another, for one coalition of sensory and motor processes to succeed 
another. If these tendencies are acquired by interacting with the environment 
(through neural plasticity) then they will recapitulate the sensorimotor trajec-
tories that occurred during that interaction, and simulated interaction will 
occur when the brain's dynamics is allowed to freewheel. 
The benefits of allowing the brain to freewheel in this controlled way are 
considerable. If an animal can hold back from immediate action, and antici-
pate the likely outcome of a behaviour before selecting it, then it can avoid 
dangers it would otherwise have been prey to and take opportunities it would 
otherwise have missed. The survival value of such an ability is obvious (although 
the animal has to avoid getting stuck in a thinking rut, carefully weighing its 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
168
options while a predator rapidly approaches).15 More generally, the ability to 
rehearse interaction with the environment permits the animal to explore its 
space of affordances, filling in blindspots and exposing regions of affordance 
that were previously hidden, which is one of the primary functions of cognition 
(as set out in Chapter 2). 
We have been concentrating on the conjunction of an internally closed 
sensorimotor loop with a global workspace. But the latter isn't a requirement 
for the former. An internal sensorimotor loop might be realized by direct con-
nections between sensory and motor processes, without involving a broadcast 
mechanism. So what are the ramifications of the combination? First, according 
to global workspace theory, only rehearsal that proceeds via the global work-
space can contribute to phenomenology. Internally simulated interaction with 
the environment that operated by direct reciprocal connections between sen-
sory and motor areas would (if it took place at all) be unconscious. Second, 
according to the dynamical characterization of global workspace architecture 
on offer here, only an exploration that proceeds via the workspace is capable, 
not merely of exposing hidden regions of the space of possible affordances, but 
of actually extending it, of opening out whole new vistas of affordance by 
exploiting its open-endedness. 
6.3 Open-ended affordance
The reason a global workspace so dramatically extends the functionality of an 
internal sensorimotor loop is that it facilitates the exchange of information and 
influence among processes that would otherwise have no means of communi-
cation, processes that arose to meet a specific demand in the evolution or the 
lifetime of the animal and whose usual coalition partners were fixed accord-
ingly. Such specialists can transcend their specialism and form new partner-
ships if they have access to a communications backbone capable of flexibly 
opening and closing a channel between any two peers, like a telephone 
exchange. According to the present theory, the global workspace fulfils this 
function as well as that of broadcast. Indeed, these two functions go hand-
in-hand in a network conforming to the topological constraints that have been 
proposed, one in which information and influence funnel into and fan out 
from a limited capacity connective core. Such a system has the means to enact, 
and therefore to simulate, behaviours that are entirely new to the animal.
Let's consider the example from Chapter 2 (Section 2.2) in which a school-
boy realizes that he can use a pile of building bricks to manufacture a missile 
for his catapult (Fig. 2.1). This unusual affordance of the pile of bricks is not 
15 See Dawkins (1976), pp. 57-60.

THE INNER LIFE
169
immediately apparent. He sees the pile of bricks in front of him, and the 
influence of this visual stimulus is duly disseminated via the global workspace 
(Fig. 6.4, left). Various motor processes are aroused (just two of which are 
shown in the figure), corresponding to known affordances of the bricks. 
A competition between them ensues, which is won by the make-s-shape proc-
ess. However, being especially lazy, the schoolboy doesn't execute this action 
right away as it fails to elicit a sufficiently positive affective reaction. Instead he 
continues to imagine. The consequences of building the s-shaped assembly are 
anticipated in sensory cortex (Fig. 6.4, right), and the resulting pattern of 
activation gains global influence thanks to the workspace. (This episode of 
broadcast is not shown in the figure.) 
Now, the s-shaped assembly is also familiar. Its various affordances (just one 
of which is shown) might lead to the construction of a wall and then to a 
house. But this prospect is unable to produce a significant affective response, 
and the schoolboy remains inactive. However, another motor process has also 
Fig. 6.4 Opening out the space of affordances. Left: the schoolboy is confronted with 
a set of building bricks. These have various common affordances, reflected in compet-
ing motor responses (two are shown). Right: after one round of rehearsal, the school-
boy imagines an s-shaped assembly of bricks. This has further obvious affordances 
(one is shown). But because information about the imagined assembly was broadcast, 
and because it has approximately the right size and shape, a load-catapult motor 
process is also aroused. If the imagined assembly is substituted for the ball usually 
implicated in the load-catapult process, the schoolboy will come to see the bricks as 
a potential missile, opening up a whole new region of affordance (no doubt with 
unwelcome results). 
Sensory
Motor
Sensory
Motor
Affect

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
170
responded, namely load-catapult. This process is normally mobilized in a coali-
tion with various visual and tactile processes specialized for the recognition and 
handling of the small (safe) foam balls that were provided for his new toy by the 
manufacturer. But thanks to the broadcast mechanism of the global workspace, 
the load-catapult process gets the opportunity to evaluate its own relevance to 
the situation at hand (or, in this case, the situation in mind). The s-shaped 
assembly is not dissimilar to the foam balls. It's just the right size, and its shape 
is a good enough approximation—neither too long nor too thin, neither too 
knobbly nor too spiky. It will fit the catapult, and will serve as a missile. 
This, of course, is not a judgement at the personal level, but simply the merging 
of two compatible patterns of neuronal activation, one in sensory cortex and 
one in motor cortex. These processes are spatially separated and have never 
before worked in concert, but they can become coupled thanks to the connec-
tive core. If the sensorimotor merge is successful, the coalition that results will 
come to dominate that core, at least transiently, and will therefore be able to 
exercise influence at the conscious level. Also, the patterns of activity that first 
seed the merge (in this case sensory activity corresponding to the imagined 
two-brick assembly) must attain global influence, so that all potentially rele-
vant processes can respond. So they too must be conscious. But the machinery 
that first brings about the merge operates in the background. Moreover, once 
the new coalition becomes established through repeated invocation, direct 
connections among the component processes are likely to form. It will then be 
able to work at the unconscious level, where it can contribute to later sensori-
motor merges of ever greater complexity and abstraction. 
Back in the schoolboy's head, the load-catapult process's level of activation 
is increasing. We can think of it as making a bid for access to the global work-
space. Because it has little competition—or rather, because its competition has 
such a low level of affective support—it's in a good position to recruit allies. 
The result will be a new coalition, a sensorimotor blend whose ingredients will 
include processes for recognizing, tracking, and manipulating assemblies of 
building bricks, as well as processes for grasping, loading, aiming, and releas-
ing catapults. The resulting coalition wins control of the connective core and 
its influence is disseminated accordingly (Fig. 6.4, right). The affective response 
is highly positive, and the schoolboy finally springs into action, much to the 
displeasure of the household cat. 
The basis for the sensorimotor blend in this example is the substitution of 
one object for another. The assembly of bricks substitutes for the foam ball in 
the load-catapult process, and the schoolboy is thereby able to see the bricks as 
a missile. This capacity for 'seeing as', for seeing one kind of object as another 
by allowing it to fulfil the other's role in some behaviour (or whole nexus of 
behaviours), is what permits two processes to form an alliance even though 

THE INNER LIFE
171
their original specialisms are distinct. However, for this to be possible, a degree 
of compatibility between the processes is required. The substitution has to be 
feasible. Even the naughtiest schoolboy wouldn't entertain the possibility of 
using a garden rake as a missile in a toy catapult. The size of the rake renders it 
ineligible as a substitute for the foam balls (although there is nothing to stop 
the boy from imagining a very large catapult to suit). 
A prerequisite for a system that can effect a sensorimotor merge is that its 
constituent processes must be amenable to recombination. That is to say, the 
processes that become coupled when a coalition forms must also be capable of 
being active independently, of being decoupled from each other. In the naughty 
schoolboy example, we are envisaging a load-catapult process that normally 
couples with processes specialized for finding, recognizing, grasping, and 
manipulating foam balls in a particular way. (These processes are assumed to 
operate by recruiting and modulating even more basic processes for visual 
search, reaching, and so on.) If these were not separate processes, no decou-
pling of the act of loading and the object being loaded would be possible, and 
there would be no way to effect the substitution of the assembly of bricks for 
the foam ball. 
A female cricket who uses phonotaxis to steer towards a potential partner 
cannot learn to use the same process to steer towards a food item that emits a 
distinctive noise, because the sensory activity that detects the sound of a male 
is indivisible from the motor activity that reacts to that sound. Behaviour must 
be the product of multiple processes working in concert for the very idea of 
recombination to be applicable. For recombination to be feasible in a particu-
lar instance, it must be possible to plug the candidate processes together. This 
pluggability constraint is met, for example, when one process realizes an action 
while another process procures and makes available the object to be acted 
upon. Similarly, if one process realizes an action in which one object (such as 
a stick or a hammer stone) is applied to another (such as a food pellet or a flint 
core), then potential flexibility is maximized when the processes for handling 
both objects are pluggable in this way. 
6.4 Conceptual blending
The sensorimotor blend that takes place in the schoolboy's head and the slight 
opening out of his space of affordances that results hardly qualify as a concep-
tual breakthrough. Nevertheless, a convincing case can be made that the neural 
mechanisms implicated in the schoolboy's feat are no different in kind from 
those that led to such cultural innovations as religious ritual, money, mathe-
matics, and poetry. For a shaman to see himself as an animal, for a shopper to 
see a 5-pound note as desirable, for a child learning algebra to see a variable as 

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
172
a container, for a budding poet to see life as a journey—each of these 
achievements can be thought of in terms of what Fauconnier and Turner call 
conceptual blending. Taking their cue from the seminal work of Lakoff and 
Johnson in the 1980s, Fauconnier and Turner conceive of the whole edifice of 
human thought as constructed, layer upon layer, out of mappings (blends) 
between 'mental spaces'.16
To illustrate Fauconnier and Turner's framework, and to compare it with 
the account on offer here, let's consider how a creature might learn to retrieve 
food from a trap tube in such a way as to be able to transfer what it has learned 
to a novel variation of the apparatus (Fig. 6.5). As before, it doesn't matter 
what animal we have in mind. Nor does it matter that the task in question 
could perhaps be solved in a more pedestrian way. Our imaginary subject will 
solve it by 'conceptual blending'. Specifically, it will combine its expertise in 
two micro-domains—pulling with sticks and dropping in holes. Perhaps its 
expertise in these domains is innate, or perhaps it has been learned. The impor-
tant thing for the illustration is that the animal hasn't previously encountered 
a situation in which both sticks and holes need to be dealt with at the same 
time. Nor does it have the benefit of a generic facility for physical simulation, 
which it could simply run on the configuration of objects before it. 
Now, suppose we are watching at a point when the animal undergoes a jump 
in competence with the original version of the task. We're not interested in 
actual performances on novel variations. All we're interested in is the under-
standing it acquires at this moment, an understanding that is transferable to 
variants but just now is being applied to the original apparatus. Our subject 
sees the tube. The influence of the (still novel and challenging) visual stimulus 
is duly disseminated via the global workspace (Fig. 6.5, left). The plunger 
affords pulling left and pulling right, and motor processes corresponding to 
both possibilities will be aroused, as in the earlier example. But neither process 
has further associations at present (and neither is depicted in the figure). 
However, two other motor processes also exhibit a response. The trap part of 
the trap tube is reminiscent of the sort of hole the animal sometimes drops 
food into (sometimes by accident and sometimes for caching purposes), and 
the plunger resembles the sort of twig the animal sometimes uses to extract 
insects from otherwise inaccessible crevices. 
As these processes are compatible, they are eligible to co-operate rather than 
compete, and a novel coalition arises in much the same way as it did in the 
schoolboy scenario (Fig. 6.5, right). In Fauconnier and Turner's terms, 
the animal effects a conceptual blend between three 'mental spaces'—a holes 
16 Fauconnier & Turner (2002). See also Lakoff & Johnson (1980) and Turner (1996).

THE INNER LIFE
173
mental space, a sticks mental space, and the mental space of the trap tube. The 
blend requires the stick in the sticks mental space to be mapped onto the 
plunger in the trap-tube mental space, the hole in the holes mental space to be 
mapped onto the trap in the trap-tube mental space, and the food items in all 
three mental spaces to be mapped to each other. In the emergent structure of 
the blended mental space, the plunger acts like a stick, and the trap acts like a 
hole, so that when the blend is run and the plunger is pulled to the right it 
drags the food into the trap where, as the animal has already learned to its cost, 
it is irretrievably lost. Running the blend therefore enables the animal correctly 
to predict the unfavourable outcome and avoid the wrong action. Moreover, 
the blend is transferable. It enables the animal to make similar predictions in 
different but analogous circumstances, unlike a purely associative rule, yet it 
manages this without simulating the physics of the situation in full. 
It should be clear from this example that there are no glaring incompatibili-
ties between the global workspace account we have been developing and 
Fauconnier and Turner's conceptual blending framework. (We might say that 
a conceptual blend between these two meta-level mental spaces is straightfor-
wardly produced.) In fact, they can be regarded as mutually enriching ideas. 
The present combination of global workspace theory with the simulation 
Fig. 6.5 Conceptual blending in the framework of global workspace theory. Left: the 
influence of the unfamiliar visual stimulus of the trap tube is broadcast, and elicits 
responses from two motor processes - one that normally deals with sticks and one 
that normally deals with holes. Right: The influence of these two compatible proc-
esses is blended, resulting in internally generated sensory activity resembling the 
anticipated disagreeable effect of pulling the plunger to the right.
Sensory
Motor
Sensory
Motor
Affect

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
174
hypothesis complements the theory of conceptual blending by supplying detail 
at the level of neural connectivity and neurodynamics, and by assimilating it 
within an account of consciousness.17 The theory of conceptual blending com-
plements the present account by showing how its reach might extend to every 
corner of human culture. 
Despite their affinities, there are differences of emphasis between the two 
explanatory frameworks. In particular, the present theory assigns a prominent 
role to consciousness. Both accounts are in agreement that the machinations 
of blending (the formation of novel coalitions) are not accessible to conscious-
ness. That is to say, subjects are not able to report or reflect on their workings. 
Nevertheless, as Fauconnier and Turner affirm, we 'live in the blend'. 
Consciousness is dedicated to the products of blending. Once we have the blend of 
money or the [wrist]watch or social action or ritual, we are not consciously aware of 
the different input spaces and the projections across the network. In the blend, the 
money has its value, the watch shows the time, and this is what we are aware of.18
But according to the present account, consciousness—or more precisely the 
connectivity and dynamics that underlie the conscious/unconscious distinction 
and the capacity for integration that goes hand-in-hand with it—is the necessary 
means for realizing the sort of conceptual blending that, according to Fauconnier 
and Turner, has such far-reaching implications. The connective core, we might 
say, is the 'blender'. This is not to say that blending itself is a conscious opera-
tion. Rather, it is to claim that conscious awareness of the ingredients of the 
blend is required before the processes that will contribute to the novel coalitions 
implicated in the blend can be brought together in the brain. This, indeed, is a 
major evolutionary advantage conferred by those mechanisms. 
6.5 Cognitive fluidity and the frame problem
One of the grand challenges in archaeology is to understand the explosion in 
human technology and culture that took place in the transition from the Lower 
Palaeolithic to the Upper Palaeolithic period, some 30,000 to 40,000 years ago. 
In this relatively short interval—the blink of an eye in evolutionary terms—
there is a dramatic increase in the sophistication of human tools, and at the 
same time the first irruptions of art and ritual. Why did this occur? One place 
to look for an answer is the human brain. According to Mithen, an evolutionary 
17 As far as the likely neural substrate of conceptual blending is concerned, Fauconnier 
and Turner (2002) assert that: '... elements in mental spaces correspond to activated 
neuronal assemblies and linking between elements corresponds to some kind of neuro-
biological binding, such as co-activation.' (p. 102).
18 Fauconnier & Turner (2002), p.391.

THE INNER LIFE
175
adjustment to the architecture of the hominid brain took place at this time that 
seeded the development of modern humans and their distinctive mental 
capacities.19 The effect of this adjustment was to facilitate what Mithen calls 
cognitive fluidity, which enables 'thoughts and knowledge generated by special-
ized intelligences [to] flow freely around the mind', resulting in 'an almost 
limitless capacity for imagination'.20 Cognitive fluidity, as Fauconnier 
and Turner acknowledge, is what permits conceptual blending.21 It is also one 
provision of the global neuronal workspace—its integrative facility.22
Mithen situates the concept of cognitive fluidity in relation to modular 
theories of the mind, and our understanding of the global neuronal workspace 
would be incomplete if we didn't follow his example. Modular theories come 
in many flavours, but each of them supposes that some portion of the mind 
can be divided into parts (modules), and that the parts are functionally special-
ized in some way. (The term 'module' is used in a different way here from the 
way it is used in the theory of networks, although a module in the network 
sense could realize a module in the present sense.) A recurring theme among 
modular theorists is the limits of modularity, and there is a widely perceived 
need for some means of going beyond the constraints of specialization and 
transcending modular boundaries. 
The presentation in Fodor's 1983 book The Modularity of Mind was particu-
larly influential.23 Fodor distinguishes between the mind's peripheral processes, 
specialized modules that handle such operations as low-level vision and pars-
ing, and its central processes, which are implicated in higher cognitive func-
tions. Fodor itemizes a number of features of each type of process. One property 
of peripheral processes is informational encapsulation, which means that they 
draw on information from a fixed set of sources (assumed to be small in 
number). Central processes, by contrast, are informationally unencapsulated, 
meaning they can draw on information from any source. Analogical reasoning 
epitomizes informational unencapsulation, as its very essence is the establishment 
of mappings between domains previously considered unrelated. 
Another informationally unencapsulated process, in Fodor's way of thinking, 
is 'belief update'. When the world changes, there is no way to circumscribe the 
domain of the set of beliefs that will require modification to match. The con-
cept of belief doesn't feature in the theoretical edifice we have been erecting 
19 Mithen (1996).
20 Mithen (1996), p. 71.
21 Fauconnier & Turner (2002), pp. 74-75.
22 Shanahan & Baars (2005).
23 Fodor (1983). See also the updated discussion in Fodor (2000).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
176
here, and as a consequence nor does belief update. Instead of belief, we have 
the dynamics of interacting brain processes and the behaviour they produce. 
Belief update corresponds to various forms of neural plasticity. Fodor's notion 
of belief assumes a language-like representational substrate that is similarly 
absent from the present standpoint.24 Nevertheless, it's worth temporarily 
taking up Fodor's perspective in order to engage with the frame problem, as it 
has been conceived by philosophers of mind. This will eventually lead us back 
to the issue of cognitive fluidity. 
The frame problem, in its original formulation, was discovered by artificial 
intelligence researchers in the late 1960s who were attempting to formalize the 
effects of actions in mathematical logic.25 The difficulty for the AI researchers 
was how to avoid having to represent explicitly everything that does not change 
when an action is performed. Philosophers such as Fodor, Dennett, and 
Dreyfus interpreted this as an instance of a larger problem, namely how an 
informationally unencapsulated cognitive process that worked by carrying out 
computations over representations could ever determine that its job was done, 
that it had taken into account all the information relevant to its task.26 For 
informationally encapsulated operations such as low-level vision, this isn't 
much of a problem. When all parts of the visual field have been inspected for 
edges, there is no need to look elsewhere. But for an informationally unencap-
sulated process, so the argument goes, there is no end to what could be taken 
into account. In the case of belief update, the question is how to determine 
when all the relevant revisions to a set of beliefs have been effected. 
... it's just got to be possible to determine, with reasonable accuracy, the impact of 
adopting a new belief on one's prior epistemic commitments without having to survey 
those commitments in their totality. ... The totality of one's epistemic commitments 
is vastly too large a space to have to search ...27
24 The present stance might be thought of as an example of eliminative materialism 
(Churchland, 1981). This would be wrong, however, insofar as eliminative materialism is 
taken to entail the view that the propositional mental states of everyday folk psychology 
(beliefs, desires, and intentions) do not actually exist. There is no need to discuss what 
does and does not actually exist. Beliefs, desires, and intentions are not required in our 
scientific vocabulary, and that is all that needs to be said on the matter.
25 McCarthy & Hayes (1969); Shanahan (1997).
26 Fodor (1983); Dennett (1984); Dreyfus (1991), pp. 115-121. See also Fodor (2000), 
Wheeler (2005; 2008), and Dreyfus (2008).
27 Fodor (2000), p.31. See also Carruthers (2003). Fodor regards this difficulty as fatal for 
the ambitions of any research programme in cognitive science that is based on the idea of 
computation over representations, and as he cannot conceive of a viable alternative, he 
delivers a dire prognosis for the project of understanding the mind in scientific terms: 'it's 
a mystery, not just a problem, what model of the mind cognitive science ought to try next' 
(Fodor, 2000, p. 23).

THE INNER LIFE
177
Despite the fact that the paradigm we are working in here is not Fodor's, we 
cannot altogether escape his challenge. For us there is no computational threat 
associated with belief update as such. However, there is a sense in which con-
ceptual blending, like its close relative analogical reasoning, is unencapsulated. 
In principle, any combination of processes might be mutually relevant and 
eligible to form a new coalition. To paraphrase Fodor, the totality of possible 
process combinations seems like 'vastly too large' a space to have to search. So 
even though the building blocks of our theory are brain processes and our 
theoretical focus is the dynamics of their interaction, the question still arises 
of how cognitive fluidity is actually realized. In an open-ended repertoire of 
coalitions, how does the brain single out the relevant ones? 
Half the answer is scaffolding and the other half is architecture. We'll deal 
with scaffolding first. Genuinely spontaneous, creative acts of social signifi-
cance, such as the production of the first wheel, the invention of paper, or the 
discovery of general relativity, are historically rare. The society we live in is the 
product of millennia of gradual development, and the conceptual blends we 
inhabit are sedimented layer upon layer. But as children we are inducted into 
a culture that is already there for us. In a few short years, a child has to reca-
pitulate the entire history of conceptual innovation in the society into which it 
is born, and this involves thousands of individual acts of creativity and 
moments of insight. Thousands of remarkable conceptual blends must take 
place in its head if it is to learn how to talk, how to add up, how to tell the time, 
and how to use a computer. But this is not a journey the child undertakes 
alone. Our parents, carers, teachers, and peers scaffold our learning.28 By set-
ting us tasks and giving instruction, by using props and demonstrations, 
by providing encouragement and feedback, they bring the relevant brain 
processes into juxtaposition for us. 
However, scaffolding is useless without the right architecture. No amount of 
scaffolding will enable a chimpanzee to apply Pythagoras's theorem, even if 
there are bananas involved. The child's cognitive endowment has to be one 
that, when presented with good instruction or apt demonstration, allows 
'the penny to drop'. Moreover, often the best instruction induces the child to 
discover things for itself, because the conceptual blends that result tend to have 
wider application. So we must think of scaffolding as reducing the space of 
possible process combinations to manageable proportions, not as eliminating 
the need for search altogether. Despite the reduction in size, this space 
still appears forbiddingly large if we imagine having to search it one element 
at a time, checking for relevance to the present problem-solving context 
28 The concept of scaffolding was articulated by Wood, et al. (1976), whose characterization 
was anticipated by Vygotsky (1934/1986).

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
178
(whatever that might be) as we go (Fig. 6.6, top).29 But the architecture of the 
brain is massively parallel, and thanks to the broadcast mechanism of the 
global workspace the responsibility for determining which processes are rele-
vant to the problem-solving context can be distributed among the processes 
themselves (Fig. 6.6, bottom).30
So are we done with the frame problem? Not quite. If the business of singling 
out combinations of brain processes relevant to the ongoing problem-solving 
context were simply a matter of selecting from a repertoire of tried-and-tested 
coalitions then no further explanation would be needed. Processes would be 
alert to the situation at hand (or in mind) thanks to the global workspace, and 
relevant processes would bid for influence alongside their usual partners. (The 
circles in Fig. 6.6 (bottom) might then be thought of as complete coalitions.) 
29 This serial view is encouraged by the robot thought experiment Dennett (1984) uses to 
highlight the frame problem.
30 Shanahan & Baars (2005).
Fig. 6.6 Serial versus parallel approaches to relevance. Top: if serial processing is used 
to determine relevance then it looks computationally infeasible for informationally 
unencapsulated cognitive processes. Bottom: a parallel approach that takes advantage 
of the broadcast facility of the global workspace is more plausible. Although only a 
handful of processes are shown here, in a real brain they will be massively numerous.
Parallel Unconscious Specialists
Global Workspace
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
Peripheral Processes (Modules)
Central Processes
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
B
D
A
C
"Is A relevant?"
"Is B relevant?"
"Am I relevant?"
"Am I relevant?"
"Am I relevant?"
"Am I relevant?
Yes!"
"Is C relevant?
Yes!"

THE INNER LIFE
179
But where conceptual blending is concerned, usual partners are to be avoided. 
It's unusual partnerships we're looking for. The repertoire of coalitions poten-
tially relevant to the problem-solving situation is open-ended. So the space to 
be searched is not the space of processes, but the space of combinations of 
processes, an altogether more daunting prospect.31
This is where other features of the global workspace architecture come into 
their own. Recall the proposal that the global workspace is realized by the 
bandwidth-limited connective core of a modular, small-world network and 
that information and influence funnel into and fan out from this connective 
core (Chapter 4). This network topology promotes dynamical complexity, a 
balance of segregated and integrated activity, which in turn supports the gen-
eration of a large repertoire of metastable states. Recall too that the global 
workspace is hypothesized to be not only the locus of broadcast, but also the 
arena for competition among competing process coalitions and the medium of 
coupling among coalition members (Chapter 5). Now, these architectural 
features may make an open-ended repertoire of coalitions available. But how 
do they help to isolate the relevant coalitions in that repertoire from the rest? 
The answer lies in the dynamics of the bursts of competition that punctuate 
the workspace's episodes of broadcast. Negotiations between potential partners, 
the recruitment of new coalition members, the suppression of rival coalitions—
all this goes on in parallel, until one coalition emerges from the melee as dom-
inant (Fig. 5.3). The discovery of a novel competition is not a matter of trying 
out combinations, one at a time. Rather, every process that determines itself to 
be relevant to the ongoing situation, as broadcast, attempts to commandeer 
the workspace to broadcast its claim and thereby to initiate its own bid for 
power. There is no consideration by a central executive of the takeover bids of 
rival consortia, each carefully prepared in advance. Rather, the workspace is a 
battlefield in which alliances are made and broken on the fly, depending on the 
ebb and flow of battle, and in which participants give up of their own accord 
when the fight is going against them. 
The deciding factor in this battle is relevance. Relevance to the situation at 
hand (or in mind) is what determines the strength of a coalition, its ability to 
recruit allies while subduing its opponents. Whatever longer-term, uncon-
scious incubation may have taken place, wherein processes adjust their internal 
workings and external sensitivities, when its time arrives, a novel coalition 
31 Wheeler (2008) characterizes this as the 'inter-contextual' dimension to the frame prob-
lem, which is the challenge of saying 'how a purely mechanistic system might achieve 
appropriate, flexible and fluid action in worlds in which adaptation to new contexts is 
open-ended and in which the number of potential contexts is indeterminate' (p.340). 
Wheeler's hypothesis that the problem is overcome in systems that exhibit 'continuous 
reciprocal causation' is close to the present standpoint.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
180
inaugurating a new conceptual blend will crystallize very rapidly, invading the 
workspace and disseminating its influence in a flash of insight. Far from being 
the provenance of great poets and mathematical geniuses, the present stand-
point entails that such moments of insight are the engine of everyday develop-
ment and learning. 
6.6 Space, time, and memory
Integration is achieved when the brain's full battery of resources is brought to 
bear on the ongoing situation. For a while now, our emphasis has been sensory 
and motor processes that realize expertise in one micro-domain or another, 
and whose influence on behaviour or rehearsal is immediate. But the concept 
of integration also embraces processes whose influence is deferred, that is to say 
memory processes. Without committing to a sharp distinction, we shall follow 
the usual practice within cognitive psychology of supplying separate treatments 
of working memory and episodic memory. Both types of memory contribute to 
conceptual blending, and both furnish material to the internal sensorimotor 
loop. We'll begin with working memory, focusing on what, after Baddeley's 
influential model, might be called the 'visuospatial sketchpad'.32 But we shall 
conceive of this faculty, in more neural terms, as a temporary pattern of activity 
that persists after the spatially structured stimulus that caused it has faded.33
To see a solid object, such as a cube on a table, is not simply to see a flat 
image, nor even (as we have stereoscopic vision) to see a raised surface with 
protrusions. It is to perceive everything that the three-dimensional solidity of 
the object affords—the possibility of picking it up and rotating it in the fingers, 
for example, or of moving around to the other side of it to see its back.34 In a 
similar way, when a person looks at one scene (an office worker surveying the 
disorderly collection of objects on her desk, say), then turns her head to look 
at a different scene (the view through a window to the trees outside, say), there 
is a sense in which she remains aware of the continuing availability of the first 
scene even while admiring the second. All she needs to do is turn her head 
again for it to come back into view. 
32 Baddeley & Hitch (1974); Baddeley (2007). The functionality of the 'phonological loop' - 
another component of Baddeley's model - is subsumed by the internal sensorimotor 
loop in the present architecture.
33 Wang (2001). Imaging and lesion studies classically implicate the prefrontal cortex in work-
ing memory tasks (Curtis & D'Esposito, 2003). But as D'Esposito (2007) states, 'working 
memory is not localized to a single brain region but probably is an emergent property of the 
functional interactions between the [prefrontal cortex] and the rest of the brain' (p.769).
34 Compare the discussion by Merleau-Ponty (1945/1962), pp.235-239 & 283-347.

THE INNER LIFE
181
But there is an important difference between looking at a small solid object 
and exploring the wider setting. In the latter case, the affordances are con-
structed incrementally and on the fly, because they depend on how the local 
scenery unfolds, rather than being given all at once by the familiar three-di-
mensionality of the object before the eyes. Consequently, the newly discovered 
affordances (the possibility of picking up the stapler on the desk, say) have 
somehow to be retained when they are no longer apparent to the senses 
(because the office worker is now looking out of the window). This temporary 
retention of local affordances is one aspect of working memory function.35 
(In fact, the visual 'field' itself is not continuous like a field. Rather, it is con-
structed by a series of saccades and small head movements. So, although the 
overall three-dimensionality of a small object can be taken in with a single 
gaze, at a fine spatial scale even the cube on the table is subject to the same 
considerations as the wider scenery.) 
We must take care not to over-inflate the claim that to see a solid object is to 
see what the three-dimensionality of that object affords. It would be imprudent 
to deny that the three-dimensional solidity of a cube contributes to the phe-
nomenology of seeing it. Similarly, we have spoken of the continuing 'aware-
ness' of objects that are no longer in view in terms of the persistence of their 
affordances. But our stance here does not entail that all the associated 
affordances are 'before the mind' when we see a solid object or explore our sur-
roundings. We should reject this way of putting things, and recall that a feeling 
of plenitude is not a plenitude of feeling. All those affordances, all those possi-
bilities for action, are merely available (looking behind the solid object, revisit-
ing part of the scenery, and so on). Yet whenever a particular action is called to 
mind—during inner rehearsal, say, or in response to a question—there it is. 
Again we find that the refrigerator light illusion is a good metaphor. 
In order to carry out useful off-line rehearsals of interaction with the physical 
world, the activity of the internal sensorimotor loop must respect the spatial 
structure of the world it is simulating.36 This means that in rehearsal, as in real 
interaction, affordances must be constructed on the fly and retained. After an 
animal has effected a blend between the micro-domain of pulling with sticks 
and the micro-domain of dropping in holes in order to solve the trap tube 
(Fig. 6.5), it can only carry out rehearsal with the resulting coalition of processes 
(and run the blend) if it can keep track of the different parts of the imagined 
apparatus as they are manipulated in the simulation. In other words, we need to 
35 This is also one way to characterize the grasp of object permanence (Piaget, 1954; 
Baillargeon, 1993).
36 The issues are somewhat different when it comes to interaction with the social world.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
182
supplement the presuppositions of the simulation hypothesis—and by impli-
cation the presuppositions of the proposed marriage of the simulation hypoth-
esis with global workspace theory—with the assumption that working memory, 
just like sensory and motor cortex, can function while disconnected from the 
world, and that its activity while off-line mimics its activity when on-line. 
It's important to see that, although they enjoy significant interaction, working 
memory, as the term is used here, and the global workspace are not the same 
thing.37 Indeed, working memory can be doubly dissociated from conscious 
experience (for which global workspace involvement is assumed to be a pre-
requisite). On the one hand, conscious experience is possible in which working 
memory is not implicated, as in the pain of a simple animal with negligible 
working memory capacity.38 In such a case, global workspace theory predicts 
that the brain's pain centres have taken over its communications infrastruc-
ture in order to broadcast an alarm signal.39 On the other hand, items can be 
retained in working memory without ongoing conscious involvement. Suppose 
our office worker notices that the stapler is on her desk (usually it's to be found 
on someone else's), then crosses to the photocopier where she is occupied for 
a time. When asked about the stapler by a colleague, she may well be able to 
report that it is on her desk, despite having had no thought of it while using the 
photocopier. (It might require the interventions of the omnipotent psycholo-
gist to establish this last fact empirically, but the possibility of its being true 
seems uncontroversial.) 
Not only do we see the world as three-dimensional, we also experience a 
world that is in constant flux. If we see, say, a Frisbee gliding through the air 
towards us, we speak of an object in motion, not of a series of disjointed 
snapshots. As both James and Husserl might have said, it is as if our experience 
of the Frisbee included, at each moment, both a trace of its trajectory from the 
37 Baars & Franklin (2003). Of course, the term 'global workspace theory' here refers to the 
interpretation and development of Baars's original ideas on offer in the present chapters. 
Baddeley (2007, Chapter 16) offers a sympathetic treatment of the idea of a global work-
space. But he does so by assimilating it to his own concept of working memory, and the 
result is somewhat different from the present conception of a largely passive communica-
tions infrastructure, although Baddeley attributes integrative capabilities to it that are 
similar to those at the heart of the present account.
38 Consider fish, for example. A good case for the possibility of pain in fish is made by 
Braithwaite (2010). Working memory has also been demonstrated in fish (Hughes & 
Blight, 1999), but it's hard to see why such a spatial capability should be implicated in the 
capacity to feel pain.
39 Indeed, the communications infrastructure required to broadcast such an alarm signal is 
a plausible evolutionary precursor to a full-blown global workspace.

THE INNER LIFE
183
immediate past and a projection of its trajectory into the immediate future.40 
Likewise, if we hear a familiar musical phrase, we are more likely to think of the 
tune it comes from than to dwell on the individual notes. From a behavioural 
point of view, we could not run to intercept a flying Frisbee if we had not 
already observed a fragment of its trajectory, nor whistle the fifth and sixth 
notes of the tune if we had not heard the preceding four. 
Like the previous observations about space, these observations about time 
are suggestive of the operation of working memory, according to a slightly 
extended sense of that term as it is used here. Some remnant of the history of a 
time-varying sensory stimulus must linger briefly after the stimulus itself has 
gone, perhaps as persistent activity in some reverberating neural circuit. If 
such lingering patterns are in any way to inform phenomenology, to influence 
what it is like to be an animal, then they must exercise influence on the global 
workspace. Much as we can speak of the spatial organization of the informa-
tion that is disseminated from the global workspace, so we can speak of its 
temporal organization. In short, the present theory is compatible with the 
notion that the persistent activity of working memory processes shapes the 
way we experience the world before us. 
Nothing of what has been said here about the spatial and temporal character 
of the world as we find it is intended to be philosophically challenging. It's not 
an account of the 'structure of experience' in the manner of Kant or Husserl, 
but simply a statement of the obvious.41 As such, if it fails to meet with univer-
sal approval then the fault is with its literary presentation. In Chapter 1, a 
similar theme was discussed, along with allusions to the idea of subjective 
experience disappearing into the abyss of time. But our purpose there was to 
dismantle a way of thinking that leads to a metaphysically burdened idea of 
subjectivity. Our purpose here is quite different. By juxtaposing such descrip-
tions with related neurodynamical explanations we hope to illuminate the 
relationship between our inner lives and the physical world. While doing so, 
we strive to maintain our hard-won post-reflective silence. 
6.7 Remembering and reconstructing
Working memory processes exercise their deferred influence on a relatively 
short timescale—over seconds, minutes, or perhaps hours. But human phe-
nomenology is richly informed by a narrative of remembered events that spans 
40 Husserl (1911/1991); James (1890/1950), vol. 1, pp.608-610.
41 Husserl (1911/1991); Kant (1781/1929). In this respect, James's poetically truthful 
treatment of such topics is to be preferred to the theoretically heavy approach of either of 
these philosophers.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
184
a lifetime and reaches back into early childhood. This faculty for episodic memory 
is both autobiographical and, to use the term favoured by Tulving, autonoetic.42 
It is autobiographical because it concerns the events that make up a person's 
life story, the life story of the person whose memories are in question. But not 
all autobiographical memories are episodic memories. A person can typically 
remember where and when she was born without being able recall the actual 
event. Episodic memory is autonoetic because it involves the conscious replay 
of past experiences, whether recent, such as last night's party, or distant, such 
as a childhood visit to the seaside. A number of controversies attend the topic 
of episodic memory, so construed, and it's instructive to review them in the 
light of the theory we have been developing.
Because of the notorious difficulties associated with operationalizing the 
distinction between conscious and unconscious influences on behaviour—
difficulties we have already explored in some detail for the case of immediate 
influence, and which are magnified when the influence is deferred—psycholo-
gists have been concerned to isolate purely behavioural criteria for episodic 
memory. One such criterion is that behaviour involving the exercise of epi-
sodic memory should be sensitive to what, where, and when facts about past 
events.43 In telling a friend about her day, our office worker might describe 
what she said to her boss (that he was incompetent), where the pronounce-
ment took place (in his office), as well as when (shortly after lunch). Applying 
this criterion allows researchers to look for episodic memory in non-human 
animals. Clayton and colleagues, for example, demonstrated that scrub jays, 
who cache food items for later recovery and consumption, modulate their 
recovery behaviour according to how long a food item has been cached and 
whether or not it is perishable as well as the location of the cache.44
But despite demonstrating an animal's sensitivity to the what, the where, 
and the when of its past actions, these researchers are open to the sceptic's 
charge that such sensitivity doesn't amount to truly episodic memory, because 
there is no evidence that it involves the conscious recall of a past event. It can 
equally be explained in terms of the deferred modulating influence of uncon-
scious brain processes. The sceptic's point is a pertinent, because it would be 
hard to over-estimate the importance to a human of the ability to bring to 
mind significant events in her life, of being consciously in touch with her past. 
42 The distinction between semantic and episodic memory was first articulated by Tulving 
(1974), who later introduced the concept of autonoetic consciousness (Tulving, 1983). 
For a more recent overview see Tulving (2002).
43 See Tulving (2002).
44 Clayton & Dickinson (1998). Evidence of similar abilities has even been found for voles 
(Ferkin, et al., 2008).

THE INNER LIFE
185
So animal researchers are caught between the Scylla of being unable to 
operationalize the conscious/unconscious distinction in non-human animals 
and the Charybdis of the requirement for autonoetic consciousness in 'truly' 
episodic memory. For this reason, they have conservatively resorted to charac-
terizing their findings as evidence for 'episodic-like' memory. 
Pushing the debate into new territory, Suddendorf and Corballis, citing the 
so-called Bischof-Köhler hypothesis that 'only humans can flexibly anticipate 
their own future mental states of need and act in the present to secure them',45 
recast episodic memory as one facet of a generic capacity for mental time travel. 
This capacity 'allows humans to mentally project themselves backwards in 
time to re-live, or forwards to pre-live, events'.46 Neuroscientific evidence is 
supportive of their conception. Both imaging and clinical studies suggest that 
the ability to recall episodes from the past shares a common neural substrate 
with the ability to imagine future scenarios,47 a 'core network' that has much in 
common with the so-called default mode network discussed in Chapter 4.48 
The default network, in turn, lies in the connective core that we have hypoth-
esized as the substrate of a global neuronal workspace.49
Suddendorf and Corballis emphasize the combinatorial reach of mental 
time travel: 'given a basic vocabulary of actors, objects, and events, we can 
construct unique episodes in the past and create scenarios to deal with unique 
contingencies in the future'.50 Reiterating this point, Schacter and Addis frame 
the constructive episodic simulation hypothesis that 'simulation of future epi-
sodes requires a system that can draw on the past in a manner that flexibly 
extracts and recombines elements of previous experiences'.51 Like Suddendorf 
and Corballis, Schacter and Addis take a symmetrical view of the past and the 
future, treating mental time travel in both directions as a constructive process. 
Episodic memory, on this construal, is a matter of the reassembly of the 
elements of a past episode, as opposed to the retrieval of a complete trace of a 
past experience. This reconstructive view helps to account for the limitations 
of episodic memory, limitations that lawyers are adept at exposing when ques-
tioning a witness in court. However, no specific neural mechanism capable of 
45 Suddendorf, et al. (2009), p. 1320.
46 Suddendorf & Corballis (2007), p. 299. The term was coined in Suddendorf & Corballis 
(1997).
47 Schacter, et al. (2008).
48 Buckner & Carroll, (2007).
49 Hagmann, et al. (2008). See the discussion in Chapter 5.
50 Suddendorf & Corballis (1997), p. 147.
51 Schacter & Addis (2007), p. 773.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
186
putting together scenarios using fragments of past episodes as the raw material 
has so far been proposed by any of these authors. 
Now, it will not have escaped the reader that the attributes of the global 
neuronal workspace, according to the advocated theory of its connectivity 
and neurodynamics, make it ideally suited to this job. To replay an episodic 
memory (on the reconstructive view), or to imagine a future scenario, is to 
assemble a coalition of active brain processes, a coalition that in this case 
involves memory processes. The challenge—the same challenge we confronted 
in Chapter 5—is to account for how such coalitions of arbitrary composition 
can be formed. That is to say, the repertoire of coalitions of brain (memory) 
processes involved in constructively imagining a future must be open-ended, 
not confined to the familiar or tried and tested. As before, our response is that 
this requirement is met in a parallel architecture with the right connective 
topology—one whose component processes form a modular, small-world 
network with a pronounced connective core. Such an architecture promotes 
metastability, chaotic itinerancy, and a balance of integrated and segregated 
activity, the hallmarks of a dynamical system capable of generating a large 
repertoire of coalitions. 
Of course, the 'constructive episodic simulation hypothesis' resonates with 
Hesslow's more succinctly titled 'simulation hypothesis', and not just in name. 
For the global neuronal workspace to be a viable mechanism for blending the 
narrative elements of previous experience into novel imaginary future scenar-
ios, it has to work in tandem with an internally closed sensorimotor loop in the 
way set out earlier in the chapter. Moreover, the simulation hypothesis can 
accommodate more than projection into the past or the future. Moving away 
from the notion of mental time travel, the idea of 'constructive simulation' can 
be widened further to embrace both augmented reality and fantasy.52 When a 
child absorbed in pretend play pours imaginary tea from a real plastic teapot, 
there is no mental time travel involved. The where and the when of the episode 
are here and now. Only the what has been augmented by the imagination. 
Likewise, no mental time travel needs to take place when an adult enjoys a 
sexual fantasy. There may be no particular when or where to the fantasy, just an 
overwhelming what, and most likely a particular who. The combination of 
a global workspace with an internal sensorimotor loop is applicable to 
both cases. 
52 Hassabis & Maguire (2008). The term 'augmented reality' comes from the field of com-
puter vision, and refers to a technique in which computer-generated imagery is mixed 
with real-time video data to produce a composite scene.

THE INNER LIFE
187
In short, episodic memory, alongside mental time travel and internal 
simulation in general, is naturally accounted for by the combination of a 
global workspace and an internal sensorimotor loop. A by-product of this 
accommodation, if we accept the tenets of global workspace theory, is the 
applicability of the conscious/unconscious distinction for which we have 
already established a theoretical basis. Thanks to this distinction, we can reha-
bilitate Tulving's original, intuitive distinction between semantic memory of 
past events and true episodic memory, the latter involving the conscious replay 
of the events in question (autonoetic consciousness) whereas the former 
requires only knowledge of the relevant facts. Because episodic memory, like 
mental time travel and other forms of internal simulation, involves the 
dissemination of influence and information via the global workspace, it 
contributes to the subject's phenomenology. 
Armed with a principled way of dealing with the conscious/unconscious 
distinction, we are also in a position to revisit the question of mental time 
travel in non-human animals.53 We cannot settle the debate, of course. That 
will require a good deal of further empirical work. But we can situate it within 
a broader theoretical context. For an animal to be capable of true mental time 
travel, of mental projection backwards or forward in time accompanied by 
autonoetic consciousness, the right neurological substrate is required. The 
structural connectivity of its brain should be modular, small-world, and pos-
sess a pronounced connective core. The associated dynamics should exhibit 
episodes of broadcast punctuated by bursts of competition, and the repertoire 
of process coalitions its brain generates should be open not closed. So in addi-
tion to directly addressing the question, we should look for evidence of such a 
neurological substrate, evidence that might come from imaging studies or from 
electrophysiological data, as well as from various behavioural paradigms. 
6.8 Talking to ourselves
The topic of memory is a large one, and it's impossible to do justice to it in a 
small space. Now we are going to touch on the topic of language, which is 
larger still. But with language as with memory, the aim is only to highlight 
points of contact with the theoretical foundation we have been attempting to 
lay, because it would be cause for concern if these points of contact were missing. 
53 Supplementing existing evidence for episodic-like memory in non-human animals, 
Raby, et al. (2007), for example, showed that scrub-jays are capable of planning for their 
future needs, based on their past experience, and independently of their current motiva-
tional state. But Suddendorf, et al. (2009) profess scepticism that the evidence to date for 
mental time travel in non-human animals is conclusive.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
188
Moreover, to tackle language from the standpoint of our theory is to effect a 
kind of closure, for language was also our point of departure. By taking to 
heart Wittgenstein's remarks on the nature of language, we were able to work 
through metaphysics and emerge in post-reflective silence. Language is some-
thing we do. Moreover, it is something we do together. If we want to under-
stand the things people say to each other, we can do no better than to look at 
the role those things play in people's ordinary affairs, even if the people in 
question are philosophers and the things they say are strange and disquieting.
In Chapter 1, seeing language this way helped to demystify certain difficult 
words, such as 'experience', 'sensation', 'truth', and 'concept'. Now this way of 
seeing language takes its place in our overall scientific theory of cognition and 
consciousness. In this view, the use of language is just another form of interac-
tion with the world—a world that not only contains the physical paraphernalia 
of everyday life, but that is also shared with a community of fellow language 
users. So if, as the simulation hypothesis proposes, thought arises from simu-
lated interaction with the environment, then inner speech—thinking in 
words—arises through simulated interaction with the social environment.54 
Similarly, just as the simulation hypothesis predicts that the same or similar 
neural mechanisms are involved in both simulated and actual interactions 
with the environment, so it predicts that the same or similar neural mecha-
nisms are involved in inner speech as in overt speech.55
When the simulation hypothesis was introduced at the start of this chapter, 
it was emphasized that the neurodynamics of simulated interaction is unlikely 
to be a faithful imitation of the neurodynamics of real interaction, and that 
carefully framed verbal reports of the inner life will reflect this. Similarly, the 
neurodynamics of inner speech is likely to differ in a variety of ways from the 
neurodynamics of actual conversation, and attempts to recapture the accom-
panying phenomenology will tend towards the literary. One source of such 
differences is the absence of a real audience or interlocutor. But if, as Vygotsky 
proposed, soliloquy—the habit of speaking out loud to oneself—precedes the 
development of inner speech in the child, then this difference is diminished.56 
54 Hesslow (1994; 2002).
55 Results obtained in imaging studies using an inner speech paradigm are consistent with 
this prediction, and demonstrate elevated activation during inner speech in Broca's and 
Wernicke's areas, which are associated with overt language production and comprehension 
(Shergill, et al., 2001; Jones & Fernyhough, 2007).
56 Vygotsky (1934/1986), especially Chapter 4. Vygotsky's translators use the term 'egocen-
tric speech' rather than 'soliloquy'. The preferred coinage in contemporary psychology is 
'private speech'. (Private speech, of course, has nothing to do with 'private language' in 
Wittgenstein's sense.) Vygotsky's ideas remain influential in the field of child development, 
and the stages he proposed are widely accepted (Krafft & Berk, 1998; Winsler, et al., 2000; 

THE INNER LIFE
189
Inner speech is then internalized soliloquy, which remains a form of simulated 
interaction with the environment, albeit one where the environment offers 
little in the way of response. Other alleged differences between inner speech 
and actual conversation can then be comfortably accommodated, although 
there is no need here to specify what those differences might be. 
However, a few remarks are in order on the transition from social speech to 
soliloquy (or 'private speech', as it's called in the field of child development), 
and on the significant role imputed to pretend play in effecting this transition. 
Studies on pre-school children have shown that pretend play develops at 
around the same time as private speech. Moreover, private speech tends to 
accompany certain kinds of play more abundantly than others, namely fantasy 
scenarios involving make-believe characters (who often have imagined voices 
of their own).57 Indeed, in an important sense, private speech is itself a form of 
pretend play, wherein the child pretends that an interlocutor (a carer, teacher, 
or peer) is present where there is none, and supplies the imaginary interlocutor's 
voice herself, overlaying it on the real situation just as imaginary tea can be 
envisioned in a real plastic cup and duly drunk. 
Child psychologists have accumulated evidence for the claim, again due to 
Vygotsky, that private speech helps children to self-regulate their behaviour.58 
Suppose a young child is playing with a shape-fitting puzzle. She is struggling 
to make the yellow piece fit when an older friend comes along and says, 'You've 
got to start with the green piece.' Later, when the younger child returns to the 
puzzle on her own, she picks up the yellow piece again. But this time she says 
to herself, 'Not the yellow piece, silly! Where's the green one?' and puts the 
yellow piece down without attempting to fit it. By recapitulating the older 
child's verbal instruction, she manages to guide her own behaviour and solve 
the puzzle more quickly. In a few years, a similar strategy might be beneficial 
for learning, say, an arithmetic procedure, or rationally to weigh the arguments 
for and against a position. In all such cases, the voice of the imaginary inter-
locutor is eventually appropriated and becomes the child's own, offering com-
mentary and guidance for life.59
Winsler, et al., 2003; Winsler, 2009). The present discussion is not premised on Vygotsky's 
views on language in any other respect.
57 Krafft & Berk (1998); Bergen (2002).
58 See the review by Winsler (2009).
59 Wittgenstein (1958) discusses the relationship between thought and language (§327-
§342). His strategy, as always, is critical. In affirming that 'when [we] think in language, 
there aren't "meanings" going through [the] mind in addition to the verbal expres-
sions ...' (§329), he is repudiating a particular philosophical view of meaning (as some-
thing hidden and private). His discussion has no bearing on the topic of brain processes.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
190
Much of the power of a child's imagination in pretend play derives from the 
ability to see one thing as something else—a stick as a sword, a box as a house, 
or a teddy bear as a (talking) person. This ability is accounted for in the present 
theoretical framework on the assumption that the brain can run an internally 
closed sensorimotor loop side by side with the sensorimotor loop that is closed 
through interaction with the real world, thus bringing into being a form of 
augmented reality, the augmentation in this case being the interlocutor's com-
mentary. This ability in turn relies on an integrative facility that enables brain 
processes that are not ordinarily coupled with each other to form a coalition. 
When a child tying his shoelaces says to himself, 'The rabbit runs round the 
tree and pops his head through the hole,' a coalition of brain processes has 
formed that blends together manual expertise with string-like materials, verbal 
recitation from episodic memory, and knowledge of the natural world (or a 
fairy-tale version of it). In short, the recommended combination of an internal 
sensorimotor loop with a global workspace is a plausible substrate for the 
functionality required for both pretend play and private speech. 
Further reflection on language reinforces the point. Language use in a social 
setting is no different from any other sort of behaviour insofar as it issues from 
a succession of coalitions of coupled brain processes. These process coalitions 
in turn are coupled with the environment, where the environment in this 
instance includes other language users who can be similarly described. The 
dynamics of coalition formation and break-up is the same here as described in 
Chapter 5. The combinatorial productivity of language, and the systematicity 
of thought it reflects, result from the open-endedness of the repertoire of coali-
tions of brain processes that can form. As with mental time travel, where the 
elements of past experience can be combined and recombined in endless ways, 
so the ways to assemble a sentence and put it to use in everyday life are endless. 
But with the advent of human language, thanks to its capacity for symbolic 
compression and abstraction, the potential for opening up new vistas of 
affordance is dramatically amplified. The integrative capabilities of a 
global neuronal workspace are once again called upon to explain how all this 
is possible. 
Talk in the absence of an audience, whether externalized as soliloquy or 
internalized as inner speech, similarly exploits an open-ended repertoire of 
combinatorial possibilities thanks to the global neuronal workspace. Moreover, 
just as real sensorimotor interaction with the environment (including conver-
sation) can leave a trace in episodic memory and thereby exercise deferred 
influence on the system, so can internally simulated interaction, including 
inner speech as well as visual and tactile imagery. Conversely, the 'subject 
matter' of speech is not confined to the here and now. Just as other aspects of 

THE INNER LIFE
191
behaviour are, in an open-ended way, sensitive to our recollections of the past 
and our plans for the future, so are the things we say, both to each other and to 
ourselves. Consequently, insofar as episodic memory enables us to speak about 
events in the past, it also enables us to speak of our own speech, and to speak 
inwardly of our own inner speech, drawing on all the powers of compression 
and abstraction inherent in language as we do so.60 In this way, our inner life is 
given the freedom to imprison itself in language, and from here the 'I think' of 
Descartes and the inauguration of philosophy is just a short walk away.61
In the shadow of the theoretical edifice we have erected, for example, it's 
tempting to speak of the self as a kind of 'confluence of unities'.62 The past, the 
present, and the future of an animal, it seems, are brought together within a 
singular global workspace. Like the hub of a wheel which holds all the spokes 
in place, the global workspace enables a multiplicity of parallel processes to act 
as an integrated whole and fulfil a common remit. This common remit is to 
direct the actions of a spatially localized body, using information from the 
sensory apparatus fastened to that body, for the benefit of the animal and its 
progeny.63 So we seem to find, in our selves, unity over time, unity of function, 
and unity in space. Yet each of these unities is contingent. In pathology or in 
thought experiment, the integrity of our memories can be compromised, the 
connectivity of our brains can be split or fragmented, and our bodies can be 
broken apart and rebuilt. What then am I? In the end, all we have is simply 
what we find, and what we can usefully say to each other about what we find is 
all that needs to be said. And perhaps, in the end, it's best just to sit quietly and 
let go of that thought too. 
60 This, in the present view, is what it means to have a higher-order or reflexive thought, that 
is to say a thought about a thought (Rosenthal, 1986).
61 See Lakoff & Johnson (1999), especially Chapter 19.
62 These remarks are evocative of Kant's discussion of the unity of consciousness in the 
Critique of Pure Reason. (Kant, 1781/1929, pp.129-140) (See the commentary by Strawson 
(1966), pp.72-117.) But the present project is quite different from Kant's. We are not 
seeking a priori grounds for the possibility of experience.
63 For a discussion of this point, see Shanahan (2005).

This page intentionally left blank 

Bibliography
Abarbanel, H.D.I., Brown, R., & Kennel, M.B. (1991). Variation of Lyapunov exponents on 
a strange attractor. Journal of Nonlinear Science 1, 175-199.
Achard, S., Salvador, R., Whitcher, B., Suckling, J., & Bullmore, E. (2006). A resilient, 
low-frequency, small-world, human brain functional network with highly-connected 
association cortical hubs. Journal of Neuroscience 26(1), 63-72.
Aitken, R. (1991). The Gateless Barrier: The Wu-Men Kuan (Mumonkan). North Point 
Press.
Aleksander, I. (2005). The World in My Mind, My Mind in the World: Key Mechanisms of 
Consciousness in Humans, Animals and Machines. Imprint Academic.
Amit, D.J. (1989). Modeling Brain Function: The World of Attractor Neural Networks. 
Cambridge University Press.
Andersen, H.K. & Grush, R. (2009). A brief history of time-consciousness: historical precur-
sors to James and Husserl. Journal of the History of Philosophy 47(2), 277-307.
Aristotle (350 B.C./1924). Aristotle's Metaphysics. Trans. W.D. Ross. Clarendon Press.
Aristotle (350 B.C./1941). De Interpretatione (On Interpretation). Trans. E.M. Edghill. 
In R. McKeon (ed.), The Basic Works of Aristotle, Random House, pp. 38-61.
Augustine. (398/1961). Confessions. Trans. R.S. Pine-Coffin. Penguin.
Baars, B.J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge University Press.
Baars, B.J. (1997). In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind. Oxford 
University Press.
Baars, B.J. (2002). The conscious access hypothesis: origins and recent evidence. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 6(1), 47-52.
Baars, B.J. & Franklin, S. (2003). How conscious experience and working memory interact. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7(4), 166-172.
Baddeley, A.D. & Hitch, G.J. (1974). Working memory. In G.A. Bower (ed.), Recent Advances 
in Learning and Motivation (Vol. 8), Academic Press, pp. 47-90.
Baddeley, A.D. (2007). Working Memory, Thought, and Action. Oxford University Press.
Baillargeon, R. (1993). The object concept revisited: new directions in the investigation of 
infants' physical knowledge. In C.E. Granrun (ed.), Visual Perception and Cognition in 
Infancy, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 265-315.
Bak, P. (1997). How Nature Works. Oxford University Press.
Balduzzi, D. & Tononi, G. (2008). Integrated information in discrete dynamical systems: 
motivation and theoretical framework. PLoS Computational Biology 4(6), e1000091.
Bargh, J.A. & Chartrand, T.L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American 
Psychologist 54(7), 462-479.
Bargh, J.A. & Morsella, E. (2008). The unconscious mind. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science 3(1), 73-79.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
194
Barrie, J.M., Freeman, W.J., & Lenhart, M. (1996). Modulation by discriminative training of 
spatial patterns of gamma EEG amplitude and phase in neocortex of rabbits. Journal of 
Neurophysiology 76, 520-539.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 22, 
577-609.
Barsalou, L.W. (2009). Simulation, situated conceptualization, and prediction. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B 364, 1281-1289.
Bartolomeo, P. (2008). The neural correlates of visual imagery: an ongoing debate. Cortex 
44, 107-108.
Bassett, D.S. & Bullmore, E. (2006). Small-world brain networks. The Neuroscientist 12(6), 
512-523.
Bateson, G. (1972/2000). Steps to an Ecology of Mind. University of Chicago Press.
Bayne, T. & Chalmers, D. (2003). What is unity of consciousness? In A. Cleermans (ed.), The 
Unity of Consciousness: Binding, Integration, and Dissociation, Oxford University Press, 
pp. 23-58.
Bennett, M.R. & Hacker, P.M.S. (2003). Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience. 
Blackwell.
Berg, E.A. (1948). A simple objective technique for measuring flexibility in thinking. Journal 
of General Psychology 39, 15-22.
Bergen, D. (2002). The role of pretend play in children's cognitive development. Early 
Childhood Research and Practice 4(1).
Bermúdez, J.L. (2003). Thinking Without Words. Oxford University Press.
Bird, C.D. & Emery, N.J. (2009). Insightful problem solving and creative tool modification 
by captive non-tool-using rooks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, 
10370-10375.
Blackmore, S. (2009). Ten Zen Questions. Oneworld Publications.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 18(2), 227-287.
Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology and 
neuroscience. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30, 481-548.
Borst, G. & Kosslyn, S.M. (2008). Visual mental imagery and visual perception: structural 
equivalence revealed by scanning processes. Memory and Cognition 36(4), 849-862.
Braitenberg, V. & Schüz, A. (1998). Anatomy of the Cortex: Statistics and Geometry of Neural 
Connectivity. Springer.
Braithwaite, V. (2010). Do Fish Feel Pain. Oxford University Press.
Breitmeyer, B. & Ö˘gmen, H. (2006). Visual Masking: Time Slices Through Conscious and 
Unconscious Vision. Oxford University Press.
Bressler, S.L. & Kelso, J.A.S. (2001). Cortical coordination dynamics and cognition. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences 5(1), 26-36.
Bringsjord, S. (2007). Offer: one billion dollars for a conscious robot; if you're honest, you 
must decline. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14(7), 28-43.
Brooks, R.A. (1991). Intelligence without reason. In Proceedings 1991 International Joint 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI 91), pp. 569- 595.
Buck, J.B. (1938). Synchronous rhythmic flashing of fireflies. Quarterly Review of Biology 
13(3), 301-314.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
195
Buckner, R.L. & Carroll, D.C. (2007). Self-projection and the brain. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 11(2), 49-57.
Bullmore, E. & Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of 
structural and functional systems. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10, 186-198.
Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the Brain. Oxford University Press.
Canfield, J. (1975). Wittgenstein and Zen. Philosophy 50, 383-408.
Caporale, N. & Yang, D. (2008). Spike-timing dependent plasticity: a Hebbian learning rule. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience 31, 25-46.
Caputo, J. (1983). The thought of being and the conversation of mankind: the case of 
Heidegger and Rorty. Review of Metaphysics 36, 661-685.
Carman, T. (2007). Dennett on seeming. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 6, 
99-106.
Carnell, A. & Richardson, D. (2007). Parallel computation in spiking neural nets. Theoretical 
Computer Science 386, 57-72.
Carruthers, P. (2003). On Fodor's problem. Mind and Language 18(5), 502-523.
Carruthers, P. (2006). The Architecture of the Mind: Massive Modularity and the Flexibility of 
Thought. Oxford University Press.
Cavanna, A.E. & Trimble, M.R. (2006). The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy 
and behavioural correlates. Brain 129, 564-583.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford 
University Press.
Chen, Z.J., He, Y., Rosa-Neto, P., Germann, J., & Evans, A.C. (2008). Revealing modular 
architecture of human brain structural networks by using cortical thickness from MRI. 
Cerebral Cortex 18, 2374-2381.
Cherry, E.C. (1953). Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and two ears. 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 25, 975-979.
Chialvo, D.R. (2004). Critical brain networks. Physica A 340, 756-765.
Chialvo, D.R. (2008). Emergent complexity: what uphill analysis or downhill invention 
cannot do. New Ideas in Psychology 26, 158-173.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. Mouton.
Churchland, P.M. (1981). Eliminative materialism and the propositional attitudes. Journal 
of Philosophy 78, 67-90.
Cisek, P. (2007). Cortical mechanisms of action selection: the affordance competition 
hypothesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362, 1585-1599.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again. MIT Press.
Clayton, N.S. & Dickinson, A. (1998). Episodic-like memory during cache recovery by scrub 
jays. Nature 395, 272-274.
Cole, M.W., Pathak, S., & Schneider, W. (2010). Identifying the brain's most globally 
connected regions. NeuroImage 49, 3132-3148.
Cole, M.W. & Schneider, W. (2007). The cognitive control network: integrated cortical 
regions with dissociable functions. NeuroImage 37, 343-360.
Coolidge, F.L. & Wynn, T. (2009). The Rise of Homo sapiens: The Evolution of Modern 
Thinking. Wiley-Blackwell.
Costall, A. (2006). 'Introspectionism' and the mythical origins of scientific psychology. 
Consciousness and Cognition 15, 634-654.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
196
Cotterill, R. (1998). Enchanted Looms: Conscious Networks in Brains and Computers. 
Cambridge University Press.
Craik, K.J.W. (1943). The Nature of Explanation. Cambridge University Press.
Curtis, C.E. & D'Esposito, M. (2003). Persistent activity in the prefrontal cortex during 
working memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17(9), 415-423.
Damasio, A. R. (1995). Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. Picador.
Damoiseaux, J.S. & Greicius, M.D. (2009). Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies 
combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity. Brain 
Structure and Function 213, 525-533.
Davidson, D. (1982). Rational animals. Dialectica 36(4), 317-327.
Dawkins, R. (1976). The Selfish Gene. Oxford University Press.
Decety, J. & Grèzes, J. (2006). The power of simulation: imagining one's own and other's 
behavior. Brain Research 1079, 4-14.
Dehaene, S. (1997). The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates Mathematics. Oxford 
University Press.
Dehaene, S. & Changeux, J.-P. (2005). Ongoing spontaneous activity controls access to 
consciousness: a neuronal model for inattentional blindness. Public Library of Science 
Biology 3(5), e141.
Dehaene, S., Changeux, J.-P., Naccache, L., Sackur, J., & Sergent, C. (2006). Conscious, 
preconscious, and subliminal processing: a testable taxonomy. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 10(5), 204-211.
Dehaene, S., Kerszberg, M., & Changeux, J.-P. (1998). A neuronal model of a global 
workspace in effortful cognitive tasks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 
95, 14529-14534.
Dehaene, S. & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: 
basic evidence and a workspace framework. Cognition 79, 1-37.
Dehaene, S., Sergent, C., & Changeux, J.-P. (2003). A neuronal network model linking sub-
jective reports and objective physiological data during conscious perception. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Science 100(14), 8520-8525.
Dennett, D. (1984). Cognitive wheels: the frame problem in artificial intelligence. In 
C. Hookway (ed.), Minds, Machines and Evolution, Cambridge University Press, 
pp. 129-151.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Penguin.
Dennett, D. (2001). Are we explaining consciousness yet? Cognition 79, 221-237.
Derrida, J. (1967/1973). Speech and Phenomena and Other Essays on Husserl's Theory of Signs. 
Trans. D.B. Allison. Northwestern University Press.
Derrida, J. (1982). Margins of Philosophy. Trans. A.Bass. Harvester.
Descartes, R. (1637/1968). Discourse on method. In Discourse on Method and The Meditations, 
trans. F.E. Sutcliffe, Penguin, pp. 25-91.
Descartes, R. (1641/1968). Meditations. In Discourse on Method and The Meditations, trans. 
F.E. Sutcliffe, Penguin, pp. 93-169.
D'Esposito, M. (2007). From cognitive to neural models of working memory. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B 362, 761-772.
Dias, J.R., Oliveira, R.F., & Kinouchi, O. (2008). Chaotic itinerancy, temporal segmentation 
and spatio-temporal combinatorial codes. Physica D 237, 1-5.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
197
Doesburg, S.M., Green, J.J., McDonald, J.J., & Ward, L.M. (2009). Rhythms of conscious-
ness: binocular rivalry reveals large-scale oscillatory network dynamics mediating visual 
attention. PLoS ONE 4(7), e6142.
Doesburg, S.M., Roggeveen, A.B., Kitajo, K., & Ward, L.M. (2008). Large-scale gamma-band 
phase synchronization and selective attention. Cerebral Cortex 18(2), 386-396.
Dreyfus, H.L. (1991). Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time, 
Division I. MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H.L. (2008). Why Heideggerian A failed and how fixing it would require making it 
more Heideggerian. In P. Husbands, O. Holland & M. Wheeler (eds.), The Mechanical 
Mind in History, MIT Press, pp. 331-371.
Dupret, D., Pleydell-Bouvarie, B., & Csicsvari, J. (2008). Inhibitory interneurons and 
network oscillations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 105(47), 
18079-18080.
Edelman, D.B., Baars, B.J., & Seth, A.K. (2005). Identifying hallmarks of consciousness in 
non-mammalian species. Consciousness and Cognition 14, 169-187.
Edelman, D.B. & Seth, A.K. (2009). Animal consciousness: a synthetic approach. Trends in 
Neurosciences 32(9), 476-484.
Edelman, G.M. & Tononi, G. (2000). A Universe of Consciousness: How Matter Becomes 
Imagination. Basic Books.
Eguíluz, V.M., Chialvo, D.R., Cecchi, G.A., Baliki, M., & Apkarian, A.V. (2005). Scale-free 
brain functional networks. Physical Review Letters 94, 018102.
Eilan, N. (2002). The reality of consciousness. In D. Charles & W. Child (eds.), Wittgensteinian 
Themes: Essays in Honour of David Pears, Oxford University Press, pp. 163-194.
Emery, N.J. & Clayton, N.S. (2005). Evolution of the avian brain and intelligence. Current 
Biology 15(23), R946-R950.
Eredyi, M.H. (2004). Subliminal perception and its cognates: theory, indeterminacy, and 
time. Consciousness and Cognition 13, 73-91.
Ericsson, K.A. (2006). Protocol analysis and expert thought: concurrent verbalizations of 
thinking during expert performance on representative tasks. In K.A. Ericsson, 
N. Charness, R.R. Hoffman, & P.J. Feltovich (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise 
and Performance, Cambridge University Press, pp. 223-242.
Ericsson, K.A. & Simon, H.A. (1993). Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data. MIT Press.
Fann, K.T. (1969). Wittgenstein's Conception of Philosophy. Basil Blackwell.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think: Conceptual Blending and the 
Mind's Hidden Complexities. Basic Books.
Felleman, D.J. & Van Essen, D.C. (1991). Distributed hierarchical processing in the primate 
visual cortex. Cerebral Cortex 1, 1-47.
Ferkin, M.H., Combs, A., delBarco-Trillo, J., Pierce, A.A., & Franklin, S. (2008). Meadow 
voles, Microtus Pennsylvanicus, have the capacity to recall the 'what', 'where', and 'when' 
of a single past event. Animal Cognition 11, 147-159.
Ferrarini, L., Veer, I.M., Baerends, E., van Tol, M.-J., Renken, R.J., van der Wee, D.J., 
Veltman, N.J.A., Aleman, A., Zitman, F.G., Penninx, B.W.J.H., van Buchem, M.A., 
Reiber, J.H.C., Rombouts, S.A.R.B., & Milles, J. (2009). Hierarchical functional modu-
larity in the resting state human brain. Human Brain Mapping 30, 2220-2231.
Fields, R.D. (2008). White matter in learning, cognition, and psychiatric disorders. Trends in 
Neurosciences 31(7), 361-370.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
198
Fodor, J.A. (1983). The Modularity of Mind: An Essay on Faculty Psychology. MIT Press.
Fodor, J.A. (2000). The Mind Doesn't Work That Way: The Scope and Limits of Computational 
Psychology. MIT Press.
Fodor, J.A. & Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture: a critical 
analysis. Cognition 28, 3-71.
Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Vincent, J.L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D.C., & Raichle, M.E. 
(2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated func-
tional networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 102(27), 9673-9678.
Fraiman, D., Balenzuela, P., Foss, J., & Chialvo, D.R. (2009). Ising-like dynamics in large-scale 
functional brain networks. Physical Review E 79, 061922.
Franklin, S. & Graesser, A. (1999). A software agent model of consciousness. Consciousness 
and Cognition 8, 285-301.
Freeman, W.J. (1999). How Brains Make Up Their Minds. Weidenfeld & Nicolson.
Freeman, W.J. (2003). Evidence from human scalp electroencephalograms of global chaotic 
itinerancy. Chaos 13(3), 1067-1077.
Freeman, W.J. (2004a). Origin, structure, and role of background EEG activity. Part 1. 
Analytic amplitude. Clinical Neurophysiology 115(9), 2077-2088.
Freeman, W.J. (2004b). Origin, structure, and role of background EEG activity. Part 2. 
Analytic phase. Clinical Neurophysiology 115(9), 2089-2107.
Freeman, W.J. (2006). A cinematographic hypothesis of cortical dynamics in perception. 
International Journal of Psychophysiology 60, 149-161.
Freeman, W.J. & Rogers, L.J. (2003). A neurobiological theory of meaning in perception 
Part V: multicortical patterns of phase modulation in gamma EEG. International Journal 
of Bifurcation and Chaos 13(10), 2867-2887.
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through 
neuronal coherence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9(10), 474-480.
Fries, P. (2009). Neuronal gamma-band synchronization as a fundamental process in cortical 
communication. Annual Review of Neuroscience 32, 209-224.
Friston, K. (2003). Learning and inference in the brain. Neural Networks 16, 1325-1352.
Gaillard, R., Dehaene, S., Adam, C., Clémenceau, S., Hasboun, D., Baulac, M., Cohen, L., & 
Naccache, L. (2009). Converging intracranial markers of conscious access. PLoS Biology 
7(3), e1000061.
Galesse, V. (2007). Before and below 'theory of mind': embodied simulation and the neural 
correlates of social cognition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362, 
659-669.
Gamez, D. (2008). Progress in machine consciousness. Consciousness and Cognition 17(3), 
887-910.
Garfield, J.L. & Priest, G. (2003). N¯ag¯arjuna and the limits of thought. Philosophy East and 
West 53(1), 1-21.
Geldard, F.A. & Sherrick, C.E. (1972). The cutaneous 'rabbit': a perceptual illusion. Science 
13(178), 178-179.
Ganis, G., Thompson, W.L., & Kosslyn, S.M. (2004). Brain areas underlying visual mental 
imagery and visual perception: an fMRI study. Cognitive Brain Research 20, 226-241.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Houghton Mifflin.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
199
Girvan, M. & Newman, M.E.J. (2002). Community structure in social and biological 
networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 99, 7821-7826.
Glazebrook, J.F. & Wallace, R. (2009). Small worlds and red queens in the global workspace: 
an information-theoretic approach. Cognitive Systems Research 10, 333-365.
Gong, G., He, Y., Concha, L., Lebel, C., Gross, D.W., Evans, A.C., & Beaulieu, C. (2009). 
Mapping anatomical connectivity patterns of human cerebral cortex using in vivo diffu-
sion tensor imaging tractography. Cerebral Cortex 19, 524-536.
Goodale, M.A. & Milner, A.D. (1992). Separate visual pathways for perception and action. 
Trends in Neurosciences 15(1), 20-25.
Gordon, R.M. (1986). Folk psychology as simulation. Mind and Language 1, 158-171.
Gray, C.M., König, P., Engel, A.K., & Singer, W. (1989). Oscillatory responses in cat visual 
cortex exhibit inter-columnar synchronization which reflects global stimulus properties. 
Nature 338, 334-337.
Greicius, M.D., Krasnow, B., Reiss, A.L., & Menon, V. (2003). Functional connectivity in the 
resting brain: a networks analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Science 100(1), 253-258.
Grèzes, J. & Decety, J. (2001). Does perception of object afford action? Evidence from a 
neuroimaging study. Neuropsychologia 40, 212-222.
Griffin, D.R. (2001). Animal Minds: Beyond Cognition to Consciousness. University of 
Chicago Press.
Gros, C. (2009). Cognitive computation with autonomously active neural networks: an 
emerging field. Cognitive Computation 1, 77-90.
Grush, R. (2004). The emulation theory of representation: motor control, imagery, and 
perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 27, 344-442.
Güntürkün, O. (2005). The avian 'prefrontal cortex' and cognition. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology 15, 686-693.
Güzeldere, G. (1997). The many faces of consciousness: field guide. In N. Block, 
O. J. Flanagan & G. G¯uzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates, 
MIT Press, pp. 1-67. 
Hagmann, P., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Meuli, R., Honey, C.J., Wedeen, C.J., & 
Sporns, O. (2008). Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS Biology 
6(7), e159.
Haikonen, P.O. (2003). The Cognitive Approach to Conscious Machines. Imprint Academic.
Haken, H. (2006). Synergetics of brain function. International Journal of Psychophysiology 
60, 110-124.
Hansell, M. (2000). Bird Nests and Construction Behaviour. Cambridge University Press.
Hansell, M. (2007). Built by Animals: The Natural History of Animal Architecture. Oxford 
University Press.
Hare, B., Call, J. & Tomasello, M. (2001). Do chimpanzees know what conspecifics know? 
Animal Behaviour 61, 139-151.
Hasentraub, A., Shu, Y., Halder, B., Kraushaar, U., & Duque, A. (2005). Inhibitory postsyn-
aptic potentials carry synchronized frequency information in active cortical networks. 
Neuron 47, 423-435.
Hassabis, D. & Maguire, E.A. (2008). Deconstructing episodic memory with construction. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11(7), 299-306.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
200
He, Y., Chen, Z.J., & Evans, A.C. (2007). Small-world anatomical networks in the human 
brain revealed by cortical thickness from MRI. Cerebral Cortex 17, 2407-2419.
Hedwig, B. (2006). Pulses, patterns, and paths: neurobiology of acoustic behaviour in crickets. 
Journal of Comparative Physiology A 192, 677-689.
Heidegger, M. (1926/1962). Being and Time. Trans. J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson. Blackwell.
Hellwig, B. (2000). A quantitative analysis of the local connectivity between pyramidal 
neurons in layers 2/3 of the rat visual cortex. Biological Cybernetics 82, 111-121.
Hesslow, G. (1994). Will neuroscience explain consciousness? Journal of Theoretical Biology 
171, 29-39.
Hesslow, G. (2002). Conscious thought as simulation of behaviour and perception. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences 6(6), 242-247.
Hidalgo, C.A., Klinger, B., Barabási, A.-L., & Hausmann, R. (2007). The product space 
conditions the development of nations. Science 317, 482-487.
Hoare, C.A.R. (1985). Communicating Sequential Processes. Prentice Hall.
Holender, D. & Duscherer, K. (2004). Unconscious perception: the need for a paradigm 
shift. Perception and Psychophysics 66(5), 872-881.
Holland, J.H. (1975). Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems: An Introductory Analysis 
with Applications to Biology, Control, and Artificial Intelligence. University of Michigan 
Press.
Holland, O. (ed.) (2003). Machine Consciousness: Special Issue of the Journal of Consciousness 
Studies. Imprint Academic.
Houk, J.C., Bastianen, C., Fansler, D., Fishbach, A., Fraser, D., Reber, P.J., Roy, S.A., & 
Simo, L.S. (2007). Action selection and refinement in subcortical loops through basal 
ganglia and cerebellum. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362, 1573-1583.
Hughes, R.N. & Blight, C.M. (1999). Algorithmic behaviour and spatial memory are used by 
two intertidal fish species to solve the radial maze. Animal Behaviour 58, 601-613.
Humphries, M.D., Gurney, K., & Prescott, T.J. (2007). Is there a brainstem substrate for 
action selection? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 362, 1627-1639.
Hurlburt, R.T. & Akhter, S.A. (2006). The descriptive experience sampling method. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 5, 271-301.
Hurley, S. (2006). Making sense of animals. In S. Hurley & M. Nudds (eds.), Rational 
Animals? Oxford University Press, pp. 139-171.
Husserl, E. (1911/1991). On the phenomenology of the consciousness of internal time 
(1893-1917). Trans. J.B. Brough. Kluwer.
Ijspeert, A.J. (2008). Central pattern generators for locomotion and control in animals and 
robots: a review. Neural Networks 21, 642-653.
Ikegami, T. (2007). Simulating active perception and mental imagery with embodied chaotic 
itinerancy. Journal of Consciousness Studies 14(7), 111-125.
Iturria-Medina, Y., Sotero, R.C., Canales-Rodríguez, E.J., Alemán-Gómez, Y., & 
Melie-García, L. (2008). Studying the human brain anatomical network via diffusion-
weighted MRI and graph theory. NeuroImage 40, 1064-1076.
Izhikevich, E.M. (2007). Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience: The Geometry of Excitability and 
Bursting. MIT Press.
Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. Philosophical Quarterly 32, 127-136.
James, W. (1890/1950). The Principles of Psychology. Dover.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
201
James, W. (1902/1985). The Varieties of Religious Experience. Penguin.
Jonas, H. (1966). The Phenomenon of Life. Harper and Row.
Jones, S.R. & Fernyhough, C. (2007). Neural correlates of inner speech and auditory verbal 
hallucinations: a critical study and theoretical integration. Clinical Psychology Review 
27, 140-154.
Kaneko, K. & Tsuda, I. (2003). Chaotic itinerancy. Chaos 13(3), 926-936.
Kant, I. (1781/1929). Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. N. Kemp Smith. Macmillan.
Kasulis, T.P. (1981). Zen Action Zen Person. University of Hawaii Press.
Kelso, J.A.S. (1995). Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and Behavior. 
MIT Press.
Kim, C.-Y. & Blake, R. (2005). Psychophysical magic: rendering the visible 'invisible'. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences 9(8), 381-388.
Kirk, R. (1974). Sentience and behaviour. Mind 83, 43-60.
Kirk, R. (2005). Zombies and Consciousness. Oxford University Press.
Kitzbichler, M.G., Smith, M.L., Christensen, S.R., & Bullmore, E. (2009). Broadband criticality 
of human brain network synchronization. PLoS Computational Biology 5(3), e1000314.
Koch, C. (2004). The Quest for Consciousness: A Neurobiological Approach. Roberts & 
Company.
Kolers, P.A. & von Grünau, M. (1976). Shape and color in apparent motion. Vision Research 
16(4), 329-335.
Korn, H. & Faure, P. (2003). Is there chaos in the brain? II: experimental evidence and 
related models. Comptes Rendus Biologies 326, 787-840.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1981). The medium and the message in mental imagery: a theory. Psychological 
Review 88(1), 46-66.
Kosslyn, S.M., Ganis, G., & Thompson, W.L. (2003). Mental imagery: against the nihilistic 
hypothesis. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7(3), 109-111.
Kozma, R. & Freeman, W.J. (2009). The KIV model of intentional dynamics and decision 
making. Neural Networks 22, 277-285.
Krafft, K.C. & Berk, L.E. (1998). Private speech in two preschools: significance of open-
ended activities and make-believe play for verbal self-regulation. Early Childhood 
Research Quarterly 13(4), 637-658.
Kuramoto, Y. (1984). Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence. Springer-Verlag.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. The University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and its 
Challenge to Western Thought. Basic Books.
Lakoff, G. & Núñez, R.E. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes From: How the Embodied Mind 
Brings Mathematics into Being. Basic Books.
Lambie, J.A. & Marcel, A.J. (2002). Consciousness and the varieties of emotional experience. 
Psychological Review 109(2), 219-259.
Lamme, V.A.F. (2003). Why visual attention and awareness are different. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 7(1), 12-18.
Lamme, V.A.F. & Roelfsema, P.R. (2000). The distinct modes of vision offered by feedfor-
ward and recurrent processing. Trends in Neurosciences 23, 571-579.
Landman, R., Sprekreijse, H., & Lamme, V.A.F. (2003). Large capacity storage of integrated 
objects before change blindness. Vision Research 43(2), 149-164.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
202
Langton, C. (1989). Artificial life. In C. Langton (ed.), Artificial Life, Addison Wesley, 
pp. 1-47.
Lien, M.-C., Ruthruff, E., & Johnston, J.C. (2006). Attentional limitations in doing two tasks 
at once. Current Directions in Psychological Science 15(2), 89-93.
Llinás, R., Ribary, U., Contreras, D., & Pedroarena, C. (1998). The neuronal basis for 
consciousness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 353, 1841-1849.
Loy, D.R. (1992). The deconstruction of Buddhism. In H. Coward & T. Foshay (eds.), 
Derrida and Negative Theology, State University of New York Press, pp. 227-253.
Ludlow, P., Nagasawa, Y. & Stoljar, D. (eds.) (2004). There's Something About Mary: Essays 
on Phenomenal Consciousness and Frank Jackson's Knowledge Argument. MIT Press.
Ma, R. & Kaber, D.B. (2005). Situation awareness and workload in driving while using 
adaptive cruise control and a cell phone. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 
35, 939-953.
Maass, W. (1996). Lower bounds for the computational power of networks of spiking 
neurons. Neural Computation 8, 1-40.
MacLeod, C.M. (1991). Half a century of research on the Stroop effect: an integrative review. 
Psychological Bulletin 109(2), 163-203.
McCarthy, J. (1959a). Programs with common sense. In Proceedings of the Symposium on the 
Mechanization of Thought Processes, H.M.S.O. London, pp. 75-91.
McCarthy, J. (1959b). Comment in Selfridge (1959), p. 527.
McCarthy, J. & Hayes, P.J. (1969). Some philosophical problems from the standpoint of 
artificial intelligence. In D. Michie & B. Meltzer (eds.), Machine Intelligence 4, Edinburgh 
University Press, pp. 463-502.
McDowell, J. (1994). Mind and World. Harvard University Press.
McFarland, D. (2008). Guilty Robots, Happy Dogs: The Question of Alien Minds. Oxford 
University Press.
McFarland, D. & Bösser, T. (1993). Intelligent Behavior in Animals and Robots. MIT Press.
Mack, A. & Rock, I. (1998). Inattentional Blindness. MIT Press.
Maravita, A. & Iriki, A. (2004). Tools for the body (schema). Trends in Cognitive Sciences 
8(2), 79-86.
Margulies, D.S., Vincent, J.L., Kelly, C., Lohmann, G., Uddin, L.Q., Biswal, B.B., Villringer, 
A., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., & Petrides, M. (2009). Precuneus shares intrinsic 
functional architecture in humans and monkeys. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 106(47), 20069-20074.
Martin-Ordas, G., Call, J., & Colmenares, F. (2008). Tubes, tables, and traps: great apes solve 
functionally equivalent tasks but show no evidence of transfer across tasks. Animal 
Cognition 11, 423-430.
Mason, M.F., Norton, M.I., Van Horn, J.D., Wegner, D.M., Grafton, S.T., & Macrae, C.N. 
(2007). Wandering minds: the default network and stimulus-independent thought. 
Science 315, 393-395.
Maturana, H.R. & Varela, F.J. (1980). Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the 
Living. Kluwer.
Meister, I.G., Krings, T., Foltys, H., Boroojerdi, B., Müller, M., Töpper, R., & Thron, A. 
(2004). Playing piano in the mind - an fMRI study on music imagery and performance 
in pianists. Cognitive Brain Research 19, 219-228.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
203
Merikle, P.M., Smilek, D., & Eastwood, J.D. (2001). Perception without awareness: 
perspectives from cognitive psychology. Cognition 79, 115-134.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/1962). Phenomenology of Perception. Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Metzinger, T. (2003). Being No-One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity. MIT Press.
Milner, A.D. & Goodale, M.A. (2006). The Visual Brain in Action (2nd Edition). Oxford 
University Press.
Milner, A.D. & Goodale, M.A. (2008). Two visual streams re-viewed. Neuropsychologia 
46, 774-785.
Milner, R. (1980). A Calculus of Communicating Systems. Springer (Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science No.92).
Mithen, S. (1996). The Prehistory of the Mind. Thames & Hudson.
Monaghan, J. (2001). Young peoples' ideas of infinity. Educational Studies in Mathematics 
48(2-3), 239-257.
Moore, A.W. (2001). Arguing with Derrida. In S. Glendinning (ed.), Arguing with Derrida, 
Blackwell, pp. 57-88.
Moors, A. & De Houwer, J. (2006). Automaticity: a theoretical and conceptual analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin 132(2), 297-326.
Müller-Linow, M., Hilgetag, C.C., & Hütt, M.-T. (2008). Organization of excitable dynamics 
in hierarchical biological networks. PLoS Computational Biology 4(9), e1000190.
N¯ag¯arjuna. (2nd century/1995). M¯ulamadhyamakak¯arik¯a. In J.L. Garfield (ed./trans.), The 
Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way: N¯ag¯arjuna's M¯ulamadhyamakak¯arik¯a, Oxford 
University Press, pp. 1-83.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83(4), 435-450.
Nara, S. & Davis, P. (1992). Chaotic wandering and search in a cycle-memory neural 
network. Progress of Theoretical Physics 88(5), 845-855.
Newman, M.E.J. (2006). Modularity and community structure in networks. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 103(23), 8577-8582.
Nichols, S. & Stich, S. (2000). A cognitive theory of pretense. Cognition 74, 115-147.
Nii, H.P. (1986). The blackboard model of problem solving and the evolution of blackboard 
architectures. AI Magazine 7(2), 38-53.
Nilsson, N.J. (ed.) (1984). Shakey the Robot. SRI Technical Note no. 323. SRI, Menlo Park, 
California.
Olsson, I.A. & Keeling, L.J. (2005). Why in earth? Dustbathing behaviour in jungle and 
domestic fowl reviewed from a Tinbergian and animal welfare perspective. Applied 
Animal Behaviour Science 93(3-4), 259-282.
O'Regan, J.K. & Nöe, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account of vision and visual consciousness. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24, 939-1031.
Pashler, H. (1984). Processing stages in overlapping tasks: evidence for a central bottleneck. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 10(3), 358-377.
Peirce, C.S. (1878). How to make our ideas clear. Popular Science Monthly 12, 286-302.
Penn, D.C. & Povinelli, D.J. (2007). Causal cognition in human and nonhuman animals: a 
comparative, critical review. Annual Review of Psychology 58, 97-118.
Penrose, R. (1999). The Emperor's New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of 
Physics. Oxford University Press.
Phillips, D.Z. (1993). Wittgenstein and Religion. Macmillan.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
204
Piaget, J. (1954). The Construction of Reality in the Child. Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M. & Kurths, J. (2001). Synchronization: A Universal Concept in 
Nonlinear Sciences. Cambridge University Press.
Povinelli, D.J. (2000). Folk Physics for Apes. Oxford University Press.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1981). The imagery debate: analog media versus tacit knowledge. 
Psychological Review 88(1), 16-45.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. (2003). Return of the mental image: are there really pictures in the brain? 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7(3), 113-118.
Rabinovich, M.I. & Abarbanel, D.I. (1998). The role of chaos in neural systems. Neuroscience 
87(1), 5-14.
Raby, C.R., Alexis, D.M., Dickinson, A., & Clayton, N.S. (2007). Planning for the future by 
western scrub-jays. Nature 445, 919-921.
Raichle, M.E. (2010). Two views of brain function. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 14(4), 
180-190.
Raichle, M.E., MacLeod, A.M., Snyder, A.Z., Powers, W.J., Gusnard, D.A., & Shulman, G.L. 
(2001). A default mode of the brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 
98(2), 676-682.
Rubinov, M., Sporns, O., van Leeuwen, C., & Breakspear, M. (2009). Symbiotic relationship 
between brain structure and dynamics. BMC Neuroscience 10:55.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and Object. MIT Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1969). Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. Columbia University Press.
Redgrave, P., Prescott, T.J., & Gurney, K. (1999). The basal ganglia: a vertebrate solution to 
the selection problem. Neuroscience 89(4), 1009-1023.
Reeve, R. & Webb, B. (2002). New neural circuits for robot phonotaxis. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society A 361, 2245-2266.
Reigl, M., Alon, U., & Chklovskii, D.B. (2004). Search for computational modules in the 
C. Elegans brain. BMC Biology 2, 25-37.
Reingold, E.M. & Merikle, P.M. (1988). Using direct and indirect measures to study percep-
tion without awareness. Perception and Psychophysics 44(6), 563-575.
Reingold, E.M. (2004). Unconscious perception and the classic dissociation paradigm: a new 
angle. Perception and Psychophysics 66(5), 882-887.
Rodriguez, E., George, N., Lachaux, J.-P., Martinerie, J., Renault, B., & Varela, F. (1999). 
Perception's shadow: long-distance synchronization of human brain activity. Nature 
397, 430-433.
Rolls, E.T. (2005). Emotion Explained. Oxford University Press.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton University Press.
Rosenthal, D. (1986). Two concepts of consciousness. Philosophical Studies 49, 329-359.
Ruthruff, E., Pashler, H.E., & Klaasen, A. (2001). Processing bottlenecks in dual-task per-
formance: structural limitation or strategic postponement. Psychonomic Bulletin and 
Review 8(1), 73-80.
Sackur, J. & Dehaene, S. (2009). The cognitive architecture for chaining of two mental 
operations. Cognition 111, 187-211.
Santos, L.R, Pearson, H.M., Spaepen, G.M., Tsao, F., & Hauser, M.D. (2006). Probing the 
limits of tool competence: experiments with two non-tool-using species (Cercopithecus 
aethiops and Saguinus oedipus). Animal Cognition 9, 94-109.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
205
Sauer, T. (2003). Chaotic itinerancy based on attractors of one-dimensional maps. Chaos 
13(3), 947-952.
Scannell, J.W. & Young, M.P. (1993). The connectional organization of neural systems in the 
cat cerebral cortex. Current Biology 3, 191-200.
Schacter, D.L. & Addis, D.R. (2007). The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: 
remembering the past and imagining the future. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B 362, 773-786.
Schacter, D.L., Addis, D.R., & Buckner, R.L. (2008). Episodic simulation of future events. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1124, 39-60.
Schmahmann, J.D. & Pandya, D.N. (2006). Fiber Pathways of the Brain. Oxford University 
Press.
Schneider, W. (2009). Automaticity and consciousness. In W. Banks (ed.), The Elsevier 
Encyclopedia of Consciousness, pp. 83-92.
Schneider, W. & Shiffrin, R.M. (1977). Controlled and automatic human information 
processing: I. Detection, search, and attention. Psychological Review 84(1), 1-66.
Searle, J.R. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. MIT Press.
Seed, A.M., Tebbich, S., Emery, N.J., & Clayton, N.S. (2006). Investigating physical 
cognition in rooks, Corvus frugilegus. Current Biology 16, 697-701.
Selfridge, O.G. (1959). Pandemonium: a paradigm for learning. In Proceedings of the 
Symposium on the Mechanization of Thought Processes, H.M.S.O. London, pp. 511-529.
Seth, A.K. & Baars, B.J. (2005). Neural Darwinism and consciousness. Consciousness and 
Cognition 14, 140-168.
Seth, A.K., Dienes, Z. Cleermans, A., Overgaard, M., & Pessoa, M. (2008). Measuring 
consciousness: relating behavioral and neurophysiological approaches. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences 12(8), 314-321.
Shanahan, M.P. (1997). Solving the Frame Problem: A Mathematical Investigation of the 
Common Sense Law of Inertia. MIT Press.
Shanahan, M.P. (2005). Global access, embodiment, and the conscious subject. Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 12(12), 46-66.
Shanahan, M. P. (2006). A cognitive architecture that combines internal simulation with a 
global workspace. Consciousness and Cognition 15, 433-449.
Shanahan, M.P. (2008a). A spiking neuron model of cortical broadcast and competition. 
Consciousness and Cognition 17, 288-303.
Shanahan, M.P. (2008b). Dynamical complexity in small-world networks of spiking 
neurons. Physical Review E 78, 041924.
Shanahan, M.P. (2010). Metastable chimera states in community-structured oscillator 
networks. Chaos 20, 013108.
Shanahan, M.P. & Baars, B.J. (2005). Applying global workspace theory to the frame 
problem. Cognition 98(2), 157-176.
Shannon, C.E. & Weaver, W. (1949). The Mathematical Theory of Communication. University 
of Illinois Press.
Shefi, O., Golding, I., Segev, R., Ben-Jacob, E., & Ayali, A. (2002). Morphological charac-
terization of in vitro neuronal networks. Physical Review E 66, 021905.
Shepard, R.N. & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science 
171(3972), 701-703.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
206
Shergill, S.S., Bullmore, E.T., Brammer, M.J., Williams, S.C.R., Murray, R.M., & 
McGuire, P.K. (2001). A functional study of auditory verbal imagery. Psychological 
Medicine 31, 241-253.
Sherman, S.M. & Guillery, R. (2005). Exploring the Thalamus and its Role in Cortical Function. 
Second edition. MIT Press.
Siegelmann, H.T. (2003). Neural and super-Turing computing. Minds and Machines 13, 
103-114.
Siegelmann, H.T. & Sontag, E.D. (1995). On the computational power of neural nets. Journal 
of Computer and System Sciences 50, 132-150.
Simons, D.J. & Chabris, C.F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: sustained inattentional blindness 
for dynamic events. Perception 28, 1059-1074.
Singer, W. & Gray, C.M. (1995). Visual feature integration and the temporal correlation 
hypothesis. Annual Review of Neuroscience 18, 555-586.
Skarda, C.A. & Freeman, W.J. (1987). How brains make chaos in order to make sense of the 
world. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10, 161-195.
Sloman, A. (1984). The structure of the space of possible minds. In S. Torrance (ed.), 
The Mind and the Machine: Philosophical Aspects of Artificial Intelligence, Ellis Horwood, 
pp. 35-42.
Sloman, A. & Chrisley, R. (2003). Virtual machines and consciousness. Journal of 
Consciousness Studies 10(4-5), 133-172.
Smallwood, J. & Schooler, J. (2007). The restless mind. Psychological Bulletin 132(6), 946-958.
Snodgrass, M., Bernat, E., & Shevrin, H. (2004). Unconscious perception: a model-based 
approach to method and evidence. Perception and Psychophysics 66(5), 846-867.
Song, S., Miller, K.D., & Abbott, L.F. (2000). Competitive Hebbian learning through 
spike-timing-dependent synaptic plasticity. Nature Neuroscience 3(9), 919-926.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief visual presentations. Psychological 
Monographs: General and Applied 74(11), 1-29.
Sporns, O. (2010). Networks of the Brain. MIT Press.
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., & Edelman, G.M. (2000). Theoretical neuroanatomy: relating ana-
tomical and functional connectivity in graphs and cortical connection matrices. Cerebral 
Cortex 10, 127-141.
Sporns, O. & Zwi, J.D. (2004). The small world of the cerebral cortex. Neuroinformatics 
2, 145-162.
Spreng, R.N., Mar, R.A., & Kim, A.S.N. (2008). The common neural basis of autobiographi-
cal memory, prospection, navigation, theory of mind, and the default mode: a quantita-
tive meta-analysis. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 21(3), 489-510.
Strayer, D.L. & Drews, F.A. (2007). Cell-phone-induced driver distraction. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science 16(3), 128-131.
Stone, A.A. & Shiffman, S. (2002). Capturing momentary, self-report data: a proposal for 
reporting guidelines. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 24(3), 236-243.
Stout, D. & Chaminade, T. (2007). The evolutionary neuroscience of tool making. 
Neuropsychologia 45, 1091-1100.
Strawson, P.F. (1966). The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kant's Critique of Pure Reason. 
Methuen & Co.
Striedter, G.F. (2005). Principles of Brain Evolution. Sinauer Associates.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
207
Stroop, J.R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal reactions. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology 18, 643-662.
Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M.C. (1997). Mental time travel and the evolution of the human 
mind. Genetic, Social, and General Psychology Monographs 123(2), 133-167.
Suddendorf, T. & Corballis, M.C. (2007). The evolution of foresight: what is mental time 
travel, and is it unique to humans? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30, 299-351.
Suddendorf, T., Addis, D.R., & Corballis, M.C. (2009). Mental time travel and the shaping of 
the human mind. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 364, 1317-1324.
Taga, G, Yamaguchi, Y., & Shimizu, H. (1991). Self-organised control of bipedal locomotion 
by neural oscillators in unpredictable environments. Biological Cybernetics 65, 147-159.
Tani, J. (1996). Model-based learning for mobile robot navigation from the dynamical 
systems perspective. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics B 26(3), 
421-436.
Taylor, A.H., Hunt, G.R., Medina, F.S., & Gray, R.D. (2009). Do new caledonian crows solve 
physical problems through causal reasoning? Proceedings of the Royal Society B 
276, 247-254.
Tebbich, S., Seed, A.M., Emery, N.J., & Clayton, N.S. (2007). Non-tool-using rooks, Corvus 
frugilegus, solve the trap-tube problem. Animal Cognition 10, 225-231.
Thomas, N.J.T. (1999). Are theories of imagery theories of imagination? An active perception 
approach to conscious mental content. Cognitive Science 23(2), 207-245.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind. 
Harvard University Press.
Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional manifesto. 
Biological Bulletin 215, 216-242.
Tononi, G., Edelman, G.M., & Sporns, O. (1998). Complexity and coherency: integrating 
information in the brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 2(12), 474-484.
Torres, J.J., Marro, J., Cortes, J.M., & Wemmenhove, B. (2008). Instabilities in attractor 
networks with fast synaptic fluctuations and partial updating of the neurons activity. 
Neural Networks 21, 1272-1277.
Treisman, A. & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration theory of attention. Cognitive 
Psychology 12, 97-136.
Tsuda, I. (2001). Toward an interpretation of dynamic neural activity in terms of chaotic 
dynamical systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 24, 793-847.
Tsuda, I. (2009). Hypotheses on the functional roles of chaotic transitory dynamics. Chaos 
19 (1), 015113.
Tsuda, I. & Umemura, T. (2003). Chaotic itinerancy generated by coupling of milnor attrac-
tors. Chaos 13 (3), 937-946.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (eds.), 
Organization of Memory, Academic Press, pp. 381-403.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford University Press.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: from mind to brain. Annual Review of Psychology 
53, 1-25.
Turing, A.M. (1950). Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind 59, 433-460.
Turner, M. (1996). The Literary Mind: The Origins of Thought and Language. Oxford 
University Press.

EMBODIMENT AND THE INNER LIFE
208
Ungerleider, L.G. & Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems. In D.J. Ingle, M.A. 
Goodale & R.J.W. Mansfield (eds.), Analysis of Visual Behavior, MIT Press, pp. 549-586.
Uttal, W.R. (2001). The New Phrenology: The Limits of Localizing Cognitive Processes in the 
Brain. MIT Press.
Van den Heuvel, M.P., Mandl, R.C.W, Kahn, R.S., & Pol, H.E.H. (2009). Functionally linked 
resting-state networks reflect the underlying structural connectivity architecture of the 
human brain. Human Brain Mapping 30, 3127-3141.
Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Noirhomme, Q., Tshibanda, L. J.-F., Bruno, M.-A., Boveroux, P., 
Schnakers, C., Soddu, A., Perlbarg, V., Ledoux, D., Brichant, J.-F., Moonen, G., 
Maquet, P., Greicius, M.D., Laureys, S. & Boly, M. (2010). Default network connectivity 
reflects the level of consciousness in non-communicative brain-damaged patients. 
Brain 133, 161-171.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J.P., Rodriguez, E., & Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: phase 
synchronization and large scale integration. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 2, 229-239.
Von der Malsburg, C. (1995). Binding in models of perception and brain function. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology 5, 520-526.
Von Uexküll, J. (1957). A stroll through the worlds of animals and men. In C.H. Schiller 
(ed.) Instinctive Behaviour: The Development of a Modern Concept. International 
Universities Press, pp. 5-80.
Vygotsky, L. (1934/1986). Thought and Language. Trans. A. Kozulin. MIT Press.
Wakana, S., Jiang, H., Nagae-Poetscher, L., van Zijl, P.C.M., & Mori, S. (2004). Fiber 
tract-based atlas of human white matter anatomy. Radiology 230, 77-87.
Wang, X.-J. (2001). Synaptic reverberation underlying mnemonic persistent activity. Trends 
in Neurosciences 24 (8), 455-463.
Watts, D.J. & Strogatz, S.H. (1998). Collective dynamic of 'small-world' networks. Nature 
393, 440-442.
Werner, G. (2007). Metastability, criticality, and phase transitions in brain and its models. 
BioSystems 90, 496-508.
Wheeler, M. (2005). Reconstructing the Cognitive World: The Next Step. MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. (2008). Cognition in context: phenomenology, situated robotics and the frame 
problem. International Journal of Philosophical Studies 16(3), 323-349.
Williams, B. (1978). Descartes: The Project of Pure Enquiry. Penguin.
Winsler, A. (2009). Still talking to ourselves after all these years: a review of current research 
on private speech. In A. Winsler, C. Fernyhough, & I. Montero (eds.), Private Speech, 
Executive Functioning, and the Development of Verbal Self-Regulation, Cambridge 
University Press, pp. 3-41.
Winsler, A., Carlton, M.P., & Barry, M.J. (2000). Age-related changes in preschool children's 
systematic use of private speech in a natural setting. Journal of Child Language 27, 
665-687.
Winsler, A., De León, J.R., Wallace, B.A., Carlton, M.P., & Willson-Quayle, A. (2003). 
Private speech in preschool children: developmental stability and change, across-task 
consistency, and relations with classroom behaviour. Journal of Child Language 
30, 583-608.
Wittgenstein, L. (1921/1961). Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Trans. D.F. Pears & 
B.F. McGuinness, Routledge & Kegan Paul.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
209
Wittgenstein, L. (1958). Philosophical Investigations. Trans. G.E.M. Anscombe. Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1969). On Certainty. Trans. D. Paul & G.E.M. Anscombe. Blackwell.
Womelsdorf, T., Schoffelen, J.-M., Oostenveld, R., Singer, W., Desimone, R., Engel, A.K., & 
Fries, P. (2007). Modulation of neuronal interaction through neuronal synchronization. 
Science 316, 1609-1612.
Wood, D., Bruner, J.S., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal 
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17, 89-100.
Wynn, T. (2002). Archaeology and cognitive evolution. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
25, 389-438.
Yuste, R., MacLean, J.N., Smith, J. & Lansner, A. (2005). The cortex as a central pattern 
generator. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6, 477-483.
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. MIT 
Press.
Zeigler, H.P. (1993). Visuomotor mechanisms. In H.P. Zeigler & H.-J. Bischof (eds.), Vision, 
Brain, and Behavior in Birds, MIT Press, pp. 243-264.

This page intentionally left blank 

absence of conscious experience
evidence for 77-9
omnipotent psychologist thought 
experiment 80-5
absentmindedness 112-13
abstract concepts 58
sensorimotor foundation 63-4
see also mathematical concepts
access consciousness 73
Achard, S. et al. 126
action selection problem (behaviour 
selection problem) 52
'advice-taker' programme, McCarthy, 48
affect, role in global workspace 
architecture 134
affordances 44
combinatorially structured sets 45-8, 47
mastery of causal relationships 56-7
open-ended 168-71
persistence of 180-2
potential 44-5
role in behaviour selection 52-3
space of 88, 144
alarm signals 182
ambiguous images, interpretation 99-100
amygdala 127
analogue system, brain as 103
anatomy of global workspace 122-30
animal consciousness 66
arcs
definition 118
levels of organization 119
Aristotle
definition of truth 36
on language 14
arithmetic, acquisition of skill 61
artificial consciousness 65-6
artificial intelligence 42, 48
Wittgenstein on 17-18
Artificial Intelligence field, and global 
workspace theory 97
Artificial Life 65
asynchronous operation, brain 103-4
attention 136
competition for 100
attractor landscapes 139
attractors 110, 138-41
global workspace theory 110
attractor transitions
probability matrix 143-4
speed of 143
augmented reality 186
in pretend play 190
Augustine, Confessions 14
autobiographical memories 184
automatic activities 68
automaticity 69-71
coalition dynamics 134-6, 135
compromise of flexibility 85, 88
and global workspace theory 101
identification of 78-9, 80-1, 84
autonoetic memory 184
autopoiesis 65
Baars, B.J. 3, 69, 85
global workspace theory 95-7
Baars, B.J. and Franklin S. 182
Baddeley, A.D. 180
Bak, P. 146
Bargh, J.A. and Morsella, E. 70
basal ganglia 127
Bateson, G. 116
bats, subjective experience 24, 25
beetle in the box metaphor, 
Wittgenstein 19-20
behaviour-based architecture
global workspace theory 100-1, 108-9
limitations 111
behaviours, in identification of parallel 
specialist processes 99
behaviour selection 51-3, 51, 109-10
behaviour selection problem (action 
selection problem) 52
'being as a whole' 112
belief update 175-6
frame problem 176-7
binding by synchrony 
hypothesis 151
binding problem 151
binocular rivalry 99
Index
Note: page numbers in italics refer to Figures.

bipedal locomotion, sensorimotor 
coupling 107-8
Bishof-Köhler hypothesis 185
blackboard architectures 97
Block, N. 73
bottom-up attention 100
brain
cognitive control network 129
default mode network 129
differences from a computer 102-5
structural connectivity 127-30
synchronous oscillations 150-4
see also anatomy of global workspace
brain activity, integration in conscious 
experience 91
broadcast, global workspace theory 96
Broca's area, activation during inner 
speech 188
Caputo, J. 39
Carruthers, P. 85, 165-8
Cartesian dualism 7-8
categorical schemes 46-7
Cavanna, A.E. and Trimble, M.R., 129
central bottleneck hypothesis 78
central pattern generators 108
central processes 175
cerebral hemispheres, anatomy 124-6
Chalmers, D.
The Conscious Mind 8
zombie argument 21
chaotic attractors 138
chaotic dynamics 105
chaotic itinerancy 141-3
embodied 144
Skarda-Freeman conjecture 144-5
Chen, Z.J. et al. 127
Chialvo, D.R. 146
chickens, behaviour selection 51-2, 53
children
learning, conceptual blending 177
private speech 189-90
chimpanzees, tool-use 56-7
Chomsky, N. 45-6
Cisek, P. 52
closed-loop control systems 49-50
clustering coefficient
in brain 123
in networks 119
small-world networks 120, 121
coalitions 4-5
competitive dynamics 131, 135
attractors 139-41
football chants metaphor 137-8
omnipotent psychologist thought 
experiment 134-7
role of connective core 148
see also coupled processes
'cocktail party effect' 100
cogito (I am, I exist), Descartes 7, 8, 9, 
30-4, 191
cognition
biological roots 43-8
distinction from thought 42
function of 3
human evolution 54-8
influence 43, 53
sensorimotor loop 48-50
link to embodiment 64-6
purpose of 43-4
relationship to consciousness 93
cognitive control network, brain 129
cognitive fluidity 57, 174-80
cognitive masking
effect on behaviour 88-9
omnipotent psychologist thought 
experiment 84
in identification of automaticity 78-9
uses 84-5
cognitive quarantine 161
coherence, communication through 151-4
colour perception, Mary (imaginary 
scientist) 27-8
colour phi effect 74-5
colour sensation example, private language 
remarks 11
combinatorially structured sets 45-6
affordances 46-8, 47
communication through coherence 
hypothesis 151-4, 152
evidence in favour 154-8
competition, global workspace theory 96, 
99-100, 109-10
competitive coalition dynamics 134-6, 135
and attractors 139-41
football chants metaphor 137-8
role of connective core 148
computers, differences from the brain 102-5
computer simulations 104-5
concepts
acquisition of 59
ascription to non-human animals 58, 66
as building blocks of thought 43, 58
concept of 35, 58-9
counting and infinity 60-4
reality of 60
of truth 36-9
understanding of 59
conceptual blending 58, 171-4, 173
in childhood learning 177
serial versus parallel processing 178
conceptual framework 3
concurrent introspective report 75
and evidence for absence of conscious 
experience 78
Confessions, Augustine 14
INDEX
212

INDEX
213
confluence of unities, self as 191
connective core 122, 148, 170
as a 'blender' 174
brain 127-8, 130
connective infrastructure
hierarchical organization 122
levels of organization 119
modular networks 121-2
physical pathways 119
small-world networks 119-21
technical vocabulary 118
connectivity 4, 5
connectivity backbone, brain 127
connectome 130
connector hubs 121-2
in brain 127-8
Conscious Mind, The, Chalmers 8
consciousness 1-2
artificial 65-6
contrastive approach 3
'fame in the brain' metaphor 113-14
flexibility as an indicator 89
form of 129-30 129-30
limited capacity 78
link with flexibility of behaviour 85-9
nature of 34
in non-human animals 66
problem-solving as an indicator 89-90
relationship to cognition 93
relationship to retrospective report 74
theory of 3-4
conscious thoughts 2
conscious/unconscious distinction 67-9, 
89-93
automaticity 69-71
and episodic memory 187
and global workspace theory 96, 101
identification of automaticity 77-9
introspective report 71-6
omnipotent psychologist thought 
experiment 80-5
constructive episodic stimulation 
hypothesis 185, 186
content of consciousness 116
context, global workspace theory 96-7
continuous reciprocal causation 115
contrastive approach to consciousness 3
contrastive data set, omnipotent psychologist 
thought experiment 83
corona radiata 125
corpus callosum 125
cortico-cortical tracts 125-6
corvids, trap tube test 86-7, 88
Cotterill, R. 160
counting, acquisition of skill 60-1
coupled processes 4-5, 106-11
information exchange 117
see also coalitions
Craik, K.J.W. 160
cricket phonotaxis 50
critical states 146-7
Critique of Pure Reason, I. Kant 191
cutaneous rabbit illusion 74
Damasio, A.R. 8
death, fear of 1
default mode network, brain 129
Dehaene, S. and Changeux, J.-P. 111
Dehaene, S. et al. 77
Dennett, D. 8, 74, 111, 113, 142
Derrida, J. 31, 35
Descartes, R. 7-8
cogito (I am, I exist) 9, 30-4, 191
Meditations 33
D'Esposito, M. 180
diary thought experiments
phenomenal absence 22-3
Wittgenstein 11-12, 18-19
digital systems 103
Discourse on Method, Descartes 7
disembodiment of thought 41-3
dissolution of problems 2
distinction, information as 116-17
Doesburg, et al. 156
dogs, sensorimotor coupling 109, 117
domain of concern 65
domains of expertise, integration of 57
dualism 7-10
dual-systems hypothesis, visual processing 92
dual task studies 78
dynamical complexity 144-9
dynamic core hypothesis 138
dynamics 4, 5
easy problem of consciousness, Chalmers 8
ecological niches, relativity to evolutionary 
fitness 43-4
Edelman, G.M. and Tononi, G., dynamic core 
hypothesis 138
Eguíluz, V.M. et al. 127
eliminative materialism 176
embodied chaotic itinerancy 144
embodied functions, computers 104
embodiment 41
link to cognition 64, 93
emotion, role in global workspace 
architecture 134
empathy 1
Emperor's New Mind, The, R. Penrose 63
episodic-like memory 185
scrub-jays 187
episodic memory 5-6, 184
behavioural criteria for 184-5
and global workspace 186-7
and language 191
and mental time travel 185, 187

INDEX
214
episodic traces 75, 76
Eredyi, 77
Ericsson, K.A. 75, 89
evolutionary fitness 43-4
evolution of brain, cognitive fluidity 174-80
external coupling 108
external perturbation, effect on 
dynamics 140, 144
extraterrestrial scientist thought 
experiment 28-9
'fame in the brain' metaphor, conscious 
experience 113-14
fantasy 186
Fauconnier, G. and Turner, M. 5, 172-4
feedback
in behaviour selection 52
role of cognition 50
fireflies, synchronization 150
firefly in the box metaphor 23
first philosophy 34-40
flexibility of behaviour 85-9
facilitation by global workspace 
architecture 168-71
global workspace theory 111
as indication of conscious experience 89
flint-knapping 54-5
integration of domains of expertise 57
flow of consciousness 31-3
Fodor, J.A., Modularity of the Mind, 
The 175-7
Fodor, J.A. and Pylyshyn, Z.W. 46
football chants metaphor, dynamics 137-8
foundations, philosophical 35
frame problem 144, 176-80
Franklin, S. and Graesser, A. 97
Freeman, W.J. 145
Freeman, W.J. et al. 155-6
Fries, P., communication through coherence 
hypothesis 151-4
fronto-occipital fasciculi 125
functional decomposition, global 
workspace 133-4
fundamental starting point 34
Gaillard, R. et al. 157
game, Wittgenstein's treatment of the 
word 35
gamma-band oscillations 150
gamma-band synchrony, evidence 154-8
giant components 149
Gibson, J.J. 44
Glazebrook, J.F. and Wallace, R. 149
global workspace dynamics 131-7
attractor landscapes 139
attractors 138-41
chaotic itinerancy 141-3
complexity 144-9
football chants metaphor 137-8
on-line exploration 144
global workspace theory 3-5, 57-8, 69, 
95-7, 96, 102
anatomy 122-30
attractor transitions 143-4
and communication through 
coherence 152, 153
conceptual blending 171-4
connective infrastructure 118-22
coupling of processes 106-11
differentiation from working memory 182
and episodic memory 186-7
facilitation of flexibility 168-71
and frame problem 179-80
functional decomposition 133-4
influence and information 115-18
integration 112-15
internally closed sensorimotor loop 
165-8, 166
neural computation 102-6
processes 98-102
grey matter 124-5
Grèzes, J. and Decety, J. 44
Grush, R. 160
habitual activities 68
see also automaticity
Hagmann, P. et al. 126
half-zombies 23
Hansell, M. 54
hard problem of consciousness, 
Chalmers 8, 9
Hare, B. et al. 162
Hassabis, D. Maguire, E.A. 186
Heidegger, M. 40
Hesslow, G. 160
He, Y. et al. 127
hidden, senses of 26
hierarchically modular networks, connective 
core 128
hierarchical organization
in brain 124
modular networks 122, 123
higher-order thought 191
Hodgkin−Huxley neural networks 104
Holender, D. and Duscherer, K. 77
homeostasis 49
Husserl, E. 31, 183
'iconic' memory 73, 75
Ikegami, T. 144
imagination 186
pretend play 190
role in acquisition of concepts 62-3
inattentional blindness 100
inferior longitudinal fasciculus 125
infinity, concept of 61-3

INDEX
215
influence, global workspace theory 115-18
information
global workspace theory 116-18
identity criteria 117-18
informational encapsulation 175
informationally unencapsulated processes, 
frame problem 176-80
information flow, global workspace 
theory 101-2
information integration theory, 
G. Tononi 114
inner life 9, 58
inner light, and zombie twins 21-4
inner speech 5-6, 188-91
innovative capacity 55-6, 86, 88
input and output processes, coupling 109
insight 180
integration 4, 112-15, 145-6, 180
dynamical 145-6
intentionality 2
'inter-contextual' dimension, frame 
problem 179
interlocutor, Wittgenstein's use 16-20
internal coupling 108
internally closed sensorimotor loop 160-1
in global workspace architecture 
165-8, 166
internal rehearsal
benefits 167-8
in global workspace 166-7
internal sensorimotor loop 5
introspectionism 79
introspective report 71-2
concurrent 75
and evidence for absence of conscious 
experience 77-9
as evidence for the presence of conscious 
experience 77
omnipotent psychologist thought 
experiment 80-5
reporting sweetspot 76
retrospective 72-4, 75-6
Ising model of ferromagnetism 146
James, W. 31, 74, 129-30, 136
Kant, I. 183
Critique of Pure Reason 191
Kelso, J.A.S. 140
Kim, C.-Y. and Blake, R. 99, 100
kingfisher, sensorimotor coupling 107
knowing what it is like to be 
something 24-6
mechanical scientist thought 
experiment 26-7
knowledge argument 27-8
Kolers, P.A. and von Grünau, M. 74
Kosslyn, S.M. 162-3
Lakoff, G. and Núñez, R.E. 60, 61
Lamme, V.A.F. and Roelfsema, P.R. 93
language 187-8
coalition dynamics 190
combinatorial structure 45-6
extraterrestrial scientist thought 
experiment 28-9
inner speech 188-91
in philosophy 13-16
see also private language remarks
lapses of attention 112-13
limit cycles 138
limited capacity of consciousness 78
lived experience 31-3
Lyapunov exponents 141-2
macaques, tool-use studies 44-5
Maravita, A. and Iriki, A. 44
Mary (imaginary scientist) thought 
experiment 27-8
mathematical concepts
infinity 61-3
positive integers 60
reality 60
mathematical truth 37
McCarthy, J. 97
'advice-taker' programme 48
McDowell, J. 66
meaning, essence of 14-15
mechanical scientist thought 
experiment 26-7, 29
Meditations, Descartes 7, 33
Meister, I.G. et al. 162
memory 5-6
autobiographical 184
autonoetic 184
episodic 184-7, 191
and retrospective introspective report 72-4
working 180-3
memory traces 75-6
mental imagery, Kosslyn versus Pylyshyn 
debate 162-3
mental processes 91
mental rotation experiment 91-2
mental time travel 185
non-human animals 187
Merikle, P.M. et al. 77
messages 116
metaphor making 61, 63
metaphysical thinking 9-10, 13
and mechanical scientist thought 
experiment 27
origins 15
and subjective experience 26
and zombie argument 23-4
Metaphysics, Aristotle 36
metastability 140-1
metastable states 93

INDEX
216
mind−body problem 2
mindfulness 90
mind-reading theories 162
mirror neurons 162
Mithen, S. 57, 174-5
Modularity of the Mind, The, Fodor, J.A. 175
modular networks
in brain 126, 127
connective core 128
hierarchical organization 122, 123
without small-world property 121
modular small-world networks 
120, 121, 122
dynamical complexity 147, 149
modular theories of mind, cognitive 
fluidity 175-80
myelin 125
N¯ag¯arjuna 38
Nagel, T. 24-6
Necker cube 100
nest-building, village weaver (Ploceus 
cucullatus) 54
networks 118
connective core 122
connector hubs 121-2
small-world networks 119-20
see also modular networks; small-world 
networks
network theory 4
neural computation 102-6
neural networks 104, 105
evidence for critical states 147
neuroanatomy 122-30
avian 130
and global workspace theory 111
Nichols, S. and Stich, S. 161
Nii, H.P. 97
nodes
clustering coefficient 119
connector hubs 121-2
definition 118
levels of organization 119
non-human animals, mental time 
travel 187
non-terminating processes 49
objective experience 9
object permanence 181
octopus, subjective experience 25
Olduwan flint-knapping 54-5
omnipotent psychologist
commuter thought experiment 131-7
gardener thought experiment 80-5
On Certainty, Wittgenstein 33-4
ontologies 29-30
O'Regan, J.K. and Nöe, A. 75
organizational properties of life and mind 65
original conscious experience, traces 32-3
oscillatory behaviour, in control of bipedal 
locomotion 107-8
pandemonium architecture 97
parallel computer architecture 104
parallelism, comparison of brain with 
computers 103
parallel processing 142
in determination of relevance 178
parallel specialist processes 96, 99-102
path length
in brain 123
in networks 119
small-world 120, 121
Peirce, C.S. 37
Penrose, R., The Emperor's New mind 63
peripheral processes 175
phase transitions 146-7, 149
phenomenal absence, diary thought 
experiment 22-3
phenomenological consciousness 73
Philosophical Investigations, 
Wittgenstein 10-11, 13-16
interlocutor 16-20
philosophical zombies 20-4
phonological loop 180
phrenological theorizing 93
pianists, fronto-parietal activation 
study 161-2
pipelining 142
point attractors 138
positive integers, acquisition of 
concept 60-1
post-reflective condition 18-20
post-reflective silence 34-5, 38-40
potential affordances 44-5
space of 3
Povinelli, D.J. 56-7
pragmatism, conception of truth 37
precuneus 129-30
present, traces of 31-2
preservation of experience 32-3
pretend play, association with private 
speech 189-90
private inner sensations 12, 18-19
private language remarks 10-12, 18-19
beetle in the box metaphor 19-20
in context of Philosophical 
Investigations 13-16
private speech, children 188-9
problems, dissolution 2
problem-solving, as indication of conscious 
experience 89-90
processes
coupled 106-11
definition and individuation 98
provincial hubs 122

INDEX
217
putamen 126
Pylyshyn, Z.W. 162-3
quasi-attractors 140
Quine, W.V.O. 35
Raby, C.R. et al. 187
red patch scenario 114, 116
Reeve, R. and Webb, B., model of cricket 
phonotaxis 50
reflexive thought 191
refrigerator light metaphor 75, 115
rehearsal, persistence of affordances 181-2
Reingold, E.M. 77
Reingold, E.M. and Merikle, P.M. 77
relevance determination, serial versus parallel 
processing 178
replication version, simulation 
hypothesis 161
reporting sweetspot 76
resourcefulness 88
retrospective introspective report 72-4
and evidence for absence of conscious 
experience 77-8, 79
mitigation of drawbacks 75-6
reuse version, simulation hypothesis 161
robots 48
computer control 104
Rolls, E.T. 134
Sackur, J. and Dehaene, S. 142
scaffolding concept, conceptual blending 177
Schacter, D.L. and Addis, D.R. 185
Schmahmann, J.D. and Pandya, D.N. 125
Schneider, W. and Shiffrin, R.M. 88
scientific theorizing 40
scrub-jays, episodic-like memory 187
Searle, J.R. 85
Seed, A.M. et al. 87
segregation 145, 146
self, as confluence of unities 191
self-presence 30-1
Selfridge, O.G. 97
self-sufficiency 30-1
sensorimotor coupling 106
in bipedal locomotion 107-8
information exchange 117
input and output processes 109-10
kingfisher 107
recombination 168-71
sensorimotor loop 48-50, 93
and global workspace theory 100-1
internal 5
internally closed 160-1
sensory traces 75-6, 76
serial processing 142
in determination of relevance 178
Shanahan, M.P. 147, 165-8
Shannon, C.E. 116
Shefi, O. et al. 124
Shepard, R.N. and Metzler, J. 91-2, 161
Sherman, S.M. and Guillery, R. 127
shopkeeper story, Wittgenstein 14
signals, influences 117-18
silence, post-reflective 34-5, 38-40
simulation hypothesis 159-60
and conscious thought 163-5
and constructive episodic simulation 
hypothesis 186
evidence in favour 161-2
and inner speech 188
and mental imagery 162-3
reuse and replication versions 161
and social interactions 162
simulation theory of mind-reading 162
Singer, W. 150
situational awareness 78
Skarda, C.A. and Freeman, W.J. 144-5
Sloman, A. 64
small-world networks 119
attributes 120-1
in brain 123, 124, 126, 128-9
construction 120, 121
modular, dynamical complexity 147, 149
types 120
social interactions, and simulation 
hypothesis 162
soliloquy, relationship to inner speech 188-9
space of possible minds 64-6
sparse overall connectivity
in brain 123
in small-world networks 120-1
spatiotemporal horizon 65
speech see inner speech; language
Sperling experiment 73, 76
spontaneous activity 140
Sporns, O. and Zwi, J.D. 124
stacks 142
stone-age flint-knapping 54-5
integration of domains of expertise 57
stream of consciousness 31-3
Stroop test 91
structural connectivity, brain 127-30
subjective experience 9, 24-6
subliminal effects 70
Suddendorf, T. and Corballis, M.C. 185
superior longitudinal fasciculus 125
sympathy 1
synchronization, fireflies 150
synchronous devices 103
synchronous oscillations, brain 150-1
binding by synchrony hypothesis 151
communication through coherence 
hypothesis 151-4
evidence in favour 154-8
systematicity of mental states 46

218
INDEX
Taylor, A.H. et al. 87
thalamocortical pathways 125
thalamus 127
theory theory 162
Thompson, E. 65
thought
building blocks of 43, 58-60
distinction from cognition 42
higher order (reflexive) 191
thought process, disembodiment 41-3
thoughts, conscious 2
thought sampling, in identification of 
automaticity 79, 80-1
three-dimensional perception 180-1
time travel, mental 185
non-human animals 187
time-varying stimuli, and working 
memory 182-3
Tononi, G., information integration 
theory 114
tool-making, stone-age 54-5
tool-use
chimpanzees 56-7
corvids 87
modern humans 55-6
top-down attention 100
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, 
Wittgenstein 10
trap tube test, corvids 86-7, 88
truth
concept of 36-9
differentiation from consensus 59-60
Tulving, E. 184
Turing computability, and neural 
networks 105
Umwelt 46-7
uncinate fasciculus 125, 126
unconscious influences 70
understanding 27
Ungerleider, L.G. and Mishkin, M. 92
Upper Palaeolithic flint-knapping 55
integration of domains of expertise 57
Uttal, W.R. 93
Varela, F. et al. 155
verbal reports
and evidence for absence of conscious 
experience 77-9
as evidence for the presence of conscious 
experience 77
omnipotent psychologist thought 
experiment 80-5
in study of conscious condition 71-6
village weaver (Ploceus cucullatus), 
nest-building 54
virtual machines 104
visual agnosia 92
visual processing pathways 92
visuospatial sketchpad 180
von Uexküll, J. 46
Vygotsky, L. 188
Wakana, S. et al. 125
Wang, X.-J. 180
Watts, D.J. and Strogatz, S.H. 119-20, 124
Wernicke's area, activation during inner 
speech 188
Wheeler, M. 8, 179
white matter 125-6
connectivity studies 126-9
winner-takes-all mechanism, communication 
through coherence hypothesis 153-4
Winsler, A. 189
Wisconsin card-sorting task 88
Wittgenstein, L. 2, 10-12, 20, 39-40, 65
on artificial intelligence 17-18
beetle in the box metaphor 19-20
On Certainty 33-4
diary thought experiment 11-12, 18-19
interlocutor 16-20
on mental processes 91
parallels with Zen Buddhism 16, 17
Philosophical Investigations 13-16
on relationship between thought and 
language 189
shopkeeper story 14
treatment of word 'game' 35
Womelsdorf, T. et al. 154
working memory 5-6, 180
differentiation from global 
workspace 182
and experience of time-varying 
stimuli 182-3
persistence of affordances 180-2
Zahavi, D. 31
Zen Buddhism
parallels with Wittgenstein's 
philosophy 16
and post-reflective silence 39
zombie argument 21-4

