
Survival
of the
Fattest
The Key to Human Brain Evolution

Cover image: Sculpted salmon, with permission of Dr. N. Aujoulat,
Abri du Poisson, Centre de la Prehistoire, Perigueux, France

Survival
of the
Fattest
The Key to Human Brain Evolution
Stephen C. Cunnane
Canada Research Chair in Brain Metabolism
Research Center on Aging
Universite de Sherbrooke
Quebec, Canada
World Scientific
N E W 
J E R S E Y • L O N D O N • S I N G A P O R E • B E I J I N G • S H A N G H A I • H O N G 
K O N G • T A I P E I • 
C H E N N A I

Published by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office: 27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
UK office: 57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
SURVIVAL OF THE FATTEST
The Key to Human Brain Evolution
Copyright © 2005 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the Publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy
is not required from the publisher.
ISBN 981-256-191-9
Printed in Singapore by B & JO Enterprise

To Clare, Sara and Monique, who make it all worthwhile.


Contents
Foreword 
ix
Preface — How Did the Human Brain Evolve? 
xiii
Acknowledgements 
xvii
Part 1 — The Human Brain: Unique Yet Vulnerable 
1
A description of the unique and developmentally vulnerable
nature of the human brain: Beginning with an introduction to
human evolution and the plasticity of the human brain, it turns
to the brain's high energy requirements and the unique role of
body fat as energy insurance for the developing brain of babies.
The notable need for brain selective nutrients is then described in
some detail.
1. Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
3
2. The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
25
3. Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy
Requirement 
51
4. Fatness in Human Babies: Insurance for the Developing Brain 
75
5. Nutrition: The Key to Normal Human Brain Development 
101
6. Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
115
7. Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective
Minerals 
131
8. Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
151
vii

viii 
Survival of the Fattest
Part 2 — The Shore-Based Scenario 
175
Assimilation of the nutritional and metabolic constraints on human
brain development into a new explanation for how the human brain
evolved: Starting with some of the limitations to existing genetic and
environmental concepts of human brain evolution, it leads into a
description of the shore-based scenario of human evolution,
including earlier versions, supporting evidence, and mechanisms
for how shore-based nutrition could influence brain evolution.
9. Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
177
10. Bringing the Environment and Diet into Play 
191
11. The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
209
12. Earlier Versions 
227
13. The Evidence 
243
14. How Would It Work? 
265
15. Survival of the Fattest 
285
Bibliography and Relevant Readings 
295
Index 
309

Foreword
In this book, Stephen Cunnane has turned the search for human origins
from loose speculations into science. The accepted view of humans
evolving a large brain on the savannahs of Africa was sparked by
Raymond Dart's words in 1925 when he said that 'open country with
occasional wooded belts and a relative scarcity of water, together with a
fierce and bitter mammalian competition, furnished a laboratory such as
was essential to this penultimate phase of human evolution'. Since then
paleaoanthropologists have stuck to what became the "savannah
hypothesis" with almost religious fervour. This hypothesis lacked any
evidence base. It never explained why every single land-based mammal
proportionately lost brain size in relation to body size as they evolved
larger bodies. The loss was universal starting from brain representing
greater than 2% of body weight for small mammals and primates,
shrinking to less than 0.1% of body weight for larger mammals. The
350 gram brain of a one ton rhinoceros pails into insignificance
compared with the 1,800 gram brain of the dolphin or the 8 kilogram
brain of the sperm whale. This universal and massive loss of brain size
in herbivorous land species, occurred despite what must have been
successful competition for food against the large carnivores and other
mammals. Otherwise, the herbivores could not have evolved larger and
larger bodies.
What Stephen has done is to come up with strong support for an
alternative, evidence-based view that humans evolved in a coastal
ecosystem. A coastal origin was first articulated by Sir Alistair Hardy in
the 1960s. Although it found several supporters, it has been roundly
ix

x 
Survival of the Fattest
rejected by palaeoanthropologists. Yet, there is not a single piece of
evidence or even a testable hypothesis to explain how H. sapiens escaped
the trap of diminishing relative brain capacity with increasing body size
on land. Stephen provides evidence. He injects two essential criteria for
human cerebral evolution: the requirements for (i) more energy (ii) and
more refined structure. He then presents the evidence as to how these
two criteria would have been met. The energy cost for human brain
growth, which reaches 70% of all the energy the mother ploughs into her
fetus during the brain growth spurt, is guaranteed by fat stores unique to
humans amongst the primates. Comparative studies first demonstrated
the universality of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) in neural signalling
systems of the fish, amphibia, reptiles, birds, mammals and primates
alike. Science then showed that deficiency of brain DHA leads to
degenerative 
processes, reduced 
cognitive 
and visual 
function.
Conversely, added DHA, even in well nourished Norwegian women,
leads to increases in IQ in children. Genomic research has explained that
DHA is responsible for transcribing over 170 genes required in brain
development. That is, the structural and bio-motive requirement is met
by the same fatty nutrients that formed the first neurones in the sea some
500 million years ago.
A second critical feature of the book is that it turns attention away
from the macho image of killing or scavenging for food, or even the most
recent idea of endurance running to compete for food, towards the
singular and paramount importance of the mother. It is an uncomplicated
fact that the nourishment of the mother would have determined the
forward or backward evolution of the brain. This brings me to the
superiority of Stephen's thesis over the savannah proposals. Nowhere in
the latter is there a notion of the significance of "brain-selective
nutrients". Food is food and that is it. The universal collapse of relative
brain size in land-based species despite the advance in massive body size
clearly demonstrates there are different requirements for body growth on
the one hand (protein and minerals) or for the brain on the other (lipids
and trace elements). That fact is so simple, it is strange that it has been
ignored. The idea of hominids evolving a large brain by competition on
the savannahs contains no predictive power. Yet prediction and test is the
hallmark of science and progress. The persuasive evidence presented by

Foreword 
xi
Stephen has the power to predict both forward and backward evolution.
His wide view of many facets of evolving humans adds to a compelling
story, which has a message not just for our past, but for our present and
future. It was a privilege to read this book before its publication.
Professor Michael A. Crawford, PhD, CBiol, FIBiol, FRCPath
Director, Institute of Brain Chemistry and Human Nutrition
North Campus, London Metropolitan University
166-229 Holloway Road
London N7 8DB
Tel 02079734869, Fax 02077533164
www.londonmet.ac.uk/ibchn


Preface
How Did the Human Brain Evolve?
Four elements combine to influence evolution of any biological
feature - time, pre-existing rudimentary capability, genetic variation
amongst individuals, and some change in the environment. The first
two of these elements are not contentious in relation to human
brain evolution. Humans today are the living proof that sufficient time -
at least five million years - was available to evolve brains that are three
fold larger compared to either other living primates or our earliest
forebears.
The great apes are the closest genetic relatives to humans and clearly
have some rudimentary capability to learn and solve problems. Higher
cognitive function was therefore more likely to occur in an ape, which
already had a relatively large and advanced brain, than in a cow or even a
tiger, both of which have relatively small brains compared to primates.
Humans and chimpanzees last had a common ancestor 6 to 8 million
years ago and it seems likely that the earliest human forebears had
cognitive capabilities broadly similar to that of present day chimpanzees.
Hence, two of the necessary elements - sufficient time and preexisting
rudimentary cognitive capability in the last common ancestor of humans
and apes - are beyond reasonable dispute.
However, there is little agreement on the relative role of the other
two elements that participated in human brain evolution: genetic
variation and change in the environment. In essence, this is a nature
versus nurture debate, the origin of which is at least a century old.
xiii

xiv 
Survival of the Fattest
This debate is now hotter than ever as molecular biologists artificially
manipulate genes and brain function in ways unimagined even a
decade ago.
Despite clear differences in body morphology and brain capacity,
there are surprisingly few differences in the genomes of humans and
chimpanzees. At a minimum, differences in genes controlling aspects of
brain development including neurogenesis, neurotransmitter receptor
expression, and myelination are likely to have participated in the
emergence of advanced cognitive function in humans. The ways in
which these processes operate and are controlled by genes are being
intensively explored but have not yet revealed how the cognitive
differences between humans and apes evolved.
Humans have the potential for intelligence but, in acquiring
that unique specialization, appear to have paid a price in terms
of increased vulnerability of the brain, especially during infant
development. It takes at least five years before human infants
are minimally independent of their parents and even then most
cannot survive unaided. In the case of human brain evolution,
not only how the additional operating costs of the larger brain
were met needs to be accounted for but also how, simultaneously,
human evolution tolerated increasing brain vulnerability during infant
development.
Neurodevelopmental vulnerability is the clearest indication that
an interplay between genes and the environment contributes to the
exquisite functional potential of the human brain. That interplay
constitutes Darwin's 'conditions of life' and made possible human
brain evolution, just as it makes possible evolution of any other
attribute. But how do genes interact with the environment to
permit evolution of cognitive skills that have no apparent survival
value while simultaneously creating a long, vulnerable period of early
development?
Brains in general require a lot of energy so a bigger brain is even
more expensive than usual. A large, metabolically expensive, and
developmentally vulnerable brain is impressive enough, but hominids
destined to become humans didn't just evolve larger brains; they also

Preface 
xv
evolved fat babies1. It may seem only moderately difficult to meet the
energy and nutrient requirements for a larger brain, but added to the
human brain's remarkable early development is the simultaneous
accumulation of considerable body fat before birth. The fat accumulating
on a healthy human fetus as it approaches birth is not present in other
primates but is, in fact, a prerequisite for full development of advanced
brain function in human adults.
***
Since the time of Raymond Dart, the environmental catalyst for early
hominid divergence from the last common primate stock has been
thought to be a hot, dry climate that created the savannahs in East Africa
4 to 5 million years ago. Those conditions were thought to have forced a
four-legged, climbing ape to become earth-bound and search for food
while becoming bipedal (walking on two legs). Now, after well over fifty
years of muted grumbling, even from former supporters, the Savannah
Theory is transforming towards the Woodland Theory, in which the
climate of East Africa is now viewed to have been less extreme and
forests were more abundant. Hominids are still seen as evolving from an
arboreal ancestor but they stayed in the woodlands, more-or-less like
today's other great apes.
Some of the questions I want to address in this book are: If both the
human genome and the environment hominids inhabited were so similar
to those of the great apes, especially the chimpanzees, how did some
hominids go on to acquire such a unique brain? What was the catalyst
not only for evolution of a larger and more advanced brain but neonatal
body fat? Insufficient dietary energy or nutrients severely challenge both
hominids 
are defined as the branch of primates that became bipedal but did not
necessarily form part of the final lineage to humans. Hominins are the branch of hominids
that led to humans - Homo (H.) sapiens, or Homo sapiens sapiens. Exactly which of
several hominid and then hominin species were the forebears of humans is still unclear.
In the interests of simplicity, I will use 'hominid' as a general term for bipedal primates,
and will specify the species where known or appropriate. I will also use 'pre-human
hominid' to denote the pre-human lineage.

xvi 
Survival of the Fattest
brain development and fat deposition in the human fetus today, so did
these same deficits curtail evolution of both advanced brain function and
fat deposition in the fetuses and infants of non-human primates? This
book is about the 'conditions of life' that, starting from an already
successful primate blueprint, permitted only pre-human hominids to
avoid or squeeze through this double-pronged evolutionary bottleneck.

Acknowledgements
A number of people helped me with this book. Chronologically, they
start with Leo Standing at Bishop's University, who triggered my interest
30 years ago in one of his undergraduate courses. He endured several
oral and written versions as my ideas about human brain evolution
developed. My PhD mentor, David Horrobin, encouraged me by
publishing my first paper on this subject in Medical Hypotheses, the
journal he edited. Many discussions about human brain function with
Michael Crawford led me to thinking that evolution of body fat in infants
was the unique human solution that broke the barrier to brain expansion
experienced by other primates. Several meetings with Elaine Morgan
over the years reinforced my feeling that, more than other distinctive
aspects of human morphology and physiology, brain evolution was likely
to have been the main beneficiary of shore-based evolution in humans.
Her editorial skills are also much appreciated. During more than a decade
of overlapping research interests concerned with polyunsaturates and
brain development, the critical intellect and warm friendship of Tom
Brenna has been very gratifying. Kathy Stewart has been very supportive
with many discussions and forthright comments on the manuscript. I am
thankful to the members of my research team and to colleagues and
acquaintances the world over who have encouraged the evolution of
the Survival of the Fattest. Amongst them, Mary Ann Ryan stands out
for her patience and skill and without whom our research would be a
shambles. Notwithstanding their efforts and support, I am responsible for
the shortcomings and errors that remain.
xvii


Part 1
The Human Brain: Unique Yet Vulnerable


Chapter 1
Human Evolution:
A Brief Overview
What is Evolution?
Evolution involves gradual change in the form and function of
organisms. Since one's phenotype is coded for in DNA, either the
genotype itself or the way in which the genotype codes for the phenotype
must change in organisms that evolve. In organisms such as bacteria in
which the reproductive cycle is short, changes in DNA can bring rapid
changes in phenotype; in organisms with a long development time, these
changes take longer. Though it is an extremely large molecule and has to
replicate many times as the body's billions of cells divide, DNA is a
highly reliable code. Still, changes in the nucleotide sequence of DNA do
occur. If the change in DNA is too extreme or affects a critical site in the
genome, the egg may not get fertilized or the embryo may not be viable.
If it is too slight, the change may not show up in the phenotype of the
offspring.
Each species is said to have a single set of genes or genome. But the
genome of one individual is slightly different from everyone elses. No
single individual has the ideal model genome for that species. Defective
copies of a gene in one parent may be silent because the other parent's
copy for that gene is correct. Even matching but defective sections of
DNA in both parents may not matter because those sections do not code
for genes. The basis of evolution is that there is just enough non-lethal
change in just the right part of DNA.
3

4 
Survival of the Fattest
Climate (temperature, day length, humidity, radiation), predators,
food supply, water supply and population density are all factors that
constitute the environment. Part 1 of this book outlines the influence of
food components such as brain selective minerals and docosahexaenoic
acid on the development of a normal human 'neurological' phenotype;
i.e. the physical, biochemical and physiological constituents of normal
brain and behavioural development within an individual. Culture also
influences brain development but, again, mostly by affecting gene
expression within the individual.
The issue related to human brain evolution is - how do dietary,
cultural or hormonal influences in an adult affect the genotype or gene
expression in that adult's offspring? Nutrient deficiency affecting brain
function in a parent doesn't impair brain function in the child unless the
deficiency changes gene structure or unless the child also consumes the
same diet. Parents' habits or cultural milieu have an important influence
on habits of their children but how does that change the child's
genotype? If food or the environment don't change DNA in the second
generation, evolution doesn't get started.
Random mutations in DNA are exempt because, by definition, they
will happen randomly; their timing, frequency and point of impact on
DNA are not predictable. Random mutations are also extremely unlikely
to hit specifically the right genes and in the right way that a phenotype
evolves rather then dies. However, different environments could
influence the occurrence of random mutations.
Environments can also change dramatically but they 
don't
change randomly; here today, gone tomorrow. A rare but dramatic
environmental change such as a volcano spewing lava, ash and darkness
for months, occurs too suddenly for most organisms affected by the
sudden change to adapt. There are of course exceptions but, generally
speaking, environments change gradually and it is the role of these
gradual changes that are of interest here.
Natural Selection : Need Versus Blind Consequence
Charles Darwin coined the influential term used to describe how
evolution occurs - natural selection. Natural selection involves four

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
5
essential ingredients: (1) time, (2) inherent variability between
individuals (3) environmental change, and (4) some preexisting
rudimentary capacity or adaptation towards the characteristic in question.
These four variables allow characteristics (phenotypes) to evolve. With
sufficient time and preexisting capacity, environmental change tips
inherent variability in a certain feature in a particular direction, e.g.
rudimentary standing ability gets tipped towards committed instead of
opportunistic bipedalism. Without differences in these 'conditions of
life', there would be less variability within species and less for natural
selection to work with.
Darwin recognized that inherent variability in a characteristic within a
species was necessary but was not sufficient to stimulate evolution. The
crocodile has variability in many characteristics but has not evolved
substantially because no stimulus - no conditions of life - have provoked
change in favour of those with larger or smaller jaws, etc. The
environment creates the conditions of life, which may be constant or
may suddenly vary. As Richard Lewontin (Harvard University) notes,
conditions of life vary with the organism. A backyard pond may look
like just a pond to a human but the conditions of life for insects in that
pond change dramatically if it becomes inhabited by a frog or if we drop
in a couple of gold fish.
Climate change is an important condition of life that creates what is
commonly called selection pressure. Selection pressure implies that
evolution can be pushed, whether by environmental change or by a
certain need. But need (real or imagined) cannot condense the time
required to select and mate just the right individuals to withstand the
imposed change of environment. All species follow the same rules of
natural selection. Those individuals who, by chance, are most suited to
withstand the climate change get to take advantage of their better suited
genotype. Climate change can't force a change in genotype, no matter
how useful the survival value of altering a particular feature.
Selection pressure creates a common 'cart before the horse' problem
in most explanations of the origin of the human brain because an
enlarged brain is widely thought of as having a significant survival
advantage: if you have a bigger brain and are smarter, then you can make
better tools, hunt better, and find a similarly better-adapted mate. That

6 
Survival of the Fattest
offers you and your offspring a better chance to survive but it carries the
disadvantage that you now need to find more food in order to keep your
enlarged brain functional. Unless more food remains available, your
enlarged brain cannot be sustained, and you end up with no more
advantage than those with smaller brains.
It is difficult to resist invoking the need for a better quality diet or the
need for weapons and organized hunting to support the nutritional
requirements of a large brain. Humans do need a better quality diet
now that we have a large brain. A change in the conditions of life, i.e. a
better quality diet, was also necessary to get a larger brain. However,
everything revolves around the point that hominids couldn't need the
complex and sophisticated behaviours permitted by a large brain
(hunting, language, tool making, etc.) in order to get a large brain. This is
the catch-22 - how did certain hominids meet the requirements of brain
expansion without needing the skills that arose with brain expansion?
The Struggle for Existence
Over the course of at least five million years, humans have evolved out
of the mold of an ape-like ancestor. Along the way, short hairy bodies,
crude stone tools, medium-sized brains, and simple skills gave way to
taller, relatively hairless bodies, body fat, unusually large brains, and
many languages and cultures. Seemingly limitless creativity and
technological potential became interwoven with a combination of
carelessness and aggression that at times severely strains the common
good. Early human ancestors have long been thought of as maladapted
intermediates that willed their way to a better life. Humans are
considered to be the beneficiary of that effort and drive and, as such, are
still widely viewed as the pinnacle of primate evolution.
Sir Grafton Elliot Smith, a leading British anthropologist in the
1930s, promoted the idea that humans evolved by overcoming adversity
and sloth: '[Our ancestors] were impelled to issue forth from their
forests and seek new sources of food and new surroundings on hill and
plain where they could find the sustenance they needed ... The other
group, perhaps because they happened to be more favorably situated
or attuned to their surroundings, living in a land of plenty, which

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
1
encouraged indolence in habit and stagnation of effort and growth, were
free from this glorious unrest, and remained apes, continuing to lead
very much the same kind of life [as the ape-human ancestor]. While man
was evolved amidst strife with adverse conditions, the ancestor of the
Gorilla and Chimpanzee gave up the struggle for mental supremacy
because they were satisfied with their circumstances'.
With 'the struggle for existence', Charles Darwin planted the
seed nearly 150 years ago that evolution is rooted in adversity and strife
and leads to a place or physical condition where there is less of a
struggle; evolution is a process of perfection. Grafton Smith reinforced
this view of human evolution with the 'struggle for mental supremacy'
and 'evolution amidst strife with adverse conditions'. Ever since,
explanations for human evolution have consciously or unconsciously
integrated a process of success against adversity: the adversity of a harsh
climate, competing against predators, finding sparse food and becoming
bipedal and large-brained.
The concepts of struggle and survival seem to be imposed on the
process of evolution; evolution has been humanized in the context of the
Victorian era work ethic. Certainly an individual or a small group may
struggle to survive but a species doesn't struggle to evolve. Human brain
evolution didn't occur under adversity or strife any more so a million
years ago than it does today. Hundreds of millions of people today live
with constant adversity and struggle to feed themselves and their
families. Does that mean that as a species, H. sapiens, is undergoing a
struggle for existence?
Evolution occurs because of opportunity, not necessity. An
organism's existence is challenged or it isn't. If it is challenged, and if it
and enough of its progeny adapt, the species survives; if not, it becomes
extinct. Evolution occurs when there is sufficient variation in a biological
feature that, when provoked by an environmental stimulus of sufficient
magnitude, favours reproduction of those with one variant of that feature
while disfavouring the others. The feature could be tooth shape, form of
locomotion, brain size, or anything else. In principle, every aspect of our
form and function varies from individual to individual and is susceptible
to natural selection.

8 
Survival of the Fattest
The heart is recognizably similar across all mammals. According to
natural selection, this indicates that despite many different environments
and body plans, the four-chambered mammalian heart works well. It has
undergone little or no change because it perceives no real difference in
its own environment, no matter whether it is hot or cold, wet or dry, or
whether wings, fins or legs are used for locomotion.
How mammals move around is a different matter. Despite similar
musculo-skeletal organization, mammals possess a variety of locomotory
appendages including winged or webbed forelegs, two or four functional
legs, one to five toes, fins, etc. Thus, the musculo-skeletal system is
highly malleable by the environment.
What about brains? Grafton Smith's indolent, stagnant great apes
have somewhat disproportionately large brains but not nearly so much as
humans. This means that unusual circumstances were required to make
brains expand in pre-human hominids. Importantly, there was enough
natural variation in primate brain size that, with the right stimulus, it
could begin to disproportionately increase in certain hominids.
What I wish to challenge is the deeply ingrained idea that bigger
brains were better for survival and that in order to survive, hominids had
to do certain things that needed a bigger brain, such as find meat,
develop tools and language, and become social animals with culture.
Without possessing particularly large brains, the great apes have survived
much longer than humans. Some hominids survived for upwards of two
million years so, despite smaller brains, in evolutionary terms, they were
still successful. They didn't have to become human or acquire larger
brains to be evolutionarily successful.
Natural selection has no goals. Each change in form or function either
benefits or impedes the individual. What the individual's anticipated
descendents could potentially do if a particular feature were refined,
improved or abandoned is of no concern. Indeed, natural selection
wouldn't know which way to plan evolution because it cannot anticipate
when or where DNA mutations might strike, or when volcanoes might
explode and alter the environment of large areas for a prolonged period.
Hence, the fact that early pre-human hominids had, at best, modestly
improved cognition, were crude tool users, and probably had no more

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
9
than simple language, was not an impediment to their successful
reproduction and propagation.
H. erectus appears to have lasted for over a million years without
substantial change in physique. Humans per se have lasted about 100,000
years but, despite unsurpassed intelligence, are constantly at risk of
destroying themselves by a variety of means including warfare,
pollution, and carelessness. Neanderthals had larger brains than H.
sapiens but although they existed longer than have humans, ultimately,
they did not survive as a species. Hence, humans should not be viewed as
the pinnacle but may indeed be the ignominious Homo.
Brain evolution can be looked at in a different way than it has so far;
brain expansion was neither necessary for nor advantageous to survival
or evolution of hominids. University of Michigan paleoanthropologist,
Milton Wolpoff, put it succinctly: 'you could never make the case that
intelligence is the best strategy. Over the past 20 million years, monkeys
have been much more successful than apes, even though apes have
bigger brains and are more intelligent by any measure'.
Like Grafton-Smith, James Shreeve notes that gorillas have a simple
existence; they do little except eat, sleep and play, yet they are amongst
the most intelligent of animals. Shreeve and Grafton Smith therefore
contrast starkly in their appreciation of the relation between a life of
leisure and the origins of intelligence. The potential for intelligent
behaviour has clearly and uniquely arisen in humans but it also poses
many challenges and has a dark side. It is important to remain cognizant
of both the benefits and the pitfalls of higher intelligence if its origins are
to be fully understood.
Fossil Evidence
Interpretation of how humans evolved is based on two related types of
physical evidence. First, there's what has been learned about the
similarities and differences in form and function of humans and primates
most closely resembling humans. Since at least Darwin's speculation
about human origins in Africa, it has been a reasonable assumption that
the similarities between chimpanzees and humans indicate a common
ancestor. Human genes are now known to be at least 99% identical with

10 
Survival of the Fattest
those of chimpanzees. This means that the genetic blueprint for humans
and chimpanzees is almost identical but it doesn't mean that all these
genes are expressed or operational to the same degree in both species.
The other key window on human origins is the nature, age and
circumstance of hominid fossil beds and their contents. Interpreting
fossils requires detailed knowledge of the shape and size of the bones
and teeth not only of reasonably closely related species like humans and
chimpanzees but of many other species as well. Only very rarely are
fossilized bones of the skeleton or skull found intact. Teeth are better
preserved because of their extreme hardness. Nevertheless, there are
many intermediate forms of jaw shape and skull size that could account
for a specific tooth shape. Large flat teeth and heavy jaws suggest
repeated chewing of plant material while large, pointed canines suggest
meat consumption. Dating the age of fossils has become more
sophisticated and reliable, which has also greatly helped locate fossils in
time if not always in their relationship to living humans or to each other.
Still, by far the biggest challenge is that there are insufficient fossils
with which to unambiguously reconstruct the pre-human form. It is rare
to find fossils that are intact and in which the bone shape is clear and
uncontroversial. Most are found as fragments so it is a painstaking
process to find and reassemble them into their original shape. Rarely can
a fairly complete puzzle be reconstructed. This is a particular challenge
for those interested in brain evolution because the skull is relatively thin
and hence prone to being broken and crushed. The skull also covers a
large three-dimensional surface, thereby multiplying the risk that
each small error in aligning an incomplete set of fragments during
reconstruction will affect the final size and shape of the reconstructed
skull.
The two key features of human brain evolution that are available from
fossils are the size and the shape of the skull. Finding more than one
specimen of the same species and age helps establish how big the brain
really was. In the rare and fortunate cases in which relatively complete
skeletons and skulls are available, it is possible to compare skull size and
shape with the probable posture of that individual.
Humans walk vertically and have large skulls, small jaws and
relatively small molars for crushing food. Bigger hominid fossil skulls

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
11
tend to date from the more recent past and tend to be associated with
individuals that walked more vertically and had smaller jaws and teeth.
They also tend to be found at sites where there is more evidence of tool
making and use of fire.
The earliest hominid fossils generally indicate that hominids became
bipedal before they started using tools or before the brain had started to
increase very much in size. If this sequence is true, one important
deduction that follows (walking preceding tool use preceding a
significant increase in brain size) is that evolution of bipedalism could
not have depended on larger brain size to coordinate movement and
balance.
In addition to the fossil evidence that bipedalism predated significant
brain expansion, this sequence makes intuitive sense because tool
making requires the hands. If the hands were no longer needed for
walking because their owner was bipedal, they would have been
available to do other things. Though the tendency is to try to relate as
many features to each other as possible, there may not, in fact, be any
direct relationship between walking on two feet and brain size or, for that
matter, tool use.
Bipedalism may have been advantageous for the hands and possibly
for the brain. What makes sense using that premise should be explored
but, at the same time, we should not ignore the possibility that they are
unrelated. As Claude Bernard, the famous French physiologist and father
of experimental medicine, said - we must 'believe and disbelieve at the
same time': For evolution to occur, the changing feature (bipedalism)
had to be tolerated by the whole organism. Realigning the torso from a
largely horizontal to a vertical line through the head, back and pelvis is a
major change in design. Why this was advantageous (or, in fact,
acceptable) to the rest of the body?
Australopithecines
The evolutionary pathway to humans starts in East Africa as the Miocene
turned into the Pliocene epoch about 5 million years ago. Five million
years earlier in the middle of the Miocene, continental uplift and faulting
produced the Rift Valley in East Africa. Earlier in the Miocene, some

12 
Survival of the Fattest
drier areas already existed in the northern and southern extremes of
Africa but towards the end of the Miocene and the beginning of the
Pliocene, repeated glaciation in the Northern Hemisphere led to wide-
spread drying of warmer climates, reduced sea levels and fairly
widespread replacement of tropical forests by savannah in equatorial
Africa.
The Miocene was a period of abundant speciation involving the
emergence of new mammals, including the common ancestor of apes and
the early variants of hominids. Hominids were the first branch of
primates to become irreversibly bipedal, which is considered to be the
first and most fundamental anatomical commitment towards becoming
human. The eastern side of the Rift Valley was drier and experienced
repeated volcanic activity. This is also where many early hominid fossils
are found. In contrast, the western side of the Rift Valley remained
cooler and wetter and is where the non-human primates prospered.
The best-known Australopithecine skeleton is that of Lucy, who is
classified as Australopithecus (A.) afarensis, for the Afar region of
Ethiopia where she was uncovered by a team led by Donald Johansen.
Lucy and others like her were essentially three-foot tall, bipedal apes that
lived 3 to 4 million years ago (Figure 1.1). The wear patterns on their
teeth suggest a mixed diet of plants, fruit and perhaps a little meat.
Paleopanthropologists like Richard Leakey feel that A. afarensis was not
in the hominid lineage so this controversy leaves the shape of the early
pre-human lineage very uncertain. Debate also occurs about whether
another 4 million year old Australopithecine, A. garhi, was in the line
that led to humans. Nevertheless, there is general agreement that
Australopithecines left little or no evidence of having been tool users.
One branch of Australopithecines existed 1.3 to 2.7 million years ago
and is generally agreed not to have been pre-human (Figure 1.1). These
hominids had heavier physiques and larger teeth and are sometimes
categorized as a separate genus - Paranthropus (P. ethiopicus, P.
robustus, and P. boisei). Paranthropus species are also known as the
'robust' Australopithecines because they were physically heavier the
'gracile' or slim Australopithecines such as A. africanus that existed
simultaneously during the period 2.2 to 2.7 million years ago. The heavy
jaw structure and large flat molars of Paranthropus suggest they were

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
13
specialized plant eaters consuming a diet that required considerable
mastication. A. africanus is usually viewed as the most recent
Australopithecine leading to Homo.
Homo habilis
By the start of the second to last major polar glaciation about 2.6 million
years ago, the various Australopithecine species had disappeared,
and the markedly larger males and smaller females that characterized
Australopithecines disappeared with them. The final major glaciation
occurred about two million years ago, marking the beginning of
the Pleistocene epoch and the emergence of the first Homo species
(Figure 1.1).
Homo (H.) habilis (handy man) existed 2.4 to 1.8 million years ago
and left the first clear evidence of having intentionally made stone tools.
Tools made by H. habilis are the simplest and are called Oldowan
technology for the Olduvai Gorge in Kenya where they have been found
in abundance. Some paleoanthropologists feel that the skull of H. habilis
shows the first evidence of asymmetry in the brain's left hemisphere that
is associated with development of areas for speech and language. Stone
tools made by H. habilis appear to have been predominantly made by
right-handed individuals. These two points stress the emerging links
between increasing brain size, manual dexterity and tool making.
It is clear from the fossil record that a little less than two million years
ago, H. habilis co-existed in some areas for at least 100,000 years with
two or three other hominids including H. rudolfensis, H. ergaster and
possibly early H. erectus. Thus, early hominids were not purely a
sequence of species heading towards humans but branched out into
parallel lines evolving simultaneously. One or two Paranthropus species
also existed at this time. Different species are generally thought not to
share identical ecological niches. Since the stone tool technology
developed by H. habilis was apparently not shared or acquired by other
hominids at that time, it is reasonable to conclude that, though they
coexisted temporally, some Homo species probably were specialized to
distinct diets, habitats and environments.

14 
Survival of the Fattest
Figure 1.1. The phylogenetic tree of human origins starting about 4.5 million years
ago (modified from Broadhurst et al 1998). A - Australopithecus; P - Paranthropus;
H - Homo.
Homo ergaster
H. ergaster was an African hominid with similarities to H. erectus. The
best known example of H. ergaster is Turkana boy', a fairly complete,
adolescent male specimen found near Lake Turkana. With the arrival
of H. ergaster, hominids had gained about 50% in height and were

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
15
approaching H. sapiens in body form. This substantial change in height
and the less distinct wear patterns on the teeth suggest that H. ergaster
ate less plant material and probably had a higher quality diet than H.
habilis. The usual inference is that more meat was being eaten but the
location of Turkana boy's fossils near Lake Turkana means that other
food was certainly available, including shellfish and fish.
H. ergaster is credited with two other significant steps towards
becoming human. First, they used a new, higher quality stone tool - the
so-called Acheulian hand axe. Second, they appear to have developed the
first controlled use of fire. Despite the development of more refined
stone tools, the cruder Oldowan tools remained in wide use at the same
time. Hence, there was no sudden abandonment of the simpler tools in
favour of the more sophisticated technology.
This story repeats itself with the monotonous use of highly refined
stone tools by Neanderthals despite clear evidence that early humans (the
Cro-Magnon) were simultaneously using more advanced tools made
from materials other than stone. If the new tools developed by H.
ergaster were necessary for killing or dissecting animals to be eaten, or
for preparing clothing or shelter, one would imagine that such new
technology would have been seen as advantageous and would have been
more widely adopted.
Stones whose edges were purposely flaked off to leave a sharp edge
are almost always viewed as having been tools to cut meat, hides or other
materials. However, in some instances these flaked stone tools are more
sophisticated than necessary for the apparent task at hand. Interpreting
why certain tools were made the way they were, i.e. whether they were
used purely for subsistence purposes or whether they possibly had artistic
or decorative uses, may therefore need reevaluation.
How these tools were used and what difference they made to the lives
of their owners remains enigmatic. Some experts feel that, despite the
increase in brain size that seems to be linked to the emergence of the
Acheulian tools, nothing in the archeological record shows a real change
in lifestyle of H. ergaster over H. habilis. Hence, increased brain size
may have occurred independently of technological change: increased
computing power did not necessarily have rapid repercussions on the
quality of life of hominids.

16 
Survival of the Fattest
Once again, the critical factor is the quality of the archeological
record - it may never be clear what skills or material goods were
accumulated because few of them were made of substances that fossilize
or are otherwise preserved. If it is correct that evolution of a bigger brain
was dissociated from increased capacity to make more sophisticated
tools, then this is important in interpreting different options for the
lifestyles and evolution of early hominids. It also takes some of the focus
off needing a larger brain for survival.
Homo erectus
The glaciation ending about two million years ago was followed by the
emergence of the globe-trotting H. erectus. Uplifting, faulting and
extensive volcanic activity characterized this period, leading to
confusingly mixed layers of igneous and sedimentary layers with
volcanic ash in between. During the Pleistocene, much of the climate of
East Africa became hot and dry but there were still massive lakes in
equatorial East Africa, including paleo-Lakes Turkana and Olduvai, as
well as what was to become present-day Lake Victoria.
H. erectus overlaps entirely in the archeological record with
H. ergaster and emerged as H. habilis was nearing the end of its run as a
species. However, H. erectus lasted much longer than the earlier
hominids and was probably around when the earliest anatomically
modern (though behaviourally primitive) humans appeared 300,000
years ago. H. erectus seems to have been the first truly adventuresome
hominid because their fossils have been found in a wide ranging area
extending from Africa to China to Java.
As recently as 25 years ago, many similar hominid fossils were
vying for the status of being distinct species. The picture is gradually
being consolidated as the variations between these specimens are
considered to be insufficient to merit the naming of an individual
species or genus. Hence, Pithecanthropus or Java Man is now H. erectus,
H. transvaalensis is now an Australopithecine, and Singanthropus
pekinensis is now H. erectus.
At the moment, at least three Homo species preceding H. sapiens are
now widely recognized (H. habilis, H. erectus, and H. neanderthalensis).

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
17
Besides being bipedal, all Homo have other key features in common
making them distinct from other primates, including large brains, truly
vertical stance, modestly sized jaws located directly under the face, and
opposable thumbs. Some experts feel the lumping of hominid specimens
under a total of three or four species names has gone too far and that
distinctions are now being overlooked for the convenience of an overly
simplified lineage.
Homo heidelbergensis
It is unclear whether H. erectus led to H. sapiens or was a separate
terminal hominid branch. Even if H. erectus was a separate branch, there
are still several distinct hominids between H. ergaster and H. sapiens
(Figure 1.1). These include the 800,000 year old H. antecessor
recently discovered in Spain, as well as the somewhat younger
H. heidelbergensis. H. heidelbergensis had a moderately large brain and
left scattered archeological evidence of social structure and possible
controlled use of fire. Still, the types of tools they used were not
noticeably improved compared to those in use at least 500,000 years
earlier in Africa. This repeats the increasingly familiar disjunction
between anatomical evidence for approaching 'humanness', i.e. larger
brain size and erect stature, yet paucity of evidence in the archeological
record of artifacts indicating greater cognitive capacity.
If such tools were not being made, what circumstances supported
evolution of a considerably larger brain? Put another way, if
H. heidelbergensis did not depend on more sophisticated tools to hunt or
survive, what were they eating to sustain the increasing energy needs
of the enlarging brain and the gains in body height and weight over
H. erectus and, especially, over H. habilisl Did they not need make more
refined tools or were they still not able to? If they didn't need to make
sophisticated stone tools, is the notion that they needed their bigger
brains to invent tools or weapons for survival still tenable?
H. heidelbergensis shows little evidence for improved tool design but
they do show the first apparent anatomical evidence for speech. If this
modification in the skull shape of H. heidelbergensis means they had
speech, then they seem to have been the first hominid in whom language

18 
Survival of the Fattest
and, hence, verbal communication, was emerging. This would represent
the fundamental roots of what is commonly referred to as culture, which
is one of the cardinal distinctions between humans and other species.
Hence, there is intense interest to date the emergence of speech, language
and other early signs of culture.
Homo neanderthalensis
H. neanderthalensis (Neanderthals or Neandertals) is so-named because
the original specimens were found in a cave in the Neander River valley
of Germany. Neanderthals were the only para-human hominid because
although early humans had evolved during the Neanderthal period, DNA
evidence tends to suggest that they were distinct and did not interbreed.
They lived for about 200,000 years but became extinct about 30,000
years ago.
Based on the size and thickness of the fossilized bones, Neanderthals
were bigger and stronger than H. sapiens. Body proportions were also
different with the upper body and arm length being longer in relation to
the legs than in humans. Neanderthals also had larger skulls with heavier
eyebrow ridges but they had smaller slanting foreheads. Overall,
their brains were bigger but were also differently shaped with a smaller
frontal area and a flatter brain case protruding somewhat at the back.
Preliminary DNA evidence now adds to the general agreement that these
morphological differences constitute sufficient grounds to distinguish H.
neanderthalensis and H. sapiens as separate species.
Neanderthals endured considerable extremes of climate. They left
abundant evidence of having had plenty of food to eat yet no evidence of
structured campsites. They made beautiful tools, known as the Mousterian
tool industry, which was based on the prepared core technique in which
suitable stones were expertly selected and worked. After initial chipping
and flaking, a carefully aimed strike would break off a large flake,
leaving a sharpened tool nearly ready for use. This invention of this
technique cannot be attributed with certainty to Neanderthals but they
clearly exploited it. Their ability to work stone points led to skilled
hunting of large animals. Nevertheless, Neanderthals did not make more
advanced tools or weapons from other materials like bone.

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
19
Whether Neanderthals had speech is unclear. Anatomically, it seems
plausible but there is a lack of coincidental cultural sophistication or use
of symbols that would be anticipated to accompany language. They had
heavily built long bones that are consistent with abundant diets and a
large capacity for physical exertion. However, some features of their
skeletons also suggest they experienced specific nutritional deficiencies
(see Chapter 14). Their heavier skeletons have often been assumed to
arise from an increased level of exertion but this cannot be the whole
story because their children and infants were similarly heavily built.
Hence, these contrasts, particularly the scant evidence for basic cultural
practices such as burial, make it difficult to attribute the Neanderthal
lifestyle, diet, and technological achievements to having developed
advanced cognitive function or being able to exploit their large brains.
Homo sapiens
Anatomically modern humans (H. sapiens) have existed for at least
100,000 years, with some authorities claiming as long as 300,000 years.
H. sapiens seems to have come from Africa about 130-160,000 years
ago. Nevertheless, clear evidence for a creative explosion does not
appear until about 30,000 years ago with the prolific and now well
documented cave art that is found especially in France and northern
Spain. This was the creative work of the Cro-Magnon who exhibited a
major leap forward in brain function over any hominids. Their cave
paintings show a good understanding of anatomy, proportion, colour and
perspective.
The realistic nature of much of their cave art is all the more
astonishing given the extremely difficult working conditions they chose
for their art, including inaccessible, dark caves. In some caves they chose
to work lying down and worked on the ceilings in cramped spaces only a
meter high, and using poor light from candles lasting no more than a
couple of hours.
Those whose drawings, paintings and etchings have been found
clearly took their art very seriously and, in all likelihood, these artists
were respected then at least as much as Renaissance or contemporary
artists are today. Art seems to have been central to their lives. The

20 
Survival of the Fattest
Cro-Magnon also made rope, fired clay figurines, straightened bone for
spear points, made musical instruments, and also provided elaborate
burials for some of their dead.
It is reasonably clear that Neanderthals coexisted in time and in
several geographical regions with early H. sapiens, perhaps even in
relative proximity. Whether early humans and Neanderthals interacted
and, if so, how, is the subject of much speculation. Indeed, whether the
Neanderthals disappeared because early humans killed them off or
because they were less adaptable to climatic change is debated. Recent
DNA evidence makes it unlikely that Neanderthals were genetically
integrated with H. sapiens. It is clear that H. sapiens is still a relatively
young species and is the only Homo species present today.
Bipedalism, Smaller Jaws and Bigger Brains
Bipedalism is a strange invention. Its evolution has long been
rationalized as being advantageous because it freed the hands of the first
hominids from helping with locomotion. Thus the hands could do other
things including eating, carrying, tool making, etc. But evidence of
bipedalism in hominids precedes evidence of stone tool making by about
two million years. If tool making didn't drive bipedalism, what did? The
Ohio State University anthropologist, Owen Lovejoy, commented that -
'for any quadruped to get up on its hind legs in order to run is an insane
thing to do'.
Bipedalism largely committed hominids to a ground-based existence.
This probably led to a more nomadic existence because, once refined,
bipedalism is a more efficient way of walking than the knuckle walking
of other primates, which are either tree bound or quadrupedal.
Quadrupedalism favours balance and climbing in trees, activities for
which humans are ill-designed. Bipedalism might have yielded
advantages in hunting animals on the ground but this isn't necessarily so.
In fact, the human version of bipedalism has significant disadvantages.
Human babies can't walk or even crawl for six months to a year, but the
babies of other primates are physically much more mature. How, then,
did imperfect bipedalism and immature babies help humans evolve?
Only by not being a hindrance to survival.

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
21
Moving from 
H. habilis to H. erectus and then to H.
neanderthalensis, the proportion of the overall head size occupied by the
jaws shrank and the teeth became smaller. The walking stance became
more upright, overall height increased and a larger brain case developed.
The implication is that changes in these features are probably related. A
smaller jaw and teeth combined with taller bodies probably means a
better quality diet and less need for chewing to extract nutrients and
energy from food. A bigger brain definitely meant higher energy
demands but it also implies potentially better manual, intellectual and
social skills. The reasonable conclusion is that hominids having access to
a higher quality diet had to chew less and, therefore, had enough energy
left over in the diet for fuelling further body growth as well as brain
expansion.
Digestion releases the energy and nutrients in food, but some foods
are more difficult to digest and yield correspondingly less net energy.
Digesting fibrous food releases some absorbable carbohydrates but
requires a larger gut and more time, both of which diminish the net
nutritional value of fibrous foods. The net energy content of plant foods
is therefore lower than from meat or fish. Hominid fossil teeth and jaws
started to become smaller at about the same time as the skeleton was
adapting to upright stance and bipedalism. Thus, by moving very
differently and possessing different teeth and jaws, early hominids
undoubtedly ate different food than did quadrupedal primates. Such
different food selection would, in turn, probably be dependent on
hominids living in a different habitat than that occupied by other
primates.
H. sapiens kept up the trend for more erect walking, a more
condensed jaw and the larger forehead first introduced by H. erectus.
However, overall body and skull size is 10-15% less in present day than
in early humans (the Cro-Magnon). Brain size is even a few percent
smaller than in Neanderthals. If bigger brains means more intelligence
and more ability to adapt to or modify the environment (shelter, warm
clothing, etc.), Neanderthals would be expected to be the only current
Homo species because they were brawnier and brainier than H. sapiens.
However, it was early H. sapiens that ousted or at least replaced

22 
Survival of the Fattest
Neanderthals. Something about the skills, adaptability, or intelligence of
H. sapiens exceeded that of H. neanderthalensis.
Stone Tools
Chimpanzees and a few non-primate species use primitive tools, such as
thin sticks to probe termite colonies, or stones to break nuts or seashells.
Still, for a very long time, humans and certain hominids before them
have been the most sophisticated toolmakers. The usefulness of sharp-
pointed tools as weapons of predation or defense, or to procure food,
seems self-evident and has influenced how human evolution, food
selection and, indeed, human identity are viewed.
However, learning to make and use truly efficient stone tools such as
spears, arrows or knives must have taken a very long time. Some present
day anthropologists have specialized in the making of stone tools (stone
knapping) and have needed many years to learn how to select the correct
types of stone and work them to give a tool equivalent to those made
100,000 years ago. In approaching the problem of how just the right
stone was knapped into an efficient cutting tool, a present-day human has
all of the recorded history of tools and weapons on which to consciously
or unconsciously look back upon.
A present day stone knapper also has the advantage of knowing that a
product of a particular specification could be produced because so many
of them made long ago still exist today. If motivated, modern-day, large-
brained humans take ten or more years to perfect their skill at stone
knapping, it is reasonable to assume that many generations of somewhat
smaller brained early hominids also had to endlessly tinker with and
refine this activity before stone artifacts could be reliably used for any
specific purpose, whether it was hunting with spear points or cutting and
trimming hides. How were they clothing, protecting and feeding
themselves before adequately developing these skills?
Furthermore, many Acheulian stone tools are more refined than
appears necessary for the tasks for which they are assumed to have been
made. This added degree of effort would be like sculpting ornate, in-laid
handles on cutlery used every day: attractive to look at but not really
necessary. Perhaps early H. erectus enjoyed the stone-knapping process;

Human Evolution: A Brief Overview 
23
perhaps function is interpreted today when they actually intended art. In
any case, when one has enough time that a device is made more carefully
and in more detail than its function appears to call for, the maker can be
assumed to have had plenty of time on his or her hands. Supper must not
have been an urgent issue. Food and leisure time must both have been
plentiful so that pursuits other than survival could occupy these
hominids.
Regardless of the use to which stone tools might have been put, who
was making them? Did hominid clans have families specialized in this
craft or did everyone try it, some more successfully than others?
Whomever it was, they either had no difficulty feeding themselves from
readily available food choices, or else someone was specialized in
collecting food while the knappers knapped (or napped). Either way, it
means that food had to be abundantly available. The hunting and
gathering process must not have been challenging if one could feed
oneself or others quite easily.
Art
Like tool making, making easily recognizable images of animals is
another highly skilled activity that irreversibly distanced the Cro-
Magnon from hominids. Anthropologists and art historians agree that the
level of skill (use of perspective, colour, shading, anatomical correctness,
and knowledge of seasonal changes in fatness of herd animals) shown in
cave art and in the earliest known sculptures is close to that displayed by
present day artists who have trained for many years. The important
distinction is that artists working in the last few thousand years have
mostly had the advantage of working with better materials and under
much more amenable circumstances than in caves lit only by primitive
and short-lived candles.
As with tool making, the skills to become an accomplished artist
would have taken time, even more so if the brain was more primitive
than today. Presumably, as now, many more hominids were dabbling in
art than were exhibiting their work publicly or were given the honour of
painting in the caves. Like with tool making, someone had to be finding
food for the artists or it must have been sufficiently abundant that they

24 
Survival of the Fattest
could easily find enough for themselves without taking too much time
from their art.
The point regarding both tool making and art is that (as with most
skilled activities) a much larger number of people is usually engaged in
the activity than is actually producing the final products of high quality.
If, like grazing animals, your days are spent feeding yourself, sleeping,
or in self-defense, you stand zero chance of developing the skills of an
artist or toolmaker. If, like most primates, you spend only part of your
day feeding, sleeping or defending yourself, and have time left over to
amuse yourself and socialize, you have at least a slim chance of
acquiring the skills to become a tool user or an artist.
Before the advent of agriculture 10,000 years ago, hunting and
gathering as they are conventionally described would have been a major
preoccupation of virtually every able-bodied individual. Hominids would
also have had weekly or seasonal periods of hunger and perhaps famine.
Who, then, had time to sit around and 'invent' art or music or stone tools
when they were thinking about tomorrow's if not today's supper? Who
would have had time to become good enough that the tools actually
worked or the art was appreciated enough to be encouraged and allowed
on seemingly sacred sites like secluded cave walls? There is no adequate
explanation for how these sophisticated skills emerged and were
endorsed and refined by the pre-human clans and societies that existed
more than 100,000 years ago.

Chapter 2
The Human Brain:
Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity
Evolution of Neuronal Complexity
The mechanism that makes tissues electrically responsive or excitable
has changed little in the 500 million years since the major animal
families last had a single common ancestor. As first shown over fifty
years ago by Hodgkin and Huxley in the squid giant axon, action
potentials are propagated 'by means of an electrical duet played between
sodium channels and delayed rectifier potassium channels', (B Hille,
University of Pennsylvania). When the action potential arrives at the
nerve terminal, calcium channels are used for the rapid release of
neurotransmitter vesicles. How did these excitable systems arise?
Eukaryotic cells (possessing nuclei and other internal organelles)
arose about 1.4 billion years ago. Their emergence involved what must
then have been radical cellular innovations, such as mitochondria for
cellular respiration, as well as the organelles for processing amino acids
into proteins, including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, and
lysosomes. These internal systems of the cell engineered new proteins,
which had not previously existed including tubulin, actin, myosin, and
calmodulin. This diversification with new proteins and new membranes
surrounding new organelles permitted the evolution of new cellular
processes, including sorting and packaging of membrane proteins into
vesicles, secretion of the contents of the vesicles, development of an
internal skeleton permitting cells to move and shape change, and more
refined control of cellular activities using calcium as a second messenger.
25

26 
Survival of the Fattest
Multicellular eukaryotes arose in three groups about 700 million years
ago - the fungi, the animals and the plants. The principle difference
between animals and fungi or plants is the ability to make more rapid
movements. By 525 million years ago, the major animal groups were
established, i.e. the jellyfish, worms, arthropods and chordates. All
nervous systems are based on the same fundamental conditions for
membrane excitability that connect sensory and conducting cells, namely
the need for cell membranes, ion gradients, gated ion permeability
changes, and an effector system capable of responding to the resulting
signal.
Neuronal complexity arose through increased connectivity between
these cells. HJ Karten (University of California, San Diego) describes the
evolution of the cerebral cortex as having involved at least two separate
and specific steps. First, distinct populations of neurons emerged, each
with a characteristic type of interneuronal connection. Second, these
distinct neuron populations became laminated, a process occurring as a
result of sequential migration to form cell layers from the progenitor
cells or neuroblasts. Neurons with a single common neuroblast migrate
together to form a distinct cell layer within the cortex.
Transmission of a signal across a synapse between two neurons can
be electric or chemical. Electric transmission between two or more
electrically responsive cells requires a bridge or syncyctium between the
cytoplasm of one cell and another, a feature that can exist in fungi, plants
and animals. Only animals have true gap junctions, in which the
cytoplasm is separate but the membranes of the two cells are essentially
fused. Chemical transmission across a synapse requires several features,
including neurotransmitter packaging into vesicles within the cytoplasm,
controlled release or exocytosis of the vesicle contents at the plasma
membrane, and ion channels sensitive to the chemical neurotransmitter.
Chemical neurotransmitters are common molecules. Their uniqueness
in relation to signal transmission comes in positioning their release sites
on the pre-synaptic cell near the receptors for these chemicals on the
post-synaptic cell, and in the speed and modulation of their calcium-
mediated response. Bacteria are prokaryotes that can synthesize several
neurotransmitter molecules but do not meet the other criteria for
chemical transmission, which are present in all eukaryotes.

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
27
Protein Homology
The relevant proteins used as enzymes, ion channels, and receptors in
these neuronal communication processes are very similar between yeast
and mammals so they have evolved little over the past billion years.
Modern protein evolution involves mosaics formed by the assembly of
multiple protein blueprints that were repeatedly recombined on a
common template, resulting in complex proteins with specific domains
for substrate recognition, catalysis, modulation and protein-protein
recognition.
Homeobox or 'hox1 genes are central to expression of specific
characteristics in developing brain and many of these genes are
homologous across extremely diverse species, such as humans and the
housefly, Drosophila. The bacterium, E. coli, has sodium-potassium
pumps that, although not used for signal transmission, are homologous to
those in plants, yeast and animals. This commonality implies that the
basic components needed to evolve complex brains arose only once.
Fundamentally different forms of respiration, locomotion and sexual
reproduction exist but complexity in the nervous system follows a
recognizably similar pattern across diverse animal species.
Karten proposes that the nervous system's dependence on a core
blueprint arose with the evolution of homologous proteins in widely
differing species and with the homologous domains on single proteins
that are functionally linked despite being used for diverse purposes. Such
homologous domains include cyclic nucleotide phosphorylation, cyclic
nucleotide ion channel gating, voltage gating of cation channels, and
membrane pore-forming regions.
The structure of some of the many different voltage-gated potassium
channels in the mouse is more similar to these channels in the housefly
than to other potassium channels in the mouse. These protein homologies
exist within animals but not in plants or fungi, suggesting they were a
fundamental part of the evolution of nervous systems. Calcium channels
probably evolved from potassium channels and sodium channels
probably evolved from calcium channels before the wide diversity in
potassium channels evolved. Sodium channels make rapid conducting
axons possible, which allows signals to be transmitted without

28 
Survival of the Fattest
unnecessary and excessive use of calcium-dependent messaging during
each stimulus.
The earlier evolution of mechanisms to maintain potassium and
calcium gradients suggests they became more important than sodium or
chloride gradients because many bacteria can grow in the complete
absence of the sodium or chloride ions. Rapid conducting axons using
sodium channels would only be necessary in large animals, which
evolved later than smaller multicellular organisms. The evolution of
these three types of ion channels allowed for specialization of some cells
specifically for signal conduction rather than for contractile and secretory
functions.
The Brain in Primate Embryos
The large difference between the brain size of humans and other primates
is almost nonexistent in early stage primate embryos, such as humans
and macaques, in both of which the brains occupy about one third of
overall body size. Not only are the brain sizes relatively much larger than
at any later time in development, but they are also virtually the same size
at the same stage of development in these two very different primate
species (Figure 2.1). This striking evidence is uncommon because these
comparisons are not often reported. Nonetheless, this example suggests
that if, as embryos, primates as different as humans and macaques have
similarly large brains, then humans have no specific anatomical or
genetic advantage for brain growth that shows up early in embryonic
development. Rather, the developmental differences that favour much
larger brains in humans really emerge later in fetal development and
continue to widen as development proceeds postnatally to adulthood.
A simple anatomical comparison such as similar brain weight in
embryos of humans and macaques is inadequate proof that there are
really only minimal differences in the genetic potential for brain growth
between humans and other primates. Genetic differences between species
show up in the way and rate that a species develops all the way from
embryo to newborn to adult. However, differences in the genetic
potential for primate brain growth may well remain small until the fetus
gets to the stage at which the brain starts to make significant metabolic

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
29
Figure 2.1. Similar and large brain to body proportions in a macaque (left) and human
(right) embryo, both aged about 45 days. Modified from Schultz (1969).
demands, i.e. the stage at which it has sufficient working cells that its
oxygen and energy demands start to mount. Genetic differences in the
ability to develop a blood supply to the brain and to provide it with
energy and nutrients will then start to play a role in influencing the
duration of neuronal network expansion, which is a key component of
brain growth and enlargement.
Extraordinary Connectivity
The attributes 
of consciousness, imagination, problem 
solving,
adaptability to new situations, and language (both spoken and written)
are important components of advanced cognitive function in humans.
They are dependent on attaining a more sophisticated level of
information processing than is present in any other land-based species
besides humans. Large brain size relative to body size appears necessary
for advanced cognition but the threshold of brain size and organization at
which intelligent thought becomes possible is still unclear.

30 
Survival of the Fattest
Viewed in terms of evolution, the question is how the prerequisite of
advanced cognition - extraordinary connectivity - amongst neurons in the
human brain got started in the first place. The fly in the ointment is that
the presumed stimuli for advanced cognition - language, culture and
organized social activity - all already require an advanced brain. If one
already possesses an advanced brain, one can learn new skills and can
improve them with practice. But are rudimentary efforts to acquire new
skills passed on the next generation? Does a well-trained chimpanzee
produce smarter offspring? Humans speak because we have advanced
brains and the appropriate anatomy and neural circuitry. Language
acquisition can be improved by interacting with family and others in
society. But which comes first, the chicken or the egg: social, intellectual
and manual proficiency or a bigger more advanced brain?
This is a difficult but important issue in explaining human brain
evolution because culture, hunting, and tool making are all to a greater or
lesser extent seen as the foundation of the larger and more advanced
human brain. However, this is a circular argument because a more
advanced brain is needed before one can improve the proficiency of
neuronal activity commensurate with intelligent thought. How did
humans get bigger, more sophisticated brains without the skills that
already need a bigger brain?
The usual answer is that it happened incrementally - a little at a time.
Hominid societies became larger and the intricacies of culture started to
emerge. People in close proximity start to learn skills from each other.
Larger social groups, i.e. villages, require a stable habitat and food
supply but don't require bigger brains. That is reasonable but it really
does have to start somewhere. How did hominids start to congregate in
larger groups than other primates? There aren't dozens of large-brained,
cognitively advanced primates on which to model human brain
evolution; there is only one.
Something had to increasingly propel certain hominids into
increasingly social interaction and it had to be something that had no real
or imaginary benefit for their survival; natural selection governs
evolution and has no vested interest in survival or the emergence of any
particular characteristics, including bigger brain or higher cognitive
function.

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
31
Survival Versus Plasticity
The misleading thing about the human cognitive capacity is that
the benefits receive most of the attention. Human intelligence is
unsurpassed in its potential to solve problems and to do beautiful and
imaginative things. But this cleverness has its down side too. In order
to achieve moderate to high intelligence, humans need the correct
genetic endowment. Minimum standards of nutrition and psychosocial
development also need to be met in the first few years of life.
Furthermore, achieving reasonably intelligent and constructive behaviour
in later life depends on graduating through a series of critical windows.
Cruelty, neglect, malnutrition or extreme poverty all exert a negative
influence on human brain and psychological development; they may not
prevent achievement of high intelligence but they can permanently
distort one's perception of the world and greatly reduce the odds of
normal mental development. Thus the psychosocial and nutritional
setting during the critical windows are enormously important for later
attitudes.
The existence of critical windows during infancy and childhood
means that normal cognitive development is not assured, i.e. it
is vulnerable. This important issue is dealt with in more detail in
Chapter 4. The emergence of the high functioning human brain
demonstrates that this developmental vulnerability can usually be
avoided but this doesn't mean the vulnerability wasn't a problem as brain
expansion began, nor does it mean that it has disappeared. Iodine
deficiency disorders and cretinism in over 700 million people worldwide
today makes this very clear (Chapter 6). The point is that hominid brain
evolution had somehow to deal with and accommodate to this evolving
vulnerability.
Added freedom of choice and the ability to decide between different
options lead to the potential for greater extremes of behaviour in humans
than in other species. Humans are capable of worshipping other people or
killing them or themselves. Humans can choose to copulate with one or
numerous partners, heterosexually or homosexually, or with none at all.
Humans are capable of lethal self-starvation in the face of plenty
(anorexia) or of overeating to the point of incapacitating obesity.

32 
Survival of the Fattest
Humans can devise intricate and beautiful objects or can be wantonly
destructive, risking the destruction of humanity.
As David Horrobin brilliantly described in The Madness of Adam and
Eve, the same brain that is capable of creating beautiful art, music,
architecture or anything else that most people would admire is, through
disease and psychosis, also capable of a highly distorted view of self and
of the motives of others. As well as harbouring immense creativity, the
humans can be deceitful, cruel, paranoid and irresponsible. The
neurological basis of creativity clearly involves a dark side as well. In
evolutionary terms, the propagation of madness and extreme anti-social
behaviour for the sake of stone tools seems to be a risky venture.
In Promethean Fire: Reflections on the Origin of Mind, Charles
Lumsden and Edward Wilson note that despite its distinctive and
powerful capacities, the human mind can also be remarkably inefficient
in some ways. They note that humans are relatively poor at information
recall, are unable to adequately judge the merits of other people, and are
poor at estimating risk. As well, they make excessive use of stereotypes
while planning strategy. Lumsden and Wilson claim that humans
tend to equate events that have low probability and trivial consequence
with events that have low probability but important consequence.
Therefore the lasting impact of catastrophes, such as warfare, floods,
windstorms, droughts, etc., is generally underestimated even when the
same catastrophe is repeated and experienced by several sequential
generations.
Compared to whales or birds that communicate with long, complex
sound sequences, humans also have a poor ability to faithfully replicate
sound or movement. This includes poor memory for numerical sequences
like the arithmetic term 'pi' to multiple decimal places. This must have
been an impediment to acquiring speech. Idiots savant may excel at this
rote-type capacity but, paradoxically, are often otherwise intellectually
subnormal and socially dysfunctional. Humans also have poor memory
for space and time compared to, say, honeybees, which can faultlessly
traverse a complicated route from a new food source and accurately
report its location to members of the hive.
There is also a tendency to equate today's more advanced
technological achievements with higher intelligence. The possibilities

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
33
offered by technology whether it be exploration of Mars, high efficiency
automobiles, or video-cell phones are impressive and, despite their
desirability, were not possible even fifty years ago. Does that make
today's youth inherently smarter than their grandparents or people living
in the Middle Ages?
Present day technology builds on previous technology and
information but, in lamenting the decline in wisdom during his time, T.S.
Elliot noted that knowledge does not substitute for wisdom nor
information for knowledge. And that was in 1934! We certainly have
more information today than ever before but it is not clear that any more
information filters through to become wisdom than it did a century or
even a millenium ago. Thus, despite disproportionately large brains,
humans do not uniformly excel in all aspects of neurological activity or
decision-making. Indeed, we are much worse at some activities than
some rather humble insects.
The point is that human intelligence and normative behaviour are both
plastic - there is no rigid blueprint for either. That is precisely the point.
To function normally, termite and bee colonies and, to a lesser extent,
even mammals require and receive specific blueprints for behaviour and
survival. Humans do not and as a result outcomes related to survival can
potentially be a lot better but also potentially a lot worse. Brain
expansion and advancement during human evolution was thus a double-
edged sword.
Brain Weight, Body Weight and Encephalization Quotient
Despite today's modern imaging technology and accurate balances, there
is still discrepancy as to the average normal adult human brain weight.
Part of the discrepancy arises from differences in what is being
measured. At what anatomical landmark is it no longer the brain and
becomes the spinal cord? Is volume or weight being used? Is it the brain
of a 20 year old or one of an 80 year old, because aging alone causes the
brain to shrink. Is it the space inside the empty dry skull or the brain
itself, stripped of all protective membranes? The volume of the brain's
cavities and cerebrospinal fluid they contain vary considerably.

34 
Survival of the Fattest
John Allen and colleagues at Washington University in St. Louis
have recently reconstructed human brain volumes from magnetic
resonance images. They reported that the 'empty' brain of young, male,
adult humans has a volume of 1273 cubic centimeters (cm3), a value
that increases to 1360 cm3 if the associated fluids but no surrounding
membranes are included. The reference value for modern human
brain size that I will use here is therefore 1360 grams, which is
equivalent to 1360 cm3. Allen's group confirmed that male brains are
generally larger than female brains by 10-15% in all regions. They also
showed that, compared to male brains and to other areas of the female
brain, the left occipital (back) region of the female brain has the
most variable volume.
Allen's images confirm many previous reports showing that the
occipital lobe has undergone extensive reorganization in humans
compared to other primates. In contrast, the visual cortex is larger and
spread more laterally in non-human primates. Allen's values are
consistent with other imaging studies and provide a useful basis for
understanding why some of the variability occurs between other reports.
Brain 
weight 
is widely claimed 
to increase 
proportionally
(allometrically) with body weight but not quite as fast as the increase in
body weight. However, Michael Crawford at London's Institute for
Brain Chemistry and Human Nutrition has pointed out for many years
that, in fact, the brain shrinks in proportion to increasing body size,
something that is evident from the very small brains and large bodies of
the big savannah herbivores like the rhinoceros (Table 2.1).
Humans have larger brains than expected for their body size,
whether compared to other primates or to hominids. To have a measure
of this 'overencephalisation' in humans, Harry Jerison from the
University of California at Los Angeles, introduced the concept of
encephalization quotient (EQ). Published EQ values differ somewhat
according to what adjustments are to Jerison's formula but, in moving
from Australopithecines through more advanced hominids to living
humans, all studies show EQs increasing two to three fold (Table 2.2).
That means that humans have two to three times more 'corrected brain
capacity' than in their forebears.

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
35
Table 2.1. Average body weights (kg), brain weights (g) and brain to body weight ratios
(%) in a range of small, medium, large and very large mammals. Note the marked
dichotomy between brain weights of the large marine mammals versus the large
terrestrial mammals'.
Species 
Body Weight 
Brain Weight 
Brain/Body Weight
Tree Shrew 
0.3 
4 
1.3
Marmoset Monkey 
0.4 
13 
3.3
Grey Squirrel 
0.6 
20 
3.0
Cebus Monkey 
1.9 
63 
3.3
Cynomologus Monkey 
3.0 
110 
3.1
Chimpanzee 
45 
400 
0.9
Human 
60 
1360 
2.3
Porpoise 
125 
1400 
1.1
Bottle-nosed Dolphin 
165 
1600 
1.0
Gorilla 
170 
500 
0.3
Ox 
500 
450 
0.10
Black Rhinoceros 
1200 
500 
0.04
Elephant 
5000 
7500 
0.15
Sperm Whale 
37000 
7820 
0.02
'Modified from Cunnane et al (1993).
The EQs shown in Table 2.2 are not the same as those in the
published literature because I have arbitrarily given H. sapiens a relative
EQ of 100 and then took EQs of hominids and living apes from the
literature and expressed them as a percent of the human EQ. This doesn't
give humans even more braininess, but simply converts all the numbers
to a percent scale, using one species EQ as a reference.
The average adult human brain weighs 1360 grams (about 3 pounds)
and the average human body weighs 60 kilograms (or 132 pounds; Table
2.2). The early hominids, A. afarensis, A. garhi, and A. africanus, had
brains about one third the weight of human brains. A. afarensis had a
body weight about half that of humans but other hominids such as A.
africanus and the Paranthropus species had lean body weights that come
closer to those of humans. Thus, A. afarensis had a brain to body weight
ratio of about 1.7% (455 grams divided by a body weight estimated to be
27 kilograms).

36 
Survival of the Fattest
Table 2.2. Brain and body dimensions of extinct and extant adult hominids, humans and
related primates.
Species (time period) 
Brain 
Body 
Brain/Body 
Relative
Weight1 
Weight1 
Weight 
EQ2
(grams) 
(kilograms) 
(%)
A. afarensis (3.6-2.8 mya) 
455 
27 
1.7 
41
A. garhi (2.5 mya) 
450
A. africanus (3.0-2.2 mya) 
445 
46 
1.0 
44
P. aethiopicus (2.7-2.3 mya) 
405 
38 
1.1 
44
P. boisei (2.3-1.3 mya) 
500 
53 
0.9 
46
P. robustus (1.8-1.5 mya) 
520 
47 
1.1 
50
H. rudolfensis (2.4-1.7 mya) 
750 
46 
1.7 
59
H.habilis (1.9-1.5 mya) 
650 
35 
1.7 
57
H. ergaster (1.8-1.4 mya) 
855
H.erectus (early; 1.8-1.5 mya) 
863 
60 
1.6 
63
H. erectus (late; 0.5-0.3 mya) 
980 
58 
1.6 
63
H. heidelbergensis (600-200 kya) 
1200 
66 
1.8 
74
H. neanderthalensis (200-40 kya) 
1420 
76 
1.9 
75
H. sapiens (early; 100-10 kya) 
1490 
63 
2.4 
102
H. sapiens (adult male) 
1360 
60 
2.3 
100
(corrected to lean body weight) 
51 
2.7
H. sapiens (newborn) 
400 
3.5 
11.4
(corrected to lean body weight) 
2.9 
13.3
Pan troglodytes (adult male) 
400 
45 
0.9 
42
Pan troglodytes (newborn) 
180 
1.6 
11.3
Pongo pygmaeus (adult male) 
400 
80 
0.5 
32
Gorilla Gorilla (adult male) 
500 
170 
0.3 
25
'These data are averaged from publications by Aeillo and Dean (1990), Pinker (1997),
Ruff et al (1997), Kappelman (1996), MacKinnon (1978), Falk (1987), Cronin et al
(1981), Passingham (1985), Blumenberg (1983), and Leonard and Robertson (1994),
Schultz(1969).
2Encephalization Quotient: Data are averaged from Ruff et al (1997), Martin (1981),
and Kappelman (1996). For easier comparison, they are standardized to a new term -
relative EQ - in which living H. sapiens are set at 100 and comparisons become
percentages of the human value,
mya/kya - million/thousand years ago.

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
37
A brain to body weight ratio of 1.7% is about three quarters of the
2.3% value in modem humans (1360 grams divided by 60 kilograms).
Hence, the three fold absolute difference in brain weight between
humans and A. afarensis is greater than the difference in their brain to
body weight ratios because the body weights are not as different as the
brain weights. Using my relative EQ of 100 in H. sapiens as a reference,
A. afarensis had a relative EQ of 41, meaning that their corrected brain
capacity was about 41% of that in humans today. Because humans have
evolved larger bodies as well as larger brains, current human brain
capacity is more similar to that in early hominids than the three fold
difference in brain size alone would imply.
Brain size and relative EQ both increased by 40-45% in going from A.
afarensis to H. habilis (Table 2.2). Similarly, in going from H. habilis to
H. erectus, there was a further 40% increase in brain size but relative EQ
increased much less because H. erectus was considerably bigger than H.
habilis. H. heidelbergensis had a 20-30% increase in absolute brain size
over H. erectus but, again, body weight increased so the change in
relative EQ (74 versus 63) was less than in absolute brain weight.
Neanderthals gained both brain and body weight so they had almost
identical brain capacity to the somewhat earlier H. heidelbergensis.
Early humans (Cro-Magnon) had the largest known hominid brain
size at 1490 grams and had somewhat smaller bodies than Neanderthals
so they experienced a relatively large (36%) increase in EQ compared to
Neanderthals. Compared to the Cro-Magnon, living humans have lost
about 130 grams of brain weight but have also lost about 3 kilograms of
body weight, resulting in both the brain to body weight ratio and relative
EQ of humans slipping 2-3% over the past 20-30,000 years.
These changes in relative brain size between hominids and humans
can be condensed into four broad phases (Table 2.3): First there was
about a 40% increase in EQ over the 1.5 million year period between
A. afarensis and H. habilis. Second, there was only a small increase in
EQ between H. habilis and H. erectus because body growth paralleled
brain expansion. Third, there was about a 62% increase in brain size and
EQ between H. erectus and H. sapiens, because brain growth again
considerably exceeded body growth. Finally, there was a small, parallel
reduction in both brain and body size in the past 30,000 years that
slightly reduced EQ in present day compared to early humans.

38 
Survival of the Fattest
Table 2.3. The four broad phases of human brain evolution.
Approximate 
Species Involved 
Main Change in
Duration 
Brain Size
Phase 1: 
1.5 million years 
A. afarensis to H. habilis 
40% increase in EQ
because brain growth
exceeded body growth
Phase 2: 
1 million years 
H. habilis to H. erectus 
Minimal change in EQ
because body and
brain growth occurred
in parallel.
Phase 3: 
400,000 years 
H. erectus to early H. sapiens 
62% increase in EQ
because brain growth
exceeded body growth.
Phase 4: 
30,000 years 
Early to present H. sapiens 
Small parallel
reduction in both body
and brain weight.
These four phases support three important concepts in human brain
evolution: First, sporadic change with periods of slow to negligible
growth occurred, rather than continuous, gradual change in brain and
body weight. Second, changes in brain and body size did not necessarily
occur at the same time. Third, changes in brain size (upward or
downward) always seem to have accompanied upward or downward
changes in body size but increased brain size occurred twice when body
size seems to have changed very little (first as Australopithecine became
H. habilis and again as H. erectus evolved to H. sapiens).
Table 2.2 also includes EQs for living non-human primates. Lean
body weights of humans are almost the same as in chimpanzees, so this
comparison shows a two to three fold advantage for humans whether
absolute brain weight, relative brain weight or EQ is considered. Adult
gorillas are nearly three times bigger than human adults but still have
brains the size of early hominids (both 450-500 grams). Unlike in

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
39
hominids, impressive body growth can clearly occur in other primates
without concomitant brain growth.
A Milligram Every Year
Body weight was essentially the same in H. erectus and H. sapiens, so
the rate of change in brain size between them can be discussed without
correcting for differences in body weight or EQ. Brain size increased by
about 500 grams over the 400,000 years between later H. erectus and
early H. sapiens (Table 2.2). An increase of 500 grams over 400,000
years is equivalent to a one milligram increase per year. A change in
brain size of one milligram every year seems trivial, especially when a
difference in brain size within a single human family of a hundred or
more grams is completely normal today.
Some periods (thousands or perhaps tens of thousands of years
long) probably saw more expansion than did others. For instance,
between 200,000 and 40,000 years ago is generally regarded as the
fastest period of brain expansion, whereas the million years between
Australopithecines and early H. erectus is generally regarded as the slow
period (although body growth was substantial during this earlier period).
Fast or slow, ultimately, there were about four million years of
cumulative brain expansion.
Then, suddenly, the four million year old freight train of pre-human
brain expansion ground to a halt. Average brain size stopped increasing
roughly 30,000 years ago, which, paradoxically, was not long after the
time when hominid fossils became close enough to those of modern day
humans to be classified as truly human. In fact, the freight train has been
slowly reversing since then because, compared to the earliest 'modern'
H. sapiens who had brains weighing an average of 1490 grams, the
average size of human adult brains is 1360 grams, or 130 grams smaller
today. That's a loss of slightly more than four milligrams of brain per
year, which is a rate of loss of brain size four times faster than the rate of
gain made over the preceding 500,000 years.
The large number of skull samples of both Cro-Magnon and present
day humans precludes miscalculating their average brain size to yield a
loss of 130 grams over 30,000 years. Perhaps the loss of brain size that

40 
Survival of the Fattest
humans are currently experiencing is a temporary dip in what would
otherwise be truly considered a plateau. A time period of 30,000 years is
really too short to know for sure. If real, such a loss in human brain size
has implications for mechanisms of its evolution.
Incidentally, disregarding the threefold increase in brain size from
infancy to adulthood, Lars Svennerholm at Gothenberg University has
shown that, after about 25 years old, the human brain actually shrinks by
about 8% or just over 100 grams over the next 50-60 years. In fact, the
normal shrinkage humans experience during a lifetime equals or slightly
exceeds the loss of brain size our species has experienced over the past
30,000 years. Some diseases like autism are associated with somewhat
larger brain size while low birth weight and prematurity commonly
retard brain growth and development.
Challenges to Interpreting Hominid Fossil Crania
Few paleontologists or anatomists have the knowledge of hominid fossils
of Philip Tobias from Witwatersrand University in Johannesburg, South
Africa. Tobias has emphasized that there are many challenges to
interpreting hominid fossil crania, starting with the paramount need for
careful dating and good identification of skulls or endocasts (casts made
of the inside of skulls). In his opinion, all that can really be objectively
evaluated in fossil skulls is size, shape and surface impression. In the
first 2 to 3 million years of hominid evolution, these criteria limit
discussion to only a few good specimens. Even in the reliable specimens,
the paucity of good fossils and the variation in shape and size leads to
disagreement over the actual size of the brain.
Body weight in hominids is even more uncertain than brain shape or
volume because it has to be estimated from one or other feature of the
skeleton believed to relate directly to body weight, i.e. the length of leg
bones or width of the pelvis, etc. Hence, an error factor is built into all
such measurements. Again, there are frequently only a few specimens to
start with and there isn't good agreement about which skeletal features
best correlate with body weight.
Despite being of similar absolute size, Australopithecine cranial
endocasts have several clear attributes distinguishing them from the

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
41
brains of the great apes: First, in Australopithecines, the hole in the base
of the skull through which the spinal column passes (foramen magnum)
is located forward of its position in apes. This places the spinal column
of Australopithecines more directly under the skull rather than projecting
at an angle backward from it as in the apes. This, in turn, is an important
feature suggestive of more upright stance if not full bipedalism in
Australopithecines.
Second, the parietal lobe is better developed in Australopithecines
than in living apes. Third, in Australopithecines and Homo, the cerebrum
is the most posterior component of the brain so, with rare exception, it
occupies the whole top of the head and the cerebellum is centered under
the cerebrum. In apes, the cerebellum projects more posteriorly (see
Figure 2.2).
Somewhat in contrast to Tobias' conservative view, Ralph Holloway
of Columbia University in New York sees several important
organizational changes occurring in Australopithecines before the brain
of H. habilis emerged. First, he suggests that 3-4 million years ago, the
primary visual cortex at the back of the brain started to decrease in size
by as much as 20%. Simultaneous with the reduction in the visual cortex,
the association area of the parietal cortex at the side of the brain started
to increase in area. Holloway proposes that these two changes pushed the
significant groove dividing the back from the side of the brain (the lunate
sulcus) backwards in hominids compared to where it is in all of the apes
(Figure 2.2).
Since the parietal association area is used for multi-channel
processing of visual, auditory, and somatic sensory information, as well
as for social communication, Holloway suggests that the larger
association area of the later hominid parietal cortex helped mediate
improvements in understanding spatial relationships. Its expansion would
appear to be an important reason why language developed in Homo but
not earlier hominids. In essence, he suggests that the early expansion of
the parietal association area is intimately linked to the emergence of truly
human neurological capabilities. Holloway sees this improved function
as supporting adaptation to harsher savannah life, tool making and
bipedalism.

42 
Survival of the Fattest
Figure 2.2. Comparison of the morphology of the human and chimpanzee brain (modified
fromConroy, 1997).
Two to three million years ago cerebral asymmetries became evident
including left occipital and right frontal enlargement. These asymmetries
suggest cerebral specialization that may have begun in A. africanus but
are certainly clear in H. habilis. Not long after the reduction in the visual
cortex and expansion in the parietal cortex, the frontal lobes started to

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
43
reorganize. Thus, speech-processing capabilities started to develop
in Broca's area 2.5 to 1.8 million years ago. This particular change is
first clearly evident in H. habilis. Apart from these specific (and
controversial) changes, Holloway notes that brain enlargement was
proportional to the increase in body size that was occurring
simultaneously in other Homo.
Vascular Evolution in Hominids
Changes in blood flow in the hominid cranium contribute to
understanding changes in brain size and morphology. Primate brains
have an inordinately high metabolic requirement for their size so even
bigger primate brains require more oxygen and produce more carbon
dioxide and wastes. Brain function is also compromised by a rise in its
temperature. Since bigger brains produce more heat, they require a
commensurate increase in blood supply not only to nourish them but also
to dissipate the heat produced during their activity.
The major vessels, especially the venous sinuses and meningeal
vessels that collect the blood between the surface of the brain and the
skull, make impressions in the skull. The pulse of the brain's major
arteries that lie under the veins and sinuses contributes to the grooved
impressions in the skull. Hence, in order to better understand how the
hominid brain evolved, it is possible to study changes in cranial
vasculature simultaneously with changes in brain shape and size.
The brain's blood drains through rigid-walled venous sinuses of the
dura mater, which are the protective membranes surrounding the brain.
These sinuses are on the sides and top of the brain and connect to the
veins, which, via multiple branches, drain into the internal and external
jugular veins in the neck. The dura mater sinuses and the temporal and
parietal superficial vessels deeply groove the cranium from before birth.
The anterior superficial vessels do not groove the cranium since they run
lengthwise in the space between the brain's two hemispheres.
The dura mater sinus system is present in the same form from
Australopithecines onwards but the meningeal venous system per se
becomes progressively more complex. Prior to about two million years
ago, the middle meningeal vessels were very simple or were not seen at

44 
Survival of the Fattest
all. A. robustus but especially A. gracilis are good examples that reflect
the simple cranial venous topography of the human neonate. In later
hominids, the brain became larger and shows more complexity of venous
drainage beginning with branching of the middle meningeal veins.
Despite a much larger brain, Neanderthals still had an old-fashioned
meningeal vessel system with poorly developed branching and a large
anterior vein on both sides of the brain that does not correspond to
drainage features in humans. This simplicity in the Neanderthal brain's
venous drainage is especially evident in Neanderthal infants. In contrast
to Neanderthals, the earliest modern humans had more branches between
the middle meningeal vessels. In these specimens, the most extensive
venous branching seems to be at the top of the brain. Full complexity of
the middle meningeal venous network seems to have been achieved by
30,000 years ago.
Increased branching and complexity of the brain's venous system
must parallel similar changes in the arterial system, but the latter are not
traceable because, unlike the veins and sinuses, the arteries are not close
to the surface of the skull. These vascular changes must also probably
reflect changes in metabolic rate, energy demand and heat production in
the brain areas they serve, i.e. in the frontal and temporal cortices where
speech was first emerging and where cognitive processing was becoming
more sophisticated.
Bipedalism in hominids probably increased venous drainage pressure
on the vertebral venous plexus at the top of the spinal column. Dean Falk
of Florida State University suggests that this additional pressure and the
need for improved cooling via veins on the brain's surface improved
venous drainage from the brain in early Homo, which is thought to have
helped release a thermal constraint on brain expansion. This is the basis
for the Radiator Theory of human brain evolution, i.e. once the brain
could get rid of more heat through better drainage, its expansion could
occur or continue.
The Cranial Base - Is There a Link to Brain Evolution?
The cranial base below the front part of the skull is the interface between
the skull and facial bones. Fred Spoor and colleagues of the University

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
45
College London explored whether the morphology of the cranial base of
human infants could provide insight into the origins of the modern form
of the human skull and hence human brain evolution.
In contrast to other primates, several aspects of the cranial base in
humans are different: First, the bones cementing the bottom of skull to
the roof of the mouth (the petrous pyramids) are more upright in humans.
Second, the foramen magnum is more tucked in under the middle of the
skull in humans. Third, the base of the human cranium is more flexed in
midline, meaning that at the front it is more horizontal but, behind the
foramen magnum, it becomes angled almost vertically downwards. This
makes the depressions on both sides of the back of the lower skull (the
cranial fossae) considerably deeper and wider in humans than in other
primates.
According to the Spatial Packing Hypothesis, the shape of the cranial
base is seen as responding to the development of the brain and face. In
species in which the brain is larger, this hypothesis proposes that brain
enlargement is possible due to more flexion of the cranial base, i.e. the
brain enlarges in part by expanding backwards but also downwards.
Since the human fetal skull grows more slowly at the base than
elsewhere, the occipital regions seem to flex downwards under the
pressure of this growth because the brain itself, especially the
cerebellum, is growing rapidly during the third trimester.
Spoor's group made magnetic resonance images of formalin-fixed
human fetuses and found that downward flexion of the cranial base
increased by 9° between 10 to 29 weeks of gestation. This flexion
occurred in several phases and was greatest at birth compared to either
mid-gestation or adulthood. The reduced angle in adults compared to
newborns contradicted their expectation that flexion of the cranial base
would relate directly to the degree of brain enlargement. Indeed, the size
of neither the cerebellum nor the cerebrum was statistically correlated to
the amount of flexion of the cranial base or to the final orientation of the
petrous pyramids joining the skull to the roof of the mouth. Since cranial
base angle in human infants was not at all correlated with final brain size,
these data did not support the spatial packing hypothesis. Therefore,
increased brain size must be accommodated elsewhere than at the base of
the cranium.

46 
Survival of the Fattest
Indeed, Spoor's group found that there is actually less flexion of the
cranial base in humans than would be expected for our brain size, and
suggested that perhaps there are limits to the flexibility of the cranial
base beyond which other functions involving the neck, including
respiration, might be compromised. They suggest that mechanisms
controlling cranial base morphology are different in humans than in non-
human primates, with different growth of organs in the neck probably
being implicated in the particular ontogeny of the human cranial base.
Since speech involves the pharynx, the different cranial base morphology
in humans may be directly or indirectly related to the evolution of
speech.
Body Fatness: A Key Factor in Relative Brain Weight
When comparing body weights, it is assumed that humans, chimpanzees
and extinct hominids all had similar body composition. This isn't so
because primates normally have very low fatness, especially in their
babies. This may seem like an implausible oversight because we are so
conscious today of excess body weight caused by fat. Nevertheless, body
fatness is never actually taken into consideration in body weight
comparisons between humans and other primates or hominids.
Correcting for body fat not found in other species actually sets relative
brain weights in modern humans further apart from other animals than is
commonly recognized.
In healthy adult humans, body fat usually contributes to 15-20% of
overall weight. In affluent societies, body fat averages more than 20% of
body weight but it is rare that adults anywhere are healthy with less than
10% body fat. However, few other land animals in the wild have more
than 5% body fat. Of the fat that can be measured chemically, almost
none in other animals is visible as subcutaneous fat (under the skin). This
difference in body fatness between humans and non-human primates
leads to underestimating relative brain weights in humans because they
typically have four times more body fat than adult non-human primates.
To compare like with like, not only body weight but also body
composition needs to be measured and should be as similar as possible
across species. In other words, about 15% of average adult human body

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
47
weight should be removed so that normally lean non-human species can
be compared to the corrected lean weight of humans. This would leave
the average lean adult human weighing about 51 kg instead of 60 kg.
Correcting for fatness doesn't change actual brain size but it does raise
the relative brain weight of modern humans to 2.7% from 2.3% and
relative EQ would correspondingly rise to about 117.
Relative Brain Size in Fat Babies
Brain weight corrected to lean body weight is more important
when comparing infant rather than adult humans with chimpanzees.
It is in infants that the brain is vulnerable and developing infants
have relatively much larger brains than do adults. Equally importantly,
human newborn babies are positively obese compared to babies of
other species, including chimpanzees. The modern day, full term,
healthy human baby has an average brain weight of 400 grams and
an average body weight of 3500 grams. That makes its relative brain
weight 11.4%.
However, about 500 grams or about 14% of its body weight is fat.
Hence, an average healthy newborn human has a lean body weight of
about 3000 grams and has a brain weight relative to lean body mass of
13.3%, which is 13% more than before correcting for fatness. Newborn
chimpanzee infants are also lean and have relative brain weights of about
11%, which is the same as in human infants. Removing body fat from the
calculation means lean human babies then have similar body
composition but have true relative brain weights about 18% larger than
in chimpanzees.
Several points arise from these comparisons (Table 2.4): First,
newborn human infants have brains that are about one third of the
absolute size of those in adult humans. However, this difference is much
smaller than for their body weights, those of infants being 1/20 the size
of adults. As a result, relatively speaking, the brain weighs much more at
birth than in the adult. This is true across species, not just in humans, and
is an important factor that needs to be considered in discussing brain
evolution.

48 
Survival of the Fattest
Table 2.4. Key points in the comparison of adult and infant brain size and brain/body
weight ratio.
1. 
Body fat is a much larger component of the body weight of healthy human infants
(about 14%) compared to other large terrestrial mammals, including all other
primates.
2. 
To compare like with like, body fat should be removed from body weight, giving
'lean' human infants a brain/body weight ratio of about 13%.
3. 
Even without removing the effect of body fat in human infants, brain/body weight
ratios are much more similar in human and chimpanzee infants than in the respective
adults.
4. 
Notwithstanding a bigger increase in brain weight as humans mature, the main
difference in brain weight between adult humans and chimpanzees is greater body
growth in chimpanzees.
5. 
Body fatness is crucial to more than the brain/body weight ratio in humans; because
body fatness after birth is a function of early nutrition, its presence is one of the
most important indicators of normal human brain development.
Second, at birth, the difference between the relative brain weights of
chimpanzees and humans is smaller than it is in adults. The human infant
brain is over twice as big as in chimpanzee infants while in human
adults, the brain is about three times bigger than in adult chimpanzees.
Although humans and chimpanzees are born with a relatively small
difference in brain size, after birth, chimpanzees put more effort into
body growth while humans keep putting it into brain as well as body
growth.
Third, would it make any difference to their brain development
if human babies were born leaner and were, in fact, more like
chimpanzees? Yes, is the short and unequivocal answer; it makes a huge
difference. Fatness makes a newborn human baby healthy and is
essential for normal brain growth and neurological development.
Leanness in a human baby is not the normal or ideal situation. Leanness
can be healthy in adults but it isn't in babies. Leanness in babies arises
due to being born early (premature) or by being undernourished during
pregnancy. Either way, in general, lean babies have a much higher risk of
slower brain development (see Chapters 4 and 5).

The Human Brain: Evolution of Larger Size and Plasticity 
49
Evolutionary processes are often assessed by comparing the adults of
different species. Across primates, the developmental difference in brain
size (actual or relative) is greatest in adults so it is understandable to use
the adults as the main models. However, the foregoing analysis of
relative brain size in human and chimpanzee babies is intended to lay the
foundation for the case that it is differences and similarities amongst
neonates that may be more likely to inform us about human brain
evolution rather than the differences between adults.
##*
I suggested earlier in this chapter that the small reduction in brain size
as early humans (the Cro-Magnon) evolved into present day humans
should give us pause for thought. Did the functional capacity of the brain
also decline with that loss of size, or was it unaffected? Could genes that
promoted increasing brain size during the previous million or more years
change and reverse the increase in size?
A facultative parameter like the environment (climate or diet) can
wax or wane; that is the nature of environmental events or change.
Genetic information is more of a constitutive parameter. It does change,
but in this case the reversing trend in brain size implies that the
mutations that helped program the increase in brain size got switched off.
Actually, it is more than that; if human brain size is really shrinking, the
genetic change favouring expansion would have to be more than
switched off; switching off would potentially arrest brain expansion but
for the brain to shrink, genetic effects on expansion would have to start
reversing themselves. One therefore would have to postulate new genetic
events that exactly nullified the initial genetic change.
Alternatively, are there indeed environmental changes that have
adversely affected human brain size in the past 30,000 years? Agriculture
was a major invention and has been widely adopted in the past 5,000
years; could it (or any other significant dietary change) affect brain size
on a global basis? We will come back to these questions as we
investigate next how the brain works and then its metabolic and
nutritional vulnerabilities.


Chapter 3
Defining Characteristics:
Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement
Embryonic Brain Development
The earliest stages of embryonic brain development involve rapid cell
proliferation, resulting in accumulation of a very large number of cells
destined to become neurons. The final number, form and destination of
neurons depend as much on the rate and timing of programmed cell
death, or apoptosis, as on the rate of formation of these cells. In humans,
the peak number of neurons occurs at 10 to 18 weeks gestation.
Organized migration of newly formed brain cells begins soon after the
proliferation phase. This migration has two important characteristics; it is
time-sensitive, and different cell types migrate as separate clusters that
stay in parallel alignment and become distinct layers. Cell-specific
structures also start to emerge at this time, i.e. neurons grow axons and
dendrites, and neuroglia start to differentiate into astrocytes and
oligodendroglia. The latter then start to develop the myelin sheaths that
surround axons.
Across animal species, there is remarkable similarity in the forms and
stages through which the brain passes during its early development, i.e.
the initial induction of the neural plate, followed by regionalized cell
proliferation, and then cell migration and finally programmed cell
death. Migration is timed such that some cells that are still developing
in the deeper area of the brain where most neurons originate must
then pass through zones of other neurons that have already migrated,
differentiated, and are well established at their final destination. Thus,
51

52 
Survival of the Fattest
younger migrating neurons that will eventually reside in the cerebral or
cerebellar cortex near the outer surface of the brain must first pass
through deeper brain areas such as the thalamus, which contains older,
more established neurons that will remain where they are. Apoptosis and
resorption of neurons that have not migrated or adequately established
dendritic connections in the layer for which they are destined is a normal
phase of brain maturation.
Glia (or neuroglia) are the family of brain cells that support the
neurons. They are mostly located between the brain's blood supply and
the neurons themselves. Glia transfer nutrients and synthesize other
substances necessary to maintain function of the neurons. They are also
responsible for generating the myelin sheath that protects the integrity of
neuronal signals and insulates each neuron's axon.
Depending on their function, the timing of neuronal maturation, i.e.
development of dendrites and axons, starts earlier in gestation than for
the glia and is relatively complete early postnatally. Neuronal cell
division and migration is usually occurs during a ten week period at 14 to
25 weeks of gestation, after which the adult number of cells is then
present in the brain. Glia start to form at about 15 weeks gestation but in
contrast to neurons, they continue to divide and proliferate through adult
life. Depending on the region of the brain, their maturation continues for
at least two years postnatally, during which time their total number also
drops dramatically.
The cerebral cortex is anatomically distinct by eight weeks gestation.
By 26 weeks gestation, its multi-layered structure and the outer gray
matter (mainly cell nuclei) and inner white matter (mainly myelin) are
clearly evident. The different functional areas of the cerebral cortex
develop at different stages according to their priority. For instance,
myelination of the visual and auditory areas occurs earlier (and
prenatally) than in circuits involving movement of the limbs which
require integration of the cerebellum and cerebrum, and can take three to
four years to complete. Control over movement of the arms and upper
body develops before that of the legs, thus delaying walking over
grasping with the fingers or turning the head. Final myelination of
circuitry that defines more advanced decision-making and reproductive
behaviour does not mature until after adolescence.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
53
From about six months gestation until about the time of birth, the
cerebrum undergoes the most rapid growth. Most of the increase in the
volume of the cerebellum is postnatal and occurs more slowly than for
the cerebrum. This crude measure of differential growth of brain
components is consistent with the fact that the cerebellum is more
concerned with control of precise movements of the limbs, an attribute
which is largely lacking at birth but which becomes established over the
subsequent months and years. On the other hand, it is through the mid-
brain and the brain stem that virtually all incoming and outgoing signals
pass, including those that control functions such as heart rhythm and lung
function. Automatic control of these vital functions is needed for survival
at birth so must become established fairly early in gestation.
Investing in Vulnerability
Birth is a convenient reference point at which to compare 'functional
capacity' of the brain because the newborn has had no time for learning
or for the influence of feeding. Within minutes of being born, some
mammals can stand, use their eyes, vocalize and find the mother's nipple
and feed themselves. Others, like humans, are relatively helpless and
can't do much except vocalize. Therefore, based on their maturity and
functionality at birth, there are two classical categories of neonates: First,
are the altricial species, which are born helpless, immature, and usually
in larger litters. Second are the precocial species, which are born more
mature, more independent, and usually in small litters.
Rats and mice fit well into the altricial mold. Chimpanzees and other
non-human primates are typical of the precocial mold. Humans fit into
neither mold because they are almost always born in small litters (usually
only one) yet are also born totally helpless. Pigs also break the mold
because they are incredibly active and mature immediately after birth yet
come in litters of eight to ten.
Clearly, what humans lack in survival capacity at birth can be made
up for as they mature, but this requires 10 to 15 years to accomplish.
Some can play the piano, are competitive at chess, or can solve advanced
math problems at five years old. That is a spectacular improvement over
what can be done at birth or what any other species can do at any time in

54 
Survival of the Fattest
their lives. But if the food isn't very near at hand and in a familiar place,
not many five year olds can feed themselves. Few five year old humans
can survive independently.
Unlike in other primates, evolution has invested heavily in what the
human brain can eventually do in an adult but has not invested in what it
can immediately do in the infant. Humans have colour and stereoscopic
vision, abstract thought, language and specific physical refinements, i.e.
the opposable thumb and forefinger, which greatly facilitate manual
dexterity. Conversely, human evolution did not particularly invest in
smell, night vision, or hearing.
The size of specific areas of the brain reflects these differences.
The enlarged human cerebral cortex is used for thinking and planning,
and emphasizes touch, language and vision. In contrast, there is
loss of areas like the olfactory cortex, which interprets smell.
Humans still use smell, probably more so than is commonly realized,
but more during infancy than later in life. Memories involving smell
are amongst our most enduring. Nevertheless, unlike many other
animals, humans do not depend on smell to seek food or identify
friend or foe.
The extraordinary capability of the human brain arises in part because
of a long period of childhood that can be used to acquire language and
other skills. The puzzle that needs to be accounted for in human brain
evolution is that children are allowed to take so long to acquire the skills
to become independent of their parents. What environmental conditions
allowed humans the luxury of at least five years of total vulnerability of
their infants, during which they need a guardian virtually day and night?
Healthy babies don't lose their baby fat; they maintain it for two to three
years so the maternal investment in putting that fat in place before birth
continues long afterwards.
The very long-term investment in the human infant brain juxtaposed
against its prolonged vulnerability is an unresolved issue that has to be
addressed in coming to a full understanding of human brain evolution. It
is a paradox in which, effectively, evolution selected for vulnerability at
birth. Logically, vulnerability is the last attribute one would select for if
one were constantly worried about survival.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
55
Critical Periods - A Key Source of Vulnerability
A key attribute of normal development is that the success of each stage
depends to some extent on the success of preceding events. This
sequential maturation creates a series of critical periods in which each
stage has a certain amount of time to be completed. Critical periods
characterize neurological development, but also occur in development of
the cardiovascular, skeletal and immune systems.
Critical periods in brain development have long been recognized both
by behaviourists studying imprinting, and by neurobiologists studying
the sequence of maturation of cells and processes in the brain and central
nervous system as a whole. Successful completion of subsequent stages
depends on (is vulnerable to) the successful completion of each earlier
stage. Environmental deprivation or stimulation during the critical period
for a certain event affects that specific event largely to the exclusion of
other developmental processes that have already occurred.
Car assembly plants are perhaps a suitable analogy: if putting on the
doors occurs before fitting the windows but the team putting in the doors
doesn't get all four on before the car has moved on to the window area,
then the car moves on anyway and one or more doors are left missing. In
reality, the missing door would get put on later even if it had to wait until
the car was completed since, because it is on the outside, a door could be
fitted at any time. On the other hand, if placement of the steering wheel
normally occurs before fitting the dashboard, the assembly line would
have to stop if the steering wheel had not been placed in time, because it
could not be done later.
If, as with brain maturation, the assembly line cannot be stopped, the
car produced without a steering wheel would be useless; everything else
would look right and the engine would work but it couldn't be driven.
Hence, during car assembly, there is a critical time point for putting in
the steering wheel, after which malfunction is assured unless the timing
of this event is respected. Nowhere in infant development is the concept
of critical periods in development more important than for the brain.
The difference between car assembly and brain assembly is that car
assembly can be stopped. The plant manager will grumble about the cost
but the only thing that is really affected is time and money. In contrast,

56 
Survival of the Fattest
only death can stop infant brain assembly. Death might well occur if a
component of the brain as important as the steering wheel could not be
installed during its critical period. The risk the brain faces is not so much
one of missing parts but, still with the car assembly analogy, more like
poor working conditions - bad lighting, electrical black-outs, sloppy
work, or ill-fitting parts. The whole car can usually be put together
regardless of the working conditions, but the number of lemons produced
will be increased when assembly conditions are poor. Human brain
assembly during fetal and neonatal development faces the same
vulnerability.
Normal development involves the emergence and maturation of
specific processes and pathways. The sensitivity of these processes to
external modification has a finite critical period before or after which the
opportunity for such modification rapidly declines. Developing certain
behaviours or achieving a certain level of performance involves critical
periods, each of which necessarily involves its own period of
vulnerability. The vulnerability imposed by a critical period can be
genetic or environmental and is different for different aspects of
neurodevelopment. The timing, nature and severity of the insult are also
important in determining its impact.
John Dobbing of Manchester University is particularly associated
with the concept that critical periods in mammalian brain development
arise according to the stage of overall development. After the first
trimester of pregnancy, the developing brain becomes resistant to toxic
agents causing morphological malformations but it remains vulnerable to
Dobbing's deficits and distortions of function, which can remain into
adulthood.
Deficits and distortions occur both within specific regions of the brain
and also in the brain as a whole compared to the rest of the body. These
impairments arise because of inability to complete in the prescribed order
or sequence the maturation of a certain cell type or region of the brain.
This may be because of defective production or migration of certain
types of cells, or because of selective and excessive cell death.
Distortions arise because a deficit in a preceding stage in development
affects the completion of the next stage. A distortion could involve
almost any part of brain development, including a reduction in size of the

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
57
cerebellum relative to the rest of the brain, a reduction in myelination
caused by insufficient cholesterol required for myelin, or impaired
development of reflexes or a certain behavioural pattern. Distortion in
brain myelination {hypomyelination) is one of the main consequences of
postnatal malnutrition that may well account for the significant decrease
in brain size and function caused by malnutrition.
Vulnerability and Resistance to Brain Damage
The risk associated with interrupting the brain's oxygen and energy
supply is permanent damage because, unlike some organs such as
muscle, skin or adipose tissue, the brain is committed to a continuous
state of high activity; it never shuts down. Some areas of the brain
become more active with stimulation but the brain as a whole is still
considered to be a continuously active organ. Interruption of the oxygen
supply to the brain prevents renewal of brain fuel needed for the ion
gradients and neurotransmitter release that are the basis for signal
transmission. Fuel stores within the brain last only a few minutes so
inability to replace them means imminent cell death and permanent
damage to the affected region.
The vulnerability of the brain to permanent damage is common to all
vertebrates but some species have extreme resistance to such damage.
Goldfish can withstand oxygen-free (anoxic) water for sixteen hours at
20°C without noticeable loss of brain function. Some carp can withstand
anoxic water at near freezing temperatures for months. Some freshwater
turtles can withstand anoxia for at least three months at 3°C.
Unlike humans, goldfish, carp and turtles are not characterized by
particularly advanced cognitive capacity. Humans and goldfish are
therefore examples of two extreme strategies in brain evolution (Table
3.1). In goldfish, there was minimal evolutionary investment in cognition
and maximal investment in protecting the brain against various
environmental insults such as low oxygen, low temperature or poor
nutrient availability.
In humans, the investment was the opposite: the brain's adaptability
or plasticity got maximum effort but the trade-off was that it remained
highly vulnerable to insult and defective development. If protection of

58 
Survival of the Fattest
the brain is the priority, it is because environmental factors - oxygen,
temperature or nutrition - are variable and often insufficient. The cost of
that priority is that brain size must remain small and control only
absolutely essential functions so that nutrient and oxygen demands are
manageable even under difficult circumstances.
In contrast, if vulnerability in brain development has arisen it is
because, throughout millions of years of evolution, those parameters on
which 'optional' brain functions depend, i.e. advanced cognition, have
been reliably available and vulnerability to them is only rarely exposed.
Lack of oxygen, hypothermia or nutritional insult still cause serious
problems in the species with the vulnerable brain but the chances of
exposure to such circumstances are markedly lower than in the goldfish,
carp or turtle.
Table 3.1. Resistance or plasticity: the two extreme strategies of brain evolution.
Goldfish 
Non-Human 
Human
Primate
Variability of environment: 
High 
Low 
Low
Resistance to damage: 
High 
Medium 
Low
Vulnerability of the brain: 
Low 
Medium 
High
Investment in cognition: 
Low 
Medium 
High
Plasticity of brain function: 
Low 
Medium 
High
Need for stable fuel supply: 
Low 
Medium 
High
Investment in fuel reserves: 
Low 
Low 
High
Functionality at birth: 
High 
High 
Low
Mammals, especially primates, have had dependable oxygen and
nutrient supply for tens of millions of years. Genes refining and
extending brain development have therefore evolved without the
constraint of constant vigilance against environmental insult. Hominids
took it one step further than did primates and humans took it the furthest.
Hence, brain vulnerability necessarily co-evolves with increasing
cognitive capacity. Both are only possible with exposure to a very stable

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
59
supply of oxygen, good control of brain temperature and rich nutrient
supply.
Because uterine contractions tend to compress the baby and restrict
blood flow in some areas of the body during birthing, transient under-
oxygenation of brain (hypoxia) commonly occurs during birth. The lower
energy requirement of the infant compared to the adult brain probably
helps it better tolerate hypoxia. For instance, during recovery from
hypoxia in infants, lactate enters the brain in proportion to its
concentration in blood and is immediately used as a fuel. This spares
glucose, accounting for the paradoxical rise in brain glucose after
hypoxia. Human infants have some brain glycogen but, in contrast to
adults, brain glycogen in the infant seems unresponsive to hypoxia.
Of the three major environmental insults to the brain (lack of oxygen,
low temperature, or nutrient lack), only nutrition is really relevant to
human versus non-human primate evolution. Protecting the brain against
vulnerability means either cognitive sophistication must be restricted or
better protection of the brain must be assured in the form of brain fuel
reserves. By evolving body fat stores during fetal development, humans
developed better nutrient and fuel protection for the brain than did non-
human primates or any other terrestrial animals.
Human infants are much less functional than are the infants of many
other precocial species including non-human primates: at birth, they
cannot sit, stand, walk, grasp, etc. By permitting the lowest possible
'functionality' at birth, this put the lowest possible energy demand on the
fetal and neonatal brain, thereby reducing oxygen consumption and
hence vulnerability. By developing the lowest possible functional
demands on their infants while also obtaining best quality diet available,
hominids limited the vulnerability of their brains more than anything else
could (Table 3.1).
As a result of a lengthy period of evolution in a highly stable
environment, the human infant as a whole became increasingly
vulnerable. Low functionality of the infant places fewer demands on the
brain but makes the infant increasingly dependent on the mother. Natural
selection considers not what the brain or other organs would like but
what the organism as a whole can tolerate. Infant viability must not have
been substantially imperiled or humans would not have evolved

60 
Survival of the Fattest
cognitive advancement. An environment providing a rich and stable
nutrient supply would have offered the best opportunity to combine brain
expansion and extreme infant vulnerability.
It would have been advantageous if the more advanced human brain
could have evolved a lower fuel requirement. That also would have made
it less vulnerable, but this would have been at the cost of limiting the
expensive process of establishing and maintaining brain connectivity,
which is the hallmark of advanced cognitive capacity. In effect, without
having evolved adequate fuel reserves for the brain, non-human primates
were restricted to a lower functionality, lower vulnerability strategy of
brain development.
How Much Energy is Needed for Brain Activity?
It is difficult to measure how much energy brain cells need when they are
active. Is there such a thing as an inactive brain cell or brain region? If
there is a difference caused by activity, how is it measured? For species
with higher cognitive aptitudes, what is the energy cost of that increased
ability? Underlying this problem is a general assumption that active brain
cells use more energy than inactive brain cells.
Brain imaging tools like functional magnetic resonance do not
measure neuronal activity per se but, rather, they image blood flow to
brain regions. Positron emission tomography is another common
technique to measure brain energy metabolism and it, too, does this
indirectly by measuring regional brain uptake of glucose. Both these
techniques show that increased blood flow and increased glucose
utilization accompany an increase in activity of a certain area of the
brain, i.e. the visual cortex.
The increased energy demand of higher brain activity is usually met
by increased oxidation of blood sugar (glucose). Increased blood flow is
a response to a combination of related events occurring during brain
activity, including increased glucose utilization, lower oxygen levels, and
increased carbon dioxide production. Blood flow is what can be
measured and the common assumption is that changes in blood flow to a
specific region of the brain are an accurate substitute for changes in brain
activity.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
61
Several years ago, Marcus Raichle of Washington University
challenged this view. His imaging data confirmed that blood flow and
glucose uptake increased in brain areas that were active. However he also
showed that there was less than a 6% increase in oxygen consumption in
the active area. Raichle suggested this small increase in oxygen
consumption was insufficient to account for brain activity. In fact, in
some of his experiments, oxygen extraction from the blood seemed to
decrease during visual and somatosensory stimulation.
Therefore Raichle reasoned that if blood flow and glucose uptake
increased yet oxygen uptake decreased in the affected area, oxygenation
of the active brain area must paradoxically increase not decrease during
activity, i.e. that brain activity does not depend on an immediate increase
in oxygen uptake. Thus, it was unlikely that neural activity alone is
sufficiently costly to increase both oxygenation and regional brain blood
flow.
The basis for Raichle's controversial argument is that the brain is
already using the maximum oxygen available just to maintain membrane
potential, ion gradients, neurotransmitter production, etc. If brain oxygen
uptake were already maximal in the 'resting state', added brain activity
would have to be independent of oxygen uptake. Therefore, lactate (or an
alternate fuel) would have to be produced to provide the extra energy
substrate during stimulated brain activity. His results supported this but
the rise in lactate seemed too low to really account for the increased
energy requirement of the stimulated region of the brain.
Some labs showed that oxygen uptake increased more with the same
test as Raichle used. Others supported Raichle's findings but showed that
although tactile stimulation was not sufficient to increase oxygen uptake,
visual stimulation was. Raichle's data were also supported by reports
showing that brain lactate increased during brain stimulation in the cat. A
rise in lactate usually suggests that the tissue is active without using
oxygen. These inconsistencies support the need for a reexamination of
what actually fuels brain activity.
Of the apparently low amount of oxygen consumed during brain
activity, as much as half seems necessary to fuel the energy needs of glia,
which are the support cells not directly implicated in neural signal
transmission. An increase in blood flow may also help maintain

62 
Survival of the Fattest
potassium homeostasis and pH. Hence, the increase in oxygen
consumption alone during brain activity is probably insufficient to
account for increased blood flow in an active brain area. Raichle felt that
integration of the activity of glia and capillaries with that of active
neurons in a specific area of the brain may well account for the blood
flow and increased oxygen consumption of that region.
Hemoglobin is the oxygen transport molecule in the blood. With
activation of a brain area there is a rapid loss of oxygen from hemoglobin
causing a transient rise in deoxyhemoglobin (hemoglobin having no
oxygen) lasting 200-300 milliseconds. About 3 seconds after stimulation,
the situation reverses with an increase in oxyhemoglobin. This confirms
that the brain rapidly consumes oxygen, which is then replaced with
more oxygen from the blood. The problem is that the techniques used in
these experiments do not show which cells are using the oxygen, or
glucose for that matter.
Overall, these studies implicate other brain cells besides the neuron
itself in neural communication, a point that Raichle was initially at pains
to make. Some of the glucose taken up by the brain is probably made
into lactate by astroglia, which the neurons then use to make ATP during
a burst of activity. Lactate transporters and other enzymes exist making
this more indirect scenario feasible.
Energy Requirements of the Brain
KW Cross and D Stratton at the London Hospital Medical College
showed that the temperature deep in the ear indirectly measures the
brain's heat production and is a good estimate of the brain's metabolic
rate. These and other studies were supported and extended by Malcolm
Holliday at the University of California at San Francisco, who showed
that the newborn infant brain takes about 74% of the energy consumed
by the whole body (Table 3.2). By the time an infant weighs about five
kilograms, i.e. at about three months old, the percentage of whole body
energy intake consumed by its brain has dropped to about 64% of the
total. This compares to the liver taking 18%, muscle taking 7%, and the
other organs including the heart competing for the remaining 11% of
energy intake.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
63
Table 3.2. Energy requirements of the human brain from birth to adulthood (modified
from Holliday, 1971).
Age 
Body Weight 
Brain Weight 
Brain's Energy 
Consumption
(years) 
(kg) 
(g) 
(kcal/day) 
(% of total)
Newborn 
3.5 
400 
118 
74
4-6 months 
5.5 
650 
192 
64
1-2 years 
11 
1045 
311 
53
5-6 years 
19 
1235 
367 
44
10-11 years 
31 
1350 
400 
34
14-15 years 
50 
1360 
403 
27
Adult 
70 
1400 
414 
23
If the baby is born prematurely or was malnourished in utero, muscle
and fat are smaller but brain weight is close to normal, so an even higher
percent of total energy consumed by the body goes to the brain. There
has to be an upper limit to the amount of energy that can be drawn by the
brain, even in the most premature the infant. For example, in a premature
infant weighing 1100 grams (the average being 3500 grams) with a brain
weighing 190 grams, the same metabolic demand by the brain as in a
term infant would exceed the energy intake of the whole body.
Therefore, the brain's metabolic rate must either ramp up postnatally or
be significantly compromised by premature birth. Both may be true but
exact values are not known.
In adults, the body's energy requirement is about 25 kilocalories per
kilogram of body weight, or 1700-1800 kilocalories per day. Holliday
showed that the energy requirement of the brain, heart, kidneys and liver
is completely disproportionate to their size; they consume two thirds of
the body's energy intake but they represent less than 6% of the body's
total weight. In terms of energy consumption (kilocalories per kilogram
of tissue per day), the metabolic rate of the heart is highest at 610. The
heart is followed by the kidneys at 390, the brain at 296, and the liver at
290 kilocalories per kilogram per day. Well below these values are those
of other organs, including skeletal muscle at about 17 kilocalories per
kilogram of tissue per day.

64 
Survival of the Fattest
Because of its relatively large size compared to the heart and kidneys,
the adult human brain consumes the most disproportionate amount
(about 23%) of the body's total energy needs. The heart and kidneys are
metabolically more active but the brain takes a higher proportion of total
energy consumption because it is larger than the heart and kidneys. Thus,
if they were the same size, the brain would have a significantly lower
energy requirement than the heart or the kidneys. Skeletal muscle has a
relative low rate of energy consumption but, overall, still takes 25-30%
of the body's energy intake because it occupies 40-50% of total body
weight and represents 80% of the body's total cell mass.
Experiments have been conducted to measure the energy cost of the
brain's metabolic activity. These experiments either temporarily knock
out the sodium-potassium pump with a drug or they hyperstimulate
the brain using seizures. They show that the combined demand by
the sodium-potassium pump and synaptic neurotransmission account
for 50-60% of the brain's energy consumption. The remaining energy
requirement of the brain is for synthesis of neurotransmitters and
numerous structural and regulatory molecules.
Still, about 20% more glucose is consumed by the brain than can be
strictly accounted for by the brain's energy needs. This excess
breakdown of glucose by the brain appears in newly synthesized lactate
and pyruvate, which can be measured leaving the brain in venous blood.
Some glucose carbon also goes into other products in the brain including
neurotransmitters.
Unlike in the heart, muscle or liver, there are clear differences in
oxygen consumption across brain areas. Glucose consumption is higher
in the brain areas with the highest metabolic activity, which are the
auditory cortex and inferior colliculus, both of which are used for
hearing (see Table 3.2). It is interesting to note here the relationship
between brain energy metabolism, iodine and hearing: The development
of hearing is the most energetically expensive area of the brain and
iodine is a key nutrient in the regulation both of energy metabolism and
the normal development of hearing (see Chapter 6). Expansion of the
auditory region in humans undoubtedly facilitated the evolution of
speech uniquely in humans, so two key aspects of human evolution
(speech and brain enlargement) have marked energy demands and are
vulnerable to iodine status.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
65
Table 3.2. Oxygen consumption (micromoles/100 grams/minute) in different areas of the
monkey brain.
GRAY MATTER: 
Inferior colliculus 
103
Auditory cortex 
79
Superior olivary nucleus 
63
Medial geniculate 
65
Vestibular nucleus 
66
Mamillary body 
57
Thalamus (lateral nucleus) 
54
Cochlear nucleus 
51
Parietal cortex 
48
Caudate-putamen 
52
Thalamus ventral nucleus 
43
Visual cortex 
59
Cerebellar nucleus 
45
Lateral geniculate 
39
Superior colliculus 
55
Nucleus Accumbens 
36
Hippocampus 
39
Pontine gray matter 
28
Globus pallidus 
26
Substantia nigra 
29
Cerebellar cortex 
31
Hypothalamus 
25
Amygdala 
25
WHITE MATTER: 
Corpus callosum 
11
Internal capsule 
13
Cerebellar white matter 
12
WEIGHTED AVERAGE 
36
Data compiled from Sokoloff (1991).
One of the earliest approaches to determining the energy requirements
of the brain was by comparing the concentration of glucose, oxygen and
carbon dioxide in the carotid arteries supplying blood to the brain with
their concentration in the carotid veins coming from the brain. The
difference between the arterial and venous concentration of a substance

66 
Survival of the Fattest
is the arterio-venous difference. If the arterio-venous difference is a
positive number, the tissue is taking up the substance in question because
more arrives at the tissue in the arterial blood than leaves in the venous
blood, i.e. oxygen or glucose. If the arterio-venous difference is negative,
the tissue is producing more of that substance than arrives in the arterial
blood, i.e. carbon dioxide.
The high volume of blood flowing through the brain means that
useful measurements of arterio-venous difference in the brain are
restricted to metabolites in high enough concentration, mainly oxygen,
carbon dioxide and glucose. Numerous arterio-venous 
difference
measurements for glucose and oxygen show that for each molecule of
glucose consumed by the brain, about 5.5 molecules of oxygen are also
consumed.
Oxygen consumption by the brain can vary with changes in blood
flow, i.e. with dilatation of cerebral blood vessels in response to low
oxygen or high carbon dioxide load. Extraction efficiency of oxygen can
also change irrespective of a lack of change in blood flow. Still, arterio-
venous differences are sufficient to calculate the brain's energy (glucose)
consumption, which is about 3.5 grams per 100 grams brain per minute
in adults. Glucose consumption is even higher in the infant than it is in
the adult brain (5.3 grams per 100 grams brain per minute).
Brain energy requirements appear not to change with changes in
'normal' brain activities as different as sleep or activities requiring
intense concentration. However, the brain's energy requirement is
measurably reduced during loss of consciousness. It may also decrease in
the elderly and in conditions in which the blood's oxygen carrying
capacity is reduced, such as anemia. There is disagreement on whether
hypothyroidism reduces brain oxygen consumption. At levels raising
blood pressure and causing anxiety, adrenaline notably increases oxygen
consumption by the brain. Convulsions and epileptic seizures can double
the brain's energy consumption. Hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid
gland) has no measurable effect on the brain's consumption of energy,
even though it can raises energy expenditure of the body as a whole by
up to 50%.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
67
The Brain's Energy Substrates Linked to Glucose
With normal food availability, the brain runs almost exclusively on
glucose. Glucose metabolism is normally aerobic (oxygen consuming).
Lactate is a three-carbon molecule derived from glucose metabolism by a
process called anaerobic glycolysis or glucose breakdown without using
oxygen. In most tissues, lactate can function as a temporary alternative
fuel when insufficient oxygen is available for normal glucose
metabolism, i.e. during hypoxia. Hypoxia occurs routinely during
extreme exercise, especially if one is insufficiently trained.
Because of uterine contractions and compression of the blood supply
to the baby, transient brain hypoxia also commonly occurs during birth.
The lower energy requirement of the infant brain compared to the adult
brain helps it better tolerate hypoxia. This is supplemented by the brain's
ability to use lactate as a fuel, which enters brain from the blood in
proportion to arterial concentration.
During prolonged hypoglycemia, i.e. starvation, when there is no
incoming glucose or other carbohydrates, the body is capable of using
gluconeogenesis to make glucose from several other substances (see
Figure 3.1). In muscle, removal of the nitrogen from amino acids makes
these molecules good short-term sources of carbon for glucose. This use
of amino acids to make glucose consumes muscle protein and leads to
muscle breakdown in starving humans so, at best, it is a temporary
solution.
Amino acids 
Glycerol
(protein) 
^ s . 
/
^ 
(from fats)
GLUCOSE
Lactate 
-"-""''^ 
^~~"--- 
Glycogen
(from glucose) 
(stored glucose)
Figure 3.1. Compounds contributing to gluconeogenesis.
Glucose can also be produced from recycled lactate or pyruvate. This
source doesn't represent net glucose synthesis because the lactate or
pyruvate came from the breakdown of glucose in the first place. Glucose

68 
Survival of the Fattest
can also be made from glycerol produced during the breakdown of
triglycerides from body fat. Glycerol has three carbons and readily slips
into the pathway of glucose synthesis. Gluconeogenesis from these other
molecules works for 24-48 hours but is an inadequate solution to meeting
the constant and high energy needs of the brain. Amino acids come
principally from muscle so their breakdown to supply the brain's energy
needs for even a few days would be incapacitating. Thus to provide
longer-term back-up fuel requirements for the brain, a different energy
substrate not involving glucose or tissue breakdown is needed.
Ketone Bodies - Alternatives to Glucose
Ketone bodies {ketones for short) are that different energy substrate and
they are derived from fatty acid oxidation (see Figure 3.2). There are
three ketones - beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, and acetone. All the
steps in ketone metabolism occur in the brain, including conversion of
beta-hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate, acetoacetate to acetoacetyl CoA,
and acetoacetyl CoA to acetyl CoA. Acetyl CoA is the final common
denominator in the metabolism of all the different energy substrates for
ATP production. Conversion of beta-hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate
occurs via the enzyme - beta-hydroxybutytrate dehydrogenase - which is
very active in both mitochondria and synapses of nerve endings. It is also
present in glia, neurons and nerve fibers.
Fatty acid oxidation
i
Acetyl CoA
I
•I (two acetyl CoAs condense)
I
Acetoacetate —> acetone
it
beta-Hydroxybutyrate
Figure 3.2. Ketone body synthesis. Multiple arrows in a row indicate several steps; two-
way arrows indicate reversibility of the reaction. Acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate
both have four carbons. Acetone has three carbons and is formed by the spontaneous
decarboxylation of acetoacetate.

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
69
Brain uptake of ketones increases in proportion to the ketone levels
in the blood. As fasting starts, brain ketone uptake is modest but it
increases the longer that fasting continues, i.e. the longer that elevated
blood ketone levels are sustained. When fasting starts, the initial rate of
brain ketone body uptake is relatively slow because plasma ketone
concentrations are low, and because the monocarboxylic acid transporter
is still not fully activated for ketone transport. As fasting continues, this
all changes because the stimulation of insulin production by dietary
carbohydrate stops and so production rises and brain uptake of ketones
becomes fully activated. When insufficient glucose is available, ketones
can supply up to two thirds of the adult human brain's energy needs.
Ketone utilization by the brain is not an adaptive response because the
amounts and activities of the relevant enzymes are not changed by
starvation and always exceed the amount necessary to supply the brain's
energy needs. This implies that the brain is used to metabolizing ketone
bodies and is prepared to use them as soon as they are available. The
factor that limits ketone body use by the brain is therefore ketone
availability and not the brain's ability to use them. Ketone availability is
determined by glucose and insulin levels and the ability to generate
ketones, i.e. fat stores.
Ketones seamlessly replace an inadequate supply of glucose to meet
the brain's energy needs, but some glucose is still needed to supply at
least one third of the brain's energy needs. In an experimental model
involving marked ketosis, the rat brain shows no electrical activity when
the blood glucose concentration is below a certain point (less than two
millimolar), so high levels of ketones are unable to completely substitute
for glucose in the brain.
Thus, during starvation when insulin and glucose are low and blood
ketones are elevated, the brain still has an absolute dependence on
glucose for about one third of its energy requirement. Hence, the brain
actively transports glucose as well as ketones even during starvation and
fully developed ketosis. In addition to providing the carbon to replace
oxaloacetate, glucose is essential for the brain as the precursor to lactate,
which is exchanged when ketones are taken up by the brain.
There are two key advantages to having ketone bodies as the main
alternative fuel for the human brain. First, humans normally have

70 
Survival of the Fattest
significant body fat stores so the supply of fatty acids to make the
ketones is almost unlimited. Second, using ketones for up to half the
brain's energy requirement frees up a lot of glucose and greatly reduces
the risk of detrimental muscle breakdown or compromised function of
other organs dependent on glucose. Ketone body uptake by the brain is
five times faster in newborns than adults, and four fold faster in older
infants compared to adults, so the infant brain is arguably better equipped
with 'fuel insurance' than the adult brain.
Radiotracer studies show that, compared to glucose, ketones are
unevenly utilized by the brain. Beta-hydroxybutyrate penetrates all of the
cerebral cortex but more beta-hydroxybutyrate than glucose penetrates
the sub-cortical areas. Low amounts of labeled beta-hydroxybutyrate are
found in certain deep regions of the brain, but are elevated in the
hypothalamus. By far the most labeled beta-hydroxybutyrate is found in
the pituitary and pineal glands, both of which have endocrine regulatory
functions. The region-specific brain uptake of ketones suggests they may
be able to supply certain regions but might not be capable of supplying
the energy requirement of the whole brain.
The ability of the brain to switch to ketones as the primary energy
substrate is not unique to humans but is better in humans than in other
omnivores like the rat, pig, or monkey. Adult carnivores like dogs
achieve negligible ketogenesis during fasting but also have smaller
brains and markedly lower brain energy needs.
Challenges to Meeting the Brain's Metabolic Requirements
Several challenges for brain energy metabolism arose during its
evolution (Table 3.3): The first challenge is the brain's high metabolic
rate. As in other cells, to regenerate ATP, the brain has to process
glucose through the tricarboxylic acid cycle. a-Ketoglutarate and
oxaloacetate are two key intermediates in the cycle that are normally in
equilibrium with the amino acids - glutamate and aspartate. Glutamate is
also in equilibrium with other amino acids and other related metabolites
capable of being converted to glutamate. This interconvertability of
metabolites is useful, indeed necessary, if, like the brain, the tissue has
high energy needs and an active tricarboxylic acid cycle. The brain uses

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
71
the tricarboxylic acid cycle to generate its ATP but the problem is that
same glutamate entering the tricarboxylic acid cycle is also a
neurotransmitter that can trigger undesirable signals if its concentration
in the brain becomes raised inappropriately.
Table 3.3. Unique challenges to brain energy metabolism.
1. 
The maintenance of the membrane potential and synaptic function of neurons
necessitates high energy consumption.
2. 
The blood-brain barrier markedly limits access of potentially suitable energy
substrates such as fatty acids. Despite its ability to oxidize fatty acids, the brain's
need for a strictly controlled fatty acid composition makes these otherwise excellent
energy substrates largely inaccessible to the brain.
3. 
The brain uses glucose as its principle energy substrate but is insensitive to insulin,
the principle hormone controlling glucose metabolism in other tissues.
4. 
Glycogen can only be a minor fuel reserve for the brain because there is insufficient
space within the cranium for the necessary tissue expansion required by the
additional water that accompanies glycogen production.
The brain is therefore forced to maintain about a thousand-fold lower
glutamate concentration in the fluid surrounding the cells where signals
get generated and transferred among neurons than inside its cells where
the brain can use glutamate to generate ATP without risking an
undesirable electrical discharge.
The second challenge is the blood brain barrier. In terms of nutrient
and metabolite in-flow, the brain is almost sealed off from the rest of the
body. Still, it uses metabolites found elsewhere in the body, including
certain amino acids (GABA, glycine, and glutamate) that are both protein
constituents and neurotransmitters. Liberal access by amino acids that are
neurotransmitters but coming from outside the brain would destroy the
tight, local control of their release and would severely disorganize brain
function so their access to the brain has to be extremely carefully
regulated.
Complex molecules, including albumin and lipoproteins, can dock at
receptors on the capillaries of the brain but the blood brain barrier blocks

72 
Survival of the Fattest
direct access to the brain by these large molecules. Specific transporters
have evolved for the brain to take up the exogenous substances it needs,
even for simple but important molecules like glucose.
The third challenge is the brain's use of glucose as its main energy
substrate. Unlike other tissues, brain glucose uptake is not responsive to
high or low insulin in the blood, nor does brain glucose uptake increase
when blood glucose is elevated. This relative insensitivity to insulin
helps maintain a steady rate of brain energy metabolism by preventing
wide swings in brain glucose uptake. The brain can somewhat increase
the efficiency of glucose uptake when blood glucose is low, but this
process seems to become less efficient in elderly humans and may
contribute to decaying cognitive function and memory loss.
Fourth, it was encased in cartilage or bone, thereby precluding
significant daily fluctuations in size. Unlike in muscle and liver, this
prevented significant storage of glucose to use as an energy reserve.
Glycogen is the storage form of glucose but glycogen synthesis requires
three to four grams of water for each gram of glycogen, which takes a lot
of space. This is fine for liver and muscle, which are not encased by bone
but cannot be accommodated by the brain. In fact, there is a small
amount of glycogen in the brain but it appears to last for no more than a
few minutes and so takes up very little space. In effect, sufficient glucose
to meet the brain's needs cannot be stored by the brain so it is dependent
on glucose supplied to it in the blood.
A few minutes supply of glycogen is present in the brain but this
small reserve is of no long-term use. If the brain depended only on
glucose, its own energy needs when the body was low in energy reserves,
i.e. starved, would consume significant amounts of amino acids that can
be converted to glucose and would destroy the protein in other organs
like muscle and intestine. Hence, a final challenge is that the brain needs
alternative energy substrates to glucose that are compatible with the
body's energy needs as a whole.
Energy Needs and Human Brain Evolution
Taking account of the need to constantly supply large amounts of energy
to the brain is fundamental to developing any reasonable explanation of

Defining Characteristics: Vulnerability and High Energy Requirement 
73
human brain evolution. This constant need by the brain for fuel exists
regardless of conscious (adult) brain activity or immaturity of the brain,
i.e. in the infant. The human neonate is a clear example of natural
selection investing a lot of effort in an organ that provides very little
short term benefit; human babies do very little cognitively and yet this
genetic and metabolic investment has been heavily made in humans.
It is necessary to explain how this added dietary energy started to
became available to early hominids but not to other species, especially
non-human primates. Such an explanation has to include a mechanism by
which abundant dietary energy supply became consistently available. In
addition, it is necessary to explain how the extra dietary energy was
available not only to meet the needs of the brain but also to deposit body
fat in the fetal and neonatal period.


Chapter 4
Fatness in Human Babies:
Critical Insurance for Brain Development
When hominids first evolved body fat is unknown. Without clues in the
fossil record or other artifacts no one can say with any certainty what
degree of fatness was present during the long period before enduring
visual images of humans were first made tens of thousands of years ago.
What is clear however from the earliest sculpted or carved images seen
as representing the human (mostly female) form is that at the dawn of
modern humanity 20,000 to 30,000 years ago, women were fat.
Many of the sculpted or etched images show fatness equivalent to
that of a mature, obese woman. Others, such as the etching recently
discovered at a cave in Cussac near the Dordogne River in southern
France, clearly show a firmer, less layered fatness more typical of a
younger woman. Perhaps fat women were uncommon or some artistic
license was taken. However, bears, horses, mammoths, reindeer (and
salmon; see cover) drawn on or etched into cave walls were neither fat
nor badly proportioned, so some awareness of fatness was part of and
apparently peculiar to the human experience at that time.
Assuming that many young and older women truly were fat at the
time behaviourally modern humans first evolved, it seems reasonable
that infants would have been similarly fat. 
In any event, fatness is
characteristic of healthy infants today (Figure 4.1). It is a reasonable
assumption that fatness in human babies is at least 20,000 years old,
but probably much older. In all likelihood, body fatness was part and
parcel of becoming human and, like large human brains and bipedal
75

76 
Survival of the Fattest
locomotion, probably took a long time to emerge. The problem is that it
is impossible to quantify the degree of fatness of pre-humans because no
known attributes of fatness are preserved after death.
Figure 4.1. Body fat distribution on a healthy human newborn infant as shown by cross-
sectional scans obtained using magnetic resonance imaging (modified from Harrington
et al 2002, with permission).
Body fat is widely claimed to have evolved in humans either as a
form of insulation against the cold or as a physical cushion for more
comfortable sitting down. Body fat may do these things but the primary
reason it exists in any organism is to be a storage form of excess
incoming energy from the diet. Body fat stores expand when more
dietary energy is consumed than is needed to stay alive and shrink when
energy intake is less than energy expenditure. Fat must have evolved in
humans for fundamentally the same reason - at some stage, hominids
must have had access to a modest excess of dietary energy relative to
energy expenditure.
In affluent countries, there is great concern today about the health
risks of excess fatness in adolescents and adults. This concern has led to

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
11
extensive research into how fatness develops in adolescents and adults
and why so many people have lost the appropriate balance between
appetite, food selection and physical activity. As a consequence, obesity
has increased in wealthier countries to what many now call epidemic
proportions. Obesity brings along with it a cluster of heightened health
risks including premature birth, hypertension, insulin-resistant diabetes,
premature cardiovascular disease and cancer.
In light of the very legitimate concern about the health risks and
insidious rise of obesity in developed countries worldwide, the fact that
fatness is a vital form of energy insurance for healthy, normal infant
development is commonly forgotten. Contrary to the adult situation
where excess fatness is a harbinger of a health risk in later life, fetal and
neonatal fat is beneficial, indeed essential, for normal growth. Fatness in
newboms is distinct from excess fat in adolescents and adults.
Energy Balance
What is referred to as dietary energy comprises the energy that can be
obtained from food and used to make energy (ATP) for cells to function.
For their weight dietary fats have twice the energy content of dietary
proteins, sugars or starches. Food is converted to energy for essential
processes like breathing, heart contraction, immune surveillance, and
organ function in general. This minimal necessary energy requirement
for life is called the basal metabolic rate, which allows an organism to
meet the barest essentials of life, i.e. while asleep or totally inactive. It
does not include the energy requirements of physical activity.
All daily activities require additional energy than the amount used
during sleep because activity requires muscles to work. Oxygen and fuel
consumption increase to power the muscles, so heart and respiratory
rates are also higher during activity. The digestive system converts
dietary constituents into useable energy substrates but the processing of
food to meet the added fuel requirements also contributes to energy
expenditure.
These metabolic processes consume more energy than is needed
while asleep so additional dietary energy (food) has to be consumed in
proportion to the amount of additional activity. Depending on activity

78 
Survival of the Fattest
level, average total daily energy expenditure exceeds basal metabolic rate
by 50-100%. This means that someone who is extremely active may need
double the energy intake of an inactive person. Similarly, if one is
pregnant, nursing, or fighting a severe infection, more dietary energy will
be required for these additional activities; if it isn't consumed, this
additional energy will have to come from body stores. Many people in
affluent Western societies eat as though they are quite active but actually
lead sedentary lives, so body fat gradually accumulates because energy
intake from the diet continually exceeds the body's needs.
Glucose meets most short-term energy needs. Because of its primary
importance as a fuel, in addition to liberating it from sugars or starches in
the diet, glucose can also be made in the body. Glucose is a 'simple
sugar' or monosaccharide. Table sugar or sucrose is a 'double sugar'
or disaccharide of glucose and another simple sugar. Starches are
polysaccharides or chains of many sugars, some of which are glucose.
After digestion and absorption, incoming glucose has several fates. It
may go straight into the tricarboxylic acid cycle where it will be used to
make ATP. It may also be bulk stored in liver or muscle as glycogen,
which is a molecule comprising chains of glucose. If glycogen stores are
full, remaining glucose could also be converted into amino acids or fatty
acids. The important point is to get excess glucose out of the blood, a
process that is orchestrated by the hormone, insulin.
When less energy is consumed than the body needs, hunger is
experienced and one eats to restore the energy balance between
incoming and outgoing fuels. If one has not eaten within the past 24
hours, there will have been no incoming glucose in any form. However,
the body's need for fuel will not have changed so glycogen releases
glucose stores to continue to meet those fuel needs. Depending on
activity level, glycogen stores may last 24 hours. As glycogen reserves
dwindle, the continuing low insulin levels lead to recruitment of other
fuel reserves other than glycogen.
During gluconeogenesis, proteins in muscle provide amino acids to
convert to glucose. However, fatty acids from body fat are the main
alternative fuel to glucose. The various body fuel reserves can potentially
keep a healthy adult human alive for up to 30-40 days of total starvation.
Thus, there is a constant interplay between glucose supply and demand,

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
79
with short- and long-term alternate fuels filling in when glucose stores
are used up.
Body Fat Distribution
Fat is present in two general regions of the body: Subcutaneous fat is
under the skin while visceral or intra-abdominal fat surrounds the
abdominal organs. There are many other smaller fat stores such as those
around the kidneys or heart, or in between the large muscles of the arms
and legs, but the main places are the subcutaneous and visceral sites. By
definition, visceral fat is restricted to the abdominal cavity itself.
Depending on the degree of fatness, subcutaneous fat is prominent
around the abdomen but is also found on the buttocks, chest, shoulders,
back, upper arms and legs, cheeks, and under the chin.
Two general body profiles of fat accumulation are widely recognized in
obese adult humans. The apples accumulate fat mostly around the waist
but less on the buttocks and thighs. Men with beer bellies are classic
examples. The pears have the opposite pattern with fat accumulating more
on the buttocks and thighs and less on the abdomen. The apple pattern of
excess fatness is more of a health concern because it is associated with
more visceral fat and a higher risk of insulin resistance or non-insulin-
dependent diabetes (also called Type 2 or adult-onset diabetes).
Non-insulin-dependent 
diabetes 
is 
of 
great 
concern 
as 
a
cardiovascular disease risk especially since it is no longer restricted to
adults but is now seen in obese adolescents and even children. The
number of people with non-insulin-dependent diabetes is rising steadily
in virtually all areas, city and countryside alike, where people eat in
excess of their energy needs and are insufficiently active.
By looking at the body from the outside, it is not always apparent
what proportion of the fat on the abdomen is due to visceral or
subcutaneous fat. Sophisticated medical imaging techniques now make it
possible to measure the thickness and location of fat by images of the
body taken in cross-section. Those who successfully lose weight still
may not be fully satisfied with their body shape but these images almost
always show that they are healthier if they are losing weight from the
visceral site, i.e. that their risk of insulin resistance and heart attack has
gone down.

80 
Survival of the Fattest
Uniqueness of Human Baby Fat
Perhaps because excess fat is considered to be unattractive in adults, its
physiological and evolutionary significance in babies has largely been
missed. We are attracted to plump babies because they appear healthy
and their fatness somehow makes them innately attractive. Nevertheless,
few people have considered the biological origins and possible
evolutionary value of fatness in babies. The fossil record has yielded few
specimens of hominid infants. In addition, body fat doesn't fossilize.
This makes almost everything about the emergence of fatness in hominid
infants completely speculative.
In 1993, I published a paper co-authored with Michael Crawford and
Laurence Harbige in which we speculated that since body fat was a key
form of energy insurance for the voracious energy needs of the
developing human brain, baby fat might have had a key role in human
brain evolution. Not long afterwards, in The Descent of the Child, Elaine
Morgan noted that the ten fold higher number of fat cells in humans than
other land animals quite reasonably needs explanation. She also
recognized the uniqueness of human baby fat and speculated that it
would have both advantages and disadvantages.
One advantage of fat would be that if some hominids had made liberal
use of shore-based foods, they would have accessed the water and more
body fat would have facilitated flotation. Morgan, too, recognized that it
would be useful to have a fat store for the costly energy requirement of
the developing brain. However, larger fat stores have the disadvantage of
making childbirth more difficult because human babies are bulkier than
are other primate babies. In addition, it is metabolically costly to deposit
fat in neonates.
Human baby fat is different from adult body fat in at least four
important respects (Table 4.1): First, its distribution is different. Baby fat
is much more evenly distributed on the limbs, face and the torso. Adults
tend to accumulate fat centrally and have little fat on the lower arms or
legs, or on the hands or feet, although distribution at these sites increases
with extreme obesity. Second, magnetic resonance imaging studies show
that baby fat is almost all subcutaneous and, unlike in adults, little or
none is present around the visceral organs.

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
81
Third, in comparison to adults, baby fat at birth contains very low
amounts of the two primary dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids, linoleic
acid and alpha-linolenic acid. These two fatty acids are typically found in
adult body fat in amounts corresponding to the amount consumed.
However, baby fat at birth has almost none of these two vitamin-like
fatty acids so the fetus accumulates very much less linoleic acid and
alpha-linolenic acid compared to the significant place they occupy in the
mother's fat. Hence, before birth, the placenta somehow screens out
these two fatty acids and sends very low amounts of them to the fetal
body fat that is developing in the third trimester.
Table 4.1. Important differences between infant and adult body fat.
1. 
Baby fat has wider and more even distribution under the surface of the skin.
2. 
Baby fat is almost exclusively under the skin and, unlike in adults, is not present in
the abdominal cavity as visceral or intra-abdominal fat.
3. 
Baby fat contains very low proportions of the two most common dietary
polyunsaturated fatty acids - linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids.
4. 
Baby fat contains significantly higher proportions of the two key long chain fatty
acids in membranes - arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid - than in adult
body fat.
Interestingly, the brain's fatty acid composition is like that of the
baby's body fat in also having very low amounts of linoleic acid and
alpha-linolenic acid. This is unlike adult body fat or all other organs
whether in babies or adults, which tend to have 10-20% of their total
fatty acids as linoleic acid. Thus, it seems undesirable, uneconomical, or
both to accumulate more than trace amounts of linoleic and alpha-
linolenic acids in body fat before being born.
The fourth reason baby fat is different from adult fat is that it contains
higher amounts of the two principal long chain polyunsaturated fatty
acids than are present in adult fat. The two polyunsaturated fatty acids
mentioned so far are linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid. These two
fatty acids are vitamin-like because they have irreplaceable functions as
building blocks in the body and because mammals cannot make them in
their bodies. Hence, they have to be supplied in the diet. In fact, in the

82 
Survival of the Fattest
1930-40s, linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid were collectively known
as 'vitamin F', a term that went out of use in the 1950s.
As will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 8, linoleic acid
and alpha-linolenic acid are slowly converted to the long chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids - arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic
acid, respectively, which are particularly important in phospholipids of
the brain. One would not expect to find high amounts in adipose tissue of
two fatty acids needed in the brain and, indeed, that is the case. However,
three to four times more arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid are
found in body fat at birth than in adults, apparently as a reserve for later
needs, especially in the brain.
Polyunsaturates represent less than 1% of the fatty acids in body fat at
birth, of which docosahexaenoic acid is about 0.4%. When that very
small percentage is multiplied by the normal 500 grams of fat at birth, it
amounts to one gram reserve of docosahexaenoic acid. Our studies have
shown that the human brain normally accumulates about 10 milligrams
of docosahexaenoic acid per day during the first six months of postnatal
life. Thus, if it were supplying only the brain, this one gram
docosahexaenoic acid reserve would last 100 days or about three months.
We calculated that all the rest of the body needs about as much
docosahexaenoic acid as the brain does so the total docosahexaenoic
acid needed by the developing infant during the first six months of
life is about 20 milligrams per day. If no docosahexaenoic acid was
available from mother's milk or from a milk formula, and if all the
docosahexaenoic acid in body fat at birth was available for growth and
development, this reserve would still last an impressive 50 days.
Next to nothing is known about what triggers the deposition of fat on
the developing human fetus. However, this process is known to be
limited to the third trimester (Figure 4.2). Almost no fat is present on the
human fetus before it is 26 weeks old, i.e. before the beginning of the
third trimester. Hence the fat a baby is normally born with almost all
accumulates in the final 13-14 weeks of pregnancy. Insulin is present in
fetal blood before the third trimester but it does not affect glucose or
fatty acid metabolism until the fetus is about 28 weeks old, the same time
that fat starts to accumulate on the fetus.

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
83
Figure 4.2. Accumulation of body fat on the human fetus during the third trimester of
gestation (wk = weeks). Note that the total increase is about ten fold what is present at
week 25-26. Amongst all large mammals, especially primates, this amount and rate of
body fat accumulation is unprecedented.
Because of the very rapid rate of fat accumulation on the fetus during
the third trimester, babies born before term (prematurely) have less fat
that do those born at term. Babies born five weeks early have only about
half the fat they should; those born ten weeks early have only about 15%
of the fat they should. Even if pre-term babies had the same percentage
of docosahexaenoic acid or arachidonic acid in their fat as term babies (a
point that is unknown at present), the low body fat stores of these two
long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids means that pre-term babies have
lower absolute amounts of these two important fatty acids needed to help
build brain membranes.
Body and Dietary Fat
Body fat in adults comes from fat in the diet and from fat the body can
make. Because the body can synthesize fat, people consuming very low
fat diets can still become obese. In fact, believing that low fat diets will
prevent obesity is one of today's most widely held misconceptions about
diet and health in affluent societies today. Consistent overeating in
comparison to energy needs, no matter what the composition of the diet,

84 
Survival of the Fattest
leads to increasing fat accumulation. It doesn't matter whether it is bread,
butter, meat, pasta, ice cream or whatever. Conversely, people around the
world consume a wide range of diets but no one diet, race or culture is
particularly predisposed to obesity. Obesity occurs when more dietary
energy is routinely consumed than is spent for daily living, regardless of
the diet.
Excess circulating glucose coming from 
a high intake of
carbohydrates (starches, bread, pasta, rice, cereals, or sugars) can be
converted to body fat at a rate exceeding the normal intake of dietary fat.
On average, people in affluent societies eat about a lA of a pound or 100-
120 grams of fat per day. Experiments with very low fat diets show that
humans can make as much as 150 grams of fat per day. Thus, on a low
fat diet the body can make more fat than one normally consumes.
Therefore, the central issue in obesity is not dietary fat intake alone but
how much food one eats compared to one's exercise level. Adding to the
misconception that low fat diets will reduce body fat is the sad fact that
intermittent or yo-yo dieting actually adds to the body's ability to make
fat when one isn't actually dieting. This occurs because the combination
of sporadic low fat diets and dieting actually stimulates the enzymes of
fat production and prevents weight loss rather than the opposite and
hoped for effect.
Body fat accumulates in specialized fat cells called adipocytes. All
cells have a thin elastic membrane around them that keeps their contents
inside but also lets the cell exchange molecules with the surrounding
fluid. A membrane also surrounds the various working components
(organelles) inside the cell like the nucleus, and the energy burning
factories called mitochondria. Like other cells, adipocytes have this
cellular machinery because they also have to be able to respond to
messages to either store or release fatty acids.
Adipocytes are different from other cells in having their inner
'working' part pushed very much to the side to make room for
the fat droplet they are storing. They end up looking rather like
balloons, with the fat droplet being the air in the balloon and the
nucleus and the rest of the working part of the adipocyte being the
knot on the surface.

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
85
The fat droplet in a fat cell is a mixture of molecules called
triglycerides, in which the 'tri' refers to the three fatty acids that make up
the bulk of the triglyceride, and the glyceride refers to the anchor or
backbone to which the three fatty acids are attached (Figure 4.3). Fatty
acids are molecules like metal chains but usually only with an even
number of links. Most fatty acids in the diet or in the body are chains of
16 or 18 links. Fatty acids usually have a fairly rigid shape; there is some
movement but the links do not move randomly in relation to each other
like they can in a normal metal chain.
Some fatty acids are straight and are known as saturated fatty acids.
Others called monounsaturated fatty acids have a kink near the middle
that gives them a significant bend (Figure 4.3). Our bodies can make the
saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids but we also get them in the
form of dietary fats. The third family of fatty acids, the polyunsaturated
fatty acids, has from two to six kinks making these fatty acids much
more curved 
than 
monounsaturated 
fatty 
acids. Two 
of 
the
polyunsaturated fatty acids are vitamin-like because animals including
humans cannot make them like other fatty acids can be made (see
Chapter 8). This means these two polyunsaturates have to be included in
our diet if humans are to grow, develop and reproduce normally.
c—c/
I
Figure 4.3. Stick model of a triglyceride with a polyunsaturated (top), monounsaturated
(middle) and saturated (bottom) fatty acid. The vertical bonds connecting the three
carbons on the left of the model represent glycerol. In nature, triglycerides exist with a
very large number of combinations of saturated, monounsaturated or polyunsaturated
fatty acids. The angled bonds represent double bonds, which change the shape of the
fatty acid.

86 
Survival of the Fattest
Dietary Fat
Whether it is from bacon, butter, salad oil, mayonnaise, fish, walnuts, or
whatever, most daily intake of fat is in the form of triglycerides. During
digestion, one, two, or all three of the fatty acids are broken off the
triglycerides and are absorbed across the wall of the small intestine. They
are then repackaged into new triglycerides in the intestinal wall and sent
via the blood to the liver for further processing.
During processing of fatty acids by the liver, lipoproteins rich in
triglyceride are formed and secreted into the blood. It is as lipoproteins
that most lipids circulate in the blood. It is possible, but very unlikely,
that after digestion the same three fatty acids could reassemble back on
the same glyceride anchor thus making up a triglyceride molecule
exactly the same as it was before it was digested. Hence, the intestines
themselves and the liver do a large amount of further recombining of
fatty acids to make new triglycerides and phospholipids, which circulate
in the blood.
The fatty acids that make up the triglycerides of body fat come from a
combination of the fatty acids that were eaten and those made in the
body. Analysis of a tiny sample of body fat therefore gives a good
indication of a person's choice of dietary fat over the previous months. If
one never previously ate fish, this would be obvious in body fat from the
lack of long chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids that are mostly
peculiar to fish and seafood. If one then started eating fish, it would
become evident within three to four days from the changed fatty acid
pattern in fat. If one had always eaten some fish and then completely
stopped, this would eventually become measurable but it would take
months before this was clearly obvious because fatty acids in body fat
are used up rather slowly.
Experiments in which changes in body fat composition are measured
after changing dietary fat intake demonstrate that the fatty acids in
adipocytes do not stay there forever; the fatty acids in body fat are slowly
and continuously changing regardless of whether one changes what one
eats. This release and replacement or turnover of fatty acids is regulated
by hormones and by stimulation from the nerves connected to fat cells.
All adipocytes have a blood supply providing them with oxygen,
nutrients, and the fatty acids available for accumulation. The blood also

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
87
takes away the carbon dioxide, wastes, and the fatty acids released by
adipocytes. Hormones influence the speed of these processes and arrive
at the adipocyte via the blood.
Insulin is one of the most important hormones affecting release or
uptake of fatty acids by adipocytes. Higher insulin levels (such as occur
after a meal) increase fatty acid uptake into adipocytes and inhibit their
release. When insulin decreases two to three hours after the last meal or
on waking, this removes the brake on the outflow of fatty acids from
adipocytes and they are again released into the blood. These released
fatty acids are fuels when glucose is low. Other hormones, particularly
those involved in the stress response like adrenaline, can stimulate
adipocytes to release more fatty acids because of an impending need for
additional fuel to aid in the reaction to a stressful or exciting situation.
Phospholipids
Humans or animals with no visible body fat still have chemically
measurable fat in them because the membranes surrounding and within
each cell are made not only of proteins but also of two fatty substances
called phospholipids and cholesterol. In one way, phospholipids are
chemically similar to triglycerides because they are both made
principally of fatty acids. However, there are five important ways that
phospholipids are very different from triglycerides (Table 4.2):
Table 4.2. Significant chemical differences between phospholipids and triglycerides that
markedly differentiate both their chemical nature and their biological roles.
1. 
Phospholipids contain phosphorus but triglycerides do not.
2. 
Phospholipids are components of membranes and, unlike triglycerides, are not
stored as droplets in the cell.
3. 
Phospholipids contain two fatty acids instead of the three in triglycerides.
4. 
Phospholipids are richer in polyunsaturated fatty acids, especially the long chain
polyunsaturates, arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid. Triglycerides are richer
in saturates and monounsaturates, and usually have very low amounts of long chain
polyunsaturates.
5. 
Unlike triglycerides, which are storage fats used for energy, phospholipids are
structural fats used to maintain cell form and function.

88 
Survival of the Fattest
Two key features making phospholipids very important components
of cell membranes are the several different possible head groups and
the high proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acids in phospholipids.
Phospholipids are especially important in organs such as the heart, brain
and eye, each of which depends on relatively high electrical activity.
Just exactly why phospholipids are so important in cell membranes is
under intense investigation. In part, these molecules help docking points
(receptors) on the surface of the cell recognize and transport substances
like glucose that are needed inside the cell. Other receptors anchor
hormones like insulin that influence how the cell works. Phospholipids
help orient a myriad of proteins in appropriate places and configurations
in the cell's membranes. They are also part of a cascade of signalling
molecules within the cell that direct the cell's response to virtually all
stimuli received and reacted to by the cell.
The chemistry and molecular biology of cell-cell interactions is
immensely complicated and growing the more so as new technologies
expand the tools for their investigation. Suffice it to say at the moment
that phospholipids and their particular fatty acid profiles are an integral
part of these cellular mechanisms.
Structural Lipids and Storage Fats
Distinguishing between triglycerides and phospholipids is important in
understanding why lipids are biologically important, especially for
human brain evolution. The overall term, lipid defines these 'fatty
molecules' on the basis of their common chemistry, which is that they
are extractable from tissues or foods by organic solvents like chloroform.
Hence, lipids include all phospholipids, cholesterol, triglycerides, as well
as other related substances.
The common term -fats - refers to fatty acid-rich lipids that are solid
(fats) or liquid (oils) at room temperature. Thus all fats or oils are
triglycerides and are also lipids. However, because substances like
cholesterol are extractable with organic solvents but do not contain fatty
acids, not all lipids are fats. These definitions overlap and are admittedly
confusing. Regardless of the ambiguity between chemical and biological

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
89
terminology, the important thing is that the storage fats and structural
lipids are functionally quite distinct.
The confusion is more than with overlapping definitions because
when all the fats (lipids) are extracted from tissues by organic solvents,
the phospholipids, cholesterol and triglycerides all come out together. It
is rather like with apples and oranges; they are different to feel, look at or
to taste, yet they are both sweet, have a peel and have seeds inside. Once
squeezed and the juices combined, it is no longer possible to tell how
much of each contributed to the total.
So it is with phospholipids and triglycerides; chemists lump them as
fats and when they are extracted from a food sample or tissue, they can
no longer be told apart unless further sophisticated analysis is done. On
the other hand, biologists recognize that phospholipids are structural
lipids occurring only in cells membranes while triglycerides are storage
fats almost always found in droplets and from which cells can derive
energy. Like phospholipids, cholesterol is a key structural lipid and
cannot be used as a fuel.
After extraction with an organic solvent, brain tissue is chemically
about half fat, but this fat is not 'fat' in the biological sense because
almost none of it is in the form of fat droplets, i.e. it is not triglyceride.
Rather, the brain's fat content is almost exclusively in phospholipid and
cholesterol and is all in the brain's cell membranes. Phospholipids and
cholesterol help insulate the main wiring of nerve cells so that messages
go where they should. These two lipids also help constitute the billions
of finely organized branches and synapses between nerve cells. Thus,
essentially all the fat in the brain is structural lipid.
Other organs like muscle or liver also have structural lipids in cell
membranes but, unlike the brain, they also store some triglyceride in fat
droplets. Hence, part of their fat is structural lipid in membranes and part
is storage fat. Adipocytes also have phospholipids in their membranes
but they are unique in having a very large storage droplet of triglyceride
as well.
When measured chemically, even the leanest animals always contain
4-5 % fat. In such lean animals, this extractable fat is comprised almost
entirely of phospholipids and cholesterol in the cell membranes of every
organ and tissue in the body. When opened up for dissection, these lean

90 
Survival of the Fattest
animals have few visible fat deposits as such. Thus, the leanest animals
physically have very little body fat. In practice, most animals usually
have low to moderate amounts of true storage fat in subcutaneous or
visceral depots. The amount of storage fat varies with several factors,
most notably the season and the food supply. Therefore, adding the
structural lipid and storage fat together gives a value of chemically
extractable total fat of something usually between 5-10% of body weight.
Some animals, especially marine mammals like seals living in cold
water, have large amounts of true storage subcutaneous fat. Hence, they
can be as fat as obese humans. In that sense, human body fat is not
unique in the animal kingdom. However, besides humans, no animals
living on land truly have fat babies, e.g. with noticeable fat deposits
under their skin. Some marine animals have fat babies but humans seem
to be unique amongst land-based animals in this respect.
Fat Metabolism, Ketogenesis and Brain Fuel
A fatty acid that has been burned as a fuel is said to have been oxidized.
Beta-oxidation is the more correct name because there are various ways
oxidation of fatty acids takes place but only beta-oxidation leads to fuel
production. Rancidity of fats occurs because of peroxidation of fatty
acids but this is a very different process than the oxidation of a fatty acid
for fuel. Fatty acid oxidation takes place in mitochondria.
The main signal telling mitochondria to oxidize fatty acids is low
insulin in the blood, such as would occur after overnight fasting. Low
blood insulin tells adipocytes to break individual fatty acids off the
triglycerides in their fat droplet and to release the resulting free fatty
acids into the blood. Cells that can oxidize fatty acids then take them up
from the blood and transfer them to their mitochondria where the fatty
acid will be broken down two carbons at a time. These two carbon units
are used to make acetyl CoA, which enters the final process of generating
ATP. Carbon dioxide and water are the final waste products of this
process.
Not all cells can burn fatty acids as fuels. Hence, when blood glucose
is low and muscle or heart cells are happily burning fatty acids as a
substitute, the brain still burns some glucose but also counts more and

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
91
more on a different alternative fuel - ketone bodies (ketones for short).
Ketones generally have a bad reputation because they are associated with
uncontrolled insulin-dependent diabetes. Hence, high blood ketone levels
(above 20 millimolar) are a sign of serious metabolic disturbance.
However, the mild to moderate blood ketone levels produced during
normal (or even prolonged fasting), or which are normally present during
infancy, rarely exceed 2-3 millimolar and are entirely benign. In fact, to
the contrary, mildly elevated blood ketones are essential for normal brain
development, at least in humans.
In the process of ketogenesis, two of the accumulating acetyl CoAs
condense together and form the first ketone - acetoacetate (Figure 3.2).
Acetoacetate has four carbons and can be converted to a more stable
ketone, beta-hydroxybuyrate, also with four carbons. Acetoacetate can
also lose one of its carbons and become the third ketone, acetone, which
is the same substance that is a household solvent commonly used for
removing nail polish. Acetoacetate, beta-hydroxybutyrate and acetone
are all released into the blood from the liver where most of the body's
supply of ketones is produced. Organs like the brain readily use ketones
when blood glucose starts to drop.
Humans have a better than average ability to raise ketone levels in the
blood. My hypothesis is that evolution of a greater capacity to make
ketones as well as to build up fatty acid reserves in fat stores in order to
make the ketones arose during or before human brain expansion. In all
species, the brain is a sophisticated organ and is very vulnerable to its
energy supply. To both expand brain size and increase its sophistication
so remarkably as occurred during human evolution would in all
likelihood have required a reliable and copious reserve of dietary energy
for at least a million years. Glycogen stores cannot serve this fuel
function for long because they are two small relative to the energy needs
of large-brained species.
Hence, some hominids began to evolve larger brains as a consequence
of acquiring a more secure and abundant food supply that helped build
up more long-lasting body fat stores. Evolving a larger brain depended
on simultaneously or previously evolving significant fat stores and
having reliable and rapid access to the fuel in those stores. Although fat
stores were necessary, they were still not sufficient without an improved

92 
Survival of the Fattest
capacity for ketogenesis. This combination of outstanding, long term
neonatal fuel store as well as rapid access to the fuel was the key
insurance for expanding the hominid brain, insurance that was not
available to other land-based neonates, especially other primates.
Fatty Acid Oxidation and Synthesis in Infants
Acetyl CoA is an important molecule derived mainly from glucose, fatty
acids or ketone body oxidation. When mitochondria are replenishing the
cellular fuel, ATP, normally the cell uses the available acetyl CoA only
to make ATP. However, once ATP is topped up, acetyl CoA can be used
to build many different molecules, like new fatty acids or cholesterol that
are then incorporated into cell membrane lipids. If the body's main need
at the moment is to make more fuel because blood glucose is low, then
the available acetyl CoA will be used as a fuel and there is little chance
that it will be used to make a new fatty acid instead.
Thus, the normal situation in fasted (energy-depleted) adults of all
animal species is that acetyl CoA is primarily used as a fuel. Acetyl CoA
has a myriad of potential uses so it makes sense to prevent it from being
used to build new molecules when what the body really needs at that
moment is more fuel for energy-starved cells. In contrast to the fasting
situation, when there is sufficient glucose around, then excess acetyl
CoA is channeled towards building tissue protein or fats.
That is the normal situation in adults but infants use acetyl CoA
differently than do adults; infants can synthesize new fatty acids while
simultaneously burning other fatty acids as fuels. Hence the acetyl CoA
that adults would only channel into ATP synthesis can be diverted by
infants towards synthesis of new fatty acids. Hence, unlike in adults,
fatty acid oxidation in human infants isn't strictly limited to the goal of
making more fuel.
Babies are usually fed sufficiently frequently that ketone production
would never be stimulated if it depended only on being hungry, yet
babies constantly have higher blood ketones than adults. This is the
normal situation and is true regardless of whether blood ketones are
measured before or after feeding. Furthermore, fat stores normally

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
93
expand during infancy so, despite constantly producing ketones, some
fatty acid synthesis and storage is also going on simultaneously.
The fact that babies tend to have higher blood ketones than adults is
all the more interesting considering that their brains are proportionally
much bigger than in adults and that their brains are able to extract
ketones from the blood three to four times more effectively than in
adults. In other words, all things being equal, it would take three to four
times more ketones to be pumped out by the liver just to keep the same
blood ketone level in infants as in adults because the infant brain can
remove the ketones that much more effectively. That means the infant
must be producing more ketones or using them more slowly outside the
brain than occurs in adults. Since blood levels of ketones are actually
higher in infants despite their brain's greater ability to take them up from
the blood, their net ketone production compared to utilization is
considerably greater than in adults.
Ketones and Lipid Synthesis
Ketones are important alternate fuels to glucose for the brain but that is
not all they do. Ketones are versatile molecules and are used as building
blocks, for instance, to make cholesterol and saturated fatty acids. Thirty
years of studies done in rodents, non-human primates and humans were
the foundation for this fundamentally important observation.
On the surface, this situation seems counterproductive. Why recycle
an oxidized fatty acid through ketone bodies into a new fatty acid or into
cholesterol for that matter? Where does this happen and why? The brain
definitely can use ketone bodies as building blocks for structural lipids
for myelin and nerve endings. However, other organs like the intestines,
lung and liver also accumulate lipids made by reutilizing oxidized fatty
acids to make new fatty acids or cholesterol.
Compared to glucose, ketones are actually preferred sources of carbon
to make fatty acids or cholesterol. The infant brain has a very high
demand for cholesterol, but it can't import sufficient cholesterol from the
rest of the body. Hence, the ability of infants to turn oxidized fatty acids
into brain cholesterol via ketones starts to make sense; this process is
intimately linked to supporting brain development.

94 
Survival of the Fattest
The issue during human brain evolution was basically one of meeting
the requirements of both brain development and high brain energy
demands while simultaneously expanding the brain. This had to be done
while using small molecules like ketones that have mixed uses, i.e. that
are good fuels but, simultaneously, also are good molecules to build
membrane lipids.
One potentially relevant point is that the brain is not very good at
burning fatty acids as fuels. This is good news because the brain has no
triglyceride stores, so if it were able to oxidize its own fatty acids and use
them as fuels, it would have to use up its structural fatty acids in
membrane phospholipids. Every time this happened, a new period of
membrane reconstruction would be needed to restore membrane structure
and brain function.
An analogy is the inability of the liver to make ketones while
simultaneously using them for energy; if the liver could oxidize ketones,
its high metabolic rate would consume all the ketones it produces and
there wouldn't be enough left over to export to other organs, especially
the brain. Seen in this light it makes sense that the brain doesn't burn its
own fatty acids to any significant extent. Metabolically expensive organs
have to clearly separate molecules they use as fuels from molecules they
need in membrane structure.
Not all fatty acids are equally easily oxidized and converted to
ketones. Interestingly, the two vitamin-like polyunsaturated fatty acids
(linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid) appear to be the preferred fatty
acids used to make ketones. Linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids are
thought to be important as direct precursors to other longer chain
polyunsaturates needed in membranes so it seems paradoxical that they
would also be the most easily oxidized of the common dietary fatty acids.
Actually, this is no more paradoxical than using ketones both as fuels
and as building blocks for brain lipids; it just means that these two fatty
acids serve different and sometimes competing functions. Dietary
supplies of linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid are normally fairly
generous and humans rarely undergo extended periods of voluntary
fasting with prolonged ketone production, so the use of these two fatty
acids for ketone production rarely risks inadequate amounts remaining
for synthesis of long chain polyunsaturates.

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
95
Fat Babies and Child Birth
Despite the merits of body fat stores for brain development in human
infants, as Elaine Morgan pointed out, the larger brain and extra fat have
an important disadvantage - they make babies bigger and therefore
their birth more difficult. The birth canal passes through an oval opening
in the base of the pelvis. The pelvis is like a basket with a large hole in
the bottom. Inside the basket are the lower abdominal organs including
the large intestine and, in the female, the reproductive organs. During
pregnancy, the enlarging uterus with its fetus and placenta become
occupants of this space as well. These organs (and the developing fetus)
are kept from falling through the hole in the base of the pelvis by the
support of strong muscles surrounding the anus.
A double challenge for the pelvic area affected childbirth in pre-
human hominids and humans. First, it had to provide a sufficiently large
opening for the much larger human baby during birth. Second, the pelvic
opening had to be kept small enough to support walking and running
upright, while also preventing prolapse of the lower abdominal organs
out through this opening. Hominids didn't just evolve large-brained
babies with lots of body fat; they also evolved bipedalism.
The main part of the back and lower human pelvis supports the
vertical spine and anchors the legs. The lower front part of the pelvis
completes the oval-shaped basket and gives strength to the hip joints. It
also creates the opening of the birth canal. The front bony part of the
pelvis, or pubis, has an expandable joint in the middle. This joint is hard
and essentially immovable most of the time but softens and becomes
stretchable just in time for childbirth. Childbirth in humans can be a
difficult process for both the mother and the baby but this appears not to
be so in other primates.
The main reason that birth seems to be less difficult in other primates
is that, compared to humans, the pelvic opening is considerably larger
relative to the infant's head size and shoulder width. Humans seemed to
have pushed fetal brain and body size to the maximum possible limit
allowed by the pelvic opening. In so doing, childbirth is commonly
painful if not outright difficult for most women. In some women,
childbirth is clearly traumatic and risks harming the baby.

96 
Survival of the Fattest
The whole organism has to benefit from (or at least cope effectively
with) the morphological changes being introduced. The advantage of a
hominid woman's new ability to walk on two legs had to accommodate
not only the increased difficulty with supporting her abdominal organs
that were now vertically stacked, but also had to accommodate the birth
of larger-headed, fatter infants. The bigger brain and the added body fat
constitute, at least in modern times, a risk to safe, trouble free childbirth.
These risks were evidently not sufficient to have prevented evolution of
the big-brained fat human baby.
Nutritional status of the mother is one of the important factors
affecting the difficulty of childbirth. A woman who is inadequately
nourished during her own childhood and adolescence will usually be
smaller than average and will have a smaller than average pelvis. She
may get pregnant before she has finished growing and so will have to
share the nutrients she consumes with her developing baby. She may
have a normal or a small baby depending on the type and timing
of the nutritional compromise she still faces. Thus, being small may
not necessarily make childbirth more difficult if the baby is also
proportionately small. However, if the mother is small but the baby is
closer to normal size, childbirth is bound to be more difficult. Unless
maternal malnutrition is prolonged and severe, the baby is more likely to
be closer to normal size because its nutrient supply is favoured during
pregnancy.
The point is that maternal nutrition influences all the parameters
relevant to child birth - the size of the mother's pelvic opening, the
amount of fat on her baby, and her baby's body and brain size. Evolution
of human fetal fat occurred in a genetic and nutritional environment that
also favoured brain expansion but which, at the same time, had to ensure
an adequate opening in the maternal pelvis.
Prematurity, Low Birth Weight and Fat Stores
During the first two thirds of gestation, the human fetus is lean like the
fetuses of other terrestrial species, i.e. it has essentially no body fat
deposits. When the human fetus is 25 to 26 weeks old, some cells under
the skin start to differentiate from connective tissue and become fat cells

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
97
or adipocytes. The differentiation of adipocytes is the start of a process
during which body fat content will more than double during the next 6 to
7 weeks and will more than triple during the next and final 6 to 7 weeks
of pregnancy.
As a result, about 500 grams (about VA pounds) of fat will normally
be deposited on the body of the fetus by the time it is born. This fat
forms a more or less uniform layer under the skin of the trunk, face and
limbs. Its distribution is unlike that of fat in the obese adult or
adolescent, in particular because almost none of the fat of the newborn
surrounds the organs inside the abdominal cavity where, in adults, it is
associated with a higher risk of diabetes.
Adipocyte number increases two to three fold and their fat content
increases up to fourteen fold during the first two to three post-natal years.
As a result, during the first year of life, total body fat content increases
about four fold and parallels body weight gain. Adipocytes have an
enormous capacity to expand in size so the total increase in fat during the
first few postnatal years can be accommodated by adipocytes present at
birth rather than requiring differentiation of new adipocytes. However,
during childhood and adolescence, total body fat content increases more
than the adipocytes formed during infancy can accommodate, so further
adipocyte differentiation usually occurs during this later period.
Nutritionists and pediatricians have always been concerned about
protein intake and lean tissue growth as markers of health in the fetus or
infant. However, fat deposition is also a key aspect of healthy human
fetal development in the third trimester. In fact, during the final weeks of
the third trimester, Fred Battaglia (University of Colorado) showed many
years ago that the near-term fetus spends considerably more energy on
fat deposition than it does on protein synthesis and lean tissue growth.
Fat deposition is by far the major component of the increase in body
weight during the third trimester. This fat accumulation is desirable,
indeed necessary, for healthy post-natal development in humans.
Low body fat is the most important contributor to low birth weight in
humans. Fetal body fat is deposited primarily during the third trimester
so premature birth is associated with a disproportionately low amount
of body fat. Premature infants risk compromised organ function because
of underdeveloped digestive and immune systems and inadequate fat

98 
Survival of the Fattest
reserves. This is a problem similar to that faced in malnutrition when
energy reserves are low to nonexistent and poor sanitation often results
in gastrointestinal infection and poor nutrient absorption. In effect, even
the healthiest premature infant is at higher risk of malnutrition than is a
healthy term infant. Modern hospital care decreases this risk, which
would otherwise more often be fatal.
Premature infants 
have several problems 
linked 
to energy
metabolism. First, they have low fat stores because they are born before
fat stores have been adequately deposited. Second, because they have
less body fat, premature infants have proportionally larger brain size
even than healthy term infants. Third, small bodies have proportionally
larger surface area, which increases heat loss and hence energy demand.
Effectively, the premature infant faces the challenge of simultaneously
fuelling the high cost of staying warm, developing the brain and other
tissues, but without the fuel reserves of the term infant.
This problem is more acute the more premature the infant. Birth
weights under one thousand grams (birth at 22-25 weeks, compared to
the normal 39-40 weeks gestation) are not uncommon today but this is an
extremely unhealthy situation. In most cases, pediatric intensive care is
needed not only to try to maintain normal growth but to reduce
unnecessary fuel demands so as to provide a better chance of normal
brain development.
In the face of limited glucose and poor alternative energy sources,
prematurity, low birth weight or malnutrition after birth each stunt brain
development and growth. This is because the body may actually be
obliged to choose between meeting the high energy costs of maintaining
body temperature versus development of organs, especially the brain.
Normal physical growth and psychomotor development are the best
evidence that the brain's essential fuel needs are being met and that
nutrients are left over for tissue expansion and growth.
Fat stores are more critical to energy needs during early development
in species with larger brains. This is the central feature of the uniqueness
of human brain evolution. Body fat is the best reservoir of an alternate
energy source to glucose to fuel the expensive brain between meals.
Even expansion of body fat stores is energy consuming. It is soon after
birth that the development of body fat stores is most vulnerable to

Fatness in Human Babies: Critical Insurance for Brain Development 
99
inadequate nutrition, which is precisely when humans have the most
need of body fat.
Low fat reserves in premature infants creates competition to oxidize
for energy the very long chain fatty acids that should be destined for
synaptic membranes in the developing brain, and represents a huge
challenge for normal development. Low fat reserves represent a similar
limitation to brain development in other species, including non-human
primates, and prevent them from evolving human-type brain size and
function. In effect, all other species are born with fuel reserves
equivalent at best to premature human infants. Some are born helpless
like humans; others are born 'fully functional' and can identify their
mother and feed immediately. Regardless of their maturity, they are born
without clear fat reserves underlying the skin. Those born precocial have
brains that are better developed, which allows them to function at least
physically.
More importantly, though, most other species are not expanding their
brain function significantly after birth; the energy investment in brain
function is smaller because the brain is proportionally smaller than in
humans and because much of the brain's maturation was completed
before birth. Hence, it would be a waste to develop postnatal fat stores
because the brain isn't big enough and because further functional
capacity isn't needed. The piglet is a good example of such a precocial,
highly functional species at birth, but it cannot develop sufficient ketosis
to save its own life if starved for more than a day or two. In the context
of survival, it has a high functioning brain at birth but that brain function
will not expand much postnatally because there are no fuel reserves to
support it.
***
Healthy newborns do not lose their body fat as they grow; in fact,
they gain more during the first few years of life. In effect, after birth they
continue to build fat stores to accumulate fuel insurance for their brains.
One might well ask how this reserve could be important if it expands
rather than being used up during early development. Indeed, why do fat
reserves develop so rapidly during the third trimester when the fetus has
no real use of its brain, at least for survival?

100 
Survival of the Fattest
Body fat expands during late fetal development essentially to provide
the best possible insurance that postnatal development will proceed
uneventfully despite inevitable nutritional 'bumps in the road'; nobody
guarantees your food supply. One is led to conclude that for so much
metabolic and genetic effort to be invested in the brain during fetal
development while the organism is extremely vulnerable and has no
real use of the rapidly developing but still very immature cognitive
capability, this investment must happen under conditions in which the
brain is highly protected. In other words, the brain's vulnerability is well
masked.

Chapter 5
Nutrition:
The Key to Normal Brain Development
A changing environment creates selection pressures that are an important
stimulus for evolution. Most major environmental change such as
volcanoes, glaciation, or rifting in the earth's crust involves climate
change affecting temperature and the availability of food or fresh water.
Abundance of food or water could rise or fall with the climate change
and also create selection pressures. How the pressure works depends on
the species involved, i.e. it could favour survival of some while straining
survival of others. To survive, either a sufficient number of individuals
within a species is capable of adapting to the environmental change or
must be capable of moving away from it, probably to face new
challenges.
Those individuals that survive and reproduce do so because they are
already sufficiently adapted, i.e. different, to be able to tolerate the
change. That adaptation, whether it is beak shape, rudimentary standing
ability or whatever, then becomes the focus for the distinctiveness from
the parent population that is the seed of the new species. The concept of
selection pressure can have a negative connotation in the sense that the
environmental change is seen as exposing survival limitations; only a
few individuals are sufficiently different within the species to both be
members of that species but also to survive and reproduce in the
changing new environment.
In my view, changing environments not only force evolution, they
also permit it. A changing environment may unlock a certain genetic
101

102 
Survival of the Fattest
potential for morphological or physiological change that previously
remained silent. Some individuals within a species and certainly some
species as a whole may be better prepared for and better able to take
advantage of a particular climatic or environmental change than others.
Genetic or physiological preparedness means that a change in the
environment is permissive; the changing environment doesn't necessarily
force change, it allows it.
My hypothesis is that key nutritional changes in a new environment
permitted human brain evolution because the brains of some hominid
species were genetically prepared for such change. There was no
selection pressure. Nothing forced the brain to become larger. Nothing
forced babies to develop body fat. Hominid survival was not at risk;
several survived for million year periods without substantial change in
brain size.
In fact, inadequate human diets today are evidence that by exposing
the brain's developmental vulnerability, evolution in hominids actually
increased the risk of not surviving. As we saw in Chapter 3 and will
discuss again in the next several chapters, cognitive advancement can
still today be victimized by a developmental problem in the brain. If
vulnerability to nutritionally imposed developmental delay remains a
paramount feature of the human brain today, the risk of that
developmental delay must have been essentially non-existent for it to
have been retained as such a dominant feature during human brain
evolution.
The increasing vulnerability inherent in the process of enlarging the
hominid brain demonstrates that brain enlargement and increasing
cognitive potential were neither evolutionary objectives in themselves
nor were they solutions to any problem of survival. The fact that
increased developmental vulnerability of the brain was tolerable, i.e. did
not substantially impair reproduction, survival or, indeed, evolution of
the Australopithecines into Homo, means that the organism as a whole
was not put at substantially greater risk by increased vulnerability of the
enlarging brain. That, in turn, must mean that food and habitat of the
species became increasingly secure as brain expansion occurred.
***

Nutrition: The Key to Normal Brain Development 
103
Primates, especially chimpanzees, are intelligent compared to other
mammals. They occupy stable nutritional niches and have established
social order and communities. In many ways, they are genetically nearly
identical, but behaviourally simplified, versions of humans. However,
one of their important physical differences with humans is in jaw and
dental structure. Flatter molars with larger surface area occur in species
consuming predominantly plant-based diets that require a lot of chewing
to degrade the fibrous support structures of the shoots, leaves or roots
prior to digestion. The grinding of food also requires a larger, heavier
jaw and bigger jaw muscles.
If diet can so markedly affect jaw and tooth shape, it can affect other
physiological and biochemical attributes as well. Differences in diet
between humans and chimpanzees represent important differences in
nutrient intake. Given the susceptibility of the human and non-human
primate brain to function suboptimally when fuel (energy) and certain
nutrients are consumed in lower than necessary amounts, it is important
to explore the relation between nutrition, brain development and brain
evolution. Adverse nutritional, disease, economic, and psychosocial
circumstances expose developmental vulnerabilities preventing at least
one quarter of the world's population from attaining the high level of
brain function of which humans are theoretically capable.
Maternal Nutrition, Prematurity and Early Development
Normal growth of the mammalian fetus depends on the mother having
adequate nutrients and energy during pregnancy. Lower birth weight of
the infant is a common consequence of intrauterine growth retardation
and maternal undernutrition during pregnancy. Maternal nutrition
sufficiently bad to cause low birth weight or prematurity (less than 37
weeks gestation) is frequently associated with stunted intellectual
capacity at school and lifelong mental disability of the offspring. The
lower the birth weight, the higher the risk of handicap, including mental
retardation, visual impairment with retinopathy and blindness, hearing
impairment, cerebral palsy, spasticity and autism. The prevalence of
these developmental handicaps in infants of normal birth weight is under
1%. However, they occur in 20% of babies weighing under 1500 grams

104 
Survival of the Fattest
at birth, i.e. the risk is 20 fold higher than at normal birth weight.
Nowadays, medical advancements ensure that very low birth weight
babies survive longer after discharge from hospital, but the occurrence of
handicap in these children is not changing. Thus, their perinatal mortality
is decreasing but their long-term risk of incapacity is not.
Michael Crawford of London Metropolitan University in the UK has
extensively researched the nutritional basis for poor neurological
development in low birth weight and premature infants. His work
points to a lack of several vitamins and minerals in the maternal diet
as being associated with low birth weight. He has noted the difficulty
that premature and low birth weight infants have in meeting their
requirement for the key long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids such as
docosahexaenoic acid during early neurological and visual development.
Crawford was also the first to recognize the parallel requirement
for long chain polyunsaturates in both vascular and neurological
development. The importance of an intact vascular system to normal
neurological development is apparent from the high incidence of
intracranial hemorrhage in infants with impaired neurodevelopment, and
from the high incidence of placental infarction causing poor fetal
development. Part of the challenge facing brain development is adequacy
of the blood supply to the brain; when the capillary network in the brain
itself or in the placenta is also underdeveloped and fragile, the brain's
development is at much higher risk.
Clear evidence for long-term neurodevelopmental problems arising
in very low birth weight babies comes from Maureen Hack's work
in Cleveland first published about a decade ago. She studied the
development of very low birth weight infants that, by definition, weigh
less than 1500 grams at birth. Her group focused on those low birth
weight infants that had growth problems around the time of birth.
The average birth weight of the children she studied was actually
about 1,200 grams and they were born 10-11 weeks premature. Her
babies faced an incredible challenge, in that just to grow to the
equivalent weight of normal term infants at birth (3,600 grams), they had
to triple in size but without the benefit of being in the uterus for the last
quarter of pregnancy. Aside from prematurity, they had no confounding
diseases; thus, they were as healthy as very premature infants can be.

Nutrition: The Key to Normal Brain Development 
105
Clinical and socioeconomic circumstances were similar in the infants
with small head size compared to children with normal head size.
Twelve per cent of the children in Hack's very low birth weight group
had abnormally small head size at birth. Twice as many had small head
size 10 weeks later when they reached normal term, and 13 % still had
small head size at eight months old. Hence, despite the best available
medical care, once born, it is very difficult for the premature infant to
attain normal growth and development.
Hack's group found that, independent of all other factors,
normal head size at eight months old in these infants was the best
predictor of neurological and behavioural development at three years old.
Notwithstanding some confounding effects, head circumference during
the first year of life is a good measure of quantitative features of normal
neurological development, i.e. the size, volume, cell density, and DNA
and lipid content of the brain.
Using the same cohort of children but studying them at three
years old, Hack compared the performance on normal tests of
neurodevelopment at school once they reached seven to eight years old.
On most measures those with small head size at eight months old were
much more likely to be low achievers. These tests assessed language
development, hand-eye coordination, social competence, behaviour, and
achievement at school.
They concluded that poor school age performance is almost
guaranteed unless an infant with a small brain at birth has the chance to
catch up to normal by the time it is eight months old. If catch up in
growth is to be of any help, it has to occur within the first year of life.
Otherwise children and adolescents that were malnourished during
infancy will continue to have small head size and poor neurological and
behavioural outcomes. Catch up requires improvement not only in
nutrition and energy intake but also good psychosocial support.
As Michael Crawford has frequently noted, the problem of
prematurity and low birth weight is no longer rare. Not only are smaller
and smaller premature infants 'technically surviving' as medical
technology improves but the proportion of total births represented
by small babies is increasing in affluent and developing countries alike.
The cause of this growing problem is multifactorial: Poor maternal

106 
Survival of the Fattest
socioeconomic circumstances play a key role in poor diet selection and
higher risk of nutrient deficiencies in the fetus.
In fact, Crawford's work points to poor nutrition having a negative
impact on pregnancy outcome before conception. Poor nutrition reduces
the size of follicle development in the ovary thereby affecting the earliest
stages in reproduction. This makes it difficult if not impossible to correct
maternal nutritional deficits once pregnancy is established. The most
viable public health option is to more vigorously pursue the pre-
conceptional prevention of low birth weight by improving the health and
nutrition of the mother before pregnancy.
Malnutrition and Brain Development
The adult brain is spared during malnutrition, e.g. its function is
maintained and it loses the least weight compared to those organs
occupying the majority of body weight. This metabolic sparing of the
brain is a feature of the physiological response to undernutrition or
starvation in all mammals, and was probably an early and essential
feature of mammalian brain evolution. Thus, the evolution of efficient
protective mechanisms to meet the brain's energy requirement leads
directly to its sparing during malnutrition but masks the underlying
vulnerability of brain function.
Because of their rapid growth and immaturity, children are the most
adversely affected by hunger and malnutrition. Unlike in adults, the
brains of young children are still very vulnerable to starvation. This is
due to the proportionally higher energy requirements of the brain during
childhood than at any other time later in life. Severe malnutrition rapidly
dampens the exploratory behaviour of children and leads to apathy. Brain
activity is metabolically expensive so less responsiveness and reduced
physical activity allows the developing brain to better withstand the
severe metabolic impact of malnutrition, but at the risk of long-term
suboptimal performance.
The primary deficit in the brain that is caused by nutritional
deprivation is smaller brain size, whether in relation to age or to body
weight. The reduction in brain size is accompanied by a reduction in

Nutrition: The Key to Normal Brain Development 
107
weight, volume, number of cells, and total amount of DNA and lipid in
the brain as a whole.
Different timing of the brain growth spurt in different species must
be taken into account in modeling this process because the same
nutritional deprivation induced after the brain growth spurt has much
less impact compared to during the brain growth spurt. The young of a
species with a prenatal brain growth spurt, e.g. the guinea pig, are less
affected by postnatal malnutrition or by excess competition for milk
caused by a large litter than are the young of a species whose brain
growth spurt is perinatal, e.g. the human, or whose brain growth spurt is
postnatal, e.g. the rat.
In addition to impairing protein synthesis, malnutrition in human
infants less than a year old also reduces the total content of cholesterol
and phospholipids in the brain. Brain DNA levels (a marker of brain cell
division) are relatively unaffected unless malnutrition is prolonged into
the second year of life. These changes parallel those observed in animal
models and suggest that the impact of severe malnutrition on the
developing brain has a broadly equal and severe effect on lipids as on
protein and DNA synthesis.
Malnutrition at birth reduces brain cell number and size. Malnutrition
starting later in infancy may only affect brain cell size because normal
brain cell number should have been achieved by then, even though these
cells are impeded from achieving their full growth potential. In the latter
case involving normal cell number but small size, is it possible for
refeeding to restore some normality to brain development. However, if
malnutrition occurs earlier, i.e. before the critical period for establishing
brain cell number has passed, the deficit cannot be corrected and brain
function will be permanently impaired.
Malnutrition, Brain Lipids and Myelination
Malnutrition during the suckling period impairs myelination. This
impairment arises because malnutrition prevents development of a full
compliment of myelin-producing glia and because they lack the
necessary amount of substrate needed to make the normal amount of
myelin. Impaired brain cholesterol synthesis is a key part of the problem

108 
Survival of the Fattest
because cholesterol is an important part of myelin. In addition to
cholesterol, myelin lipids also contain large amounts of very long chain
saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids that are relatively unique to
the brain. As with cholesterol, these fatty acids are almost entirely made
within the brain. Their synthesis is impaired during malnutrition because
the carbon that would have been used to make them gets used as a fuel.
During malnutrition, the deficit in myelin lipid production arises in
part because normal rates of cholesterol or long chain fatty acid synthesis
within the brain cannot be achieved during malnutrition. It also occurs
because very little lipid gets into the brain from outside it to make up for
what is being made too slowly within the brain. Malnutrition redirects
the glucose (or ketones) that would have been used for cholesterol and
long chain fatty acid synthesis towards fuels to keep organs functioning,
especially the energetically expensive ones like the brain, kidneys and
heart. Malnutrition during the critical period of myelination leaves less
substrate for protein, long chain fatty acid and cholesterol synthesis
needed to make myelin.
In effect, malnutrition forces all systems of the body to compete in the
face of fuel deficit and some processes, like myelin lipid synthesis,
simply cannot compete and be sustained at the normal rate. Thus, less
total myelin is produced and it is thinner, reducing the fidelity of
message transfer from neuron to neuron. The timing and duration of
malnutrition determine which areas of the brain undergo a deficit or
distortion in myelination because myelination is completed at different
times depending on the nerve tract and brain region involved.
Malnutrition versus Specific Nutrient Deficiencies
Malnutrition occurs when total food intake (energy, protein and required
nutrients) is below the requirement level for a period of several weeks or
more, resulting in weight loss as well as poor growth in children. There
is an important distinction between generalized malnutrition versus a diet
providing adequate energy and protein but inadequately supplying one or
more specific nutrients needed in the diet: In the first case, malnutrition
and starvation due to insufficient food intake and poor sanitation are
widespread in the world today. By impairing nutrient absorption or

Nutrition: The Key to Normal Brain Development 
109
increasing disease, poor hygiene exacerbates malnutrition and vice versa.
In the second case, despite sufficient energy and protein intake, moderate
to severe deficiency of a nutrient like vitamin C still causes the specific
symptoms of scurvy.
Malnutrition impairs growth and learning in all animals, not just
humans. Unless it is severely deficient, an iodine deficient diet does not
impair growth but it does impair learning in animals and humans. Hence,
iodine deficiency can be part of malnutrition but on its own, iodine
deficiency has a more limited and specific effect than that of generalized
malnutrition. Species possessing more advanced brains are more severely
affected by iodine deficiency. Specific nutrient deficits are therefore not
the same as general malnutrition and are more severe when the attribute
affected is better developed or more dependent on that nutrient, e.g. brain
function in iodine deficiency.
Malnutrition clearly damages brain development on several fronts.
Specific nutrient deficiencies can also be very damaging even when total
dietary energy and protein intake is sufficient. For example, copper
deficiency causes tremor and neuromuscular instability because it
induces hypomyelination. This occurs because of a specific impairment
in the ability to convert saturated to unsaturated long chain fatty acids
used in myelin lipid synthesis. A deficit in availability of polyunsaturated
fatty acids like docosahexaenoic acid markedly impairs neuronal signal
transmission but has very little effect on myelin because myelin contains
almost no polyunsaturated fatty acids. Thus, the brain's autonomy
regarding lipid synthesis can be betrayed by generalized malnutrition or
by deficit of a specific nutrient needed to synthesize or assimilate the
lipid building blocks.
The Need for Specific Dietary Nutrients
A hundred and fifty years of nutrition research has shown that to
develop, mature and reproduce normally, plants and animals require a
number of organic and inorganic molecules collectively known as
dietary nutrients. These molecules cannot be made by higher organisms
and without them in their food supply, a variety of essential functions,
including growth and reproduction, are impaired or cease altogether.

110 
Survival of the Fattest
Dietary nutrients include numerous minerals, vitamins, certain amino
acids, and certain polyunsaturated fatty acids. Appropriate amounts of all
these nutrients are required to achieve the normal structure and function
of cells. Certain other substances that are important in metabolism or cell
structure are not termed dietary nutrients because they can be made in the
body irrespective of their level in the diet. These other substances include
glucose and cholesterol.
Deficient intake of dietary nutrients causes reproducible symptoms,
i.e. the gum deterioration and bleeding that occurs as a result of scurvy in
vitamin C deficiency. These symptoms are usually characteristic and can
only be corrected or prevented by adding that specific nutrient back to
the diet. Such deficiencies occur in two ways: through diets low in that
nutrient, or through diseases affecting the ability to absorb, utilize or
retain that nutrient.
The latest report of the United Nations Children's Fund examined
health and nutritional status in 80 developing countries representing
about 80% of the world's population. It states unequivocally that the
'brainpower of entire nations is slipping because of a shortage of the
right dietary nutrients, including, iodine, iron, vitamin A and zinc. The
report claimed that inadequate iron intake reduces a child's IQ by five to
seven points, while insufficient iodine reduces childhood IQ by 13 points.
Iron deficiency is pervasive enough that it is estimated to reduce the
gross domestic product of the most affected countries by 2%'. The report
claims that 'so ubiquitous is vitamin and mineral deficiency that it
debilitates in some significant degree the energies, intellect and
economic prospects of nations'.
Supplementation with iodine or iron during infancy markedly
improves growth and brain development of affected children while
vitamin A supplements completely prevents a form of blindness.
Though widespread, these nutrient deficiencies are still relatively
specific and preventable. They are serious and debilitating but still
correctable by replacement of the affected nutrients, i.e. vitamin A
injection, or iodized or iron supplemented table salt. The point in relation
to human brain evolution is that about a billion people are sufficiently
iodine or iron deficient to cause mild to moderate impairment in mental

Nutrition: The Key to Normal Brain Development 
111
function. This excludes the tens of millions that are severely deficient in
these two nutrients.
General malnutrition as well as inadequate intake of specific
dietary nutrients therefore have an adverse impact on human brain
development and function that is hard to overstate. General malnutrition
has devastating effects as a consequence of environmental, economic,
or political disaster. In contrast, iodine and iron deficiencies are
independent of disaster; their elimination only requires modest political
and economic commitment.
The genetic potential of the human brain clearly cannot be developed
or fully expressed under circumstances involving malnutrition or
deficient intake of specific nutrients. The genetic potential of humans
living in Western countries to attain their cognitive potential is only
expressed today because it was learned that cretinism and goiter are
caused by iodine deficiency (see Chapter 6). Prior to the 1930s, cretinism
was prevalent in Europe and the USA and affected large proportions of
the population, regardless of the overall affluence of the countries
involved. As a result of discovering the simple link to insufficient dietary
iodine, national governments now mandate iodine supplementation; if
that had not happened, almost the entire population of the world would
still be iodine deficient.
Large-scale nutrient deficiencies occur where soils are deficient but
Chapters 6-8 will explain that where shore-based foods are consumed,
these nutrient deficiencies are rare or do not exist at all. Because of
global population growth during the past millenium, most people are no
longer lucky enough to be living on the shorelines where foods naturally
contain enough iodine and other essential nutrients.
If iodine deficiency prevents expression of the human brain's
potential for intelligence, we have to ask how the genetic potential of
the pre-human brain could ever be fully expressed in inland areas that
have always provided insufficient dietary iodine relative to iodine
requirements of the human brain? Even without the ice ages washing
away iodine-rich soils, shore-based foods (seaweed, shellfish, fish,
turtles, eggs from birds nesting near water, etc.) provide much more
iodine than inland vegetation and more than meat or other animal tissues.

111 
Survival of the Fattest
Iodine will be discussed separately in Chapter 6 because it is central
to the case for shore-based foods as determinants of human brain
evolution. My point here is that human brain evolution was dependent on
changing two aspects of hominid nutrition: First, there was a general
change assuring a rise in food and energy availability sufficient to permit
the evolution of fatness in babies. Second, there was a specific rise in the
availability of several key nutrients needed in particular by the brain. A
change in neither of these aspects alone would have been sufficient; both
were required to change.
In proteins, the key building blocks are the indispensable amino acids
or, in the old terminology, the essential amino acids. The body has
to obtain these specific amino acids from the diet or else that particular
protein will not be made or will be misformed and will not work
correctly. There are a couple of polyunsaturated fatty acids in
phospholipids that are also indispensable. The common term for them is
essential fatty acids because, like indispensable amino acids, they too
have to be present in the diet. Docosahexaenoic acid is a good example
of a polyunsaturated fatty acid indispensable for normal brain
development (see Chapter 8).
How did animals (and plants) get into the situation of having an
absolute dependence on certain specific minerals, vitamins, amino acids
or fatty acids in the diet? Wouldn't it be advantageous to be completely
independent of the composition of the diet? It would indeed be
advantageous to be independent of the diet but it is more costly than it is
worth. If the diet reliably contains a series of nutrients that the organism
doesn't have to make, this saves the genetic programming, production of
enzymes, and the metabolic costs to make those substances. Hence, it is
more advantageous to be able to depend on the diet for as many nutrients
as possible.
The risk is that some diets may not contain one or more of the
necessary nutrients. Then the organism is out of luck and must find the
appropriate diet or suffer the deficiency symptoms of lacking that
nutrient. Some foods are better able to match with an organism's nutrient
requirements than are others, so matching one's diet to one's nutrient
needs is an important step in survival.

Nutrition: The Key to Normal Brain Development 
113
In a normal healthy baby whose mother is adequately nourished,
breast milk supplies sufficient amounts of all nutrients for about the first
six months from birth. Thus, from a strictly nutritional point-of-view,
initial brain development is virtually assured for babies raised on breast
milk from an adequately nourished mother.
A wide variety of foods is compatible with good nutrition. Variety is
in fact the key. With the advent of agriculture, some societies have
become excessively dependent on a very restricted selection of crops
such as rice, cassava and corn. This is a high-risk strategy for nutritional
adequacy because if the crops in question lack sufficient amounts of any
of the important dietary nutrients or if the crop fails, that society will
suffer the consequent deficiencies.
Two Types of Problems
The problem with important dietary nutrients comes in two broad
forms: genetic errors and dietary deficiencies. The genetic errors involve
an inability of the mother to absorb or use a nutrient. An example is the
rare inherited disease - phenylketonuria, in which the indispensable
amino acid, phenylalanine, cannot be metabolized properly, so it
accumulates causing neurological damage. As a result, foods containing
phenylalanine have to be removed from the mother's diet, or the infant
will develop mental retardation.
The other damaging result of such a genetic defect is that, if there is
insufficient amount of the required nutrient, a needed product (building
block or enzyme) is not made in sufficient quantities. This occurs with
the malabsorption of zinc in the genetic disease - acrodermatitis
enteropathica. Genetic errors in the utilization of quite a few essential
nutrients present a risk of toxicity at levels that either occur in some soils
or can be induced by blockage in their metabolism.
The second broad problem with essential nutrients is the risk of their
deficiency in the diet. Iodine is a classic example. Further details of the
damaging effects of nutrient deficiencies on brain development will be
provided in the rest of Part 1. The point in discussing them briefly
here is that the brain not only has certain energy requirements but
also has certain structural requirements allowing its cells to grow and

114 
Survival of the Fattest
communicate efficiently. Part of the structural requirement for normal
brain development can be met by the body making the required
molecules - proteins, phospholipids, cholesterol, etc. However, part of
the structural requirement depends on sufficient dietary supply of the
indispensable nutrients (vitamins, minerals, amino acids and fatty acids),
which have to be present in the diet in sufficient but not excessive
amounts.
One way to probe how the human brain evolved is to examine what
problems arise when it isn't supplied with the nutrients it needs to
develop and function normally. Regardless of whether a species is large-
or small-brained, environmental variables contribute significantly to how
well the brain functions and whether it will achieve its developmental
potential. Broadly speaking, essential nutrients in the diet affect
almost all aspects of body function and operate in all species. They
place limitations on brain function mostly because they expose the
reproducible and unavoidable vulnerabilities of the brain, especially
during its early development.

Chapter 6
Iodine:
The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient
In a paper on the role of nutrition in human brain evolution published in
1993 and coauthored by Michael Crawford and Laurence Harbige, I
introduced the term - brain specific nutrients. The idea was to have a
collective term encompassing those nutrients needed especially for
normal human brain development. This term was later revised to brain
selective nutrients because, although they are important for the brain,
these nutrients aren't specific to the brain; they are used elsewhere in the
body as well. If the requirement for any one of the brain selective
nutrients is not met at the correct stage of development, permanent
mental retardation results. Evolving a larger brain implicitly involves
either a higher requirement for or more efficient use of brain selective
nutrients.
Prior to substantial expansion and increased sophistication of the
brain, some (perhaps many) ecological niches would have offered
sufficient food and total dietary energy to sustain healthy reproduction in
early Australopithecines. The dietary availability of nutrients and energy
did not likely have a direct influence on evolution of bipedalism.
However, amounts of brain selective nutrients in these ecological niches
would almost always have been sufficiently limiting to prevent
significant brain expansion. Limited availability of brain selective
nutrients in woodland and grassland niches is still likely to be a major
limitation preventing full expression of the genetic potential for brain
expansion in non-human primates.
115

116 
Survival of the Fattest
Getting the nutrient intake mix right was essential for human brain
evolution. The three broad stages in brain expansion (Australopithecine
to H. habilis, H. habilis to H. erectus, and H. erectus to H. sapiens; see
Chapter 2) would not have occurred without substantial and sustained
improvements in the dietary supply of brain selective nutrients. Such
improvements in diet would have required many tens to perhaps
hundreds of thousands of years to take effect and would still have needed
the cooperation of sustained genetic change in order to evolve advanced
cognition.
As different ecological scenarios for human evolution are considered,
the food sources providing an increased supply of energy, minerals,
indispensable amino acids, long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids and
vitamins need to be kept in mind. Where did they come from? If the
'average primate diet' was not sufficient, how were these requirements
met and by which hominids? Brain expansion would have been
prevented by insufficient dietary supply of brain selective nutrients in
almost all geographical regions. If restricted access to brain selective
nutrients was one of the keys to human brain evolution, at least one
ecological niche somewhere had to provide a better supply of energy and
these nutrients not generally available elsewhere.
For at least twenty years now, Robert Martin (formerly of the Institute
of Anthropology in Zurich, now at the Field Museum in Chicago), Bill
Leonard of Northwestern University, and others have described how an
improved energy supply in the hominid diet was necessary to support
evolution of the human brain. A generous and sustained dietary supply of
energy was necessary not only to fuel the already relatively large energy
demands of the primate brain, but to support the even higher fuel
demands of further brain expansion.
My view is that abundant energy supply was a necessary prerequisite
but was still insufficient to support human brain evolution because
additional dietary energy alone could not meet the increasing need of the
larger brain for molecules that control and refine brain function. This was
the role filled only by brain selective nutrients, including at least five
brain selective minerals: iodine, iron, copper, zinc and selenium, which
control key aspects of increased cognitive sophistication. Each has a
unique role in brain development and function that is described in this

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
117
and the following chapter. The deficiency of any one of these
minerals causes specific and well-defined neurological symptoms that,
individually, would have prevented human brain evolution.
These five brain selective minerals are not necessarily more important
than some vitamins, especially vitamin A, which are also probably
brain selective nutrients. However, compared to several vitamins,
polyunsaturated fatty acids and amino acids, it is simpler to characterize
the function of essential dietary minerals because there is no capacity to
synthesize them in the body.
Most minerals have different oxidation states, bind to various atoms,
and their absorption or excretion may be more or less tightly regulated.
However, unlike for most of the relevant vitamins, fatty acids and amino
acids, the biological role of trace minerals is not complicated by varying
degrees of synthesis or organic transformation in the body. Hence, the
case for classifying iodine, iron, zinc, copper and selenium as brain
selective minerals is simpler than it is for organic nutrients.
Iodine - The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient
Iodine is a brain selective nutrient because of its essential role in thyroid
hormone production, which, in turn, is needed for normal brain
development. Iodine is the only nutrient for which governments legislate
supplementation in the human food supply. This is a strong indicator
not only of its importance for normal human health but also the
exceptionally widespread extent to which, without supplementation,
humans would otherwise consume inadequate amounts of iodine.
Shellfish, fish and coastal plants are rich in iodine. It is difficult (but not
impossible) for humans to obtain sufficient iodine by consuming a
diet lacking fish or seafood. Conversely, a modest amount of fish or
seafood intake per week would essentially eliminate iodine deficiency
worldwide.
At least in industrialized countries, it now is taken for granted that
table salt is iodized but this has only been the case for the last 80 years.
Indeed, due to political pressure for free choice by citizens, some
European countries still require that non-iodized table salt be sold along
side iodized salt. Were it not for iodination of table salt since about 1920,
iodine deficiency would remain widespread today in North America and

118 
Survival of the Fattest
Western Europe because, despite the affluence of these regions, fish and
seafood consumption is inadequate to supply iodine requirements needed
to sustain normal human brain function. Iodine deficiency is widespread
in inland or mountainous areas of India, Southeast Asia, South America,
and Africa.
Legislating supplementation to ensure an adequate iodine supply is
necessary because most humans voluntarily eat insufficient amounts of
fish or shellfish, yet without iodine supplements, the socioeconomic
costs of its deficiency are exceedingly high. Iodination of table salt is the
commonest method of supplementation but bread is iodized in some
areas while elsewhere iodized oil is given by intramuscular injection.
The present day need for dietary iodine supplementation is the basis
for iodine being the primary brain selective nutrient. This need for iodine
supplementation indicates three important limitations about the quality of
food relative to where humans live (Table 6.1): First, unless they are
coastal, most habitats that might otherwise be suitable for humans
do not provide diets containing adequate amounts of iodine. Distance
inland from the coasts is the problem because, without sophisticated
transportation systems and relative affluence, people mostly eat what is
available locally. The further they are from the coasts, the less people eat
fish and seafood, and the higher the incidence of iodine deficiency.
Table 6.1. Why iodine is the primary brain selective nutrient.
1. 
Diets containing shore-based foods (shellfish, fish or coastal plants) are the most
likely to provide sufficient iodine to meet the needs of humans.
2. 
Iodine deficiency disorders are entirely preventable; indeed, do not occur, in people
consuming shore-based foods.
3. 
The primary sequelae of iodine deficiency involves defective mental development.
Second, iodine deficiency is entirely preventable by appropriate food
selection, especially shellfish and other shore-based foods. Easily
accessible shellfish like cockles and mussels are particularly rich in
iodine and are abundant alone shorelines of lakes, estuaries, rivers and
the sea. Eggs can be a good source of iodine, while meat and nuts are
moderately good.

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
119
Third, the clinical and socioeconomic sequelae of iodine deficiency
disorders revolve around impaired brain development and mental
retardation. These sequelae are widespread and extreme, yet preventable.
In short, optimal human brain function is incompatible with the majority
of habitats that are distant from shorelines.
The neurological symptoms of iodine deficiency are debilitating and
permanent (but preventable). Since people regularly consuming coastal
or shore-based foods do not need iodine supplements, I make the case
that the pre-human hominid brain could only have evolved into the
human brain if, starting before H. habilis, they had greater access to a
shore-based food supply. Diets based on fruits, nuts and meat, i.e.
'inland' as opposed to shore-based foods, do not supply enough iodine to
have supported brain expansion. Brain expansion on the human scale
necessitated sustained access to shellfish and other shore-based foods
that are naturally richer in iodine than inland plants and animals.
In many regions, inland (non-coastal) communities today are still at
grave risk of iodine deficiency, a risk that includes loss of fertility in
addition to impaired brain development. Therefore, as hominids evolved
and expanded their habitats globally over at least the last two million
years, the coincident increase brain size and cognitive improvement
of the hominid lineage leading to all humans was incompatible with
extended occupation of areas distant from shores.
Iodine Deficiency and Hypothyroidism
Iodine is necessary for thyroid hormone production. In the short term,
too little thyroid hormone causes lethargy. In the long term, mental
retardation is a serious risk, especially in infants and children. Too much
thyroid hormone and one becomes sweaty, irritable and hyperactive.
Hence, it is important that thyroid hormone levels in the blood be well
controlled, particularly during early development.
Like many other hormones in the body, a 'stimulating hormone'
controls thyroid hormone secretion. For the thyroid, the controlling
hormone is thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). Low plasma thyroid
hormone stimulates the release of TSH, which stimulates the production
of more thyroid hormone. As increasing thyroid hormone levels in the

120 
Survival of the Fattest
blood reach the pituitary, they suppress further release of TSH, which in
turn shuts off the stimulus for more thyroid hormone secretion.
This process is called negative feedback regulation because higher
levels of the stimulating hormone raise the hormone itself (TSH in
this case), which then suppresses the stimulating hormone. Control of
hormone secretion, whether of thyroid hormone or others, is more
complex than described here but the key element is a system of negative
feedback amongst a series of hormones, one affecting the other in a loop.
This results in a pulse-like rising and falling cycle of thyroid hormone
production throughout the day. The feedback mechanism is essential to
maintain appropriate thyroid hormone levels on which normal brain
development depends.
The thyroid takes up most of the iodine entering the body. A typical
adult human thyroid gland weighs about 20 grams and contains
about 8 milligrams of iodine, an amount sufficient to sustain normal
thyroid hormone secretion for several weeks. Almost half the iodine
in the thyroid is in the form of thyroid hormone. Thyroid hormone is
actually a collective term for two similar hormones - thyroxine and
triiodothyronine. Iodine in the thyroid that is not yet in thyroid hormone
is stored as 'pre-thyroid hormone units' called iodotyrosines, which are
bound to a large reservoir protein called thyroglobulin.
As with other nutrients, iodine requirement varies with growth rate,
body weight, sex, the remaining diet, climate and disease. For adult
humans, there is widespread agreement that the iodine requirement is 1-2
micrograms per kilogram of body weight per day. Since a typical adult
weighs about 60 kilograms, this means they need 60-120 micrograms
per day of iodine, a range usually rounded for convenience to 100
micrograms per day. As with most nutrients, a somewhat higher value is
recommended during pregnancy and lactation. A range of iodine intakes
from 100-1000 micrograms per day is usually considered to be safe, i.e.
at or above the absolute minimum required but also below a toxic intake.
During a period of iodine deficiency exceeding a couple of months,
the thyroid becomes depleted of its iodine and thyroid hormone reserves
and thyroid hormone secretion decreases. As usual, low plasma thyroid
hormone raises TSH. Initially, triiodothyronine secretion increases
disproportionately compared to thyroxine because the former is more

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
121
potent and because it contains three atoms of iodine instead of the four
in thyroxine, thereby economizing on iodine. Over the long term, the
thyroid cannot maintain thyroid hormone production when it is iodine
deficient, so the constantly low plasma thyroid hormone levels mean that
the normally pulsatile stimulation of the thyroid by TSH does not let up.
This constant stimulation causes the thyroid to enlarge, resulting in a
lumpy swollen thyroid gland that becomes visible from outside the neck
and is known as a goiter.
During iodine deficiency, the thyroid gland becomes more efficient at
iodine recovery. However, iodine cannot really be conserved because
there is no mechanism to decrease its excretion in the urine. Thus, as
long as dietary intake remains suboptimal, the amount of iodine that can
be incorporated into thyroid hormone continues to decrease and thyroid
hormone secretion continues to decrease despite sustained stimulation by
TSH. If iodine deficiency is prolonged, thyroid hormone secretion
becomes chronically reduced and clinical symptoms of hypothyroidism
develop.
In 
adults 
with 
no previous 
history 
of 
iodine 
deficiency,
hypothyroidism is characterized by tiredness, lethargy, and increased
sensitivity to cold and heat. These symptoms of slowing metabolism
caused by iodine deficiency result from lower thyroid hormone levels
and, consequently, a reduced signal to cells to consume oxygen and
produce heat. Hypothyroidism is usually more severe in women. Mild to
moderate iodine deficiency is significantly more likely to cause thyroid
disease and further symptoms of iodine deficiency in women who have
been pregnant compared to those that have not.
Iodine Deficiency Disorders
Thyroid hormone deficiency can be caused by a genetic defect in thyroid
function totally unrelated to iodine intake or it can be due directly to
iodine deficiency. The historically separate description of different forms
of thyroid hormone deficiency or hypothyroidism on different continents,
each confounded by different environmental circumstances, resulted in
different terms being used even though they represent largely the same
condition. The older terms will be described briefly here but the
preferred blanket terminology now for a variety of conditions involving

122 
Survival of the Fattest
insufficient iodine intake and/or hypothyroidism is iodine deficiency
disorders.
Clinical hypothyroidism or endemic cretinism involves shrinkage of
the thyroid that can eventually result in no thyroid hormone secretion at
all. In infants, clinical hypothyroidism is also known as cretinism or
myxedematous cretinism. It carries a high risk of mental retardation,
deaf-mutism, dwarfism, delayed sexual development, protuberant lips,
flat nose, curvature of the spine, and abnormal heart rhythm. In adults,
this severe form of hypothyroidism causes dry, waxy skin and is also
called myxedema. The symptoms in adults are milder than in adolescents
or children, but there is still a moderate risk of mental retardation in
iodine deficient adults even if they consumed sufficient iodine during
childhood. These clinical effects confirm microscopic analysis of the
brain showing that human cretins have both severe loss of and damage to
brain cells.
Endemic cretinism occurs in regions where goiter is widespread and
severe and is associated with an iodine intake of less than 20 micrograms
per day. In addition to the cognitive deficit, endemic cretinism is
characterized by various neuromuscular defects including spasticity,
shuffling gait and peculiar posture. Short stature, infertility, and
squinting are also common. Widespread neuropsychological and physical
retardation in geographic regions with endemic cretinism are not only of
medical concern but they are life long, clearly making cretinism a serious
socioeconomic problem as well.
The other main form of clinical hypothyroidism goes under various
terms including nervous cretinism, neurological cretinism, or the
neurological syndrome. In this form, goiter is still common but thyroid
function tests may be normal. Strangely, thyroid test results often bear no
relation to the severity of the clinical symptoms, which are seen in half or
more cases of congenital hypothyroidism. The symptoms include mental
retardation, deaf-mutism, abnormal eye movements, speech and language
defects, dwarfism, abnormal stance and gait caused by rotation of the
hips and bent knees, spasticity or spasticity-rigidity, exaggerated
reflexes, and impaired ability to stand.
Nervous cretinism is common in mountainous regions of all
continents. It is widespread in Papua New Guinea, Latin America,

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
123
Vietnam, eastern China, Algeria and Sicily. If iodine treatment were
available prior to pregnancy, cretinism would be prevented but poverty,
political instability and lack of global effort prevent this treatment from
being adequately implemented. Nervous cretinism is uncommon in
Central Africa despite goiter being common there. Nervous cretinism
typically involves goiter but, with goiter being ten times more common
than cretinism, the reverse is not necessarily true. Hence, goiter can be
precipitated by factors that cause secondary iodine deficiency, i.e.
impaired iodine uptake into the thyroid even when there may be
sufficient iodine in the diet.
During pregnancy or infancy, hypothyroidism that is not severe
enough to cause the full mental retardation of cretinism still causes
significant behavioural problems including poor practical reasoning, poor
hand-eye coordination, impaired hearing, poor memory, low language
comprehension, reduced fine motor skills, and hyperactivity. Spasticity
and related problems including poor hand to eye coordination arise from
impaired gross and fine motor coordination, which indicate defective
development and function of the cerebellum. Hypothyroidism may well
contribute to attention deficit, which also occurs in iron deficiency.
Despite the obvious importance of these symptoms, clinicians
typically classify such intermediate cases as 'minimal brain dysfunction'.
IQ tests may initially score within the normal range but age-adjusted
scores tend to decrease. By nine years old, about a fifth of children born
hypothyroid are in special education. The origin of these problems is
usually fetal hypothyroidism because the degree of developmental delay
during childhood correlates directly with the extent of hypothyroidism
that is already present at birth. Without exception, these developmental
problems are difficult to correct.
Serious hearing impairment occurs in hypothyroidism, probably
because of abnormal ossification of the Organ of Corti in the inner ear.
Even when hearing is not impaired, learning from the spoken word and
verbally expressing ideas are impaired, indicating that the assimilation of
auditory information is impaired. It is interesting to note that hearing is
an aspect of brain function that has been independently shown to have a
particularly high energy requirement. Expansion of the auditory region in
humans undoubtedly facilitated the evolution of speech uniquely in

124 
Survival of the Fattest
humans. Hence, two key aspects of human evolution (speech and brain
enlargement) had an increasing requirement for energy and are also
vulnerable to inadequate iodine status.
Goiterogens
Goiterogens or goiter-causing substances in food are a major contributor
to iodine deficiency disorders and complicate the etiology of different
forms of cretinism in several regions of the world. Cassava is probably
the most important goiterogenic food both because of its relatively
high content of two iodine binding substances, hydrocyanic acid and
linamarin, and because of its widespread consumption as a staple food of
humans. The body detoxifies hydrocyanic acid to thiocyanate. However,
thiocyanate is still a strong goiterogen that is excreted in larger
quantities, thereby depleting the body of iodine.
Other goiterogenic foods also consumed widely by humans include
maize, cabbage, rape, soybean and mustard. These foods are frequently
used in feed for farm animals where they are also goiterogenic. They
reduce the iodine content of animal tissues, which reduces iodine
available to humans consuming meat or dairy products from these
animals. Though a less common cause of iodine deficiency, peanuts and
pine nuts also contain mild goiterogens.
Because they bind to dietary iodine and impair the body's ability to
absorb it, goiterogens can induce iodine deficiency despite an apparently
adequate level of iodine in the diet. Hence, regardless of iodine intake,
TSH is the best measure of iodine that is functionally available for the
thyroid.
Iodine Deficiency in Developed Countries
During the ice ages, continental and alpine glaciation extensively eroded
soils of the Northern Hemisphere. Adding to the soil-depleting effects of
glaciation, extensive flooding and leaching has made soils in most
temperate and tropical areas of the upper Northern Hemisphere more
deficient in iodine than other minerals. This loss of iodine from^the soils
is especially evident in alpine and mountainous areas, whether temperate

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
125
or tropical, so it is in these regions where human iodine deficiency is still
commonly found.
Even with mandatory iodination, iodine deficiency is still sufficiently
widespread and deleterious to be currently ranked the world's most
serious nutritional deficiency, adversely affecting nearly a billion people
or more than a fifth of the world's population. It is staggering to think
what the extent of iodine deficiency would have been if food or salt
iodination programs had not been implemented. Therefore, the sheer
scale of this problem emphasizes how few people are currently
occupying areas that naturally provide adequate dietary iodine.
Iodine deficiency disorders have a significant socio-economic impact
in developing countries, especially those that are poor and have
populations subsisting on vegetarian diets that contain goiterogens.
However, iodine deficiency is not just a problem in poor countries.
Less than a decade ago, the World Health Organization reported that
up to 10% of Europeans, especially women, are presently at risk of
iodine deficiency. Other reports surveying large numbers of people,
including the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES III) in the USA, suggest that mild hypothyroidism presently
goes undetected in upwards of 10 million Americans, and upwards of 40
million Europeans. On the basis of urinary iodine excretion decreasing
by about 50% over the past 20 years, recent reports suggest that over
20% of Australian women are also at risk of being mildly to moderately
iodine deficient.
Measuring Iodine Status
Plasma TSH is the best test of thyroid function because it rises
dramatically in response to a modest decline in thyroid hormone. There
is no precise point at which declining thyroid function becomes
hypothyroidism. In practice, a maximum blood value for TSH has been
chosen, above which intervention with thyroid hormone supplements is
started. That TSH value is usually 4 milliunits per liter (raU/L) of
plasma. This compares to a maximum 1.5 mU/L in those considered to
be totally free of the risk of hypothyroidism. In some parts of the USA,
up to 10% of adults have a TSH above 5 mU/L so, by definition, they are
clinically mildly hypothyroid.

126 
Survival of the Fattest
Concern is emerging that hypothyroidism is significantly under-
diagnosed because the upper limit of normal plasma TSH has been set
too high, i.e. that mild thyroid dysfunction actually starts with a TSH
lower than 4 mU/L. Some British experts feel that hypothyroidism really
starts with TSH above 2 mU/L. This concern is well supported by studies
in different countries involving millions of people. Cost-benefit analysis
suggests screening for hypothyroidism is as effective as screening for
hypertension in the same age group. Mild hypothyroidism is associated
with diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, 
osteoporosis, hyperlipidemia,
hypercholesterolemia, hyperhomocysteinemia, and cardiovascular and
neuropsychiatric disease, especially in the elderly.
The persistent problem of mild hypothyroidism and mild to moderate
iodine deficiency in affluent countries seems to be independent of
moderately high supplementation of table salt with iodine. This is
because although salt intake is necessary to prevent hypothyroidism in
most people, salt intake has been decreasing for many years due to the
perceived risk of excess dietary salt for hypertension. Iodine intake is
also decreasing not only because of insufficient intake of foods that are
the best sources of iodine, i.e. fish and shellfish, but also because of
lower intake of foods that are moderately good sources of iodine, i.e.
milk, eggs and meat.
Though richer in iodine than fruits or vegetables, many common
foods that are moderately good sources of iodine are often shunned in
affluent regions because they are perceived to be unhealthy. Indeed, the
irony is that an apparently healthy diet consisting of cereals, vegetables
and fruit is very likely to be iodine deficient. This risk of iodine
deficiency occurs in part from the low iodine content of these foods and
in part from the higher intake of goiterogens in popular vegetarian food
ingredients like soy. This problem can only be avoided by reducing
intake of goiterogen-containing foods while increasing consumption of
milk, eggs, fish and/or shellfish.
Iodine Content of Foods
For at least a thousand years, various coastal populations have known
that eating seaweed is a simple and effective way to treat goiter. About
200 years ago, iodine itself first became directly associated with the

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
127
remedial effects of seaweed and shore-based foods. The content of iodine
in the major categories of foods available today is shown in Table 6.2.
Present day dietary sources of iodine vary with the degree of
iodination during food processing. Modern day food processing practices
are largely irrelevant to nutrient availability prior to one hundred years
ago so the notable presence of iodine in bread and other baked products
is not relevant to human brain evolution. Thus processed foods
are not accounted for in Table 6.2. However, modern day iodine
supplementation of processed foods is relevant to minimizing the
occurrence of hypothyroidism that would otherwise be widespread.
Table 6.2. Iodine content of various major food groups.
Food Group' 
Iodine Concentration2 
Amount Needed3
(micrograms per 100 grams) 
(grams per day)
Shellfish 
10-28 
680 (360-1000)
(150 in cockles, mussels)4 
(67)5
Eggs 
53 
190
Vegetables 
1-3 
4,200(3,300-5,000)
(20,000 in dried seaweed) 
(< 1)
Fruit 
1-5 
6,000 (2,000-10,000)
(9 in strawberries) 
(1110)
Nuts 
5-10 
1,500(1,000-2,000)
(20 in peanuts) 
(500)
Cereals 
6 
1,670
Pulses 
2 
5,000
Milk 
15 
6,670
Meat 
5-10 
1,500(1,000-2,000)
Fish 
50-110 
150(90-200)
(250 in haddock) 
(40)
'These groups of foods are arbitrary but encompass all unprocessed foods.
2Compiled from a variety of reference sources. Where available, a range of values is
given in brackets.
3 Amount of the food category needed to satisfy the daily iodine requirement, which has
been averaged to a single, commonly accepted value of 100 micrograms per day for
adult, non-pregnant humans.
4The amount of iodine in the foods richest in iodine (even if rare).
5Best case scenario, using the richest dietary sources of iodine.

128 
Survival of the Fattest
Cow's milk, fruit and vegetables are uniformly low in iodine, so
much higher volumes of these foods are required to meet the human
dietary requirement for iodine (Table 6.3). Second, the iodine content of
cereals and pulses (beans, peas and legumes) is somewhat higher than in
fruit or vegetables. Third, fish, meat and nuts are moderately rich in
iodine but still lower than shellfish or eggs. Thus, any intake of eggs or
shellfish dramatically decreases the amount of any other types of food
that would be needed to meet iodine requirement.
Table 6.3. Amount (grams) of each food group required to meet the daily iodine
requirement in non-pregnant, non-lactating adult humans. Variation in abundance of
these foods, e.g. with season or need for domestication, and any restrictions on
bioavailability of iodine from these foods, has not been taken into consideration in
calculated quantities required.
Fish 
150
Eggs 
190
Shellfish 
210
Meat 
1,500
Nuts 
1,500
Cereals 
3,200
Pulses 
3,700
Vegetables 
4,200
Fruit 
6,000
Milk 
6,670
Iodine and the Brain
Little is known about precisely how iodine deficiency impairs brain
development. Iodine and thyroid hormone are involved in energy
metabolism and since the brain has a high metabolic rate and demand for
energy it seems logical that this vulnerability could lead to impaired
brain development and function in iodine deficiency. Several steps in
ketogenesis are inhibited by nearly 50% in iodine deficient rats. Since
iodine deficient young animals have an impaired ability to generate

Iodine: The Primary Brain Selective Nutrient 
129
ketone bodies, this implicates iodine in the well-established role of
ketones in brain energy metabolism.
Delayed neurological development in iodine deficiency includes
impaired production of myelin, a process also linked to availability of the
ketone bodies, beta-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate, which are the
primary substrates for brain lipid synthesis during early development.
Thus, iodine deficiency impairs at least two key aspects of lipid
metabolism in the developing mammalian brain - ketogenesis for energy
metabolism and myelin synthesis. It is unknown whether iodine has other
roles in brain energy metabolism independent of its effects on brain lipid
metabolism.
Iodine and Human Evolution
Humans are unable to conserve iodine when they become iodine
deficient. Rather, in iodine deficiency, urinary excretion of iodine
continues as usual. The inability of humans to conserve iodine seems to
have arisen and persisted because, early in human evolution, diets were
rich in iodine and there was no need to conserve iodine. If hominids
evolved on shorelines, iodine would have been abundant in the diet.
Hence, controls did not evolve to reduce its excretion because diets from
at least the time of H. erectus until the advent of agriculture were not
limiting in iodine. The only place where dietary iodine is abundant and,
hence, where this oversight could arise without adversely affecting brain
expansion is on the shorelines.
No other species in the wild, including primates, exhibits symptoms
of iodine deficiency while consuming their routine diet. The implication
is that if symptoms of deficit are normally uncommon, then intake
of a nutrient is probably not limiting for reproduction, growth or
development. Since it is unreasonable to think that the human
requirement for iodine (or other nutrients) dramatically increased in the
past few thousand years, this unfortunate situation seems to have arisen
from increasing human occupation of geographical regions ill-suited to
human iodine requirements, i.e. inland or mountainous regions distant
from shorelines and shore-based foods.

130 
Survival of the Fattest
The modern day prevalence of iodine deficiency disorders and the
exquisite sensitivity of the developing brain to insufficient iodine or
thyroid hormone are perhaps the most important evidence for the shore-
based hypothesis of human evolution. How could the brain of early
Homo have expanded and become increasingly sophisticated in the face
of this major endocrine and dietary hurdle?
Insufficient intake of brain selective nutrients like iodine prevents the
brain of H. sapiens from developing or functioning normally in modern
times so, regardless of genetic potential, the ongoing presence of such a
nutrient limitation in the diets of the Australopithecines would have
prevented substantial expansion of cognitive capacity. Insufficient
dietary iodine would have prevented emergence of the larger, more
capable brain ofH. erectus.
Once pre-human hominids found themselves in an environment
providing more iodine and with the brain slowly expanding, vulnerability
to inadequate iodine intake would then be more acute in the larger-
brained individuals. In effect, the larger pre-human brain became even
more dependent on finding an appropriate diet to sustain the higher
iodine intake needed for its normal development. Hominids choosing to
remain in a lower iodine environment, eg. the Pananthropus genera,
would have foregone brain expansion but would not be otherwise
compromised. Those entering a truly low iodine environment would have
become sterile.
If the human predilection to consume iodine deficient diets and
become mildly to moderately hypothyroid does not change, this
oversight may well constitute a new environmental stimulus to some
future degenerative change in the cognitive capabilities of H. sapiens in
iodine-deficient regions.

Chapter 7
Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium:
The Other Brain Selective Minerals
Iron
Despite knowledge of the health attributes of iron since ancient times,
and its abundance in the earth's soils, iron deficiency has become a
widespread, serious nutritional problem in humans. It is much more of a
problem in developing compared to industrialized countries but is still
prevalent wherever the population is poor. Chronic mild to moderate iron
deficiency is common because it can remain undetected for months in
infants, children and adults. In many areas of the world it represents a
persistent, significant obstacle to normal neurological development.
Iron is required for the normal production and function of several
important proteins, notably hemoglobin for oxygen transport in blood,
and myoglobin for oxygen transport in muscle cells. Hemoglobin
contains the main pool of iron in the body. Red blood cells carry
hemoglobin so a low red cell level in blood (anemia) reveals low iron
status. As plasma iron starts to decline at the onset of iron deficiency,
additional iron is released from body stores in the form of two proteins -
ferritin and hemosiderin. If this additional iron does not sustain or restore
plasma iron, yet another iron-rich plasma transport protein - transferrin
- will release iron.
If iron deficiency persists, hemoglobin synthesis will decrease which,
in turn, reduces production of red blood cells. In mild iron deficiency
anemia, red cell iron levels may be normal but more subtle markers of
iron deficiency usually are present, i.e. low serum ferritin. In severe iron
131

132 
Survival of the Fattest
deficiency, this results in hypochromic microcytic anemia or low
amounts of red blood cells each low in hemoglobin.
Myoglobin in muscle and hemoglobin in red blood cells are similar
proteins because both have a structural core called heme, which is the
part of the protein that actually traps the iron. Dietary iron consumed as
meat or blood products is therefore known as heme iron, whereas iron in
other dietary constituents or foods is non-heme iron. Unlike in many
plant foods, iron in meat is easily digested and absorbed, i.e. it is readily
bioavailable. Despite the value of meat as a source of iron, low to
negligible meat intake in many areas of the world makes meat a minor
source of iron for millions of people, especially in poorer countries.
The ability of muscles to obtain oxygen determines their work
capacity so impaired ability to make hemoglobin due to iron deficiency
is a major cause of poor strength and early onset of fatigue. Mild to
moderate anemia is associated with lower oxygen uptake from the lungs
and is strongly positively correlated with poor performance in exercise
tests. Weakness and fatigue are commonly complicated by a tendency to
be less resistant to infections in iron deficient individuals. Chronic iron
deficiency also occurs due to menstrual blood losses or gastrointestinal
bleeding caused by parasitic infection in the gut.
Iron is needed for 'activation' of oxygen by several oxidase and
oxygenase enzymes, and in the cytochrome proteins used to transport
electrons during fuel production in mitochondria. Iron's role in these
enzymes derives from an interplay between its two oxidation states,
ferrous (Fe+2) and ferric (Fe+3), on which several steps in cellular
respiration and metabolism depend. Iron deficiency impairs control
of body temperature by interfering in conversion of thyroxine
to triiodothyronine. This reduces the ability to conserve heat and
contributes to coldness in the extremities as well weakness and
fatigability in iron deficiency. Like iodine, sufficient iron is essential for
the body to effectively use oxygen and metabolic fuels and to meet its
energy requirements.
Iron absorption is highly variable depending on the food source in
question. Its absorption is facilitated by other nutrients such as vitamin
C. Like with zinc, however, iron absorption is inhibited by phytate, a.
molecule abundant in plants rich in fiber, including cereals and legumes

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
133
(beans and pulses). Phytate binds to trace minerals thereby inhibiting
their absorption. This is a well-established problem that affected
sedentary paleoagricultural tribes such as the Pima of the southwestern
USA, who at various times since the advent of agriculture have been
severely anemic and iron deficient due to high intake of corn, which is
rich in phytate. The problem of poor absorption of iron from plant-based
foods can be ameliorated by the presence in the diet of animal foods, i.e.
fish or meat, especially liver, because they are richer in iron and do not
contain phytate (see Table 7.1).
Table 7.1. Iron content of the main food groups.
Food Group1 
Concentration2 
Amount of Needed3
(milligrams/100 grams food) 
(grams/day)
Shellfish 
1-3 
800 (400-1200)
15 in winkles, 25-40 in cockles4 
305
Eggs 
2 
600
Vegetables 
0.4-1.0 
2,100(1,200-3,000)
5-7 in parsley, endives 
200
Fruit 
0.2-0.8 
3,700(1,500-6,000)
1.0 in berries, olives; 1.5 in avocados 
1,000
Nuts 
1-3 
800(400-1,200)
4 in almonds 
300
Cereals 
0.2-4 
3,100(300-6,000)
Pulses 
2-8 
370(150-600)
Meat 
1-3 
800(400-1,200)
3-7 in organ meats; 10 in liver 
120
Fish 
0.3-0.4 
3,500 (3,000-4,000)
1.5 in mackerel 
800
Milk 
0.05 
24,000
'These common food groups are arbitrary but encompass all unprocessed foods.
2These data are compiled from a variety reference sources.
Average amount of the food category needed to satisfy the daily iron requirement
(12 milligrams per day). Where available, a range is given in brackets.
The amount of iron in the foods richest in iron (even if rare).
5Best case scenario, using the richest dietary sources of iron.

134 
Survival of the Fattest
A major global cause of long-term iron deficiency is poor absorption
of iron from cereal-based diets. In poor areas, geophagia or pica (eating
earth, especially clay) contributes to iron deficiency because soils contain
compounds binding to iron and preventing its absorption. However, if
adults initially have adequate body iron stores, short term decreases in
dietary iron intake rarely cause acute symptoms of iron deficiency
because, unlike for iodine, iron excretion is well controlled and can be
reduced to prevent further losses.
Currently, 20% of women in the USA are iron deficient enough to
have no detectable ferritin. Half of these women are anemic, i.e. have
low hemoglobin or red cell count in the blood. Complicating the
detection and treatment of iron deficiency is the fact that chronic
inflammatory diseases commonly raise serum ferritin. This effect
therefore masks the effect of iron deficiency and can misleadingly
suggest that some people with chronic inflammatory disorders such as
arthritis have normal iron status when in fact they are iron depleted.
Iron and Brain Function
Historically, the relationship of iron deficiency to impaired brain
function originated in empirical observations concerned with fatigue,
weakness and headache amongst patients subsequently shown to be
anemic. Brain iron concentration and neurotransmitter levels are reduced
by dietary iron deficiency. Betsy Lozoff (University of Michigan) has
pointed out that vulnerability to iron deficiency is critical during early
development because that is when the brain growth is most rapid and
because infants are also more likely to become iron deficient than are
adults.
Iron deficiency appears to be a principal cause of neurodevelopmental
delay and emotional fragility seen in malnourished children. Ernesto
Pollitt (University of California at Davis) is one of the world's leading
experts on iron deficiency in humans. He has shown that iron deficiency
has a significant and specific effect on visual attention, concept
acquisition, verbal scores, and school achievement. Some of the decline
in cognitive performance in iron deficient children appears to be
coordinated via changes in brain receptors for two neurotransmitters,

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
135
dopamine and gamma-aminobutyric acid. Elevated plasma glucose and
insulin during iron deficiency and impaired transport into the brain of the
amino acid, valine, may also be relevant.
Lower oxygen uptake in the brain caused by insufficient iron appears
to contribute to poorer performance on cognitive tests in iron deficient
children. However, performance on tests of cognitive function is
modified by arousal, attention and, especially, motivation. The emotional
reaction to novelty (affect) plays an important role in behavioural testing.
Abnormal affect includes hesitancy, fearfulness, and tenseness. It can
result in unreactivity to or disinterest in test materials. Familiarity with
the examiner is also a factor in affect. Pollit's studies make it clear that
getting to the root of the role of iron in neurodevelopment is confounded
by deterioration in affect in iron deficient children.
Copper
Normal myelin synthesis requires copper. Hypomyelination occurs
during dietary copper deficiency, and this contributes to poor control of
the skeletal muscles because the nerves do not conduct signals faithfully
unless they are fully insulated by myelin. The link between myelination
and copper was first observed in copper deficient lambs, in which
hypomyelination causes a shaky gait called swayback. Swayback results
from either insufficient copper in pastures or a combination of low
copper intake plus a dietary excess of other minerals that competitively
reduce copper absorption.
In humans, dietary copper deficiency is rarely if ever severe enough
to cause the equivalent of swayback. However, Menke's disease is
a genetic abnormality in copper absorption causing severe copper
deficiency, hypomyelination and mental retardation. Copper deficiency
in Menke's disease occurs because copper absorbed from the diet is not
released from intestinal cells to the rest of the body. The symptoms
include progressive mental retardation, hypothermia, and seizures. Death
during infancy is common.
In addition to normal myelination requiring sufficient copper, at least
three enzymes involved in neurotransmitter synthesis and degradation
also require copper as a cofactor: They are tyrosinase, which converts the

136 
Survival of the Fattest
amino acid, tyrosine, to the neurotransmitter dopamine, and also converts
dopamine to dopaquinone; dopamine-beta-hydroxylase, which converts
dopamine to another neurotransmitter - norepinephrine, and monoamine
oxidase, which inactivates monoamine neurotransmitters, including
noradrenaline, serotonin, and dopamine.
Connective tissue defects affecting bone and arterial structure also
occur in Menke's disease because copper is needed for synthesis of two
proteins that are part of the connective tissue of bone, cartilage and
arteries (collagen and elastin). Deficient copper intake therefore results
in weak bone and easily ruptured arteries. The copper-dependent enzyme
used to cross-link or strengthen collagen and elastin is lysyl oxidase.
Copper deficiency raises blood cholesterol and impairs glucose
metabolism, thereby mimicking the effect of atherosclerosis and
diabetes, respectively. Mild to moderate copper deficiency may well
exacerbate the risk of heart disease in middle-aged individuals in
industrialized countries. Several proteins with antioxidant properties
contain copper, including ceruloplasmin as well as two different forms of
the superoxlde dismutase enzymes.
Copper also has several important links to iron and energy
metabolism. First, in addition to its antioxidant activity, the copper
transport protein, ceruloplasmin, is needed for iron incorporation into
hemoglobin. Therefore, regardless of iron status, a common symptom of
copper deficiency is anemia. Second, like iron, copper is also required
for normal function of at least one of the cytochromes in the electron
transport chain (cytochrome C oxidase), and is therefore needed to
produce ATP for cell metabolism. Cytochrome C oxidase has high
activity in the brain, when cellular energy requirements are very high.
Hence, copper is a brain selective mineral for two broad reasons:
First, it has several essential biological roles relevant to brain function,
i.e. in neurotransmitter and myelin synthesis, in elastin used for blood
vessel structure, in antioxidant protection, and finally, with iron, for
cellular energy metabolism. Expanding brain size and complexity of
connections between neurons increased the need for the supporting
processes, several of which depend on copper, including antioxidant
protection of the additional membrane lipids which are easily damaged
by free radicals and lipid peroxidation, additional capacity for cellular

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
137
energy production, more myelination for integrity of many more signals,
and additional blood flow to meet the increasing energy requirement of
the brain.
Second, many human diets around the world are marginally sufficient
in copper. Shore-based foods, nuts, and organ meats, especially liver, are
the best sources (Table 7.2). Copper excretion is tightly controlled,
which helps protect against deficiency symptoms despite low copper
intake in most countries. Copper content of many human diets is
marginal, a situation aggravated by the fact that copper absorption is
inhibited by excess vitamin C, iron, molybdenum or zinc.
Table 7.2. Copper content of the main food groups.
Food Group' 
Concentration2 
Amount Needed3
(milligram/100 grams) 
(grams/day)
Shellfish 
0.2-0.4 
900(625-1,250)
0.8 in shrimp; 7 in oysters, whelks4 
355
Eggs 
0.1 
2,500
Vegetables 
0.06-0.2 
2,700(1,250-4,200)
0.6 in mushrooms 
420
Fruit 
0.03-0.2 
4,800(1,250-8,300)
0.4 in pineapples 
625
Nuts 
0.2-0.5 
900(500-1,250)
1.0 in Brazil nuts 
250
Cereals 
0.03-0.2 
4,800(1,250-8,300)
Pulses 
0.5-2 (beans, lentils, chick peas) 
300(125-500)
Meat 
0.1-0.3 
1,700(833-2,500)
2-10 in liver 
25
Fish 
0.05-0.2 
3,100(1,250-5,000)
Milk 
0.02 
12,500
'These food groups are arbitrary but encompass all unprocessed foods.
"These data are complied from a variety reference sources.
'Average amount of the food category needed to satisfy the daily copper requirement
(2.5 milligrams per day).
4The amount of copper in the foods richest in copper (even if rare).
5Best case scenario, using the richest dietary sources of copper.

138 
Survival of the Fattest
Zinc
Zinc is needed for the normal activity of over one hundred enzymes,
especially those involved in digestion of food, and in the synthesis of
DNA and proteins. It is a structural component of several proteins and
enzymes involved in gene expression. These roles make it essential for
normal growth, development, sexual maturity, reproduction, immune
function, taste and appetite, and tissue repair. Cell division requires DNA
replication so cells that must be frequently replaced are most vulnerable
to zinc deficiency, i.e. those in the skin, immune system, and in the lining
the intestine.
The requirement for zinc is linked to nitrogen intake, which is
primarily used for protein and tissue synthesis; if protein intake is low,
the limiting effect of zinc on these processes is less obvious because
growth is already inhibited by low nitrogen intake. The body does not
store zinc so regulation of body zinc levels is dependent on the efficiency
of zinc absorption from the intestine.
Meat is a good source of zinc but shellfish, especially oysters, is
the best dietary source of zinc. Phytate is a significant component of
cereals that inhibits mineral absorption, so dietary insufficiency of zinc
occurs in areas in which the diet is rich in cereals. Thus, zinc is less
available from cereals than would appear to be the case from their
zinc content alone (Table 7.3). Pica or clay consumption in extremely
poor populations causes hypogonadism and dwarfism due in part to
chronic zinc deficiency. High intakes of copper, calcium and iron
are competitive with zinc and can also cause its deficiency. In addition,
areas where zinc intake is marginal are often plagued by low food
availability and chronic infectious disease, which exacerbates zinc
deficiency.
Zinc deficiency can also be secondary to genetic disorders affecting
its absorption, or to diseases of malabsorption or liver disease.
Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a rare genetic disease in which
zinc absorption is impaired. It causes skin lesions, gastrointestinal
malabsorption, growth failure, and hair loss.

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
139
Table 7.3. Zinc content of the main food groups.
Food Group1 
Concentration2 
Amount Needed3
(milligrams/100 grams) 
(grams/day)
Shellfish 
2-5 
500 (280-700)
7 in whelks, 10-100 in oysters 
14
Eggs 
1.5 
930
Vegetables 
0.1-0.4 
8,700(3,500-14,000)
0.9 in parsley, 1 -2 in green beans 
700
Fruit 
0.1-0.3 
9,300(4,700-14,000)
Nuts 
2-4 
500 (350-700)
Cereals 
0.6-1.0 
1,900(1,400-2,300)
Pulses 
3 
470
Meat 
1-4 
900(350-1,400)
7 in calf s liver 
200
Fish 
0.3-2.0 
2,700 (700-4,700)
3 in herring; 6 in walleye pike 
230
Milk 
0.03 
47,000
'These food groups are arbitrary but encompass all unprocessed foods.
These data are compiled from a variety reference sources.
'Average amount of the food category needed to satisfy the daily zinc requirement
(14 milligrams per day).
4The amount of zinc in the foods richest in zinc (even if rare).
5Best case scenario, using the richest dietary sources of zinc.
Zinc is a brain selective mineral because of the rapid onset of zinc
deficiency in infants and children, and because zinc is highly
concentrated in mossy fibers of the hippocampus where it appears to be
involved in enkephalin binding to opiate receptors. Zinc is also needed
for normal metabolism of one of the neurotransmitters - norepinephrine.
Learning and memory are impaired in young, zinc deficient animals,
partly because zinc is also needed in the metabolism of polyunsaturated
fatty acids, notably in the synthesis of arachidonic acid.
Selenium
Selenium is best known for its role in the normal activity of a family of
antioxidant proteins called glutathione peroxidases, which are used for

140 
Survival of the Fattest
defense against the damage produced when oxygen attacks unsaturated
lipids, releasing free radicals and causing lipid peroxidation, or
rancidity. Polyunsaturated fatty acids such as arachidonic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid are very susceptible to lipid peroxidation because
of their multiple double bonds (four and six, respectively). Glutathione
peroxidase has a key role in protecting docosahexaenoic acid in the brain
and eye during early development. Vitamin E is also involved in
antioxidant protection, and selenium deficiency is exacerbated by
vitamin E deficiency. Another selenium containing protein, thioredoxin
reductase, is an antioxidant but is also involved in DNA synthesis.
Free radicals can be damaging but they are also needed in the immune
response so their appropriate production yet confinement is essential.
Immune function is impaired by selenium deficiency, thereby increasing
potency of viruses that normally are not very harmful. This increased
vulnerability to infection may affect susceptibility to heart disease and
chronic inflammatory diseases. Deficient intake of selenium is also
involved in Keshan-Beck disease, which causes cardiomyopathy in
children and is widespread in rural China.
Selenium is involved in several processes that involve two other brain
selective minerals - iron and iodine. For instance, heme production is not
only dependent on iron but is also selenium-dependent, making selenium
important in the capacity of tissues, especially the brain, to obtain
oxygen and ramp up energy metabolism. Selenium is essential for the
activity of the enzyme, iodothyronine deiodinase, which is required to
remove one iodine atom from thyroxine, thereby converting it to
triiodothyronine in target tissues outside the thyroid itself. Depending on
the tissue, three different versions of this enzyme exist but all three are
selenium-dependent.
Plasma thyroid hormone levels are not necessarily affected in
selenium deficiency but the efficacy of thyroid hormone action is
impaired by selenium deficiency because triiodothyronine production is
impaired. In effect, selenium deficiency contributes significantly to
iodine deficiency disorders. In addition to its role in reducing lipid
peroxidation, the key role of selenium in iodine metabolism is perhaps
the most important reason selenium is a brain selective nutrient.

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
141
Table 7.4. Selenium content of the main food groups.
Food Group1 
Concentration2 
Amount Needed3
(micrograms/100 grams) 
(grams/day)
Shellfish 
30-40 
300 (250-330)
60-70 in oysters4 
15O5
Nuts 
1-7 
5,500(1,430-10,000)
200 in Brazil nuts 
50
Meat 
1-14 
5,000(700-10,000)
200 in kidney 
50
Eggs 
11 
900
Fish 
10-30 
660(330-1,000)
60 in herring 
170
Cereals 
3-9 
2,200(1,100-3,300)
53 
190
Pulses 
2-10 
3,000(1,000-5,000)
100 in lentils 
100
Vegetables 
1-3 
6,700(3,300-10,000)
12 in mushrooms 
830
Fruit 
1-5 
6,000(2,000-10,000)
Milk 
1-10 
5,500(1,000-10,000)
'These food groups are arbitrary but encompass all unprocessed foods.
"These data are compiled from a variety reference sources.
'Average amount of the food category needed to satisfy the daily selenium requirement
(100 micrograms/day).
4The amount of selenium in the foods richest in selenium (even if rare).
5Best case scenario, using the richest dietary sources of selenium.
Dietary 
selenium 
generally 
occurs 
as 
selenomethionine 
or
selenocysteine, which are associated with proteins, so it is generally low
in fruits and vegetables because they are low in protein (Table 7.4). Meat
is a moderately good source of selenium. Fish, shellfish and other shore-
based foods are the best sources of selenium. The selenium content of
plants depends on the selenium content of the soil, which can vary from
deficient in one region to toxic in another. In several areas of the world,
including the far western USA, several areas in China and all of New
Zealand, selenium levels in the soil are insufficient to feed to livestock

142 
Survival of the Fattest
without selenium supplements. In contrast, some plants in the central
USA accumulate sufficient selenium to be toxic to animals.
Brain Selective Minerals in the Diet
Knowing the human daily requirement for these five brain selective
minerals and their concentration in various foods allows the calculation
of how much of each food group would be needed if that food group
alone supplied the daily requirement for these minerals. Table 7.5 shows
that 900 grams of shellfish would be required to supply the daily needs
for all five minerals. This is considerably less than for any other food
group. Except for their low copper content, eggs would be as good a
source of these minerals as seafood. Fish are the best source of iodine
and selenium but are poor in copper, zinc and iron so they rank below
seafood and eggs. Pulses supply more copper, iron and zinc than the
equivalent weight of seafood but pulses have much less iodine and
selenium than seafood, so they rank further down the list.
Table 7.6 simplifies the numerical values in Table 7.5. Note that this
ranking is based on the amount the least to most abundant of these five
minerals in each food category. Note also that the amounts of food
required seem high (even 900 grams of shellfish) but are based on food
composition tables and established nutrient requirements in humans.
Requirement values aim to avoid deficiency in at least 97% of the
population, so they may exceed the requirement of many individuals.
Hence, the intakes shown in Tables 7.5 and 7.6 reflect this stipulation.
Table 7.6 simply reconfirms in a different format that shellfish is best
able to meet the adult requirement for these brain selective minerals.
Thus shellfish is relatively poor in copper but rich in iodine and iron so it
takes more shellfish to meet the daily requirement for copper than would
be needed to meet the iron or iodine requirement. On the other hand,
pulses are rich in copper but much higher amounts of pulses are needed
to meet the requirement for iodine than for copper. Eggs or nuts are the
second best sources of most of these minerals. Copper is the least
abundant brain selective mineral in three food groups (shellfish, eggs and
cereals), zinc is the least abundant in three food groups (vegetables, fruit
and milk), selenium is least abundant in two food groups (meat and nuts),
while iodine is least abundant in one food group (pulses; Table 7.6).

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
143
Table 7.5. Amount of each major food group required to meet the daily requirement for
five brain selective minerals.
Food Group 
Iodine 
Iron 
Copper 
Zinc 
Selenium
Shellfish 
6801 
800 
(900) 
500 
300
Eggs 
190 
600 
(2,500) 
930 
900
Fish 
150 
(3,500) 
3,100 
2,700 
660
Pulses 
(3,700) 
370 
300 
470 
3,000
Cereals 
3,200 
3,100 
(4,800) 
1,900 
2,200
Meat 
1,500 
800 
1,700 
900 
(5,000)
Nuts 
1,500 
800 
900 
500 
(5,500)
Vegetables 
4,200 
2,100 
2,700 
(8,700) 
6,700
Fruit 
6,000 
3,700 
4,800 
(9,300) 
6,000
Milk 
6,670 
24,000 
12,500 
(47,000) 
5,500
'Values are for non-pregnant, non-lactating adult humans and are shown in grams. The
nutrient shown in brackets is the most limiting in each food group, i.e. it is the mineral for
which the largest amount of each food group would be required daily.
Table 7.6. Rank order of the major food groups according to their ability to meet the
needs of five brain selective minerals.
Food Group 
Ranking of the least to most abundant mineral
(minimum amount required/day) 
in each food group
Shellfish (900 grams) 
Copper » selenium > zinc > iron > iodine
Eggs (2,500 grams) 
Copper » zinc = selenium > iron > iodine
Fish (3,500 grams) 
Iron > copper > zinc > iodine > selenium
Pulses (3,700 grams) 
Iodine > selenium > » zinc > iron > copper
Cereals (4,800 grams) 
Copper > iron > selenium > zinc > iodine
Meat (5,000 grams) 
Selenium » copper > iodine > zinc > iron
Nuts (5,500 grams) 
Selenium » iodine > copper = iron > zinc
Vegetables (9,000 grams) 
Zinc > selenium > iodine > copper > iron
Fruit (9,000 grams) 
Zinc > selenium = iodine > copper > iron
Milk (47,000 grams) 
Zinc » iron » copper » iodine > selenium
This ranking is based on the average amount of each food group (grams/day) that is
needed to meet the daily needs of the least abundant of these five minerals in each food
group. It is based on the concentration of these minerals in a range of foods in (Table 6.2
and Tables 7.1 to 7.4) as well as on the minimum daily requirement for each of these
minerals.

144 
Survival of the Fattest
Based only on the concentration of these five minerals in these
ten food groups, lower amounts of shellfish than any other food group
(less than a kilogram per day) would be needed to meet the daily
needs of humans for these brain selective minerals. The next best
source is eggs but about 2.5 kilograms would have been required.
Pulses and fish are next at about 3.5 kilograms each, followed by cereals,
meat or nuts at about five kilograms each. No one food group totally
lacks all of these minerals but milk is clearly the poorest source by a
wide margin.
Shellfish is the best all round source of these brain selective minerals.
Thus, inclusion of any amount of shellfish in the diet would have helped
improve supply of these minerals to the human (or pre-human hominid)
brain. Because shellfish is such a good source of brain selective minerals,
and because major inland areas of most continents lack sufficient dietary
sources of iodine, selenium and iron, it seems that intake of shellfish
can't help but contribute to normal human brain function.
These rankings are not corrected for bioavailability (mostly
absorbability) of these minerals. Nutrient bioavailability is not
compromised by shellfish, eggs, fish or meat, but several minerals are
markedly less available from plants, especially those containing phytate.
These rankings are also not corrected for accessibility of the food groups
in paleolithic times. Domestication in the past 10,000 years markedly
increased availability of pulses, cereals, meat and milk, but had not
occurred a million years ago. In many cases, especially for species listed
in these tables, fishing also requires sophisticated skills not yet acquired
500,000 years ago. However, catfish were seasonally abundant to early
East African hominids at least two million years ago (see Chapter 13).
Shellfish are the best source of these brain selective minerals because
of the high concentration of these minerals, and the greater year round
abundance, accessibility, and digestibility of shellfish compared to other
food groups. The rich density of shellfish just below the water line in
mud or sand and on rocks, and their full exposure at low tide makes
shellfish accessible to all age groups. This is particularly exemplified by
the shellfish gathering by both the Moken children of Indonesia and the
Meriam children of Mer Island in the Torres Straits off Australia.

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
145
Eggs, fish and nuts are not quite as good sources of these
minerals as shellfish. In addition, seasonal and vulnerability to climatic
variability (drought) and competitors sometimes reduce their availability.
Consequently, compared to shellfish, significantly higher amounts of
nuts, fish and eggs are needed to meet the requirement for brain selective
minerals.
Meat has moderately high concentrations and good bioavailability of
zinc, copper and iron but is poor in selenium and iodine. Owing to the
skills necessary to catch animals, as well as competition from other
predators and scavengers, meat would have been a sporadic hominid
food, at least initially. Fruit and vegetables are also seasonal so, despite
their abundance, the markedly lower concentrations and poorer
bioavailability of most minerals make fruit and vegetables less reliable
sources of these nutrients.
Present day varieties of pulses can be good sources of these minerals.
However, as with cereals, domesticated pulses contain anti-nutrients
such as phytate and goiterogens, which significantly limit their suitability
as sources of brain selective minerals. Like milk, pulses and cereals
would have required a significant period of domestication to make them
practical sources of these minerals.
Of course, no single food group would have been consumed to the
exclusion of all others. Variety would have been as desirable and
unavoidable in paleolithic times as it is now. A combination of shellfish,
fish, nuts, eggs, meat and fruit seems probable. The key point is that any
amount of shellfish would have helped considerably to meet the needs
for these important minerals. Thus, occupation of shorelines would have
provided unparalleled access to brain selective minerals while creating
no dietary, physical or cultural disadvantage.
Interactions Between Brain Selective Minerals
Individually, iodine, iron, copper, zinc and selenium have important
roles in human nutrition and in several aspects of brain structure and
function. Specific deficiencies of these nutrients clearly have distinct
pathology related to their precise roles in different processes or
structures of the cell. These trace minerals also interact with each

146 
Survival of the Fattest
other, sometimes synergistically, sometimes in parallel, and sometimes
competitively. This builds complexity into meeting the requirement
for these nutrients and makes it more important for brain function that
minimum levels of the whole cluster of brain selective nutrients be
available.
For instance, iron and iodine are probably the most important
nutrients for cellular respiration, eg. to fuel the 'expensive' organs like
the brain and to prevent fatigue and weakness in continuously active,
muscular organs like the heart. Iodine and iron act through different
mechanisms but are complementary in this role. They are not alone in
controlling the rate of cellular respiration in that each depends on another
trace mineral for its activity. Iron cannot prevent anemia unless there is
sufficient dietary copper, because copper is required for hemoglobin
synthesis. Iodine cannot be into incorporated into triiodothyronine unless
there is sufficient selenium for the deiodinase enzyme. Selenium is also
involved in heme synthesis, thereby affecting the ability of iron to
contribute to synthesis of hemoglobin.
Excess of some minerals inhibits absorption, metabolism or
utilization of others. One of many such examples is that excess iron or
copper inhibits absorption of zinc. Moderate to high intakes of some
'anti-nutrient' components of foods, i.e. phytate, are also serious
nutritional problems because they inhibit absorption of most trace
minerals. Plant-based goiterogens create a particularly serious and
widespread problem for iodine absorption and utilization.
Brain Selective Minerals and Lipid Synthesis
In addition to their diverse roles in cellular biochemistry and energy
metabolism, iodine, iron, zinc, copper, and selenium all have one broad
metabolic effect in common that is directly relevant to brain function and
evolution - they all interact importantly in lipid metabolism (Table 7.7).
Lipids are major components of both the neuronal synapses needed to
receive and integrate information leading to the development of a signal,
and the myelin needed to protect the integrity of the signal being sent
from the brain to the target tissue.

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
147
Table 7.7. Interactions of brain selective minerals in lipid metabolism.
1. 
Iron is a component of the desaturase enzymes required for the synthesis of long
chain monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fatty acids.
2. 
Copper has a role in delta-9 desaturation, possibly as part of its function in the
electron transport chain.
3. 
Iodine is needed for ketogenesis and normal myelination.
4. 
Zinc is required for delta-5 and delta-6 desaturase activity, possibly through its
effects on electron transport. This effect makes zinc particularly important to ensure
sufficient capacity to synthesize arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid when
these two fatty acids are not present in the diet.
Iron is a structural component of the desaturase enzymes, which are
required to add double bonds to long chain fatty acids. There are several
fatty acid desaturases that are structurally similar but not interchangeable
because they insert double bonds in different locations in fatty acids.
They all have in common a structural requirement for one iron atom per
enzyme molecule. One of the desaturases, the delta-9 desaturase, makes
the eighteen carbon monounsaturated fatty acid, oleic acid, from
the eighteen carbon saturated fatty acid, stearic acid. The delta-5 and
delta-6 desaturases are needed at separate steps in the synthesis of
polyunsaturated fatty acids, i.e. docosahexaenoic acid from alpha-
linolenic acid and arachidonic acid from linoleic acid (see Chapter 8).
Although there is intense discussion amongst nutritionists and
pediatricians concerning how to get adequate docosahexaenoic acid into
the developing human brain, there is actually a lot more oleic acid than
docosahexaenoic acid in the brain. Oleic acid is used in all brain lipids,
i.e. both in myelin and in synapses, whereas docosahexaenoic acid is
principally found in synapses.
The crucial point about iron-dependent desaturation of fatty acids is
that although there is abundant stearic and oleic acid in the diet and in
body fat stores of all mammals, the brain is largely incapable of
acquiring sufficient amounts of these two fatty acids from outside itself.
The brain takes up small amounts of stearic and oleic acid but the
amount is too low to meet the requirements of brain growth and lipid
deposition. Thus, in contrast to the brain, other organs such as the

148 
Survival of the Fattest
liver can get their oleic acid directly from the diet or via synthesis from
stearic acid.
Iron deficiency inhibits delta-9 desaturation in all tissues studied and
hence affects tissue stearic and oleic acid levels, but organs other than
the brain do not depend on synthesis to make oleic acid. However, iron
deficiency reduces the oleic acid content of brain synapses and myelin.
Iron deficiency also decreases the brain content of other longer chain
monounsaturated fatty acids derived from oleic acid that, like oleic acid,
are important components of myelin and contribute to optimal learning
and memory.
Copper is also needed for delta-9 desaturation and oleic acid
synthesis. Thus, copper deficiency also reduces oleic acid levels in
tissues whereas copper excess increases oleic acid. Copper's exact role in
desaturation is much less clear than for iron. It is not a structural
component of the desaturase protein itself but copper does have a role in
electron transport at the cytochrome C oxidase transferring electrons to
the terminal step at the desaturase protein itself.
The main consequence of low brain oleic acid caused by iron or
copper deficiency is hypomyelination causing weakness or errors in the
electrical signal. The outcome of low desaturation caused by copper
deficiency is therefore spasticity, tremor and muscle weakness and
fatigue.
Iodine is also needed for normal myelination and at several stages in
ketogenesis. Ketogenesis is essential not only to provide alternate fuel to
the brain (ketones) but for the synthesis of lipids such as cholesterol and
long chain fatty acids destined for both neuronal synapses and myelin.
Hence, the role of iodine in ketogenesis impacts on myelin synthesis
because long chain saturated (palmitic and stearic acids) and
monounsaturated fatty acids (oleic acid) used in myelin synthesis are
important products of ketogenesis in the developing brain.
The process of electron transport from the donor proteins
(cytochromes) to the fatty acid desaturases is dependent on zinc. The
delta-5 and delta-6 desaturases involved in converting linoleic acid and
alpha-linolenic acid to the longer chain polyunsaturates seem somewhat
more sensitive to zinc deficiency than does the delta-9 desaturase
converting stearic acid to oleic acid.

Iron, Copper, Zinc and Selenium: The Other Brain Selective Minerals 
149
As a result, synthesis of the long chain polyunsaturates, especially
arachidonic acid, is markedly impaired by even mild to moderate zinc
deficiency. This inhibition of the desaturases by zinc deficiency is so
strong in infant humans and in young animals that it causes a more
rapid decline in tissue arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid than
does the direct dietary deficiency of all the omega 6 or omega 3
polyunsaturated fatty acids.
***
Several key nutrients participate in the control of human growth,
metabolism and brain function. Iodine promotes early development but it
depends on zinc and amino acids for protein and tissue building. Iodine
stimulates cellular metabolism but it depends on copper and iron for the
cellular furnaces (mitochondria) to generate heat and maintain body
temperature.
Some animals can survive in environments that are quite low in these
required nutrients but they are all small-brained. For several required
nutrients, humans now occupy a large number of environments that no
longer meet their daily requirements for normal development. In
industrialized countries, this problem has been artificially addressed by
iodine supplements but nutrient deficiencies, principally for iodine, iron
and zinc, remain a problem in many areas.
The metabolic interactions within brain selective minerals and
between brain selective minerals and other nutrients represent some of
the many such interactions between the full spectrum of essential
nutrients needed for normal human development. This complexity and
interdependence on nutrients coevolved with complex, multicellular
systems and is widespread in both plants and animals; it is not a function
of hominid or human evolution in particular.
Two (or even five) million years ago, some groups of hominids may
have been genetically predisposed to having a brain weighing 1500
grams but it didn't happen. I believe that a hominid brain weighing 1500
grams didn't arise until 50-100,000 years ago because, prior to that, there
was insufficient nutritional support for it. Even if only one nutrient is
'limiting' and all the others are available and working in concert,
permanently changing key metabolic processes or limitations on cell

150 
Survival of the Fattest
structure, i.e. expansion of the cerebral cortex, cannot bypass dependence
on that limiting nutrient.
Humans are now living beyond the optimal nutrient limits for intake
of several nutrients. Adaptation will be necessary, either by making
supplements more widely available or by moving back to the shorelines,
or we will conceivably face evolutionary processes that could eventually
reduce cognitive capacity.

Chapter 8
Docosahexaenoic Acid:
The Brain Selective Fatty Acid
Saturates, Monounsaturates, and Polyunsaturates
Fatty acids with no double bonds are saturated, meaning all the carbons
in the chain except the two end ones have four neighbouring atoms each
consisting of two carbons in the chain and two hydrogens sticking out to
the sides. Each bond joins the carbons together at angles to one another
but once ten or more carbons are lined up in a saturated fatty acid, the
result is a carbon chain that is saw-toothed but, overall, is straight.
There are two alternatives to a fatty acid being saturated: The first
alternative is that the fatty acid is monounsaturated, meaning that one
pair of carbons, usually near the middle of the molecule, is linked
together by a double bond. This effect of the double bond gives
monounsaturates a kink in the middle, compared to saturates which are
straight. Biologically, this makes a big difference to the way that fatty
acids pack together; saturates jam together like sardines in a tin;
monounsaturates figuratively have their elbows sticking out so fewer can
be packed together.
The second alternative is that the fatty acid has more than one double
bond. Two or more double bonds make the fatty acid polyunsaturated,
which, in practice, means two, three, four, five or six double bonds.
Using the elbows analogy, polyunsaturates have large elbows and
become curved. At five or six double bonds, they even spiral into a helix.
Saturates pack together densely and so can become hard at room
temperature (like butter or lard). Monounsaturates can pack a little so
151

152 
Survival of the Fattest
they are unlikely to be hard at room temperature but the may become
harder when is it colder, like in the refrigerator. Polyunsaturates are
unlikely to harden except when very cold. Therefore, double bonds are a
feature of major importance in the biology and chemistry of fatty acids.
Fatty acids common in the diet are mostly sixteen or eighteen carbons
long. Those that are important in the structure of membranes are 16 to 24
carbons long. Fatty acids shorter than sixteen carbons are certainly
present in the body but are uncommon in the diet and rarely important
in membranes. The sixteen carbon fatty acids can be saturated
{palmitic acid) or monounsaturated (palmitoleic acid). The eighteen
carbon fatty acids can be saturated (stearic acid), monounsaturated (oleic
acid), polyunsaturated with two double bonds (linoleic acid), or
polyunsaturated with three double bonds (alpha-linolenic or gamma-
linolenic acid).
Two fatty acids with the same chain length and same number of
double bonds but with the double bonds in different places are called
isomers because they are chemically similar but biologically quite
different. Hence the two polyunsaturates with three double bonds each
are both called linolenic acid but one is alpha-linolenic acid and the
other is gamma-linolenic acid. This is the problem with fatty acids -
their variety is enormous and multiplies not only as the chain length and
the number of double bonds increase but also with the location of the
double bonds in the molecule.
There are two key points about polyunsaturated fatty acid isomers:
First, two isomers like alpha-linolenic acid and gamma-linolenic acid
exist in the body but have very different functions. Second, one would
expect that as the number of double bonds increases, so too would the
number of isomers. Once there are three or four double bonds and 18
to 20 carbons, there are a large number of possible isomers but,
biologically, the number of isomers is actually fairly limited. For
example, there is effectively only one isomer of a polyunsaturate with
four double bonds, and it has twenty carbons (arachidonic acid). For all
intents and purposes, there is also only one twenty carbon polyunsaturate
with five double bonds {eicosapentaenoic acid).
Of the many possible options, there are actually only two important
isomers of polyunsaturates with 22 carbons and five double bonds. Most

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
153
importantly, there is only one known isomer of the 22 carbon
polyunsaturate with six double bonds - docosahexaenoic acid (Figure
8.1). Of all the possible carbon chain lengths and double bond isomers,
arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acids are the two polyunsaturates most
relevant to understanding brain function.
Metabolism of Omega 6 and Omega 3 Polyunsaturates
Polyunsaturates occur in two different families based on two different
double bond positions (Figure 8.2). The naming is based on the location
of the first double bond nearest the omega (or methyl) carbon, which is
the end one with three hydrogen neighbours. The opposite end of a fatty
acid is the carboxyl end because that is where the carbon-oxygen group
(carboxyl) is located. One family of polyunsaturates has all its members
with the first double bond starting at the sixth carbon from the omega
carbon; hence, it is the family of omega 6 polyunsaturates. The other
family is the omega 3 polyunsaturates.
Linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid are the 'parent' polyunsaturated
fatty acids at the head of omega 6 and omega 3 families, respectively
(Figure 8.1). In animals, a one step conversion turns the parent fatty acid
into the next fatty acid in the series. Effectively, linoleic acid is
converted through two intermediates to arachidonic acid, the primary
'long chain' omega 6 polyunsaturate in membranes.
CH - CH 2 - CH 2 - COOH
. .CH — CH2 — CH
CH - CH 2 - CH
/ /
,CH
CH2
X C H \ \
CH - CH 2 - CH
CH - CH 2 - CH
CH — CH 2 — CH3
Figure 8.1. The structure of docosahexaenoic acid. Its unique combination of features
includes having 22 carbons and six double bonds that are arranged at the 'omega 3' or
methyl (CH3) end of the molecule.

154 
Survival of the Fattest
Omega 6 Polyunsaturates 
Omega 3 Polyunsaturates
Linoleic acid 
alpha-Linolenic acid
(sunflower, corn oils) 
(flaxseed, perilla, soybean oils)
4 
4
gamma-LinoIenic acid 
Stearidonic acid
(evening primrose, borage oils) 
(blackcurrent, borage, oils)
4 
4
Dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid 
Eicosatetraenoic acid
4 
4
Arachidonic acid 
Eicosapentaenoic acid
(lean red meat) 
(fish, shellfish, especially marine)
4 
4
Docosatetraenoic acid 
Docosapentaenoic acid (omega 3)
4 
4
4 
4
4 
4
Docosapentaenoic acid (omega 6) 
Docosahexaenoic acid
(fish, shellfish, especially marine)
Figure 8.2. Metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Common dietary sources of these
fatty acids are shown in brackets. Note that synthesis of the final fatty acids in both series
require three steps that are not shown (hence, three consecutive arrows). Less than 5% of
the overall metabolism of the parent polyunsaturates (linolenic and alpha-linolenic acids)
proceeds through this pathway; the great majority is consumed via beta-oxidation (use
as a fuel; see Figure 8.3). Not shown here are the four distinct families of eicosanoids
(prostaglandins, leukotrienes and related substances) that are produced from dihomo-
gamma-linolenic acid, arachidonic acid, eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid.
For the omega 3 polyunsaturates, there is a similar sequence in which
alpha-linolenic acid is converted through four intermediates on its way to
becoming docosahexaenoic acid. With both the omega 6 and omega 3
polyunsaturates, it is a later fatty acid than the parent in the sequence that
seems the most important for normal early development in babies, i.e.
arachidonic acid in the omega 6 series and docosahexaenoic acid in the
omega 3 series.
The fatty acid conversion pathway leading from linoleic acid to
arachidonic acid and from alpha-linolenic acid to docosahexaenoic acid

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
155
exists in humans and in animals. However, in most animal species the
synthesis of long chain polyunsaturates is a slow process that is relatively
tightly controlled. Thus, non-vegetarians can make a little arachidonic
acid and docosahexaenoic acid but can also get some from the diet (meat
and fish, respectively).
Polyunsaturates in Neonatal Body Fat Stores
Whether the mother has eaten sufficient of these two fatty acids or has
made them herself, she passes more of them on to her fetus to help build
its cell membranes and to store in its fat before birth than she stores in
her own fat. That is why baby fat at birth contains more arachidonic acid
and docosahexaenoic acid than does the mother's fat (Table 8.1). The
logic of this seems to be that if the mother provides the baby with a
ready-made supply of arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid for its
needs after being born, it will have a higher chance of developing
normally because it will depend less on its immature capacity to make
these long chain polyunsaturates. In effect the baby is better insured.
Table 8.1. Comparison of the fatty acid composition of body fat in human adults to that
of body fat and brain in newborns. Adults accumulate much more linoleic acid and alpha-
linolenic acid in body fat than do newborns or the newborn brain.
Adult 
Newborn 
Newborn
Body Fat 
Body Fat 
Brain
SATURATES:
Palmitic Acid 
20.1 
43.0 
28.5
StearicAcid 
4.7 
4.1 
18.2
MONOUNS ATURATES:
OleicAcid 
41.7 
27.6 
20.0
Omega 6 POLYUNSATURATES:
Linoleic Acid 
15.4 
2.0 
0.9
Arachidonic Acid 
0.3 
0.7 
11.2
Omega 3 POLYUNSATURATES:
a-Linolenic Acid 
1.5 
<0.1 
<0.1
Docosahexaenoic Acid 
0.1 
0.4 
8.4
Data compiled from Hirsch et al (1960), Sarda et al (1987), and Farquharson et al (1993).

156 
Survival of the Fattest
The adult human body puts only small amounts of arachidonic acid
and docosahexaenoic acid into body fat stores because these two fatty
acids have important roles in cell membranes and there is very little of
them left over to put in storage. Nevertheless, there is noticeably more
docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid in body fat at birth than in
adults, which is an important difference between baby and adult human
fat (Table 8.1).
There is a premium on docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid in
two ways; first, because they are needed for normal membrane structure
and function and, second, because they are not made in abundant
quantities from their parent fatty acids. Hence, storing 3 to 4 times
more of these fatty acids in body fat at birth than in adults signifies
the importance placed on these two fatty acids for normal infant
development.
Much of human brain growth occurs after birth so being born with
stores of key fatty acid nutrients makes good sense. If the mother stores
too much arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid in her much larger
body fat stores, either the baby will have less insurance or the mother
will then have to transfer them into her milk to make sure the baby gets
the docosahexaenoic and arachidonic acid stores it needs. Hence, passing
on as much of these two fatty acids as possible to the baby before birth
also makes sense.
We recently showed that the typical healthy human baby is born with
about three months store of docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid
in its fat. This is in addition to its own ability to make a little of these two
fatty acids and to the normal daily delivery of these same fatty acids in
the mother's milk. Hence, the healthy term baby's requirement for these
two important long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids is normally quite
well insured.
Fat contains three months supply of docosahexaenoic acid and
arachidonic acid not because there is a high concentration of these fatty
acids in baby fat but because there is normally about 500 grams of body
fat at birth. The concentration of fatty acids in body fat of pre-term
infants has not been reported but there would still be much less
docosahexaenoic acid or arachidonic acid in total because pre-term
infants have much less body fat than do term infants. Thus, the newborn

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
157
premature human infant has less insurance to meet its energy needs and
its needs for building up the lipid structure of all cell membranes,
especially in the brain.
Though other species use arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid
in the brain and receive them in mother's milk, they do not store them in
body fat at birth nor, indeed, even have visible body fat stores at birth. I
would argue that they don't need to store these two fatty acids because
their brains are not expanding very much after birth. The advantage of
nutrient storage in body fat at birth is, in fact, a necessity as seen from
the vulnerability to neurodevelopmental problems encountered by babies
born prematurely, all of whom have low fat stores.
Docosahexaenoic Acid - The Brain Selective Fatty Acid
More has been written about the possible role of docosahexaenoic acid in
human brain evolution than for any other brain selective nutrient. 'Fish is
brain food' is an adage that substantially predates the discovery in fish of
the omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids that are now known to be
important in brain function. Docosahexaenoic acid is the main
polyunsaturated fatty acid in fish from marine temperate or polar waters;
it is always one of the main polyunsaturated fatty acids in fish, whether
from temperate fresh or salt water (Table 8.2), East African lake fish
(Table 8.3) or in shellfish (Table 8.4).
Despite its similarity in structure to docosahexaenoic acid, omega
6 docosapentaenoic acid does not overcome the symptoms of
docosahexaenoic acid deficiency. The same is even true of the immediate
precursor to docosahexaenoic acid, omega 3 docosapentaenoic acid.
Thus, the two fatty acids most similar to docosahexaenoic acid
but containing only five double bonds (omega 6 and omega 3
docosapentaenoic acids) cannot effectively substitute for docosahexaenoic
acid's six double bonds, thereby making docosahexaenoic acid alone a
brain selective fatty acid.
Before turning to a description of the main factors affecting
docosahexaenoic acid synthesis and why they would make a dietary
source of docosahexaenoic acid essential for human brain evolution, it is
notable that there is wide agreement amongst specialists that specifically

15 8 
Survival of the Fattest
docosahexaenoic acid has an irreplaceable role in brain lipid and
photoreceptor structure. Thus, brain function and vision are compromised
when docosahexaenoic acid is reduced and docosahexaenoic acid cannot
be replaced in these roles by any other (even similar) polyunsaturated
fatty acids. Despite this wide agreement today, this was not the case even
ten years ago so the consensus has been slow to emerge.
Table 8.2. Docosahexaenoic acid in fish (milligrams/100 grams) from temperate fresh or
salt water.
Fresh water: 
Carp 
114
Catfish 
234
Northern Pike 
74
Walleye 
225
Saltwater: 
Bluefish 
519
Cod 
130
Grouper 
220
Haddock 
126
Halibut 
292
Herring, 
Atlantic 
862
Pacific 
689
Mackerel, 
Atlantic 
1400
King 
177
Spanish 
1010
Mullet 
108
Perch, Ocean 
211
Pollock, Atlantic 
350
Smelt 
536
Tuna, 
Bluefin 
890
Skipjack 
185
Turbot 
880
Mixed fresh and salt water: 
Salmon, 
Atlantic 
1115
Chinook 
944
Chum 
394
Coho 
656
Pink 
586
Sockeye 
653

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
159
Sophisticated techniques that assess how the exact shapes of molecules
give them biological activity suggest that docosahexaenoic acid's shape
is uniquely important to its function in the brain. The double bonds in
docosahexaenoic acid each twist the molecule a little bit. With six double
bonds, each twist helps contribute to a total curvature of about one turn
of a helix or coil. This gives docosahexaenoic acid a somewhat
cylindrical shape that probably varies in length, i.e. it can compress or
lengthen a little bit like coiled spring with about one full turn. Other fatty
acids with fewer double bonds cannot make the same coiled shape,
which seems to be the factor that makes them unable to replace
docosahexaenoic acid.
Table 8.3. Docosahexaenoic acid (milligrams/100 grams) in East African lake fish
(modified from Broadhurst et al, 2002).
Mbelele (catfish; Lake Nyasa) 
842
Carp (Njenu; Lake Nyasa) 
363
Mfui (Lake Nyasa) 
200
Kambale (Lake Nyasa) 
227
Tilapia (Lake Turkana) 
343
Perch (Lake Turkana) 
447
Table 8.4. Docosahexaenoic acid (milligrams/100 grams) in shellfish.
American clam 
420
Quahog clam 
370
Surf clam 
370
Crayfish 
38
Blue crab 
150
Queen crab 
113
Blue mussels 
253
Eastern oysters 
292
Pacific oysters 
250
Shrimp 
222

160 
Survival of the Fattest
Progress on understanding why docosahexaenoic acid's shape is
biologically important is advancing most rapidly in studies on its role in
the photoreceptor of the mammalian eye where docosahexaenoic acid
interacts with rhodopsin in transforming photons of light into
electrochemical signals sent to the brain. In a manner analogous to its
interaction with rhodopsin, docosahexaenoic acid is also believed to be
important in the transfer of signals across the synapse between two nerve
cells. How this happens is still unclear. What is clear is that those human
infants or animals with low levels of brain docosahexaenoic acid have
poorer memory and slower learning.
Capacity to Make Docosahexaenoic Acid
Docosahexaenoic acid is the eighth in the sequence of omega 3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (Figure 8.1). If they are provided with the
precursor omega 3 fatty acid, alpha-linolenic acid, all mammals in which
this pathway has been studied can make some docosahexaenoic acid. The
efficiency of the desaturation - chain elongation pathway varies
markedly across species, with most rodents being more efficient than
humans but carnivores such as cats and lions being less efficient than
humans. Caution is therefore needed in extrapolating from one species to
another, especially from rats, which are a common laboratory model for
human physiology and biochemistry (this is less of a problem with lions).
Humans have a low capacity to make docosahexaenoic acid but that
capacity does exist. Of the seven omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids
ahead of docosahexaenoic acid, two are found in the diet. For unknown
reasons, the other five omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in the
sequence before docosahexaenoic acid occur in only minute amounts in
animals and are not found at all in plants.
The two that are found in the diet are alpha-linolenic acid and
eicosapentaenoic acid (twenty carbons long and containing five double
bonds). Apart from a few rare fungi and lichens, alpha-linolenic acid is
the only omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid in terrestrial plants. It
appears to be present in all plants, especially in the leaves, and can
account for as much as 60% of the plant's fatty acids. However, with the
exception of the seeds, most plant tissues contain very low levels of fat

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
161
so large amounts of plant material would have to be consumed for it to
be considered a good source of alpha-linolenic acid.
Alpha-linolenic acid is also present in animal fat in proportion to
its intake so it is generally higher in herbivores consuming it directly
than in carnivores, which only get it when they eat herbivores. Like
docosahexaenoic acid itself, eicosapentaenoic acid is common only in
fish, with more being found in cold water marine fish than in tropical or
freshwater fish.
The reason that pre-formed dietary docosahexaenoic acid was
probably needed for human brain evolution is that the simple
presence of the biochemical pathway to convert, alpha-linolenic acid
to docosahexaenoic acid does not guarantee sufficient capacity to
synthesize docosahexaenoic acid to meet the brain's needs. This is most
clearly evident in infants given a formula containing no docosahexaenoic
acid. Until two years ago (ten years ago in Europe), neither the USA nor
Canada allowed infant formula manufacturers to put docosahexaenoic
acid in their infant nutrition products. This was despite that fact that
regardless of high or low docosahexaenoic acid intake, it is present in the
breast milk of mothers around the world.
The main reason for banning docosahexaenoic acid from milk
formulas was a fear that if it were added, its six double bonds would
cause it to go rancid (like in decaying fish). Additionally, several studies
had shown that infants could make docosahexaenoic acid, so it was
assumed that the risk of rancidity combined with the ability to synthesize
docosahexaenoic acid made it redundant in milk formulas.
At the time, little thought was given to whether the infant had
sufficient capacity to make docosahexaenoic acid. A couple of papers
published during the past decade each showed that infants on a formula
not containing docosahexaenoic acid do not achieve the same brain level
of docosahexaenoic acid as breast fed infants, i.e. they cannot make
enough docosahexaenoic acid to achieve 'normal' brain docosahexaenoic
acid levels. These papers were instrumental in contributing to reversing
the ban on docosahexaenoic acid in milk formulas. They were a powerful
reminder that the presence of a biochemical pathway does not insure that,
starting with the main precursor (alpha-linolenic acid), the end product of

162 
Survival of the Fattest
that pathway (docosahexaenoic acid) can necessarily be made in
sufficient amounts.
Like other enzyme pathways, the desaturation and chain elongation of
alpha-linolenic acid (or linoleic acid) depends on cofactor nutrients
including vitamin B6, magnesium, iron and zinc. This means that if one
or more of these cofactors is not present in sufficient amounts in the diet,
docosahexaenoic acid synthesis will be impaired. Indeed, if animals or
humans are undernourished, their need to burn (oxidize) fatty acids
increases and net docosahexaenoic acid synthesis ceases. Therefore, the
desaturation - 
chain elongation pathway cannot guarantee that
docosahexaenoic acid will be reliably synthesized unless essentially
all nutritional circumstances affecting this process are consistently
favorable.
In other words, in humans, there is enough of a bottleneck at one or
more points in the pathway that little or no end product gets made. That
is why, regardless of the intake of alpha-linolenic acid, the infant brain
has lower docosahexaenoic acid if docosahexaenoic acid isn't provided
in the milk.
Veganism and Docosahexaenoic Acid Insurance
Vegans eat strictly plant-based diets. Unless they take supplements
containing 
docosahexaenoic 
acid, 
they 
consume 
next 
to 
no
docosahexaenoic acid. Marine or shore-based plants may contain
eicosapentaenoic acid but no edible plants provide docosahexaenoic
acid. Vegans may still be able to synthesize sufficient docosahexaenoic
acid for normal development but they have much less margin of error
than in individuals with even a modest dietary intake of docosahexaenoic
acid.
Even with abundant intake of alpha-linolenic acid, the desaturation -
chain elongation pathway is an inefficient way to make the amount of
docosahexaenoic acid necessary for the brain. With the exception of
shore based plants like dulce and some seaweeds, alpha-linolenic acid is
the only omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid in plants. As such, it
follows that a strictly plant-based diet is an inefficient way to acquire
docosahexaenoic acid.

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
163
Norman Salem's group at the National Institutes of Health in
Rockville, Maryland has shown that, even with their more efficient
synthesis of docosahexaenoic acid, suckling rats still do not achieve
optimal brain docosahexaenoic acid levels unless docosahexaenoic acid
is actually in the milk. This strongly implies that veganism a risky way to
achieve normal brain development in animals as divergent as rats and
humans. That is not to say it is impossible, just more difficult. The point
is that if it were hard to sustain normal brain development when
docosahexaenoic acid is limiting, ultimately, it would be even harder to
expand brain size and cognitive capacity without an even more reliable
dietary source of docosahexaenoic acid.
It is impossible to achieve normal brain function in the absence
of both body stores of docosahexaenoic acid at birth and a lack
of docosahexaenoic acid in the diet. On the one hand, vegans consuming
no foods of animal origin and, hence, consuming no dietary
docosahexaenoic acid (which is present in low amounts in milk, cheese
or eggs) have not been reported to be cognitively impaired. They have
lower docosahexaenoic acid in milk and in the infants' blood but their
infants are believed to have normal development.
Thus, marginally lower docosahexaenoic acid per se is not necessarily
catastrophically limiting for brain function. Many millions of human
infants have been raised on formulas containing no docosahexaenoic
acid. Perhaps not all of them were high achievers but some undoubtedly
were, so it is possible to achieve normal brain function without a dietary
source of docosahexaenoic acid.
Although docosahexaenoic acid is lower in vegans than in those
consuming some fish or meat, it is not as low as when there is no dietary
source of any omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid. Thus, vegans must be
able to make some docosahexaenoic acid and may well have somewhat
higher efficiency of docosahexaenoic acid synthesis because there is no
dietary docosahexaenoic acid to inhibit its own synthesis by negative
feedback. Their infants don't achieve the tissue docosahexaenoic acid
levels of infants consuming some docosahexaenoic acid but they may
still be above the necessary threshold for docosahexaenoic acid adequacy
for the brain.

164 
Survival of the Fattest
Clearly, it is more difficult to achieve optimal tissue docosahexaenoic
acid without docosahexaenoic acid in the diet; dietary docosahexaenoic
acid is invaluable insurance for acquisition 
of optimal brain
docosahexaenoic acid and optimal brain function. As with the deficiency
symptoms for other nutrients, there is no specific threshold for
docosahexaenoic acid deficiency symptoms involving vision or brain
function. Rather, the effects vary with age, species, the test used, etc.
Thus, we cannot say that unless H. erectus got a precise amount of
docosahexaenoic acid, H. sapiens would not have evolved.
The point in relating dietary docosahexaenoic acid to human brain
expansion is not that an exact amount of docosahexaenoic acid or any
other single nutrient was needed to have expanded the hominin brain.
Rather, at some point, lower intake or synthesis of docosahexaenoic acid
limits brain function 
sufficiently 
that expansion and increased
complexity of the brain is much less likely when docosahexaenoic acid
intake is low. In that sense, there is a threshold docosahexaenoic acid
intake for optimal human brain function.
Zellweger Syndrome
Beyond the issue of nutritional deficiencies that inhibit docosahexaenoic
acid synthesis is the rarer but much more serious problem of genetic
mutations blocking docosahexaenoic acid synthesis. The last stage of
docosahexaenoic acid synthesis requires organelles in the cell called
peroxisomes. In addition to other serious consequences, a disorder in
which peroxisomes are absent almost totally inhibits docosahexaenoic
acid synthesis. Zellweger syndrome is one of a cluster of related
peroxisomal biogenesis disorders that are characterized by extreme
mental retardation and early death.
In general, this disease is less severe before weaning from breast milk
because the mother is still providing pre-formed docosahexaenoic acid in
her milk. Once on a milk formula, most of which still do not contain
docosahexaenoic acid, the absence of incoming docosahexaenoic acid as
well as the inability to make it essentially prevents further neurological
or physical development in Zellweger cases.

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
165
Manuela Martinez from the University of Barcelona has spent
many years characterizing the involvement of docosahexaenoic acid
in Zellweger syndrome. She has clearly demonstrated both the
catastrophically reduced brain levels of docosahexaenoic acid in these
infants and a modest beneficial effect of supplemental dietary
docosahexaenoic acid on development in Zellweger cases. Though
Zellweger syndrome is relatively rare, the point of describing it (or,
indeed, the nutritional cofactors needed for efficient docosahexaenoic
acid synthesis) is that depending on docosahexaenoic acid synthesis is a
much less reliable way to achieve necessary tissue docosahexaenoic acid
levels than consuming pre-formed docosahexaenoic acid in the diet.
Arachidonic Acid - Important but not Brain Selective
Arachidonic acid is an omega 6 polyunsaturated fatty acid that in some
ways is structurally and metabolically similar to docosahexaenoic acid.
However, the two are sufficiently distinct that arachidonic acid cannot be
classified as a brain selective fatty acid. The human brain content of
arachidonic acid is broadly equivalent to that of docosahexaenoic acid; in
some brain lipid classes it is higher, while in others it is lower. With
twenty carbons and four double bonds, arachidonic acid is neither as long
nor as unsaturated as docosahexaenoic acid.
In general, the biological function of arachidonic acid has been
studied for longer and its metabolism is arguably better understood that
that of docosahexaenoic acid. Nevertheless, compared to docosahexaenoic
acid, less is known about what arachidonic acid actually does in the
brain.
Arachidonic acid is the main precursor to a myriad cascade
of bioactive molecules collectively called eicosanoids. Eicosanoids
include the prostaglandins, leukotrienes and several related substances.
Eicosanoids have diverse and sometimes confusing effects on immune
function, vascular tone, platelet aggregation and many other processes.
They are regarded as key signalling molecules between cells but, in
excess, i.e. in inflammation, can turn on the body and do considerable
damage. Inflammatory joint disorders like arthritis are treated by aspirin

166 
Survival of the Fattest
and other drugs which block the pain and swelling caused by excess
eicosanoid synthesis.
Eicosanoids can be produced in the brain from arachidonic acid but
whether they are essential to brain biochemistry is unknown. Whether
the relatively high concentration of arachidonic acid in the brain has any
direct bearing on brain eicosanoid production is also unknown.
In contrast to docosahexaenoic acid, it is relatively hard to increase or
decrease brain arachidonic acid levels. Raising and lowering tissue levels
of a molecule normally present in the body is a useful tool in determining
what that molecule does. Arachidonic acid is primarily found in meat and
fish so if these foods are not present in the diet, as with docosahexaenoic
acid, some arachidonic acid can be made from its main precursor,
linoleic acid, which is widely distributed in foods. Nutritional limitations
apply to the synthesis of arachidonic acid from linoleic acid in the same
way they apply to docosahexaenoic acid synthesis.
Providing linoleic acid as the only dietary omega 6 polyunsaturated
fatty acid does not reduce brain arachidonic acid, even though, in the
analogous experiment, brain docosahexaenoic acid is decreased when
diets are provided in which alpha-linolenic would be the only dietary
omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid. The same desaturation - chain
elongation enzymes are used to make both arachidonic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid but fewer steps are needed to make arachidonic
acid from linoleic acid than to make docosahexaenoic acid from alpha-
linolenic acid. Arachidonic acid synthesis also does not need to pass
through peroxisomes.
In experimental animals and in human infants, even a severely
deficient intake of linoleic acid reduces brain arachidonic acid much
less than the reduction in brain docosahexaenoic acid that occurs
with deficient intake of alpha-linolenic acid. Compared to brain
docosahexaenoic acid, either it is somewhat easier to make brain
arachidonic acid or it is somewhat easier to prevent it from being broken
down and removed from the brain. Clearly, despite both being
polyunsaturates that are required in the brain, arachidonic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid are not metabolized by the body in exactly the
same way.

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
167
Brain levels of arachidonic acid are much less vulnerable to a dietary
deficiency of omega 6 polyunsaturates than are brain levels of
docosahexaenoic acid when intake of omega 3 polyunsaturates is low.
The point is that, compared to docosahexaenoic acid, arachidonic acid
seems more tenaciously held by the brain. This had made brain
arachidonic acid more difficult to manipulate and study but, equally, is
an indication of its importance in the brain.
Since it is almost impossible to deplete brain arachidonic acid even
using diets not containing arachidonic acid, a dietary source of
arachidonic acid seems less important for brain development than
a dietary source of docosahexaenoic acid. Nevertheless, arachidonic
acid is present in shore-based foods and in meat so, in contrast
to docosahexaenoic acid, it is possible to meet arachidonic acid
requirements either from the diet or via synthesis. Meat alone could
supply the body's arachidonic acid requirements but is unlikely to be
able to meet the body's docosahexaenoic acid requirements. Shore-based
foods meet the requirements for both these fatty acids. Hence,
dependence on terrestrial foods (meat or plant material) would be
sufficient 
for 
arachidonic 
acid but would be insufficient 
for
docosahexaenoic acid.
Other Important Fatty Acids in the Brain
Arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid are unquestionably
important in brain development. Nevertheless, in some ways, they are
actually no more important than other lipids present in brain. Brain
phospholipids need relatively large amounts of at least one saturated
fatty acid, palmitic acid, and even larger amounts of the principal
monounsaturated fatty acid, oleic acid.
One new and exciting role for palmitic acid recently discovered by
Philip Beachy's group at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore is as an
obligatory component for the normal expression of at least one of the
family of proteins called hedgehog. Hedgehog proteins help guide the
normal development of the embryo, especially its brain. Under- or over-
expression of hedgehog is catastrophic for normal development.

168 
Survival of the Fattest
Cholesterol is one key lipid constituent needed for hedgehog
expression. Beachy's recent discoveries show that supplying just the
right amount of palmitic acid and cholesterol is important for this
protein's expression. Too much or too little palmitic acid or cholesterol
and hedgehog expression is altered and development becomes distorted.
This is one example of why it is as important to the brain to get the
supply of cholesterol and palmitic acid right as it is to get the supply of
arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid right. The brain has evolved
the ability to regulate its lipid composition very carefully and to do so
has retained the ability to make most fatty acids and cholesterol. That
way it is independent of the vagaries of the dietary supply of palmitate
(or cholesterol). The brain still depends on the diet for the long chain
polyunsaturates, somewhat analogous to vitamins or indispensable amino
acids.
Oxidation of Linoleic and alpha-Linolenic Acids
Since both the mother and the developing fetus or infant can make
docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid, why is it important to have
them stored as insurance in body fat? The reason is that there is just one
chance, one critical period, to get brain development correct. Each in the
series of critical windows in brain development depends upon successful
completion of the previous one; otherwise, John Dobbing's 'deficits and
distortions' start to arise and learning ability becomes compromised
(Chapter 4). The bigger the brain and the more it develops postnatally,
the higher the fuel and structural needs and the greater the vulnerability if
they cannot be met. Therefore, having two of the fatty acids needed by
the brain pre-formed and ready in fat stores reduces the risk that
problems in their synthesis will compromise early brain development.
If the parent polyunsaturates (linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid)
can be converted to arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid,
respectively, why is it important to have stores of arachidonic acid and
docosahexaenoic acid? Their stores are important because the synthesis
pathway is susceptible to inhibition - it isn't dependable. Indeed, it isn't
even known what the capacity of the pathway actually is except that
measurable amounts of conversion occur. The pathway can be stimulated

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
169
by some hormones, inhibited by others and is particularly vulnerable to
inhibition by low intake of certain cofactor nutrients.
More importantly, the amount of conversion depends on availability
of linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids. The problem is that linoleic and
alpha-linolenic acids are both extensively oxidized in the body as fatty
acid fuels (Figure 8.3). It may seem illogical to take a vitamin-like fatty
acid such as alpha-linolenic acid and use it as a fuel when there are
plenty of other fatty acids that could be fuels, yet none of these others
can be converted to docosahexaenoic acid. How could such a risk be
taken during evolution?
Looked at the other way around - oxidation of alpha-linolenic acid
would not be a big risk if the maternal diet could be relied upon to
provide a constant and abundant pre-formed source of docosahexaenoic
acid, i.e. from shellfish, fish or other shore-based foods. In fact, relying
on a multi-step enzyme pathway that responds negatively or positively to
various hormones and can be inhibited by dietary deficiency of iron,
zinc, magnesium or vitamin B6 is actually a lot more risky than relying
on an abundant dietary source of pre-formed docosahexaenoic acid.
When the mother consumes docosahexaenoic acid, she stores some in
her fat, transfers some to the fetus, and transfers some to the suckling
baby via her milk.
>80%: beta-oxidized 
<5%: incorporated
to carbon dioxide 
into body stores
^~^~ Linoleic acid or 
^"^
alpha-LinoIenic acid
<5%: recycled into 
<5%: converted to long
newly synthesized lipids 
chain polyunsaturates
Figure 8.3. Overall utilization of the parent polyunsaturates, linolenic and alpha-linolenic
acid. Unlike Figure 8.1, this shows the extensive catabolism of these two fatty acids,
resulting in their use as fuels or in the synthesis of other lipids. The percents shown are
compiled from various studies and represent values that are generally seen in a wide
variety of healthy, physiological states.

170 
Survival of the Fattest
These various ways of getting pre-formed docosahexaenoic acid into
the baby actually appear to make its synthesis in the baby almost
redundant. In this situation, the presence of the pathway to make
docosahexaenoic acid becomes an evolutionary vestige - needed only
by animals with small brains, no body fat at birth and no dietary
docosahexaenoic acid, but not by those consuming and storing
docosahexaenoic acid.
If the baby doesn't really need to make docosahexaenoic acid, it can
afford to oxidize alpha-linolenic acid. Thus, as precursors to make long
chain polyunsaturates, linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid are actually
redundant in those species consuming a shore-based diet. In diets that are
not shore-based, linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid would not be
redundant but then the organism's brain development has to be scaled
back to stay within the constraints of low and variable synthesis of
arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid, respectively.
Low Levels of Linoleic and alpha-Linolenic Acids in the Brain
As part of our research into the magnitude of oxidation of linoleic acid
and alpha-linolenic acid, we undertook studies in which these fatty acids
were 'labelled' with a marker or tracer such as carbon-13 or carbon-14.
The metabolism of these tracers was then assessed by quantitative
methods involving nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and mass
spectrometry. To our great interest and surprise, a considerable amount
of the oxidized carbon from linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid
appeared in newly synthesized lipids like cholesterol. This occurred most
commonly in infant animals but occurs under all circumstances we have
studied.
In fact, other laboratories, notably that of Tom Brenna at Cornell
University, have confirmed our observations. Indeed, Andrew Sinclair of
the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology in Australia demonstrated
the same effect thirty years ago but his observations remained unnoticed
until we picked up on them and extended his work early in the 1990s.
Further work we have done since then has shown that, to end up in a
newly synthesized lipid, the carbon from oxidized linoleic or alpha-
linolenic acid is recovered in ketone bodies which are then incorporated
into the newly made lipids.

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
171
Making new fatty acids out of linoleic or alpha-linolenic acid seems
like a complicated and wasteful use of two valuable fatty acids.
However, the fact is that the brain and body fat of infants contains very
low amounts of linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid. Very low means
linoleic acid is under 2% of total fatty acids and alpha- linolenic acid is
almost undetectable (Table 8.1).
In contrast, in fat from adults, linoleic acid is typically 10-15% of the
total fatty acids present and alpha-linolenic acid is 0.5-2% of the total.
These amounts vary with the type and amount of fat one eats but are
reasonable as a normal range. Hence, adults usually have five to ten
times more linoleic acid and a-linolenic acid in their body fat than do
infants. Interestingly, in adult or infant brain, linoleic acid and alpha-
linolenic acid are also present in very low amounts - about 1% and 0.1%
of total fatty acids, respectively.
It isn't a coincidence that the body fat and brain of infants have
similarly low amounts of linoleic and alpha-linolenic acids. Nor is it a
coincidence that infant and adult brains contain similarly low amounts of
these two fatty acids. In my view, the infant's body fat is helping supply
the fatty acid needs of the brain and so it's body fat contains
polyunsaturates according to the needs of the brain during its early
development. Compared to other fatty acids, there isn't much linoleic or
alpha-linolenic acid in the brain and yet two polyunsaturates are needed
in the brain, just not linoleic or alpha-linolenic acid.
Hence, linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid actually seem less
important in the developing infant than they are in the adult. A greater
dependence by the infant on ready-made docosahexaenoic acid and
arachidonic acid frees up the linoleic acid and alpha-linolenic acid for
other purposes. Ketone body synthesis is a beneficiary of the relaxed
need by the infant for linoleic and alpha-linolenic acid to make the longer
chain polyunsaturates.
Different Strategies to Obtain Fatty Acids
The mammalian brain developed three distinct strategies to obtain an
appropriate mixture of fatty acids for its membranes (Table 8.5). The
first strategy was to make the fatty acids it needed, i.e. palmitic acid.

172 
Survival of the Fattest
stearic acid, and oleic acid, and ignore the presence of these fatty acids in
the diet. This strategy was more biochemically and metabolically
expensive but it also gave the best guarantee for getting exactly the
required amount of the fatty acids that were needed. If only this strategy
had been employed in brain evolution, brains would have remained small
and simple.
Table 8.5. Three different strategies evolved by the mammalian brain to acquire fatty
acids.
1. 
Synthesis within the brain: This strategy is used mainly for palmitic, stearic and
oleic acids, which are essential in the brain, and makes brain entirely independent of
external sources of these fatty acids.
2. 
Combination of efficient synthesis and highly regulated transport: This strategy is
reserved for arachidonic acid, thereby guaranteeing appropriate brain levels under
most conditions.
3. 
Combination of inefficient synthesis and moderately efficient transport. This strategy
is reserved for docosahexaenoic acid, thereby usually guaranteeing appropriate
tissue levels. Nevertheless, in the absence of dietary docosahexaenoic acid, human
infants cannot acquire normal brain levels of docosahexaenoic acid, so this strategy
leaves humans dependent on a dietary source of docosahexaenoic acid.
A second strategy was reserved for arachidonic acid. Like with other
fatty acids, arachidonic acid is needed for brain membrane structure but
arachidonic acid is different in having the additional responsibility for
the delicate business of eicosanoid production. Therefore, more active
capacity to transfer arachidonic acid across the blood-brain barrier was
retained but the body also reserved the right to make sufficient amounts
of arachidonic acid to meet the needs of the brain. Like with the fatty
acids in the first strategy, this makes it difficult to deplete the brain of
arachidonic acid. Unlike the other fatty acids, arachidonic acid fairly
easily accesses the brain from the diet but the brain is not dependent on
the diet for arachidonic acid. This two-pronged strategy (synthesis and
transfer from the diet) was used only once and seems reserved for
arachidonic acid.

Docosahexaenoic Acid: The Brain Selective Fatty Acid 
173
The third strategy was to remain dependent on the diet for
docosahexaenoic acid. The brain of no mammalian species has escaped
the vitamin-like nature of docosahexaenoic acid. Those that couldn't
obtain docosahexaenoic acid in the diet were prevented from brain
expansion. Those that could reliably obtain docosahexaenoic acid were
able to meet the requirement for the only dietary fatty acid that limited
brain expansion. Note that there is no strategy to acquire linolenic or
alpha-linolenic acid by the brain. Brain levels of these two fatty acids are
very low and they appear unimportant for brain function.
There are only two mammalian species widely recognized to have
both disproportionately large brains and advanced cognition - the bottle-
nosed dolphin and humans: Both employ these three strategies to obtain
brain fatty acids and both depend on docosahexaenoic acid as a brain
selective fatty acid. By remaining in the marine environment, only the
dolphin has retained liberal access to docosahexaenoic acid (and other
brain selective nutrients).


Part 2
The Shore-Based Scenario


Chapter 9
Genes, Brain Function and
Human Brain Evolution
Genes and Biological Complexity
In general terms, there are three basic options by which genes influenced
human brain evolution. Each option involves at least one gene but more
likely a gene cluster that works in sequence or in concert. First, a gene or
gene cluster promoting brain development started to become functional
in hominids but did not exist in a functional state in primates. Second, a
gene or gene cluster suppressing brain development ceased to be
functional in hominids but remained active in primates. Third, a
combination of these two promoter and suppressor options occurred.
The promotion or suppression of brain development by a mutated
gene can be direct or indirect. No one knows exactly which genes control
brain development or how but, for argument's sake, let's take a
hypothetical case in which a gene controlling brain cell production
(neuro gene sis) is changed in a way resulting in a longer period of
neurogenesis. Longer neurogenesis results in more brain cells, which
results in a bigger brain. By affecting, say, the replication process in
neuroblasts that determines neuron number, the gene controlling
neurogenesis can act directly on the final steps in that control process.
A mutated gene could also affect production of a master hormone
like thyroxine, which controls several aspects of fetal or childhood
development by influencing expression of many genes.
The point is that at least two types of strategies are needed to examine
the evolution of differences in complex organs like the brain: On the one
177

178 
Survival of the Fattest
hand it is essential to be focussed in order to understand how a specific
gene works and build up a framework one gene and one species at a
time. Whether that single gene works the same way in humans as in
genetically related but cognitively different primates then needs to be
determined. Humans have a large number of genes in common with
species as different as houseflies and even bananas, so using other
species to model what human genes do may be informative but is also
limited in utility.
On the other hand, it is also essential to respect the fact that evolution
involves whole organisms and not single genes, single proteins, or single
cells. Humans are large organisms and their brains are perhaps the most
complex structures in biology. Most of the body plan of humans and
chimpanzees is very similar, with the differences being largely restricted
to skeletal structure, body hair development, skin pigmentation, neonatal
fatness and brain size. A 1% difference between the genomes of humans
and chimpanzees still represents about 300 genes. Some of those gene
differences may be silent, while others may be more affected by
environmental differences in humans than in chimpanzees, or vice versa.
Genes controlling brain complexity and body fatness in neonates are
likely to be functionally linked because humans lacking neonatal fat
(premature infants), have a higher than normal risk that full development
of brain complexity will not be achieved. In fact, the very existence of a
risk that brain complexity will fail is an important clue to examining
genetic and environmental controls on that risk of failure. Unlike the
brain, the heart or lungs, or most other organs for that matter, have a low
risk of failing to develop normally. Certainly, their development seems
much less vulnerable to nutritional and other environmental insults than
that of the brain. This is a clue that will need to be followed up in order
to understand the close relationship between vulnerability and
complexity in evolution of the human brain.
Amidst the hoopla surrounding the announcement of 'completion' of
sequencing the human genome was a certain uneasiness that humans had
fewer genes than had always been expected for our size and cognitive
complexity. After all, the human body contains more than a hundred
trillion cells, one hundred billion of which are in the brain. The
laboratory roundworm has less than a thousand cells in its entire body, of

Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
179
which three hundred are in its nervous system. How could we have only
about 30,000 genes whereas the lowly worm has almost 20,000 genes?
Surely human complexity is dependent on more than a 50% increase in
the number of genes compared to a worm.
The issue of how biological complexity resides in a relatively small
increase in the number of genes is a thorny one forcing scientists to
examine more closely how genes interact and are controlled. The number
and complexity of proteins is a function both of the way genes are
transcribed and of the interaction between genes, each of which can vary
substantially and independently of the actual number of genes.
Genetic Proximity of Humans to Other Primates
The amino acid sequence of genes for brain proteins differs about twice
as much between humans and other primates as do the genes for liver or
white blood cell proteins. Svente Paabo's group at the Max Planck
Institute has used this feature to explore the genetic proximity of humans
to other primates. They studied 21,000 DNA sequences representing
17,000 genes in white blood cells, liver cells and brain cells. Each DNA
coding sequence studied contained about a thousand base pairs so that
both the differences and similarities of these genes were maximized.
For both white blood cells and liver, these DNA sequences were more
similar between humans and chimpanzees than either was to macaques.
However, in the brain genes, the chimpanzee sequences were more
similar to those of the macaque than to the human. This greater
difference between brain compared to liver or white blood cell genes was
viewed as having arisen due to about a five fold acceleration in the rate
of change of gene expression levels in the brain in hominids or humans
themselves.
Paabo also noted that differences in the method for measuring
how gene expression changes greatly affected the apparent rate of
change of brain genes between humans and chimpanzees. Though still
controversial, the apparently larger difference in gene expression in brain
compared to other organs suggests that sometime in the 'recent' past
allowed the human brain began to evolve faster than the chimpanzee
brain.

180 
Survival of the Fattest
Offsetting the enthusiasm with which genome differences are
being pursued to establish evolutionary proximity of humans to other
primates is the recognition that various mice strains of similar genetic
diversity to humans and chimpanzees have differences in gene
expression in the brain equivalent to those seen between humans and
chimpanzees. In fact, even very similar inbred strains of mice, i.e. that
differ in phenotype but which still most definitely represent one species,
have equivalent variety in their genomes as do humans and chimpanzees.
Hence, it is difficult to directly relate differences in DNA sequence to
species differences.
It is now becoming clear that DNA sequence of the genome is only
a crude framework for evolutionary distance between two species.
Rather than differences in DNA sequence, the goal of more accurately
determining when species split may become more accessible by
studying differences in mRNA expression. mRNA codes for both
qualitative differences between proteins, i.e. amino acid composition
determining which protein is expressed, and for the amount of each
protein expressed.
The types of proteins in the human and chimpanzee brain differ by
7-8%. A similar difference in brain proteins has been found in different
mice strains. However, there was nearly a four-fold difference in total
amount of some proteins in the human compared to chimpanzee brain, a
difference that markedly exceeded what was seen across mouse strains.
The question then arises as to whether differences in the various types or
actual amount of proteins is more important in demarcating differences
in brain size and function across species.
Despite problems with interpreting the results of molecular
technology, it is becoming clear that the human brain differs in mRNA
and protein expression compared to our nearest evolutionary relations.
Despite seemingly small differences in the chimpanzee and human
genome, where they differ most seems to be accompanied by significant
differences in DNA or mRNA or both. How these differences translate
into the marked cognitive differences between humans and chimpanzees
still needs extensive work. It is also where environmental factors
probably come into play.

Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
181
Genes and Human Brain Size
Small differences between the genome of humans and non-human
primates, especially chimpanzees, belie notable organ-specific differences
in gene expression, especially in or affecting the brain. Nancy Minagh-
Purvis (University of Pennsylvania) recently reported that a distinct
mutation gives humans smaller masseter and temporal muscles than
other primates. These muscles are on the side of the head and are used to
operate the jaw, especially during mastication. She estimated that this
mutation occurred about 2.4 million years ago and concluded that its
main benefit would be to reduce the need for the big bony anchors on the
ridgeline at the top of the primate skull, to which the enlarged temporal
muscles anchor. Minagh-Purvis concluded that smaller jaw muscles in
hominids might have reduced a significant constraint on expansion of the
primate skull because of the reduced pressure created by these muscles
on the skull. Once this pressure was removed, the skull could then
accommodate an expanding brain. She suggests, however, that this
expansion could have created an increased challenge for survival since
the heavy food grinding capacity found in the hominid and non-human
primate jaw would then have been lost.
Bruce Lahn and colleagues at the University of Chicago studied
the abnormal spindle-like microcephaly-associated gene, which they
speculate could have been involved in expansion of the human
cerebral cortex. The normal form of this gene causes microcephaly, or
impaired neuron development resulting in a smaller brain cortex. Lahn
hypothesized that expression of an abnormal form of this microcephaly-
associated gene preventing microcephaly may have been necessary for
humans to evolve a fully developed cerebral cortex. By comparing the
DNA sequence of the microcephaly-associated gene in humans, non-
human primates and other mammals, Lahn's group was seeking evidence
for whether this gene could have contributed towards explaining the
minimal expansion of the cerebral cortex in non-human primates and its
more marked expansion in humans.
They found that protein-changing mutations in this microcephaly
gene increased as the species under study got closer to humans, but there
were few such mutations in the cow, dog, sheep, cat, rat, mouse, or in

182 
Survival of the Fattest
more primitive primates. Such a clear trend in gene mutation across
species is uncommon, so they speculated that an appropriate mutation
resulting in expression of the abnormal form of this gene may have had a
role in expansion of the human cerebral cortex because it permitted
cortical neutron development in a way that seems not to be possible in
non-human mammals possessing the normal form of this gene.
The N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Gene and Brain Function
The physical basis for learning is still unknown but seems more and
more likely to involve long-term and simultaneous dialogue between
neurons via well-established synaptic connections. Communication
between two neurons can be strengthened by repeated use of synapses.
This synaptic modifiability can be studied by employing long term
potentiation, which occurs with brief, repeated stimulation of specific
neural pathways, notably in the hippocampus. Long-term potentiation
that increases the efficiency of transmission in hippocampal synapses can
last from hours to days depending on the model. Several studies support
the concept that long term potentiation is a necessary component of
learning.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor in the brain binds the
amino acid, glutamate, which is a neurotransmitter controlling the
initiation of long-term potentiation in the hippocampus. The NMDA
receptor has a special combination of structural subunits that determines
the amount of long-term potentiation that is possible. One such subunit,
known as NR2B, is more abundant in young animals than in adults, and
appears to be responsible for more efficient long-term potentiation and
learning in younger compared to older animals.
At Princeton University, Ya-Ping Tang over-expressed the NR2B
subunit of the NMDA receptor in adult mice. Three different types of
learning were improved in the mice with the 'boosted' NMDA receptors
- fear responses, associative learning and faster re-learning or override of
a previously learned task. Effectively, the NMDA-boosted mice were
smarter. Tang did not speculate about a possible role of the NMDA
receptor in human brain evolution but this example shows how relatively

Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
183
simple gene changes affecting brain neurochemistry can have profound
effects on brain function and learning capacity.
Protein Phosphorylation and Brain Function
Growth associated protein (GAP-43) is a very different protein from a
neurotransmitter receptor like NMDA but it, too, is implicated in the
relation between synaptic input, memory, and learning, so changes in its
production could affect learning processes relevant to human evolution.
Like with many other signaling processes, GAP-43's role in learning
seems dependent on phosphorylation, or the addition of a phosphorus
group to part of the protein.
If GAP-43 is involved in learning, in principle, modifying the GAP-
43 gene to over-express the phosphorylated form of GAP-43 should
enhance learning. Likewise, since phosphorylation is essential to GAP-
43 activity, preventing phosphorylation of GAP-43 even in mice that
overexpress this protein should prevent increased learning. Knocking out
or preventing expression of the GAP-43 gene would be another approach
in which learning should be impaired but this approach is not practical
because mice do not survive deletion of this gene.
Aryeh Routtenberg at the University of Michigan showed that in
several different learning trials, overexpression of phosphorylated GAP-
43 in mice reduced the time needed to find the location of a hidden food
sample, i.e. reduced errors in learning. This improvement was more
apparent as the time delay between initial exposure to the test and
subsequent re-testing was increased. Relearning, i.e. unlearning the
original location and learning the new location of the food was also faster
in the mice overexpressing GAP-43.
Because GAP-43 is present more at synapses than elsewhere in the
brain, Routtenberg concluded that the two necessary precursors to true
learning - long-term potentiation and synaptic connectivity - were both
increased by overexpressing GAP-43. GAP-43 might also increase the
release of certain relevant neurotransmitters at the time of the test,
thereby inducing a form of neurotransmitter priming. This priming is in
turn thought to improve long term potentiation by strengthening the
signal coming back from the post-synaptic to the pre-synaptic cell.

184 
Survival of the Fattest
Phenylketonuria and Other Forms of Mental Retardation
Molecular modification of genes clearly shows that learning can be
experimentally manipulated in animal models. However, it is equally
clear that several gene mutations affecting brain function cause mental
retardation in humans. In fact, there are no known genes or gene
mutations that specifically improve brain function in humans; they all
seem to be detrimental and are known as inborn errors of metabolism.
The disease - phenylketonuria - is a classical example. The term comes
from the fact that a degradation production of an important amino acid,
phenylalanine, is excreted in high amounts in untreated patients with this
disease.
The metabolic defect in phenylketonuria involves inadequate
conversion of phenylalanine to a second amino acid, tyrosine. Both
phenylalanine and tyrosine are present in mother's milk and in most
dietary sources of protein including milk formulas. These two amino
acids are needed to build tissue proteins and other molecules including
neurotransmitters.
When conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine is impaired, incoming
dietary phenylalanine builds up in tissues including the brain.
Phenylalanine can be converted to some other metabolites but these other
routes are not very efficient so, in the absence of the gene controlling
conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine, high levels of phenylalanine
accumulate and become toxic to the brain. Until tests for this gene defect
became routine, it was impossible to know that a child had this disease
until it was already mentally retarded. Routine testing for the
phenylketonuria gene at birth now gives sufficient warning that low
phenylalanine diets can be given, resulting in more normal brain
development.
Inborn errors are rare but often cause devastating diseases. They
affect the synthesis or metabolism of many important molecules
including cholesterol and glucose, and most minerals, vitamins, fatty
acids, and amino acids. Many but not all of these errors cause mental
retardation. None are known that enhance brain function. Nature seems
to have left humans with no notably smart variants but has left many
different (although still rare) defective variants. Perhaps the human brain

Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
185
is already operating at peak capacity. Gene mutations may be able to
ramp up performance of certain neurotransmitters or signaling processes
in lab animals but, metabolically or nutritionally, perhaps humans are
already at or near the upper physiological limit of cognitive performance.
Genes, Schizophrenia and Brain Function
Until his recent death, David Horrobin of Laxdale Limited in Stirling,
Scotland, was a prolific medical scientist interested in many aspects of
the biology and clinical importance of polyunsaturated fatty acids. In his
recent book, The Madness of Adam and Eve, he speculates that genes
affecting metabolism of these fatty acids are involved in human
intelligence and, more specifically, a darker side of human intelligence -
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia tends to involve increased creativity,
paranoia, intense religiousness and artistic achievement; in short, the
essence of some of the defining characteristics of humanity but in
extreme forms. Bearers of this disease are often incapacitated by it but
positive (artistic and creative) elements of the disease are commonly seen
in less-affected relatives.
Horrobin proposes that schizophrenia arose before human races
evolved because it occurs in about 1% of the human population and
appears to be evenly distributed between races. He has therefore
reasoned that schizophrenia is a truly human condition that arose as an
unfortunate product of the expanded intelligence that benefits the human
species as a whole. In several studies, he has shown that schizophrenia
involves slower uptake and faster release of polyunsaturated fatty acids
in membranes than in healthy controls. He reasoned that this would
reduce membrane polyunsaturates and adversely affect 
synapse
development and remodeling during learning, thereby distorting the
learning process and causing abnormal perception of what was learned.
Rather than focusing on single gene changes, Horrobin has
speculated about coordinated changes in gene expression affecting
several proteins involved in polyunsaturated fatty acid metabolism.
These include proteins affecting body fat reserves, desaturase enzymes
required for conversion of shorter chain to long chain polyunsaturates,
phospholipases that cleave fatty acids from membrane phospholipids,

186 
Survival of the Fattest
and fatty acid binding and fatty acid transport proteins that would help
get more fatty acids into the brain.
He notes that these multiple changes in fatty acid metabolism
probably happened relatively recently and certainly after the emergence
of H. erectus. Their impact would have been to promote the burst in
creativity and early evidence of religious belief first associated with the
Cro-Magnon.
Genes and Human Behaviour
The influence of genes on human behaviour is part of two disciplines -
evolutionary 
psychology 
and behavioural 
genetics. 
Evolutionary
psychologists propose that many behaviours specific to humans became
hard-wired early in human evolution and that they should be traceable to
human genes. Thus, by supposedly possessing brain structures that
enable them to better detect cheating, preferred mates, or probable
members of a good hunting team, etc., men are said to be genetically
better prepared for food procurement. Hence, they rather than women
evolved the culture of hunting.
However there are several problems with this reasoning. First, the
'fixing' of these behaviours requires that hominids occupy a specific
habitat or environment that would have facilitated hunting. Would men
still be responsible for food procurement if hunting weren't always
possible? Second, human mate selection behaviours are also said to be
hard-wired but culturally acceptable mate selection behaviour varies
widely across human cultures and races. Thus, behavioural tendencies in
one society (often Western/US) are naively assumed to apply universally
and, furthermore, to be equivalent to evolutionary 'fitness'. Third,
behaviour is a complex attribute presumably with input both from many
genes and from developmental circumstances, so the hard wiring of
behaviours in genes would take complex co-evolution of many genes.
Behavioural genetics is the other discipline addressing the role of
genetics in human behaviour and cognitive advancement. It is built
around the statistical comparison of identical and fraternal twins and
has a long history of equating behavioural differences occurring in
families with genetic differences. Twins are frequently used in studies of

Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
187
supposedly inherited characteristics like IQ, but on the basis of the totally
inappropriate assumption that the environment of fraternal twins is the
same as for identical twins. Furthermore, even if twins are separated at
birth, their shared prenatal intrauterine environment is usually ignored.
In fact, if birth weight isn't the same, all bets are off anyway because
factors affecting the rate of growth in utero (fetal programming) have a
major impact on post-natal development and predisposition to disease
(see Chapter 14). As Richard Lewontin has attempted to convey in
several books, the problem is not only that no one really knows where
shared genes and shared environments meet but also no one knows how a
gene will behave in a new environment.
The Environment and the Heritability of Complex Traits
Heritability is a term that was originally applied to highly specific
desirable (or undesirable) traits in animals or plants that were amenable
to selective breeding. Heritability has evolved beyond its original intent
and now more complex socially influenced characteristics such as high
intelligence quotient (IQ) are said to be heritable, i.e. smart parents
produce smart children.
However, the fact that IQ appears to show heritability establishes
little about the role of genes in IQ because parents and their children
share more than the same genes, they usually share the same habits
and the same living environment. Heritability is a very local measure;
it changes substantially with changes in genetic make-up or changes
in the environment. Using Richard Lewontin's example, Roman
mathematicians calculated slowly because they had a cumbersome
numerical system not because they were unintelligent.
Indeed, if complex behaviours were truly heritable, it would be
predicted that the high positive correlation between parents and offspring
for both religious preference and political party was genetically
governed, a proposal that would insult most people. Regardless of within
family tendencies, both religion and voting preference are changeable
showing that something in our cultural-social or nutritional environment
modifies such preferences.

188 
Survival of the Fattest
Even in fairly specific, non-controversial cases, heritability of a gene-
linked disease indicates nothing about how easily the disease can be
nutritionally managed. In some cases, the mutation is silent and no
management is needed, such as in most of the more than 1,000 known
mutations of the cystic fibrosis gene that have no detrimental effect
on health. Clearly, in some cases, a mutation does cause symptomatic
cystic fibrosis, which affects pancreatic, lung and intestinal function.
Nevertheless, all known variants of cystic fibrosis are manageable to a
greater or lesser extent with antibiotics and nutrition. As a result, life
expectancy in cystic fibrosis is steadily increasing past thirty years old.
In other gene-linked diseases like phenylketonuria or acrodermatitis
enteropathica, once the biological basis of the disease is understood,
appropriate nutritional strategies can be devised and such individuals can
lead normal lives including having children. Hence, although these
inborn errors of metabolism are strictly speaking genetic in origin, the
patient's nutritional environment plays a pivotal role in determining the
eventual outcome of the disease.
Highly heritable behaviours are still modifiable by a change of
environment. Indeed, empirically, prenatal and cultural environments
must have a major influence because there are not enough human
genes to accommodate existing gradations in human behaviour. The
neurochemical basis for behaviour, i.e. interpreting what actions or
reactions are appropriate, is genetically controlled, but specific genes
alone cannot control individual behaviour or choices. Given the
relatively small number of genes thus far known to be associated with
learning and behaviour, consensus is emerging that most genes involved
in human learning and behaviour are pleiotropic, i.e. must be involved in
more than one process.
The advantage of such a situation is that a mutation improving
one function is more likely to be selected for because it influences
several other functions as well. More importantly, the plasticity of
behaviour leads to contrasting benefits of the same behaviour, e.g.
impulsivity, which can be advantageous in a fight-or-flight situation but
disadvantageous for mate selection. This plasticity doesn't rule out a
gene effect; it just shows a lack of predictive ability of a supposed gene
effect once the environment changes.

Genes, Brain Function and Human Brain Evolution 
189
Even when the role of the environment in a complex condition like
heart disease is acknowledged, it is common to try to estimate the
relative roles of genes and the environment in the risk of that disease.
However, it is fallacious to set percent contributions of genes and the
environment to a particular attribute and, without experimental testing, to
try to predict the amount these proportions will change in a different
environment. Heritability does not confer fixity. Gene effects are not a
fixed property but vary according to the environment. Differences
amongst humans, i.e. in behaviour, intelligence or in disease risk, are an
additive consequence of both genetic and environmental differences; the
two are not independent causal pathways.
Richard Lewontin makes the case (is) that genes have three functions:
(1) To specify the exact code for the composition of proteins, (2) to
specify the start and end of protein production; thus, even though they all
have the same genetic code, cells of different tissues can be different and
developmental maturation can occur, and (3) to be the pattern to make
further copies of themselves.
Genes are commonly said to make proteins and to be self-replicating
but Lewontin points out that in the absence of the appropriate cellular
machinery and raw materials, genes make nothing. The genetic code is
called a blueprint but it is a blueprint that is not functional in the absence
of the relevant raw materials, i.e. amino acids to build the proteins, other
nutrients that are substrates for lipids and most complex molecules, etc.
The blueprint cannot work without the machinery or the raw materials
and vice versa; neither is more important than the other.
***
Perhaps in the not too distant future there will be ways in which
studies like Routtenberg's involving overexpression of a certain mouse
gene that increases 'smartness' can be done in the same mice in which
Bruce Lahn's microcephaly gene is simultaneously knocked-out. An
approach of this nature might allow us to see whether combined
mutations could have a cumulative positive effect on learning in mice. It
would probably be easier to see a human-like impact of such changes if
the gene modification were done in primates but this type of experiment
still seems a long way off.

190 
Survival of the Fattest
Are there in fact differences in GAP-43 expression or any of these
other genes between humans and non-human primates? Where such gene
differences have been identified, do the proposed explanations exclude
other equally plausible interpretations?
In the case of the gene discovered by Minagh-Purvis, could it be that
a better quality diet permitted or even promoted loss of the jaw muscles
whose shrinkage in humans she attributes to a gene mutation? The diet
effect might or might not be dependent on certain nutrients affecting the
size of jaw muscles. Perhaps there was no scramble for survival at all,
but rather the combination of an improved diet and loss of the gene for
large temporal and masseter muscles was advantageous to human brain
expansion.
Underlying experiments on the molecular or genetic basis of brain
function and evolution is the question of whether gene mutations could
lead towards the human capacity for intelligence only in an already
human-like animal, i.e. in a primate at least as cognitively advanced as a
chimpanzee. Making a smart mouse is an impressive accomplishment
and shows that highly specific changes in genes can have a marked
influence on that animal's performance on selected tasks. Certainly, if
translatable to humans, even a 10% improvement in learning ability
would be a powerful change, but would it have adverse effects?
The positive attributes of the mouse learning experiments are widely
publicized but would such an improvement apply equally in a more
developed (primate) brain? Would the same overexpression of GAP-43
make humans more creative or actually more devious, dangerous or
likely to harm others? Mice aren't able to be sinister so it may difficult to
see or directly monitor the negative potential of such experiments when
done in species smarter than a mouse. As Lewontin has remarked, if the
true basis of human intelligence is to be understood, the strong desire to
oversimplify its fundamental complexity needs to be contained.

Chapter 10
Bringing the Environment
and Diet Into Play
Empirically, we know from everyday experience that environmental
stimulation has an important effect on human behaviour and function,
whether the stimulus involves one's diet, one's family activities, or one's
broader social environment. Two broad categories of environmental
stimuli affect brain function - culture and nutrition. Culture involves
people interacting with people thereby communicating skills and
acquired knowledge that affect individuals or the group as a whole.
Nutrition represents the constituents of foods, some of which are useful
as energy substrates and some of which are substances essential for the
structure of the brain.
Charles Darwin thought that cultural factors were a major stimulus for
human brain evolution. Many prominent biologists support the idea
that the modern human brain arose primarily because early humans
developed more advanced culture than hominids or primates. Ralph
Holloway and Harry Jerison propose that culture only came into play
once language, a key antecedent of culture, emerged.
Language was certainly a decisive factor in developing a cooperative
social milieu and, in some uncertain way, was dependent on expansion of
pre-human group size. The connection between group size, language,
culture, and brain stimulation is a safe bet but it leaves two important
questions unanswered: What stimulated larger group size and how does
brain stimulation lead to brain expansion and evolution?
191

192 
Survival of the Fattest
Gene-Culture Co-Evolution
In Promethean Fire: Reflections on the Origin of Mind, Charles
Lumsden and Edward Wilson propose that the human mind evolved as a
product of gene-culture co-evolution. Lumsden and Wilson's concept of
gene-culture co-evolution involves a genetic influence promoting culture
via changes in what they consider to be well-established behaviours
all humans have in common, regardless of culture or race, including:
outbreeding favoured over inbreeding, mothers bonding with infants,
certain colour preferences, shape preferences during early development,
consistent facial expressions for the main moods and emotions, the
capacity to discriminate the taste of different sugars, acid, salty or bitter,
anxiety at an early age in the presence of strangers, and certain phobias.
According to Lumsden and Wilson, these universal human
behavioural features are all independent of culture, and all follow
epigenetic rules, i.e. rules that create recognizable, consistent stages in
mental development that lead to an innate preference for one mental
operation over another. They suggest that these rules form an underlying
structure that jointly guides human cultural and mental development and
ultimately supports human survival.
Culture influences genes because ways in which the mind develops
or is likely to develop increase the odds of certain reproductively
advantageous outcomes or behaviours. This leads to more efficient
reproduction, thus further increasing those behaviours in the population
and influencing the gene pool. Humans are therefore a product of gene-
culture interaction, which predicts rapid evolution of the human brain
and transmission of culture and cultural diversity that varies according to
the behaviour in question.
Like Lumsden and Wilson, in The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of
Human Nature, Steven Pinker claims humans have a gene or genes to
fear spiders and snakes. If humans are born hard-wired with such phobias
that aid survival, this is important evidence that at least some of our most
fundamental behaviours are laid out in our genes, ready to function on
first exposure to the relevant stimulus.
However, in Guns, Germs and Steel, Jared Diamond argues that
human fear of spiders is a learned response. When human infants see

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
193
older children or adults grimace at the sight of a spider, they quickly
mimic this response just as they mimic many other responses or
behaviours they see. Diamond notes that there is a high abundance of
both spiders and snakes in New Guinea but children there show no fear
of spiders and, indeed, eat some of them! Pinker acknowledges that
apparent non-fear of snakes exists in some aboriginal peoples but claims
the innate fear is overcome by practice and sufficient exposure.
Clearly it is important to primate and human survival in woodlands or
jungles to have a fear of dangerous predators, including snakes and
spiders. The issue is whether fears are imprinted or whether the fear is
already there prenatally, pre-packaged and ready to operate at first
exposure. This example is fundamental to the debate over nature versus
nurture - how much of human behaviour is learned versus innate.
A mother's face (and smell) also gets imprinted so I would argue that
imprintability, i.e. the ability of infants to learn certain responses very
rapidly, is what is hard-wired in our genes. However, a high capacity for
imprintability does not mean that a repertoire of specific imprints is pre-
packaged in human genes.
There are many well-documented examples of young animals
imprinting on genetically-unrelated or inanimate objects as their parents.
These objects have no intrinsic survival value to the infant animal but
they are imprinted as supposed parents because virtually any object seen
often enough very early in life is most likely to be a parent bringing food,
warmth or comfort. Ability to recognize the food bearer is imprintable
and hard-wired but the form or even the species of the food bearer is
flexible.
Trying to establish which behaviours are specific to humans and
which aren't misses the point. The underlying point is that, compared to
primates, humans have an expanded range of imprintable behaviours. As
Richard Lewontin has elegantly argued, how specific behaviours became
part of the overall human behavioural repertoire isn't the issue; the issue
is how the range and depth of the human behavioural repertoire evolved.
In fact, it is the loss of specific, rigid behaviours and the expansion of a
wider range of flexibility in what can be learned that is uniquely
characteristic of humans.

194 
Survival of the Fattest
Genes appear to be responsible for the neurochemical and molecular
machinery making rapid and flexible imprintability of behaviours
possible. That rapid imprintability makes some apparently universal
human behaviours appear innate. It also makes other behaviours that will
emerge later in development more or less likely. The learned behavioural
repertoire varies according to the habits and behaviours of different
human groups and forms the basis for culture.
What remains to be found is a mechanism by which the possible
behavioural repertoire of pre-humans expanded during human evolution.
Culture is a product of that repertoire and can shape it but culture didn't
create the expanded template for human behaviour. Specific genes create
the blueprint for specific biochemical reactions but human behaviour
isn't about specific reactions, it is about the evolution of expanded
flexibility (and vulnerability) in learning as well as behavioural plasticity
that is not limiting or detrimental to survival.
Extraordinary Circumstances
We take it for granted that the human mind is distinct because of
powerful long-term memory, symbolic thinking and language. Lumsden
and Wilson point out that, actually, the human mind is also remarkably
inefficient in some ways. They note that humans have poor ability
to recall rote information, to judge the merits of other people, or to
estimate risk or plan strategy. Humans also make excessive use of
stereotypes in planning strategy, and also tend to equate events that have
low probability and trivial consequence with events that have low
probability but important consequence. Therefore we underestimate the
effect of catastrophe even when the identical events are repeated and
experienced by sequential generations, i.e. warfare, floods, windstorms,
drought, etc.
Unlike whales or songbirds, which can faithfully repeat long
complicated sound sequences in their songs, humans have poor
kinesthetic memory - the ability to exactly replicate sound or movement
sequences. Only idiots savant are capable of repeating the numerical
value of 'pi' to many decimal places. Humans also have poor spatial
and temporal memory compared even to simple-brained insects like
honeybees.

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
195
Possession of these capabilities at a higher functional level, i.e. ability
to repeat species-specific sound sequences or to recall events in time and
space would seem to have been advantageous to human survival. As
suggested in Chapter 4, the cognitively advanced human brain seems not
to be especially well developed around attributes that would seem to
favor survival; some other much simpler animals are able to make these
survival 'decisions' better than are humans.
How is it that humans have such an advanced behavioural repertoire
yet they are decidedly inefficient in survival behaviours or skills?
Lumsden and Wilson try to address this paradox by arguing that while
it would be advantageous to individual humans to have improved
kinesthetic memory or to be better able to judge the merits of other
humans, the need for such skills appears to be lower when living in large
groups, i.e. in society. They therefore argue that some aspect of the
environment actually perpetuates a certain degree of 'inefficiency' in
human mental processing, perhaps because those mental skills are not
crucial to the group's survival, only to an individual on its own.
Lumsden and Wilson are unimpressed with the classical explanations,
including Darwin's, that war or sexual competition promoted human
brain evolution. They also pan the idea that extreme temperature effects -
both heat stress from hunting on savannahs and the stress of a cold
environment - might contribute to brain expansion, even though survival
is dependent on solutions to these problems.
They speculate that 'some extraordinary set of circumstances - the
prime movers of the origin of mind - must have existed to bring hominids
across the Rubicon and into the irreversible march of cultural evolution.'
Extraordinary circumstances would indeed have been needed to
help perpetuate such a remarkable combination of human mental
inefficiencies that all bear more or less on chance of survival, i.e. poor
memory for sound, place and time, or poor judgement of character or risk
of catastrophe, while at the same time facilitating development of skills
with no survival immediate value, including art, music, and religion.
As a solution, they turn to H. habilis whom they claim was not skilled
in any particular way but was nevertheless 'pre-adapted for intelligence'
by already having a large brain. They speculate that H. habilis had to
evolve better intelligence to compete, which'nudged the human line

196 
Survival of the Fattest
forward until gene-culture co-evolution ignited and became a self-
sustaining reaction'. This competition ignited cultural innovations,
which, in turn, acted as a new class of mutations - memes - that
'accelerated evolution and pushed the species forward to its present
genetic position'. Memes are bits of culture that maximize their own
replication, somewhat like Richard Dawkins' selfish genes.
The problem is that this argument is circular - H. habilis was just
sufficiently cognitively advanced to respond to a timely need to compete.
How did H. habilis get sufficiently advanced and what exactly was the
need for competition - for food, sex, or territory? Many humans are
undeniably territorial today but the catalyst to get H. habilis sufficiently
advanced to move on to Lumsden and Wilson's cultural Rubicon remains
a mystery. How, indeed, did H. habilis become competitive despite
spatial and temporal forgetfulness, inability to judge the merits of others
or of risks in general?
Like Lumsden and Wilson, Paul Ehrlich and Marcus Feldman at
Stanford University propose that human behaviour is a product of a
diverse cluster of non-genetic information they call culture, but Ehrlich
and Feldman couple culture to chance and natural selection. For them,
chance constitutes short-term random mutations in genes whereas natural
selection represents long-term change in genes supported by successful
reproduction. Given that vision is the principal sensory means by which
humans interact with the environment, they suggest that human
perception of the world and our opportunity to evolve a culture is
primarily based on visual cues. Ehrlich and Feldman suggest that
evolution of more sophisticated interpretation of visual stimuli (in the
association areas of the cerebral cortex) had a role in human behavioural
evolution.
Separate External and Internal Environments
In a simplified form, Darwin's message was that evolution involves
organisms that adapt or die. Organisms that successfully adapt are able to
reproduce and leave successful offspring. Darwin's central point was that
the environment is separate from the organism; external and internal
environments are separate. The environment throws up the problems and

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
197
the individual attempts to solve them. Various solutions appear more or
less at random with individuals bearing the most correct ones being
preserved.
To Richard Lewontin, too much of modern biology promotes the idea
that nature has dealt a set of cards that cannot be altered so it must be our
internal environment, i.e. our innate differences or our genes, that makes
some humans fit and others unfit for nature's fickleness. This is the
foundation of biological determinism, which, as applied to humans, has
three key attributes - (1) individual humans differ in fundamental
abilities because of innate differences, (2) these differences are inherited,
and (3) human nature guarantees the formation of hierarchical society.
Genetic determinism accepts that an organism's features are a
consequence of genes plus an effect of the environment but claims that
the environment simply extracts or magnifies the genetically-determined
differences. In contrast to the premise of both biological and genetic
determinism that innate capacities are fixed, Lewontin notes that, in fact,
capacities vary a great deal according to the environment: In one
environment, one capacity may be superior, but another environment can
make that same capacity inferior.
The tasks that demonstrate the fallibility of the fixity of innate
capacity do not need to differ that much. One strain of mice may be
better at one task than a second strain but worse at a different task, yet
their genes haven't changed when the learning task changes. Hence, from
the genes alone, it cannot be predicted what differences in learning
capacity will be exposed on different tests, i.e. in different environments.
In lab animals with long histories of separate breeding that give rise
to identical genes, differences truly attributable to genes are relatively
easy to distinguish but only in identical environments. This type of
experiment is much harder to do in people who share not only genes but
also family history, culture and social structure. Studies of identical twins
raised apart should give best evidence of role of genes in a trait since
they have identical genes but are located in different environments.
Developmental 'noise' is the final wrench in the gears of the
simplistic gene versus environment, nature versus nurture, debate.
Developmental noise is the persistent variation that still occurs even
when genes and the environment are identical. Lewontin cites the

198 
Survival of the Fattest
example of different numbers of hairs on one side compared to the other
side of the belly of the housefly. The fly's environment is the same as are
the genes controlling its belly size and shape but the number of hairs is
not. Genetically identical worms raised in the same container in the
same lab have different insulin sensitivity and different longevity.
Developmental noise is the uncontrollable variable that gets between the
environment and genes. The reasons for this variability are unclear. The
debate is really not between nature and nurture but is really a poker game
between nature, nurture and noise, with noise being dealt the occasional
wild card that the other two never get.
Individuals, Society and Environment
Lewontin laments the fact that the search for humanness in our genes
engenders a reductionism that misses the point that human social
organization exceeds the apparent limitations of the individual. He uses
the example of human flight, which, unaided by aeronautic technology,
is impossible for an individual or even for a group of individuals. Yet
powered human flight happened. Human flight was a consequence
of human social organization - organization of science, education,
discovery of gasoline, monetary systems, air traffic control, electronic
communication, etc. Nevertheless, society does not fly. Individuals
do, but only as a consequence of social organization. As Lumsden
and Wilson suggest, individual limitations do not necessarily limit
individuals in a society.
Society creates a dynamic that cannot be understood by looking at the
individual removed from its society (environment). This not only applies
to technological achievement but also to human susceptibility to certain
diseases, which do not affect the individual except when they are massed
in (and, in this context, disadvantaged by) society. In both cases, the
nature of what is human is a product of the environment, an environment
created by individuals.
This is not to say that human biology is irrelevant to human
behaviour, competencies or social organization. Lewontin cites body size
(5-6 feet tall) as a critical feature that gave humans the physical strength
to acquire the early technologies of smelting, mining, fire control, etc.,

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
199
all of which were necessary for modern technology. Although
intelligence is more than a product of brain size, it still probably takes
a minimum brain size to have enough neuronal complexity for
speech. For their size, ants are very strong, clever and socially organized
but they will never get to the moon (except, perhaps, as opportunistic
passengers).
Genes certainly helped make humans physically big enough and
provided the blueprint for larger brains with advanced memory and
cognitive function, yet there are not enough genes to account for
human consciousness, which is the single most important feature creating
the human environment. From history, we can see what human
consciousness has accomplished but if history teaches us anything it is
that we cannot know what humans are capable (or incapable) of in the
future.
Adaptation and Exaptation
Adaptation is another mechanism by which new features (including
behaviour) are said to evolve. Every aspect of an organism's morphology,
physiology and behaviour can be viewed as adaptation to challenges
faced by the organism. Adaptationists propose that a feature is present to
address a preexisting challenge to survival. This makes it a somewhat
reactive approach to evolution, i.e. that the human brain is designed in
response to environmental demands, such as the need for tools to hunt.
For instance, the adaptationist explanation for bipedalism in humans
is that it is a more efficient (less energy consuming) means of locomotion
for humans than the quadrupedalism of chimpanzees. Bipedalism also
freed the hands, which were needed for tool use. Tool use was needed for
hunting. Hunting was needed to fuel brain expansion, which was
adaptive for culture.
Wait a minute - bipedalism may be more efficient today than
quadrupedalism (although even that is still debated). However, early
bipedalism could hardly have been more efficient in the beginning when
hominids were tottering around trying to get their balance. This rationale
requires the first hominids to adapt to a more primitive form of
locomotion (early bipedalism) than they previously had so that they

200 
Survival of the Fattest
could eventually become more efficient bipedal walkers (100,000 years
later, maybe more?).
If energy efficiency were the driving force of bipedalism, why
wouldn't chimpanzees also adapt to it? Natural selection doesn't
anticipate eventual improvements. To be selected for, each step has to
have a net positive benefit to those individuals in the species that display
the modification as it is occurring rather than for whatever value it might
have in later generations.
Ian Tattersall of the American Museum of Natural History in New
York is reluctant to specify what he thinks might have been the stimulus
for human brain evolution. In Becoming Human, he takes a minority and
somewhat courageous view that once the larger human brain had evolved
it became exapted for improvements in hunting, language, behavioral
refinement, and other skills. Hence the brain expanded (somehow), and
then hominids began to take advantage of the brain's improved
capabilities, i.e. they exapted it to their behavioural advantage.
Reflecting on the classic explanations for human brain evolution, i.e.
meat eating by scavenging or hunting, Tattersall is concerned that
although scavenging has a rather undignified reputation, hunting falsely
embellishes the human self-image. He feels that the idea that hunting was
the catalyst for human brain expansion has arisen from a 'deeply flawed
interpretation of our past in terms of our present'. He proposes that
'something else' promoted human brain expansion, which then created
the opportunity for language and other cooperative social skills. Once
established, these developments were in effect self-propagating and led
to culture, hunting, technological achievement, etc.
I agree with Tattersall that 'something else' promoted human brain
expansion, from which language, culture, art, religion and technological
advances took advantage, i.e. became exapted. Tattersall comes closer
than anyone I have read to suggesting that human brain expansion was an
undirected, passive process; it had no purpose and did not occur to
increase chances of survival. Everyone agrees that natural selection is
supposed to work that way but few explanations for human brain
evolution actually adhere to this demanding rule.
Kevin Laland and Gillian Brown at Cambridge University propose
that human behaviours are 'by-products of our extraordinary adaptability

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
201
rather than being adaptations'. To me, this is the same as Tattersall's
idea that the human behavioural repertoire is an exaptation, i.e. taking
advantage of a modified feature (the enlarging brain) for a new use once
it is in place. In some cases, the modified feature may have evolved for
other reasons. In contrast to adaptation, adaptability or exaptation doesn't
lock in any specific behaviours, circumstances or outcomes; anything
could happen, good or bad.
Adaptability or exaptation as a part of human brain evolution is an
important yet rare idea. I would equate these terms with plasticity.
Plasticity during development is tolerable as long as one is not too
vulnerable to negative outcomes. Plasticity and vulnerability are opposite
faces of the same coin - human brain development has high plasticity
and high vulnerability. Chimpanzees have somewhat lower neural
plasticity but they also have somewhat lower vulnerability. Goldfish
have very low neural plasticity but they have very low vulnerability (see
Table 3.1). Increased vulnerability generally implies decreased chance of
reproductive success and survival, so for plasticity to permeate neural
development, vulnerability has to be keep to a minimum - it has to be
masked by developmental stability.
Neural plasticity and low vulnerability in humans must be a product
of high vulnerability being masked by environmental, developmental and
nutritional stability. High vulnerability cushioned by environmental
stability is a condition that no other mammals besides humans, even
primates, ever experienced. Goldfish inhabit an environment that is
notoriously fickle with extremes of oxygen and temperature so they were
forcibly excluded from the high vulnerability option and had to accept
the low vulnerability - low neural performance option.
Humans, and hominids before them, adapted to the high vulnerability
- high performance option because they increasingly inhabited an
environment that was stable and rich in both brain energy substrates and
brain selective nutrients. Essentially, this left them less and less exposed
to their underlying developmental vulnerability. Neanderthals appear to
have had their neurodevelopmental vulnerability reexposed by less stable
environmental conditions (possibly worsening diet; see Chapter 13) that
cut into their adaptability and reduced their cognitive performance
relative to early humans.

202 
Survival of the Fattest
Diets - A Key Attribute of the Environment
Accepting Tattersall's view that hominids exapted their evolving brains
to uses that were eventually beneficial, and Lewontin's point that
different environments modify the phenotypes of identical genomes, it
seems reasonable to propose that human brain evolution required a
significantly different environment (different 'conditions of life') from
that inhabited by other primates. Still, there is little useful evidence in the
fossil record to guide the search for the essential features of this seminal
environmental difference.
The main clue in fossils is that hominids had smaller jaws and teeth
than do the great apes. Smaller jaws and teeth suggest less need for
strong jaw muscles and large tooth surfaces to grind fibrous plant food
that has low energy density. Hominid fossil specimens with larger crania
generally have smaller jaws and teeth, especially in the last two million
years. Hence, early humans not only have larger brains than did
hominids but hominids gradually acquired a better quality diet than was
consumed by other primates.
Over many years, anthropologists have taken a broad look at the
impact of the diet in human evolution. For instance, in People of the
Lake, Leakey and Lewin suggest that the turning point in human history
came when people started to live in villages and had food that could
be stored because it was available in excess of their immediate
requirements. Once a long term abundant food supply becomes available
in a single place, they suggest that the constraints on population growth
imposed by a nomadic, hunter-gatherer lifestyle are lifted. Birth rate then
increases, and the population starts to grow and accumulate possessions.
Leakey and Lewin note that contrary to common belief, the key
feature of successful village life is not necessarily agriculture but simply
a plentiful and reliable supply of a staple food in a central accessible
location. It might be corn or wheat but it could equally be fish. Hunter-
gatherers may well have a plentiful supply of food but they have to move
around to exploit it, thereby preventing a material economy or fixed
physical location for developing more complex social structure. Leakey
and Lewin are not specific about which hominids their concept applies
to, nor where they might have existed.

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
203
Twenty years ago, Robert Martin added the issues of energy intake
and brain energy needs to the melting pot of ideas on dietary influences
on human brain evolution. Others such as Tim Clutton-Brock at
Cambridge University had already started to deal with the primate
brain's energy requirements in general terms. By suggesting that the
brain's expensive metabolism would have limited brain expansion unless
dietary energy could keep pace with the increased energy demand,
Martin seemed to nail down more clearly than anyone at the time the
necessity of a better quality diet.
Amongst those who ran with the 'better quality diet' concept in
relation to human brain evolution, Bill Leonard of Northwestern
University near Chicago stands out. In collaboration with various
colleagues, he has published numerous articles describing the need for a
higher quality diet to support the energy demands of a larger brain. In his
recent work, he reports semi-standardized measures of diet quality that
take into account the contributions of different structural parts of edible
plant material. Thus, the bark, leaves, and stems offer the lowest diet
quality. Reproductive plant material, e.g. fruits and flowers, are of higher
quality, but intake of animal parts provides the highest energy and
nutrient quality to the primate or human diet.
Leonard notes that large-bodied primates generally have a
combination of lower metabolic rate, lower quality diets and
proportionally smaller brains. Small-bodied primates have a higher
metabolic rate and larger brains relative to body weight. He notes that
humans are exceptional in having both a better quality diet and bigger
brain size than predicted from body size. Leonard provides well-reasoned
and well-documented support for these observations and quite reasonably
concludes that the possessing a bigger brain 'necessitates' a better
quality diet; pre-human hominids had bigger brains so they had to find a
better quality diet.
Like many before him, Leonard adheres to the Savannah Theory,
eg. that a drier climate in east Africa up until about two million years
ago would have reduced woodlands and promoted emergence of
savannahs. In effect, a harsh climate forced the newly bipedal
Australopithecines to adapt to a grassland habitat for survival. Savannah
grasses provided lower energy density than did the fruit-bearing trees,

204 
Survival of the Fattest
bushes and other plants of the disappearing woodlands. However, the
savannahs encouraged the establishment and proliferation of grazing
animals - antelope, gazelle, etc., which became part of the pre-human
hominid diet.
After a long period of adaptation during which Australopithecine
brain size changed little, the tool using capacity of H. habilis began to
emerge. This newfound skill was put to the test by occasional and then
more regular recovery of meat from carcasses remaining from lion kills.
Sharpened cutters and scrapers made of stone would have been used to
remove and cut meat. They also served to remove and clean the hides
that could then be used for clothing and shelter. Increasing intake of meat
more than made up for the lower energy yield from savannah grasses that
would have been the only real alternative. Meat intake increased diet
quality and met the increasing energy needs of the larger body and brain
as H. erectus evolved from H. habilis.
Hominid fossils from this period clearly show changes in jaw
shape and structure as well as in dentition that are consistent with
lower intake of fibrous plant material typical of that consumed by present
day non-human primates. Leonard and colleagues also point to fossil
evidence suggesting that as Australopithecines evolved into Homo,
total musculature decreased compared to other primates and, indeed,
compared to all other comparably sized mammals. Thus, improved diet
quality contributed to a net energy surplus in early Homo, especially
earlier H. erectus, in whom brain size was markedly increasing. This
energy surplus was used to fuel three metabolic requirements - larger
body size in female H. erectus than in earlier female hominids, the larger
brain, and fat deposition, especially in infants.
In work separate from but relevant to Leonard's, Leslie Aiello and
Peter Wheeler have noted an additional energy saving process as
hominids started eating meat - the gut decreased in size as the
consumption of vegetation was reduced. Since the gut is a significant
component of body weight and is much larger in vegetarian primates
than carnivores, if the gut had lower energy needs as H. habilis or H.
erectus ate more meat, that could tip the net whole body energy balance
further into surplus.

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
205
What Exactly was the Better Quality Diet?
Over the past twenty years, Boyd Eaton and colleagues at Emory
University in Atlanta have developed the case that the diet consumed by
present day aborigines who maintain their traditional hunter-gatherer
lifestyle is a good model for 'paleolithic nutrition' in hominids and
humans. Eaton has calculated a range of possible nutrient intakes from
the wide variety of plants and meat consumed by various groups of
extant hunter-gatherers. These data have been compared to present-day
food and nutrient intakes of more sedentary populations in industrialized
countries. They show that the intake of saturated fat and sodium is higher
but intake of slowly absorbed carbohydrates, protein, dietary fiber,
polyunsaturated fatty acids, and vitamin C is lower in the more affluent,
'non-traditional' groups. Eaton describes meat as a source of the two
omega 3 polyunsaturates - eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic
acid. (Actually, meat from wild animals is a very poor source of these
important fatty acids.)
Eaton proposes the that lower incidence of chronic degenerative
'western' diseases (cancer, diabetes, obesity, hypertension, atherosclerosis)
in aboriginal groups still adhering to their traditional lifestyles is due in
large measure to their diet, which provides less total fat, saturated fat,
and sodium but higher intake of slowly absorbed carbohydrates, fiber,
vitamins and polyunsaturated fatty acids. Present day advice from a wide
range of government and public health agencies is consistent with
Eaton's assessment and lays much of the blame for chronic 'killer'
diseases at the feet of the current 'western' diet, which is widely felt to
contain too much refined sugar and fat, and too little fruit, vegetables,
fiber, and slowly absorbed carbohydrate.
Eaton has reasonably assumed that food procurement patterns of
present day traditional hunter-gatherers are a proxy for hominid food
intake patterns. Given that the database from which the average hunter-
gatherer diet composition was based, Eaton comes to the unsurprising
conclusion that hominids had a lower intake of fat and a higher intake of
fiber and vitamins than at present. Noting that later hominids were at
least as tall if not taller than humans today and that many specimens had
heavier bone structure, Eaton suggests that some hominids probably had
higher meat intake, and much more strenuous lifestyles than humans

206 
Survival of the Fattest
have at present. Despite a wide-ranging discussion in several published
reviews of the relevance of nutrition to human chronic disease incidence,
Eaton discusses neither human brain evolution nor the extremely high fat
intake of the Arctic Inuit.
Human Tolerance of Variability in Diet Composition
It needs to be clear that wider extremes of diet than those proposed by
Leonard, Eaton or others can still easily meet known human nutrient
requirements and can also be physically tolerated for long periods by
humans today. Both lower chronic disease risk and improved physical
performance, especially by athletes, are widely thought to occur when
carbohydrate is the principal component of the diet. With physical
performance, the logic is that since glucose supports energy expenditure
of muscle, and glycogen is the storage form of glucose, therefore high
dietary carbohydrate helps maintain maximal tissue glycogen levels and
optimize physical performance.
In a 2004 article in Nutrition and Metabolism, Stephen Phinney
succinctly and explicitly lays out the case that it ain't necessarily so.
Phinney is a physician scientist particularly interested in the relation
between diet, health and physical performance. He, too, adhered to the
concept that moderately high carbohydrate intake was essential for
optimal athletic performance, a concept supported by his own controlled
metabolic experiments showing that endurance of both athletes and
soldiers in the Canadian Arctic was reduced when very low carbohydrate
diets were consumed.
However, Phinney was puzzled by two nagging but well-established
examples in which humans could maintain long periods of high
endurance under adverse physical conditions while eating almost no
carbohydrate. The first example is of the Arctic Inuit (previously known
as Eskimos) who endure extreme cold for long periods yet eat almost no
carbohydrate except for a brief period in late summer when berries can
sometimes be collected. The impressive tolerance of low carbohydrate
intake together with unimpaired physical performance by the Inuit could
arguably be based on a form of genetic or metabolic adaptation occurring
over the 5,000 years or so that the Inuit have nomadically occupied
the Arctic.

Bringing the Environment and Diet Into Play 
207
Adaptation cannot account for the other example, which is of the
Europeans who explored the Arctic over the past 150 or more years.
Their diaries are the principal source of information about what they ate,
the length of their expeditions, and the distances they covered. In that
sense, their reports are unproven and anecdotal. Nevertheless, as Phinney
notes, over the course of an Arctic winter, a dog sled team can only carry
so much food after which one relies entirely on what can be snared,
harpooned, hunted or hooked. Reindeer were and still are a key source of
food in the Arctic. These explorers of European origin describe the
expected fatigue of switching to extremely low carbohydrates once their
original rations ran out. However, they go on to recount how that phase
passes as the body adapts to prolonged though moderate ketosis.
Outsiders never seriously 
questioned 
the duration 
of these
expeditions. Still, the possibility that they were completed while
subsisting exclusively on meat and fat was scoffed at. Hence, to resolve
the ongoing controversy of whether humans could survive while fat was
the principal component of the diet, one of the explorers agreed to
recreate his Arctic diet under highly controlled conditions in a metabolic
research setting in New York.
Constant observation guaranteed that over a twelve month supervised
experiment, a diet comprising only meat and fat was consumed. This
regimen resulted in sustained ketosis yet absence of nutrient deficiencies,
especially the much-anticipated scurvy caused by vitamin C deficiency.
Nutrient deficiencies were not only absent but, in fact, the two subjects
maintained good health and physical performance as they had claimed
for their period while isolated in the Arctic.
The two key elements of long term adaptation to ketosis in humans
are, first, that health and physical performance need not be impaired by a
low carbohydrate (ketogenic) diet and, second, that the adaptation period
takes about three to four weeks before the previous level of physical
performance is reacquired. Hence, short term studies of physical
performance lasting less than two weeks will indeed find lower
performance while on very low carbohydrate intake but that situation
changes when the adaptation to very low carbohydrate intake extends for
longer periods.

208 
Survival of the Fattest
Two features of a very high fat diet are crucial to maintaining
physical performance and preventing fatigue. These are the maintenance
of mineral (sodium and potassium) balance and the maintenance of an
optimal range of protein intake - neither too low nor too high. The Inuit
and Caucasians who have lived with them have adapted to these limiting
features of sustaining ketosis.
Like Phinney, Loren Cordain of Colorado State University has
similarly cautioned that meat intake exceeding about 100 grams per day
causes metabolic problems and cannot be sustained by humans. Hence,
the key element in the Inuit diet is a very high fat intake. This leads to
the highest intake in the world of long chain omega 3 polyunsaturates but
is also the highest intake by any aborigines of total fat, regardless of
composition.
I agree with the interpretation of Eaton and others regarding the range
of diet composition that supports optimal health in present day, sedentary
peoples. I accept that many traditional hunter-gatherers in warmer
climates than the Arctic eat low amounts of fat and high amounts
of fiber, fruit and vegetables. Indeed, some appear to be nearly as
vegetarian as other primates. Like Eaton, I dislike the pervasive presence
of refined sugar, adulterated fats, and innumerable additives in the
'modern' diet.
Disregarding the inconveniences and short-comings of the refined,
modern day, western diet, I support Phinney's case that an extremely
high fat intake with modest intake of protein and mineral balance is
compatible with healthy human subsistence and physical performance.
Humans can in principle survive on a wide range of diets in which fat
can represent from 10 to 90% of energy intake.
However, I acknowledge that when offered a choice, humans do not
typically choose diets containing 90% fat nor 90% carbohydrate nor,
indeed, do they chose 90% protein for that matter. My point is that once
minimum nutrient requirements are met, a very wide range of dietary fat
intake is entirely compatible with human existence. We should therefore
be cautious of developing an excessively specific or narrow range of
carbohydrate, protein or fat composition of a single idealized paleolithic
diet that minimizes chronic degenerative disease risk in present day
humans.

Chapter 11
The Shore-Based Scenario:
Why Survival Misses the Point
How did pre-human hominids obtain a better quality diet than was
available to other primates? The fossil record clearly shows that around
two million years ago hominid brains were starting to expand noticeably.
By this time, hominids had learned how to make sharp stone tools and
were using them to hunt animals for meat. Meat is a good source of
energy and nutrients and early humans are widely thought of as having
been hunter-gatherer-scavengers. Much later on, fossil evidence shows
that some hominids, especially Neanderthals, ate a lot of meat. Hunting
would certainly have helped meet the increasing energy requirement as
the brain got larger.
However, there is a problem with hunting giving rise to big
human brains. In fact there are several problems: First, in order to
conceive of using sharpened stones as weapons and then to use them
to hunt effectively, one would already need some degree of cognitive
improvement before the brain expanded. How would that have been
achieved if it was the proceeds of hunting and scavenging that fuelled the
initial brain expansion? Second, one would need to demonstrate that the
meat acquired by hunting was available to infants and children, because
they are the ones with the rapidly developing, vulnerable brains. Third,
although present-day humans possess big brains and have the potential to
be very intelligent, few humans are skilled enough to hunt with simple
weapons.
209

210 
Survival of the Fattest
Successful hunting takes time and practice so, even when stimulated
by hunger, few humans without considerable experience can successfully
trap or kill an animal for food. Hunting is a learned skill but not under
the duress of imminent hunger or starvation. The ability of early
hominids to make the tools and learn the skills of hunting could have
evolved no faster than their brains evolved and certainly could not have
preceded brain enlargement. Initially, hominid brains weren't any bigger
than those of chimpanzees today. Early attempts at hunting would
therefore have been clumsy and dangerous, and would not have met the
energy needs of many people, let alone those with rapidly growing brains
such as babies and children.
Chimpanzees have smaller brains than humans and are not especially
frequent hunters. Nevertheless, in small groups, they are very good
opportunistic hunters. Three important points emerge from this example:
First, primates with smaller brains than humans can still be efficient,
cooperative hunters. Second, opportunistic hunting doesn't necessarily
give rise to a larger brain or to dependence on hunting. Third,
chimpanzees are not very good at sharing a killed monkey or other game,
so early hominid hunters cannot really have been expected to have
generously distributed meat amongst the whole clan with the perceptive
intention of assuring normal brain development in their infants and
children.
The 'gatherer' part of the human 'hunter-gatherer' heritage may have
been more important for obtaining meat than the 'hunter' part. There was
always carrion on the savannahs. Lions make a kill and satisfy
themselves but then ignore a large portion of the available meat.
Scavenging from carrion requires less skill than hunting live game but
also yields less meat. The meat of grazing animals that are the prey of
savannah carnivores has little body fat to improve the energy intake of
scavenging hominids but the marrow of their long bones does contain fat.
The big hunting cats rarely puncture the skull yet the brain itself could be
an excellent source of nutrients and energy. Surely early hominids
exploited this potential food resource along with the high nutrient quality
of meat left on the carcass? Most likely they did, whenever they could.
However, they had to withstand the risks of the meat being spoiled or of
being attacked by the big hunting animals or other efficient scavengers

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
211
such as hyenas. Assuming some people (presumably the young men)
became highly skilled in locating carcasses and recovering the remaining
meat, how much meat, bone marrow or brain would likely get
transported back to the mothers, children and infants?
Thus, there isn't really a good case to be made to support the common
premise that bigger brains or hunting were necessary for hominid
survival as such. Indeed, nuts are richer in energy than most other foods
including meat, so if more dietary energy were all that was needed to
expand the brain, several primates as well as early hominids had a rich
history of gathering fruit and nuts to rely on - no hunting was needed.
However, a nut gatherer has to constantly search for food on the
ground or in the trees, which in itself is an energy-consuming process.
The energy cost of living on nuts and fruit therefore compromises the
goal of committing more dietary energy to brain evolution and fat stores.
There are also several efficient quadrupedal primates that could easily
compete for fruit and nuts with recently bipedal hominids.
Other dietary options besides fruit and nuts have been suggested.
Digging for roots or raiding termite colonies adds variety to the diet.
Still, the effort these activities require and the low energy yield of the
termites or roots that are collected competes with the increased energy
needs of expanding the brain. Therefore, it is doubtful that there would
be much net energy gain by consuming roots or termites. Beyond these
issues, the main problem with using fruits and nuts to explain increased
fuel use by the brain is - how did only the hominid brain expand so
markedly while consuming a diet so similar to that of other primates
whose brains expanded to a much lesser extent, if at all?
Hunting fresh game or scavenging meat off carcasses would have
been helpful but still insufficient to explain hominid brain evolution.
Inherent in these concepts are the same problems - how, starting with the
same primate brain as chimpanzees, did hominids alone develop
weapons, which made them so much more effective at hunting? If
hominids were eating a vegetarian diet broadly similar to that of other
primates, how did they alone expand the brain to such an extent? Altered
expression of some specific genes have been shown to markedly affect
brain function in rodents (see Chapter 9) but there is still no suggestion

212 
Survival of the Fattest
that these genetic changes were involved in primate brain evolution let
alone in more advanced cognition in hominids.
Why Survival Misses the Point
Starting with the Savannah Theory, most scenarios for human brain
evolution implicitly or explicitly involve 'necessity': in order to survive
when food resources were dwindling during the dry, early Pleistocene,
hominids needed to make tools; in order to expand the brain, they
required more dietary energy. In these scenarios, the connection between
achieving brain expansion by solving the hunger problem is clear.
Language and more sophisticated social dynamics were also supposedly
needed to catalyze the hunting process and make it more efficient. This
also required a larger brain. Larger brains required more energy, so a diet
with a higher energy density had to be found.
Necessity puts the cart before the horse. Evolution occurs by natural
selection, which operates purely by chance, catalyzed by opportune
changes in both the genome and the environment. These changes are
unplanned and sometimes undesirable. Sometimes the environmental
change is too extreme and, like the dinosaurs, you don't survive. Or, like
Darwin's finches, you are blown off course to isolated islands but you
survive and propagate because the demands of your new environment,
although different, are not too extreme. Sometimes the opportunity is too
minor to induce evolution and, like alligators, for millions of years you
don't change much, if at all.
Whatever it is, one cannot need to evolve a bigger brain (or anything
else). Populations evolve but individuals survive or die. Pre-human
hominids cannot have needed bigger brains, bipedalism, stone tools, or
fat babies. Whether survival was or was not an issue, it could not cause
human brain evolution. Concepts of human brain evolution based on
enhancing survival miss the point.
Clearly humans did evolve bigger brains and have more advanced
cognition than earlier hominids or other primates, so now we do need
more dietary energy than chimpanzees if our brains are to develop and
function to their potential. There is a crucial distinction between evolving
big brains that subsequently need more energy, as opposed to first

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
213
finding a better diet and then, as a consequence, evolving a larger brain,
which then needs more energy to maintain its function.
Hominids cannot have needed to learn to hunt because they had to
fuel their already bigger brains. Rather, they chose to hunt having
already fortuitously evolved bigger brains that they were already
nourishing and could continue to nourish without hunting. Brain
expansion in certain hominids didn't occur under survival pressure. The
conditions of primate life in woodlands or open savannah were not right
for marked brain expansion or it would have happened to some notable
degree in other primates.
Environmental Permissiveness
A dry, hot climate is widely felt to have been the key environmental
pressure forcing habitat, lifestyle and dietary change in hominids that led
to our present day human form. The pressure is seen as one for survival.
For 2 to 3 million years, hominids are supposed to have become more
adept at food procurement or would have gone extinct. In one form of
another, harsh climate change is at the core of most theories of human
evolution; this is the core feature of the Savannah Theory.
Two features about any crisis (survival)-based concept of human
evolution are wholly unsatisfactory: First, by definition, crises don't
leave much time, yet brain expansion in early hominids was fairly slow.
Even though late Australopithecines were probably efficiently bipedal, it
must have taken tens if not hundreds of thousands of years for H. habilis
to become efficient toolmakers; how was H. habilis not only surviving
but also evolving a bigger brain during the period before tool use became
proficient?
Second, two of the three definitive attributes of humans (larger brains,
fatter babies, bipedalism) seem to be the very antithesis of helping
survival in harsh climatic conditions; large brains are not truly useful for
survival for at least the first five years of life, and scarcity of food
impairs brain function by reducing fatness in adults and babies alike.
Climate change was certainly happening in Africa 2 to 4 million years
ago. Glaciation affected water levels, precipitation and temperature.
Intermittent volcanic activity affected soil conditions, direction of

214 
Survival of the Fattest
watercourses and the availability of many types of food. Not all
Australopithecines became Homo, so a harsher, drier climate might have
accelerated but was still not essential to converting Australopithecines
from a fruit- and nut-based diet to the meat-eating H. habilis. The
'robust' Australopithecines remained plant eaters yet survived for a
further 500,000 to one million years. If they didn't have to eat meat or
become large-brained to survive over this substantial period, survival
alone cannot be at the root of human brain evolution either.
Protein-energy malnutrition and specific nutrient deficiencies impair
brain development and function in all mammals in which this
relationship has been studied. If nutrient deficiencies affect rat and
human brain function in qualitatively similar ways, why is nutrition
especially important in human brain evolution? For the three reasons
outlined in Table 11.1. No other terrestrial species evolved this tidy
solution to the challenge of fuelling brain expansion. Nutrition of the
adult is part of the unique human solution to brain expansion because
sufficient excess maternal dietary energy is necessary in order to deposit
body fat on the fetus and neonate.
Table 11.1. Why nutrition was important in human brain evolution.
1. 
Presently, about one fifth of the world's human population consumes diets that
inadequately support brain development.
2. 
The common nutrient deficiencies affecting humans can only be avoided by
consuming shore-based diets.
3. 
Adequate body fat is a major determinant of normal brain development in infants.
Environmental pressure and selection pressure push the idea that
hominids had difficulty finding supper and were under pressure to make
'intelligent' decisions that almost instantly had a beneficial impact.
Environmental pressure means that, alone amongst the primates,
hominids had to almost instantaneously become proficient toolmakers
and had to be brave and wily enough to outwit lions and hyenas, so as to
protect the energy supply of their newly enlarging brains.

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
215
There is perhaps a better case to be made that environmental
permissiveness rather than environmental pressure fits closer with the
obligatorily blind nature of natural selection. What if some hominids
stumbled into a habitat that provided better, more secure nourishment?
What if dietary improvements that did not require tools or hunting
permitted gradual brain expansion?
Shore-Based Human Evolution - A Vignette
Imagine that it is three million years ago and you're an Australopithecine
teenager. That means you are little different from a chimpanzee and
perhaps not quite as clever since chimpanzee brains have evolved too.
You require all the things that other animals require - food, fresh water,
shelter, and, eventually, a mate and reproductive success. However, the
climate has been changing and it is getting dryer. The forest is shrinking
and there is more competition for food. Like other primarily vegetarian
animals of the forest, you are forced to look for new options, i.e. to
become more competitive or go hungry. Some of your clan has perished
from hunger or insufficient vigilance against attack by predators.
You are sitting on a log on a lakeshore or the edge of a large pond.
You've seen fish before, some of which slow down and die seasonally
after spawning. Raptors sometimes make off with one. You've seen bird
nests containing eggs in reeds in the marsh. Perhaps you've even noticed
a few clam or mussel shells in the mud. This time, though, you are
hungrier than you can ever remember. Beyond the fringe of the forest,
the lions have been more aggressively protecting their kills and hyenas
are just too difficult to contend with. Chimpanzees are better climbers
than you are and they have been getting to the ripest fruit just a little
faster than you and your mates.
So you took a little more interest in those clamshells than before.
There aren't many dangers and perhaps you are in a group so you are
better protected and more willing to explore. You pick one up, wipe off
the mud, bash it with a stick and realize that the juicy contents that spill
out might just be edible. Indeed they taste good and you scrape around in
the mud to find more. For a moment you forget about the effort of
awkwardly scrambling up trees and grasping for fruit or nuts.

216 
Survival of the Fattest
Circumstances like this would have been the humble beginning of the
gradual hominid exploitation of one of the richest food resource on the
planet - freshwater or saltwater shorelines. It started simply enough - as
an option - stay in the woods and compete or look elsewhere.
Chimpanzees stayed in the woods - you and your mates looked
elsewhere. You didn't have far to look because you were used to
drinking fresh water anyway. Initially, and for tens of thousands of years
or more, you and your descendants weren't committed to any particular
environment or diet.
Maybe more severe climatic change in some areas inexorably forced
the use of shorelines as primary rather than occasional feeding grounds.
Maybe in some locations, some Australopithecines started exploring
shorelines without any sense of urgency at all, i.e. without being forced
to do so by a drying or changing climate. Regardless, you and your clan
gradually became aware that mussels, clams, crabs, fledgling or molting
birds, crayfish, marsh plants, eggs, frogs, turtles, spawning fish and many
other types of food were available in relative abundance on the shores of
fresh water rivers, lakes and estuaries. They tasted pretty good and there
wasn't much competition. You wouldn't have taken long to realize that
most of these foods didn't poison you and didn't take all that much effort
to catch or pry off rocks or out of the mud. Some were hard to catch but
others were easier especially at certain times of the year. Some amongst
your clan may have exploited the saltwater shorelines but would always
have required ready access to fresh water.
You didn't know it at the time but you'd found the world's best
source of brain selective nutrients and in relative abundance. Your taste
for roots, nuts and meat would remain to be indulged as opportunity
permitted. In the meantime, in a relatively short period of time you and
your clan mates had started to explore and exploit a new but more
reliable food supply.
How Could Shorelines Make Such a Difference?
Shorelines are richer in biomass than any other ecological zone on the
planet. That means that food is commonly more abundant on shorelines
than anywhere else. There also wasn't much competition - most other

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
217
primates are low, mid-level or upper canopy foragers in the forest. On
the shorelines, you could entertain yourselves trying to catch more
elusive prey as you wished. Sometimes, these exploits would take you
far afield and you got quite hungry and maybe some of your clan
perished as a result. Mostly, though, you knew you could return to the
same (or perhaps a different) shore-based camp.
The key point is that, for most of you, survival was not an issue. This
is a crucial point in the evolution of your brain. You didn't depend on
improved cognitive powers or better memory for survival. You'd found a
place to eat and live, and finding your next meal was not a challenge.
Your children could feed themselves. So could your aging parents and
your offspring for thousands of generations to come. There wasn't any
pressure to risk your life to be the great provider. The climate was dry
but the massive lakes and rivers of east Africa never disappeared.
What did you do with this newfound freedom? You got a little fatter.
So did your soul mate, and most of the rest of your clan, but especially
your babies. You had time on your hands so you started to play with
rocks, sticks and the like. Initially, these 'toys' held no particular
importance to you. You and many subsequent generations were perfectly
happy with this arrangement. Life was good. This was the start of a
leisurely lifestyle that, three million years on, is now causing us
heightened risk of health problems like diabetes, hypertension,
atherosclerosis, cancer and obesity. Back then it was the fortuitous route
to brain expansion.
Toys not Tools
One day, thousands of years after your seminal discovery, one of your
descendants tried using the edge of a stone to cut something. Slowly they
realized this worked better than using a fingernail or trying to tear it. The
advantage of a sharp stone edge quickly became obvious because,
unnoticed and unneeded by you, your brain was working a little more
efficiently than in previous generations. The genetic potential for
improved brain function had always been there in the primate genes you
and previous generations inherited, but prior development of this
potential was impeded by insufficient dietary availability of energy and

218 
Survival of the Fattest
brain selective nutrients. By stumbling upon an abundant and markedly
improved diet, your generation would forever change that limitation on
primate brain expansion. As a result of marginal and truly unnecessary
improvements in brain function occurring over thousands of years, your
descendants were the first to be able to imagine how such an object could
useful as a cutter, scraper or digger, i.e. as a tool.
The first primitive tools were useful for play activities but they were
not necessary for survival. Primates use sticks and stones to prod, bash or
break things, but you were the first primate to start to realize the potential
of tools to improve your life and the lives of your clan members. It
hadn't mattered before and, indeed, it didn't matter now either. The
insight that certain types of stone or wood might be useful crystallized
gradually over many thousands of years, as the younger generations
watched and learned from the older ones while little by little improving
their ability to assess the collective experience with implements used as
tools.
The key point is that, all the while, tools were unnecessary. They
were optional. Effectively, they were playthings. Even recognizing their
usefulness for a few simple routines of play depended on gradually
improving memory, insight and cognition. These improvements were a
consequence of increasing availability of dietary energy and nutrients to
the embryonic and fetal brain, and more fat deposition both on the
mother and on the fetus (and probably on the males as well).
The Venus figurines that appeared much later on show that artists
noticed fatness in women. Cave images of animals were authentically
proportional so it is reasonable to think that women proportioned as fat in
figurines or etched into cave walls actually were fat. Teleologically, this
would seem to have been necessary in order to have fat babies, so it is
significant that there is a clear record of human fatness in the cave art of
early humans.
Added dietary nutrients and infant body fat supplies were stimulating
expression of genes affecting the timing and amount of brain cell
development, resulting in increasing numbers of connections being made
between brain cells. The 'hard drive' (brain size) was slowly getting a
little bigger and the software (cell to cell connections through synapses)
was becoming a little more sophisticated.

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
219
Instead of making a play tool, perhaps one of your distant descendants
was pleased by the colour or pattern of something they were doodling
with. So it was that art as self-entertainment began. Instead of cutting or
colouring, perhaps you created a musical sound that amused everyone.
You were playing and behaving just as children do today.
Young children don't think about tomorrow or even tonight; they live
in the present. Their learning is opportunistic and they mimic. As any
good teacher knows, the key to effective learning is a relatively stress-
free environment lacking concerns about safety, nourishment or survival.
A rich and reliable food supply afforded early hominids this same luxury.
The Infant is the Focus of Human Brain Evolution
The real focus of human brain evolution is the infant. An adult is less
nutritionally vulnerable than is an infant, but to develop a healthy adult
brain, one has to start out with a healthy infant brain. Intelligent children
have at least the potential to become intelligent adults but mentally
retarded children cannot become normally functioning adults. Humans
can cope with a surprising range of physical infirmities but cannot easily
overcome impaired brain development during infancy. Hence, it is
essential to respect the need of the developing infant brain for a near
constant supply of high quality food.
When food is temporarily lacking, the healthy term infant has
abundant fat stores from which to draw for brain fuel, but low birth
weight or premature infants do not have that 'energy insurance'. Neither
do chimpanzee or other primate infants. Human infants and children are
a steady drain on food resources long before they can contribute to the
food requirements of the family, clan or village. Childhood is a time
when one is most vulnerable and least able to fully exploit the
innumerable advantages of a large brain. Most amazingly, how did
hominid infants manage to be at the center of brain evolution while
simultaneously investing an equal amount of metabolic effort in laying
down an impressive layer of body fat as went into fueling their brains?
How could hominids afford to concentrate a major part of the energy-
demanding component of brain evolution in the fetus as it nears term and
in the first five post-natal years?

220 
Survival of the Fattest
The point is that hominids heading towards the human lineage were
intent not on survival but on play. No one was under any pressure to find
supper. The brain was starting to function slightly more efficiently and
memory was improving. Imagination was born because of modification
of the necessary genes, more reliable fuel supply, and because of a rich
supply of brain selective nutrients was improving neuronal connectivity.
More than anything, sufficient time was available.
Time is an essential element of successful play. As they get honed,
skills learned during play can potentially be applied to survival
strategies. By now your clan had evolved into what would much later be
known as H. habilis, but your enhanced learning capacity was still
associated with play. It was still very much opportunistic - useful, but not
essential. The chance of making connections between specific objects
and pleasant, rewarding functions was improving, but was never
necessary. Crucially, there was no urgency to make these connections
because you weren't hungry.
Eventually some of your descendants would have gone hunting. They
would have hunted because they felt like it, or because the challenge
intrigued them. Only rarely would they have gone because they needed
to. By not needing to hunt, they would have had time to refine tools and
skills in step with the minor, sporadic increments in intuition, memory
and skill that were occurring almost randomly. It was in leisure and play
not in hardship and strife that the human brain evolved. If supper was
reliable and abundant, there was time to play and socialize. This is the
blind, undirected process of natural selection at work. This led to a
fundamentally different lifestyle, one of leisure and abundance, rather
than grim-faced determination to overcome hunger.
Indeed, the leisure time enjoyed today by many aboriginal societies
contrasts sharply with the supposedly 'nasty, brutish and short' lives of
human ancestors. In some aboriginal groups, childhood in boys is
allowed to extend to about twenty years old and is relatively free of the
stress and obligation to search for food. These traditional groups measure
affluence not in material possessions but in time available for story
telling, music and dancing. Lumsden and Wilson note that the Ituri
Pygmies and !Kung Bushman leave their children to occupy themselves
by themselves much more than in supposedly more 'advanced' societies.

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
221
The children have no difficulty acquiring language, social and domestic
skills by observation and mimicry.
Lumsden and Wilson note that the minds of these children 'flourish in
these casual circumstances. They become sophisticated in speech,
quotidian skills and tribal lore'. Translation - they have time to learn
because they have time to play, because finding tonight's or even
tomorrow night's supper is not an issue.
Feckless, Irresponsible Pleasure
The shore-based environment allowed hominid adolescents and adults to
be children for an extended period in life. Lewis Thomas, a prominent
American pathologist, put the puzzle of human childhood succinctly.
Invited to make a new list of the seven wonders of the modern world to
replace the old, out-of-date original wonders, he named the human child
as his Seventh Wonder because it seemed to him '... unparsimonious to
keep expending all that energy on such a long period of vulnerability and
defenselessness, with nothing to show for it, in biological terms, beyond
the feckless, irresponsible pleasure of childhood'. That fecklessness,
both for hominid children and adults, was a key ingredient in human
brain evolution. With a reliable food supply, stimulation by thyroxine
and nutritional tweaking of gene expression (see Chapter 14), play led to
repeated activity that was optional to survival but which became
reinforced because it was pleasurable and rewarding, and because certain
hominids were developing sufficient brain connectivity to be able to
evolve better memory.
Pleasure has a biochemical and genetic component, the rudiments of
which exist in other primates like chimpanzees. The repeated activity
that certain hominids found pleasurable and rewarding included
acclimatizing to the water, chipping stone, serendipitously developing
rudimentary musical instruments, appreciating the attractiveness of
colour and design (art), and the sombre yet fulfilling reward of respecting
the dead. These activities all occurred because the ability to experience
pleasure was evolving and because of abundant leisure time. The fact
that creative activities could and did emerge is incredible but the
proficiency with which some, especially art, were developed, even

222 
Survival of the Fattest
30,000 years ago, exceeds what all but a few humans, big brain and all,
can do today.
Seeing the origin of these cognitive and creative developments in
childhood and play may seem to trivialize the complex process of human
brain evolution. That is not the intention. I am very serious about it
precisely because play respects the interconnection of free time, memory,
learning and the maturation of neuronal connections. Play has a vital role
in normal childhood social and skill development. Any adult with an
accomplished skill usually voluntarily develops an interest in that
activity during childhood. Adults also know that it takes time - 10%
inspiration and 90% perspiration, for talent to become skill. There is a
tremendous amount of learning and repetition involved.
And that is just the effort that it takes in humans today, a species with
an already enlarged brain that has unparalleled neuron-to-neuron
connectivity. How could it have happened before the brain started to
enlarge or while under duress to find supper? There isn't time to play or
refine a skill if you are too occupied collecting food (or, in modern times,
working excessively long hours). Conceiving of the origin of human
cognition and creativity in play respects the fact that time is needed for
creativity, innovative activity and skill development. With a lifestyle
centralized on shore-based diets, time would have been available. The
pressure of constantly searching for food was lifted, thereby providing
the freedom and time to play.
The Shore-Based Scenario
The Savannah Theory has been taking a beating for many years. It was a
framework but over time the weight of evidence didn't support it. The
Savannah has become the Woodlands Theory largely because East
Africa probably wasn't as dry as originally thought. Woodlands implictly
involve more rainfall or groundwater to support the trees and are a wetter
environment than the savannahs. Woodlands would require less hunting
but would provide other tool-based food resources like tubers or roots
underground.
Surely a non-specialist ape could evolve bipedalism and a big brain in
this familiar environment? Not if you accept that the big brain and fat

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
223
babies are the defining features of humans. Bipedalism in the woodlands
- maybe. Primitive tool making - quite probably. Big brain and fat
babies? Not likely, because the woodlands didn't offer enough
geographic isolation or enough brain selective nutrients to evolve these
features in any other large woodland primate, so how could they evolve
in hominids? The genome has to be involved but it isn't different enough
in humans and chimpanzees to account for these features, especially the
big brain's vulnerability that is constantly exposed when shore-based
nutrients, particularly iodine and iron are inadequately available.
The geological events of the past five million years in East and
Northeast Africa are well known and clearly support the existence of
large estuaries connecting the Red Sea, Gulf of Aden and perhaps other
rivers from the Rift Valley reaching the Indian Ocean. This created large
areas of various wetlands from South Africa to Saudi Arabia. Clearly
volcanism and continental glaciation played havoc with the climate and
landscape of East Africa on many occasions in the past two million
years, altering lake drainage and river flow and, thus, habitability of
preferred lake margins or river banks (or forests for that matter).
Bipedalism was an early feature of hominids so mobility to new, more
hospitable sites became feasible. The ecology of marine or fresh water
wetlands is compatible with survival of a crudely bipedal, non-specialist
hominid 4 to 5 million years ago. Kathy Stewart has shown clear
exploitation of wetland food resources, especially shallow water fish at
several two million year old hominid fossil sites in the Rift Valley.
There is a two million year gap between the advent of bipedalism and
the first clear evidence of organised fishing by H. habilis but earlier
hominids could still have been exploiting other shore-based foods
besides fish, including shellfish, eggs, turtles and plants. Shallow water
fish and other shore-based foods provided a significantly better supply of
brain selective nutrients than any exclusively terrestrial food supply.
More than that, the fossil record shows that they were abundant in East
and South Africa.
The Shore-based Scenario predicts that time was available, leading
not only to fat deposition and fat babies but, from there, to uniquely
human physical, mental and cultural skills. An abundant food supply
makes it reasonable to hypothesize that shore-based life provided an

224 
Survival of the Fattest
excellent opportunity for leisure and play activity. The Shore-based
Scenario isn't woodland and it isn't aquatic but it could well include
opportunistic exploitation of woodlands or water as time, skill or
ecological conditions permitted. What it does exclude is need (to develop
tools to dig or hunt). The shores provided an excellent opportunity for
the development of tools and hunting, but didn't require them; they
allowed for the development of some aquatic or semi-aquatic features but
didn't require them.
The Shore-based Scenario doesn't require the two phases of the
aquatic theory (into the water and then out again). Neither does it involve
the single dramatic phase of coming out of the trees onto the savannahs.
It, too, is a single phase theory but involving ongoing dependence on the
shores. Our ongoing dependence on shore-based nutrients for optimal
brain development and to reduce the risk of chronic diseases (Morgan's
'scars of evolution') demonstrates that humans today are still in the
shore-based phase of human evolution.
The Shore-based Scenario derives nutrients from shellfish, fish, shore
plants, eggs, and small animals. By first approximation, this food
selection has ample minerals and vitamins but, because of the non-plant
sources, it appears low in fat, low in carbohydrate and high in protein. In
fact, plants growing on the shores and in shallow water would probably
make up the majority of the diet. They would be supplemented intake of
shellfish, fish and other animals as opportunity or season permitted.
Hence, carbohydrate would still be a major component of the diet, and
fat would be fairly low but would be rich in omega-3 polyunsaturates,
including pre-formed eicosapentaenoic acid and docosahexaenoic acid.
There is no a priori reason why the Shore-based Scenario wouldn't fit
well within the dietary guidelines for human metabolism and survival.
More importantly, there are advantages to the shore-based diet that no
other diet selection could meet, because shellfish are the richest source of
brain selective nutrients. Beyond diet per se is the overlooked but
essential element of stationary, reliable, abundant food resources that
would have reduced foraging time and increased leisure time, thereby
setting the scene for play and learning.

The Shore-Based Scenario: Why Survival Misses the Point 
225
The Savannah-cum-Woodland supporters consistently note that none
of the supposedly unique 'aquatic' features were sufficient justification
for an aquatic phase in human evolution. I agree that hominids didn't
need to become fully aquatic but, to become humans, hominids did need
a shore-based food supply. They still do. The best available evidence
shows that we are still a shore-based species.


Chapter 12
Earlier Versions
The idea that certain hominids evolved through a shore-based phase on
the way to becoming human is not new. From a chronlogical perspective,
it all really got going in 1960, with Alister Hardy's article in The New
Scientist, Was Man More Aquatic in the Past? Desmond Morris very
briefly acknowledged Hardy's idea in his 1967 book, The Naked Ape,
which is where Elaine Morgan first learned about it.
Morgan was Hardy's first unequivocal supporter, and she is still the
most widely published. In a series of books starting in 1972 with the
Descent of Woman, she popularized what became known as the Aquatic
Ape Theory. Her support for and extension of Hardy's hypothesis
continued with The Aquatic Ape (1982), Scars of Evolution, (1990), The
Descent of the Child (1994), and the Aquatic Ape Hypothesis (1997).
Michael Crawford is a preeminent international expert on the role of
docosahexaenoic acid in normal human infant development. While
investigating the biochemical requirements for advanced brain function,
he reported in 1972 that long chain omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids,
especially docosahexaenoic acid, were important constituents of the
mammalian brain. Before moving to London's Institute of Zoology,
Crawford had spent several years in East Africa where the marked
disparety in brain size relative to body weight between the large
savannah herbivores and the primates had left a lasting impression
on him.
I introduced Crawford to Hardy's hypothesis in 1981. Since Crawford
was already aware that docosahexaenoic acid was uniquely prevalent in
marine organisms and was an important component of the brain, he was
227

228 
Survival of the Fattest
immediately receptive to shore-based diets as a rationale for separating
advanced human brain capacity from what was more typical of evolution
on the savannahs, namely increased physical growth but relative
shrinkage of the brain. With David Marsh, he published The Driving
Force in 1989, which addressed the role of marine food in the evolution
of Homo aquaticus. They explicitly supported both Hardy's original
concept and Morgan's more detailed expansion of it.
My 1980 publication in Medical Hypotheses, entitled The Aquatic
Ape Theory Reconsidered, started life in 1974 as a university term paper
in a course taught by Leo Standing at Bishop's University (Lennoxville,
Quebec). The goal of my paper was to report on the 'establishment'
reaction to the publication of Hardy's first paper. When he published his
New Scientist paper, Hardy was a well-respected professor and zoologist
from Oxford University and Morgan had thoroughly and lucidly
marshalled not just supporting evidence but the logical inconsistencies in
the Savannah Theory.
By 1980, my take was that the Aquatic Ape Theory had generated
little published reaction from the anthropology establishment and, save
faint praise in Desmond Morris' Man Watching, none of what the experts
said was complimentary. Hardy's hypothesis was not so much
discredited by scientific argument as ignored; the few that deigned to
comment on it all knew that hunting on the savannahs was the obvious
path to human evolution. So, on the rare occasions it was mentioned, an
aquatic phase was ridiculed as simply too complicated and unnecessary.
The marked presence of body fatness in humans was a key element in
Hardy's hypothesis but body fatness has long been a touchy subject for
westerners so perhaps that doomed Hardy from the start.
With several colleagues including Michael Crawford, I published
several papers since 1993 discussing the need for brain selective
nutrients in human brain evolution. Our approach was to point out
the significant metabolic and biochemical constraints on brain function
as well as the evidence for vulnerability of the developing brain to
nutritional deficit. We proposed human evolution was 'shore-based'
because it met those metabolic constraints, did not require tool making or
hunting for survival, and yet was not as committed to aquatic life as
Hardy originally proposed.

Earlier Versions 
229
Leigh Broadhurst, of the United States Department of Agriculture in
Beltsville, Maryland, was a major contributor and lead author of several
of these papers. She not only amassed detailed geological and
environmental support for it but also obtained new data about the unique
molecular confirmation of docosahexaenoic acid that helped explain its
special role in the brain.
In an ongoing series of papers starting in 1985 in Medical Hypotheses
entitled The Aquatic Ape Theory: Evidence and a Possible Scenario,
Marc Verhaegen has systematically speculated about an aquatic role in
the origins of several human attributes, notably dentition, speech, and
brain function. Verhaegen launched his support for Hardy with detailed
accounts of dental and skeletal features consistent with adaptation to an
aquatic environment. Like Hardy, he proposed that streamlining of the
human torso and boney protection of the ears and eyes represented a
major commitment to aquatic life that included extensive and frequent
diving. Verhaegen sees not only bipedalism but also brain enlargement
and speech as arising in an aquatic environment. Unlike both Hardy and
Morgan, who proposed that the aquatic phase occurred only in the period
of the fossil gap (5 to 7 million years ago), Verhaegen has it running at
least to the Neanderthal period.
What is New About the Shore-Based Scenario?
The Shore-based Scenario has evolved. By succinctly identifying several
key physiological characteristics that seemed incompatible with the
Savannah Theory, Hardy laid the initial groundwork. Morgan and
Verhaegen endorsed and expanded the Aquatic Theory around further
dissatisfaction with explanations for unusual human physiology and
anatomy. Morgan added seminal concepts about both the importance of
the child in human evolution and the physiological penalties or 'scars of
evolution' that all species pay, no matter by which path they evolve.
The disregard by paleontologists and physical anthropologists for the
legitimacy of Hardy's fundamental observations on the uniquely fat and
stream-lined, bipedal human form is what lit the flame for me. It rankled
that no evolutionist would say that Hardy's observations were valid even
if his interpretation was radical. Crawford and others showed that the

230 
Survival of the Fattest
link between human brain function and docosahexaenoic acid was
vulnerable to dietary inadequacy of omega 3 polyunsaturates.
Elaine Morgan intrigued me with Descent of the Child, and Michael
Crawford 
amassed compelling evidence for the importance of
docosahexaenoic acid in brain development. Crawford had also written
about how widespread inland iodine deficiency must have been an
impediment to savannah-based human evolution. These 'earlier versions'
of the Shore-based Scenario each emphasized different aspects of human
physiology and metabolism, and proposed different degrees of hominid
commitment to semi-aquatic life.
On the basis of this mosaic of observation, evidence, and controversy,
I add that there is more to the shore-based environment than a nebulous
'better quality diet' needed to fuel brain expansion. Throughout the
1980s, my research at the University of Toronto seeded the idea for a
cluster of brain selective nutrients. We then discovered several new
attributes of baby fat that seem to contribute to insuring brain
development: First, we showed that body fat in a baby born at term
contains sufficient docosahexenoic acid to meet the brain's needs for
several weeks without depending on docosahexaenoic acid supplied by
maternal milk or by synthesis within the baby itself. Second, most but
not all of the fatty acids in baby fat are fuel insurance for the brain. Some
of the fatty acids will be made into ketone bodies which become the
main building blocks of lipids, e.g. cholesterol, that are arguably even
more important in the brain than docosahexaenoic acid.
In essence, the insurance provided by fatty acids in human baby fat
releases three important constraints that limit brain development in other
mammals, including primates: they are an important fuel store; they
provide a ready-to-use supply of docosahexaenoic acid; and, they
provide an abundant reserve of ketone bodies for synthesis of brain
lipids. However, the effectiveness of this insurance absolutely depends
on the amount of body fat at birth. With prematurity or low birth weight,
the insurance reserves are markedly reduced and the consequent
vulnerability of the brain's development is immediately revealed. This
work formed the basis for my 'Survival of the Fattest' article published
in 2003 in Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology, in which fat
babies were proposed as a key prerequisite to evolving big brains.

Earlier Versions 
231
My other original contribution to this discussion is to reject the
'necessity' of a better quality diet as the primary force in human brain
evolution. Once the brain was larger and more advanced, a better quality
diet was necessary. However, the fundamental constraint of natural
selection is that nothing evolves (or can be retained) because of
necessity. Evolution of the human brain became possible by a change in
lifestyle owing to fortuitous exploitation of the shores. To be sure, the
changed lifestyle on the shores markedly improved nutrition but food
abundance also left pre-human hominids with plenty of time away from
the monotonous and sometimes arduous demands of food gathering.
With free time on their hands, play emerged which was the forerunner of
tool making and creativity. More free time expanded socializing, which
was the forerunner of language and culture. Free time also slowed down
activity, which was the forerunner of fatness.
Ongoing vulnerability is the outstanding consequence of commiting
the brain to expansion, greater complexity and dependence on increased
intake of energy and brain selective nutients. The World Health
Organisation and other agencies have reported that vulnerability directly
compromises brain development in about one quarter of the world's
population. Until eighty years ago, iodine deficiency caused impaired
brain function ranging from mild retardation to full blown cretinism in
substantial areas of the USA and western Europe. It may also have
contributed to gradually declining human brain size over the past 30,000
years.
Jerry Dobson of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee
suggests iodine deficiency may have been an important factor in the
limited creativity of Neanderthals and possibly in their eventual demise
(see Chapter 13). Premature and low birthweight infants face formidable
challenges to attaining normal neurosensory development, in large
measure because of issues related to nutrient and energy supply. Serious
concerns are also being raised about whether the higher prevalence
of depression and psychological, psychiatric, and neurodegenerative
diseases in many 'westernized' countries is related to lower intake of
several brain selective nutrients, notably omega-3 polyunsaturates:
humans have not escaped this ongoing vulnerability.

232 
Survival of the Fattest
This is the context from which my version of the Shore-based
Scenario emerged. The ground-breaking contributions of Hardy, Morgan,
Crawford and Verhaegen clearly fertilized my ideas but the predominant
roles of baby fatness, brain selective nutrients and leisure time are where
my contribution is original. Let's backtrack and lay out in a little more
detail some of the features of those initial formative contributions.
Sir Alister Hardy, FRS
When I first mentioned Hardy, he was simply Alister Hardy. Now I've
called him Sir Alister Hardy, FRS (Fellow of the Royal Society). The
added credentials came after he had formulated his novel ideas about an
aquatic phase in human evolution but before he reported them publically
or published them. This delay was no coincidence as he readily
acknowledged. Perhaps knighthood was not on his mind but an FRS, the
top academic recognition in the UK, certainly was.
Hardy recognized the irony that if he publicly presented his radical
hypothesis before receiving his FRS, it would probably be met with
skepticism from influential people and might well derail an otherwise
healthy shot at the coveted FRS. He therefore waited, just over thirty
years, actually. With the FRS finally in hand, he chose a low key public
lecture to announce his idea. Distortions of what he said in the
subsequent media reports made it essential to rapidly publish his own
version of what he had said in the lecture. The result was his now famous
article in The New Scientist - Was Man More Aquatic in the Past?
What Hardy said in that article was that representatives of most
groups of animals, extinct and living, have had aquatic phases in their
evolution. For some, the transition to aquatic life has been permanent but
others continue to occupy both land and water. Several features of
humans seemed to Hardy to be empirically easier to understand if pre-
human evolution had also involved a 'semi-aquatic' phase in which
searching for food while wading gradually gave way to locomotion by
swimming. Gradual improvements in breath-holding would allow
shellfish and crustaceans to be caught by diving further from shore.
The alignment of hair tracts is different in humans than other
primates. The reduced amount of hair and their alignment with the flow

Earlier Versions 
233
of water seemed to Hardy to facilitate swimming. Bipedalism seemed
more plausible if one were toddling and then wading into deeper water
because boyancy helps support a vertical body position. Body fat is
distinctively absent in primates but present in aquatic mammals. Unlike
other primates, the thumb opposes the fingers on the human hand and
this makes it easy to pick up or hold things. The fingers are sensitive
enough to grasp and identify items even without being able to see them.
If hominids were exploring the water's edge, the selection of
crustaceans, molluscs, turtles, eggs and edible plants on the shores would
naturally have been noticed, tested and exploited. Hardy recognised that
if sea levels had risen over the last several million years, such a semi-
aquatic phase in human evolution might explain at least part of the
lengthy gap in the hominid fossil record prior to the earliest
Australopithecines. He concluded that his 'thesis is, of course, only a
speculation - an hypothesis to be discussed and tested against further
lines of evidence'.
The New Scientist is at the interface between the peer-reviewed
reports in the primary research literature and the popularization of
science in more fluid, digestable, but opinionated form. I suspect that
Hardy chose The New Scientist because, alarmed at some of the extreme
interpretations of his lecture that found their way in the popular press, he
wanted a rapid, respected but also widely disseminated printed medium
to clarify his ideas before they became permanently misconstrued.
He claimed that his original intention was to publish a book providing
a more complete version of his hypothesis but this never happened. If he
had supported his ideas in more detail, this might or might not have
enhanced his stature amongst physical anthropologists. However,
publishing his first and only widely distributed article on this subject in a
format unreviewed by his peers certainly did not improve the odds of
him being taken seriously. That it was a radical concept to boot more or
less guaranteed he would be ignored or criticized by anthropologists.
Seventeen years after the first, Hardy published a second article, Was
There a Homo Aquaticus?, in Zenith, the magazine of the Oxford
University Scientific Society. He added little of substance to the original
idea but noted in his paper that another well-known zoologist from
Oxford, Desmond Morris, and a TV script writer from Wales, Elaine

234 
Survival of the Fattest
Morgan, had by then written about his hypothesis. Morris' 1967 book,
The Naked Ape, noted simply that an aquatic phase 'would not have
seriously clashed with the general picture of the hunting ape's evolution
out of the ground ape'.
Notable in Hardy's second article was his affirmation from his
original article of an extremely long fossil gap, during which he proposed
hominids had a semi-aquatic life. A quotation from that article sets the
context of his idea : 7 must make it clear that I do not suppose man spent
more than perhaps five or six hours in the water at a time. Homo
aquaticus left the sea (or lake) a very different creature from when he
first entered it. Now with a hairless body, subcutaneous fat ..., a
knowledge of making and using tools and, above all, the erect posture,
he might well be called a new species of man : indeed the ancestor of
Homo erectus.
This was a shore-based proposal that seemed to give a plausible
account of the evolution in humans of bipedalism, body fat and and tool
making during a period when hominid fossils had, at the time, been hard
to find, thereby leaving these issues unanswered. It is clear from this
quotation that Hardy saw the aquatic phase as transitional and that, once
fully bipedal, hominids in the form of H. erectus were firmly back on dry
land. Whether he imagined that H. erectus and early humans would have
remained shore-based is unclear.
Elaine Morgan
Hardy was the creator of the original aquatic hypothesis but Elaine
Morgan became and remains its heart and soul. Actually, she has pointed
out that eighteen years before Hardy, a German professor, Max
Westhofer, wrote a book chapter suggesting much the same hypothesis.
However, his version was poorly circulated outside Germany and Hardy
had been unaware of it.
Morgan added form and substance to the aquatic hypothesis. By the
time she wrote The Aquatic Ape Hypothesis, popular dissemination of the
original idea had transformed it into the Aquatic Ape Theory, a term that,
with typical modesty, she resisted because too much of it was still
controversial. Morgan discussed the good, the bad and the ugly of human

Earlier Versions 
235
evolution. The Descent of Woman was her first assessment of the
problems with the savannah theory. In it, Morgan suggested that human
evolution, whatever its path, was as dependent on female as on male
evolution. She dismissed the widespread notion of human evolution
based on pair bonding in which males provided food and were rewarded
with sex.
In The Aquatic Ape Hypothesis and in Scars of Evolution, more than
anyone else before or since, Morgan discussed a wide range of anatomy
and physiology peculiar to humans. She defended the aquatic hypothesis
but still accepted its limits - many human features seem more plausible,
but cannot be exclusively explained, on the basis of shore-based
evolution.
Above all, she emphasized that evolution affects the whole organism :
bipedalism may have certain advantages ensuring its adoption but
that doesn't mean there aren't some disadvantages too. Once one is
bipedal and the viscera are stacked vertically with the heart lower than
some organs but higher than others, back trouble, and more difficult
birthing, i.e. Morgan's 'scars of evolution', are easier to understand. In
his introductory book, Evolution, Morton Jenkins summarized it neatly:
'something must have favoured the erect posture ... but, whatever it was,
we pay for it today with hernias, pot-bellies, difficult childbirth and back
problems'.
One of the most outstanding potential disadvantages to being human
is being a human baby. The degree and duration of extreme vulnerability
are certainly more marked than in other primates. If the infant is
inadequately nourished, the risk of impaired brain development is
lifelong. Curiously, although infant formulas represent the modern
'improvement' in infant feeding, Alan Lucas of the Institute of Child
Health in London points out that until recently, many such formulas were
nutritionally inadequate and had a real risk of limiting IQ by as much as
10 points in the first ten years of life.
In The Descent of the Child, Elaine Morgan focussed on the unique
evolutionary situation of the human child. As Morgan sees it, and 1
agree, the disadvantages of being a human child were made tolerable by
shore-based evolution. The combination of fatness, large brain, rapid

236 
Survival of the Fattest
learning of speech, and developmental vulnerability do not coexist
elsewhere in the animal kingdom.
The present book is really an extension to The Descent of the Child. It
lays out in more detail how the developing brain is vulnerable to
nutrition and why body fat is the essential currency of the extraordinary
brain development in human infants. Whatever the advantages body fat
may have for bouyancy and insulation in infants, increased energy
availability to the mother and child are the sine qua non. Body fat in
neonates and infants starts to be laid down early in the final third of
pregnancy and becomes the most, expensive part of fetal growth towards
normal term. Maternal energy restriction virtually guarantees less body
fat and thinness at birth, especially if birth is premature.
A lifestyle affording a reliable energy intake that includes an
abundant source of brain selective nutrients is necessary to avoid
developmental delay in humans. Woodland or savannah settings do not
meet these criteria but the shorelines do. Bouyancy and insulation
weren't the reason for neonatal fatness but became a fortuitous result of
dietary richness available from shore-based existence that then led to
greater tolerance and exploration of water throughout the human
lifespan.
Michael Crawford and the Land-Water Interface
Michael Crawford's crucial insight is that humans did not actually evolve
larger brains. He doesn't question that humans have larger brains than
other primates, but maintains that land mammals including other
primates lost relative brain size as their bodies became bigger. Small
mammals have relatively large brain size, several on the order of 2% or
more of body weight, which is similar to humans.
Early hominids like A. afarensis had brains occupying about 1.7% of
body weight before the split between the 'robust' and 'gracile'
Australopithecines. The robust Paranthropus line lost relative brain size
as did the eventual modern non-human primates. However, the Homo
line came close to maintaining the same relatively high brain to body
ratio of 1.7-1.9% right through H. Neanderthalensis. With the emergence
of Cro-Magnon and humans, only a small proportion of the final gain in

Earlier Versions 
237
brain to body weight ratio is attributable to an absolute gain in brain size;
most was due to decreased body size in comparison to Neanderthals.
Other primates such as the gorilla, but especially the savannah
herbivores like the elephant and rhinoceros, lost relative brain size
because they became physically immense. Their brains were unable to
keep pace with their physical growth because the savannah offers not
only a paucity of brain selective nutrients but also food selection with
low energy density. Amongst the herbivores such as the pig and sheep,
those that are wild have bigger brains than have the domesticated
varieties, even though the domesticated ones generally have access to
more dietary energy because they are being fattened up for market.
More than any one else, Crawford was responsible for identifying
the limiting nature of the savannah food chain for the brain, especially
the absence of arachidonic acid and docosahexaenoic acid, in all
diets except those of the carnivores. He points out that, among large
mammals, only the dolphin has keep close to the human pace in brain
size, brain proportion and brain complexity, and that the dolphin is in
a marine environment. My own ideas concerning the role of long
chain polyunsaturates for brain function were formed and have
been maintained during our close working association over the past
twenty years.
This puts Crawford firmly in the Hardy-Morgan camp at the land-
water interface in explaining how humans evolved larger, more complex
brains. He firmly believes we remain today as vulnerable as ever to an
inadequacy of shore-based nutrients. Hence, our dependence on this
unique ecological zone is far from over.
Marc Verhaegen
Over the past twenty years, Marc Verhaegen has meticulously gathered
and published evidence supporting the Aquatic Ape Theory. In several
detailed papers, he attributes numerous human or pre-human skeletal
features to semi-aquatic life spanning H. erectus to H. Neanderthalensis.
These features include a thicker, elongated skull, heavier skeletons
especially the long bones of the legs, spinal and pelvic adaptations,
enlarged sinuses in the maxilla (behind the nose), and external boney
protection outside the ears and above the eyes.

238 
Survival of the Fattest
In reference to the large human brain, Verhaegen has developed a
detailed case suggesting human cranial anatomy and localized brain
enlargement is a consequence of previous adaptation to semi-aquatic life
involving extensive wading and diving. Areas of the brain originally
controlling breathing and mouth and neck muscles would have, by
exaptation, been recruited to become Broca's area, which is used for
motor control of speech in the mouth and throat. Like Broca's area in the
precentral gyrus, Wernicke's area or the primary speech centre in the
post central gyrus, is unique to humans. In fact, Verhaegen notes that
they are connected by a uniquely human nerve tract, the arcuate
fasciculus. Together these two brain areas contribute significantly to
expanded brain size in humans.
Although barely identifiable from indentations in the skull of at
least one H. erectus speciman, these features did not occur in the
smaller and simpler Australopithecine brain, nor do they exist now in
the chimpanzee, or in brains of other primates. Therefore, Verhaegen
suggests that wading might have begun earlier but swimming and
diving only became fully developed with the emergence of H. erectus.
Verhaegen would place H. erectus in a more salt water coastal location
whereas Neanderthals would have swum and dived in freshwater. Hence,
contrary to the views of Morgan and Hardy, he feels the Homo lineage
and not the Australopithecines were the fully developed 'aquatic apes'.
Like Morgan, Verhaegen recognised that the return of Homo to a
predominantly terrestrial existence would carry with it 'scars of
evolution' particular to humans. His 1987 paper in Medical Hypotheses
details several such scars, which fall into categories related to disorders
of respiration (hyperventilation, spasm of the larynx and bronchi),
diseases of the skin (seborrhea, dandruff and acne), and problems of
upright posture (hernia, varicose veins and osteoarthritic joint disease).
In fact, this paper stimulated Morgan's 1990 book, Scars of Evolution,
which covered different aspects of the same subject.
When did the Aquatic Phase Occur?
In both his brief accounts, Hardy was specific about when he thought
hominids were semi-aquatic : for him it was in the period of the 'fossil

Earlier Versions 
239
gap' that ended about five million years ago. In both papers, the aquatic
phase occupied the whole fossil gap but he did not extensively defend his
reasoning beyond noting that it would account both for the emergence
of bipedalism and the absence of hominid fossils during that period. In
The Aquatic Ape Hypothesis, Morgan supported Hardy's time line but
shortened it: 'the hypothetical aquatic phase of the ancestral apes
during the fossil gap would have been brief a matter of two or three
million years'. Clearly, for both Hardy and Morgan, the aquatic phase
was the essential prelude to bipedalism which was the first genuinely
hominid feature, predating the main phase of brain enlargement by 2 to 3
million years.
In discussing the principal elements accounting for the evolution
of bipedalism in hominids, Verhaegen explicitly supports the Hardy-
Morgan hypothesis. However, he also describes a semi-aquatic stimulus
for brain expansion in H. erectus, especially as it related to the origins of
human speech. Accelerated brain expansion did not start until the
appearance of the fully bipedal H. rudolfensis and H. habilis, both about
two million years ago.
Verhaegen also attributes several features of Neanderthals to semi-
aquatic life. Since he agrees with the semi-aquatic phase driving
bipedalism, Verhaegen clearly extends the semi-aquatic phase well
beyond the 4 to 5 million year old limit set by Hardy and Morgan to a
period only tens of thousands of years ago. If, as Hardy and Morgan
claim, the semi-aquatic period ended 4 to 5 million years ago, it was over
before substantial brain expansion had even begun. It could only have
contributed materially to brain expansion if some hominids had remained
shore-based.
A semi-aquatic phase beginning at least five million years ago may
well have been able to contribute to the slow, early stages of hominid
brain expansion. Still the question remains - if hominids were semi-
aquatic and consuming a shore-based diet during a two million year
period that ended five million years ago, why was the start of the main
period of brain expansion delayed for at least two million years, i.e. until
H. erectus evolved?
Suppose for argument's sake that the situation is simple - that there
are two distinct theories of human evolution - the Savannah Theory and

240 
Survival of the Fattest
the Aquatic Theory. Suppose also that both have their hardliners and
their softliners. Thus, some savannah supporters are more literal about
the savannahs and see hominids initially scavenging antelope carcasses
but then progressing fairly directly to hunting large animals, while others
see a more wooded environment with varied subsistence including fruit,
nuts, termites, etc.
Starting with Hardy himself, some aquatic theorists are also more
hardline and describe streamlining and hair tract patterning of the human
form as arising due to a significant commitment to swimming and diving.
Others propose a more moderate view based on wading in marshes, with
greater emphasis on food gathering from the shores and shallow water
rather than from deeper areas requiring diving. Some aquatic supporters
focus on a fresh water milieu; others feel sea marshes and shorelines held
less competition or risk from predators and so were more compatible
with human evolution.
Hardliner or softliner, everyone with an interest in human origins
has an opinion about the plausibility of one or other of these two
theories, even if they only focus on the opposing theory's most glaring
weaknesses without recognising their own. Let's therefore be clear about
a couple of things : First, the situation is not simple; there is a single
version of neither the Savannah nor the Aquatic Theory. Rather,
depending on the proponent, descriptions including their time frames are
both fairly fluid. Second, in both theories, 'need' to adapt to a new
environment for survival is still implied as a driving force. Key questions
about human uniqueness expose the weaknesses or the strengths of both
theories : How did the hominid brain expand without the support of
shore-based nutrients? How did hominid babies get fat without a
sedentary lifestyle? How did bipedalism arise in hominids and did it
occur quickly or slowly? Why would tool use have arisen? Why are
many hominid fossils apprently distant from shorelines?
Furthermore, there are contentious issues about lineage, age,
physical form and habitat during human evolution that interest many
anthropologists more than settling whether human origins were strictly
aquatic or savannah. How the brain got larger is less important to some
people than knowing which areas of the brain enlarged and in what
order, or what cultural skills or artifacts accompanied brain enlargement.

Earlier Versions 
241
For these individuals, one or other theory is a good enough working
framework for their particular specialization and getting to the bottom of
either is not their main subject of interest.
Therefore, focussing on generic versions of the savannah versus
aquatic theories polarizes the situation unnecessarily. In fact, many
paleoanthropologists now reject the original version of the Savannah
Theory just as they always rejected the Aquatic Theory. Currently, a
softer, woodlands version of the Savannah Theory holds the most sway
but the aquatic supporters still tend to dismiss anything non-aquatic as
the Savannah Theory.
Compared to the Hardy-Morgan version of the Aquatic Theory, the
Savannah-woodland Theory starts out from a position of strength
because basically everyone studying human evolution learns it. With few
exceptions, most leading contemporary physical anthropologists are
savannah-woodland supporters. One of those exceptions is Professor
Philip Tobias of Witwatersrand University in South Africa, who has on
several occasions publicly said that it is time to lay the Savannah Theory
to rest. Nevertheless, relatively few students of anthropology ever hear
about the Aquatic Theory and when they do it is usually only in a cursory
or perjorative context. This is in part because aquatic ape supporters are
mostly non-specialists in human evolution who have little clout in
anthropology circles.
***
Hardy's point was that humans have several attributes quite unlike
those of other primates but in common with aquatic mammals. He asked
whether human ancestors could have been more aquatic in the past. The
logic of aquatic features, therefore an aquatic past, was arrestingly
simple, but intellectually also too radical. Hardy's hypothesis is a
legitimate framework for scientific enquiry. The evidence for what might
be called 'predominantly aquatic attributes' in humans is impressive.
Occurrence of these attributes in a species said to have evolved
exclusively on the land is, or should be, unsettling.
Hardy's insight about aquatic features was a flash, a serendipitous
connection. It was something he ignored for long enough, but he
remained captivated by its simplicity. In retrospect, what is perhaps

242 
Survival of the Fattest
surprising is that although Hardy held off publishing for so long he
amassed so little evidence during that interval. Even after publication of
his short controversial papers, he did not subsequently publish detailed
support for his hypothesis. It is therefore understandable that physical
anthropologists, for whom hard, conclusive evidence is so difficult to
come by, would dismiss an insightful concept because it was given so
little substance by its originator.
In addition, animals with no known or even plausible aquatic past are
at home in the water, e.g. several strains of dog. A diving reflex can also
be experimentally induced in dogs. Hence, physiological or anatomical
features most easily interpreted as representing adaptation to water,
including possession of a diving reflex, are circumstantial and are not in
themselves sufficient evidence for aquatic evolution. It is not hard to see
how the baby has been thrown out with the bath water.
It is therefore time to turn to the harder geological and fossil evidence
for shore-based human evolution.

Chapter 13
The Evidence
One would one expect to find the fossils of shore-based hominids on the
shores. The problem is that the position of the shorelines changes when
the water level changes. If the water level goes up, fossils on the shores
go under water and become inaccessible. If it goes down, they end up on
exposed sites or washed downstream by rivers, and much of the context
of where and when the individual died is lost or gets confusing. This is a
major problem with the Aquatic Theory - many anthropologists have
dismissed it primarily because they claim there is no supporting fossil
evidence in geographic regions where hominid evolution was occurring.
Despite the general impression one gets from the literature, quite a
few reports by some highly respected physical anthropologists place
early hominid remains near fresh water lakes in East Africa. In referring
to hominid fossil discoveries on the shores of Lake Turkana in northern
Kenya, the title of Leakey and Lewin's book - People of the Lake -
seems to make the connection obvious. In Becoming Human, Ian
Tattersall refers to the 'riverine forests' at Hadar and the forests
surrounding an ancient lake' at one of the most famous hominid fossil
regions of all - the Olduvai Basin in northern Tanzania. In Java Man,
Carl Swisher of the Berkeley Geochronology Group refers to 1.5 million
year old H. erectus encampments at a 'soft sandy bank on the bend of a
small stream'.
In Lucy - The Beginnings of Humankind, Donald Johanson and
Maitland Edey describe the Hadar area in northern Ethiopia 3 to 4
million years ago as having been a lake bordered by plateaus. At the
time, this area underwent considerable volcanism, earthquakes and
243

244 
Survival of the Fattest
climate change. Rivers coming off the plateau carried sediments that
gradually filled in the lake and, in the process, covered the fossils. Basalt
layers from nearby volcanoes and faulting both changed the topography
and direction of river flow and sediment deposits on several occasions. A
rainy climate 3 to 4 million years ago was followed by extensive drying
which has resulted in the virtual desert that exists there presently.
Johanson and Edey clearly indicate that 'hominids lived along the
lakeshore throughout this entire period' (4 to 2.6 million years ago).
Elsewhere in Lucy, they describe the areas around Omo and Turkana in
Kenya and Afar in Ethiopia as 'lush lake regions swarming with game,
laced with winding rivers and stands of thick tropical forest; now near
desert. Laetoli was drier than they were then and greener now... there
are several lakes in its vicinity'. Later on, they mention the 'lake shores,
rivers and forests of the Afar landscape three million years ago'.
Curiously, but perhaps most importantly, these and other descriptions
don't mention possible exploitation by hominids of these lush shoreline
settings for food. Richard Klein of Stanford University noted that
hominids in south Africa that pre-dated H. erectus 'camped on stream
banks or on channel bars, on lake margins, near springs...', but he was
skeptical that they were exploiting these shores for food. Did they camp
at these lake and river shores simply for fresh water while seeking food
elsewhere, or did they camp there because they were eating shore-based
foods?
The Geological Evidence
Many of the earliest Australopithecine fossils have been found in present
day northern Kenya and Ethiopia. In fact, most fossils that predate the
first global hominid wanderer, H. erectus, have been found in a string of
sites which all have one thing in common - the five thousand kilometer
long Rift Valley of East Africa. The southern end of the Rift Valley is
near the Zambesi River in Mozambique (Figure 13.1). From there, it runs
north, splitting around Lake Victoria. The western split predominates
into northern Uganda and large sections of it are now occupied by big
lakes including Lakes Tanganyika and Malawi.

The Evidence 
245
The eastern split is indistinct through Tanzania but predominates
again as the Rift Valley continues to cut north through Kenya into
southern Ethopia where it gradually widens out to the northeast. Once as
far north as present day Addis Ababa in central Ethiopia, it continues to
spread out with the western edge heading north to the Red Sea and the
eastern edge heading east through Somalia to the Gulf of Aden. This
widening of the northern part of the Rift Valley is known as the Afar
Triangle.
Continental drift and seafloor spreading characterize the geological
origins of the Afar Triangle. About thirty million years ago near the end
of the Oligocene and beginning of the Miocene epoch, the continent of
Africa, or more correctly the African plate was slowly pushing the
Arabian plate into the Eurasian plate. Over the next fifteen million years
the dynamics of this collision involved upwards and downward heaving
of large blocks of continental crust, which gradually shaped the Afar
region, Red Sea, Gulf of Aden, and the huge lakes of East Africa. In
short, these events created the essential geological elements of the Rift
Valley that exist today.
During this period, the Mediterranean and Red Seas were at
times connected and at other times separated. Both dried out several
times. Towards the end of the Miocene, perhaps 7 to 8 million years
ago, the Red Sea was separated from the Gulf of Aden by the Afar
Isthmus and was a long, narrow gulf open only to the Mediterranean
Sea. The Afar Isthmus was an important land bridge between Africa
and Eurasia by which several animal migrations occurred during the
late Miocene.
By the beginning of the Pliocene about five million years ago, the
Red Sea was no longer a gulf of the Mediterranean but was instead open
at the other end to both the Gulf of Aden and a significant stretch of the
northern end of the Rift Valley as well. Continuous water between the
Red Sea, Gulf of Aden and Rift Valley cut off present day central
Somalia from the Ethiopian escarpment to the west and the Arabian
peninsula to the north.

246 
Survival of the Fattest
Figure 13.1. The Rift Valley of East Africa (shown in black). The main countries through
which it passes include Ethiopia (1), Kenya (2), Tanzania (3) and Uganda (4).

The Evidence 
247
In the Miocene, the Danakil Horst was a major feature of the uplifted
area that created the Afar Isthmus at the present day junction of the Red
Sea, Gulf of Aden and Afar Gulf. At that time, the Danakil Horst formed
the northern boundary of the Afar Triangle and the southern boundary of
the Red Sea. This area is now known as the Danakil Alps which run
about 500 kilometers northwest to southeast along the southern edge of
the Red Sea.
Along the lower elevations where its northwestern side faced the
Ethiopian Escarpment, the Danakil Horst was filled with salt deposits
that were part of the Red Sea. This area is called the Danakil Depression,
which was located in the middle of ongoing tectonic activity.
Sedimentation throughout the Miocene created deposits known as the
Red Series, which are found on both sides of the depression. At the time
these deposits were forming, the Danakil Depression was a lake or bay
extending from the Red Sea. Periodic volcanic activity spread layers of
lava over the lake bottom's sediments. The periodic drying out of the
Red and Mediterranean Seas probably occurred in the Danakil
Depression as well.
Five to six million years ago, the Danakil Horst twisted and tilted
resulting in the waters of the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden joining and
occupying a major part of the Rift Valley. Thus, according to Leon
Lalumiere, previously of the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington,
who first developed this scenario, the Danakil Horst became Danakil
Island, which was about 500 kilometers long and about 75 kilometers
wide. Danakil Island may still have been connected to present day
Somalia but, because of massive basalt layers from volcanic activity, the
neck of land connecting them was devoid of vegetation so the Danakil
Horst was at least a 'biological island' on which Lalumiere proposes
some pre-Australopithecine apes could have been marooned.
The region around Danakil Island has yielded hominid fossils. Still,
very early hominids have been found at other locations further south in
Kenya and further west in Chad. Hence, locations with the the geology
and ecological isolation of Danakil Island may be generically important
to hominid speciation and could have been duplicated elsewhere in
eastern and northern Africa.

248 
Survival of the Fattest
Leigh Broadhurst, Michael Crawford and several other collaborators
including myself developed a similar scenario but instead of focussing on
the single, fairly restricted Danakil Island site in Lalumiere's scheme,
suggested that the shores of massive lakes of the Rift Valley were the
sites at which hominid bipedalism evolved. Broadhurst notes that the
junction of the present day Red Sea, Gulf of Aden and northern Rift
Valley are the only present day example of failed or 'proto-oceans'.
During the late Miocene and early Pliocene, these bodies of water
occupied at least a million square kilometers. They formed in sunken
basins that occurred during the faulting that formed much of the Rift
Valley 8 to 9 million years ago.
Today, the remnants of these proto-oceans include Lakes Victoria,
Turkana, Tanganyika and Malawi, several of which have deep
water geological features peculiar to oceans. At about 70,000 square
kilometers, Lake Victoria remains the world's largest tropical lake. It
dried out during the late Pleistocene and reformed about twelve thousand
years ago. Like the others, its level still varies markedly with temperature
and rainfall.
Broadhurst distinguishes between the different climates and outcomes
of hominid evolution on the eastern compared to the western sides of the
Rift Valley. She proposes that the western side remained more humid
and forested, conditions which continued to sustain the great apes. In
contrast, the eastern side became drier and less forested due to ongoing
volcanic activity and uplift. Despite the dryness of the Pleistocene
period, there were still abundant lakes, marshes and rivers, including
Paleo Lake Hadar in the north, and Paleo Lakes Turkana and Olduvai
further south in Kenya. Contemporaneous Australopithecine fossils have
also been found near lakes much further west in present day Chad. These
lacustrine and riverine conditions supported the evolution of hominids
and, later, their transition into humans.
The Ecological Evidence
Geological evidence in the Rift Valley clearly shows that the sediments
where numerous Australopithecine fossils have been found were
adjacent to or formed by lakes, marshes or rivers. Derek Ellis is a marine

The Evidence 
249
ecologist from the University of Victoria in British Columbia who has
addressed whether the ecology of such habitats would have been able to
support the evolution of bipedalism and the speciation of hominids. As
with others seeking a more viable framework for the antecedants of
human evolution, his premise for investigating the plausibility of
hominids evolving bipedalism in a shore-based ecosystem arose from
dissatisfaction with the Savannah Theory's basic premise, which is that
selection pressure brought certain apes out of the trees and directly onto
the savannahs. For Ellis, various predators and competitor species of
baboons were a significant obstacle to pre-hominid or hominid
occupation of the savannahs.
He notes that the 'savannah is occupied by specialist long-ranging
and fast cursorial herbivores and carnivores. Food would have been
hard to get there, hard to keep, and getting it would be dangerous
enough for hunting parties let alone camp followers comprising elders,
pregnant females, and infants. In the process of adapting to parkland,
not only the adult males, but also females and infants, would have to be
viably adapted to the complexities of whatever ecosystems they were
inhabiting at any one time (especially to predation) during the long
series of anatomical, physiological and behavioural changes on the way
to becoming human. And they would have to be able to push their way
into the new ecological niche by adaptiveness superior to that of the
baboons which had 'come down from the trees' [Ellis' quotes] before
them. Therefore the evolutionary challenge was to transfer certain apes
from a lower strata forest niche onto tropical parkland or riverine treed
grassland, not the the open savannah'. In any case, Ellis argues that the
savannahs offer insufficient isolation between pre-hominids and apes to
allow only the former to become bipedal.
Like several others, Ellis sees the geological events during the early
Pliocene that formed the Rift Valley as fundamental to the climatic and
ecological circumstances of hominid evolution. He proposes that
hominid evolution was more plausible in marine rather than freshwater
wetlands because marine wetlands are richer in immobile and slow
moving edible biomass (food) and are also safer from predators than
freshwater wetlands.

250 
Survival of the Fattest
Like Lalumiere, Ellis sees the marine coast at the northern end of the
Rift Valley near the Red Sea and Danakil Depression as a likely region
of hominid evolution, but also thinks the southern end of the valley at the
Zambezi River is a theoretically viable possibility. Both the oceanic
rifting that created coastal archipelagos and volcanic activity in the Rift
Valley would have destroyed many previously habitable areas.
Bipedalism providing mobility to seek new habitats would therefore have
been advantageous and might explain the widespread and scattered
distribution of hominid fossil sites in Africa.
Ranked from wettest to driest, Ellis classifies marine wetlands as salt
marshes, mangrove swamps, lagoons, rock shores, surf beaches, and sand
dunes. Salt marshes support numerous edible plants, animals, fish,
ground-nesting birds, worms and insects. They increase in salinity on the
seaward side where molluscs, snails and aquatic Crustacea prevail, and
where fish occupy pools and streams especially at high tide. In the
tropics, marshes also support trees particularly mangroves.
Lagoons are marine lakes that also vary in salinity but are generally
protected from direct wind and waves. Lagoons host many grasses,
invertebrates, fish, migratory birds, and aquatic herbivores. Rock shores
host invertebrates, intertidal plants like algae and kelp, and birds and
mammals that scavenge at low tide. Sand beaches and dunes are less
productive either because of low rainfall, low ground water or
continuous wave and tide action, but can still sustain dormant plants and
oases. These various forms of wetlands can be adjacent to each other in
any combination and are found in all types of climate the world over. Of
particular relevance to hominid evolution, they exist from the Red Sea all
the way down Africa's east coast.
In the time frame of hominid evolution, Ellis proposes that the Red
Sea may well have been an isolated inland sea with variations in habitat
and climate occurring both seasonally and due to periodic uplifting or
subsidence caused by faulting. Higher temperatures and the dryest
conditions would have confined the most productive wetlands to islands,
coral reefs off shore, or oases inland. Cooler and wetter conditions would
have expanded these wetlands and made many of the mangrove forests
continuous with the rainforests inland. Whether isolated along the coasts
(as in Borneo today) or occupying larger areas inland, these rainforests

The Evidence 
251
could have sustained a lower canopy or ground dwelling ape during the
initial formation of the Rift Valley upwards of twenty million years ago
or during the more active rifting about five million years ago.
If seasonal flooding of the Rift Valley lakes and river valleys
occurred as it does today in the Amazon, a rich flora and fauna
seasonally adapted to flood conditions would have developed. Ellis
suggests that, in short order, improved knowledge both of the predators
and necessary feeding cycles caused by predators or ocean tides would
bring further adaptation. Some pre-hominid or hominid clades might well
have inhabited islands and been relatively secure from predators. A
variety of simple tools would have been used to crack open shellfish or
Crustacea or to slice open beached animals.
Tolerance of water would begin in children, which were developing
fat and could easily float, especially in saline conditions. He notes that
there is no implicit biological problem with a woodland ape evolving
into a fully aquatic hominid, which, with speech, better dexterity, and
higher cognitive function, would have adaptive advantages over the
versatile baboon. The problem is in subsequently turning the aquatic
hominid into a terrestrial human such that the original aquatic hominid
becomes extinct.
Thus, geological events in paleolithic East Africa creating ecological
settings suitable for a semi-terrestrial ape to become a bipedal wetlands
ape are crucial for plausibility of a shore-based phase in human
evolution. The real plausibility of such a habitat gives substance to the
physiological or morphological features of humans discussed that are
supposedly adaptations to shore-based or aquatic life. Hence, Hardy,
Morgan, Verhaegen and other aquatic supporters cannot be dismissed on
the grounds of lack of plausibility. Nevertheless, plausibility isn't direct
evidence that a pre-hominid ape actually occupied, indeed depended on,
such a habitat to become a hominid. Without evidence coming directly
from hominid fossil sites, compelling support for wetlands or shorelines
as a speciating force in human evolution would still be elusive.
Fish in the Hominid Fossil Record
Ten years ago, Kathy Stewart of the Museum of Nature in Ottawa
published a paper in the Journal of Human Evolution documenting that

252 
Survival of the Fattest
H. habilis in the Rift Valley purposefully exploited significant amounts
of fish for food. Stewart is well known in the paleoanthropology
community for her skill at identifying individual fish species in hominid
fossil sites. She points out that the presence of fish remains has been well
known for over thirty years at several hominid fossil sites around Lake
Turkana in Kenya, Senge in Zaire, and Olduvai in Tanzania. Stewart has
worked at several of these locations, notably with Meave Leakey at Lake
Turkana. Despite their abundance, human paleoanthropologists have
paid scant attention to fish remains in the ecology and food supply of
hominids.
Fish bones are also plentiful at early human sites along the Nile River,
and in Zaire, Botswana, and Kenya. At the White Paintings Rock Shelter
site in south Africa, catfish remains are spread throughout more than two
meters of deposits (or middens). Unlike Olduvai Gorge, these early
human sites are typically late Pleistocene, with those of the Nile River
being dated to about 40,000 years ago, while those at the mouth of the
Semliki River are about 25,000 years old. Barbed points recovered
amongst these fish remains suggest the use of spears to catch fish.
Stewart's evidence of long periods of planned, 
purposeful
exploitation of fish by early humans motivated her to investigate whether
fish were also a food resource for at least some hominids. Some hominid
fossil sites, like Olduvai Gorge, have particularly dense fish remains
that greatly outnumber the mammalian fossils. 
She and others have
identified remains of both catfish (Clarias) and cichlids (i.e. Tilapia, a
fish similar to perch) from more than 4,000 fish elements found at two
hominid sites in Olduvai Gorge. Catfish are a bottom-feeding inshore
fish growing up to two meters in length. They are tolerant of a wide
range of water conditions including low oxygen and alkalinity. Cichlids
prefer fairly shallow water near shores and can also tolerate poor water
conditions.
A lower density of fish remains usually indicates the fish accumulated
after dying of natural causes, whereas a higher density of accumulation
typically implies that hominids caught the fish and left their bones
behind. Regardless of the cultural artifacts that are recovered, catfish
predominate at all but one of the sites. Stewart suggests this is not
because of technical skill or species preference but rather can be

The Evidence 
253
attributed to the saline and alkaline conditions of paleo-Lake Olduvai,
which eliminate many aquatic flora and fauna.
Clear, straight cutmarks on animal or fish fossils are unlikely to occur
from natural causes or from animal predation, so they are a hallmark of
hominid or pre-human butchery and consumption. In the absence of such
direct evidence of handling by hominids, paleoanthropologists are
reluctant to attribute the proximity of fish and hominid fossils as
indicating active and purposeful exploitation of fish for food.
Catastrophic environmental events completely unrelated to hominid
use can cause unusual fish bone accumulation, including wind storms or
large amounts of run-off water. Successive deposits of fish bones are also
more likely to occur with seasonally receding waters repeated over
many years. As commonly occurs in modern times, stranded fish may or
may not then be preyed upon by carnivores or other animals including
hominids. Hence, the presence of fish bones amongst hominid fossils is
encouraging but still inadequate evidence of purposeful or large scale
exploitation of fish as a food resource.
Fish remains at several hominid sites recur in successive layers. The
abundance of these remains and their distribution show that certain fish
species were caught during specific seasons. At some sites, Stewart has
identified as many as eight fish genera, with cichlids, if they are present
at all, coming a distant second to catfish. In fact, catfish may represent
close to 100% of the fish at most of these sites. As is the practice today,
catfish and cichlids were probably caught during two seasons - on the
floodplains of rivers during the wetter, spawning season and again during
the dry season as waters receded.
On the basis of detailed assessment of the plant material that
accompanies the fish remains, Stewart suggests that one of the richest
sites of fish remains in Olduvai Gorge, known as FLKNN, was a lake
margin site about one kilometer distant from the lake itself. Like other
lakes in the Rift Valley, paleo-Lake Olduvai had no outlet so its water
levels varied markedly with season and climate. Encampments would
therefore be more likely at a site less prone to flooding and hence
somewhat removed from the water's edge. Two levels of the FLKNN
site contain very high densities of catfish remains. The size and age
profiles of the bones imply that they were fished 
somewhat

254 
Survival of the Fattest
indiscriminately and unrelated to season or spawning. Level 3 of this site
contains fossils of H. habilis and relevant cultural and animal remains
whereas Level 2 contains only animal remains.
Stewart argues that several lines of evidence accompanying fish
remains at Olduvai Gorge sites collectively represent purposeful hominid
exploitation or predation offish (Table 13.1). Uniequivocal cut marks are
rare on fish bones but appear likely on several specimens she has studied.
In addition, higher accumulation of fish heads rather than the vertebrae
suggest the heads were detached prior to consuming the rest of the fish
elsewhere. Natural causes of massive fish die-offs usually result in equal
ratios of fish heads to backbones so successive deposits of fish remains
containing skewed ratios of cranial and vertebral bones are unlikely to be
attributable to environmental causes.
Table 13.1. The main features leading Kathy Stewart to conclude there was a high
probability of active predation of fish by H. habilis and H. erectus. In some cases, these
features are common to fish assemblages uninfluenced by hominids or other predators,
i.e. they occur due to natural disasters. However, in her view, the joint occurrence of five
or more of these characteristics in well perserved and relatively large fish assemblages at
early Pleistocene fossil sites in Olduvai Gorge provides good evidence of intentional
hominid exploitation.
1. 
The fish fossil sites are located at the banks or mouths of rivers.
2. 
Few species are represented.
3. 
Evidence of selective exploitation occurs according to seasoning and spawning
habitat.
4. 
The fish remains are from species that can be caught with minimal technology.
5. 
There is a skewed distribution of skull and vertebral fragments in the deposits.
6. 
Several sites show evidence of repeated hominid occupation.
7. 
In a few cases, there is evidence that hominids probably made cutmarks on the fish
bones.
Stewart also notes that the fish skulls in particular are fragmented
in the hominid fossil sites. Natural die-offs generally cause little
fragmentation of fish bones, especially the skull but crushing the fish
skull prior to eating its brain is a common practice in present-day African

The Evidence 
255
groups. The hominid fossil sites in the Olduvai Gorge also contain turtle
shells without other remains of the turtle which also indicates probable
hominid predation.
Despite the presumed consumption of meat by H. habilis, Stewart
observes that present-day hunter-gatherers in Tanzania and South Africa
have a relatively poor record of success capturing medium to large
mammals. During study periods averaging six to nine months, the kill
rate by two such hunter-gatherer groups was about one such animal
every three to six days. As the sole source of food, this success rate is
insufficient to feed their typical group sizes, which number around fifty.
During seasonal climate extremes, all mammalian sources of protein
become harder to obtain and are often extremely lean, indicating other
food sources are needed.
Stewart notes that fish are a staple and nutritious food resource for
many present day African groups that still maintain a traditional lifestyle.
Fish are equivalent to meat in protein quality and, seasonally, are
commonly richer in fat than animals. As documented in Part 1 of this
book, their mineral content, especially brain selective minerals, is
unmatched by almost all terrestrial food sources, plant or animal.
Several indigenous African and Australian groups are well-
documented to seasonally select certain species of fish particularly for
their fat content, and will reject those that are too thin as being in 'poor
condition'. Increased fatness in fish is commonly associated with the dry
period just before spawning. Fish caught during the dry season would
therefore easily replace the reduced availability and quality of many
plants and animals.
Successful 'low technology' fishing, i.e. by hand or with spears or
clubs but without lines or hooks, requires a knowledge of the relation
between fish type, spawning period, habitat, and season. In east Africa,
the main rainy season is March to April and may intermittently recur
in November. Catfish are best caught in the wet season as they move
upriver before spawning. They may also be caught returning downstream
after spawning because the onset of the dry season strands many of them
in shallow pools as the waters recede. With such knowledge, strategic
planning can yield plenty of fish caught by hand. The addition of a little
crude technology, such as sharpened sticks or clubs makes the process

256 
Survival of the Fattest
even more efficient, but is unnecessary if one is in the shallow waters
commonly preferred for spawning. Catfish are abundantly caught in this
manner, as are some cichlids.
Given the seasonal and short term nature of catfish or cichlid
availability, this exploitation would have been planned and might well
have involved competition from carnivores or other predators. Still, large
groups of individuals could be fed this way. All age groups could also
participate because fish stranded in shallow water are easy to catch.
Several present day African groups including the Dinka have seasonal
festivals based on such low tech fishing. Procuring stranded fish from
lake margins or pools would have been less challenging than catching
them during spawning migrations on rivers. Peak fish availability in the
dry season contrasts with that of most other food resources, making fish
exploitation by hominids more plausible even in the face of potential
competitors including carnivores, hyenas, and certain primates like
baboons.
What does confirmed consumption of fish establish about the lifestyle
or habitat of pre-human hominids two million years ago? First, it puts
some of them on the margins or shores of lakes and rivers during at least
part of the year. Knowledge of fish migration or stranding and careful
selection of fish in 'good condition' (as some African fishers do today)
requires a presence on the shores and some attention to be paid to what
goes on in the water. As Stewart speculates, low technology fishing can
be a group activity that, unlike hunting, is inclusive of the young, the
pregnant, the nursing, and the elderly. Being on the shores for extended
periods provides the opportunity to exploit other shore-based food
resources besides fish, including shellfish, turtles, birds, shore and
shallow water plants, etc.
If we accept that H. habilis was fishing, this necessitates at least
wading in shallow water. Thus an opportunistically bipedal hominid
would be likely to improve stance and gait while wading in the water to
fish or look for other food. Attempts at floating, paddling, swimming and
head submersion leading to diving would occur opportunistically but
more frequently with habituation.
Better than almost any other food resources, fish consumption in
H. habilis and H. erectus would contribute towards the metabolic and

The Evidence 
257
nutritional requirements of brain expansion. Brain expansion and
sedentary encampments would catalyse social activity, speech, play and
cultural activities. Tool making and art would be natural sequelae. The
trigger in this scenario may well have been need, i.e. the seasonal need to
find alternative food, but it wasn't the Savannah Theory's presumed need
to make stone tools and hunt in order to find more food; everything about
shore-based food procurement is low tech.
Intentional fishing by H. habilis doesn't adequately explain the
origins of bipedalism or the gradual, early hominid expansion of the
brain. These two features of Homo remain hard to explain unless fishing
(or its nutritional equivalent) was occurring at least four million years
ago. Stewart notes that the evidence for organised, even intensive,
fishing by H. habilis couldn't arise overnight, so she feels that in some
form or other it must have started in Australopithecines. How much
earlier is unknown.
Despite the plausible geology and ecology, and the speculations of
Hardy, Morgan, Crawford, Broadhurst, and Verhaegen, there simply
isn't any firm objective evidence for early Australopithecine exploitation
of shore-based foods at the level found by Kathy Stewart for H. habilis.
Not yet, anyway. That may change if she has a chance to investigate the
early hominid sites in northern Ethiopia.
Shellfish
Robert Walter is presently at the Department of Geology of the Centre
for Scientific Investigation and Higher Education at Ensenada, Mexico
and was previously in the Department of Anthropology at the University
of Toronto. He has described clear evidence of exploitation of shellfish
by early humans living on a coral reef on a bay on the present day Eritrea
shores of the Red Sea. His group identified shells of two species of
oysters, 31 species of molluscs and at least one species of large, edible
crab in these coral reef and limestone deposits dated to 125,000 years
ago. Sharp-edged tools were found in abundance, usually amongst the
shell middens in and around large oyster beds. Walter concluded that the
flake stone tools were used to harvest and crack open the shellfish or
crustaceans.

258 
Survival of the Fattest
Walter's report is consistent with others describing early human or
pre-human exploitation of coastal shellfish but his group's date of
125,000 years ago is the earliest firm date for significant consumption of
such a shore-based food resource. They found no pre-human or human
fossils associated with these shellfish remains but contemporaneous
African hominid fossils are clearly all early or fully modern Homo
sapiens.
Walter suggests that dry inter-glacial conditions at the time would
have encouraged exploration of coastal food resources, as would the
relative lack of competition or predators on the coasts. He speculates that
the extensive exploitation of the Red Sea site his group discovered
implies that the first appearance of coastal food procurement would have
been much earlier than the 125,000 year old date of their samples.
Walter's speculation repeats Stewart's conclusion that if some H. habilis
were regularly consuming lots of fish, some Australopithecines must also
have been familiar with fish or shellfish as food.
Walter may not be prepared to say that exploitation of coastal
shellfish by early humans more than 125,000 years ago implies that H.
habilis was eating shellfish about two million years earlier. He would be
even less likely to speculate about Australopithecine consumption of
shellfish. Still, like fish in shallow water, molluscs and Crustacea are
shore-based foods requiring no specific skills or knowledge to find and
eat. On some shores their abundance is overwhelmingly obvious. Though
the fossil evidence is not yet available (and may never be conclusive), as
Stewart speculates, if hominids before H. habilis were eating fish, they
were probably also eating shellfish. Probability isn't proof but several
pieces of the puzzle fit with a preliminary conclusion that some
Australopithecines were eating both fish and shellfish.
Whether the shellfish consumed by pre-human hominids were on the
sea coasts or were strictly freshwater is moot. Before and during the
Pleistocene, the paleo lakes of East and North East Africa are known to
have been variously saline and alkaline, often extremely so. Their input
or drainage was often isolated and may not ever have been connected to
the sea. Climate conditions varied considerably, both by season and over
multi-year periods.

The Evidence 
259
Some lakes and rivers systems were connected via the Rift Valley to
the sea while others were not. A variety of fish, molluscs, crustaceans
and other shore-based life, both plant and animal, have been conclusively
documented in widely dispersed hominid fossil sites by Stewart, Walter
and others. John Parkington and colleagues have similar data from large
shellfish middens in early human fossil sites in South Africa but most of
their material is dated later than Walter's.
The point is therefore to establish not that a specific type of food was
consumed but, rather, that a broad and variable habitat zone on or near
the shores was being exploited, first by certain groups of early hominids
and then almost continuously by early humans. This exploitation would
have been climatically forced in some areas or at some times and would
have been optional at others. Either way, the use of shore-based foods,
above ground or in shallow water, would have facilitated habitual
bipedalism and gradual brain enlargement in successive groups of
hominids. Hominids that did not continue to exploit this rich ecological
zone would not have become humans.
Isotope Archeology
The emerging field of isotope archeology has implications for
determining food resources used by hominids. Different numbers of
neutrons change the weight of the atomic nucleus creating different
forms (isotopes) of individual elements. Isotopes can be unstable
(radioactive) or stable (non-radioactive) but they still represent the same
element. For instance, there are three isotopes of carbon with atomic
weights of 12 (carbon-12;), 13 (carbon-13; 13C) or 14 (carbon-14; 14C).
The main form of carbon is 12C which represents almost 99% of all
carbon in the earth and in all organisms. 13C is carbon's non radioactive
(stable) isotope and represents about 1.1% of all carbon. 14C is the
radioactive and quantitatively very minor third isotope of carbon.
The relative amount of the stable isotope of an element is commonly
presented as a ratio to that of the principal isotope, i.e. the 13C to 12C
ratio. The analytical method of determining the ratio between two
isotopes of the same element is called isotope ratio mass spectrometry.
Differences in the isotope ratio of an element can be very informative

260 
Survival of the Fattest
about the chemical or biological origin of compounds containing that
element. In turn, some isotope ratios potentially indicate the food origin
of molecules in a living or fossil organism. Importantly, because the
isotopes themselves and their ratios are stable, this methodology is
applicable to the study of very old samples.
The ' C to I2C ratio is one of several such stable isotope fingerprints
useful in paleoanthropology. In organic molecules, such as those
remaining in animal or hominid fossils, this ratio varies depending on the
plant source that first provided the carbon. The 13C to 12C ratio in
different plants falls into one of two different ranges because plants have
two different ways of processing carbon from carbon dioxide to make
their organic molecules. Some plants use a three carbon intermediate
between carbon dioxide and organic molecules. These are called the C3
plants, which include the large majority of wild and domesticated plants
worldwide, including most bushes, trees and shrubs. Other plants,
particularly tropical grasses eaten by grazing herbiovores in areas with
low rainfall, use a four carbon intermediate, so they are called the C4
plants. Corn and millet are two model C4 plants important in human
paleoanthropology.
A lower 13C to 12C ratio is typical of the C3 plants and the browsing,
leaf- or fruit-eating animals that that eat them. A higher 13C to I2C ratio is
characteristic of the C4 plants and the grazing animals that eat them. The
13C to I2C ratio has been widely used to evaluate when pastoral or coastal
peoples in Europe started to switch to corn- or millet-based agriculture.
Placed in the context of sound cultural and fossil artifacts, the 13C to 12C
ratio is an excellent index of the domestication of two agricultural plants
- corn in the Americas and millet in Asia.
The 13C to 12C ratio also provides a promising new way to investigate
whether shore-based foods were fundamentally part of hominid evolution
and, if so, when. Starting with plankton, marine plants and subsequently
the fish and marine animals that eat them have a higher 13C to 12C ratio
than do most edible terrestrial (C3) plants. In the absence of signs of
cultivation of corn or millet, a higher 13C to 12C ratio therefore generally
stands out as uniquely marking the consumption of food that must have
been of marine origin, i.e fish or shellfish procured along the seacoasts.

The Evidence 
261
Judith Sealy and Nik van der Merwe of the University of Cape Town,
South Africa, have extensively investigated the contribution of marine
foods to the intake of humans living on the coasts of South Africa in the
past 10,000 years. Their stable isotope data using 13C to 12C and isotopes
of nitrogen (15N to 14N) unequivocally confirm that the vast deposits (or
middens) of shells at these sites occurred because early humans ate
substantial amounts of shellfish such as mussels. Thus, these middens
accumulated directly because of human consumption and not because of
natural disasters or other causes.
Also using 13C to 12C and 15N to 14N ratios, Erik Trinhaus and
colleagues from Washington University in St. Louis have reported that
20,000 to 28,000 years ago, early modern humans were consuming some
fish and other aquatic food resources including molluscs and shore birds.
Their analysis of Neanderthal specimens confirm what so many cultural
artifacts have long suggested which is that most Neandertals were eating
terrestrial herbivores. Just as the coaccumulation of shellfish middens
with hominid or human fossils doesn't mean the shellfish were being
eaten, so the animal bones in Neanderthal fossil sites don't prove these
animals were being eaten. However, stable isotope ratios that are similar
in the shellfish middens and animal fossils as in pre-human remains
would make the direct food connection essentially irrefutable.
It is always satisfying when there are relatively few plausible options
and the isotope ratios confirm the abundant cultural evidence at the fossil
site. Sometimes, however, the fossil evidence is far from clear. Apart
from a hominid fossil tooth or some other identifying skeletal fragments,
there is little supporting evidence of any kind for what diets hominids
were consuming. Julia Lee-Thorp from the Department of Archeology at
the University of Cape Town, South Africa, has dealt with this situation.
Her group has used stable isotope methodology in several investigations
to assess the diets of much earlier hominids such as A. africanus, but she
has still been forced to guess the implications of certain results.
For instance, Lee-Thorp showed that the 13C to 12C ratio in tooth
enamel from Australopithecines unearthed in Makapansgat, South
Africa, was somewhat higher than in C3 plants but not as high as in truly
mixed consumers of C3 and C4 plants. The large, thick molars of
Australopithecines also imply that the moderately elevated 13C to 12C

262 
Survival of the Fattest
ratio arose in part from grinding fibrous, tough C4 plants, i.e. tropical
grasses. Her values in these early hominid specimens were almost
identical with those in hyenas and quite different from those of
committed vegetarian primates that rely mostly on C3 plants. This led
Lee-Thorp to conclude that A. africanus had a varied diet and was
consuming a few C4 but mostly C3 plants, or was consuming meat from
the animals that ate such plants.
The higher 
I3C to 
12C ratio in Lee-Thorp's Australopithecine
specimens could also have come from consuming shore-based foods,
i.e from lake margins or rivers, but she didn't address this possibility.
As Kathy Stewart speculates, some A. africanus or equivalent
Australopithecines, were probably familiar with shore-based foods.
Perhaps those around Makapansgat were not eating fish but there is
general agreement that Australopithecines were opportunistic feeders.
Lee-Thorp's stable isotope data are ambiguous about what foods A.
africanus was consuming in South Africa and do not exclude shore-
based foods. Where climate conditions permitted it is now becoming
clear that their opportunism would have brought some Australopithecines
face to face with shore-based foods including fish, shellfish, birds,
amphibians and plants.
Other stable isotope ratios and ratios between different elements may
also be helpful in evaluating the intake of shore-based foods, particularly
those on marine shores. Nitrogen ratios (15N to 14N) in fossil material
decline slightly but significantly as intake of plant material increases.
The ratio of barium to strontium goes the other way - it decreases from a
high in terrestrial sources to middle values in freshwater specimens to a
low in marine species.
Dental enamel from teeth is laid down earlier than bone and, if
remodelled at all, is changed much more slowly than bone. Hence,
differences in isotope ratios between tooth enamel and bone of adults can
indicate whether diet changed over the lifetime. Tooth enamel is also
much better preserved in animal fossil material from the ancient past
than is bone collagen so it is a vital source of material for stable isotope
study.
Still, as Henry Schwarcz of McMaster University in Hamilton,
Ontario, points out, there is no free lunch. There are significant

The Evidence 
263
methodological pitfalls in applying stable isotope methodology to
evaluate fossils for evidence of dietary preferences. The first requirement
- clean and uncontaminated starting material - is paramount and can be
difficult to adhere to. Over time, inorganic elements infiltrate bone to
fossilize it. This contamination is less likely with organic elements such
as carbon but can occur if organisms like bacteria occupied any surfaces
or porous matrix of the fossil.
Second, and equally importantly for hominid studies, 2 to 3 million
years is a long period of time to preserve an organic molecule in bone.
Most don't make it. Amongst the few organic molecules in bone that
offer the greatest hope, collagen has been the most intensively explored.
Third, isotope ratios vary for many reasons including climatic or
geographic changes, etc., so the impact of these confounding effects
needs to constantly be borne in mind.
The evidence for fish consumption by H.habilis obtained by Kathy
Stewart is about as good as it gets. Nothing else puts hominids in such
close contact with shore-based foods. Isotope ratios have the potential to
clarify whether shore-based foods were consumed but have not yet been
fully applied to this question. In some cases, isotope ratios will put the
interpretation beyond reasonable doubt. In most cases, isotope or
strontium-barium ratios will simply add to a weight of evidence
suggesting a higher or lower probability of certain food options. That is
still important because there are so few ways the problem can be studied
in ancient specimens.
Iodine Measurements - Another Clue?
In addition to the isotope analyses of fossils that are known to be relevant
to identifying food resources, iodine is another element that bears on the
issue of shore-based foods in human brain evolution. Chapter 6 makes
the case for iodine's importance in brain development. Chapter 14 will
return to iodine via the thyroid and its potential role in speciation.
Sebastiano Venturi of the Health Service in Pennabilli, Italy, points out
that for all its importance in thyroid function, more iodine is located
outside the thyroid than within it. He and his colleagues note that iodine
is more abundant in the marine environment.

264 
Survival of the Fattest
They propose that iodine may be an antioxidant that limited terrestrial
vertebrate evolution until the thyroid evolved and was able to concentrate
iodine for use in tissues other than the thyroid. In the absence of a
thyroid gland per se, thyroxine still existed in the iodine-rich marine
milieu where invertebrates evolved hundreds of millions of years ago.
Venturi suggests that progression to the low iodine setting of terrestrial
life required animals to develop a thyroid gland to increase thyroxine
production.
Higher thyroxine could, in turn, be recruited as a means of getting
more iodine into cells. The more active form of thyroid hormone,
triiodothyronine, remained a hormone committed to controlling
metamorphosis and thermogenesis but he speculates thyroxine really
became an iodine transporter because it is more efficient than several
well-known antioxidants including glutathione, vitamin E, and ascorbic
acid.
Focussing Venturi's concept of iodine as an antioxidant on the need
to protect vulnerable polyunsaturated fatty acids from lipid peroxidation,
one could well see that further commitment of polyunsaturates like
docoshexaenoic acid to brain membrane specialization in hominids
would be curtailed in the absence of sufficient antioxidant protection. If
any iodine-rich compounds survive over two million or more years, they
would provide continuity between Stewart's evidence of hominid
consumption of fish and the ongoing vulnerability of humans to iodine
deficiency to the present day.

Chapter 14
How Would It Work?
We have examined the plausibility that conditions existed in East Africa
that brought shore-based nutrition into play and could reasonably have
contributed to human brain evolution. The issue remains as to how these
nutritional catalysts could influence the genome in a way that created
improvements in cognition that were transferred to future generations?
Something has to mediate such a change.
Thyroid Hormone
One possibility is that the environmental change involves a change in the
dietary intake or endogenous production of thyroid hormone (thyroxine
and triiodothyronine combined). Thyroid hormone has two major
functions in vertebrates: it regulates the rate of metabolism in cells and it
is required for normal early development. The brain, heart and kidneys
have a continuously high metabolic rate, day in and day out. These three
organs must be well supplied with blood vessels to meet the high oxygen
and nutrient needs. When these conditions are not met, these organs fail
rapidly, as in a stroke knocking out brain function and causing paralysis,
or impaired blood flow to the heart causing a heart attack.
In contrast, other tissues like skeletal muscle are active only
transiently. In athletes, skeletal muscle is more active than in sedentary
office workers taking the train or car to the office every day. The typical
shortness of breath and muscle weakness experienced by people who are
unfit indicates insufficient oxygen supply to the muscles. Energy
consuming processes like blood circulation, cognitive function or high
265

266 
Survival of the Fattest
physical activity levels depend on efficient energy generation in the
mitochondria which, in turn, depends on optimal thyroid function.
The number of thyroid hormone receptors per cell is a key
determinant of the ability to increase or decrease metabolism or cell
development in response to thyroid hormone. In the laboratory rat, brown
fat and the pituitary have the highest concentration of thyroid hormone
receptors. After brown fat and the pituitary, the density of thyroid
hormone receptors is somewhat lower in liver and kidney and still lower
in the cerebral cortex. Immune cells have very few thyroid hormone
receptors while none have been detected in testes or spleen. The lack of
thyroid hormone receptors makes the testes and spleen totally
unresponsive to thyroid hormone. Interestingly, the adult brain is also
unresponsive to thyroid hormone despite having large numbers of
thyroid receptors. Apparently the responsiveness of the developing brain
to thyroid hormone switches off as the brain matures even though the
receptors remain into adulthood.
Unlike development of the brain, which depends heavily on adequate
thyroid hormone levels, normal development and function of the heart
and kidneys is relatively insensitive to thyroid hormone. Thus, the basic
shape and function of the heart or kidney does not differ much across
vertebrates despite wide differences in body form, locomotion, and
cognitive capacity. Evolution seems somehow to have optimized the
structure-function relationship of the vertebrate heart and kidney and, in
so doing, gradually desensitized them to thyroid hormone. In contrast,
body morphology and brain capacity are still open to evolutionary
change and are still sensitive to environmental challenge and
modification by thyroid hormone, especially during early development.
The flexibility inherent in brain and body morphology is both an
advantage and a disadvantage. Flexibility is advantageous because it
helps individual species adapt to different or changing environmental
circumstances, i.e. to evolve. A species might be able to evolve wings or
modify the brain in a certain environment but, so far at least, wide
differences in locomotion or food selection have not required a radical
new design of the basic blueprint of the vertebrate heart.
On the other hand, inter-species differences in physical form and in
brain development are a disadvantage, at least during early development.

How Would It Work? 
267
because they show that conditions adversely affecting thyroid hormone
production, i.e. iodine deficiency, seriously compromise physical
development 
and cognitive function. 
Animals possessing more
sophisticated neurological development are therefore vulnerable to
impaired thyroid function but the malleability of their brain and physical
development leaves them better able to take advantage of conditions that
increase thyroid hormone production.
The Pacemaker
Thyroid hormone has a key role in three systems in the body:
reproduction, fetal and early post-natal development, and the response to
stress. Thyroid hormone controls cell division and differentiation,
thereby effectively controlling the timing and duration of development. It
is not only the single most important regulator of normal development,
including metamorphosis of the tadpole, but it also links many
morphological, physiological and behavioural traits. Normal variations in
thyroid hormone production lead to subtle differences in phenotype, i.e.
hair colour, stress, response, etc. The thyroid appears to be central to
translating environmental factors into physiological and developmental
responses that lead to sufficient genetic variability to allow speciation to
begin.
Blood thyroxine levels normally vary in a pulsatile manor. The length
of time each pulse lasts varies across different species. For instance,
blood thyroxine pulses last longer in humans than in domesticated
animals such as cats or dogs. Maximum and minumum levels of thyroid
hormone pulses change daily and with progress through developmental
stages from larva to adulthood in different fish, birds and mammals.
Cyclicity and pulsatile secretion are well established features of
thyroid hormone production, with a rhythm and pattern that are species-
specific during early development. Even within a single species such as
the dog, differences in blood thyroxine level are sufficient to affect the
receptivity to mating of some but not other dog strains.
There are also marked differences in thyroxine's half-life (length of
time spent in the blood) between species whose young develop quickly
or slowly. These rhythms and the modulator effect of thyroid hormone

268 
Survival of the Fattest
on secretion of hormones by the pineal, hypothalamus, pituitary, adrenal
and gonads, give the thyroid a key pacemaker role exerted by no other
organ.
Heterochrony and the Antecedents of Speciation
Heterochrony is the natural variation in the rate and timing of pre- and
post-natal development that leads to differences in size and shape
of individuals within a species. Susan Crockford is a developmental
biologist in Victoria, British Columbia, who feels that heterochrony is
responsible for much of the inherent variability in phenotype that is
essential for natural selection. Indeed, Crockford and others believe that
heterochrony is the most common and significant biological mechanism
underlying speciation.
Differences in thyroxine's half life appear to be necessary to make
heterochrony possible. Small differences in thyroid rhythms create
variability in traits between individuals and also account for generation-
to-generation differences in traits. Both of these attributes present the
opportunity for phenotypic change, including planned change such as
human domestication of animal species. The dynamics of domestication
are particularly informative about the early events leading to speciation.
Similar thyroid hormone responses in genetically distinct populations
help explain similar physical, behavioural and life history traits in
genetically distinct populations, i.e. convergent evolution.
In addition to the genetic control that creates distinct thyroid rhythms,
thyroxine secretion changes in a species-specific manner according to
age, season, reproductive stage, presence of disease and stress response.
As a pacemaker hormone, thyroxine coordinates the adaptive response of
the body to short and long term environmental changes. If environmental
changes are rapid or severe, i.e. increasing heat or cold, reduction in
water supply, increased predators, etc., this invokes a further level of
reaction or stress response.
Environmental challenges, including novel habitats, are better
accepted by stress-tolerant individuals. Stress tolerant individuals cope
better with evasion of predators, searching for more tolerable
temperatures, or scarce water, etc. Changing habitat or circumstances

How Would It Work? 
269
may even be attractive to such stress-tolerant individuals. Stress
tolerance varies across individuals and can account for up to 20% of a
population. Those who are immediately capable of adapting to the stress
of a new environment become morphologically, physiological and
behaviourally, i.e. phenotypically, distinct, yet still retain a close genetic
relationship to the ancestral population. This distinction is emphasized by
increasing behavioural and reproductive isolation yet is genetically
almost invisible.
When forced to opt for or against for a novel habitat, stress intolerant
individuals do their best to avoid the new stress, i.e. they simply stay
home. Crockford proposes that, within any species, stress tolerant
individuals become founder populations. Founder populations contain a
subset of individuals with smaller variation in their thyroid hormone
receptors than were that present in the ancestral population. Matings
within such smaller groupings would be expected to result in retention
and promotion of the distinctive characteristics of - the founder
population.
Protodomestication
In most families of higher organisms, clear evidence is missing for
intermediate discernible forms in the fossil record that show the bridge
between species. For instance, there are still large gaps between different
hominids that leave some doubt as to which form led directly to humans.
Despite intensive ongoing expeditions to uncover hominid fossils, these
gaps remain because of the relative rarity of hominid fossils. The gaps
are usually interpreted as indicating that the morphological changes
associated with speciation are very gradual and require a long time
period to occur.
Crockford suggests that this is not necessarily true. She points
out that some new species of fish have arisen within the past 200 years,
a period of time that is evolutionarily instantaneous. Furthermore,
the morphological changes that accompany domestication or even
protodomestication in species like the dog can involve significant
changes to the skeleton that are not nearly as gradual as is generally
assumed. Hence, the absence of evidence of intermediate forms in the

270 
Survival of the Fattest
archeological record is not sufficient justification for supposing that
speciation always has to proceed slowly or by extremely small
increments.
One example of a rapid change in a characteristic that appears to
lead to speciation is the inheritance of stress tolerance during the
domestication of foxes on Russian fur farms studied by Belyaev starting
in 1959. This domestication permitted the furs to be harvested with less
effort and with less damage to the animals than would be caused by
hunting and trapping, thereby improving their value. By selecting the
foxes most tolerant of the stress of being near humans, remarkably high
tolerance was developed within twenty fox generations.
Domestication of foxes had the fortuitous and unanticipated effect of
selecting for animals capable of bearing two litters per year compared to
the usual single annual litter, an effect that not only halved the time to
accommodate these changes but was also clearly economically desirable.
Coat coloration also changed and piebald patterns emerged within the
same twenty generations. The domesticated foxes had smaller adrenals
and higher fertility, and some started barking like dogs.
Hence, the first step leading to speciation is the initiation of a separate
founder population within the parent population as a whole. The
difference in the founder population typically includes higher stress
tolerance. In these foxes, it was tolerance of humans; in another species,
it might be tolerance to a different stressor such as drought, parasites or
predators. Stress tolerance would be advantageous to any species facing
difficult choices affecting survival.
Proto-domestication of foxes shows that part of the genome
controlling expression of physiological responses can, within a few
generations, rapidly accommodate changes in an innate response, i.e. to
fear of humans. In the fox, the change in stress response was soon
accompanied by changes affecting reproductive rate in the stress-tolerant
founder population, which, in turn affected the rate at which the new
variant expanded. Thus, expression of a gene or genes influencing
thyroid function can be modified by the environment. This modification
is fairly easily transferred to succeeding generations without requiring
gene mutations per se.

How Would It Work? 
271
Iodine is needed for optimal thyroid function, so it seems reasonable
that geographical areas providing more iodine would improve the ability
of the thyroid to mastermind developmental change in susceptible organ
systems (brain and skeleton) as environmental conditions change. This
rationale predicts that species adapt to a certain level of iodine intake and
have a tendency to remain evolutionarily static unless iodine or thyroid
function changes. Conversely, access to a diet providing higher iodine
predicts change in thyroid rhythms, stress tolerance, etc.
Thyroid Hormone and Hominid Evolution
For normal development in humans, no organ has a higher dependence
on thyroid hormone or on iodine than the brain. It therefore seems
inevitable that dietary iodine and thyroid function are closely linked to
the unique changes in brain function that occurred as one branch of
Australopithecines became the founder population for early Homo and
eventually H. sapiens.
Improved stress resistance was probably an essential feature of
exploration that occurred as H. erectus colonized temperate regions
within and beyond Africa. The curiosity and fearlessness about unknown
neighbouring localities that became large-scale exploration would have
been strongly supported by the emergence of true bipedalism which,
itself, would have arisen more easily in a habitat providing more thyroid
hormone and/or iodine.
Bipedalism probably arose by heterochrony in a founder population
of pre-Australopithecine primates that were normally quadrupedal. Many
primates that lack the distinct and dedicated bipedal skeletal morphology
found in bipedal hominids and humans still occasionally stand on
two feet. As observed in the virtual domestication of foxes, only two
things are required to exaggerate such a tendency from opportunistic to
fully developed bipedalism : First is sufficient intrinsic variability in
developmental morphology of the skeleton. Second is a slightly different
rate or timing of skeletal development in the founder (bipedal prone)
group. Different habitat and food sources would probably have been key
stimuli, not only to opportunistic bipedalism, but also to a changing
thyroid rhythm, which would have been necessary to promote the
required morphological changes in the pelvis and spine.

272 
Survival of the Fattest
A change in global distribution is often forced on a species by climate
changes causing habitat change. Major global climate changes have
periodically occurred and appear to have predisposed emergence of
successive waves of change in the primate ancestor leading to humans.
During one of these climate changes about 16 million years ago in the
Miocene epoch, African apes expanded into Europe and Asia. Further
climate change five million years ago in the Pliocene appears to
have facilitated conversion of some quadrupedal pre-Australopithecine
primates into bipedal Australopithecines. The start of the Pleistocene
epoch about two million years ago saw futher climate change and the
emergence of H. erectus, who was the first hominid to leave Africa about
one million years ago. Certainly, Australopithecines appear not to have
left Africa.
Changes in dentition between Australopithecines and other primates
indicate some Australopithecines were exposed to dietary diversification
and broader selection of foods. Crockford suggests that these new foods
probably included increasing amounts of insects, grubs, eggs, and
fledgling or moulting birds. I would add shore-based animals like
ground-nesting water fowl, fish that were relatively easily caught by
hand (catfish), crayfish, shellfish, and some small reptiles or amphibians.
Although some of these animals were perhaps already somewhat familiar
food, none of them would previously have been consumed in any great
amount because, initially, Australopithecines were neither forced to
diversify their diet nor were they well equipped for it.
All animal tissues including eggs contain some thyroid hormone.
They also contain more iodine than do plant-based foods (Table 6.1).
Consumption of fish, shellfish, meat or eggs therefore inevitably led to
intake, even if sporadic, of exogenous thyroid hormone. Small animals
eaten whole (frogs, some fish, fledgling birds, etc.) would have given a
larger surge of thyroid hormone because of consuming the thyroid itself.
Thyroid hormone is the only hormone that is absorbed intact during
digestion. This increase in available thyroid hormone would have
stimulated relatively rapid morphological changes in development of the
infants of a founder population of hominids that were eating more meat,
eggs and shellfish. At a minimum,* the combination of higher intake of
both exogenous thyroid hormone and iodine would have provided

How Would It Work? 
273
unmatched metabolic and developmental support for the skeletal changes
and habits that were beginning to favour bipedalism. Bipedalism required
better unconscious control by the brainstem and cerebellum. Improved
manual dexterity, planning, and memory all involve improved conscious
function of the forebrain or cerebrum.
Crockford notes that since thyroxine can be toxic in high amounts, a
high enough maternal intake of thyroid hormone and or iodine would
potentially cause maternal hyperthyroidism, which could reduce fertility
and even produce malformations. Still, some malformations could have
been favourable, e.g. pelvic adjustments that favoured bipedalism and
birthing of a larger brained baby. If such morphological changes
favoured survival and did not imperil successful reproduction, there was
a higher chance they would be passed on to the next generation. Thus, to
Crockford, it seems possible that functional (if not fully optimized)
bipedalism could have evolved within a very short period, perhaps within
a few tens of thousands of years.
If, as is widely portrayed, H. habilis became a skilled scavenger of
animal carcasses killed by other predators on the grasslands or open
woodlands of East Africa, they would have consumed thyroid hormone
from the diet. Competing successfully 
with other well-adapted
scavengers and grassland predators would have required substantial
stress tolerance. Those H. habilis who chose the scavenging route
to nourish themselves undoubtedly faced at least as demanding an
environmental challenge as those who found themselves in areas
providing minimally adequate availability of food and water. Ability to
scavenge would certainly have benefited as much from improved stress
tolerance as would those exploring other lifestyles and ecological niches.
Animal carcasses and other terrestrial foods consumed by the
scavengers would have provided less iodine and pre-formed thyroid
hormone than would have been in the fresh foods on shorelines. Hence,
a land-locked clade of scavenging H. habilis would have undergone
slower morphological change in response to environmental stimuli than
would have occurred in those occupying the shorelines. As a result,
improvements in cognitive function and dexterity of the land-locked
early Homo would have occurred more slowly compared to those on the
shorelines. This may at least in part account for the morphological

274 
Survival of the Fattest
mismatches that seem to occur in some Australopithecine and early
Homo fossils, in which inordinately big brains occur in specimens with
relatively primitive evidence of bipedalism, or vice versa.
Within 250,000 years of the emergence of H. habilis, H. erectus had
started to evolve and probably co-existed with H. habilis for some period
of time. The habitat of H. erectus grew rapidly to extend throughout the
temperate regions of Europe and Asia. Fossil evidence in Polynesia
unmistakably shows that H. erectus voluntarily traveled by water for at
least 50 miles, a distance greatly beyond the horizon, i.e. beyond which
destination land masses could be seen. Clearly, to have become familiar
enough with water to be exploring blindly over such distances, some
H. erectus were not only highly stress tolerant but were skilled enough
to navigate water craft. Whether they intentionally fashioned these
watercraft or were opportunistic 'boaters' is unknown.
The underlying point is their evident willingness to increasingly
engage in novel and potentially stressful activities unfamiliar to previous
generations. Unlike most mammals, some H. erectus clearly seem to
have accommodated easily to water. This suggests that at least in some
areas, H. erectus had lifelong familiarity with water; they must have
lived near it, played in it and used it to explore new coastlines. The
enjoyment of water by humans contrasts with the fact that most primates
spend little or no time in the water, so some form of stress tolerance was
needed to alter this situation.
Neanderthals - A High or Low Thyroid Variant?
Neanderthals colonized colder regions, so Crockford describes them as a
cold tolerant variant of their predecessor, H. heidelbergensis. Cold
tolerance is dependent on thyroid hormone production, so Neanderthals
may have been a high thyroid variant of H. heidelbergensis. More
thyroid hormone production could also help explain why Neanderthals
were physically massive. They ate more meat because they had acquired
sufficient hunting skills and because of the lower availability of edible
plants (fruit, nuts, seeds) in northern latitudes with longer cold seasons.
Still, the meat was mostly raw because Neanderthals left little or
no evidence of cooking. This would have resulted in higher thyroid

How Would It Work? 
275
hormone intake than in H. erectus, and might account for faster growth
rate of Neanderthal compared to human infants. Neanderthals may well
have had their own thyroid rhythm distinctive from other pre-humans.
Nevertheless, other attributes suggest Neanderthal had inadequate
access to iodine. Jerome Dobson of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory
in Tennessee notes that several Neanderthal skeletal and morphological
traits are observed in endemically hypothyroid, iodine deficient humans
(cretins). They include muscular hypertrophy, disproportionately long
trunk relative to the short arms and short (bowed) legs, large head, low
forehead, flared nostrils, marked brow ridges, large, rounded eyes, high
bone density and tendency to arthritis.
Dobson describes how early explanations of the bowed femurs of
Neanderthals were variously, but erroneously, attributed to rickets or
arthritis. Rather, he believes that Neanderthals were essentially cretins,
characterized by iodine deficiency from a combination of inefficient
iodine uptake and excessive distance from the iodine-rich foods available
on coasts.
The Venus figurines of the Cro-Magnon of the Upper Paleolithic
period in Europe resemble cretins in the marked curvature of the spine,
protruding belly, retracted (inverted) nipples and visibility of female
genitalia. Dobson suggests that these features were used by the artists
and sculptors of the day to model their figurines not because of some
stylized but distorted female image but because they were prevalent in
many women, most of whom were iodine deficient.
Dobson suggests that periodic sea level fluctuations caused by
continental glaciation 200,000 to 20,000 years ago increased food
competition and population pressures inland. This competition forced
some clans to look for food elsewhere, including on the coasts, where
they inevitably, and fortuitously, found shellfish. Those who established
themselves on the coasts consumed iodine-rich, shore-based foods and
became humans. They were able to force the less competitive clans away
from the coasts and further inland. This would have pushed them towards
the caves and mountains nearer the cold glacier fronts where, generation
after generation, they became progessively more iodine deficient and
where the most classic Neanderthal morphology arose.

276 
Survival of the Fattest
Those with somewhat better but still intermittant access to coastal
food resources had less severe symptoms of iodine deficiency and
became the progressive Neanderthals. Migration from coastal settings
would also help explain the presence at hominid fossil sites of mollusc
shells hundreds of kilometers from their native coastal habitat.
Dobson 
postulates 
that 
a mutation 
helped 
convert 
certain
Neanderthals into the earliest Cro-Magnon stock. By making the uptake
of iodine by the thyroid more efficient, this mutation helped overcome
the nutritional and population pressures created by advancing and
retreating shorelines and allowed both streamlining of the newly human
torso as well as cognitive improvement of the already large brain. In
effect, Dobson suggests that Neanderthals were a diseased version of
Cro-Magnon. He suggests that a genetic mutation increasing the
efficiency of iodine uptake by the thyroid released the Cro-Magnon from
this metabolic stranglehold, particularly on brain function.
The attractive element in such a pathological explanation is that
it accounts for several unexplained features including the probable
co-existence of Neanderthals and Cro-Magnan, the limited cultural
and hunting repertoire of the Neanderthals, and their very rapid
disappearance during less than 10,000 years. Successive waves of
migrants from healthy coastal locations would have contributed to
maintaining clan density in certain areas as well as skill levels for both
hunting and modest cultural advancement. The higher incidence of
symptoms of iodine deficiency in women supports the fossil evidence
suggesting female Nedanderthals were more sedentary and less mobile
because of skeletal pathology and obesity. If Dobson is correct,
Neanderthals are the evidence that iodine deficiency crippled and
eventually killed off the last non-human branch of hominids.
One way the discrepancy might be resolved between Crockford's
high thyroid/iodine and Dobson's low thyroid/iodine explanations of
how thyroid or iodine limitations contributed to the rise and fall of the
Neanderthals is that high protein intake contributes to iodine loss from
the thyroid. Thus, as Crockford proposes, by eating more meat
Neanderthals may well have had higher thyroid hormone intake. This
would have contributed to better cold tolerance and morphological
changes increasing their skeletal and muscle mass. However, high intake

How Would It Work? 
Ill
of meat may have helped deplete iodine, thereby curtailing brain
development in Neanderthals and limiting their cultural and technical
development. Iodine deficiency could then have contributed to the pot-
bellied physique which occurs in present day cretins who can fully
develop physically but are neurologically impaired. A variant of
Neanderthals with more efficient thyroid uptake of iodine and/or better
access to dietary iodine became the Cro-Magnon who noticed and
sculpted the unique anatomical features of iodine deficient Neanderthals
into their figurines before they became extinct.
Fetal Programming
The vulnerability of the brain is mostly within the individual. An iodine
deficient person may be mentally retarded but, if fertile, can still produce
a baby. If it can avoid iodine deficiency, that baby will have the potential
for normal brain development. Environmentally-induced deficits (or
advantages) in development that occur in the parent are not inherited by
the next generation. However, as soon as the egg is fertilized, it becomes
susceptible to the conditions of life. The blueprint for the frame of
the house is laid out but the final form the house takes, i.e. whether it
will have a leaky roof, air conditioning or elegant furnishings, is still
unknown.
Translation of the DNA code into phenotype is sensitive to the
conditions of embryonic and fetal development. Over the past twenty
years, two separate research teams led by British scientists, David Barker
of the University of Southampton and Alan Lucas, originally of
University of Cambridge but now at the Institute for Child Studies in
London, have independently developed this concept, which is called fetal
programming.
Both groups found that environmental stresses causing a human fetus
to develop a little slower or be bom a little smaller could significantly
raise the risk of death from heart disease. Babies born small had higher
risk of premature diabetes, hypertension and death from heart disease.
Smallness was more likely if your mother was small, smoked or had
malnutrition. In effect, environmental conditions that impaired the
function of the placenta or restricted fetal growth had long-term

278 
Survival of the Fattest
ramifications well into adulthood. Regardless of one's nutritional good
fortune after birth, the enhanced risk remained.
Still, higher risk acquired during stressful fetal development can be
attenuated by a healthier post-natal lifestyle, or can be exacerbated by an
unhealthy lifestyle. Low body fat content is a big part of the problem
with slow fetal development and low birth weight, but the reasons why
this is so remain unclear.
Two important points emerge from Barker's and Lucas' observations:
First, getting a full complement of defect-free software (DNA)
doesn't guarantee that the hardware (the organs and body as a whole)
will work perfectly. Translating the genome into all the essential
functions constituting a complete organism is open to manipulation at
various points starting during development of the embryo. Second,
disadvantageous conditions during fetal life increase the risk of
premature heart disease without changing DNA per se. Hence, in effect,
a phenotype for premature heart disease is acquired before birth, not
because of a defect in the DNA code itself but because of the way the
code is interpreted as the fetal cardiovascular system is developing.
Genetic control of protein synthesis, enzyme activity, thyroid
hormone levels, etc., is responsive to regulatory molecules controlling
gene expression. Gene expression is the flexible aspect of interpreting
DNA. It is where the environment affects development, disease risk and,
in the case of human brain evolution, many aspects of brain maturation
and function from neurogenesis to myelination to memory.
Barker's and Lucas' analysis show that if your mother was small and
you maintain the same lifestyle as your mother (especially if you are a
woman), you are more likely to be smaller in stature and to transfer that
smallness to your baby. Your DNA complement remains unaffected but
its translation is compromised. With careful attention to an optimal
lifestyle, this situation can reverse at the same rate that it can deteriorate.
In effect, the environment can impose on natural selection and on the
inherited DNA an influence that, though uninherited per se, affects the
second generation. Barker and Lucas have also documented fetal
programming effects predisposing to higher cardiovascular disease risk,
particularly those involving obesity, hypertension, insulin resistance and
diabetes. Others, like Lucille Hurley's group at the University of

How Would It Work? 
279
California-Davis showed twenty years ago that the immune system in
mice likewise remains 'scarred' for multiple generations by malnutrition
involving zinc deficiency.
Amongst humans, the second generation usually adopts the same
habits and lifestyle as its parents (the first generation), so the same
environmental influence on phenotype can be propagated to the second
generation and beyond. Negative effects of an adverse environment are
correctable because the genotype has not changed, but they persist as
long as the next generation is raised under the same conditions as the
previous generation. Natural selection determines your genotype but the
environment is the master of its translation into phenotype.
Fetal programming is therefore an important example of non-genetic
multi-generation change in function that affects a variety of organ
systems including the brain, cardiovascular system, the skeleton and the
immune system, in which the genotype is not changed but the phenotype
is, even when the environmental insult is later lifted. This shows that
in addition to changes in genotype, environmental influences can
be transferred to the next generation. There is no (known) change in
genotype, but neither is it Lamarckian inheritance. Rather, fetal
programming is a gray area permitting long term environmental effects
on succeeding generations.
Gene Defects in Nutrient Metabolism
Seriously impaired absorption or metabolism of a single nutrient
is uncommon but genetic defects with this outcome do occur.
Acrodermatitis enteropathica is a rare but devastating and rapidly fatal
disease in which a single gene defect specifically impairs the intestinal
uptake of zinc from the diet. The ensuing serious zinc deficiency impairs
growth, protein synthesis and immune function.
Other examples include Wilson's Disease, which impairs copper
excretion, and phenylketonuria impairing phenylalanine metabolism. In
fact, the adverse impact of these genetic diseases has been overcome
only in the past 50 years and only because ways of environmentally
(nutritionally) managing them have been developed. Thus the negative
effects of single gene mutations depend very much on environmental

280 
Survival of the Fattest
circumstances, particularly the intake of affected nutrients. Clearly,
many gene mutations causing disease affect pathways unrelated to
nutrient metabolism and cannot be corrected by a change in nutrition.
Nevertheless, quite a few mutations do affect nutrient metabolism and
can be largely overcome by altered nutrient intake.
Gene defects causing specific defects in nutrient metabolism are
devastating but still rare diseases. On the other hand, cystic fibrosis is not
only the most common inherited disease in Caucasian males but also
causes more generalized malnutrition. The main problem in cystic
fibrosis is with the function of the pancreas and intestines. As a result,
absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins (but not other nutrients like
minerals, sugars or proteins) is markedly impaired. In the long term,
impaired lung function, a strained immune system and intestinal
malabsorption reduce appetite and food intake and cause malnutrition.
When the first gene for cystic fibrosis was discovered in 1989, many
dared to dream that this was the beginning of the end of cystic fibrosis.
Now, however, over 1,000 different mutations in the cystic fibrosis gene
have been discovered. Most of them are clinically silent (phenotypically
normal). In fact, 70% of symptomatic cystic fibrosis cases have one of
only a dozen different mutations. Scientists studying the molecular
genetics of cystic fibrosis can now tell expectant parents whether their
fetus has no gene for cystic fibrosis, an abnormal but silent gene or, in
the worst case, one of the few versions of the dreaded abnormal gene
actually causing cystic fibrosis. Initially, looking at the DNA sequence
didn't indicate which was which unless the living person was available to
compare the mutations to the presence or absence of the disease.
Cystic fibrosis is a good model of several important features of
gene-nutrient interactions influencing human health: First, it is a
relatively widespread defective gene in humans. Second, it shows how
many silent defective versions of the same gene can exist. Third, it is a
model of how much is still unknown about relating a disease (or
phenotype) outcome to a gene defect. Fourth, its management depends
heavily on effective nutritional intervention. Antibiotics are essential to
the effective treatment of cystic fibrosis but focussed, intensive
nutritional management also makes a big difference to the expected life
span in cystic fibrosis.

How Would It Work? 
281
Cystic fibrosis is an example of why linking human brain evolution to
specific, advantageous gene changes is so challenging. How do we know
which gene changes will be silent and which will be advantageous to
brain function and whether they will depend on certain nutrients or other
environmental variables? How many intended variants of 'smart' mice
have not been heard about because the mutation was silent? Beneficial
nutritional effects on cystic fibrosis take several years to become
obvious; will 'smart' mice still be smarter when they age?
How do Nutrients Affect Gene Expression?
Establishing that gene mutations affecting nutrient metabolism can be
nutritionally managed or altered demonstrates that nutrition and genetics
are not two solitudes. Genes are neither independent of nor more
important than the environment. Whether we are talking about response
to a cold or evolution of the brain, Darwin's 'conditions of existence'
involve a complex dialogue between the genome and the environment.
But how does it work? What is the mechanism by which nutrients affect
gene expression and, ultimately, evolution?
An old but still valid example is one place to get started. In the 1960s,
Myron Winick at Columbia University was one of the first into the yet to
be named field of nutrigenomics. Winick was trying to determine how
indispensible amino acids affect growth and development. He had two
varieties of bacteria, one that could make one of the indispensable amino
acids, histidine, and one that could not. Since the variety that could not
make histidine was in effect lacking an essential nutrient for its growth, it
did not grow well unless histidine was supplied in the culture medium.
However, when the variety lacking the ability to synthesize histidine was
given histidine, it multiplied better than the bacteria that could synthesize
histidine.
One might expect that the two varieties would become equivalent
once histidine was given to those that couldn't make it. On the contrary,
not being able to make histidine was advantageous as long as histidine
was given in the culture medium. Apparently, it was more efficient for
growth in these bacteria to be dependent on the diet for histidine than to
be independent of dietary histidine by being able to make it. Winick's

282 
Survival of the Fattest
interpretation was that if the enzymes usually needed to make histidine
synthesis are no longer necessary because histidine is present in the diet,
more DNA and mRNA are available for other requirements of cell
division and growth.
Eliminating instructions for one amino acid from the cramped space
in the bacterial genome frees up that space for other useful information
that, in Winick's example, seems to have conferred an advantage because
the bacteria depending on diet for histidine grew faster than expected.
Bacteria grow and replicate very quickly so they also evolve quickly. In
effect, histidine became a dietary vitamin and nutrition became of direct
importance in regulating the bacteria's gene expression and evolution.
The trade-off is the dependence upon the environment, in this case, for a
nutritional supply of histidine.
Then why not free up as much space as possible in the genome by
depending on the diet for all nutrients? Organisms do indeed depend on
diet for many nutrients. Some nutrients can be made by some organisms
but not by others, i.e. plants can make the vitamins and other organic
nutrients needed by animals. Other nutrients, like minerals, can't be
made by plants, animals (or bacteria).
The trick is to depend on the diet only for substances (nutrients) found
in good supply in your chosen diet. Don't evolve in a habitat that fully
meets your nutrient needs and then move to a habitat no longer meeting
those needs. This is what has happened with humans during the past
century - we now consume diets that do not meet our needs for brain
selective nutrients and enormous numbers of people are paying the
consequences.
Lipids and Gene Expression
Polyunsaturates directly modify the expression of several genes
controlling the enzymes of fat metabolism, tending to inhibit fatty acid
synthesis and increase fatty acid oxidation. Effects of polyunsaturates on
fat synthesis and oxidation probably have an impact on fetal fat
development in humans but, at the moment, this is entirely unexplored.
Polyunsaturates also control genes for glucose transport into cells. These
are very broad ranging effects that operate at different points controlling

How Would It Work? 
283
the post-transcriptional production of mRNA and hence the amount of
enzyme produced as well as its activity.
One question that arises concerning a change in gene expression that
affects brain function is - are gene-directed changes in function possible
without corresponding changes in metabolism? The brain is energetically
expensive for its size so there is a crude positive relation between
'smartness' and energy requirement of the brain. Perhaps energy
metabolism studies are now being undertaken in genetically modified
strains of 'smart' mice. Do smart mice eat more? Are they leaner or is
there no discernable impact on metabolism of faster learning and better
memory?
This is a key issue in understanding human brain evolution. How
much did human brain evolution, i.e. the evolution of 'smartness',
depend on altering brain energetics? Could hominids have experienced
improvements in intelligence of 50% without needing to eat more food
or would even a 10% improvement demand a commensurate increase in
energy intake?
It is probably naive to expect a simple link between brain function
and energy metabolism because, even in humans of widely varying
intelligence, we are unlikely to ever show that the energy requirements of
the smarter exceed those of the less smart. Although smartness varies
across humans, humans all have larger brains that are more energetically
expensive than in chimpanzees or in H. habilis.
At some point energetics seems to have been involved in brain
expansion and increasing sophistication of neural circuitry but, at another
point, it is not very relevant. Hence, combining the subject of the
molecular genetics of 'smartness' in mice with the subject of energy
metabolism should lead us towards a better understanding of how
energetics may or may not influence the possible advantage of a 'smart
gene'.
Equally, how does iron or iodine deficiency affect the performance of
'smart mice'? Are they more resistant to the functional decline imposed
by iron deficiency, are they more susceptible, or neither? Modeling of
this sort is quite feasible today and should provide a much needed
perspective on the relevance of gene mutations or modified gene
expression to human brain evolution.

284 
Survival of the Fattest
Ultimately, changes in gene expression induced by changing levels of
thyroxine, iodine, iron or other nutrients in one generation are able to
change gene structure before reproduction and transfer of the genome to
the next generation. Naturally, there is no one mechanism for controlling
gene expression, even by a single nutrient. How histidine appears to
work in Winick's humble example does not explain how it works in a
different situation, let alone how polyunsaturates affect gene expression.
Indeed, as this new field of nutrigenomics emerges, there is a blizzard
of new data accompanying the application of new methods that require
verification in real life situations. The next decade should see significant
advances in the understanding of the exact mechanisms by which gene
expression can be permanently changed in the presence of chronically
different nutrient intake.

Chapter 15
Survival of the Fattest
The human brain evolved because certain hominids 
stumbled
serendipitously across solutions to two major constraints on primate
brain size and function, one a metabolic constraint and the other a
structural constraint. The unique cognitive potential of the adult human
brain emerged as a direct consequence of evolving neonatal body fat as
insurance against the metabolic constraint - the voracious fuel needs of
the infant brain. Neonatal body fat improved the fuel supply to the brain
by providing an alternative fuel to glucose in the form of ketone
bodies. Ketone bodies magnified the potential for more sophisticated
communication between neurons, but only because the habitat and diet
permitting the development of body fat simultaneously provided a
richer supply of brain selective nutrients. These nutrients, particularly
docosahexaenoic 
acid, met the need for 
additional 
membrane
complexity, which released the structural constraint on neuronal
connectivity.
Of these two principal constraints, it is the first one - fuel insurance
for the brain - which most clearly distinguishes humans from other
primates. This book is therefore called Survival of the Fattest because the
fattest infants had the most insurance and stood the best chance of
becoming the smartest adults. Whatever best explains the evolution of fat
babies also explains big, advanced brains in humans. A lot of physiology
and biochemistry has to change to improve both brain function and fetal
adiposity and, for the latter, there was no previous primate blueprint. To
evolve fat babies, one is obliged to look to the shores because it was only
there that the habitat and diet were sufficiently stable and abundant,
285

286 
Survival of the Fattest
while also providing a significantly improved supply of brain-selective
nutrients.
Plausibility, Prediction, and Parsimony
The Shore-based Scenario has three important features of a valid theory
- plausibility, prediction, and parsimony. The plausibility is that
compared to all other sources of food, the shore-based food supply is
richest in brain selective nutrients (Tables 6.1 and 7.1 to 7.6). The
hominid and early human fossil record in several parts of Africa supports
purposeful consumption of shore-based foods, particulary shellfish and
catfish, dating back at least two million years.
The prediction is that a functional deficit in brain development will
occur if human infants consume inadequate amounts of shore-based
foods. More specifically, if brain selective nutrients contributed to
gradually improving hominid brain function, then lower intake of these
nutrients should have three important outcomes : 1) it should increase the
risk of impaired brain development in infants, 2) it should increase the
risk of impaired brain function later in adult life, and 3) it should have a
significant negative impact on the evolution of hominids unable to
sustain a liberal dietary supply of energy and brain selective nutrients.
The World Health Organisation's description of the widespread
debilitating vulnerability to iodine and iron deficiency during childhood
is compelling confirmation of the first prediction. Low accumulation
of fat on the fetus in humans, whether through intrauterine growth
retardation or prematurity, confers an increased risk of subnormal
neurological development. With respect to the second prediction
(impaired brain function later in life), many studies now indicate that
Alzheimer's disease is more prevalent in populations consuming low
amounts of fish and other shore-based nutrients. The third prediction is
supported by the extinction of Neanderthals, in whom 'non-competitive'
brain function accompanied large brain size in hominids. The reason for
the demise of the large-brained Neanderthals is unknown but Jerome
Dobson makes a good case for iodine deficiency having a role
(Chapter 14).

Survival of the Fattest 
287
Despite having somewhat larger brain size, subnormal brain function
also occurs in autistic children today. Autism is clearly not a simple
nutrient deficiency but added zinc and iron during childhood can
improve the prognosis. Insufficient food availability does not seem to be
a contributing factor to the defective brain function in either autism nor
in Neanderthals, so the common assumption that improved dietary
energy supply alone was sufficient to account for pre-human brain
expansion is not well supported by these two examples.
Early hominids with somewhat less brainpower either watched and
mimicked those that were slightly brighter who were already gathering
fish and shellfish, or they competed with other primates in a woodland or
savannah environment. If they were the former, they were more likely to
become the gracile Australopithecines and to have the chance to evolve
into H. habilis, H. erectus and, eventually, humans. If they were the
latter, they were more likely to become the robust Australopithecines,
who, by foregoing the abundance and availability of shore-based foods,
unknowingly forfeited the accompanying benefits for the developing
brain. Hence, added dietary energy might have helped get hominid brain
expansion started but, without brain-selective nutrients, was insufficient
to transform a hominid brain into a human brain.
Thusfar, other theories of human brain evolution have not shown this
predictive ability : there is no evidence that low intake of alternative
sources of dietary energy, such as meat or nuts, is associated with
impaired brain function during either early development or during aging.
Hence, diets that are not shore-based may have contained sufficient
energy to meet the requirements of hominid brain expansion but they had
and still have two serious inadequacies for human brain development:
First, they are more likely to create nutrient deficiencies, particularly
of docosahexanoic acid, iron and iodine. Second, plant-based diets
contain anti-nutrients such as phytate and goiterogens, that exacerbate
deficiencies of nutrients such as zinc and iodine, respectively.
The areas of the brain used for hearing need the most energy and are
also the most vulnerable to dietary or congenital iodine deficiency. Good
hearing is a key prerequisite for language, which is a defining feature of
humans. Therefore, it is appropriate to think of iodine as a sentinel
nutrient for human brain evolution because of its intimate link to the

288 
Survival of the Fattest
function of brain areas responsible for hearing and, indirectly, speech.
Conversely, woodlands and grasslands occupied by non-human primates
provided less iodine but these lower iodine levels were in keeping with
lower demand for (and supply of) other brain selective nutrients. Lower
iodine intake in fruit or vegetable-based diets wouldn't prevent other
primates from having good hearing but would prevent a combination of
both good hearing and brain expansion.
As John Langdon of Indianapolis University notes, parsimony is
important in evolutionary theory; if a transformation during evolution
can be completed in one stage instead of two, the simpler version should
be favoured unless there is overwhelming evidence for a more complex
process. The Aquatic Theory requires that the pre-human hominid
lineage go through two adaptive phases. First it had to go from a semi-
arboreal to a semi-aquatic habitat. Once transformed into a bipedal semi-
aquatic ape, a second phase brought the bipedal ape back to terrestrial
subsistence, at which point the semi-aquatic habitat was largely
abandoned. Since some aboriginal groups seem well adapted to harsh
inland settings where brain selective nutrients are clearly more
limiting than on the shores, Langdon claims that the Aquatic Theory
overcomplicates human evolution by adding a shore-based stage where
none was needed.
On the other hand, the Savannah Theory proposes that the transition
to bipedal human from quadrupedal ape involved only one fully
terrestrial but necessarily more dramatic phase. The problem is that the
Savannah Theory overlooks the suboptimal mental function and physical
capacity of many hundreds of millions of iodine and iron deficient
people, mostly in regions distant from the shores. Things may indeed be
too complicated with the Aquatic Theory but they are also a bit too
simple with the Savannah Theory. As Einstein noted, 'explanations
should be made as simple as possible but no simpler'.
Humans have clearly adapted to an incredible variety of ecological
niches worldwide but it is a different matter as to whether they could
actually have evolved in those difficult, challenging conditions where
food resources can be stretched very thin. Once one is the possessor of a
large and sophisticated brain and has access to centuries of training and
experience passed down from previous generations, one is much better

Survival of the Fattest 
289
able to extract the necessities of life from an inhospitable environment.
That is a much different thing than humans actually evolving from
unspecialized hominids in such an inhospitable and competitive setting
as the savannah.
The Shore-based Scenario is the middle ground between the Aquatic
and Savannah Theories, both conceptually and ecologically. It provides
not only the food and lifestyle necessary for human brain evolution, but
also the geographic isolation that is generally more likely to foster
speciation. Crucially, it respects parsimony because it involves only one
phase - humans are still in the shore-based phase. Humans have explored
other niches in the past and will continue to do so in the future but we are
still best adapted to, and dependent on, a shore-based food supply.
Scars of Evolution
Support for the concept that we are best adapted to the shores is
provided by a suite of diseases or chronic degenerative conditions to
which humans are particularly vulnerable. Elaine Morgan describes
these problems, particularly involving the joints and back, as scars
of evolution (see Chapter 12). Leigh Broadhurst, Michael Crawford,
Marc Verhaegen, Artemis Simopoulos, Loren Cordain and others add
heightened susceptibility to several life-threatening degenerative diseases
(atherosclerosis, hypertension, and insulin resistence) to Morgan's list of
scars. A great deal of epidemiological evidence as well as numerous
intervention trials demonstrate that humans consuming a shore-based diet
are less vulnerable to these scars.
It is the ongoing developmental vulnerability of the infant brain which
is the most significant scar of all. Humans didn't need to become divers
or swimmers, nor did we need to become spear-wielding hunters to avoid
these scars, but we did need moderately frequent access to a shore-based
diet. The key trick to improving cognitive function during human
evolution was to avoid exposing the brain's increasing developmental
vulnerability as it expanded. This masking of developmental fragility
was essential to refining brain function and was something that no other
land-based species accomplished. Ongoing brain vulnerability during
infancy makes it abundantly clear that humans have not yet distanced
themselves from shore-based nutrition.

290 
Survival of the Fattest
Improved problem-solving skills led to humans exploring and
establishing themselves in inhospitable environments including the
Arctic, the deserts, and remote inland or moutaineous regions. By
discovering and legislating iodine supplements early in the 20th century,
we have, in effect, modified the inhospitable low iodine environment
inland. In so doing, the catastrophe of acutely impaired brain
development has largely been avoided in many countries. Seven hundred
million iodine deficient people worldwide attest to the fact that this
success is still incomplete but that the failure is more political and
logistical than scientific.
Environmental Permissiveness
There is great interest today in understanding the role of genes in human
brain evolution. One important challenge facing these studies is to
explain how genes that would have promoted increasing hominid brain
size during a 2 to 3 million year period stalled and then reversed the
increase thereby allowing the fairly rapid (although still small; see
Chapter 2) decrease in human brain size during the past 30,000 years. Is
it reasonable to postulate that gene-dependent processes account first for
the increase, and then changed sufficiently to account for the subsequent
decrease in brain size? In addition, is it reasonable to postulate that gene
changes affecting brain size and sophistication coincided with those
permitting additional body fat deposition so that brain expansion could
be fuelled?
The environment or the diet can wax or wane; that is the nature of
environmental events; sometimes environmental events make life more
difficult but sometimes they can be permissive and make life easier in
those who are genetically prepared to take advantage of the change. On
the other hand, genetic information is more constitutive, so reversal of a
'beneficial' mutation is highly unlikely. Reversal of brain expansion in
humans makes it implausible that genetic factors alone were the
dominant force in propelling the changes in brain size and function
leading to present day humans. Rather, the key to hominid brain
expansion was environmental permissiveness (of the shore-based
habitat), which still respects the requirements of natural selection and the
role of genes but removes the pressure of survival as a speciating force.

Survival of the Fattest 
291
Dolphins
Dolphins are perhaps the most cognitively advanced species after
humans. Amongst the large mammals, their brain size relative to body
weight comes closest to that of humans (1.0% compared to 2.2% in
humans; see Table 2.1). Dolphins have some interesting behavioural
capacities that until recently were believed to be uniquely human,
including mirror self-recognition, the ability to understand artificial and
symbol-based communication, and the inter-generational transfer of
behaviours that can be equated with a form of culture.
Humans and dolphins have two other attributes in common besides
large, cognitively advanced brains and certain behavioural similarities :
they both have marked body fatness and a marine food supply. Dolphin
body weight is 18-20% fat and up to 70% of the energy in their maternal
milk is provided by fat. Their cold water, marine environment clearly
demands a high energy intake in order to maintain body temperature but
this high fat intake also serves to fuel the large developing brain.
Dolphins subsist principally on fish and squid, both of which are rich
sources of docosahexaenoic acid and brain selective minerals. The shore-
based/marine food supply therefore seems to have been a crucial
component in the evolution of the large brain and advanced cognitive
capabilities common to both humans and dolphins.
Still, the dolphin brain has much more folding and a thinner
'neocortex' than in humans. It also evolved much earlier and under
different circumstances than the human brain. Therefore, at best, one can
say that the similarities between human and dolphin brain function
represent convergent evolution. Nevertheless, docosahexaenoic acid is a
prerequisite for normal brain function in all species in which the
relationship has been studied so it is beyond reasonable doubt
that dolphins would be cognitively advanced without consuming
docosahexaenoic acid from fish.
Shore-Based Adaptations
Anna Gislen of the University of Lund has described the unmatched
underwater visual acuity of the Moken 'sea gypsy' children of Thailand's
Surin Islands who can gather shellfish at depths of 3 to 4 meters

292 
Survival of the Fattest
underwater without the aid of goggles. The Meriam children of the Island
of Mer in the Torres Straits off Australia perform likewise. In contrast,
untrained 'landlubbers' have poor visual acuity underwater and, without
goggles, are unable to duplicate the skill of these children.
In fact, several present day traditional hunter-gatherers exploit shore-
based food resources, sometimes in very inhospitable environments : The
Inuit hunt seal, walrus and polar bear on Arctic ice floes. In northern
Quebec, they also go underneath the coastal ice to collect shellfish at low
tide. The Ama of Korea and Japan, push the extremes of endurance to
make a living by diving for undersea shellfish. Hence, exploitation of
shore-based food resources is familiar to a wide variety of human
populations in tropical as well as polar environments.
The origin of many human features such as relative hairlessness,
bipedalism, and subcutaneous fat is contentious, whether explained by
the Aquatic or Savannah Theory. In compiling the evidence supporting
the Aquatic Theory of human evolution, Hardy, Morgan, Verhaegen, and
others propose these features arose as adaptations of early hominids to an
aquatic or semi-aquatic environment. But as Derek Ellis points out, the
adaptations of aquatic and semi-aquatic mammals to their chosen habitat
differ depending on the species. Some aquatic mammals are relatively
hairless, others aren't. Some possess a significant layer of subcutaneous
fat, others don't. Some are opportunistically bipedal, others aren't. There
really is no single, fixed mammalian 'aqua-type' to which humans
conform.
It is uncommon but not unheard of for terrestrial mammals other than
humans to have the so-called diving reflex which appears specially
evolved for aquatic life. However, the diving reflex can apparently be
induced in the dog, which did not have an aquatic evolutionary phase.
Accordingly, diving is not the only possible explanation for the diving
reflex in humans. Hence, cataloguing human features that are analogous
to those in certain aquatic or semi-aquatic mammals inevitably leads to
some degree of selectivity. Physiological, morphological or behavioural
features compatible with aquatic life are not enough evidence for
evolution via water.
Could the diving reflex have arisen in humans because of something
other than an aquatic phase in evolution? Perhaps its presence in humans

Survival of the Fattest 
293
has another explanation, i.e. arising from convergent evolution related
more to respiratory control for speech than for diving. Like speech, that
still makes the diving reflex fairly unique in humans and perhaps
dependent on some aspect of a semi-aquatic phase in evolution but not
necessarily because of diving. The same issues arise with other human
features supposedly having evolved in an aquatic or, indeed, savannah
environment. However, in the context of needing the shores for human
brain evolution, other features of the human body that may or may not be
so clearly dependent on shore-based evolution become more plausible.
Exploration by Sea
Notwithstanding the possibility that certain apparently shore-based
adaptations like good underwater visual acuity or the diving reflex could
have evolved in response to non-aquatic stimuli, their utility in the
context of shore-based activities merits comment. The most obvious use
(exaptation) that longterm exposure to inland or maritime shores would
have for a bipedal hominid is to provide the opportunity to explore the
coasts both on foot and by water. For instance, Australia was discovered
at least 50,000 but perhaps as much as 80,000 years ago. To get to
Australia required travel by water for a minimum of 50 miles (90
kilometers). Some form of watercraft was therefore needed that was
seaworthy for a period of perhaps a week if not more.
Fifty to one hundred thousand years ago, the hominids that made it to
Australia were probably H. sapiens, but trips of that distance would have
been preceded by a great deal of short distance travel. Hundreds of
thousands of years would have been needed to acquire the skills and
confidence to explore to such distances. Longterm shore-based existence
would have been an obvious prerequisite to such a process of
familiarization with boat building and the hazards of ocean travel. More
recently but equally challenging, the discovery of the Americas
increasingly seems to have been via coastal routes from Northeast Asia.
At least 500,000 years ago, H. erectus became widely dispersed from
Africa to the Middle East, China, and southeast Asia. Some of that
exploration might have been by sea but much clearly must have occurred
on foot. The acquisition of skills for ocean navigation by no means

294 
Survival of the Fattest
excludes other forms of exploration; on the contrary, they are
complimentary because inland bodies of water on all the continents,
especially large rivers, can present formidible obstacles to unassisted
land-based exploration.
Hence the Shore-based Scenario is not only compatible with the
major events in pre-human and early human evolution, it explains their
circumstances more parsimoniously than other theories that exclude
shore-based subsistence. The events of significance in human evolution
start with the emergence of bipedalism and the evolution of fat babies
and larger brains. They extend to the comparatively recent discovery of
Australia and the Americas. Whether inland or on the seacoasts, these
events were most plausibly a consequence of shore-based subsistence.
Most importantly, the Shore-based Scenario offers a clear rationale for
the most important hangover of human evolution - the ongoing
developmental vulnerability that is peculiar to the brain.

Bibliography
Adam PAJ, Raiha N, Rahiala EL, Kekomaki EL. Oxidation of glucose and D-Beta-
hydroxybuyrate by the early human fetal brain, Ada Paediatr. Scand. 64, 17-24,
1975.
Aeillo LC and Dean C. Introduction to Human Evolutionary Anatomy. Academic, New
York, 1990.
Aiello LC, Wells JCK. Energetics and evolution of the genus Homo. Ann Rev Anthropol
31, 323-338, 2002.
Aeillo LC, Wheeler P. The expensive-tissue hypothesis. The brain and the digestive
system in human and primate evolution. Current Anthropol 36, 199-221, 1995.
Allen JS, Damasio H, Grabowski TJ. Normal neuroanatomical variation in the human
brain. An MRI-volumetric study. Am J Phys Anthropol 118, 341-358, 2002.
Andersen HT. Physiological adaptations in diving vertebrates. Physiol Rev 46, 212-243,
1966.
Armstrong E. Relative brain size and metabolism in mammals. Science 230, 1302-1304,
1983.
Arthur JR. Functional indicators of iodine and selenium status. Proc Nutr Soc 58,
507-512, 1999.
Balazs R, Brooksbank BWL, Davison AN, Eayrs JT, Wilson DA. The effect of neonatal
thyroidectomy on myelination in the rat brain. Brain Resarch 15,
219-232, 1969.
Barker DJP. Maternal nutrition, fetal nutrition, and disease in later life. Nutrition 13,
801-813, 1997.
Barinaga M. What makes brain neurons run? Science 276, 196-198, 1997.
Barton RA, Harvey PH. Mosaic evolution in brain structure in mammals. Nature 405,
1055-1058, 2000.
Battaglia FC, Meschia G. Fetal and Neonatal Physiology. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK, 1973.
Battaglia FC, Thureen PJ. Nutrition of the fetus and premature infant. Nutrition 13,
903-906, 1997.
295

296 
Survival of the Fattest
Bazinet RP, McMillan EG, Seebaransingh R, Hayes AM, Cunnane SC. Whole body beta-
oxidation of linoleate and alpha-linolenate in the pig varies markedly with weaning
strategy and dietary alpha-linolenate. J Lipid Res 44, 314-319, 2003.
Benton D. Selenium intake, mood and other aspects of psychological functioning. Nutr
Neurosci 5, 363-374, 2002.
Bliss TVP. Young receptors make smart mice. Nature 401, 25-27, 1999.
Blumenberg B. The evolution of the advanced human brain. Current Anthropol 24,
589-622, 1983.
Bogin B. Evolutionary hypotheses for human childhood. Yearbook Physical Anthropol
40, 63-89, 1997.
Bower JM, Parsons LM. Rethinking the 'lesser' brain. SciAmer 289, 50-57, 2003.
Boyd Eaton S, Eaton SB, Sinclair AJ, Cordain L, Mann NJ. Dietary intake of long chain
polyunsaturated fatty acids during the paleolithic. World Rev Nutr Diet 83, 12-23,
1998.
Brace CL, Montagu A. Man's Evolution: An Introduction to Physical Anthropology.
MacMillan, London, 1965.
Bradshaw JL. Encephalization and Growth of the Brain. Ch. 8 (p. 145-156) in Human
Evolution and Neuropsychological Perspective. Psychology Press, Hove, UK. 1997.
Brent GA, Moore DD, Larsen PR. Thyroid hormone regulation of gene expression. Annu.
Rev. Physiol53, 17-35, 1991.
Broadhurst CL, Cunnane SC, Crawford MA. Rift Valley lake fish and shellfish provided
brain-specific nutrition for early Homo. Brit JNutr 79, 3-21, 1998.
Broadhurst CL, Wang Y, Crawford MA, Cunnane SC, Parkington JE, Schmidt W. Brain-
specific lipids from marine, lacustrine or terrestrial fodd resources; potential impact
on early African Homo sapiens. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. Part B 131, 653-673. 2002.
Burton JH, Price TD. The ratio of barium to strontium as a paleodietary indicator of
consumption of marine resources. J Archeolog Sci 17, 547-557, 1990.
Butte NF, Wong WW, Fiorotto M, O'Brien, Smith E, Garza C. Influence of early feeding
mode on body composition of infants. Biol Neonate 67, 414-414, 1995.
Calvin WH. The emergence of intelligence. SciAmer, 101-107, October 1994.
Chamberlain JG. The possible role of long chain omega 3 fatty acids in human brain
phytogeny. Persp Bio Med 39, 436-445, 1996.
Changeux J-P and Chavaillon J. Origins of the Human Brain. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1995.
Chisholm BS, Nelson DE, Schwarcz HP. Stable carbon isotope ratios as a measure of
marine versus terrestrial protein in ancient diets. Science 216, 1131-1132, 1982.
Chou HH, Hayakawa T, Diaz S. Krings M, Indriati E, Leakey M, Paabo S, Satta Y,
Takahata N, Varki A. Inactivation of CMP-iV- acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase
occurred prior to brain expansion during human evolution. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA
99, 11736-11741,2002.
Conroy GC. Reconstructing Human Origins: A Modern Synthesis. WW Norton, New
York, 1997.

Bibliography 
297
Cooper DS. Subclinical thyroid disease: a clinician's perspective. Ann Intern Med 129,
135-138, 1998.
Cordain L, Watkins BA, Florant GL, Kelher M, Rogers L, Li Y. Fatty acid analysis of
wild ruminant tissues. Evolutionary implications for reducing diet-related chronic
disease. Europ J Clin Nutr 56, 1-11, 2002.
Cordain L, Watkins BA, Mann NJ. Fatty acid composition and energy density of foods
available to African hominids. Evolutionary implications for human brain
development. WorldRev. Nutr. Dietet. 90, 144-161, 2001.
Clark DA, Mitra PP, Wang SS-H. Scalable architecture in mammalian brains. Nature
411, 189-193,2001.
Crawford MA, Bloom M, Broadhurst CL, Schmidt W, Cunnane SC, Galli C. Evidence
for the unique function of docosahexaenoic acid during the evolution of the modern
hominid brain. Lipids 34, S39-S47, 1999.
Crawford MA, Costeloe K, Ghebremeskel K, Phylactos A, Skirvin L, Stacey F. Are
deficits of arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acids responsible for the neural and
vascular complications of preterm babies? Amer J Clin Nutr S66, 1032S-1041S,
1997.
Crawford, MA, Cunnane SC, Harbige LS. A new theory of evolution. Quantum Theory.
P. 87-95 in Essential Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids. Invited Papers from the Third
International Congress. Eds. Sinclair A, Gibson R. AOCS Press, Champaign, IL,
1992.
Crawford MA and Marsh D. The Driving Force: Food in Evolution and the Future.
William Heinemann, London, 1989.
Cremer JE. Substrate utilization and brain development. J Cerebral Blood Flow Metab 2,
394-407, 1982.
Crockford SJ. Animal Domestication and Heterochronic Speciation, The Role of Thyroid
Hormone. P. 122-153 in Human Evolution through Developmental Change. Eds
Minught-Purvis N, McNamara KJ. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore,
2002.
Crockford S. Thyroid rhythm phenotypes and hominid evolution. A new paradigm
implicates pulsatile hormone secretion in speciation and adaptation changes. Comp
Biochem Physiol 135, 105-129, 2003.
Cronin JE, Boaz NT, Stringer CB, Rak Y. Tempo and mode in hominid evolution. Nature
292, 113-122, 1981.
Cross KW, Stratton D. Aural temperature of the newborn infant. Lancet ii, 1179-1180,
1974.
Cunnane SC. The aquatic ape theory reconsidered. Med Hypoth 6, 49-58, 1980.
Cunnane SC. New developments in alpha-linolenate metabolism with emphasis on the
importance of beta-oxidation and carbon recycling. World Rev Nutr Dietet 88, 178-
183,2001.
Cunnane SC. Problems with essential fatty acids: Time for a new paradigm? Progr Lipid
Res 42, 544-568, 2003.

298 
Survival of the Fattest
Cunnane SC. Metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids and ketogenesis. An emerging
connection. Prostagl Leukotri Essent Fatty Acids 70, 237-241, 2004.
Cunnane SC, Crawford MA. Survival of the fattest. Fat babies were the key to evolution
of the large human brain. Comp Biochem Physiol 136A, 17-26, 2003.
Cunnane SC, Francescutti V, Brenna JT, Crawford MA. Breast-fed infants achieve a
higher rate of brain and whole body docosahexaenoate accumulation than formula-
fed infants not consuming dietary docosahexaenoate. Lipids 35, 105-111. 2000.
Cunnane SC, Harbige LS, Crawford MA. The importance of energy and nutrient supply
in human brain evolution. Nutr Health 9, 219-235, 1993.
Cunnane SC, Menard CR, Likhodii SS, Brenna JT, Crawford MA. Carbon recycling into
de novo lipogenesis is a major pathway in neonatal metabolism of linoleate and
alpha-linolenate. Prostagl Leukotr Essential Fatty Acids 60, 387-392, 1999.
Cunnane SC, Ryan MA, Nadeau CR, Bazinet RP, Musa-Veloso, K, McCloy U. Why is
carbon from some polyunsaturates extensively recycled into lipid synthesis. Lipids
38, 477-484, 2003.
Darwin C. The Origin of Species. Random House, Toronto, 1998.
Dawkins, R. The Blind Watchmaker. Penguin, London, 1986.
Deacon TW. What makes the human brain different? Ann Rev Anthropol 26, 337-357,
1997.
De Raveglia IF, Gomez CJ, Ghittoni N. Effects of thyroxine and growth hormone on the
lipid composition 
of the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum of developing rats.
Neurobiology 3, 176-184, 1973.
De Urquiza AM, Liu S, Sjoberg M, Zetterstrom RH, Griffiths W, Sjovall J, Perlmann T.
Docosahexaenoic acid, a ligand for the retinoid X receptor in mouse brain. Science
290, 2140-2144, 2000.
Dobson JE. The iodine factor in health and evolution. Geograph Rev 88, 1-28, 1998.
Dussault JH and Ruel J. Thyroid hormones and brain development. Ann Rev Physiol 49,
321-334, 1987.
Eaton SB, Eaton SB, Konner MJ, Shostak M. An evolutionary pespective enhances
understanding of human nutritional requirements. J Nutr 126, 1732-1740, 1996.
Eaton SB, Konner M. Paleolithic nutrition. A consideration of its nature and current
implications. New Engl J Med 312, 283-289, 1985.
Edmond J. Ketone bodies as precursors of sterols and fatty acids in the developing rat. J
Biol Chem 249, 72-80, 1974.
Edmonds CJ. Peripheral metabolism of thyroxine. Journal of Endocrinology 114, pp.337-
39, 1987.
Ehrlich P, Feldman M. Genes and cultures: What creates our behavioral phenome?
Current Anthropol 44, pp.87-107, 2003.
Ekstig B. Condensation of developmental stages and evolution. BioScience 44, 158-164,
1994.
Ellis D. Proboscis monkey and aquatic ape. Sarawak Museum J 57, 251-261, 1986.

Bibliography 
299
Ellis DV. Wetlands or aquatic ape? Availability of food resources. Nutr Health 9,
205-217, 1993.
Eisner N, Schnitzler H-U. Eds. Brain and Evolution. Proceedings of the 24' Gottingen
Neurobiology Conference 1996. Georg Thieme, Stuttgart, 1996.
Enard W, Khaitovich P, Klose J, Zollner S, Heissig F, Giavalisco P, Nieselt-Struwe K,
Muchmore E, Varki A, David R, Doxiadis GM, Bontrop RE, Paabo S. Intra-and
interspecific varitation in primate gene expression patterns. Science 296, 340-343,
2002.
Erecinska M, Silver IA. Iron and energy in mammalian brain. Progr Neurobiol 43, 37-71,
1994.
Evans RM. The steroid and thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. Science 240, 889-895,
1988.
Falk D and Gibson KR. Evolutionary Anatomy of the Primate Cerebral Cortex.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.
Falk D. Hominid paleoneurology. Ann Rev Anthropol 16, 13-30, 1987.
Falk D. Hominid brain evolution. Looks can be deceiving. Science 280, 1714, 1998.
Farquharson J, Cockburn F, Patrick WA, Jamieson EC, Logan RW. Infant cerebral cortex
phospholipid fatty acid composition and diet. Lancet 340, 810-813, 1992.
Farquharson J, Cockburn F, Patrick WA Jamieson EC, Logan RW. Effect of diet on
infant subcutaneous tissue triglyceride fatty acids. Arch Dis Child 69, 589-593, 1993.
Finlay BL, Darlington RB. Linked regularities in the development and evolution of
mammalian brains. Science 268, 1578-1584, 1995.
Francon J, Fellous A, Lennon AM, Nunez J. Is thyroxine a regulatory signal for
neurotubule assembly during brain development? Nature 266, 188-190, 1977.
Gahtan V, Olson ET, Sumpio BE. Molecular biology. A brief overview. J Vase Surg 35,
563-568, 2002.
Godfrey L, Jacobs KH. Gradual, autocatalytic and punctuational models of hominid brain
evolution. A cautionary tale. J Human Evol 10, 255-272.
Gancedo B, Alonso-Gomez AL, de Pedro N, Delgado MJ, Alonso-Bedate M. Changes in
Thyroid Hormone Concentrations and Total Contents through Onctogeny in Three
Anuran Species: Evidence for Daily Cycles. Gen Comp Endocrinol 107, 240-250,
1997.
Geelhoed GW. Metabolic maladaptation: individual and social consequences of medical
intervention in correcting endemic hypothyroidism. Nutrition 15, 11-12, 1999.
Gislen A, Dacke M, Kroger RHH, Abrahamsson M, Nilsson DE, Warrant EJ. Superior
underwater vision in a human population of sea gypsies. Current Biology 13,
833-836, 2003.
Goldey ES, Kehn LS, Rehnberg GL, Crofton KM. Effects of developmental
hypothyroidism on auditory and motor function in the rat. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
135, 67-76, 1995.
Gould SJ. Ever Since Darwin: Reflections in Natural History. Burnett Books, London,
1978.

300 
Survival of the Fattest
Gould SJ. The Mismeasure of Man. WW Norton, New York, 1981.
Gould SJ. Wonderful Life. Penguin, London 1989.
Gould SJ, Lewontin RC. Spandrels of San Marco and the Panglossian paradigm: a
critique of the adaptationist programme. Proc Royal Soc London B205, 581-598,
1979.
Gunton JE. Iodine deficiency in ambulatory participants at a Sydney teaching hospital: is
Australia truly iodine replete? Med JAustral 171, 467-470, 1999.
Hack M, Flannery DJ, Schluchter M, Cartar L, Borawski E, Klein N. Outcomes in young
adulthood for very low birth weight infants. New Engl J Med 346, 149-157, 2002.
Hack M, Breslau N, Weissman B, Aram D, Klein N, Borawski E. Effect of very low birth
weight and subnormal head size on cognitive abilities at school age. New Engl J Med
325, 231-237, 1991
Hack M, Taylor GH, Klein N, Eiben R, Schatschneider C, Mercuri-Minich N. School-age
outcomes in children with birth weights under 750 g. New Engl J Med 331, 753-759,
1994.
Hak AE, Pols HAP, Visser TJ, Drexhage HA, Hofman A, Witteman JCM. Subclinical
hypothyroidism is an independent risk factor 
for atherosclerosis and myocardial
infarction in elderly women. The Rotterdam study Ann Intern Med 132, 270-278,
2000.
Hardy A. Was man more aquatic in the past? New Scientist 7, 642-645, 1960.
Hardy A. Was there a Homo Aquaticus? Zenith 15, 4-6, 1977.
Harrington TA, Thomas EL, Modi N, Frost G, Coutts GA, Bell JD. Fast and reproducible
method for the direct quantitation of adipose tissue in newborn infants. Lipids, 37,
95-100, 2002.
Hille B. A potassium channel worthy of attention. Science 273, 1677, 1996.
Hirsch J, Farquhar JW, Ahrens, EH, Jr, Peterson ML, Stoffel W. Studies of adipose tissue
in man. Am J Clin Nutr 8, 499-511,1960.
Hladik CM, Chivers DJ, Pasquet P. On diet and gut size in non-human primates and
humans. Is there a relationship to brain size? Current Anthropol 40, 695-698, 1999.
Hofman M. Energy metabolism, brain size and longevity in mammals. Quart Rev Biol
58,495-512, 1983.
Holliday M. Metabolic rate and organ size during growth from infancy to maturity and
during late gestation and early infancy. Pediatrics 41, 169-172, 1971.
Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, Hannon WH, Gunter EW, Spencer CA,
Braverman LE. Serum TSH, T4, and thyroid antibodies in the United States
population (1988-1994): National Health and Nutrition Examintion Survey
(NHANES III). J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87, 489-499, 2002.
Holt AB, Cheek DB. Prenatal hypothyroidism and brain composition in a primate. Nature
243,413-415, 1973.
Horrobin DF. Lipid metabolism, human evolution and schizophrenia. Prostagl Leukotr
Essent Fatty Acids 60, 431-437, 1999.

Bibliography 
301
Horrobin DF. The Madness of Adam and Eve. How Shaped Humanity. Bantam, New
York, 2001.
Hotz CS, Fitzpatrick DW, Trick KD, L'Abbe MR. Dietary iodine and selenium interact
to affect thyroid hormone metabolism of rats. J Nutr 127, 1214-1218, 1997.
Jeffery N, Spoor F. Brain size and the human cranial base: A prenatal perspective.
Amer J Phys Anthropol 118, 324-340, 2002.
Jenkins, M. Evolution. Hodder Headline, London, 1999.
Jerison H. Evolution of the Human Brain and Intelligence. Academic Press, London,
1973.
Johanson D and Edey M. Lucy: The Beginnings of Mankind. Touchstone Books, New
York. 1981.
Kahn P, Gibbons A. DNA from an extinct human. Science 277, 176-178, 1997.
Kappelman J. The evolution of body mass and relative brain size in fossil hominids.
J Human Evol 30, 243-276, 1996.
Karten HJ. Evolutionary developmental biology meets the brain: The origin of
mammalian cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94, 2800-2804, 1997.
Kety SS. The general metabolism of the brain in vivo. P. 221-236 in Metabolism of the
Nervous System, Ed. Richter D, Pergamon, London 1957.
Klein AH, Meltzer S, Kenny FM. Improved prognosis in congenital hypothyroidism
treated before age three months. J Pediatr%\, 912-915, 1972.
Klein RG. Whither the Neanderthals? Science 299, 1525-1527, 2003.
Kondo K, Levy A, Lightman SL. Effects of maternal iodine deficiency and
thyroidectomy on basal neuroendocrine function in rat pups. J Endocrinol 152,
423-430, 1997.
Krings M, Capelli C, Tschentscher, F, Geisert H, Meyer S, Von Haeseler A,
Grossschmidt K, Possnert G, Paunovic M, Paabo S. A view of Neandertal genetic
diversity. Nature Genetics 26, 44-146, 2000.
Krings M, Geisert H, Schmits R, Krainitzki H, Paabo S. DNA sequence of the
mitochondrial hypervairable region II from the Neandertal type specimen. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 96, 5581-5585, 1999.
Krings M, Stone A, Schmits RW, Krainitzki H, Stoneking M, Paabo S. Neandertal DNA
sequences and the origin of modern humans. Cell 90, 19-30, 1997.
Kuhn, TS. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd Edition. University of Chicago
Press, London, 1970.
La Lumiere LP. Evolution of human bipedalism. A hypothesis about where it happened.
Phil Trans Royal SocLond 292, 103-107, 1981.
Langdon J. Umbrella hypotheses and parsimony in human evolution. A critique of the
Aquatic Ape Theory. J Human Evol 33, 479-494, 1997.
Leakey R. The Origin of Humankind. Basic Books, New York, 1994.
Leakey RE and Lewin R. People of the Lake: Mankind and Its Beginnings. Anchor Press,
New York, 1978.

302 
Survival of the Fattest
Lee-Thorp J, Thackery JF, van der Merve N. The hunters and hunted revisited. J Human
Evol 39, 565-576, 2000.
Leonard WR. Food for thought. Dietary change was a driving force in human evolution.
SciAmer 2$7, 106-115, 2002.
Leonard WR, Robertson ML. Evolutionary perspectives on human nutrition. The
influence of brain and body size on diet and metabolism. Am J Human Biol 6, 77-88,
1994.
Leonard WR, Robertson ML. On diet, energy metabolism, and brain size in human
evolution. Current Anthropol 37, 125-129, 1996.
Leonard WR, Robertson ML, Snodgrass JJ, Kuzawa CW. Metabolic correlates of human
evolution. Comp Biochem Physiol 136A, 5-16, 2003.
Lewin R. How did humans evolve big brains? Science 216, 840-841, 1982.
Lewontin R. The triple helix: Genes, organisms and the environment. Cambridge,
Harvard University Press, 2000.
Lewontin R. It ain't necessarily so. The dream of the human genome and other illusions.
New York Review Books, New York, 2000.
Lindahl T. Facts and artifacts of ancient DNA. Cell 90, 1-3, 1997.
Lovejoy O. The origin of man. Science 211, 341-350, 1981.
Lozoff B, Brittenham GM. Behavioural aspects of iron deficiency. Progr Hematol 14,
23-53, 1986.
Lutz PL, Nilsson GE. The Brain Without Oxygen, 2nd Ed. Chapman and Hall, New York,
1997.
Lumsden CJ and Wilson EO. Promethean Fire: Reflections on the Origin of Mind.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1983.
Mace GM, Harvey PH, Clutton-Brock TH. Brain size and ecology in small mammals.
JZool 193, 333-354, 1981.
MacKinnon, J. The Ape Within Us. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1978.
Martin RD. Relative brain size and basal metabolic rate in terrestrial vertebrates. Nature
293,57-60, 1981.
Martin RD. Scaling of the mammalian brain: the maternal energy hypothesis. News
Physiol Sci 11, 149-156, 1996.
Martinez R, Toledano A. Histochemical study of the metabolism of ketone bodies in the
nervous system. Ada Histochem 38, 218-226, 1970.
McCloy U, Ryan MA, Pencharz PB, Ross RJ, Cunnane SC. A comparison of the
metabolism of eighteen carbon 13C-unsaturated fatty acids in health women. J Lipid
Res 45, 474-485, 2004.
McKinney ML. The juvenilized ape myth. Our 'overdeveloped' brain. Bioscience 48,
109-116, 1998.
Mink JW, Blumenschine RJ, Adams DB. Ratio of central nervous system to body
metabolism in vertebrates: its constancy and functional basis. Amer J Physiol
R203-R212, 1981.

Bibliography 
303
Mitchell JH, Nicol F, Beckett GJ, Arthur JR. Selenium and iodine deficiencies: effects on
brain and brown adipose tissue selenoenzyme activity and expression. J Molec
Endocrinol 155, 255-263, 1997.
Mitchell JH, Nicol F, Beckett GJ, Arthur JR. Selenoprotein expression and brain
development in pre-weanling selenium- and iodine-deficient rats. J Molec Endocrinol
20, 203-210, 1998.
Monastersky R. Children of the C4 world. Did a decline in carbon dioxide concentrations
spur our evolution? Science News 153, 14-15, 1998.
Montagu A. Human Heredity. Second Edition. Signet Science Library Books, Toronto,
1963.
Montagu A. Man: His First Million Years. The New American Library, New York, 1960.
Morgan E. The Descent of Woman. Bantom Books, New York, 1972.
Morgan, E. The Aquatic Ape: A Theory of Human Evolution. Souvenir Press, London,
1982.
Morgan E. The Scars of Evolution: What Our Bodies Tell Us About Human Origins.
Oxford University Press, New York, 1990.
Morgan E. The Descent of the Child: Human Evolution from a New Perspective. Oxford
University Press, New York, 1995.
Morgan E. The Aquatic Ape Hypothesis: The Most Credible Theory of Human Evolution.
Souvenir Press, London, 1997.
Morris D. The Naked Ape. Jonathon Cape, London, 1967.
Morris MS, Boston AG, Jacques PF, Selhub J, Rosenberg IH. Hyperhomocysteinemia
and hypercholesterolemia associated with hypothyroidism in the third US National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Atherosclerosis 155, 195-200, 2001.
Nilsson GE. Brain and body oxygen requirements of Gnathonemus Petersii, a fish with
an exceptionally large brain. J Exper Biol 199, 601-607, 1996.
Oldendorf WH, Cornford ME, Brown WJ. The large apparent work capability of the
blood-brain barrier. A study of the mitochondrial content of capillary endothelial
cells in brain and other tissue of the rat. Ann Neurol 1, 409-417, 1977.
Ovchinnikov I, Gotherstrom A, Romanove P, Kharitonov VM, Liden K, Goodwin W.
Not just old but old and cold? Nature 410, 771-772, 2001.
Ovchinnikov IV, Gotherstrom A, Romanova GP, Kharitonov VM, Liden K, Goodwin W.
Molecular analysis of Neanderthal DNA from the northern Caucasus. Nature, vol
404. PP.490-493, 2000.
Pardridge WM. Blood-brain barrier transport of glucose, free fatty acids, and ketone
bodies. P. 43-53 in Fuel Homeostasis and the Nervous System, ed. Vranic M et al
Plenum, NY, 1991.
Parkington JE. The impact of the systematic exploitation or marine foods on human
evolution. Colloquia of the Dual Congress of the International Association of the
Study of Human Paleontology and the International Society of Human Biologists.
Sun City, South Africa, June 28-July 4, 1998.
Passingham R. What's so special about man's brain? New Scientist 27, 510-511, 1975.

304 
Survival of the Fattest
Passingham RE. Rates of brain development in mammals including man. Brain Behav
Evol26, 167-175, 1985.
Patel MS. Influence of neonatal hypothyroidism on the development of ketone-body-
metabolizing enzymes in rat brain. Biochem J 184, 169-172, 1979.
Patel MS, Owen OE. Development and regulation of lipid synthesis from ketone bodies
by rat brain. J Neurochem 28, 109-114, 1977.
Paulson OB, Newman EA. Does the release of potassium from astrocyte endfeet regulate
cerebral blood flow? Science 237, 896-898, 1987.
Pennisi E. Did cooked tubers spur the evolution of big brains? Science 283, 2004-2005,
1999.
Pharaoah POD, Buttfield IH, Hetzel BS. Neurological damage to the fetus resulting from
severe iodine deficiency during pregnancy. Lancet 13, 308-310, 1971.
Phinney SD. Ketogenic diets and physical performance. Nutr Metab 1, 2, 2004.
Picciano MF. Human milk: nutritional aspects of a dynamic food. Biol Neonate 72,
84-93. 1998.
Pinker S. Revenge of the Nerds, p. 149-210 in How the Mind Works. WW Norton, New
York, 1997.
Pinker S. The Blank Slate. Penguin, New York, 2002.
Pleasure D, Lightman C, Eastman S, Lieb M, Abramsky O, Silberberg D. Acetoacetate
and D-(-)-beta-hydroxybutyrate 
as precursors for sterol synthesis by calf
oligodendrocytes in suspension culture. Extramitochondrial pathway for acetoacetate
metabolism. J Neurochem 32, 1447-1450, 1979.
Pollitt E. Iron deficiency and cognitive function. Ann Rev Nutr 13, 521-537, 1993.
Pollitt E, Metallinos-Katsaras E. Iron deficiency and behaviour. Constructs, methods, and
validity of the findings. Nutr Brain 8, 101-148, 1990.
Porterfield SP. Vulnerability of the developing brain to thyroid abnormalities:
environmental insults to the thyroid system. Environ Health Perspect 102, suppl 2,
125-130, 1994.
Prechtl HFR. New perspectives in early human development. Obstet Gynecol Reprod
Biol 21, 347'-355, 1986.
Previc FH. Thyroid hormone in chimpanzees and humans. Implications for the origins of
human intelligence. Am J Phys Anthropol 118, 402-403, 2002.
Raichle ME. The metabolic requirements of functional activity in the human brain: a
positron emission tomography study. P. 1-4 in Fuel Homeostasis and the Nervous
System, ed. Vranic M et al Plenum, New York, 1991.
Ramkrishnan U. Prevalence of micronutrient malnutrition worldwide. Nutr Rev 60,
S45-S52, 2002.
Relethford JH. Genetics of modern human origins. Annual Rev Anthropol 27, 1 -23, 1998.
Remer T, Neubert A, Manx F. Increased risk of iodine deficiency with vegetarian
nutrition. Brit J Nutr 8, 45-49, 1999.
Rhys Evans PH. The paranasal sinuses and other enigmas. An aquatic evolutionary
theory. J Laryngol Otol 106, 214-225, 1992.

Bibliography 
305
Richards MP, Pettitt PB, Stiner MC, Trinkaus E. Stable isotope evidence for increasing
dietary breadth in the European mid-Uppe Paleolithic. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 98,
6528-6532.
Robillard PY, Chaline J, Chaouat G, Hulsey TC. Preeclampsia/eclampsia and the
evolution of the human brain. Current Anthropol 44, 130-134. 2003.
Roede M, Wind J, Patrick J, Reynolds V. The Aquatic Ape: Fact or Fiction? Souvenir
Press, London, 1991.
Roncagliolo M, Garrido M, Walter T, Peirano P, Lozoff B. Evidence of altered central
nervous system development in infants with iron deficiency anemia at six months.
Delayed maturation of auditory brainstem responses. Amer J Clin Nutr 68, 683-690,
1998.
Routtenberg A, Cantallops I, Zaffuto S, Serrano P, Namgung U. Enhanced learning after
overexpression of a brain growth protein. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA 97, 7657-7662,
2000.
Ruff CB, Trinkaus E, Holiday TW. Body mass and encephalization in Pleistocene Homo.
Nature 387 173-176, 1997.
Sarda P, Lepage G, Roy CC, Chessex P. Storage of medium-chain triglyceride in adipose
tissue of orally fed infants. Am J Clin Nutr 45, 399-405, 1987.
Schultz AH. The Life of Primates. Weidenfeld and Nicholson. 1969.
Schwarcz H. Problems and limitations of absolute dating in regard to the appearance of
modern humans in southwestern Europe. P. 89-106 in Conceptual Issues in Modern
Human Origins Research, Eds. Clark GA, Willermet CM. Walter de Gruyter, New
York, 1997.
Schwarcz HP, Schoeninger MJ. Stable isotope analyses in human nutritional ecology.
Yearbook Phys Anthropol 34, 283-321, 1991.
Sealy JC, van der Merve N. Social, spatial and chronological patterning in marine food
use a determined by 13C measurements of Holocene human skeletons from the south-
western Cape, South Africa. World Archeol 20, 87-102, 1988.
Shreeve, J. The Neandertal Enigma: Solving the Mysteries of Modern Human Origins.
William Morrow, New York, 1995.
Smith RJ. Biology and size in human evolution. Statistical inference misapplied. Current
Anthropol 37, 451-481, 1996.
Smith RJ. Estimation of body mass in paleontology. J Human Evol 43, 271-287, 2002.
Smith SV, Rroopnick P. Carbon-13 isotopic fractionation as a measure of aquatic
metabolism. Nature 294, 252-253, 1981.
Sokoloff L: Measurement of local cerebral glucose utilization and its relation to local
functional activity in the brain. P. 21-42 in Fuel Homeostasis and the Nervous
System, ed. Vranic M et al Plenum, NY, 1991.
Sorcini M, Balestrazzi P, Grandolfo ME, Carta S, Giovanelli G. The national register of
infants with congenital hypothyroidism detected by neonatal screening in Italy.
J Endocrinol Invest 16, 573-577, 1993.

306 
Survival of the Fattest
Sorensen MV, Leonard WR. Neandertal energetics and foraging efficiency. J Human
Evol 40, 483-495, 2001.
Sponheimer M, Lee-Thorp JA. Isotopic evidence for the diet of an early hominid,
Australopithecus africanus. Science 283, 368-370, 1999.
Sponheimer M, Lee-Thorp JA. Differential resource utilization by extant great apes and
australopithecines. Towards solving the C4 conumdrum Comp Biochem Physiol
136A, 21-14, 2003.
Staub JJ. Minimal thyroid failure: effects on lipid metabolism and peripheral target
tissues. Europ J Endocrinol 138, 137-138, 1998.
Steudel-Numbers KL. The energetic cost of locomotion. Humans and primates compared
to generalized endotherms. J Human Evol 44, 255-262, 2003.
Stewart KM. Early hominid utilisation of fish resources and implications for seasonality
and behaviour. J. Human Evol., 27, 229-245, 1994.
Stewart K. A report on the fish remains from Beds I and II sites, Olduvai Gorge,
Tanzania. Darmst Beitrag Naturgesch 6, 263-269, 1996.
Stringer C. Coasting out of Africa. Nature 405, 24-27, 2000.
Stringer C. Out of Ethiopia. Nature 423, 692-694, 2003.
Svennerholm L, Bostrom K. Changes in weight and composition of major membrane
components of human brain during the span of adult life of Swedes. Ada
Neuropathol 94, 345-352, 1997.
Swisher CC, Curtis GH and Lewin R. Java Man: How Two Geologists' Discoveries
Changed Our Understanding of the Evolutionary Path to Modern Humans. Scribner,
New York. 2000.
Tang Y-P, Shimizu E, Dube GR, Rampon C, Kerchner GA, Zhuo M, Liu G, Tsien JZ.
Genetic enhancement of learning and memory in mice. Nature 401, 63-68, 1999.
Tattersall I. Becoming Human: Evolution and Human Uniqueness. Harcourt, Brace and
Company. New York, 1998.
Tattersall I, Matternes JH. Once we were not alone. Sci Amer, 56-62, Jan 2000.
Tauber H. Carbon-13 evidene for dietary habits of prehistoric man in Denmark. Nature
292, 332-333, 1981.
Teaford MF, Ungar PS. Diet and the evolution of the earliest human ancestors. Proc Natl
AcadSci USA 97, 13506-13511, 2000.
Templeton AR. Testing the Out of Africa Replacement Hypothesis with Mitochondrial
DNA Data. P. 329-360 in Conceptual Issues in Modern Human Origins Research,
Eds. Clark GA, Willermet CM. Walter de Gruyter, New York, 1997.
Thurston JH, Hauhart RE, Dirgo JA, Levine SK, Jones EM, Ikossi-O'Connor MG, Pierce
RW, Pollock PG. Selected Blood and Brain Metabolites as an Index of Cerebral
Energy Metabolism in Newborn and Developing Mice. P. 271-281 in Cerebral
Metabolism and Neural Function, Eds. Passonneau JV, Hawkins RA, Lust WD,
Welsh FA. Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, 1980.
Tobias PV. Some aspects of the multi-faceted dependence of early humanity on water.
Nutr. Health, 16, 13-17, 2002.

Bibliography 
307
Towers HM, Schulze KF, Ramakrishnan R, Kashyap S. Energy expended by low birth
weight infants in the deposition of protein and fat. Pediatr Res 41, 584-589, 1997.
Ulijaszek SJ. Energetics and human evolution. P. 166-175 in Human Energetics in
Biological Anthropomtery. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1995.
Ulijaszek SJ. Comparative energetics of primate fetal growth. Am J Hum Biol 14,
603-608, 2002.
Van der Heyden JTM, Van Toor H, Wilson JHP, Hennemann G, Krenning EP. Effects of
caloric deprivation on thyroid hormone tissue uptake and generation of low-T3
syndrome. Amer J Physiol E156-E163, 1986.
Van der Merve NJ, Thackeray JF, Lee-Thorp JA, Luyt J. The carbon isotope ecology and
diet of Australopithecus africanus at Sterkfontein, South Africa. J Human Evol 44,
581-597,2003.
Vanderpas JB, Contempre B, Duale NL, Goossens W, Bebe N, Thorpe R, Ntambue K,
Dumont J, Thilly CH, Diplock AT. Iodine and selenium deficiency associated with
cretinism in northern Zaire. Amer J ClinNutr 52, 1087-1093, 1990.
Vanderpump MPJ, Tunbridge WMG, French JM, Appleton D, Bates D, Clark F, Grimly
Evans J, Hasan DM, Rodgers H, Tunbridge F, Young ET. The incidence of thyroid
disorders in the community. A twenty year follow-up of the Wickham Survey. Clin
Endocrinol 43, 55-68, 1995.
Venturi S, Venturi M. Iodide, thyroid and stomach carcinogenesis. Evolutionary story of
a primitive antioxidant? Europ J Endocrinol 140, 371-372, 1999.
Venturi S, Donati FM, Venturi M, Venturi M. Environmental iodine deficiency. A
challenge to the evolution of terrestrial life. Thyroid 10, 727-729, 2000.
Verhaegen MJB. The aquatic ape theory and some common diseases. Med Hypotheses
24, 293-300, 1987.
Verhaegen M. Aquatic Ape Theory, speech origins and brain differenes with apes and
monkeys. Med Hypotheses 44, 409-413, 1995.
Verhaegen M. Aquatic theory, the brain cortex and language origins. Revision 18, 34-78,
1995.
Verhaegen M. Aquatic features in fossil hominids? P 75-114 in The Aquatic Ape: Fact of
Fiction? Eds. Roede M, Wind J, Patrick JM, Reynolds V. Souvenir Press, London,
1991.
Verma M. Raghuvanshi RS. Dietary iodine intake and prevalence of iodine deficiency
disorders in adults. J Nutr Environ Med 11, 175-180, 2001.
Vranic M et al. Editors, Fuel Homeostasis and the Nervous System, Plenum, NY, 1991.
Wade N. The New York Times Book of Genetics. The Lyon Press, Guilford,
Connecticut, 1998.
Walrath D. Rethinking pelvic typologies and the human birth mechanism. Current
Anthropol 44, 5-31,2003.
Walravens P, Chase HP. Influence of thyroid on formation of myelin lipids. J Neurochem
16, 1477-1484, 1969.

308 
Survival of the Fattest
Walter RC, Buffler RT, Bruggemann JH, Guillaume MMM, Selfe SM, Negassi B,
Llibeski Y, Cheng H, Edwards RL, von Cosal R, Neraudeau D, Gagnon M. Early
human occupation of the Red Sea coast of Eritrea during the last interglacial. Nature
405, 65-69, 2000.
Weetman AP. Hypothyroidism. Screening and subclinical disease. Brit Med J 314,
1175-1178, 1997.
Whiting B A and Barton RA. The evolution of the cortico-cerebellar complex in primates.
Anatomical connections predict patterns of correlated evolution. J Human Evol 44,
3-10,2003.
Widdowson EM, Changes in body proportion and composition during growth. P. 153-163
in Scientific Foundations of Pediatrics. Eds. Davies JA, Dobbing J. Heinemann,
London, 1974.
Wiener R, Hirsch HJ, Spitzer JJ. Cerebral extraction of ketones and their penetration into
CSF in the dog. Am J Physiol 220, 1542-1546, 1971.
Wildman DE, Uddin M, Liu G, Grossman LI, Goodman M. Implication of natural
selection in shaping 99.4% nonsynonymous DNA identity between humans and
chimpanzees: Enlarging genus Homo. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100, 7181-7188,
2003.
Willis D. The Hominid Gang: Behind the Scenes in the Search for Human Origins.
Viking, New York, 1989.
Wood B. Hominid palaeobiology: Have studies of comparative development come of
age?AmerJPhysAnthropol 99,9-15. 1996.
Wynn M, Wynn A. Human reproduction and iodine deficiency: Is it a problem in the
UK? J Nutr Environ Med 8, 53-64, 1998.
Zivin JA, Snarr JF. Glucose and D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate uptake by isolated perfused rat
brain. J Appl Physiol 32, 664-668, 1972.

Index
Abdominal fat (see Body fat) 
Adipocyte(s), 84, 89
Aborigine(al), 
early development, 97
adaptation, to harsh environments, 
triglyceride, 85
288 
Adrenal,
Ama, 292 
thyroid hormone, 267
Inuit, 206, 292 
Aeillo, Leslie, 204
Ituri Pygmies, 220 
Afar, 244
!Kung Bushman, 220 
lakes, 244
leisure time, 220 
Gulf, 247
societies, 220 
Isthmus, 245, 247 (see also
Absorption, nutrients (see individual 
Danakil)
nutrients) 
Triangle, 245
Acetoacetyl Co A (see also Ketone 
Affect, 135 (see also Iron Deficiency)
bodies), 68 
Africa, 213 (see also Climate; Fossils;
Acetone (see Ketone Bodies) 
Kenya; Rift Valley; specific
Acetyl CoA, 68 
countries)
Acheulian hand axe, 15 
East, 223
Acid (see individual fatty, amino acids 
Ethiopia, 244 (see also Afar)
by name) 
hominid speciation, 247
Acrodermatitis enteropathica, 113, 138, 
lakes, 243 (see also individual
279 (see also Zinc) 
names; Lake -)
Adaptability (see also Exaptation, 
Somalia, 245
Plasticity), 200-201 
South, 223
Adaptation, to environment, 101, 199, 
Tanzania, 243
207, 288 
volcanoes, 213, 243
phases (see Aquatic Theory) 
Age (aging), 33
shores, 291 (see also Shore-based 
(see also Brain, aging)
Scenario) 
Agriculture, 24, 49, 113, 202
Adenosine triphosphate (see ATP) 
Allen, John, 34
309

310 
Survival of the Fattest
Allometry (ical), 34 (see also 
Aquatic Ape Theory: Evidence and
Encephalisation Quotient) 
Possible Scenarios, 229 (see also
Alpha-linolenic acid, 81, 94 (see also 
Aquatic Theory; Verhaegen, Marc)
Polyunsaturates) 
Aquatic Ape Theory Reconsidered, The,
animal fat, 161 
228 (see also Aquatic Theory;
brain, 170 
Cunnane, Stephen)
cholesterol, 170 
Aquatic Theory, 224, 225, 227-228,
infant body fat, 155 
234, 241
metabolism, 154, 168 
bipedalism, 233
oxidation, 169 
body fat, 228
plants, 160 
brain enlargement, 237
recycling, 169-170 
fossils, 243
Altricial, species, 53 
hair tracts, 232
Ama, 292 (see also Aborigines) 
Homo erectus, 237
America(s), 294 (see also USA) 
Neanderthals, 237
Amino acids, (see also Phenylketonuria; 
phases, 287, 288
specific amino acids) 
wading, 233
brain, 72 
Arachidonic acid, 81, 82
essential (indispensable), 112 
brain, 166, 167, 237
histidine, 281-282 
brain transport, 172
iron, 135 
eicosanoids, 154,165, 166
Anemia (see Iron deficiency) 
infant body fat, 155-156, 168
Anoxia (see Oxygen) 
inflammation, 165
Antecessor, Homo (see Homo 
meat, 167
antecessor) 
peroxidation, 140
Anti-nutrients, 145, 287 (see also 
synthesis, 154
Goiterogens; Nutrient 
zinc, 139, 147
bioavailability; Phytate) 
Archeology, isotope (see Isotopes)
Antioxidants, 136 (see also Copper; 
Arctic, 206-207, 290, 292
Iodine) 
Area, association (see Association area;
Ape (see also Aquatic Ape; Aquatic 
specific brain areas)
Theory) 
Art, cave (see Cave art)
Aquatic, 224 (see also Shoreline) 
Arterio-venous difference (across
Aquatic Ape: A Theory of Human 
brain), 66
Evolution, The, 227 (see also 
Ascorbic acid (see Vitamin C)
Aquatic Theory; Morgan, 
Association area, 41
Elaine) 
(see also Cortex)
Aquatic Ape Hypothesis, 227, 235, 239 
Astrocytes, 51, 62
(see also Aquatic Theory; Morgan, 
Atherosclerosis (see Cardiovascular
Elaine) 
disease)
Aquatic Ape Theory (see Aquatic 
ATP, 70, 77-78, 90, 92 (see also
Theory) 
Copper)

Index 
311
Auditory cortex, 64 (see also Brain) 
Barker, David, 277-278
Australia, 294 
Battaglia, Fred, 97
iodine deficiency, 125 
Beachy, Philip, 167-168
Meriam children, 144 
Becoming Human: Evolution and
Australopithecines (A.), (see also 
Human Uniqueness, 200, 243
Australopithicus; Climate; 
(see also Tattersall, Ian)
Paranthropus), 11 
Behaviour, 105 (see also Development;
biological island, 247 
Human behaviour)
brain evolution, 257 (see also Brain 
adaptation, 199
evolution) 
co-evolution, 192 (see also Culture;
carbon isotope ratios, 259-261 
Genes)
endocasts, brain, 41 
competition, 195
encephalization quotient, 35 
exaptation, 199
fish (see Fish; Hominid) 
genes, 186, 194
foramen magnum, 41 
human, 186, 188
fossil(s), 244 
imprintability, 193
fossil gap (see Fossil gap) 
innate preference, 192, 197
gracile, 236, 287 
(see also Innate)
habitat, 204 
iron deficiency, 135
Homo transvaalensis, 16 
phobia (see Phobia)
iodine, 129 
plasticity, 194
Lucy, 12 
survival, 195
robust (see also Paranthropus), 12, 
technology, 198
236, 287 
Behavioural genetics, 186
shorelines, 216 
Bernard, Claude
venous sinuses, 44 
believe and disbelieve, 11
Australopithicus (see Australopithecine) 
Beta-oxidation (see Fatty acid
Afarensis, encephalization quotient, 
oxidation)
37 
Bioavailability (see Nutrient
Africanus, 12 
bioavailability)
encephalization quotient, 36-37 
Biological,
Garhi, 12 
determinism (see Determinism)
Autism, 40, 287 
island, 247
Axe, hand, Acheulian (see Acheulian 
Biomass (see also Shorelines)
hand axe) 
wetlands, 249
Axon, 25 
Bipedal(ism), 11, 20, 44, 203 (see also
Exaptation; Shore-based evolution)
Baby, babies, (see also Infant) 
Aquatic Theory, 233 (see also
evolution in hominids, xiii 
Aquatic Theory)
fat (see Body fat) 
evolution, 229, 249, 272-273, 288
Back, problems, 235 (see also 
foramen magnum, 41
Bipedalism) 
Lovejoy, Owen, 20

312 
Survival of the Fattest
posture, 235 
fatty acids (see individual fatty
thyroid hormone, 271 
acids; Polyunsaturates), 81
Birds, 
fetus, 82
eggs, 216 (see also Shore-based 
flotation, 80
foods) 
genes, 290
fledgling, 216 (see also Shore-based 
health risks, 76, 217 (see also
foods) 
Cardiovascular disease;
molting, 216 (see also Shore-based 
Obesity)
foods) 
hominids, 75, 217, 234
shore-based, 256 
human, 45, 47, 76, 80, 95, 100, 292
song, 194 
insulation, 76
Birth, 
insurance, 100, 168, 230
developmental vulnerability, 53 
lean animals, 90
pelvic opening, 95 
leisure time (see also Toys)
Birth weight, (see also Fetal 
linoleic acid, 171
progamming) 
malnutrition, 236
low, 96, 97, 277-279 
maternal, 236
Bishop's University, 228 
pear, 79
Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of 
play, 218 (see also Toys)
Human Nature, (see also Pinker, 
polyunsaturates, 155-156, 168 (see
Steven) 192-193 
also Polyunsaturates)
Blood brain barrier, 71 
prematurity, 98
lipoproteins, 71 
primates, 45, 47, 233
Blood supply, 
relative body fat, 45
brain 29, 43 
size, hominids (20)
venous sinuses, 43 
subcutaneous, 45, 79
Body fat (see also Obesity; individual 
temperature, 132
fatty acids; Insurance; Shore-based 
triglyceride, 68
evolution), 31 
visceral, 79
adipocytes, 84 
vulnerability during development,
alpha-linolenic acid, 171 
59
apple, 79 
weight, baby, 47
Aquatic Theory, (see Aquatic 
Bone(s), 210,
Theory) 
carbon isotope ratios, 259-261
arachidonic acid, 168 
fish 
(see Fish; Hominid)
brain development, 75, 80, 99, 156, 
marrow, 211
216, 236 (see also Brain 
Brain,
development) 
aging, 33, 40
childbirth, 95 
alpha-Linolenic acid (see alpha-
distribution, 76, 79-80 
Linolenic acid)
dolphin, 291 
arachidonic acid (see Arachidonic
acid)

Index 
313
area (see also Brain, regions), 64 
function (see Brain function)
asymmetries, 42 
glycogen, 59
base, 44-45 
growth spurt, 107
bipedalism (see Bipedalism) 
Hedgehog, 167
blood flow (see Blood supply, 
iodine (see Iodine)
brain) 
insurance, 100, 164
blood brain barrier (See Blood 
intelligence (see Intelligence)
brain barrier) 
iron (see Iron, also Brain selective
Broca's area, 43 
nutrients)
cell number, 107 
jaw size, inverse relation, 20
cells, 51 (see Astrocytes; Glia; 
language (see Language)
Oligodendrocytes) 
large (see Brain evolution; Brain
cerebellum, 41 
size)
cholesterol (see Cholesterol; Brain) 
linoleic acid (see Linoleic acid)
complexity, see (Brain evolution) 
ketone bodies, 148 (see also
constraints (nutritional, metabolic, 
Ketogenesis; Ketone bodies)
structural), 285 
membrane, 33
cooling, 44 
meningeal vessels, 43
damage, (see Brain damage) 
microcephaly, 181
development, 51 (see Brain 
myelination, (see Myelination;
development) 
Nutrition)
disease (see Disease) 
necessity, better quality diet (see
disorders, 184 (see also Disease) 
Diet, better quality)
docosahexaenoic acid, 164, 285 
nutrition (see Nutrition)
(see also Brain fatty acids; 
region (see Cortex), 64
Docosahexaenoic acid) 
schizophrenia, 185
dolphin, 173, 291 (see also 
selective minerals (see also Brain
Dolphin) 
selective nutrients), 4
dura mater, 43 
selective nutrients (see Brain
endocasts (see Endocasts, brain) 
selective nutrients)
energy requirement (see Brain 
shrinkage (see Brain shrinkage)
energy requirement) 
size, (see Brain size)
evolution (see Brain evolution) 
survival, 8
expansion (see Brain evolution; 
venous sinuses, 43
Brain size) 
volume, 33 (see Brain size)
fatty acids (see Body fat; Brain 
vulnerability, xii, 31, 209, 236
fatty acids; individual fatty 
weight, human brain, 33
acids) 
zinc, (see Zinc)
fish (see Brain evolution; Fish; 
Brain damage,
Shore-based Scenario) 
malnutrition, 213
fuel, 57, 58 (see also Brain energy 
phenylketonuria, 113
requirement; Ketone bodies) 
resistance to, 57

314 
Survival of the Fattest
Brain development, 51, 58 (see also 
synapse function, 71
Iodine) 
thyroid function, 66
apoptosis, 51 
Brain energy substrates
birth weight, low, 104, 105 
glucose, 67
cell migration, 51 
Brain evolution, (see also Culture;
cholesterol, 168 
Docosahexaenoic acid; Genes;
fetal programming, 279 
Shore-based Scenario)
genes, 177 (see also Genes) 
agriculture, 49
growth spurt, 107 
anti-nutrients, 287
Hedgehog, 167 
brain selective nutrients, 149, 287,
iron (see Iron) 
293-294
Neanderthals, 201 
cart before the horse, 5, 212
nutrition (see Nutrition), 106, 
cholesterol, 230
293-294 
competition, 195
phenylketonuria, 113 
constraints, nutritional, metabolic,
plasticity, 58, 201 
structural, 285
polyunsaturates, 156 
diet, 209
prediction (evolutionary theory), 
dolphin, 291
286 
energy requirement, 73
resistance, 57 
exaptation, 200, 201
thyroid hormone, 266, 267 
fish, 
253-257 (see also Fish;
vulnerability, 201, 228, 289, 294 
Hominid)
Zellweger syndrome (see 
genes (see also Genes)
Zellweger syndrome) 
gene-nutrient interactions, 281-284
Brain energy requirement, 60, 62 (see 
human, 3 (see also Aquatic Theory,
also Energy requirement; Brain 
Savannah Theory, Shore-based
energy substrates) 
Scenario)
ATP, 70 
infant, 219
consciousness, 66 
insurance, 100, 230
convulsions, 66 
ketone bodies, 230, 285 (see also
glucose, 60, 64-66 
Ketone bodies)
glycolysis (anaerobic, aerobic), 67 
language (see Language)
heat production, 62 
necessity (for Savannah Theory),
hominid evolution, 94, 202 
212
insurance, 100 
nutrition, 213 (see also Nutrition)
ketone bodies (see Ketone bodies), 
parsimony (evolutionary theory),
69 
286
lactate, 61 
phases, 37
magnetic resonance imaging, 60 
plausibility (evolutionary theory),
newborn, 62 
286
oxygen consumption, 65, 66 
prediction (evolutionary theory),
sodium-potassium pump, 64 
286

Index 
315
impaired neurological 
dolphin, 291
development, 286 
evolution, 230, 285, 287-288 (see
Alzheimer's Disease, 286 
also Brain evolution)
reversal, 39, 290 
grasslands, 115
serendipity, 285 
hominids, 116
shellfish, 257-259 
shore-based foods, 224 (see also
toys, 218 (see also Toys) 
Shore-based diet)
Brain fatty acids, 171 (see also 
toys, 218 (see also Toys)
individual fatty acids) 
vitamin A, 116
alpha-Linolenic acid, 171 
woodlands, 115
arachidonic acid, 172 
Brain shrinkage, 227, 231
docosahexaenoic acid, 163, 172 
Paranthropus, 236
linoleic acid, 171 
savannah herbivores, 236
oleic acid, 167 
Brain size (see also Brain development)
palmitic acid, 147, 167 
autism, 40, 287
stearic acid, 147 
change during hominid evolution,
strategies, 172 
20, 28, 49, 294
Brain function, 
childbirth, 96
consciousness, 29 
Cro-Magnon, 236
docosahexaenoic acid, 158 (see 
dolphin, 290
also Docosahexaenoic acid) 
genes (see Genes; Brain size)
genes (see also Genes), 177 
herbivores, 227
imagination, 29 
human, male versus female, 34
inefficiency, 32 
malnutrition, 106
nutrients (see specific nutrients; 
microcephaly, 181
Brain selective nutrients) 
Neanderthals, 236
problem-solving, 29 
prematurity, 96
stereotypes, 32 
primate embryos, 28
toys, 218 (see also Toys) 
savannah herbivores, 227
Zellweger syndrome, 164 
Brain weight (see Brain size)
Brain selective fatty acid (see Brain 
Breast milk, 113
selective nutrient; Docosahexaenoic 
docosahexaenoic acid, 156, 157
acid) 
Breath-holding, 232 (see also Diving
Brain selective minerals, 291 (see also 
reflex)
Brain selective nutrients; Iodine; 
Brenna, Tom, 170
Iron; Copper; Zinc; Selenium) 
Broadhurst, Leigh, 229, 248, 257, 289
Brain selective nutrients, 4, (see also 
Broca's area, 43, 238
Iodine; Iron; Copper; Zinc; 
Brown, Gillian, 200
Selenium) 
Burial (see Culture, burial)
Australopithecines, 115
brain development, 115 (see also 
C3, C4 plants, 260
Brain development) 
12C (see Carbon-12)

316 
Survival of the Fattest
13C (see Carbon-13) 
Cereals, 118, 119 (see also
Calcium channel (see Channel, 
Carbohydrate; Shore-based foods)
calcium) 
Cerebellum, 41
Cancer, 77, 205 
Cerebral cortex (see Cortex, cerebral)
Carbohydrates, 206 
Cerebrospinal fluid, 33
slowly absorbed, 205 
Ceruloplasmin, 136 (see also Copper)
Carbon, 
Chad, 247, 248
carboxyl, 153 
Channels (calcium, sodium, potassium)
isotopes (see Isotopes) 
25, 27
ketone bodies, 170 (see also Ketone 
Childbirth, 95
bodies) 
brain size, fetus, 96
methyl, 153 
nutritional status, of mother, 96
omega, 153 
Childhood, 220, 221 (see also Children;
polyunsaturates, 169 (see also 
Play; Time)
alpha-Linolenic acid; Linoleic 
Ituri pygmies, 220
acid) 
!Kung Bushman, 220
recycling, 170 
Children, (see also Childhood)
Cardiomyopathy, 140 (see also 
Meriam, 144, 292
Selenium) 
Moken, 144, 291
Cardiovascular disease, 77 
Chimpanzee,
diet, 189 
common ancestor with humans, 9
fetal programming, 277-279 
genes, (see Genes)
selenium, 140 
infant, 48
western diet, 205, 208 
learning (see Learning)
Carp, 57 
tools, primitive, 22
Cart before the horse, 5, 212 
Cholesterol, 88, 89
Carvings (see Cave art) 
brain, 93, 107, 168, 230
Catch 22, 
copper, 136
diet, better quality, 6 
Hedgehog, 168
Catfish (Clarias), 256 (see also Fish; 
ketone bodies, from 93
Hominid) 
Chronic disease (see Disease)
fatness, 255 
Cichlids, 252, 253, 256 (see also Fish;
hominid evolution, 252, 253 
Hominid)
spawning, 255 
Clams, 216 (see also Shore-based
Cave art, 32, 218, 221 
foods)
carvings, 75 
Clarias (see catfish)
Cro-Magnon, 23 
Climate,
Cussac, 75 
Australopithecines, 213
France, 19 
conditions (Pleistocene), 213
sculptures, 75 
East Africa, 217
Venus figurines, 218 
evolution, 4, 5
Cave paintings (see Cave art) 
glaciation, 213

Index 
317
Savannah Theory, 213 
iodine, 146
volcanoes, 213, 243 
iron, 146
Clinical hypothyroidism (see 
lipid metabolism, 147
Hypothyroidism) 
myelin, 135
Clutton-Brock, Tim, 203 
neurotransmitter synthesis, 135,
Coastal, 
136
exploration, 293, 294 
shore-based food, 136
foods (see Shore-based foods) 
Copper deficiency,
marshes (see Shorelines) 
antioxidants, 136
plants (see Shore-based foods) 
cholesterol, 136
Cockles (see Shore-based foods) 
energy metabolism, 136
Co-evolution (see Culture; Genes) 
glucose, 136
Cognition (see Brain function) 
hypomyelination, 135
Cognitive function (See Brain function) 
iron, 136
Collagen, 136 (see also Copper) 
lipid peroxidation, 136
Color, 219 (see also Cave art) 
Menke's disease, 135
Communication, 
mental retardation, 135
bird, 32, 194 
symptoms, 136
whale, 32, 194 
Coral reefs, 250
Competition, 195 
shellfish, 257
Conception, 
Cordain, Loren, 208, 289
pre-conceptional nutrition, 106 
Cortex, (see also Brain)
Conditions of life (existence) (see also 
auditory, 64
Darwin, Charles), 4, 5, 202, 281 
cerebral, 25, 52, 181
Connective tissue, 136 (see also 
frontal, 34
Copper) 
neuronal migration, 25
Connectivity, neuronal, 25, 30 
occipital, 34
Consciousness, see Brain function 
parietal, 34, 41
Constraints, (see also Brain evolution; 
temporal, 34, 41
Nutrition) 
visual, 41
metabolic, 285 
Crabs, 216 (see also Shore-based
nutritional, 231, 285 
foods)
Continental drift, 245 
Cranial (ium) see Brain
Convergent evolution (see Evolution, 
Crawford, Michael, 34, 80, 104—106,
convergent) 
115, 227, 228, 230, 232, 236, 237,
Copper (see also Brain selective 
248, 257, 289 (see also Driving
nutrients; Copper deficiency) 
Force, The)
ATP, 136 
Crayfish, 216 (see also Shore-based
desaturases, 147 
foods)
energy metabolism, 146 
Cretin(ism), 31 (see also Iodine), 111
fatty acid metabolism, 147 
geographic occurrence, 122
food, content, 136, 143 
infant development, 123

318 
Survival of the Fattest
pregnancy, 123 
Cystic fibrosis, 188, 280 (see also
symptoms, 122 
Gene; Inborn errors of metabolism;
Venus figurines, 275 
Nutrition)
Critical period,
deficits and distortions, 56 
Danakil, (see also Ethiopia, Red Series)
malnutrition, 57 
Alps, 247
neural development, 56 
Depression, 247
vulnerability, 55 
hominid evolution, 250
Critical window (see Critical period), 
Horst, 247
31 
Island, 247, 248
malnutrition, 31 
Dart, Raymond,
Crockford, Susan, 268 
Savannah Theory, xiii
Cro-Magnon, 15, 19, 20 
Darwin, Charles,
art (see also Cave art), 23 
chimpanzee, 9
encephalization quotient, 37 
conditions of life (existence), xii,
fish consumption, 261 
xiv, 281
iodine deficiency, 274-275 
culture, 191
Neanderthals, coexistence with, 20, 
environment, 196
275 
finches, 212
shellfish consumption, 261 
human behaviour, 195
Venus figurines, 275, 277 
natural selection, 4 (see also
Crustaceans (see Shellfish) 
Natural selection)
Culture, 
struggle for existence, 7
brain evolution, 4, 196 
Dawkins, Richard, 196
burial, 19 
Deficiency (see Iodine; other specific
environment, 187 
nutrients)
exaptation, 199 
Deficits and distortions, 56, 106, 168
innate preference, 192 
(see also Brain; Brain
memes, 195 
Development)
technology, 198 
Degenerative disease (see Disease;
Cunnane, Stephen, 80, 115, 169, 170, 
specific diseases)
201, 222, 225, 227, 228, 230-233, 
Deoxyhemoglobin (see Hemoglobin)
248, 272 (see also Aquatic Ape 
Depression, 231
Theory Reconsidered, The; 
Desaturases (desaturation; see also
Survival of the Fattest) 
Polyunsaturate metabolism),
Cussac, 75 
copper, 147
Cutmarks, 253 (see also Fish; 
iron, 147
Hominids) 
docosahexaenoic acid, 160
Cytochrome C oxidase, 136 (see also 
Descent of the Child, 80, 227, 230, 235,
Copper) 
236 (see also Morgan, Elaine)
Cyclic nucleotides, 27 
Descent of Woman, 227, 235 (see also
Morgan, Elaine)

Index 
319
Desert, 290 
Dinka, 256
Determinism, 
Discovery, 294 (see also Australia;
biological, 197 
Coastal exploration)
genetic, 197 
Disease (see also specific diseases;
Development(al), 
Inborn errors)
behaviour, 105 (see also 
Alzheimer's, 286
Development) 
genes, genetic mutations (see
brain (see Brain development) 
Genes; see also specific
early (see also Critical window) 
diseases)
infant (see also Nutrition), 103 
chronic, (see Disease,
iodine, 265 (see also Iodine) 
degenerative)
noise, 197 
degenerative, 205, 208, 277-279,
psychosocial, 31 
289
Diabetes, 77, 79, 205, 277 (see Also 
fetal programming, 277-279
Disease, degenerative) 
Neanderthal, 276
Diamond, Jared, 192, 193 (see also 
neurodegenerative, 231
Guns, Germs and Steel) 
risk, 
188, 208
Diet(ary), (see also Food; Gene; 
skin, 238
Nutrition; specific nutrients) 
Western, (see Disease,
better quality, 5, 203, 209, 230, 231 
degenerative)
carbohydrate, 208 (see also 
Disorder (see Disease; Iodine,
Carbohydrate) 
deficiency disorder)
energy, 77 
Diving, 256 (see also Aquatic Theory,
fat, 85, 207 (see also Dietary 
Shore-based Scenario)
energy, Nutrition; 
reflex, 232, 241, 292-293
Polyunsaturates) 
exaptation, 293
fiber, 205 
DNA, (see also Gene, mRNA)
gene-nutrient interactions, 281-284 
brain evolution, 3
genetic programming, 112 
genes (see Genes)
goiterogens, 126 
histidine, 281-282
gut, 204 
mutations, 4, 8, 177
hominid diet, 116 
nutrition, 107, 281-283
human evolution, 102, 202, 203 
replication, 138
Inuit, 206, 207 
selenium, 140
jaws, 202 
zinc, 138
ketogenic, 207 
Dobbing, John, 56, 168
mineral content (see specific 
Dobson, Jerry, 231, 275, 286
minerals) 
Docosahexaenoic acid, (see also Brain
necessity, 203 
evolution; Brain selective nutrients,
plant-based, 113 
Shore-based Scenario)
shore-based (see Shore-based diet) 
birth weight, low, 104
teeth, 202 
brain content, 163, 227, 237

320 
Survival of the Fattest
brain development, 4, 81, 82, 112 
Ear,
brain transport, 172 
iodine deficiency, 123
depression, 231 
Organ of Corti, 123
dolphin, 173, 291 
Early development (infants; see
fish, 157, 158 
Development)
hominid diet, 205 
Early humans (see Cro-Magnon; see
infant body fat, 155, 156 
also Human)
insurance, 164 
shellfish consumption, 258
mother's milk, 156 
Earthquake(s), 243
peroxidation, 140, 161 
East Africa (see also Africa; see also
peroxisomes, 164 
Climate, Rift Valley)
psychiatric illness, 231 (see also 
hominid evolution, 251
Depression) 
lakes, 245, 258
seafood, 158 
proto-oceans, 248
shore-based diet, 169, 224, 230 
Eaton, Boyd, 205, 206, 208
structure, 153, 229 
Ecosystem, 249 (see Shoreline)
synthesis, human capacity, 153, 
Edey, Maitland (see Johansen, Donald)
160 
Eggs (see also Shore-based foods), 111,
Zellweger syndrome, 164, 165 
142, 143, 216
zinc, 147 
thyroid hormone, 272
Docosapentaenoic acid (omega-3), 157 
Eicosanoids, 154, 165, 166
Docosapentaenoic acid (omega-6), 157 
Eicosapentaenoic acid, 152, 224
Domestication, 269 (see also Thyroid 
Einstein, Alfred, 288
hormone) 
Elastin, 136 (see also Copper)
foxes, 270 
Electron transport, 148
Dopamine, 136 (see also Copper) 
Elements (see Carbon; Isotopes;
Dolphin, 173 
Nitrogen)
body fatness, 291 
Elliot, TS (wisdom, knowledge) 33
brain 291 
Ellis, Derek, 248-250
brain selective nutrients, 291 
Embryo,
communication, 291 
human, 29
convergent evolution, 291 
macaque, 29
diet, 291 
primate, 28, 29
docosahexaenoic acid, 237, 291 
Encephalization quotient, 34-37
(see also Docosahexaenoic 
Endemic cretinism (see Cretinism)
acid) 
Endocasts, brain, 40
fish, 291 
Australopithecine, 41
humans, 291 
Energy metabolism, 77 (see also
squid, 291 
Energy requirement)
Driving Force, The, 228 (see also 
basal metabolic rate, 77
Crawford, Michael) 
brain, 203
Dura mater, 43 
brain selective minerals, 146

Index 
321
copper, 136 
pressure, (see also Selection
iodine, 132 
pressure) 101, 213, 214
iron, 132 
psychosocial, 31
selenium, 140 
Epigenetic rules, 192 (see also Gene;
Energy requirement (see also Brain 
Lumsden, Charles)
energy requirement; Glucose) 
Epoch (see Miocene, Pliocene)
adult, 63 
EQ (see encephalization quotient)
balance, 78 
Erectus, Homo (see Homo erectus)
brain, 203 
Ergaster, Homo, (see Homo ergaster)
heart, 62-64 
Erhlich, Paul, 196
human brain evolution, 73 
Eritrea,
infection, 77 
shellfish, 257
iodine, 132 
Errors, inborn errors of metabolism
kidney, 63, 64 
(see Inborn errors of metabolism;
liver, 62-64 
Gene)
muscle, 62-64 
Eskimos (see Aborigines, Inuit)
newborn, 63 
Essential fatty acids (see
pregnancy, 78 
Polyunsaturates)
sodium potassium pump, 64 
Ethiopia (see also Afar, Africa)
substrates, 67 (see also Brain 
Addis Ababa, 245
energy substrates) 
Australopithecine fossils, 244
Environment(al) (see also Culture; 
Escarpment, 247
Habitat) 
hominid fish consumption, 256
aborigines, 288 
Europe,
adaptation, 288-290 
iodine deficiency, 125, 231
Arctic, 290 
Evidence, (see also Geology)
desert, 290 
ecological, 248
brain evolution, 4, 49 
hominid fish consumption,
conditions of existence (Darwin), 
252-254
281 
Evolution, 235 (see also Jenkins,
culture, 187, 188 (see also Culture) 
Morton)
external, 196 
Evolution, (see also Brain evolution)
genes, 187 
agriculture, 202
gene, co-evolution, 192 
alligators, 212
inhospitable, 288-289 
aquatic phase (see Aquatic Theory)
internal, 196 
brain, (see Brain evolution)
intrauterine, 187 
child, importance of, 229
niche (see also Nutrition) 
complex traits, 187
nutrient supply, 60, 101, 187 
constraints (see Brain selective
(see also Nutrition) 
nutrients; Constraints;
nutrition (see Nutrition) 
Nutrition)
permissiveness, 101, 213, 215, 290 
convergent, 291

322 
Survival of the Fattest
diet, 202 (see also Diet; Brain 
insulin, 87
selective nutrients; Nutrition) 
storage (see Triglyceride)
DNA, 3 
structural (see Phospholipid)
dolphin, 291 
synthesis, 84, 282
fish, 202 
Fatty Acid(s), 151, 152 (see also
hearing, 124 
individual fatty acids;
heart, 8 
Polyunsaturates; Saturates;
hunter-gatherer, 202 
Monounsaturates)
opportunity, 7 
copper, 147
nutrition, 114 (see also Diet) 
free, 90
protein (see Protein, evolution) 
infant body fat, 92, 155
survival, 53 
iron, 147
theories, crisis-based, 213 
isomers, 152
vulnerability, 53 
metabolism, 147, 185, 185
women, 235 
oxidation, 90, 169 (see also alpha-
Evolutionary psychology, 186 
Linolenic acid; Ketones;
human behaviour, 186 
Linoleic acid)
Exaptation, 199, 201 (see also 
Feldman, Marcus, 196
Adaptability; Plasticity) 
Ferritin, 131, 134 (see also Iron)
bipedalism, 199, 293 
Fetal programming, 277 (see also
diving reflex, 292-293 
Nutrition)
human behaviour, 200 
birth weight, 278
hunting, 200 
brain development, 279
language, 200 
disease risk, 277-279
natural selection, 200 
immune function, 279
Neanderthals, 201 
skeleton, 279
Expensive Gut Theory, 204 
vulnerability, to chronic diseases,
Expression, (see Genes; Expression) 
277
External environment (see 
Fetus,
Environment) 
neuronal development, 52
Eye, 
Fiber,
docosahexaenoic acid, 158, 160 
dietary, 205
photoreceptor, 158 
Figurines, 218 (see also Cave art)
rhodopsin, 160 
Fish, 111 (see also Shore-based foods)
bipedalism, 257
Falk, Dean, 44 
brain evolution 257, (see Brain
Fat(ness), 
evolution; Brain selective
babies, 285, 294 (see also Body fat, 
nutrients; Shore-based
infants; Shore-based Scenario) 
Scenario)
body (see Body fat; also Obesity) 
carbon isotope ratios, 260, 261
cells (see Adipocytes) 
cultural artefacts, 252
dietary (see Dietary fat) 
cutmarks, 253

Index 
323
Dinka, 256 
carbon isotope ratios, 259-261
docosahexaenoic acid, 158, 159 
fish, 
251, 253
dolphin, 291 
shorelines, 243
fatness, 255 
Fossil gap, 223, 229, 233, 234, 239
H. erectus, 256 
Founder population,
H. habilis, 256 
stress tolerance, 269
hominid fossil sites, 252, 257 
Free fatty acid, 90
Lake Turkana, 252 
Free radicals, 140 (see also Lipid
low technology, 256 
peroxidation; Polyunsaturates)
nitrogen isotope ratios, 261 
Freshwater, 249 (see also Wetlands)
Olduvai Gorge, 252 
shellfish, 259
play, 256 
Frogs, 216 (see also Shore-based foods)
remains, 252-254 
Frontal cortex (see Cortex, frontal)
Senge, 252 
Fuel (see Dietary energy; Brain energy
skulls, 254 
requirement)
spawning, 216, 255
speech, 256 
Gap (see Fossil gap)
Fish is brain food, 157 
junction, 26
Fluid, cerebrospinal (see Cerebrospinal 
GAP-43, 183, 189
fluid) 
Gatherer (see Hunter-gatherer)
Food, (see also Diet; Nutrition; specific 
Gene(s) xii, 3 (see also Genetic; Inborn
nutrients) 
errors of metabolism; Nutrition)
coastal (see Shore-based foods) 
Acrodermatitis enteropathica, 188
copper content, 137, 143 
banana, 178
docosahexaenoic acid, 158, 159 
behaviour, 193
goiterogens (see Goiterogens) 
blueprint, 189
iodine content, 127, 128, 143 
brain,
iron content, 133, 143 
development, 177
selenium content, 141,143 
evolution, 49, 177, 265, 290
shore-based (see Shore-based 
proteins, 179
food), 143 
size, 180, 181
zinc content, 139, 143 
chimpanzee, 179
Foramen magnum, 41 
cystic fibrosis, 188, 280-281
(see also Brain, base) 
determinism, 197
Forest(s), (see also Woodland) 
disease risk, 188
mangrove, 250 
environment, 187
rain (see Rainforest) 
errors, inborn, 113
Formula milk, 
expression (see Gene expression)
docosahexaenoic acid, 162 
fat deposition, 290
Fossil (see also Africa; Hominid; Jaw; 
fatty acids,
Skull; Teeth) 
binding proteins, 185
Australopithecine, 244 
transport, 185

324 
Survival of the Fattest
fetal programming, 278-279 
Glaciation, 213
GAP-43, 183 
inter-glacial, 258
housefly, 177 
iodine, 124
human, xiii, 9, 177, 178 
Gland, thyroid (see Thyroid; see
hunting, 186 
specific gland)
imprintability, 193 
Glia, 51, 52
inborn errors of metabolism, 184 
Gluconeogenesis, 78
microcephaly, 181 
Glucose, (see also Brain energy
neurogenesis, neurotransmitter, 
requirement; Energy substrates;
myelination, xii, 177 
Gluconeogenesis) 60, 64, 69, 71,
NMD A, 182 
78, 84, 92, 98, 206
nutrient interactions, 281-284 
iron, 135
phenylketonuria, 188, 279 
lipid synthesis, 93
phospholipase, 185 
starvation, 69
phospholipids, 185 
Glutamate, (see also Amino acids), 70,
pleiotropy, 188 
182
roundworm, 178 
Glutathione peroxidase, 139 (see also
selfish, 196 
Iodine; Lipid peroxidation;
schizophrenia, 185 
Selenium)
thyroid hormone, 265 
Glycerol, 68
Wilson's disease, 279 
Glycogen, 91, 206
zinc, 138 
brain, 59, 71
Gene expression, 138, 180 
Glycolysis (anaerobic, aerobic), 67
childhood, 221 
Goals,
histidine, 282 
natural selection, 8
mRNA, 180 
Goiter (see also Iodine deficiency
nutrients, 281, 284 
disorders),
polyunsaturates, 282 
goiterogens, 124
thyroxine, 284 
seaweed, 126
Genetic, (see also Gene) 
symptoms, 121
determinism (see Determinism) 
Goiterogens (see also Anti-nutrients;
preparedness, 102 
Goiter), 124, 145, 146
Genome (see Genes) 
cassava, 124
Geological events, 257 (see also Africa; 
soy, 126
Climate; Glaciation; Volcanoes) 
Goldfish, 57, 201
continental drift, 245 
Gorge, Olduvai (see Olduvai Gorge)
seafloor spreading, 245 
Gorilla, encephalization quotient, 35
Gestation, 
Gulf of Aden, 223, 245, 247
neuronal development, 52 (see also 
Afar (see Afar Gulf)
Fetus, Iodine; Pregnancy; 
Guns, Germs and Steel, 192, 193
Nutrition) 
(see also Diamond, Jared)

Index 
325
Habilis, Homo (see Homo habilis) 
brain selective nutrients, 116, 119,
Habitat, stable, hominid, 20 (see also 
149 (see also Brain selective
Nutrition) 
nutrients)
Australopithecine, 203 
carbon isotope ratios, 261
marine (see Shorelines) 
exogenous thyroid hormone
novel (see Stress) 
(in diet), 272
Hack, Maureen, 104, 105 
encephalization quotient, 35
Hadar, 243 
exaptation, 199, 201
Hair, 
fish consumption, 252-254
loss, 232, 234, 292 
(see also Fish)
tract, 232 
fossil sites (fish in), 253, 257
Hairlessness (see Hair loss) 
gap (see Fossil gap)
Harbige, Laurence, 80, 115 
infant, 219
Hardy, Alister, 227-229, 
iodine, 129 (see also Iodine)
232, 233, 237-239, 241, 
pelvis, 95
251,257 
play, 220
Heart, 
shellfish, 257
disease (see Cardiovascular 
skull, 10
disease) 
speciation, 247, 251
mammalian, evolution, 8 
teeth, 261
Hedgehog protein, 167 
thyroid hormone, 271
Heidelbergensis, Homo (see Homo 
Homo antecessor, 17
heidelbergensis) 
Homo aquaticus, 234 (see also Hardy,
Heme, 146 (see also Iron) 
Alister; Aquatic Theory)
Hemoglobin, 62 (see also Iron) 
Homo erectus, 13 (see Hominids)
Hemosiderin, 131 (see also Iron) 
aquatic phase, 234
Herbivore, 
brain, 9 (see also Brain)
savannah, brain size, 227 
brain selective nutrients, 116
Heritability, 187 (se also Intelligence) 
(see also Brain selective
Heterochrony, 
nutrients)
natural selection, 268 
coastal exploration, 293
Hille, B, 25 
docosahexaenoic acid, 164
Hippocampus, 139, 182 (see also Zinc) 
(see also Docosahexaenoic
Histidine, 281-282 
acid)
Holloway, Ralph, 41, 191 
East Africa, 16
Homeobox, gene, 26 
encephalization quotient, 35
Hominid, (see also Brain; Human; 
fish 
consumption, 254, 256
specific hominids) 
glaciation, 16
bipedalism, 271 
Java Man, 16, 243
brain evolution, xii, 177, 202, 256 
Pithecanthropus, 16
(see also Brain evolution) 
shorelines, 243

326 
Survival of the Fattest
Singanthropus pekinensis, 16 
Human, (see also Cro-Magnon)
stress resistance, 271, 274 
baby,
water travel (stress tolerance), 274 
term, 47
Homo ergaster (see also Turkana 
premature (pre-term), 48
Boy), 13-15 
behaviour (see Human behaviour)
hand axe, 15 
brain evolution, 9, 285, (see also
Homo habilis, 13 
Brain evolution)
brain asymmetry, 42 (see also 
energy requirement, 73, 94
Brain) 
genes (see also Genes), 177
brain selective nutrients, 116, 119 
infant, focus, 219
(see also Brain selective 
language (see Language)
nutrients) 
nutrient requirements, 114
Broca' s area, 43 
(see also Diet, Nutrition)
competitiveness, 196 
brain selective nutrients, 116
encephalization quotient, 35 
(see also Brain selective
fish consumption, 251-258 
nutrients)
intelligence, 195 
diving reflex (see Diving reflex)
Olduvai Gorge, 14 
docosahexaenoic acid synthesis,
Pleistocene, 13 
160
shellfish consumption, 258 
early (See Cro-Magnon)
speech, 239 
encephalization quotient, 35
stone tools, 15 
(see Encephalization quotient)
Homo heidelbergensis, 
evolution (see Human evolution)
encephalization quotient, 35 
exploration, 293 (see also Coastal
Spain, 17 
exploration)
speech, 17 
features, 292 (see also Body fat;
Homo neanderthalensis 
Brain; Hair)
(see Neanderthal) 
genes (see Genes)
Homo rudolfensis, 13 
genome (see Genes; Human)
speech, 239 
intelligence (see Brain;
Homo sapiens, (see Human) 
Intelligence)
Homo transvaalensis 
origins, phylogenetic tree, 14
(see Australopithecines) 
speech, 293 (see also Speech)
Homology, protein (see Protein 
Human behaviour,
homology) 
adaptation, 199
Honeybees, 32, 194 
evolution, 186, 196 (see also
Horrobin, David, 32, 185 (see also 
Evolution)
Madness of Adam and Eve, The) 
exaptation, 199
Housefly, 198 
hunting, 186
Hox (see Homeobox) 
imprintability, 193

Index 
327
phobia, (see Phobia) 
Imprint(ing; ability), 193
technology, 198 
Inborn errors of metabolism, 113, 184
Hunt(er; ing), 186, 209 (see also Diet, 
(see also specific diseases; Gene)
better quality) 
cystic fibrosis, 280-281
choice, 213 
phenylketonuria, 184
exaptation, 199 
Indian Ocean, 223
Ituri pygmies, 220 
Infant (see also Body fat; Human;
!Kung Bushman, 220 
Primate)
leisure time, 220 
body fat, 155 (see Body fat)
nuts, 211 
brain evolution (see Brain
roots, 211 
evolution)
skills required, 210 
disadvantages, 235
termites, 211 
fatty acid oxidation, 92
Hunter-gatherer, 202, 205, 255, 292 
hominid, 219
(see also Hunt) 
Inferior colliculus, 64
Hurley, Lucille, 278-279 
Inflammatory disorders, 134
Hydroxybutyrate, beta (see Ketone 
(see also Iron)
bodies) 
arachidonic acid, 165
Hypertension, 77, 277-278 (see also 
eicosanoids, 165
Cardiovascular disease) 
Inheritance (see Heritability)
Hyperthyroidism (see also Iodine; 
Innate,
Thyroid), 66, 273 
capacity, 197
Hypomyelination (see Myelin) 
preference, 192
Hypothalamus, 70 
Inner ear (see Ear)
Thyroid hormone, 267 
Institute of Brain Chemistry and
Hypothesis (see Spatial packing) 
Human Nutrition, 34 (see also
Hypothyroidism (see also Iodine 
Crawford, Michael)
deficiency disorders; Thyroid), 66 
Instrument, musical (see Music)
fetus, 123 
Insulin, 69, 72
symptoms, 119 
dependent diabetes (see Diabetes)
Hypoxia (see Oxygen) 
fat metabolism, 87, 88
independent diabetes (see Diabetes)
Ice Age(s), 
longevity, 198
iodine, 124 
resistance, 77, 278 (see also
Idiots savant, 32, 194 
Diabetes)
Illness (see also Depression, Disease), 
Insurance (energy), 100, 230
psychiatric, 231 
low birth weight, 230
Imagination, 29 
prematurity, 230
(see also Brain function) 
Intelligence (see also Brain function;
Immune(ity), (see also Fetal 
Human; Plasticity), 21, 29-33, 185
programming) 
chimpanzee, 189
function, 279 
evolution, 186, 189, 195

328 
Survival of the Fattest
quotient (see also Brain function; 
stress response, 267 (see also
Human; Plasticity) 
Stress; Thyroid hormone)
twins, 187 
thermogenesis, 264
Interface (see Land-water interface) 
thyroid hormone (see Thyroid
Inter-glacial (see Glaciation) 
hormone)
Internal environment 
Thyroid stimulating hormone (see
(see Environment) 
Thyroid stimulating hormone)
Intra, 
Iodine deficiency disorders, 31, 110,
abdominal fat (see Body fat) 
111, 118, (see also Goiter;
uterine growth retardation, 286 
Hypothyroidism)
(see Environment; Intrauterine) 
Australia, 125
Inuit, 206, 292 (see Aborigines) 
behaviour, 123
Iodine, (see also Brain selective 
brain evolution, 230, 264, 286
nutrients) 
cretinism, 122 (see Cretinism)
antioxidant, 264 
Cro-Magnon, 277
auditory cortex, 64 
Europe, 125
brain, 31, 128 
hearing, 123
copper, 146 
IQ, 123
deficiency (see Iodine deficiency 
mental retardation, 231
disorders) 
Neanderthals, 274, 276, 277
diet, 111 
neurological symptoms, 119
energy metabolism, 146, 149 
Organ of Corti, 123
excretion, urine, 129 
prevalence, 125
food, content, 127-129, 143 
symptoms, 119
gene expression, 283-284 
terminology, 121, 122
goiter (see Goiter) 
USA, 125
hominid diets, 116, 130 
Iodized salt (see Iodine, salt; Salt;
hypothyroidism, 66 
iodized)
inferior colliculus, 64 
Iodothyronine deiodinase, 140 (see also
iron, 146 
Selenium)
ketogenesis, 128, 148 
Iodotyrosine, 120
marine environment, 263 
IQ (see Intelligence)
metamorphosis, 264 
Iron, (see also Brain selective nutrients;
Neanderthal, 276 
Iron deficiency)
polyunsaturates, 264 
absorption, 132
reproduction, 129 
anti-nutrients, 146
requirement, dietary, 120 
brain, 134
salt, 110, 111, 117 
copper, 136, 146
selenium, 140 
deficiency (see Iron deficiency)
shore-based foods, 117, 118 
desaturases, 147
soil, 124 
energy metabolism, 132, 146
status, 126 
enzymes, 132

Index 
329
ferritin, 134 (see also Ferritin) 
muscles, 181, 189
food, content, 132, 133,143 
evolution, 102
gene expression, 283-284 
Jenkins, Morton, 235 (see also
glucose, 135 
Evolution)
heme, 146 
Jerison, Harry, 34, 191
hemoglobin, 131 
Johansen, Donald, 12, 243, 244
hominid diets, 116 
(see also Lucy — The Beginnings
ketogenesis, 147 
of Mankind)
myeTination, 147
myoglobin, 131 
Karten HJ, 26, 27
neurotransmitters, 134, 135 
Kenya, 243 (see also Lake Turkana)
phytate, 133, 146 
Australopithecine Fossil(s), 244
plant foods, 131, 133 
Omo, 243
Iron deficiency (see also Iron), 110, 
Turkana, 243
111,131 
Keshan-Beck disease, 140
behaviour, 134 
Ketogenesis, 92, 148 (see also Ketone
brain development, 134 
bodies)
inflammatory disorders, 134 
Ketogenic diet, 207 (see Diet)
symptoms, 132 
Ketone bodies, 68, 70, 92
USA, 134 
brain uptake, 69
Island, (see also Danakil) 
human brain evolution, 91, 230,
biological, 247 
285
Isomer(s), fatty acid, 152 
iodine, 129, 147
Isotope(s), 
ketogenesis, 91
carbon, 259 
lipid synthesis, 93
carbon ratios, 259-261 
monocarboxylic acid transporter,
A. africanus, 261 
69
early humans, 261 
polyunsaturates, 170
marine food, 259 
Ketones (see Ketone bodies)
shore-based foods, 259 
Ketosis, 207 (see also Ketone bodies)
nitrogen isotope ratios, 261 
Klein, Richard, 244
shore-based foods, 260 
Knapp (-er, -ing), stone (see Stone
ratio, mass spectrometry, 259, 263 
knapping)
methodological pitfalls, 263 
Knuckle walking, 20
Ituri pygmies, 220 (see also Leisure 
!Kung Bushman, 220 (see also Leisure
time) 
time)
Java Man, 243 (see also Swisher, Carl) 
Lactate, 61, 67
Java Man (see Homo Erectus) 
Lahn, Bruce, 181, 189
Jaws (see also Diet; Teeth) 
Lake(s),
diet, 202 
Afar, 244
hominid, 10, 21 
East Africa, 243, 245

330 
Survival of the Fattest
Hominids, 244 
oxidation, 169
Kenya, 243 
recycling, 169, 170
Malawi, 244, 248 
zinc, 148
Marine, 250 
Lipid(s), (see Cholesterol; Nutrition;
Olduvai, 253 
Phospholipid; Polyunsaturates;
proto-oceans, 248 
Triglyceride)
shores, 215 (see also Shorelines) 
brain selective nutrients, 147
Tanganyika, 244, 248 
gene-lipid interactions, 282-283
Turkana, 14, 16, 243, 248 
Lipid peroxidation, 136 (see also
fish remains, 252 
Copper)
Victoria, 16, 244, 248 
Lipoproteins, 71, 86
Laland, Kevin, 200 
Locomotion, 8, 199 (see also
Lalumiere, Leon, 247 
Bipedalism)
Land-water interface, 236, 237 
Long-chain polyunsaturates
(see also Shorelines; Shore-based 
(see Polyunsaturates)
evolution) 
Long term potentiation, 182, 183
Langdon, John, 288 
Longevity, 198
Language, 29, 41 
Lovejoy, Owen, 20
auditory cortex, 64 
Lozoff, Betsy, 134
bipedalism, 41 
Lucas, Alan, 277-278
human evolution, 6, 191 
Lucy — The Beginnings of Mankind,
Neanderthals, 19 
243 (see also Johansen, Donald)
Leakey, Richard, 12, 202, 243 
Lucy, 12 (see also Australopithecines;
(see also People of the Lake) 
Hominids)
Lean, animals (see Body fat) 
lake setting, 243
Learning, 183, 189, 224 (see also 
Lumsden, Charles, 32, 192, 194-196,
Leisure time; Memory; Play; Toys) 
220, 221 (see also Promethean
Lee-Thorp, Julia, 261 
Fire: Reflections on the Origins
Leisure time, 220, 221 (see also Cave 
of Mind)
art; Play; Time; Toys) 
Lunate sulcus, 41
Leonard, Bill, 116,203,204
Leukotrienes (see Eicosanoids) 
Macaque, 29
Lewin, Roger (see Leakey, Richard) 
Madness, 32 (see also specific
Lewontin, Richard, 5, 187, 189, 190, 
disorders)
193, 197, 198, 202 
Madness of Adam and Eve, The, 185
Lifestyle (see also Hunter-gatherer) 
(see a l s o Horrobin, David)
sedentary, 218 (see also Toys) 
Magnetic resonance imaging, 76
Linoleic acid, 81, 82, 94 
Malnutrition, 31 (see also Diet;
brain, 170 
Nutrition)
cholesterol, 170 
b r a i n g r o w t h sP u r t' 1 0 6
infant body fat, 155 
cy s t i c f l b r o s i s' 2 8 ° - 2 8 1
metabolism, 153, 169 
global, 110

Index 
331
myelin(ation), 107, 108 
Metabolic rate, (see also Energy
neural development, 57 
metabolism)
nutrients, specific, 109 (see also 
brain, 203
individual nutrients) 
constraint, 285
preconceptional, 106 
thyroid hormone, 265
protein, energy, 108 
Metabolism,
United Nations Children's Fund, 
inborn errors (See Inborn errors of
110 (see also Iodine; Iron, 
metabolism)
Vitamin A; Zinc) 
energy (see Energy metabolism)
Man-watching, 228 (see also Morris, 
nutrients (see specific nutrients;
Desmond) 
Inborn errors of metabolism;
Marine (see Shorelines; Wetlands) 
Gene)
Marrow (see Bone) 
polyunsaturates (see
Marsh (see Shorelines) 
Polyunsaturates)
Marsh, David, 228 (see Crawford, 
Metamorphosis, 264 (see also
Michael; see also Driving Force, 
Development; Iodine)
The) 
Microcephaly, 181, 189
Martin, Robert, 116, 203 
Middens,
Martinez, Manuela, 165 
shellfish, 257, 259
Mass spectrometry, 259, 260, 
carbon isotope ratios, 260, 261
(see also Isotopes) 
nitrogen isotope ratios, 261
Maternal nutrition (see Nutrition) 
Milk (see Breast milk; Formula milk)
Meat, 142 
Minagh-Purvis, Nancy, 181, 189
nutrient availability, 145 
Minerals, see Brain selective minerals
exogenous thyroid hormone, 272 
Miocene, 11, 12, 245, 246
Mediterranean Sea, 245 
Mitochondria, 25
Membrane(s), 
fatty acid oxidation, 90
brain, 33 (see also Phospholipids; 
ketone bodies, 68
Lipids) 
Moken children, 144, 291
Memory (see also Brain function) 
Molars (see Teeth)
GAP-43, 183 
Molluscs (see Shellfish)
hippocampus, 182 
Monoamines, 136 (see also Copper)
honeybees, 32 
Monocarboxylic acid transporter, 69
Idiots savant, 194 
Monounsaturated fatty acids
kinesthetic, 194 
(monounsaturates), 85
Meningeal vessels, 43, 44 
infant body fat, 155
Mental retardation, 135, 231 (see also 
myelin, 148
Iodine; Copper deficiency) 
Morgan, Elaine, 80, 95, 227-230, 232,
phenylketonuria, 184 
234, 235, 237-239, 241, 251, 257,
Zell weger syndrome, 164 
289 (see also Aquatic Ape: A
Meriam children, 144, 291 
Theory of Human Evolution, The;

332 
Survival of the Fattest
Aquatic Ape Hypothesis; Descent 
heterochrony, 268 (see also
of the Child; Descent of Woman; 
Heterochrony)
Scars of Evolution) 
human behaviour, 196 (see also
Morphology (see Development; Iodine; 
Human behaviour)
Metamorphosis; Thyroid hormone) 
speciation, 290
Morris, Desmond, 227, 228, 233 
Nature, versus nurture debate, xi
(see also Man-watching; Naked 
Navigation, 293-294 (see also Coastal
Ape, The) 
exploration, H. erectus)
Mossy fibers, 139 (see also Zinc) 
Neander River, 18
Mousterian tool industry, 18 
Neandertal (see Neanderthal)
mRNA, 180 
Neanderthal,
histidine, 282 
Aquatic Theory, 229 (see also
Muscle mass, 
Aquatic Theory)
hominids, 204 
brain, 9 (see also Brain evolution;
Music, 219 
Hominids)
Mussels (see Shore-based foods) 
burial, 19
Mutation (see also Genes), 181 
cretin-like features, 274
cystic fibrosis, 188 
disappearance, 276
memes, 196 
disease, 276
Myelin, (see also Nutrition) 
exaptation, 201
development, 52, 57 
eyebrow ridges, 18
hypomyelination, 57 
figurines, 
277
iodine, 147 
forehead, 18
lipids, 108 
fossil gap, 229
malnutrition, 57 
glacier front, 275
oleic acid, 148 
infant, 44
synthesis, 108 
iodine deficiency, 274, 275
Myoglobin, 131 (see also Iron) 
(see also Iodine)
Myxedematous cretinism (see 
Mousterian tools, 18
Cretinism) 
muscle mass, 277
neurodevelopmental vulnerability,
n-3 fatty acids (see Fatty acids; 
201
Polyunsaturates) 
population pressure, 275
Naked Ape, The, (see also Morris, 
progressive, 276
Desmond) 227 
protein intake, 276
Natural selection, 4 (see also Darwin, 
skeleton, 19, 275-276
Charles) 
skull size, 18, 275 (see also Brain
blind nature, 215 
size)
brain evolution (see Brain 
speech, 19 (see also Speech)
evolution) 
thyroid, 274-275 (see also Iodine;
goals, 8 
Thyroid)

Index 
333
tools, 18 
dietary, 109 (see also specific
Venus figurines, 275 
names)
Necessity, 
gene, interactions, 281-284
better quality diet, 203 
Nutrigenomics, 284 (see also Nutrition;
cart before the horse, 212 
Gene)
larger brain, 212 
Nutrition, 57 (see also Gene;
Neural development (see Brain 
Malnutrition; specific nutrients)
development) 
brain,
Neuroblast, 26 
cholesterol, 107
Neurogenesis, genes, xii 
development, 101, 103
Neuroglia (see Glia) 
evolution, 49, 213
Neurological cretinism (see Cretinism) 
change,
Neurological development (see Brain 
developmental vulnerability, 102
development) 
genetic preparedness, 102
Neurological function (see Brain 
critical window, 31
function) 
cystic fibrosis, 280-281
Neurological syndrome (see Cretinism) 
environment, 60, 101
Neuronal connectivity (see 
fetal programming, 277
Connectivity, neuronal) 
gene-nutrient interactions, 281-284
Neurotransmitter, 26, 71 
hominids, 112
copper, 135 
growth spurt, 107
dopamine, 136 
lipids, 107
enkephalin, 139 
myelination, 107
GAP-43, 183 
maternal, 103
genes, xii 
myelination, 108
glutamate, 182 
placenta, 104
iron, 134, 135 
preconceptional, 106, 277
monoamines, 136 
pregnancy, 277
NMD A, 182 
prematurity, 103
norepinephrine, 136 
Nutritional constraints, 231, 285 (see
priming, 183 
also Brain evolution; Nutrition)
vesicle, 25 
Nuts, 118, 142 (see also Hunter-
zinc, 139 
gatherer, Shore-based foods)
N-methyl-D-asparate (see NMD A)
NMDA, 
Oasis, 250
gene, 182 (see also Genes) 
Obesity, 31, 77, 84, 205, 276, 278-279
receptor, 182 
Occipital cortex (see Cortex, occipital)
Noise, developmental, 197 
Ocean, 248 (see also Proto-ocean;
Norepinephrine, 136 (see also Copper) 
Coastal navigation; Water)
Nutrient(s), 
Olduvai Gorge (Basin), 243
bioavailability, 144 (see also 
fish remains, 252-255
Anti-nutrients; Phytate) 
H. habilis, 14

334 
Survival of the Fattest
Oleic acid, (see also Fatty acids) 
Parietal cortex (see Cortex, parietal)
brain, 167 
Parkington, John, 259
myelin, 148 
Parsimony (evolutionary theory), 286,
Oligocene, 245 
288, 294
Oligodendroglia (see Glia) 
Pelvis, 95 (see also Childbirth)
Omega, carbon, 153 
People of the Lake, 202, 243 (see also
Omega 3 (polyunsaturated) fatty acids 
Leakey, Richard)
(see Polyunsaturates; also 
Performance,
Docosahexaenoic acid, 
cognitive (see Brain function)
alpha-Linolenic acid) 
physical, 206, 208
Opportunity, 
Permissiveness, (see also Brain
evolution, 7 
evolution; Shore-based
Organ of Corti, (see also Ear; Iodine) 
Scenario) environmental,
iodine deficiency, 123 
101, 213, 290
Oxaloacetate, 70 
Peroxidation (see Lipid Peroxidation)
Oxidation (see also Fatty acid 
Peroxisomes, 164
oxidation; Peroxidation), 90 
Petrous pyramids, 45
Oxyhemoglobin (see Hemoglobin) 
Phases,
Oxygen, 
aquatic (see Aquatic Theory)
brain development, 57 
human brain evolution, 37, 38
brain function, 61 
shore-based (see Shore-based
consumption, by brain (see Brain 
Scenario)
energy requirement) 
Phenylalanine, 183, 279
fuel stores, 57 
Phenylketonuria, 113 (see also Gene;
transport (see Iron) 
Nutrition; Malnutrition)
Oysters, 138 
gene, 184, 279
Phinney, Stephen, 206, 208
Paabo, Svente, 179 
Phobia,
Pacemaker (see Thyroid) 
Aborigines, 193
Paddling, 256 (see also Aquatic 
infants, 192
Theory, Shore-based Scenario) 
snakes, 192
Paintings (see Cave art) 
spiders, 192
Paleo-lakes (see Lake) 
survival, 192
Palmitic acid, 147 (see also Fatty acids) 
Phospholipids, 87, 88, 89,
brain, 167 
brain, 107
Pan troglodytes (see Chimpanzee) 
Phosphorylation, 27 (see also Cyclic
Paranthropus (P.), (see also 
nucleotides)
Australopithecines; Hominids) 
proteins, 183
Boisei, 12 
Phylogenetic tree, human, 14
Ethiopicus, 12 
Physical performance, 206
iodine, 129 (see also Iodine) 
Phytate, (see also Anti-nutrients; Diet;
Robustus, 12 
Iron; Nutrition; Zinc)

Index 
335
iron, 133 
brain (see Brain development;
mineral absorption, 133, 145 
Brain evolution; Brain fatty
Pineal gland, 70 
acids)
thyroid hormone, 267 
carbon recycling, 170 (see also
Pinker, Steven, 192, 193 (see also 
Carbon recycling)
Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of 
dietary, 86, 116
Human Nature) 
human evolution, 205, 208
Pithecanthropus (see Homo Erectus) 
infants, 155
Pituitary, 70 
ketone bodies, 170 (see also Ketone
thyroid hormone, 267 
bodies)
Placenta, 104, 277 
long chain, 81 (see also
Plants, (see also Vegetation) 
Arachidonic acid;
C3, C4, 260 
Docosahexaenoic acid)
carbon isotope ratios, 259-261 
malnutrition, 108
coastal, shore-based, 111, 216 
metabolism, 153
(see also Shore-based foods) 
zinc, 139, 149
diet, 113 (see also Diet; Nutrition) 
Population, founder (see Founder
human evolution, 203 
population)
Plasticity (see also Brain function; 
Postnatal development
Brain development; Exaptation), 
(see Development)
31,33 
Posture (see Bipedalism)
Plausibility (evolutionary theory), 286 
Potassium channel (see Channel,
Play(things), 217, 219 (see also 
potassium)
Childhood; Time; Toys) 
Potentiation, long term (see Long term
aboriginal societies, 220 
potentiation)
fish, 256 
Precocial, species, 53
survival (contrast with), 220 
Preconceptional nutrition, 106
time, 220 
(see also Diet; Nutrition;
Pleiotropy, 188 
Pregnancy)
Pleistocene, (see also Hominids) 
Prediction (evolutionary theory), 286
proto-ocean, 248 
Preference, innate (see Innate
Pliocene, 11, 12, 245 
preference)
Pollitt, Ernesto, 134 
Pregnancy (see Gestation; also
Polyunsaturated fatty acids 
Nutrition)
(see Polyunsaturates) 
Premature(ity), 97 (see also Fetal
Polyunsaturates, 80, 82, 85 (see also, 
programming; Malnutrition)
Arachidonic acid; 
brain size, 96
Docosahexaenoic acid; 
maternal nutrition, 103, 104
Linoleic acid; alpha-Linolenic acid) 
(see also Nutrition)
body fat, 155 (see also Body fat) 
Prepared core technique, 18

336 
Survival of the Fattest
Pressure, 
Pyruvate, 67
environmental (see Environmental
pressure) 
Quadrupedalism (see Knuckle-walking)
population, 275 
Quotient,
selection (see Selection pressure) 
encephalization (see
Pre-term (see Premature) 
Encephalization quotient)
Primate, (see also Chimpanzee) 
intelligence (see Intelligence
body fat (see Fat, primate) 
quotient)
embryo (see Embryo, primate)
encephalization quotient, 35 
Radiator Theory, 44
metabolic rate, 203 
Raichle, Marcus, 61
pelvis, 95 
Rainforest, 250
Problem solving, 29 
Rancidity (see Lipid peroxidation; see
see Brain function 
also Docosahexaenoic acid;
Programming, fetal (see Fetal 
Polyunsaturates)
programming) 
Rate, metabolic (see Metabolic rate)
Promethean Fire: Reflections on the 
Recycling (see Carbon recycling)
Origins of Mind, 32, 194 (see also 
Red Sea, 223, 245, 250
Lumsden, Charles) 
shellfish middens, 257
Prostaglandins (see Eicosanoids) 
Red Series, 247
Protein, (see also Amino acid; specific 
Reflex, diving (see Diving reflex)
amino acids, proteins) 
Religion, 31, 187
amino acids (essential, 
Replication, DNA (see DNA
indispensable), 112 
replication; see also Zinc)
evolution, 26 
Reproduction, 267 (see also Thyroid
growth-associated (see GAP-43) 
hormone)
Hedgehog, 167 
Response, (see Stress)
homology, 26 
Retardation, mental (see Mental
intake, Neanderthal, 276 
retardation)
phosphorylation, 183 
Retinol (see Vitamin A)
Protodomestication, 269 
Reversal, human brain evolution, 39
Proto-ocean, 248 
Rhodopsin, (see Eye)
Psychiatric illness (see also Depression; 
Ribonucleic acid, messenger
Disease), 231 
(see mRNA)
Psychology, evolutionary (see 
Rift Valley, 11,12, 223, 245, 246
Evolutionary psychology) 
(see also Africa, climate; Lakes)
Psychosis, 32 
bipedalism, 249
Psycho-social environment, 31 
continental drift, 245
Pulses, 118, 142 (see also Shore-based 
fish 
remains, 251-253, 259
foods) 
forests, 251
Pump, sodium-potassium, (see Sodium- 
fossils, 244
potassium pump)

Index 
337
hominid evolution, 250, 251 (see 
cart before the horse, 5,212
also Hominids; Human) 
climate, 213
Lakes, 259 (see also Lake; specific 
language, 212
lakes) 
phases, 288
Pliocene, 245 
survival, 212
proto-oceans, 249 
Scars of Evolution, 227, 229, 235, 238,
rivers, 259 
289 (see also Morgan, Elaine)
seafloor spreading, 245 
Scavenger, 210
shellfish, 259 
bone marrow, 211
volcanoes, 250 
brain evolution, 211
Zambesi River, 250 
brain (herbivores), 210
River(ine), 243 
hyena, 210
Roots, 211, 222 (see also 
Scenario, Shore-based (see Shore-based
Hunter-gatherer) 
Scenario)
RNA (see mRNA) 
Schizophrenia, 185
Routtenberg, Aryeh, 183, 189 
Schultz, A, 29
Rudolfensis, Homo (see Homo 
Schwarcz, Henry, 262-263
rudolfensis) 
Sculptures (see Cave art)
Rules, epigenetic, 192 
Scurvy, 207
Sea (see specific names)
Salem, Norman, 162 
gypsies (see Moken)
Salt, iodized, 110 (see also Iodine; 
marshes (see Shorelines)
Sodium) 
Seafloor spreading, 245
consumption, 126 
Sealy, Judith, 261
marshes, 250 (see also Wetlands, 
Seashore (see Shore)
Marine) 
Season, (see also Climate)
western diet, 205 
fish, 253
Sapiens, homo (see Homo sapiens; 
spawning, 255
see also Human) 
Seaweed, 111 (see also Iodine;
Saturated fatty acids (saturates), 85, 
Shore-based foods)
151 
goiter, treatment, 126
disease risk, 205 
Selection pressure, 5, 214 (see also
infant body fat, 155 
Environmental pressure)
ketone bodies, 93 
cart before the horse, 5
Savannah, 
environment, 101
carnivores, 210 
nutrition (see Nutrition)
grasses, 204 
Selenium, (see also Brain selective
herbivores, brain size, 227 
nutrients; Selenium deficiency)
Savannah Theory, 203, 222, 239, 241 
foods, 141, 143
(see also Aquatic Theory; 
free radicals, 140
Shore-based Scenario; 
glutathione peroxidase, 139
Woodland Theory) 
hominid diets, 116

338 
Survival of the Fattest
lipid peroxidation, 140 
docosahexaenoic acid, 158, 159
proteins, 140 
(see also Docosahexaenoic
soils, 141 
acid)
thioredoxin reductase, 140 
ecosystem, 249
vitamin E, 140 
evolution, 235, 286, 289 (see also
Selenium deficiency 
Brain selective nutrients;
cardiovascular disease, 140 
Shore-based diet;
energy metabolism, 140 
Shore-based Scenario)
iodine, 140 (see also Iodine) 
foods, 223, 256-258, 272 (see also
lipid peroxidation, 140 
individual species; Nutrients;
Keshan-Beck disease, 140 
Brain selective nutrients;
vitamin E deficiency, 140 
Shore-based Scenario)
Selenocysteine, 141 
carbon isotope ratios, 260, 261
(see also Selenium) 
nitrogen isotope ratios, 261
Selenomethionine, 141 
thyroid hormone, 272
(see also Selenium) 
habitat, 118
Semi-aquatic 224, 232 
health, 117
(see also Aquatic) 
hominids, 249 (see also Hominids)
Serendipity, 
iodine, 126, 129 (see also Iodine)
human evolution, 285 
iron content, 133 (see also Iron)
Sexuality, 31 
Meriam children, 144
Shell (see Shellfish) 
Moken children, 144
Shellfish, 111 (see also Moken, 
nutrition 265, (see also Brain
Meriam, Shore-based foods) 
selective nutrients;
carbon isotope ratios, 260, 261 
Shore-mased Scenario)
children, 144 
oysters, 138
docosahexaenoic acid, 159 
plants, 256
exogenous thyroid hormone, 272 
seaweed, 126, 127
hominid consumption, 256-258 
selenium (see Selenium)
middens (see Middens) 
shellfish, 118
nitrogen isotope ratios, 261 
tools, 240
Rift Valley, 259 
vulnerability, 237
stone tools, 257 
Shore-based Scenario, 223, 227, 228,
Shore-based diet, 111, 250 (see also 
264, 285, 294 (see also Brain
Brain evolution; Brain selective 
evolution; Brain selective nutrients;
nutrients; Copper; Evolution; Fish; 
Hominids; Shore-based diet)
Iodine; Iron; Selenium; Shellfish; 
earlier versions, 230
Shore-based Scenario; Zinc) 
parsimony (evolutionary theory),
brain selective minerals, 142, 143, 
286
144 
plausibility (evolutionary theory),
copper, 137 (see also Copper) 
286

Index 
339
prediction (evolutionary theory), 
Spatial packing hypothesis, 45
286 
Spawning, 255 (see also Fish)
Shorelines, 118, 215, 216 (see also 
Speciation, 268 (see also Heterochrony;
Hominids; Lakes; Wetlands) 
Iodine; Thyroid hormone)
biomass, 216 
fish, 
269
competition, 216 
Species (see also Altrical; Precocial)
ecosystem, 249 
Speech, 19, 239 (see also Broca's area;
food supply (see Shore-based diet) 
Neanderthal)
Shreeve, James, 8 
fish, 
256
Shrinkage, 
Spirituality (see Burial; Worship;
brain, 
Cro-Magnon)
herbivores, 228 
Spoor, Fred, 44
human, 231 
Squid, 291
Simopoulos, Artemis, 289 
Stance, upright (see Bipedal)
Sinclair, Andrew, 170 
Standing, Leo, 228
Singanthropus pekinensis (See Homo 
Starvation, 69, 78
erectus) 
Stearic acid, 147 (see also Fatty acids)
Sinuses, venous (see Venous sinuses) 
Stewart, Kathy, 223, 251-259, 264
Sir Alister Hardy (See Hardy, Alister) 
Stone,
Size (see Body; Brain; Hominid; Skull) 
knapping, 22, 23
Skeleton, 19, 275-276 (see also Fetal 
tools (see also Tools, stone)
programming; Neanderthal; 
Storage fat (see Triglycerides)
Skeleton) 
Stress, (see also Thyroid hormone)
Skin, disease, 238 
domestication, 269
Skull, 
founder population, 269
fish, 254 
novel habitat, 268
hominid, 10, 20, 181 
response, 267
size (see also brain) 
tolerance, 267-269
Smith, Sir Elliot Grafton, 6-8 
Structural,
Society, 198 (see also Culture; 
constraints (evolution), 285
Environment) 
fat (see Phospholipids)
technology, 198 
Struggle for existence, 7
Sodium 
(see also Darwin, Charles)
channel (see Channel, sodium) 
Subcutaneous fat (see Body Fat)
western diet (see also salt), 205 
Sugar, 208 (see also glucose)
Sodium-potassium, pump, 27 (see also 
Superoxide dismutase, 136
Brain energy requirement) 
(see also Copper)
energy requirement, 64 
Survival,
Sokoloff, Louis, 65 
human features, 213 (see Human)
South Africa, 
phobia, 192 (see also Phobia)
shellfish middens, 259 
plasticity, 29
carbon isotope ratios, 261 
vulnerability, 53

340 
Survival of the Fattest
Survival of the Fattest, 230, 285 
Thioredoxin reductase, 140 (see also
(see also Cunnane, Stephen) 
Selenium)
Svennerholm, Lars, 40 
Thomas, Lewis, 221
Swim(ming), 256 (see also Aquatic 
Thyroglobulin, 120 (see also Thyroid
Theory, Shore-based Scenario) 
hormone)
Swisher, Carl, 243 
Thyroid, (see also Thyroid hormone)
Synapse, 26, 89 
body temperature, 264
Ketone bodies, 68 
iodine content, 120
Long term potentiation, 182 
iron, 132
variants (Neanderthal), 274
Table salt (see Iodine; Salt) 
Thyroid hormone, 119, 120 (see also
Tang, Ya-Ping, 182 
Development; Energy metabolism;
Tanzania (see also Africa; Rift Valley) 
Iodine; Thyroid)
Tattersall, Ian, 200, 202, 243 (see also 
adrenal, 268
Becoming Human: Evolution and 
content in animals, 267
Human Uniqueness) 
cyclicity, 267
Technique, prepared core (see Prepared 
development (see Brain;
core technique) 
Development)
Technology, 198 
exogenous (in food), 272
low (fishing), 256 
gene expression, 283-284
Teeth, (see also, Diet; Jaws) 
genetic control, 270
carbon isotope ratios, 259-261 
heterochrony (see Heterochrony)
evolution, hominid, 9, 102, 202 
hominid evolution, 271 (see also
Temperature, 
Hominid)
body (see Body temperature) 
iodine, 271 (see also Iodine)
environmental, 57 
natural Selection (see
Temporal cortex (see Cortex, temporal) 
Heterochrony)
Termites, 211 (see also 
pacemaker, 268
Hunter-gatherer) 
pineal, 268
Theory (see also Aquatic; Expensive 
pituitary, 268
Gut; Radiator; Savannah; 
post-natal development, 267
Shore-based Scenario; Woodland) 
protein intake, 276
evolutionary, 
proto-domestication, 269
parsimony (evolutionary 
pulsatile release, 267
theory), 286 
receptors, 266
plausibility (evolutionary 
reproduction, 267
theory), 286 
selenium, 140 (see also Selenium)
prediction (evolutionary 
stress response, 267, 268
theory), 286 
Thyroid stimulating hormone, (see also
Thermogenesis, 264 (see also Energy 
Iodine; Thyroid)
metabolism; Iodine; Metabolic 
iodine deficiency, 119
rate) 
thyroid (iodine) status, 124, 126

Index 
341
Thyroxine (see Thyroid hormone) 
Turtle, 57, 111, 216, 256 (see also
Tilapia (see cichlids) 
Shore-based foods)
Time, 220 (see also Leisure; Play; 
Twins,
Toys) 
fraternal, 186
aboriginal societies, 220 
human behaviour, 186
Tobias, Philip, 40, 241 
identical, 186
Tocopherol (see Vitamin E) 
innate capacity, 197
Tolerance (see Stress) 
Type 2 diabetes (see Diabetes)
Toolmaker(s), see Tools) 
Tyrosine, 184 (see also Amino acids;
Tool(s), (see also Prepared core 
Phenylketonuria)
technique; Toys)
Acheulian, 22 
Uganda, 244
H. habilis, 213 
United Nations Children's Fund,
industry (see Mousterian tool 
110
industry) 
Upright, stance (see Bipedal)
Mousterian (see Mousterian tool 
USA,
industry) 
coastal exploration, 294
primitive, chimpanzees, 22 
iodine deficiency, 125, 231
stone, 8, 15, 217, 240 (see also 
iron deficiency, 134
Stone tools)
Tooth (see Teeth) 
Valley, Rift (See Rift Valley)
Toys, 217 (see also Play; Time) 
Van der Merve, Nik, 261
brain function, 218 
Vascularization, see Blood supply
Tract, hair (see Hair tract) 
Vegan (see Vegetarianism)
Transferrin, 131 (see also Iron) 
Vegetarianism,
Transport, 
brain development, 163
electron (see Electron transport) 
(see also Brain Development)
oxygen (see Oxygen transport) 
human brain evolution, 211
Triacylglycerol (see Triglyceride) 
polyunsaturates, 162
Tricarboxylic acid cycle, 70 
Vegetation (see also Plants;
neurotransmitter synthesis, 71 
Shore-based foods)
Triglyceride (see also Adipocyte; Body 
carbon isotope ratios, 259-261
fat; Fatty Acid), 68, 87, 88 
coastal, 111
Triiodothyronine (see Thyroid 
Venous sinuses, 43, 44
hormone) 
(see also Australopithecines; Brain)
Trinkaus, Erik, 261 
Venus figurines, 218 (see also Cave art;
TSH (see Thyroid stimulating 
Cretin)
hormone) 
Verhaegen, Marc, 229, 232, 237-239,
Tubers, (see Roots) 
251, 257, 289 (see also Aquatic Ape
Turkana (see Lake) 
Theory: Evidence and Possible
Turkana Boy, 14 (see also H. ergaster; 
Scenarios)
Hominids) 
Vesicle (see neurotransmitter)

342 
Survival of the Fattest
Vessels, meningeal (see Meningeal 
Wading, (see also Wetlands;
vessels) 
Shore-based Scenario)
Visceral fat (see Body fat) 
Aquatic Theory (see Aquatic
Vision (see also Eye) 
Theory)
human behaviour, 196 
H. habilis, 256
Vitamin A, 116 
shore-based diet (see Shore-based
deficiency, 110 
diet)
Vitamin C, 205, 207, 264 
shorelines (see Shoreline)
Vitamin E, 140, 264 
Walking (see Bipedal,
Vitamin F, 82 (see Polyunsaturates) 
Knuckle-walking)
Volcanoes, 213, 243, 250 (see also 
Walter, Robert, 257-259
Climate) 
Water, 293-294 (see also Coastal
Volume, brain (see Brain size) 
exploration; Land-water interface)
Vulnerability, (see also Brain 
travel (stress tolerance), 274, 293
development; Brain evolution; 
Weight, brain (see also Brain size;
Shore-based Scenario) 
Birth weight)
altricial species, 53 
Wernicke's area, 237
auditory cortex, 64 
Western disease (see Disease; specific
baby fat, 53, 100 
diseases)
behaviour, 194 
Westhofer, Max, 234
brain, 31, 57, 209, 287 (see also 
Wetlands (see also Shorelines)
Brain) 
biomass, 249
development, 53, 58, 228, 231, 
bipedalism, 251
237, 289, 294 
coral reefs, 250
evolution (see Brain evolution) 
freshwater, 249
fuel supply, 58 
hominid evolution, 249
critical period, 55, 56 
marine, 250
degenerative diseases, 277 (see also 
Whale, 194
Disease) 
Wheeler, Peter, 204
exaptation, 201 
Wilson, EO (See Lumsden, Charles)
human evolution, 53 (see also 
Wilson's Disease, 279 (see also
Nutrition) 
Copper)
hypoxia, 59 
Window, critical (see Critical window)
insurance, 100 
Winick, Myrom, 281
malnutrition, 102 (see also 
Wisdom, 33
Malnutrition) 
Wolpoff, Milton, 9
nutrition, nutritional change, 102 
Woodlands,
(see also Nutrition) 
bipedalism, 222 (see also Bipedal)
plasticity, 58 
brain evolution, 223 (see also
precocial species, 53 
Brain)
resistance, 58 
Theory, xiii

Index 
343
World Health Organisation, 231,286 
deficiency, 110,113,138
Worship, 31 
electron transport, 148
food, content, 139, 143
Zambesi River, 250 
gene expression, 138
Zellweger syndrome, 164, 165 
hippocampus, 139
Zinc, (see also Brain selective 
hominid diets, 116
nutrients; Diet; Nutrition) 
mossy fibers, 139
absorption, 138 
oysters, 138
Acrodermatitis enteropathica, 138, 
polyunsaturates, synthesis, 147
279 
shore-based foods, 138, 139
brain, 139 (see also Brain; Brain 
(see Shore-based)
selective nutrients)

