i
Technology and the Virtues
ii

iii
TECHNOLOGY
AND THE VIRTUES
A Philosophical Guide
to a Future Worth Wanting
SHANNON VALLOR
1
iv
1
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It
furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark
of Oxford University Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press 198
Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2016
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly
permitted by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reproduction rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside
the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford
University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Vallor, Shannon, author.
Title: Technology and the virtues : a philosophical guide
to a future worth wanting / Shannon Vallor.
Description: New York : Oxford University Press, 2016. |
Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016004301 | ISBN 9780190498511 (hardcover : alk.
paper) |
ISBN 9780190498528 (ebook (updf )) | ISBN 9780190498535 (ebook
(epub)) |
ISBN 9780190498542 (online content)
Subjects: LCSH: Technology—Moral and ethical aspects. | Virtues.
Classification: LCC BJ59 .V34 2016 | DDC 179/.9—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016004301
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed by Sheridan Books, Inc., United States of America
v
Contents
Acknowledgements
ix
Introduction: Envisioning the Good Life in the 21st Century and Beyond

1
PART I : Foundations for a Technomoral Virtue Ethic
1. Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
17
1.1. The Contemporary Renewal of Virtue Ethics 20
1.2. Virtue Ethics and Philosophy of Technology 23
2. The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
35
2.1. Classical Virtue Traditions: Aristotelian, Confucian,
and Buddhist Ethics 36
2.2. The Shared Commitments of Virtue Traditions 42
2.3. The Need for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic 49
PART II : Cultivating the Technomoral Self: Classical Virtue
Traditions as a Contemporary Guide
3. The Practice of Moral Self- Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions
61
3.1. Learning from Other Virtue Traditions 61
3.2. Cultivating the Technomoral Self 63
3.3. Moral Habituation 66
vi

vi Contents
4. Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
76
4.1. Relational Understanding 76
4.2. Reflective Self- Examination 84
4.3. Intentional Self- Direction of Moral Development 91
5. Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
99
5.1. Moral Attention 99
5.2. Prudential Judgment 105
5.3. Appropriate Extension of Moral Concern 110
6. Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future: 21st Century Virtues
118
6.1. A Taxonomy of Technomoral Virtues 119
6.2. Honesty: Respecting Truth 120
6.3. Self- Control: Becoming the Author of Our Desires 123
6.4. Humility: Knowing What We Do Not Know 125
6.5. Justice: Upholding Rightness 127
6.6. Courage: Intelligent Fear and Hope 129
6.7. Empathy: Compassionate Concern for Others 132

6.8. Care: Loving Service to Others 138
6.9. Civility: Making Common Cause 140
6.10. Flexibility: Skillful Adaptation to Change 145
6.11. Perspective: Holding on to the Moral Whole 149
6.12 Magnanimity: Moral Leadership and Nobility of Spirit 151
6.13 Technomoral Wisdom: Unifying the Technomoral Virtues 154
PART III : Meeting the Future with Technomoral Wisdom, Or How
To Live Well with Emerging Technologies
7. New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
159
7.1. New Social Media and the Good Life 159
7.2. New Social Media and the Virtue of Self- Control 165
7.3. Media Multitasking, Moral Attention, and the Cultivation
of Empathy 170
7.4. New Social Media and Virtuous Self- Regard: Humility,
Honesty, and Perspective 174
7.5. New Social Media, Civic Virtue, and the Spiral of Silence 176
vii
Contents vii
7.6. Technomoral Wisdom and Leadership in a New Media

Age: Looking Forward 185
8. Surveillance and the Examined Life: Cultivating the Technomoral
Self in a Panoptic World
188
8.1. Virtue in the Panopticon: Challenging the New Cult of
Transparency 188
8.2. Technologies of the Examined Life 195
8.3. 'Smart' Surveillance and the Quantified Self 198
8.4. Surveillance and Moral 'Nudges' 202
8.5. Flourishing with Emerging Surveillance Technologies 204
9. Robots at War and at Home: Preserving the Technomoral Virtues
of Care and Courage
208
9.1. Robot Ethics as Virtue Ethics 209
9.2. Autonomous Military Robots: Courage and Hope for the
Human Future 211
9.3. 'Killer Robots' and Technomoral Courage: The 'Troubles
We Do Not Avoid' 215
9.4. Carebots and the Ethical Self 218
9.5. Technomoral Care in Relations of Human Dependence 220

10. Knowing What to Wish For: Technomoral Wisdom and Human
Enhancement Technology
230
10.1. Competing Visions of Human (or Posthuman) Flourishing 231
10.2. Technomoral Humility, Wisdom, and the Argument
from Hubris 237
10.3. Technomoral Virtue and Contemporary Life: A Crisis
of Moral Wishing 246
Epilogue
250
Notes
255
References
281
Index
299
viii
ix
Acknowledgements
t h i s w o r k i s indebted to far too many persons and organizations to
count, or name.

I am deeply grateful to the Markkula Center for Applied Ethics and others
at Santa Clara University who provided financial support for earlier phases
of this project. I owe an immense debt to the participants in the 2007
workshop at the University of Twente, Netherlands on "The Good Life in a
Technological Age,"
where this project was born; in particular I wish to thank Charles Ess for his
encouragement, intellectual engagement, and inspiration then and ever
since. This book is about humanity's need for more people with the
exemplary moral character and practical wisdom to help us navigate the
uncertain and rapidly shifting technological and social terrain ahead; in
Charles, at least, we have one.
I also thank the Arnold L. and Lois S. Graves Foundation for funding of
early research for the book. That research was assisted by the remarkable
hospitality and intellectual generosity of Philip. J. Ivanhoe and his family
and colleagues, who welcomed me to Hong Kong in 2010 and helped to
deepen my understanding of the Confucian virtue tradition.
The ideas in this book, at least the worthwhile ones, owe their mature shape
to the fellowship of my peers in the field of philosophy and ethics of
emerging technologies, with whom I have enjoyed countless stimulating
conversations, arguments, and whiskies. Though I should thank many more,
I am especially indebted to Don Howard, Patrick Lin, Evan Selinger, and
John Sul ins for their invaluable contributions to my thinking and their
enduring friendship.
To my editor Lucy Randall and others at OUP, thank you for bringing this
work into the light and making it better every step of the way.
Thanks to my grandfather Howard, who taught me at a very early age to
love science, truth, argument, and by example, virtue; to my parents
Kathleen and William Bainbridge for their boundless support, love, and
patience; and finally, to Dan, the deepest well of goodness, brilliance, and
love that I have ever known.
x

xi
Technology and the Virtues
xii
1
Introduction
Envisioning the Good Life
in the 21st Century and Beyond
i n m a y 2 0 1 4 , cosmologist Stephen Hawking, computer scientist Stuart
Russell, and physicists Max Tegmark and Frank Wilczek published an open
letter in the UK news outlet The Independent, sounding the alarm about the
grave risks to humanity posed by emerging technologies of artificial
intelligence. They invited readers to imagine these technologies
"outsmarting financial markets, out-inventing human researchers, out-
manipulating human leaders, and developing weapons we cannot even
understand."1 The authors note that while the successful creation of
artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to bring "huge benefits"
to our world, and would undoubtedly be "the biggest event in human
history ...
it might also be the last." Hawking echoed the warning later that year,
telling the BBC that unrestricted AI development "could spell the end of the
human race."
While some AI enthusiasts dismiss such warnings as fearmongering hype,
celebrated high- tech inventors Elon Musk, Steve Wozniak, Bill Gates, and
thousands of AI and robotics researchers have joined the chorus of voices
cal ing for wiser and more effective human oversight of these new
technologies.2
How worried should we be? More importantly: what should we do?

AI is only one of many emerging technologies— from genome editing and
3D
printing to a globally networked "Internet of Things"— shaping a future
unparalleled in human history in its promise and its peril. Are we up to the
challenge this future presents? If not, how can we get there? How can
humans hope to live well in a world made increasingly more complex and
unpredictable by emerging technologies? Though it will require the
remainder of the book to fully respond to that question, in essence my
answer is this: we need to cultivate in ourselves, collectively, a special kind
of moral character, one that expresses what I will call the technomoral
virtues.
2
2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
What do I mean by technomoral virtue? To explain this concept will require
introducing some ideas in moral philosophy, the study of ethics. At its most
basic, ethics is about what the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates called the
"good life": the kind of life that is most worthy of a human being, the kind
of life worth choosing from among all the different ways we might live.
While there are many kinds of lives worth choosing, most of us would
agree that there are also some kinds of lives not worth choosing, since we
have better alternatives. For example, a life filled mostly with willful
ignorance, cruelty, fear, pain, selfishness, and hatred might still have some
value, but it would not be a kind of life worth choosing for ourselves or our
loved ones, since there are far happier choices available to us— better and
more virtuous ways that one can live, for ourselves and everyone around us.
But what does ethics or moral philosophy have to do with technology?
In reality, human social practices, including our moral practices, have
always been intertwined with our technologies.3 Technological practices—
everything from agriculture and masonry to markets and writing— have
shaped the social, political, economic, and educational histories of human
beings. Today, we depend upon global systems of electronic

communication, digital computation, transportation, mass manufacturing,
banking, agricultural production, and health care so heavily that most of us
barely notice the extent to which our daily lives are technologically
conditioned. Yet even our earliest ancestors used technology, from handaxes
and spears to hammers and needles, and their tools shaped how they dealt
with one another— how they divided their labor, shared their resources and
living spaces, and managed their conflicts. Among our primate cousins,
female chimpanzees have been observed to stop fights among males
through technological disarmament— repeatedly confiscating stones from
an aggressor's hand.4
Ethics and technology are connected because technologies invite or afford
specific patterns of thought, behavior, and valuing; they open up new
possibilities for human action and foreclose or obscure others. For example,
the invention of the bow and arrow afforded us the possibility of killing an
animal from a safe distance— or doing the same to a human rival, a new
affordance that changed the social and moral landscape. Today's
technologies open their own new social and moral possibilities for action.
Indeed, human technological activity has now begun to reshape the very
planetary conditions that make life possible. Thus 21st century decisions
about how to live well— that is, about ethics— are not simply moral
choices. They are technomoral choices, for they depend on the evolving
affordances of the technological systems that we rely upon to support and
mediate our lives in ways and to degrees never before witnessed.
While ethics has always been embedded in technological contexts, humans
have, until very recently, been the primary authors of their moral choices,
and the consequences of those choices were usually restricted to impacts on
individual
3
Introduction
3
or local group welfare. Today, however, our aggregated moral choices in
technological contexts routinely impact the well- being of people on the

other side of the planet, a staggering number of other species, and whole
generations not yet born. Meanwhile it is increasingly less clear how much
of the future moral labor of our species will be performed by human
individuals. Driverless cars are already being programmed to make 'ethical'
driving decisions on our behalf while we relax and daydream, even as other
cars roll out of the factory programmed to commit the unethical act of
cheating on their innocent owners' emissions tests.5
High- frequency trading algorithms now direct the global flow of vital
goods and wealth at speeds and scales no human observer can follow.
Artificially intelligent life coach apps are here to 'nudge' us when we need
to lower our voices, call our mothers, or write nicer emails to our
employees. Advanced algorithms inscru-table to human inspection
increasingly do the work of labeling us as combatant or civilian, good loan
risk or future deadbeat, likely or unlikely criminal, hireable or unhireable.
For these reasons, a contemporary theory of ethics— that is, a theory of
what counts as a good life for human beings— must include an explicit
conception of how to live well with technologies, especially those which
are still emerging and have yet to become settled, seamlessly embedded
features of the human environment. Robotics and artificial intelligence, new
social media and communications technologies, digital surveillance, and
biomedical enhancement technologies are among those emerging
innovations that will radically change the kinds of lives from which humans
are able to choose in the 21st century and beyond. How can we choose
wisely from the apparently endless options that emerging technologies
offer? The choices we make will shape the future for our children, our
societies, our species, and others who share our planet, in ways never before
possible. Are we prepared to choose well?
This question involves the future, but what it really asks about is our readi-
ness to make choices in the present. The 21st century is entering its
adolescence, a time of great excitement, confusion, and intense anxiety, an
age both wildly hopeful and deeply troubled. As with many adolescents, our
era is also deeply self- absorbed. In popular and scholarly media, we find
both historical consciousness and the 'long view' of humanity giving way to
an obsessive quest to define the distinctive identity of the present age, an

identity almost always framed in technological terms. Whether we claim to
be living in the 'Age of Information,'
the 'Mobile Era,' the 'New Media Age,' or the 'Robot Age,' we seem to
think that defining the technological essence of our era will allow us to
better fathom the course of its future— our future.
Yet in one of those cruel paradoxes of adolescence, all our ruminations and
fevered speculations about the mature shape of life in this century seem
only to
4
4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
make the picture more opaque and unsettled, like a stream bottom kicked up
by shuffling feet. Among all the contingencies pondered by philosophers,
scientists, novelists, and armchair futurists, the possibilities presented by
emerging technology have proved to be the most enticing to the imagination
— and the most difficult to successfully predict. Of course, early visions of
a postindustrial technological society were strikingly prescient in many
respects. Debates about today's emerging technologies echo many of the
utopian and dystopian motifs of 20th century science fiction: fears and
hopes of a 'brave new world' of bioengineered humans constructed by
exquisite design rather than evolutionary chance; of humans working side-
by- side with intelligent robotic caregivers, surgeons, and soldiers; of
digitally- enabled 'Big Brothers' recording and analyzing our every act; and
of the rise of a globally networked hive mind in the 'cloud' that radically
transforms the nature of human communication, productivity, creativity, and
sociality.
Still, we cannot help but smile wistfully at the lacunae of even our most far-
seeing science fiction visionaries. In the classic Ray Bradbury tale 'The
Veldt,'

first published in 1950, we encounter the existential and moral dilemma of
the Hadley family, whose complete surrender to the technological comforts
of the
'Happy- life Home' has stripped their lives of labor, but also of joy,
purpose, and filial love. In a present marked by the increasingly
sophisticated design of 'smart homes,' Bradbury's story resonates still. It
may have taken a few decades longer than he expected, but affluent modern
families can now, just like the Hadleys, enjoy a home that anticipates their
every personal preference for lighting, room temperature, music, and a
perfectly brewed cup of coffee— and the 'smart homes'
of the future will even more closely approximate Bradbury's vision. We
also recognize all too well the Hadleys' parental anxiety and regret when
their children, irretrievably spoiled by the virtual world of their interactive
playroom, fly into an incandescent rage at the thought of having their
electronic amusements removed.
Yet today we can only laugh or cry when Lydia, the children's mother,
complains that her surrender to domestic technology has left her without
"enough to do," and too much "time to think." No technologically- savvy
21st century parent can identify with Lydia Hadley's existential plight.6
Rather, the promised land of unlimited technological leisure has given way
to a reality of electronic overstim-ulation and hypersaturation, a 24- hour
news cycle, and smartphones on which your boss texts you from the 18th
hole in Dubai while you sit at the dinner table wolfing down take- out,
supervising your child's Web research on whale sharks, feverishly trying to
get caught up on your email, responding to your Facebook invitations, and
updating the spreadsheet figures your colleagues need for their afternoon
presentation in Seoul. Leisure is one thing our age does not afford most
modern technology consumers, who struggle each night to ignore the
5
Introduction
5

incoming status updates on their bedside devices so that they may grab a
few precious hours of sleep before rejoining that electronic day that knows
neither dusk nor dawn.
Indeed, the contemporary human situation is far more complicated,
dynamic, and unstable than any of the worlds depicted in our first
imaginings of a high-tech future. Today, exponential leaps in technological
prowess and productivity are coeval with widespread economic stagnation,
terrestrial resource depletion, and rising ecological instability. A global
information society enabled by a massive electronic communications
network of unprecedented bandwidth and computing power has indeed
emerged; but far from enabling a 'new world order'
of a utopian or dystopian sort, the information age heralds an increasingly
disordered geopolitics and widening fractures in the public commons. The
rapid amplification of consumerism by converging innovations and ever-
shorter product marketing cycles continues apace; yet far from ensuring the
oft- predicted rise of technocratic states ruled by scientific experts, the
relationship between science, governance, and public trust is increasingly
contentious and unsettled.7
Paradoxically, such tensions appear to be greatest where scientific and
technical power have been most successfully consolidated and embedded
into our way of life; consider that the nation that gave birth to Apple,
Microsoft, Google, Intel, Amazon, and other tech behemoths has slashed
federal funding for basic science research, struggled with declining
scientific literacy and technical competence among its population, and
adopted increasingly ambivalent and politicized science policy— even as it
continues to shower the tech industry with tax loopholes and political
access.8
Such complexities remind us that predicting the general shape of
tomorrow's innovations is not, in fact, our biggest challenge: far harder,
and more significant, is the job of figuring out what we will do with these
technologies once we have them, and what they will do with us. This cannot
be done without attending to a host of interrelated political, cultural,
economic, environmental, and historical factors that co- direct human
innovation and practice. Indeed, a futurist's true aim is not to envision the

technological future but our techno social future— a future defined not by
which gadgets we invent, but by how our evolving technological powers
become embedded in co- evolving social practices, values, and institutions.
Yet by this standard, our present condition seems not only to defy confident
predictions about where we are heading, but even to defy the construction
of a coherent narrative about where exactly we are. Has the short history of
digital culture been one of overall human improvement, or decline? On a
developmental curve, are we approaching the next dizzying explosion of
technosocial progress as some believe, or teetering on a precipice awaiting
a calamitous fal , as others would have it?9
6
6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Should it matter whether our future can be envisioned with any degree of
confidence? Of course we might want to know where we are and where we
are heading, but humans characteristically want a lot of things, and not all
of these are necessary or even objectively worthwhile. Could it be that our
understandable adolescent curiosity about what awaits us in our century's
adulthood is, in the grand scheme of things, unimportant to satisfy? Let us
imagine for the sake of argument that given certain efforts, we could better
predict the future shape of life in this century. Other than idle curiosity,
what reason would we have to make such efforts? Why not just take the
future as it comes? Why strain to see any better through the fog of
technosocial contingencies presently obscuring our view? There is a simple
answer. Our growing technosocial blindness, a condition that I will call
acute technosocial opacity, makes it increasingly difficult to identify, seek,
and secure the ultimate goal of ethics— a life worth choosing; a life lived
well.
Ethics, defined broadly as reflective inquiry into the good life, is among the
oldest, most universal, and culturally significant intellectual preoccupations
of human beings. Few would deny that humans have always and generally
preferred to live well rather than badly, and have sought useful guidance in
meeting this desire. Yet the phenomenon of acute technosocial opacity is a

serious problem for ethics— and a relatively new one.10 The founders of
the most enduring classical traditions of ethics— Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas,
Confucius, the Buddha— had the luxury of assuming that the practical
conditions under which they and their cohorts lived would be, if not wholly
static, at least relatively stable. While they knew that unprecedented
political developments or natural calamities might at any time redefine the
ethical landscape, the safest bet for a moral sage of premodern times would
be that he, his fellows, and their children would confront essentially similar
moral opportunities and challenges over the course of their lives.
Without this modest degree of foresight, ethical norms would seem to have
little if any power to guide our actions. For even a timeless and universally
bind-ing ethical principle presupposes that we can imagine how adopting
that principle today is likely to sustain or enrich the quality of our lives
tomorrow. Few are moved by an ethical norm or ideal until we have been
able to envision its concrete expression in a future form of life that is
possible for us, one that we recognize as relevantly similar to, but
qualitatively better than, our current one. When our future is opaque, it is
harder to envision the specific conditions of life we will face tomorrow that
can be improved by following an ethical principle or rule today, and such
ideals may then fail to motivate us.
While philosophical ethics first emerged in Greece and Asia in the 6th- 4th
centuries bce, the need for ethical guidance as we face our future applies
equally to modern systems of ethics. Yet modern ethical frameworks often
provide fewer
7
Introduction
7
resources for mitigating the difficulty posed by an uncertain future than do
classical traditions. For example, the ethical framework of 18th century
German philosopher Immanuel Kant supplied a single moral principle,
known as the categorical imperative, which is supposed to be able to
resolve any ethical dilemma. It simply asks a person to consider whether

she could will the principle upon which she is about to act in her particular
case to be universally obeyed by all other persons in relevantly similar
cases.11 If she can't will her own 'subjective' principle of action to function
as a universal rule for everyone to follow, then her act is morally wrong. So
if I cannot will a world in which everyone lies whenever it would spare
them trouble, then it cannot be right for me to lie.
Although it can be applied to any situation, the rule itself is highly abstract
and general. It tells us nothing specific about the shape of moral life in 18th
century Europe, nor that of any other time or place. At first we might think
this makes the principle more useful to us today, since it is so broad that it
can apply to any future scenario we might imagine. Yet this intuition is
mistaken. Consider the dutiful Kantian today, who must ask herself whether
she can will a future in which all our actions are recorded by pervasive
surveillance tools, or a future where we all share our lives with social
robots, or a future in which all humans use biomedical technology to
radically transform their genes, minds, and bodies. How can any of these
possible worlds be envisioned with enough clarity to inform a person's will?
To envision a world of pervasive and constant surveillance, you need to
know what will be done with the recordings, who might control them, and
how they would be accessed or shared. To know whether to will a future full
of social robots, you would first need to know what roles such robots would
play in our lives, and how they might transform human interactions. To will
a world where all humans enhance their own bodies with technology, won't
you first need to know which parts of ourselves we would enhance, in what
ways, and what those changes would do to us in the long run, for example,
whether we would end up improving or degrading our own ability to reason
morally? Once even a fraction of the possible paths of technosocial
development are considered, the practical uncertainties will swamp the
cognitive powers of any Kantian agent, paralyzing her attempt to choose in
a rational and universally consistent manner.
Modern utilitarian ethics of the sort promoted by 19th- century British
philosophers Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill fares little better by
telling us that we may secure the good life simply by choosing, among the
available courses of action, that which promises the greatest happiness for
all those affected. The problem of discerning which course of action

promises the greatest overall happiness or the least harm— among all the
novel paths of biomedical, mechanical, and computational development
open to us— is simply incalculable. The technological potentials are too
opaque, and too many, to assign reliable probabilities
8
8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
of specific outcomes. Moreover, technology often involves effects on
humanity created by the aggregate choices of many groups and individuals.
When we factor in the interaction effects between converging technologies,
social practices, and institutions, the difficulty becomes intractable.
In their book Unfit for the Future, philosophers Ingmar Persson and Julian
Savulescu note that the technological and scientific advances of the 20th
century have further destabilized the traditional moral calculus by granting
humans an unprecedented power to bring about "Ultimate Harm," namely,
"making worthwhile life forever impossible on this planet."12 We might
destroy ourselves with a bioengineered virus for which we have no natural
defenses. Carbon dioxide, ni-trogen, and phosphorus from large- scale
industry and agriculture may acidify our oceans and poison our waterways
beyond repair. Or we might unleash a global nuclear holocaust, a risk that
experts warn is once again on the rise.13 How can existential risks such as
these, scenarios that would ruin any future possibility for happiness,
possibly be factored into the calculation?
Moreover, emerging technologies such as nanomedicine and
geoengineering in theory have the potential to forestall 'Ultimate Harm' to
humanity or to cause it; and not enough is known to reliably calculate the
odds of either scenario. Add to this the fact that engineers and scientists are
constantly envisioning new and untested avenues of technological
development and the insolubility of the moral calculus becomes even more
obvious. John Stuart Mill himself noted that the practicality of utilitarian
ethics relies heavily upon our collective inheritance of centuries of
accumulated moral wisdom about how to maximize utility in the known

human environment.14 Even on the timescale of our own lives, this
environment is increasingly unstable and unpredictable, and it is not clear
how much of our accumulated wisdom still applies.
Given this unprecedented degree of technosocial opacity, how can humans
continue to do ethics in any serious and useful way ? The question compels
an answer; to abandon the philosophical project of ethics in the face of
these conditions would not only amplify the risk of 'Ultimate Harm,' it
would violate a deep-seated human impulse. Consider once again Ray
Bradbury, whose stories are still among the most widely read and
appreciated in the tradition of science fiction.
What drives the imagination of a storyteller like Bradbury, and what makes
his stories resonate with so many? Reading his most lauded works
Fahrenheit 451, The Martian Chronicles, and the collection The Illustrated
Man (which leads with
'The Veldt'), one notices how closely Bradbury's vision tracked human
beings of a future Earth, or human descendants of Earth. Why this
anthropological fidelity in a writer hardly wanting for imaginative
horsepower?
Even the Martians in Bradbury's stories serve as literary foils who expose
and reflect upon the distinctive powers, obsessions, and weaknesses of
human beings.
9
Introduction
9
And why is the human future usually envisioned on a time scale of fifty
years, or a hundred and fifty? Why not a thousand years, or ten thousand?
Why do so many of Bradbury's tales have a patently ethical arc, driven less
by saintly heroes and dia-bolical villains than by ordinary, flawed humans
working out for themselves how well or how poorly their lives in an era
defined by rockets, robots, and 'televisors'

have gone? Here is one plausible answer: Bradbury seemed compelled to
imagine how human beings more or less like himself, and those he cared
about, would fare in the not so distant technological future— to envision the
possibilities for us living well with emerging technologies, and more often,
the possibilities for our failing to live well.
All of this is meant to suggest that the ethical dilemmas we face as 21st
century humans are not 'business as usual,' and require a novel approach.
Now, it is a common habit of many academics to roll their eyes at the first
hint of a suggestion that the human situation has entered some radically
new phase. As a prophylactic against overwrought claims of this kind, these
sober- minded individuals keep on hand an emergency intellectual toolkit
(which perhaps should be labeled 'Break Glass In Case of Moral Panic')
from which they can readily draw a litany of examples of any given
assertion of transformative social change being trumpeted just as loudly a
century ago, or five, or ten. This impulse is often well- motivated: libraries
worldwide are stocked with dusty treatises by those who, either from a lack
of historical perspective or an intemperate desire to sell books, falsely
asserted some massive seismic shift in human history that supposedly
warranted great cultural alarm.
Yet sometimes things really do change in ways that we would be remiss to
ignore, and which demand that we loosen up our scripted cultural patterns
of response. At risk of inviting the scorn of the keepers of academic
dispassion, I suggest that this is one of those times. The technologies that
have emerged in the last half century have led to the unprecedented
economic and physical interdependence of nations and peoples and an
equally unprecedented transmissibility of information, norms, ideas, and
values. A great many intellectual and cultural scripts are being rewritten as
a result— scripts about modern state power, about socioeconomic
development, labor and human progress, and about our relationship with
our environment, to offer just a few examples. The conventional scripts of
philosophical ethics must be rewritten as well. While an irreducible
plurality of ethical narratives is both inevitable and desirable in a world as
culturally diverse as ours, we need a common framework in which these
narratives can be situated if humans are going to be able to address these
emerging problems of collective technosocial action wisely and well. This

framework must facilitate not only a shared moral dialogue, but also a
global commitment to the cultivation of the specific technomoral habits and
virtues required to meet this challenge.
10
10
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Fortunately for us, a tradition already exists in philosophy that can provide
such a framework. That tradition is virtue ethics, a way of thinking about
the good life as achievable through specific moral traits and capacities that
humans can actively cultivate in themselves.15 Part I of this book explains
the distinctive advantages of a virtue- driven approach to emerging
technology ethics, and anticipates some of the challenges this project may
face. Part II develops the theoretical foundations for our approach. Here we
explore the rich conceptual resources of the classical virtue traditions of
Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist ethics, from which we construct a
contemporary framework of technomoral virtues explicitly designed to
foster human capacities for flourishing with new technologies. Part III
applies the framework to four domains of emerging technology (social
media, surveillance, robotics, and biomedical enhancement technology)
that are likely to reshape human existence in the next one hundred years,
assuming that we are fortunate and prudent enough to make it to the 22nd
century.
No ethical framework can cut through the general constraints of
technosocial opacity. The contingencies that obscure a clear vision of even
the next few decades of technological and scientific development are simply
far too numerous to resolve— in fact, given accelerating physical,
geopolitical, and cultural changes in our present environment, these
contingencies and their obscuring effects are likely to multiply rather than
diminish. What this book offers is not an ethical solution to technosocial
opacity, but an ethical strategy for cultivating the type of moral character
that can aid us in coping, and even flourishing, under such challenging
conditions.

The framework developed in the following chapters adapts Aristotelian,
Confucian, and Buddhist reflections on moral development and virtue to
our need for a profile of technomoral virtues for 21st century life.16 These
will not be radically new traits of character, for they must remain consistent
with the basic moral psychology of our species. Rather the technomoral
virtues are new alignments of our existing moral capacities, adapted to a
rapidly changing environment that increasingly calls for collective moral
wisdom on a global scale. In these challenging circumstances, the
technomoral virtues offer the philosophical equivalent of a blind man's
cane. While we face a future that remains cloaked in a technosocial fog, this
need not mean that we go into it unprepared or ill-equipped, especially
when it comes to matters of ethical life. The technomoral virtues, cultivated
through the practices and habits of moral self- cultivation that we can learn
from the classical virtue traditions examined in this book, are humanity's
best chance to cope and even thrive in the midst of the great uncertainties
and vicissitudes of technosocial life that lie ahead.17 This hope will only be
realized, however, if these virtues are more consciously cultivated in our
families, schools, and communities, supported and actively encouraged by
our local and
11
Introduction
11
global institutions, and exercised not only individually but together, in acts
of collective human wisdom. This is a tall order; but not beyond our
capabilities.
There is, however, what philosophers call a 'bootstrapping problem.' Our
hope of flourishing in this and coming centuries— or even of securing our
continued existence in the face of species- level threats created by our
present lack of technomoral wisdom— requires us to act very soon to
commit significant educational and cultural resources to the local and
global cultivation of such wisdom.

The framework articulated in this book, which draws strength from multiple
cultural sources, can help us accomplish just that. Yet our existing
technomoral vices, along with the normal human range of cognitive biases
and limitations, impede many of us from grasping the depth, scope, or
immediacy of the threats to human flourishing now confronting us. Even
among those who recognize the dangers, many fail to grasp that the
solution must be an ethical one. We cannot lift ourselves out of the hole we
are in simply by creating more and newer technologies, so long as these
continue to be designed, marketed, distributed, and used by humans every
bit as deficient in technomoral wisdom as the generations that used their
vast new technological powers to dig the hole in the first place!
While the first step out of the hole requires reallocating individual, local,
and global resources to technomoral education and practice, we can and
must make wise and creative use of technology to aid in the effort. Each of
the emerging technologies explored in the book has the potential to be
designed and used in ways that reinforce, rather than impede, our efforts to
become wiser and more virtuous technological citizens. Thus our way out of
the hole is a recursive procedure, in which traditional philosophical and
educational techniques for cultivating virtue are used to generate the
motivation to design and adopt new technological practices that shape our
moral habits in more constructive ways. These in turn can reinforce our
efforts of moral self- cultivation, forming a virtuous circle that makes us
even more ethically discerning in technosocial contexts as a result of
increasing moral practice in those domains. This growing moral expertise
can enable the development of still better, more ethical, and more
sustainable technologies. Used as alternating and mutually reinforcing
handholds, this interweaving of moral and technological expertise is a
practical and powerful strategy for cultivating technomoral selves: human
beings with the virtues needed to flourish together in the 21st century and
beyond.
The Motivation of the Book
I was driven to write this book by a deep moral concern for the future of
human character, one that arose over many years of watching my own

moral and intellectual habits, and those of my students, be gradually yet
profoundly transformed
12
1 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
by ever new waves of emerging digital technology. Far from regarding my
initial classroom forays into this topic as silly technophobia, my students
responded with overwhelming gratitude, even desperation, for a chance to
talk about how their own happiness, health, security, and moral character
were being shaped by their new technological habits in ways that often
bypassed their understanding or conscious choice.
These concerns will be familiar to readers of popular writing on digital
culture. Nicholas Carr, Evgeny Morozov, and Jaron Lanier are just a few of
the prominent cultural critics who have recently expressed alarm at the
possibility, even likelihood, that our mediatized digital culture is
undermining core human values, capacities, and virtues. Carr's The
Shallows warns us of deleterious cognitive and moral effects that our new
digital consumption habits may be having on our brains. Morozov's The Net
Delusion and To Save Everything, Click Here challenge our unreflective
faith in technocratic 'solutionism.' From Lanier, a computer scientist and
pioneer innovator of virtual reality technology, came the widely read
humanistic manifesto You Are Not a Gadget, which laments the domination
of contemporary technosocial life by the increasingly libertarian and
antihumanistic values celebrated by many Silicon Valley technologists:
unrestrained capital-ism, consumerism, and reductive efficiency.
This book shares with these critics a deeply humanistic and explicitly mor-
alized conception of value. It assumes that the 'good life,' by which we
mean a human future worth seeking, choosing, building, and enjoying, must
be a life lived by and with persons who have cultivated some degree of
ethical character.

It assumes that this is the only kind of human life that is truly worth
choosing, despite the perpetual challenges we encounter in building and
sustaining such lives. It also holds that a good and choiceworthy life has
never been attained in any great measure by isolated individuals, but only
by persons who were fortunate enough to enjoy some degree of care,
cooperation, and support from other humans, and who were highly
motivated to give the same. This book is therefore fundamentally
inconsistent with antihumanistic and neoliberal philosophies, and if Lanier
is right, inconsistent with the philosophy of many of those driving the
emerging technological developments it proposes to examine.
Yet the reader will also find in this book a resolute hope for the future of
human flourishing with, not without or in spite of, the technosocial
innovations that will continue to shape and enrich our lives for as long as
human culture endures. As a scholar who chose out of all possible
specialties the philosophy of science and technology, who as a young girl
wrote adventure games in BASIC
for her Commodore PET and eschewed the Barbie Dream'Vette in favor of
Star Wars AT- AT and X- Wing toys, it is simply impossible for me to be
antitechnology, personally or philosophically. Indeed, to be antitechnology
is in some sense
13
Introduction
13
to be antihuman, for we are what we do and make, and humans have always
engineered our worlds as mirrors of our distinctive needs, desires, values,
and beliefs.
Of course we are not alone— increasingly, researchers find other intelligent
animals such as birds, elephants, and cephalopods reshaping their
environments and practices in surprisingly skillful and creative ways.
Perhaps to be antitechnology is also to be antilife, or antisentience. But
however widely we share this part of ourselves with other creatures,

humanity without technology is not a desirable proposition— it is not even
a meaningful one. The only meaningful questions are: which technologies
shall we create, with what knowledge and designs, afford-ing what, shared
with whom, for whose benefit, and to what greater ends? These are the
larger questions driving this book. Yet humans lacking the technomoral
habits and virtues described within its pages could, I think, never hope to
answer them. Let us not surrender that hope.
14
15
PART I
Foundations for a
Technomoral Virtue Ethic
16
17
1
Virtue Ethics, Technology,
and Human Flourishing
t o s o m e , t h e title of this chapter may seem faintly anachronistic. In
popular moral discourse, the term 'virtue' often retains lingering
connotations of Victorian sexual mores, or other historical associations
with religious conceptions of morality that focus narrowly on ideals of piety,
obedience, and chastity. Outside of the moral context, contemporary use of
the term 'virtue' expresses something roughly synonymous with 'advantage'
(e.g., "the virtue of this engineering approach is that it more effectively
limits cost overruns"). Neither use captures the special meaning of 'virtue'
in the context of philosophical ethics. So what does virtue mean in this
context? How does it relate to cultivating moral character?

And why should virtue, a concept rooted in philosophical theories of the
good life dating back to the 5th century bce, occupy the central place in a
book about how 21st century humans can seek to live well with emerging
technologies?
The term 'virtue' has its etymological roots in the Latin virtus, itself linked
to the ancient Greek term arête, meaning 'excellence.' In its broadest sense,
the Greek concept of virtue refers to any stable trait that allows its
possessor to excel in fulfilling its distinctive function: for example, a
primary virtue of a knife would be the sharpness that enables it to cut well.
Yet philosophical discussions of ethics by Plato and Aristotle in the 5th and
4th centuries bce reveal a growing theoretical concern with distinctly
human forms of arête, and here the concept acquires an explicitly moral
sense entailing excellence of character.1 A distinct but related term de (德)
appears in classical Chinese ethics from approximately the same period. De
originally meant a characteristic 'power' or influence, but in Confucian
thought it acquired the sense of a distinctly ethical power of the exemplary
person, one that fosters 'uprightness' or 'right- seeing.'2 Buddhist ethics
makes use of a comparable concept, ś īla, implying character that
coordinates and
18
1 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
upholds right conduct.3 The perfection of moral character (ś īla pāramitā)
in Buddhism expresses a sense of cultivated personal excellence akin to
other ethical conceptions of virtue. Thus the concept of 'virtue' as a
descriptor of moral excellence has for millennia occupied a central place in
various normative theories of human action— that is, theories that aim to
prescribe certain kinds of human action as right or good.
In the Western philosophical tradition, the most influential account of virtue
is Aristotle's, articulated most fully in his Nicomachean Ethics (~350 bce).
Other notable accounts of virtue in the West include those of the Stoics, St.
Thomas Aquinas, David Hume, Francis Hutcheson, and Friedrich

Nietzsche. Yet Aristotle remains the dominant influence on the conceptual
profile of virtue most commonly engaged by contemporary ethicists, and
this profile will be our starting point. While cultural and philosophical
limitations of the Aristotelian model will lead us to extend and modify this
profile in subsequent chapters, its basic practical commitments will remain
largely intact.
Moral virtues are understood by Aristotle to be states of a person's
character: stable dispositions such as honesty, courage, moderation, and
patience that promote their possessor's reliable performance of right or
excellent actions. Such actions, when the result of genuine virtue, are not
only praiseworthy in themselves but imply the praiseworthiness of the
person performing them. In human beings, genuine virtues of character are
not gifts of birth or passive circumstance, nor can they be taught in any
simple sense. They are states that the person must cultivate in herself, and
that once cultivated, lead to deliberate, effective, and reasoned choices of
the good.4 The virtuous state emerges gradually from habitual and
committed practice and study of right actions. Thus one builds the virtue of
courage only by repeatedly performing courageous acts; first by patterning
one's behavior after exemplary social models of human courage, and later
by activating one's acquired ability to see for oneself what courage calls for
in a given situation.
Virtue implies an alignment of the agent's feelings, beliefs, desires, and
perceptions in ways that are appropriate to the varied practical arenas and
circumstances in which the person is called to act.5 Moral virtues are
conceived as personal excellences in their own right; their value is
therefore not exhausted in the good actions or consequences they promote.
When properly integrated, individual virtues contribute to a person's
character writ large; that is, they motivate us to describe such a person as
virtuous, rather than merely noting their embodiment of a particular virtue
such as courage, honesty, or justice. States of character contrary to virtue
are vices, and a person whose character is dominated by these traits is
therefore vicious— broadly incapable of living well.
Most understandings of virtue ethics make room for something like what
Aristotle called phronēsis, variously translated as prudence, prudential

reason,
19
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
19
or practical wisdom.6 This virtue directs, modulates, and integrates the
enactment of a person's individual moral virtues, adjusting their habitual
expression to the unique moral demands of each situation. A fully virtuous
person, then, is never blindly or reactively courageous or benevolent—
rather, her virtues are expressed intelligently, in a manner that is both
harmonious with her overall character and appropriate to the concrete
situation with which she is confronted.7
Virtues enable their possessor to strike the mean between an excessive and
a deficient response, which varies by circumstance. The honest person is
not the one who mindlessly spills everyone's secrets, but the one who knows
how much truth it is right to tell, and when and where to tell it, to whom,
and in what manner.8
Reasoning is therefore central to virtue ethics. Yet unlike theories of
morality that hinge on rationality alone, such as Kant's, here reason must
work with rather than against or independently of the agent's habits,
emotions, and desires. The virtuous person not only tends to think and act
rightly, but also to feel and want rightly.9
A virtuous person is not merely conceived as good, they are also understood
to be moving toward the accomplishment of a good life; that is, they are
living well. In most cases, they enjoy a life of the sort that others recognize
as admirable, desirable, and worthy of being chosen. Of course not every
life that appears desirable or admirable is, in fact, so. Conversely, a
virtuous person with the misfortune to live among the vicious is unlikely to
be widely admired, although this does nothing to diminish the fact of their
living well. The active flourishing of the virtuous person is not a subjective
appearance; virtue just is the activity of living well. This means that while
virtue ethics can allow for many different types of flourishing lives, it is

incompatible with moral relativism. There are certain biological,
psychological, and social facts about human persons that constrain what it
can mean for us to flourish, just as a nutrient- starved, drought- parched
lawn fails to flourish whether or not anyone notices its poor condition.
While the cultivation of virtue is not egoistic, since it does not aim at
securing the agent's own good independently of the good of others, a
virtuous character is conceptually inseparable from the possibility of a
good life for the agent.10 This is why Aristotle describes the virtuous
person as objectively happy; even in misfortune they will retain more of
their happiness than the vicious would.11 Although it is widely recognized
that the Greek term eudaimonia, which we translate as 'happiness,' is far
richer than the modern, psychological sense of that term (an issue to which
we will return later in this book), it will serve our preliminary analysis well
to note that the classical virtue ethical tradition regards virtue as a
necessary, if not sufficient, condition for living well and happily.12
If thinkers in this tradition are correct, then just as in every previous human
era, living well in the 21st century will demand the successful cultivation of
moral
20
2 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
virtue. Yet given what was noted at the beginning of this chapter— namely,
that the popular understanding of virtue is largely divorced from the
philosophical teachings of virtue traditions— we have to ask: how can we
possibly reconnect popular ideas about living well with technology to a
robust discourse about the moral virtues actually needed to achieve that
end? While a satisfactory answer to this question cannot be given until later
in this book, it may be helpful to briefly examine the circumstances that
have led to the revival of contemporary philosophical discourse about the
moral virtues and their role in the good life.
1.1 The Contemporary Renewal

of Virtue Ethics
Ethical theories in which the concept of virtue plays an essential and
central role are collectively known as theories of virtue ethics. Such
theories treat virtue and character as more fundamental to ethics than
moral rules or principles. Advocates of other types of ethical theory
generally see virtues as playing a lesser and more derivative role in
morality; these include the two approaches that previously dominated
philosophical ethics in the modern West: consequentialist ethics (for
example, Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill's utilitarianism) and
deontological or rule- based ethics (such as Immanuel Kant's categorical
imperative).13
Compared with these alternatives, virtue ethics stood in general disfavor in
the West for much of the 19th and 20th centuries. Reasons for the relative
neglect of virtue ethics in this period include its historical roots in tightly
knit, premodern societies, which appeared to make the approach
incompatible with Enlightenment ideals of modern cosmopolitanism.
Thanks to the medieval philosopher St. Thomas Aquinas's use of
Aristotelian ideas throughout his writings, virtue ethics had also acquired
strong associations with the Thomistic moral the-ology of the Catholic
Church. This made it an even less obvious candidate for a universal and
secular ethic. Virtue ethics was seen as incompatible with evolutionary
science, which denied what Aristotle and many other virtue ethicists had
assumed— that human lives are naturally guided toward a telos, a single
fixed goal or final purpose. Virtue ethics' emphasis on habit and emotion
was also seen as undermining rationality and moral objectivity; its focus on
moral persons rather than moral acts was often conflated with egoism.
Finally, virtue ethics' eschewing of universal and fixed moral rules was
thought by some to render it incapable of issuing reliable moral
guidance.14
The contemporary reversal of the fortunes of virtue ethics began with the
publication of G.E.M. Anscombe's 1958 essay "Modern Moral
Philosophy," in which she sharply criticized modern deontological and
utilitarian frameworks for their narrow preoccupations with law, duty,
obligation, and right to the exclusion

21
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
21
of considerations of character, human flourishing, and the good. Anscombe
also claimed that modern moral theories of right and wrong, having
detached themselves from their conceptual origins in religious law, were
now crippled by vacuity or incoherence, supplying poor foundations for
secular ethics. Her proposal that moral philosophers abandon such theories
and revisit the conceptual foundations of virtue was the guiding inspiration
for a new generation of thinkers, whose diverse works have restored the
philosophical reputation of virtue ethics as a serious competitor to
Kantianism, utilitarianism, and other rule- or principle- based theories of
morality.15 Among Western philosophers, scholarly interest in virtue ethics
continues to grow today thanks to the prominent work of neo- Aristotelian
thinkers such as Alasdair MacIntyre, John McDowell, Martha Nussbaum,
Rosalind Hursthouse, and Julia Annas, to name just a few.
Yet Anscombe was clear that Aristotelian virtue theory was not a
satisfactory modern ethic. Even contemporary virtue ethicists who identify
as neo- Aristotelian typically disavow one or more of Aristotle's theoretical
commitments, such as his view of human nature as having a natural telos or
purpose, or his claims about the biological and moral inferiority of women
and non- Greeks. No contemporary virtue ethicist can deny that there are
significant problems, ambiguities and lacunae in Aristotle's account;
whether these can be amended, clari-fied, and filled in without destroying
the integrity or contemporary value of his framework is a matter of ongoing
discussion. As a consequence, contemporary Western virtue ethics
represents not a single theoretical framework but a diverse range of
approaches. Many remain neo- Aristotelian, while others are Thomistic,
Stoic, Nietzschean, or Humean in inspiration, and some offer radically new
theoretical foundations for moral virtue.16
In addition to internal disagreements, the contemporary renewal of virtue
ethics has met with external resistance from critics who challenge the moral
psychology of character upon which virtue theories rely. Using evidence

from familiar studies such as the Milgram and Stanford prison experiments,
along with more recent variations, these critics argue that moral behavior
is determined not by stable character traits of individuals, but by the
concrete situations in which moral agents find themselves.17 Fortunately,
virtue ethicists have been able to respond to this 'situationist' challenge.
First, the impact of unconscious situational influences, blind spots, and
cognitive biases on moral behavior is entirely compatible with virtue ethics,
which already regards human moral judgments as imperfect and
contextually variable. Moreover, unconscious biases can, once discovered,
be mitigated by a range of compensating moral and social techniques.18
Perhaps the most powerful response to the situationists is that robust moral
virtue is by definition exemplary rather than typical; indeed, the
experiments most often used as evidence against the existence of virtue
consistently
22
2 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
reveal substantial minorities of subjects who respond with exemplary moral
resistance to situational pressure— exactly what virtue ethics predicts.19
Thus despite its critics, the contemporary renewal of virtue ethics as a
compelling alternative to principle- and rule- based ethics shows no sign of
losing steam; if anything, intensified critical scrutiny is a healthy indicator
of virtue ethics' returning philosophical strength.
While a survey of contemporary virtue ethics in the West might stop here, it
would be dangerously provincial and chauvinistic to ignore the equally rich
virtue ethical traditions of East and Southeast Asia, especially Confucian
and Buddhist virtue ethics. While there is important contemporary work
being done in this area, relatively few Anglo- American virtue ethicists have
acknowledged or attempted to engage this work.20 This is a substantial
loss. To ignore the content of active and longstanding virtue traditions with
related, but very distinct, conceptions of human flourishing is to forgo an
opportunity to gain a deeper critical perspective on the admittedly narrow
preoccupations of Aristotelian virtue theory.21

As we move beyond the realm of theory and into the domain of applied
virtue ethics, Western provincialism becomes entirely unsustainable; for
applied ethics— which tackles real- world moral problems through the lens
of philosophy— is increasingly confronted with problems of global and
collective action. Environmental ethics offers the starkest selection of
practical problems demanding global cooperation and coordinated human
responses that reach across national, philosophical, and ethnic lines, but
this is hardly an isolated case.
The expansion of global markets for new technologies is having profound
and systemic moral impacts on the entire human community— primarily by
strengthening the shared economic, cultural, and physical networks upon
which our existence and flourishing increasingly depend. If we look at the
spread of global information and communications systems, unmanned
weapons systems, consumer robotics, or genetic engineering, we see that
emerging technologies and their effects do not respect the cultural and
philosophical boundaries that separate capitalists from socialists,
Buddhists from Christians, or neo- Confucians from neo- Aristotelians.
It may be, for example, that liberal Europeans value personal privacy in a
manner that is, on theoretical grounds, quite distinct from the way in which
privacy values are framed in traditional Chinese society, where boundaries
between self and community are far less sharp.22 Yet if Google aims to
connect us al , and we want Google to act ethically with respect to our
privacy concerns, then it cannot in practical terms be true that these
distinct privacy values have nothing to do with one another— as illustrated
by the cultural complexities of the dispute over the European Court of
Justice's 2014 decision that EU citizens have a fundamental human "right
to be forgotten" by search engines. Likewise, applied ethicists
23
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
23
must increasingly attend to cultural differences between Japanese, South
Korean, and American attitudes toward robots precisely because of

emerging market incentives to develop robotic solutions to various
demographic and military challenges these nations share.23 And if
international tribunals of justice and human rights are to have any
continuing legitimacy, they will have to find ways of successfully framing
the ethical stakes of technologies such as autonomous weapons that effect
significant change upon global habits of military and political practice.
In the midst of such developments, ethical discourse that speaks only to the
concerns of a particular moral or philosophical 'tribe' will be helpless to
confront the ethical impact of the technosocial realities that increasingly
address humans collectively— realities which demand the effective
cultivation and application of some measure of cooperative human wisdom.
1.2 Virtue Ethics and Philosophy
of Technology
In the Introduction, we identified the emerging conditions of acute
technosocial opacity: rapid technological, sociopolitical, and
environmental change accompanied by existential risks that make the
ethical pursuit of the good life in the 21st century extraordinarily
challenging and fraught with uncertainty. I suggested that our current
patterns of thinking about ethics and the good life may well prove
ineffective, deleterious, or even catastrophic if we do not adapt them to
these new technosocial realities. I also claimed that new moral resources
for meeting this challenge with grace and wisdom can be found in the
philosophical tradition of virtue ethics. Having now outlined the general
significance of the term 'virtue ethics' in classical and contemporary
philosophy, and the cultural scope of our interest in virtue ethical
frameworks, let us turn to the important task of explaining more fully why
this type of ethical approach, more so than the obvious alternatives, offers a
uniquely helpful scaffold for a new technosocial ethics.
Let me begin by explaining further why we should be dissatisfied with the
primary alternatives. Each is vulnerable to several well- known objections.
Religious laws and norms speak only to their believers, and thus are poor
candidates for a global technosocial ethic. Utilitarianism, which employs a
universal moral calculus designed to maximize the greatest good for all

concerned, is often criticized for decoupling the moral worth of acts from
the moral worth of persons, and for legitimizing choices in which the lives
or well- being of a minority may be deliberately sacrificed for a greater
overall yield of happiness. Kantian deontology, which supplies a single
categorical imperative mandating universal rational consistency in moral
action, is criticized for treating the rational consistency of the agent as
more important to morality than natural human bonds of care and
concern.24
24
2 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Kantian and utilitarian ethics have also been thought to be overly
demanding, for example, in asking agents to be impartial in weighing the
competing interests of strangers and loved ones. Such considerations lead
many to conclude that these accounts stray too far from common moral
intuitions.25 Still, the above criticisms can be difficult to prosecute without
begging the question in favor of a virtue- or character- based account.
Fortunately, there is a more fundamental and compelling reason to prefer
virtue ethics, one made increasingly relevant by the conditions of growing
technosocial opacity to which 21st century humans are subject.
A well- known weakness of virtue ethics' competitors is their adherence to
rules or fixed principles as the final arbiters of sound moral judgment.
Consider Kant's categorical imperative and its famous blanket injunction
against lying, even to the "inquiring murderer" at our door who wishes to
know if we are sheltering the innocent person he wishes to kill. Or recall the
equally familiar challenge to utilitarian morality in which it is noted that
the principle of greatest happiness can seemingly be used to justify the
brutal execution of a randomly chosen scape-goat. When such apparent
counterexamples cannot be explained away, defenders of rule or principle-
based ethics are generally left with two options: admit limited exceptions to
the moral principle, or accept and try to defend these morally
counterintuitive implications. By rendering the theory unpalatable or
offensive to many if not most reasonable people, the latter strategy

preserves the integrity of the theory at the expense of its motivating force.
The former strategy, however, tends to produce ad hoc and apparently
arbitrary exceptions, undermining confidence in the principle upon which
the whole theory rests.
Virtue ethicists, on the other hand, avoid this dilemma by denying that right
action is ever captured by fixed principles or rules, and claiming instead
that moral principles simply codify, in very general and defeasible ways,
patterns of reasoning typically exhibited by virtuous persons. On this view,
moral expertise does not come from fixed moral principles, but is reflected
in them; and imperfectly at that. Consider an adult who can easily
understand and follow rules, but is wholly lacking in practical wisdom— a
cultivated ability of her own to recognize and independently solve moral
problems. There is no moral rule or set of rules that one could hand such a
person that would, from then on, steer her reliably and safely to the
destination of a life lived well. If the rules are well chosen, she might do
morally better in life with them than she would without them, but inevitably
she will fail to recognize situations to which the rules are supposed to
apply, and be caught short by moral situations for which the rules do not
seem to fit or where their proper application is not obvious. It is not simply
that virtue— that is, excellence in practical reasoning— is needed to
correctly apply abstract moral principles such as those of Kantian or
utilitarian ethics.26 For the virtue of practical wisdom or phronēsis
encompasses considerations of universal rationality as well
25
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
25
as considerations of an irreducibly contextual, embodied, relational, and
emotional nature— considerations that Kant and others have erroneously
regarded as irrelevant to morality. From the totality of these considerations
the virtuous person must make moral sense of each concrete situation
encountered, and give an appropriate response. A successful moral
response is distinguishable from a failed or inappropriate response in
practice, and the reasons behind the success of that response can always be

articulated after the fact. But the difference between moral success and
moral failure can rarely, if ever, be deduced in advance from a priori
principles.
Who, for example, could have deduced in advance from universal moral
principles that on December 20, 1943, in the midst of the ferocity and
desperation of a World War II battle over Bremen, Lt. Franz Stigler, a
Luftwaffe ace fighter pilot, should choose to spare the life of Charles
Brown, the American pilot of a crippled B- 17, and his helpless, injured
crew, by escorting them safely out of German air-space?27 Other morally
salient considerations and principles that spoke against such an act of
mercy, such as loyalty and duty, might have bound Stigler, and did at many
other moments in the war. This unexpected act, the virtue of which is
nevertheless easy to explain in hindsight, expressed the total and singular
moral sense he was able to make of the complex demands of that worldly
moment confronting him.
Not all moral acts appear so singular or unexpected in their general form;
yet virtue is expressed even in the distinctive way one moral person chooses
to do things that every moral person must: deliver a painful but necessary
truth, express one's deep gratitude, or forgive a petty slight. To fully
appreciate this, we need a deeper explanation of the virtue called practical
wisdom. Practical wisdom is the kind of excellence we find in moral
experts, persons whose moral lives are guided by appropriate feeling and
intelligence, rather than mindless habit or rote compulsion to follow fixed
moral scripts provided by religious, political, or cultural institutions. As
noted by the moral philosopher Kongzi (commonly known by his Latinized
name, Confucius), the acts of a virtuous person are made noble not simply
by their correct content— though that content will typically respect
important moral conventions— but by the singular and authentic moral
style in which that person chooses to express their virtue. It is this aesthetic
mode of personally expressing a moral convention, rule, or script that
embodies and presents one's virtue. The person who enacts fixed moral
rules 'correctly' but rigidly—
without style, feeling, thought, or flexibility— is, on this view, a shallow
parody of virtue, what the Confucian tradition refers to derisively as the

"village honest man."28
Even reliably pro- social habits such as following laws and telling the truth
fail to guarantee virtue. For while the virtuous person will certainly have
such habits,
26
2 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
moral intelligence is required to ensure that these habits do not produce
acts that violate the moral sense of the situation— for example, mindless
obedience to a lawful but profoundly immoral and indefensible order.
Actions issuing from the moral habits of a virtuous person— that is, a
person with practical wisdom— are properly attuned to the unique and
changing demands of each concrete moral situation. In contrast, a person
who is prone to thoughtless and unmodulated action is likely to go wrong as
often as not. Thus moral virtue presupposes knowledge or understanding.
Yet unlike theoretical knowledge, the kind of knowledge required for moral
virtue is not satisfied by a grasp of universal principles, but requires
recognition of the relevant and operative practical conditions.
Moral expertise thus entails a kind of knowledge extending well beyond a
cognitive grasp of rules and principles to include emotional and social
intelligence: keen awareness of the motivations, feelings, beliefs, and
desires of others; a sensitivity to the morally salient features of particular
situations; and a creative knack for devising appropriate practical
responses to those situations, especially where they involve novel or
dynamically unstable circumstances. For example, the famous 'doctrine of
the mean' embedded in classical virtue theories entails that the morally
wise agent has a quasi- perceptual ability to see how an emergent moral
situation requires a spontaneous and often unprecedented realignment of
conventional moral behaviors.29 Even if it is, as a rule, morally wrong to
touch naked strangers without their consent, I had better not hesitate to
give CPR to my neighbor's naked, unconscious body— if the situation calls
for it, which depends on many factors, such as whether I have adequate

training. Nor can the full content of all such tacit and embodied moral
knowledge ever be captured in explicit and fixed decision procedures.30 As
Aristotle took pains to note, matters of practical ethics by nature "exhibit
much variety and fluctuation," requiring a distinctive kind of reasoning that
displays an understanding of changing particulars as well as fixed
universals.31 On Aristotle's view, while it is true that rational principles are
part of ethics, it is the virtue of practical wisdom that establishes the correct
moral principle for a given case, rather than wisdom being defined by its
correspondence with a prior principle.32
Now we are in a position to understand why, if our aim is to learn how to
live well with emerging technologies, a virtue ethics approach will
generally be more useful than one that relies upon consequentialist or
deontological principles. If the practical conditions of ethical life in the 4th
century bce already displayed too much variety and flux for us to rely upon
a principle- based ethics, requiring instead an account that articulates the
specific virtues of persons who judge wisely and well under dynamic
conditions, then the practical uncertainties and cultural instabilities
produced by emerging technologies of the 21st century would seem to make
the contemporary case for virtue ethics that much stronger.33
27
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
27
A key phenomenon accelerating the acute technosocial opacity that defines
our age is that of technological convergence: discrete technologies merging
syner-gistically in ways that greatly magnify their scope and power to alter
lives and institutions, while also amplifying the complexity and
unpredictability of technosocial change. The technologies most commonly
identified as convergent are the fields of applied technoscience referred to
as 'NBIC' technologies: nano-technology, biotechnology, information
technology and cognitive science.34 The specific ethical challenges and
opportunities presented by many of these technologies are discussed in Part
III of this book. Yet consider just briefly the impact of their convergence on

the emerging markets for brain implants, cybernetic prosthetics,
replacement organs, lab- grown meat, 'smart' drugs, 'lie- detecting' or
'mind- reading' brain scanners, and artificially intelligent robots— and the
panoply of new ethical dilemmas already being generated by these
innovations. Now ask which practical strategy is more likely to serve
humans best in dealing with these unprecedented moral questions: a
stronger commitment to adhere strictly to fixed rules and moral principles
(whether Kantian or utilitarian)? Or stronger and more widely cultivated
habits of moral virtue, guided by excellence in practical and context-
adaptive moral reasoning? I hope I have given the reader cause to entertain
the latter conclusion, which should become increasingly plausible as this
book continues.
We can already enhance the plausibility of this claim by noticing an
emerging asymmetry between the moral dilemmas presented by today's
converging technologies and the topics that still dominate most applied
ethics courses and their textbooks. These textbooks have sections devoted to
weighing the ethics of abortion, capital punishment, torture, eating meat,
and so on. In each case, it seems reasonable to frame the relevant moral
question as, "Is x (where x is an act or practice from the above list) right or
wrong?" Of course, these questions may or may not have definitive
answers, and to get an answer one may need to specify the conditions under
which the act is being considered— for example, whether alternative
sources of nutrition are available to the meat eater. Still, such questions
make sense, and we can see how applying various moral principles might
lead a person to concrete answers. Compare this with the following
question: "Is Twitter right or wrong?" Or: "Are social robots right or
wrong?" There is something plainly ill- formed about such questions.
At this point, the reader will likely object that we are asking about the
rightness or wrongness of technologies rather than of acts, and that this is
the primary source of our confusion. But notice that it does not actually
help things to reform our questions in action- terms such as, "Is tweeting
wrong?" or "Is it wrong to develop a social robot?" The asymmetry is of a
different nature. It is not even that one set of problems involves technology
and another does not; after al , technology

28
2 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
is heavily implicated in modern practices of abortion and capital
punishment.
The problem is that emerging technologies like social networking software,
social robotics, global surveillance networks, and biomedical human
enhancement are not yet sufficiently developed to be assignable to specific
practices with clear consequences for definite stakeholders. They present
open developmental possibilities for human culture as a whole, rather than
fixed options from which to choose.
The kind of deliberation they require, then, is entirely different from the kind
of deliberation involved in the former set of problems.
Of course, the line is not a bright one, as emerging technologies also
impact long- standing practices where fixed moral principles retain
considerable normative force, such as data privacy and copyright
protection. Yet it remains the case that very often, the answers for which
questions about emerging technology beg are simply not of the 'yes/ no' or
'right/ wrong' sort. Instead, they are questions of this sort: 'How might
interacting with social robots help, hurt, or change us?';
'What can tweeting do to, or for, our capacities to enjoy and benefit from
information and discourse?'; 'What would count as a 'better,' 'enhanced'
human being?' It should be clear to the reader by now that these questions
invite answers that address the nature of human flourishing, character, and
excellence— precisely the subject matter of virtue ethics.
That said, philosophical recognition of virtue ethics as an appropriate, even
ideal framework for thinking about ethics and technology has emerged only
recently.35 While reflections on technology and the good life are found in
Plato, Aristotle, Sir Francis Bacon, J.J. Rousseau, G.W. Hegel, Karl Marx,

John Dewey, and José Ortega y Gasset, to name just a few, the 'philosophy
of technology'
came into focus only with the post- World War II writings of thinkers such
as Martin Heidegger, Jacques Ellul, Herbert Marcuse, and Lewis
Mumford.36
Whether fairly or not, the latter group's works are often described as
pessimistic, even fatalistic philosophies in which technology is a monolithic
force that invariably undermines human freedom, condemning us to narrow
lives of consumption, exploitation, and mindless efficiency.37 Once we
surrender to this thesis of 'technological determinism,' there would seem to
be little left to say with regard to ethics, a study that presupposes our
human freedom to choose a good life.
Yet by the end of the 20th century a second wave of philosophers, while still
strongly influenced by the first, had found sufficient reason to hope for a
robust ethics of technology. Foremost among them is Hans Jonas, who in
the 1970s and 1980s developed the first explicit call for a new technosocial
ethics. Though continuing to portray technology as a monolithic "colossus"
whose advance threatens to bring about the "obsolescence of man," Jonas
claimed that if we can somehow manage to survive the species- level threats
to our existence posed by technology,
29
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
29
we will need a new ethics of technology to confront the profound challenges
that these emerging innovations pose to the human image, and to our
conceptions of the good life.38 Yet he reminds us that "we need wisdom
most when we believe in it least"— in an era when the foundations of all
moral theories have been challenged, when ethical relativism is a default
stance for many, and when religious principles are no longer widely
accepted as starting points for ethics, where are we to start looking for the
technosocial wisdom we so desperately need?39 This is why Jonas

famously remarks that philosophy is "sadly unprepared for this, its first
cosmic task."40
Jonas recognized that traditional moral systems and principles would offer
little help— primarily because such systems were historically designed to
resolve moral dilemmas that confront an individual, where the ethically
relevant consequences of his or her action unfold within a foreseeable
present shared by all other moral stakeholders.41 On the contrary, as we
have already indicated, emerging technologies 1) present new problems of
collective moral action; 2) are likely to impact future persons, groups and
systems as much or more so than present stakeholders; and 3) have
unpredictable consequences that unfold on an open-ended time- horizon.
The general happiness problem becomes incalculable for the utilitarian,
and the Kantian imperative fails to capture the ethical stakes that lie
beyond the "abstract compatibility" of my private choice with my rational
will.42
Though Jonas seems more favorably disposed to virtue ethics, speaking
often of virtues like wisdom and humility, he claims that the traditional
Aristotelian view falls short of what we need. This is for two reasons; first,
because Aristotle's notion of what is good for a human life rests on
"presumed invariables of man's nature and condition" (such as basic
human biology) which, thanks to biomedical technologies like germline
engineering, are no longer invariable. Second, Aristotle's account of
practical wisdom involves a person's ability to perceive and respond to the
morally salient features of his own local context— yet as Jonas knew, and
as we have said, the choices made by 21st century humans will impact the
flourishing of the entire species (and not only our species), up to and
including future generations of life on this planet.43 It is clear to Jonas,
then, that what is needed is a genuinely new ethics.44
Unfortunately, Jonas's constructive proposal for a new ethics still remained
closely wedded to the pessimistic tone and metaphysical essentialism of
first-wave philosophers of technology. Like Heidegger and those who
followed in his footsteps, Jonas framed technology as a monolithic threat to
the 'essence of Man.'45 Jonas's proposal limits us to thinking of a new
technosocial ethic as a way to head off largely dystopian scenarios, using

what Jonas calls the "heuristics of fear."46 Those who see emerging
technologies as presenting not only grave threats but also many
constructive opportunities for humanity, and who think that a
30
3 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
blanket fear of technology breeds more problems than it solves, will find
Jonas's account deeply inhospitable to their view.47
Albert Borgmann is another second- wave philosopher of technology who
touches on the question of a new technosocial ethics and the potential
contributions of Aristotelian thought to this enterprise. Unlike Jonas,
Borgmann's writings on technology do not directly address the problem of
finding an appropriate theoretical scaffold upon which to hang a
technosocial ethics. Instead, Borgmann's reflections on modern technology
and the good life merge a broader interest in virtue and practical wisdom
with a concern for human freedom in the face of technological
compulsion.48 Borgmann takes the 'pursuit of excellence'—
understood as the cultivation of social, physical, and intellectual capacities
or virtues— as a revealing measure of our connection to the good life.
Yet Borgmann retains a largely, though not entirely, pessimistic view of the
relation between human morality and emerging technologies; by his
account, the dominant thrust of modern technological life is to subvert the
cultivation of moral excellence in favor of a life of mindless consumption—
what he calls the 'device paradigm.'49 He notes that we are not wholly
powerless to resist this paradigm— nor must we abandon technology in
order to do so. Instead, his proposal for effective reform of technological
society asks us to recognize that the ultimate end for humans is a life of
engagement, facilitated by any of a great number of practices, such as
running or gourmet cooking, which not only cultivate personal excellences
but can be used to honor "focal things" that center family and community
life and give it meaning. Using this definition of the good life, which he

takes to be Aristotelian in inspiration, Borgmann calls us to reconfigure our
technologies so that they facilitate rather than impede a life of engagement.
While the general concept of an engaged life sounds promising as a
candidate for 'a life lived well,' Borgmann's account is ambiguous and
incomplete. How are we to determine what counts as facilitating
engagement and what counts as its subversion? What specific excellences
are most worth developing in focal practices? Are some forms of personal
excellence, or some focal things and practices, more important to protect
from technological subversion than others? More importantly for our
purposes, how can a narrow focus on reform help us with those emerging
technologies whose impact on our practices is not yet manifest?
Furthermore, Borgmann's proposal for reform falls short of resolving the
problems of collective moral action with which emerging technologies
confront us.
He does address the need for public discourse about the good life, as a
means of politically negotiating and enacting meaningful technosocial
reforms.50 But within his account, such discourse seems to aim primarily at
preserving opportunities for the private pursuit of engaged living, rather
than the collective and long- term flourishing of the global human family.
And while he notes that
31
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
31
technosocial reform presupposes "shared and public" affirmations of
certain types of civic behavior needed to facilitate public discourse, he is
vague about the content of such affirmations, mentioning only briefly the
value of social expectations of "politeness, sociability, or civility."51 We
need, at the very least, a more complete and explicit account of the specific
virtues that will facilitate improved public discourse about technology and
the good life. Ideally, we should also form an idea of how to encourage the

global cultivation of these virtues, as a precondition for the emergence of
collective, rather than strictly personal and private, technosocial wisdom.
While the most influential 20th century philosophers of technology each
had a unique way of conceptualizing the ethical issues concerning
technology, they all tended to describe an ethics of technology as a
response to a singular problem or phenomenon, whether conceived as the
human 'enframing' of reality as a resource to be manipulated (Martin
Heidegger); the oppressive mandate of technological efficiency (Jacques El
ul); the spread of 'one- dimensional thought'
enslaved to technopolitical interests (Herbert Marcuse); the relentless
technological cycle of manufactured needs and desires (Jonas); or the
suffocating rule of the 'device paradigm'(Borgmann). Notice also that each
presents humans as somewhat passive subjects of the singular technological
'problem,' who must somehow reclaim their freedom with respect to
technology. In contrast, the early 21st century has seen a fundamental shift
in how philosophers approach the ethics of technology. A new generation of
thinkers has consciously moved away from essentialist conceptions of
technology versus humanity, and toward the analysis of individual
technolog ies as features of specific human contexts; away from globalizing
characterizations of the 'problem with technology' to more neutral and
localized descriptions of a diverse multitude of ethical issues raised by
particular technologies and their uses; and finally, away from metaphysical
concerns about human freedom and essence and toward more empirically-
grounded accounts of human- technology relations.52
This shift, commonly referred to as "the empirical turn," has done much to
revitalize the philosophy of technology and to expand the scope of inquiry
into technology's ethical implications. Articles in scholarly journals such as
Ethics and Information Technology now employ a variety of empirical and
philosophical approaches to explore a wide range of localized technosocial
phenomena, without adhering to any one metanarrative about technology
and its relation to the good life. Largely thanks to the critical force of the
empirical turn, the study of ethics and technology has at last developed a
range of theoretical perspectives and commitments sufficiently diverse to
constitute a genuinely philosophical field. Yet this turn, as productive and

welcome as it has been, has its price. The idea that contemporary
technosocial life might require a new ethical framework
32
3 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
has not been wholly abandoned; but it is increasingly challenged by the
sheer diversity and dynamics of the technosocial phenomena being
uncovered.53 This difficulty is further magnified by the lingering critical
reaction against totalizing, essentialist narratives, with which the call for a
new ethics of technology remains associated. Yet unless we are willing to
confront the broader significance of contemporary technosocial relations,
the ethics of technology risks being reduced to an endless catalogue of
seemingly unrelated phenomena.54
Once again, this dilemma reinforces the viability of virtue ethics as a
framework for a new ethics of technology. For as we have noted, it is the
only theoretical structure designed for maximum flexibility to accommodate
the diverse and changing particulars of ethical life. On many points we
must concede to the critics of traditional ethical theories, including
Aristotelian virtue ethics, yet this does not exclude virtue ethics as a
suitable framework. Rather, our new ethical horizon of collective human
action in the face of growing technosocial opacity invites us to consider the
possibility of the global cultivation of virtues newly adapted to our present
need. Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist virtue ethics each articulated
qualities of individuals embodying moral wisdom in their own times,
regions, or cultures. Does it not then follow that a contemporary virtue
ethic could describe characteristic qualities of those who live wisely and
well in the globally networked environment of the 21st century? Granted,
this cohort is of a size and diversity unprecedented in the history of moral
communities. Yet it is a group that shares a need to make collective and
morally wise technosocial decisions, even if attuned to more open- ended
and culturally complex horizons than the sages of the classical world could
have envisioned. But perhaps the reader thinks it implausible that such

persons or qualities exist. Are there habits of character ideally suited to our
new technosocial circumstances?
Certainly it seems there are people who are especially ill- equipped to
flourish in such circumstances. Consider the person who: 1) is
characteristically incapable of empathizing with or giving moral
consideration to others beyond their local circle; 2) is unable to
communicate or deliberate well with others, especially with those holding
different metaphysical and value commitments; 3) reasons unusually poorly
in circumstances involving great uncertainty and risk; and 4) has concerns
for the good life that rarely if ever extend beyond maximizing gains in the
present and immediately foreseeable future. If we can recognize such a
character profile in people we know (and I think most readers will), then it
seems plausible to say that a person who fits this description would, in the
context of any new technosocial ethics, be describable as generally
vicious.55 If we can identify technosocial vice, then it seems entirely
plausible that with some effort we can identify and further articulate the
nature of technosocial virtue. This is the effort that culminates in chapter 6
of this book.
33
Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
33
Virtue ethics is a uniquely attractive candidate for framing many of the
broader normative implications of emerging technologies in a way that can
motivate constructive proposals for improving technosocial systems and
human participation in them. It also allows us to avoid the perils of
essentialism, over-generalization, and abstraction that weakened first- and
second- wave attempts to frame an ethics of technology. Virtue ethics is
ideally suited for adaptation to the open- ended and varied encounters with
particular technologies that will shape the human condition in this and
coming centuries. Virtue ethical traditions privilege the spontaneity and
flexibility of practical wisdom over rigid adherence to fixed rules of conduct
— a great advantage for those confronting complex, novel, and constantly
evolving moral challenges such as those generated by the disruptive effects

of new technologies. Moreover, a turn to virtue ethics doesn't mean that we
need to abandon the fruits of the 'empirical turn' in philosophy of
technology; in fact, the empirical turn can feed practical wisdom by
opening up ever more avenues for gathering vital contextual information
about new and emerging technosocial realities.
Furthermore, as we will explore in chapter 2, virtue ethics treats persons
not as atomistic individuals confronting narrowly circumscribed choices,
but as beings whose actions are always informed by a particular social
context of concrete roles, relationships, and responsibilities to others. This
approach allows us to expand traditional understandings of the ways in
which our moral choices and obligations bind and connect us to one
another, as the networks of relationships upon which we depend for our
personal and collective flourishing continue to grow in scale and
complexity. Finally, while visions of the good life and of right action vary
considerably across virtue traditions, we will see in Part II that the basic
structure and tools of moral self- cultivation they employ manifest a great
deal of cross- cultural similarity and conceptual overlap. A technosocial
virtue ethic thus has the potential to resonate widely with a culturally
diverse and global network of persons confronting the need for collective
moral wisdom in dealing with the uncertainties, risks, and opportunities
generated by new technologies.
Similar considerations have already guided virtue theory's adoption as a
promising model for other areas of applied ethics, including environmental
ethics, bioethics, media ethics, and business ethics.56 It is time to add
technosocial ethics to this growing list. Yet to consider our project here as
simply outlining one more region of applied virtue ethics would be too
modest. As we have seen, emerging science and technology now condition
virtually every aspect of life. Every area of applied ethics, from bioethics to
media ethics to business ethics to environmental ethics, now operates within
a technosocial context of global scope. This context reaches with ever more
intimacy and pervasiveness into our homes, cars, schools,
34
3 4

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
cafes, sports fields, parks, and libraries. Arguably, a technosocial virtue
ethic is an applied ethic of contemporary life writ large.
Yet before such an ethic can be developed and used, we must establish the
theoretical foundations upon which it will stand. This foundation will
become clear in Part II, where we see how core concepts and practices of
classical virtue ethics can be remolded into a powerful framework for living
well in the 21st century and beyond. Yet even before this, we must verify that
the project of framing a global technosocial virtue ethic is philosophically
coherent and practically sound.
To do this, it is important to establish that the framework we aim to build
can withstand the significant tensions that arise from its historically and
culturally diverse origins. This task is our focus in chapter 2.
35
2
The Case for a Global
Technomoral Virtue Ethic
i n c h a p t e r 1 w e saw that virtue ethics offers the most promising
framework for living wisely and well with emerging technologies. In Part II,
we will find rich resources for contemporary technomoral life in the
classical virtue traditions of Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist ethics.
Yet any attempt to develop a contemporary virtue ethic by drawing upon
these diverse traditions must address their individual integrity, for each is
rooted in cultural and historical understandings of the good life that are
irreducibly distinct from those of other moral traditions. Even Confucian
and Buddhist practices, which have historically inter-mingled in many East
Asian cultures (while also interacting with other systems of thought such as
Daoism, Shintoism, Christianity, and Islam) reflect very different
perspectives on virtue and the good life. Likewise, while many features of
the classical Greek vision of human excellence have been adapted to Stoic,

Christian, and Islamic thought as well as to modern secular liberalism, the
vision of the good life that Aristotle expressed in the 4th century bce
remains incommensurable in many respects with its later adaptations.1
Thus before we go any further, we need to know how a conceptually
coherent framework for contemporary technomoral life could possibly
emerge from these diverse classical sources.
Moreover, there is good reason to think that certain commitments of these
classical traditions are simply wrong, not just because they fail to speak to
other cultures or to contemporary ways of life but because they are based
on objectively false claims about the subject of ethics (i.e., people).
Classical views about the intellectual and moral capacities of women,
slaves, and 'barbarians' are oft-discussed examples of such factual errors.2
Or consider Aristotle's inattention to the fundamental biological
vulnerability and social dependence of the human animal.3 Since it took
time and distance to reveal the blind spots and weaknesses in traditional
virtue ethics that are plain to us now, we cannot assume that more
36
3 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
won't reveal themselves. So even if the resources we intend to draw from
classical virtue traditions can be made compatible and relevant to
contemporary forms of life, we will still have to ask what degree of
confidence in the action- guiding content of these traditions is warranted.
On what grounds, then, does it make sense to pursue anything like the goal
of this book, namely, a global virtue ethic for contemporary technosocial
life that draws upon the resources of these culturally diverse classical
traditions? To answer that question we must take a closer look at the
traditions themselves, to see what conceptual unity licenses us to synthesize
their resources in service of a global virtue ethic for contemporary
technosocial life. Once we have established that this project is conceptually
coherent, we will turn to the reasons why its development is needed, and
within practical reach. In service of our goals in this chapter, and as a

preliminary step towards the deeper and more targeted analyses in Part II,
let us review in very broad strokes the central ethical teachings of the three
classical traditions drawn from in this book.
2.1 Classical Virtue Traditions: Aristotelian,
Confucian, and Buddhist Ethics
2.1.1 Aristotelian Ethics
The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle (384- 322 bce) greatly extended
and modified the ethical teachings of his Athenian predecessors Socrates
and Plato in a definitive series of lectures on the good life, the notes of
which were collected in a volume titled Nicomachean Ethics.4 With the
notable exception of its enduring influence upon the Catholic moral
tradition (largely owed to the writings of St. Thomas Aquinas), Aristotelian
ethics largely fell out of favor in the modern West until the mid- 20th
century, when it was returned to contemporary relevance by a growing
community of neo- Aristotelian virtue ethicists. As noted in chapter 1, its
current revival is generating new scholarly interest in the applicability of
Aristotelian ethics to contemporary moral problems.
Many key features of Aristotle's ethics were sketched in chapter 1. However,
it will help to summarize the core commitments of his approach. Aristotle
claimed that the highest good of a human life, that for the sake of which all
voluntary human action occurs, is eudaimonia (variously translated as
'happiness' or 'human flourishing'). He claimed that eudaimonia is
constituted by a complete life of virtuous activity, defined as excellence in
the active fulfillment of our unique function ( ergon) as human beings.
Believing this function to be the exercise of our capacity to reason, Aristotle
argued that its fulfillment in a life of happiness with others presupposes the
self- cultivation of various moral excellences or 'virtues'
37
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
37

( arêtes) of character, such as courage ( andreia), honesty ( aletheia),
patience ( praotes), friendliness ( philia), justice ( dikaiosunē), and
moderation ( sôphrosunê), along with the unifying intellectual virtue of
practical wisdom ( phronēsis).
A virtuous person who successfully cultivates these excellences is able to
perceive the right end or goal to seek in a wide range of practical
situations. To be right, the end must actually be achievable by the person in
that situation, and likely to promote the ultimate aim of all human action:
human flourishing or living well (which for social animals like us, always
means living well with others).
A virtuous person reliably discerns and employs effective practical means
to achieve these ends, as appropriate to the specific circumstances in which
he finds himself. So, for example, we can imagine that in one situation a
virtuous person may best promote the moral end by fiercely protecting an
important secret; yet in a different time and place, the same person might
rightly judge that promoting the moral end requires him to expose that
secret.
In Aristotle's view, this discerning skill in living rightly is cultivated through
a process of habituation and gradual refinement of one's character, in
which one's repeated practice of moral actions is guided and encouraged by
a combination of proper laws, moral education, and the presence of noble
human models (called phronimoi: 'practically wise persons') who exemplify
and inspire virtuous living.
In a fully cultivated or virtuous person (a phronimos), one's habits,
thoughts, and emotions have been refined and harmonized to such a degree
that virtuous actions are consistent, produced with spontaneity and
pleasurable ease, infused with appropriate moral feeling and belief, and
above al , intelligently guided by practical wisdom or phronēsis. While
Aristotle reserves the very highest and rarest form of eudaimonia for those
suited to a life of theoretical reason— that is, a life spent contemplating
eternal and divine realities— he claims that any human being equipped
with practical reason and a basic level of material security can achieve a
flourishing and happy life through political activity and civic friendship (
philia politikē). This counts as eudaimonia because, like philosophical

contemplation, living well in community with others also requires the
constant exercise of our distinctive capacity for higher reasoning. For
Aristotle, expressing this function ( ergon) of our particular animal kind is
what makes our lives humanly good.
2.1.2 Confucian Ethics
Kongzi (551- 479 bce) or 'Master Kong' (Latinized as 'Confucius') was a
teacher and local government minister in the Chinese state of Lu. His moral
and political philosophy is collected in a handful of classic works, the best
known of which today is the posthumously assembled Analects. Confucian
moral philosophy, also known as 'Ruism,' was greatly extended and
enriched by disciples and later
38
3 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
followers of Kongzi, among the best known of whom are Mengzi (also
known as Mencius) and Xunzi. From the time of the Han Dynasty (206 bce-
220 ad) to the present day, Confucian thought has exerted a powerful
influence on Chinese culture and the ideology of the Chinese state, though
its classical form has been repeatedly altered over the centuries by
interactions with other moral and political schools of thought, most notably
Chinese Legalism, Buddhism, Daoism, and Communism.5
As with all rich moral traditions, Confucianism is marked by doctrinal
disputes over the 'correct' version of the original account. Among the best
known of these is the dispute between Mengzi and Xunzi over whether
human nature is fundamentally good or evil. Yet classical Confucian
thought maintains a stable core, centered on the need for persons to
cultivate in themselves the kind of moral virtues that enable the flourishing
of relationships within the family— virtues that are then gradually extended
outward to other relationships to promote broader political flourishing.6
The Confucian self is not an isolated, autonomous individual but a being
defined by relationships and reciprocal obligations to others.

A life that enables familial and political flourishing is understood by
Confucians as a life in harmony with the Way ( Dao), which is seen as a
timeless ideal for the functioning of human societies.
To become the sort of person whose life engages this ideal pattern, one must
allow one's character to be shaped by lifelong study of moral tradition and
the practice of accepted moral rituals or 'rites' ( li). These rituals express
and foster attitudes of moral respect and deference in everything from the
treatment of one's family members, to the conduct of public ceremonies, to
one's personal dress and bodily gestures. Yet as we will see, ritual practice
must never be allowed to become rote, mechanical, or rigid; it must embody
a deep cognitive and emotional sensitivity to the particular roles,
circumstances, and human needs that determine the proper form of ritual
expression called for in each situation. The practice of moral self-
cultivation aims to gradually refine this intelligent sensitivity.
As with Aristotelian virtue ethics, Confucianism is shaped by a
philosophical belief that the ultimate goal of a human life (here, a life lived
in accordance with the Way/ Dao) is timeless and fixed by nature,
transcending cultures and history. As did Aristotle, Confucians also rely
heavily on the use of human models to illustrate and inspire virtuous living;
while 'adherence to the Way' is the final standard of a good life, individuals
draw from observation or historical accounts of the behavior of particular
'exemplary persons' ( junzi) to learn what adherence to the Way looks like.
As do Aristotelians, Confucians describe complete virtue as a form of
habituated practical wisdom or "intelligent awareness" that harmonizes
cognitive, perceptual, and affective motivations and guides their unified and
appropriate expression in particular moral contexts.7 The cultivated person
39
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
39
reliably discerns the 'middle way'— the 'mean state' or "due measure and
degree"

of response called for by a given moral situation— and enacts that response
with spontaneous ease and an elegant, authentic style.8 Thus in both
traditions, the rigid following of established moral rules and the
maximizing of moral utility are subservient and conditional aspects of
virtuous living at best, and mere 'semblances' of virtue at worst.9 This
stands in stark contrast to modern deontological or consequentialist moral
theories that regard virtue as defined by strict adherence to such principles.
Yet we must not elide important differences between Confucian and
Aristotelian conceptions of the good life. For one thing, Confucians stress
the logical and natural priority of family virtue, while Aristotle privileges
the flourishing of the political state or polis and sees family virtue as guided
by and ultimately in service to the state.10 Nor do individual Confucian
virtues map neatly onto Aristotelian ones. Though significant resonances
and overlaps can be discerned, for example between zhi (wisdom or
intelligent awareness) and Aristotelian phronēsis (practical wisdom),11
even virtues with nominal counterparts in Aristotle, such as courage (
yong), are framed very differently by Confucians.12
Among the Confucian virtues having no direct counterpart in Aristotle are
benevolence or humanity ( ren), ritual propriety ( li), appropriateness ( yi),
and empathic reciprocity ( shu). Finally, nothing in Confucian thought
replicates the tension found in Aristotle (and in Buddhism) between active
political flourishing and a life of contemplative and philosophical well-
being; for Confucians, all human flourishing is embodied in family and
political life.
2.1.3 Buddhist Ethics
The religious and philosophical practice of Buddhism dates back to its
origins on the Indian subcontinent in the 5th or perhaps 6th century bce.
Buddhism grew out of a wider social phenomenon of spiritual wanderers
devoted to challenging the orthodox beliefs and practices of the Vedic
tradition upon which modern Hinduism is founded. The historical
individual credited with Buddhism's founding is Siddhārtha Gautama
(Sanskrit; in Pāli script: Siddhattha Gotama), more commonly known as the
Buddha (or the 'awakened one'). Born to a royal family in what is now

Nepal, as a young man Gautama renounced conventional social and
religious life and took up a personal quest for new spiritual and moral
wisdom. As traditional accounts have it, he spent six years on his quest
before becoming enlightened or 'awakened' at the age of thirty- five, after
which he spent the remainder of his life spreading his religious and ethical
teachings throughout northeastern India.13
40
4 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Following his passing at the reported age of eighty, Buddhist teachings and
practices expanded, splintered, and were widely disseminated throughout
Southeast and East Asia. While the highest concentrations of Buddhist
practitioners remain on the Asian continent, 20th century Buddhism is a
global phenomenon with adherents numbering in the hundreds of millions—
over a billion on some accounts. Two major traditions of Buddhist thought
are distinguished today, embodying significant divergences among their
accepted teachings and practices while retaining a common core of basic
concepts and values. The oldest, Theravada Buddhism, remains dominant in
Southeast Asia, while Mahāyāna Buddhism is prevalent in East Asia where
it takes a variety of cultural forms (including Pure Land, Zen, Tibetan, and
other schools of Mahāyāna practice).
The core teachings of Buddhism are heavily rooted in traditional Vedic
metaphysics, incorporating its central concepts of karma (spiritually
significant action), samsāra (cycle of rebirths), Dharma (sacred duty or
doctrine), and yoga (spiritual discipline). However, classical Buddhism
departs from Vedic philosophy and Hinduism by denying the substantive
reality of a self ( ātman), a doctrine known as anātman (no- self ). On this
view, the worldly self that appears stable, unified, and enduring is really no
more than a collection of transient mental and physical phenomena of
various types (the s kandhas or 'aggregates'); nor is there any 'deeper'
unified self beneath the worldly one.14 Another key metaphysical principle
is that of pratītya- samutpāda, or 'dependent co- arising.' Many of
Buddhism's ethical norms follow from this view of all beings as causally

interconnected, in a manner that surpasses local spatiotemporal
boundaries. Buddhism also posits that suffering ( duhkha), which it holds as
fundamentally characterizing worldly existence within the cycle of rebirths,
can be radically transcended by reaching a state of enlightened liberation (
nirvāna). Such a state, in which one achieves the same 'awakened'
condition as did the original Buddha, is in principle attainable within the
lifetime of any individual by following the Noble Eightfold Path, a
developmental practice which jointly cultivates various practical forms of
spiritual knowledge ( prajñā), ethical conduct (ś īla), and concentrated
awareness ( samādhi).
While the moral teachings of Buddhism are sometimes described narrowly
in terms of ś īla— that is, adherence to the various 'precepts' or rules of
ethical conduct— a fuller understanding of Buddhist ethics conceives of ś
īla as one aspect of complete virtue, which must be integrated with other
virtuous dimensions of the Eightfold Path. That is, just as Confucian ritual
action ( li) and Aristotelian moral habit ( hexis) lead to genuine virtue only
when integrated with appropriate thought, perception, and feeling, Buddhist
self- cultivation requires that fully ethical conduct inform, and be informed
by, right belief, right intention, and mental and emotional discipline.15
Such enrichment enables the enlightened person to
41
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
41
modulate his or her expression of the conventional moral precepts, or even
in rare cases adopt 'skillful means' ( upāya kaushalya) to suspend them, as
called for by the morally relevant features of the particular situation. In this
way, as with other virtue traditions, Buddhist ethics takes a holistic,
flexible, and contextual approach to moral action that is fundamentally
distinct from either rule- based (deontological) or consequentialist models
of ethical life.
Buddhism's resonances with other classical virtue traditions do not end
here.

As with the central role granted by Confucian and Aristotelian ethics to
'exemplary persons' (the junzi and phronimoi respectively), bodhisattvas
(persons actively seeking enlightenment) generally receive direction to or
assistance on the path of self- cultivation from the community of exemplary
persons to which they have access. In Buddhism this is the monastic
community and lay members of the Sangha, those spiritual adepts who,
having attained a certain degree of enlightenment, are able to give spiritual
and moral direction to others. Indeed, the virtuous community of the
Sangha represent one of the 'Three Jewels' of Buddhist teaching, the other
two being the sacred teachings of Dharma and the perfected being of the
Buddha nature itself.
As with Confucian and Aristotelian ethics, the moral vision of Buddhism is
motivated by a teleology that regards a certain sort of life or nature (here,
the Buddha- nature) as a timeless and nonnegotiable ideal for human
beings. As do the other virtue traditions, classical Buddhism also stresses
the role of habituation in moral self- cultivation; enlightenment is typically
sought through devotional practices ( yoga) that function to gradually
shape one's mental/ emotional dispositions into a highly refined and
disciplined form. Thus at its core, Buddhist ethics, as with all virtue ethics,
is about gradually transforming oneself into a certain sort of person— one
who can live in a way that is worthy of human aspiration.16 Right rules or
precepts of action are only guideposts on the path to that destination, not
the destination itself, nor even the entire path.
Still, there are deep disagreements between Buddhism and other virtue
traditions, and among various Buddhist schools, about the good life and the
path leading to it. First and foremost, while individual points of contact can
be found between the expansive catalog of Buddhist virtues and the far
more limited Aristotelian and Confucian ones, the overall character profiles
of the exemplary person appear quite different among all three. In
particular, the Buddhist virtues of humility, detached equanimity, and
expansive compassion find no clear parallels, and even direct opposition, in
the Aristotelian model which encourages great men to cultivate a character
marked by warranted pride, appropriate ambition, and righteous
indignation.17

Comparing the profiles of the Buddhist and Confucian virtues may at first
seem to reveal closer affinities; but even here, virtues that seem nominally
42
4 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
similar turn out to have very different meanings in their full moral contexts.
For example, one might try to pair the virtue of Buddhist generosity ( dāna)
with Confucian benevolence ( ren), or Buddhist compassion ( karunā) with
Confucian empathy ( shu). Yet such an impulse obscures the fact that while
Buddhists regard traditional kinship loyalties as resulting from deluded
ignorance of our common nature and our moral obligation to reduce
suffering for all creatures, the Confucian worldview emphasizes graded
love and compassion, with those to whom we are related and to whom we
have incurred reciprocal social obligations having a far stronger claim to
our generosity and concern than do strangers. Faced with a dilemma
pitting important interests of one's father or ruler against the interests of a
suffering multitude from a neighboring kingdom, a virtuous Buddhist and a
virtuous Confucian might make very different choices.18
Additionally, devout Buddhists' relative disregard for material goods and
political status would be incomprehensible to Aristotle and Kongzi, who
each regarded poverty and political disenfranchisement as significant if not
insuperable obstacles to human flourishing. Finally, the state of human
flourishing at which Buddhists aim, namely nirvāna, implies a
transcendence of local and worldly striving that is wholly incompatible with
Confucian ethics or with Aristotle's life of political happiness, and distinct
even from Aristotle's highest ideal, a life of rational philosophical activity.
2.2 The Shared Commitments
of Virtue Traditions

These comparisons yield a general outline of a life that leads to virtue. It is
a life that ideally begins with proper moral habituation into social roles and
responsibilities— guided by established precepts, examples, laws, and
rituals—
but under the right conditions and with sufficient personal effort becomes
increasingly self- directed, reflective, and intelligent. Through this process
of moral self- cultivation, a virtuous person attains a level of ethical
mastery in which both the ultimate aims of moral living and the appropriate
means of attaining them in particular contexts and situations are
understood and correctly valued. Such a person does the right thing with
relative ease and joy. Moreover, she expresses an authentic and appealing
moral style of acting in the world that inspires and provides an exemplar
for others who wish to do the same. A virtuous person need not be infal ible
or wholly incapable of moral weakness, but he or she lives in a fully human
way— that is, as a person who embodies for others the best moral
possibilities of the species.
43
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
43
However attractive this picture may be, one quickly realizes that it is
notably lacking in concrete moral content. This is because as we have noted
above, there is much variation among classical virtue traditions in the
specific action- guiding principles and norms they employ. Herein lies the
problem for contemporary defenders of virtue ethics. Given the robust
differences between classical visions of the good life, is there any
justification for the assertion that the Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist
traditions are all members of a single family of ethical theories called
'virtue ethics'? We might throw other classical conceptions of virtue into
the mix, such as those of ancient Homeric or Nordic societies.19 But an
exhaustive account of such traditions is both impractical and unnecessary
for our purposes. If we can show that there is a shared conceptual core even
among the three widely influential traditions we have sketched above, one
that offers useful action- guidance even for contemporary humans in a

globally networked world, this will be sufficient to rescue the promise of a
technomoral virtue ethic of global reach.
Let us start with the question of whether these three traditions represent a
single class of moral theory, namely virtue ethics. While Aristotelian ethics
is regarded in the West as a paradigmatic virtue theory, scholars of
comparative philosophy have not been in universal agreement about
whether Confucian or Buddhist ethics belong under the same theoretical
umbrella. A few have held that Confucian ethics, with its emphasis on ritual
conduct, or Buddhist ethics, with its clear precepts for moral action, are
best classified as deontological or rule- based moral theories. Others have
claimed that Buddhism, which aims at the comprehensive reduction of
suffering by sentient creatures, is really a consequentialist or utilitarian
framework. Still other scholars have claimed that Confucianism or
Buddhism are not ethical theories at al , but mere systems of political or
religious thought. However, such views are in the minority.20 Still, even
among the majority of comparative scholars who regard Confucian and
Buddhist thought as more akin to virtue ethics than to any other Western
philosophical approach, not all are convinced that they share with
Aristotelian virtue ethics any robust conceptual core.
Yet there are compelling grounds for the claim that they do. One common
strategy for defending this claim is to distinguish between 'thick' and 'thin'
moral concepts. Thin concepts supply only the essential structure or
skeleton of an idea, whereas thick concepts flesh out that idea in richer
detail. Perhaps, then, culturally distinct virtue traditions share a thin core
of basic theoretical commitments that are filled out very differently by their
respective thick contents. These visions of human virtue would rest on very
similar conceptual foundations, yet diverge noticeably in their detailed
recommendations for how to live.21 Comparative philosopher Bryan Van
Norden has suggested that there are at least four thin
44
4 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s

commitments shared by virtue traditions, which I articulate (with some
modifications) below:22
1. A conception of the 'highest human good' or flourishing that serves as
the aim of ethics; this 'thin' concept may then take diverse thick forms: a
life of excellent rational activity (Aristotelianism), a life in harmony with
the Dao (Confucianism), the attainment of nirvāna (Buddhism), or some
other concrete vision of human flourishing.
2. A conception of moral virtues as cultivated states of character,
manifested by those exemplary persons in one's community who have come
closest to achieving the highest human good. The thick form of this shared
concept displays the diverse ideals embodied by the phronimoi, junzi,
Sangha, or other concrete exemplars.
3. A conception of the practical path of moral self- cultivation, that is, an
account of how the virtues can be cultivated by those who do not already
possess them. Different cultures may have different 'thick' accounts of the
method of self- cultivation.
4. A conception of what human beings are generally like, and the way in
which their nature typically conditions their ability to become cultivated.
Again, we would expect the 'thick' concepts of human nature and potential
to differ between traditions, or even within sub- schools of the same
tradition.
In every case, the 'thick' content that fills out each shared 'thin'
commitment is shaped by the unique social, historical, and political
configurations of the particular culture in which that tradition or its schools
is rooted. Still, I will argue in chapter 3 that with respect to items (2), (3),
and (4) above, the shared content among these traditions is even 'thicker'
than many comparative thinkers have noted, enough to provide significant
action- guiding content for a global technosocial ethic. It is important to
note the features of classical virtue traditions not included in the thin
commitments. While all three traditions are goal- directed in the very broad
sense noted under (1), a virtue ethic need not define its goal in terms of a
distinctive human function ( ergon) of the sort Aristotle invoked, or
metaphysical commitments such as those which inform the Buddhist

conception of nirvāna, or a belief in a fixed universal order ( Dao) of the
sort that Confucians hold. Furthermore, while a virtue ethic must be
naturalistic in the limited sense required by (4), it need not be reductively
so, nor need it subscribe to any essentialist account of a universal, fixed
human nature. This is important because it leaves room for a virtue ethic
that is pluralistic (open to more than one mode of expression of human
flourishing) and malleable (adapted to the needs and affordances of the
present human condition and environment). A contemporary technosocial
virtue ethic need not invoke any single, ahistorical, and universal image of
the good life for a human being. It need only hold that we can identify,
45
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
45
OceanofPDF.com

within the limits of precision and accuracy afforded by practical wisdom,
certain ways of living that plausibly count as flourishing in the present
human context of technosocial life, and others that do not.
The framework of 'thick' versus 'thin' concepts is not the only well- known
philosophical strategy for identifying what virtue traditions have in
common.
Alasdair MacIntyre has also claimed that virtue traditions share a
conceptual core, even as he rightly rejects the idea that we can extract from
these diverse traditions, with their disparate practices and conceptions of
the good, any single list of universal moral virtues. Once we examine
MacIntyre's account of the conceptual structure that unifies virtue
traditions, we will use his analysis to test the coherence of our own
endeavor.23
For MacIntyre, a given reference to a virtue is only meaningful:
1. Within the context of a recognized human practice dedicated to securing
moral goods internal to that practice;
2. Where that practice is embedded in a coherent narrative concerning a
whole human life;
3. Where that life is itself understood as participating in a shared moral
tradition of seeking the highest good for a human being.24
On MacIntyre's view, this tripartite standard is sufficient to capture the
conceptual unity behind virtue ethics' diverse and incommensurable
manifestations, and explains how one virtue tradition can successfully
adapt the resources of others to its own practices. I will not subject his
influential account to a critical inspection here; while I believe that the
commonalities among classical virtue traditions are even richer than
MacIntyre acknowledges, his analysis remains in-sightful and compelling.
Luckily for us, a technomoral virtue ethic of the kind developed in this book
can satisfy these three requirements for a virtue tradition.

This is because emerging technomoral practices have the potential to create
a new global narrative concerning the good life for human beings, a
narrative for which many classical virtue resources from diverse cultures
can be usefully adapted. In order to see how, it will help to break down and
examine MacIntyre's requirements one by one, beginning with the notion of
a practice.
MacIntyre defines a practice as a "cooperative human activity through
which goods internal to that form of activity" are sought and realized as
part of the effort to excel at that activity.25 He offers music, farming, chess,
architecture, and football as examples, and of course philosophy itself
would count as such a practice. All of these practices aim to produce
certain goods, such as wisdom, beauty, shelter, physical sustenance, and so
on. We say the goods are internal to the practice when, unlike external
goods (say, a salary that one might get paid for doing such things), the
internal good is produced purely from excelling with others
46
4 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
in the practice. A well- coordinated and highly skilled orchestra can
produce its internal good— beautiful, stirring sound— even if their activity
goes unpaid or unappreciated.
Now consider the increasingly global reach of information, communication,
biomedical and robotic technologies, and in particular, the ways in which
these technologies have enabled unprecedented global mobility and
"cooperative human activity." The emergence of electronic trading and
purchasing enabled a 24- hour global marketplace within which the
economic fates of nations and cultures are now inextricably intertwined,
defining multinational corporations as new global powers in the process.
New technoscientific capacities have fostered global research efforts such
as the Large Hadron Col ider, which required the economic and scientific
cooperation of 111 different nations. New military and surveillance
technologies entering a multinational arms market, and resisted by

underground electronic networks of 'hacktivists' working to limit state
power, are rapidly transforming how nations, groups, and individuals col
aborate to advance competing visions of global security. New information,
communications, and mobile technologies are driving unprecedented
coordination of activities by individuals and groups devoted to the shared
pursuit of human health, environmental well- being, and social and
economic justice around the world. Just this brief survey of modern
technological society makes it evident how much humans are now relying
on cooperative technosocial activity as a means of seeking the good life,
individually and collectively. This is not to say that fervent nationalism and
provincialism are dead— far from it. It is only to say that technology has
enabled new global human agencies to be added to the mix.
What, then, are the unique 'goods' internal to this global technosocial
activity? There are a number of goods we can identify as goals of
technosocial activity considered broadly: efficiency, speed, mobility,
analytical power, knowledge, pleasure, friendship, and creativity are just a
few of the goods that have been celebrated as being fostered by new
technosocial practices.26 But are these internal or external goods by
MacIntyre's standard? Unlike wealth or power, internal goods do not
typically accrue to individuals in a zero- sum fashion; they enrich the
individual and the "whole relevant community" at once.27 Most of the
goods above could be said to satisfy this requirement. Yet there is no
coherent technosocial practice that pursues all of these goods.
Furthermore, each of these goods can be sought through many other sorts
of practices that do not involve modern technology. MacIntyre is clear that
an 'internal good' is a good uniquely associated with a particular practice,
or another "of that specific kind."28
Yet there are distinctive internal goods associated with specific kinds of
technomoral practice, goods that are directly relevant to our concerns
about humanity's ability to successfully navigate a profoundly uncertain
and risk- filled future.
47
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic

47
First, the notion of global community is itself such a good. But with what
sort of technomoral practice is it uniquely associated? Consider that prior
to the information revolution, the goal of a genuinely 'global village' could
be pursued only in extremely limited ways, and only by means of practices
that were themselves dependent on technologies such as trading ships,
telegraphs, and printing presses. These technologies enabled cooperative
activities of communication and exchange relevantly similar in structure, if
not in speed or scale, to those that increasingly dominate contemporary
technosocial life. Most such activities continue to be employed for purely
private enrichment rather than for moral goods of the sort with which we
are concerned. Yet we have also seen the emergence of the idea of a new
'global commons,' and a variety of coordinated attempts to cultivate new
technomoral practices to realize this goal. Such efforts range from the open
source, 'Net Neutrality,' and digital equality movements to experiments with
global Internet currencies such as Bitcoin, to attempts (however noble or
reckless you judge them to be) by Wikileaks, Anonymous, and other
hacktivists to 'make information free' from national, economic, and cultural
hegemonies.
Similarly, intercultural understanding and global justice are moral goods
being pursued through modern technosocial practice in unique and
unprecedented ways. Social activists, relief workers, and educators have
seized upon the Internet's ability to cheaply transmit live images of violent
political or religious conflict around the world, to give marginalized or
disenfranchised persons a global voice through social media, and to
cultivate and share expertise in using these new technosocial means to
successfully marshal global financial, logistical, or popular support for
local causes. There simply were no practices prior to the information
revolution through which locally marginalized persons or groups could
reliably solicit global attention and concern. Other than their humanity,
what can a pregnant Sudanese convert to Christianity facing a death
sentence, a transgender American teenager imprisoned without charge in
solitary confinement, a Pakistani schoolgirl challenging the Taliban, and an
Egyptian marketing executive for Google in Dubai have in common? The
answer: a networked information commons that can raise local injustices to

political awareness and action on a global scale. What we are seeing is a
global social experiment with coordinated technosocial activity aimed at
securing moral goods of the sort that persons committed to this practice
regard as worthy of lifelong pursuit for a human being: goods such as
global religious freedom, gender equality, and other forms of political,
economic, and criminal justice. This fully satisfies MacIntyre's requirements
for the emergence of a moral practice.
Human security is another internal good that may be considered
distinctively realizable through global technomoral practices. By 'human
security'
I do not mean the security of individual living humans or groups, but the
48
4 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
security of the present and future flourishing of the human species from
potential threats such as global climate shifts, the emergence and spread of
new pathogens, or the rise of robust artificial intelligence. It is virtually
impossible to pursue this goal without technologies of global
communication and coordination; without new technomoral practices built
around such technologies such a good could only be hoped for, as a
delivery of blind luck, divine providence, or the aggregate yet
uncoordinated result of individual and local acts of human wisdom.
Effective, deliberate, and intelligent pursuit of this good through a human
practice demands the massive coordination of international will and
resources that only new information and communications technologies
(ICT's) make sustainable.
Finally, while collective human wisdom has always been pursued through
regional and partisan human affiliations, and occasionally envisioned as a
global hope, only with modern ICT's such as ubiquitous translation
software and streaming video does it become possible to design practices
that aim at genuinely global edification (as opposed to, say, the edification

of literate Latin- or English-speaking populaces taken to represent the
whole). It is likely that further goods internal to global technomoral
practice can be identified, and others will emerge in time; but we have
already done enough to establish the possibility, even the inchoate
beginnings of, global technomoral practices that aim at internal goods of
the sort associated with virtue traditions.
Of course, each of these goods can be sought only with great difficulty and
demands particularly noble motivations, and none have yet been
consistently or broadly realized in practice. Yet this is the case with human
practices generally.
For example, the distinctive goods of novel prediction and theoretical
unification internal to scientific practice have always been realized
imperfectly, inconsistently, and only with great effort. The same goes for the
distinctive goods realized by religious or political practice. Furthermore,
technomoral practices on a global scale remain extremely immature from a
developmental perspective, as a result of how recently these new
technological affordances for global action have emerged. It would be
unreasonable to expect any human practice to be consistently realizing its
highest internal goods in its relative infancy. As a corol ary, it is not
surprising that general rules and shared "standards of excellence" for
pursuing global technomoral goods are still evolving; we would expect to
find such stable guidelines only in mature moral practices.29
Our account of global technomoral practice also easily satisfies the second
and third core requirements of MacIntyre's analysis: that actions which are
part of a genuine moral practice be part of a personal narrative driven by
the agent's coherent intentions and beliefs, and that this individual story
make sense as part of a broader historical tradition, in which I and others
are implicated and can
49
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
49

hold each other mutually accountable for our success or failure in pursuing
the good life for a human being.30
As MacIntyre emphasizes, a moral practice is irreducibly a social
enterprise, not just the sum total of individual efforts to live well. If we
consider the internal goods of global community, intercultural
understanding, global justice, human security, and collective wisdom, it
becomes immediately evident that each of these readily makes sense as part
of a personal narrative in which an individual's beliefs and intentions are
directed toward the joint achievement of these goods. While there are
certainly those who find themselves supporting such goals accidentally or
without any motivational integrity (the person who 'likes' the Facebook
page of a social justice movement because it happens to be 'trending,'
giving it no further thought), most humans will not engage in sustained and
coordinated activity to promote these goals without a set of beliefs and
intentions directed at becoming a certain sort of person, one whose life has
been spent with others in pursuit of values that one regards as ultimately
good and affirming of a life lived well.
What about the third requirement, that this personal narrative be subsumed
within a broader community of practitioners who hold each other
accountable for the success or failure of their efforts, and whose collective
activity constitutes a historical tradition of pursuing what they agree to be
the highest human goods? It is difficult to envision the person today who
successfully engages in the enduring pursuit of global community,
understanding, justice, security, or wisdom without ever coordinating her
efforts with others who share the belief that pursuit of these particular
goods is the best way to pursue human flourishing in our present
circumstances. The efforts of legacy NGOs such as OXFAM, Greenpeace,
and Amnesty International as well as 21st century networks such as
350.org, EFF
(Electronic Frontier Foundation), and ICRAC (International Committee for
Robot Arms Control) testify to the fact that accountability for success or
failure in achieving global technomoral goods will inevitably fall to persons
in community rather than isolated individuals.
2.3 The Need for a Global

Technomoral Virtue Ethic
Most importantly, our account of technomoral practice passes one more
crucial test of MacIntyre's: if something is a practice with its own internal
goods, then there will be distinctive virtues "the possession and exercise of
which tends to enable us to achieve those goods,"31 and without which we
are prevented from achieving them. Is it at all plausible that goods such as
global community, intercultural understanding, global justice, human
security, or collective wisdom can be successfully achieved by persons
lacking in virtues such as courage, civility, or
50
5 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
caring? Or is it clear that along with nonmoral excellences such as
creativity, analytical intelligence, and perseverance, successful
technosocial practice will indeed require the cultivation of distinctly moral
excellences of character, adapted to function in this new context as
technomoral virtues?
Many of these virtues are also associated with classical traditions, despite
those moral worldviews remaining incommensurable in many ways with
contemporary technosocial goods and practices. A single virtue of
character will usually be conducive to a diverse range of incommensurable
goods and practices, and its visible aspect will vary accordingly. While a
soldier, a physician, and a politician all need courage to pursue their
respective goods in ways that appropriately channel and modulate fear and
hope, courageous action looks very different in these various practical
contexts. The meaning of a virtue is historically and culturally contingent
as well— the courageous soldier in the age of Homer would have expressed
his resolve differently than did the courageous Japanese pilot in World War
II, and as we move into an era of automated remote warfare, courage in
military practice may acquire a radically new visage.

Still, it would be a mistake to be a thoroughgoing antirealist or cultural
relativist about the virtues. For while the practices to which they are
adapted change, as do their concrete expressions, the virtues themselves are
rooted in cognitive, emotional, and perceptual capacities and
vulnerabilities that are deeply rooted in the human organism, and that
evolve far more slowly than do cultures. Humans in ancient Greece were
subject to fear and its ability to cloud moral judgment, and hence needed
courage to flourish in fearful circumstances. So were humans in Kongzi's
time and place, and so are humans today.32
Humans in all times and places have needed cooperative social bonds of
family, friendship, and community in order to flourish; this is simply a fact
of our biological and environmental dependence. Traits of caring, honesty,
and civility promote such bonds and the goods they secure, hence their
cross- cultural and historical resonance. Indeed, researchers have found a
remarkable degree of such resonance in empirical investigations of the
overlap among classical and contemporary virtue traditions.33 What
matters is that any given virtue be adapted to and explicable in terms of
some coherent moral practice, narrative, and tradition, and that we be
careful to employ as our interpretive standard for defining a virtue that set
of internal goods that we are presently seeking to achieve within our
contemporary moral practices, rather than those of a tradition that is no
longer living for us.
Thus a framework of technomoral virtues must not be an incoherent
mélange pieced together from parts of disparate, incommensurable
traditions. Rather, following MacIntyre, we start from the guiding concept
of a virtue as a character
51
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
51
trait that enables us to cooperatively achieve, through excellent activity,
shared goods that are internal to our practices. Next, we recognize in the
current human environment the emergence of a new kind of coordinated

technosocial practice with its own distinctive moral goods. The third step is
to grasp that the chances of humans flourishing in a century where
conditions for life are increasingly interdependent will depend in large part
on how effective we become at coordinating our decisions and activities in
order to secure these moral goods. The final step is to realize that to have
any hope of realizing these goods to a significant degree, we will need to
begin to cultivate in ourselves that set of moral virtues most likely to foster
their realization.
In identifying this set we must not be afraid to adapt, extend or qualify
traditional virtue concepts. Our decisions will be driven not by historical
fidelity but by the unique needs of the human present, as set out in the
introduction of this book. This also mitigates those concerns raised at the
start of this chapter about the reliability of existing virtue traditions and
their action- guiding content, for we have no reason to carry over and
endorse every action- guiding ideal, ritual, or character trait celebrated by
those traditions as conducive to a good life— unless they just so happen to
also prove conducive to securing those technomoral goods which are our
present concern.
2.3.1 The Cultural Challenge Revisited
A contemporary technomoral virtue ethic can, then, be conceptually
coherent.
Yet we still need to overcome another sort of worry about the
incommensurability of cultures and traditions. This is the worry that, even
within the contemporary human context, there are insurmountable cultural
obstacles to the emergence of a global technomoral virtue ethic of the sort I
have proposed. This worry can be articulated as two distinct objections:
1: Not all of the goods you have proposed as goals of this emerging ethical
practice ( global community, intercultural understanding, global justice,
human security, and collective human wisdom) are universally recognized
today as essential human goods.
2: Any of those goods on the list that are universally recognized as such will
be understood, from different cultural perspectives, to mean

incommensurably different things in practice. Under that circumstance, no
coherent global standards of excellent moral practice can emerge, and thus
there can be no meaningful global articulation of the virtues that will
promote these goods.
52
5 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
These are serious objections requiring careful response. The first is easiest
to deal with. It is a mistake to hold that a virtue tradition must be
universally attractive to, or adopted by, all human beings in order to be
meaningful or effective.
Every virtue tradition that has ever existed has had nonadherents and
competing value systems, even within the same ethnic or religious culture.
Aristotelian virtue ethics emerged within a diverse Greek world in which
Spartan and other value systems were direct and robust competitors. The
Confucian value system had opponents in Mohism, Daoism, and Legalism,
to name just a few. Indeed that period is often referred to as the time of
conflict among the 'Hundred Schools'
( zhūzǐ bǎijiā).34 Buddhist ethics has always had cultural competitors in
Hinduism and Jainism.
Hence it is a given that a contemporary technosocial virtue ethic will not be
attractive or compelling to everyone, and that the goods that it seeks to
promote will not be universally accepted as the highest goods to which a
contemporary human being can devote her life efforts. Furthermore, there
will inevitably remain many who are indifferent to consideration of any
'highest good' for a human life, including those who live largely without
moral reflection, who regard morality as a mere matter of convention or
power relations, or who accept religious or legal duty as exhaustive of their
moral obligations.

However, the objection is not wholly without force. A contemporary
technosocial virtue ethic must, in order to effect any one of its internal
goods, resonate broadly enough to motivate significant social cooperation
on a global scale. An ethical narrative that has motivational force only for
liberal Anglo- American philosophers, for example, will fail to suffice. The
problems of global justice, security, and community confronting the human
species in the 21st century cut across cultural, political, and religious lines,
and any technosocial ethic which does not do the same is doomed. So let us
consider the plausible scope of our proposed internal goods of technosocial
practice, one by one.
Consider global community. Why should this draw broad support as a goal
of moral technosocial practice? First, let us clarify what this term means; it
refers not to a 'world government' or any other particular institution, but to
a global moral community of active reciprocal concern and respect. Is this
a notion that has broad cultural resonance or not? Some scholars argue
that humans have expanded their circles of moral concern over time, such
that early tribal distinctions between 'us' and 'them' have gradually opened
up to encompass today, in many people's minds, the notion of the 'human
family.' Further widening of the circle of concern is proposed to include
other sentient creatures or the biosphere, perhaps even the universe itself.35
53
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
53
Of course, many of these claims occur within Anglo- American and
European perspectives informed by the cosmopolitan leanings of the
modern liberal tradition. Yet we must not forget that each of the classical
virtue traditions make reference to a similar conception of global
community; Aristotle acknowledges the friendship (however faint its
obligations) that binds all human beings; Kongzi repeatedly states that the
civilizing force of virtue reaches out even to barbarian tribes; and even a
passing knowledge of Buddhism confirms that the notion of a global moral
community is no European liberal invention.36 There is no reason to doubt,

then, that the attractiveness of this notion cuts across cultural, political, and
religious lines.
Recognition of the goods of intercultural understanding and global justice
follows naturally from any commitment to foster global community, for
these goods are essential conditions for the latter. Any community needs its
members to understand each other to some significant degree in order for
that community to function; likewise, a global community of active
reciprocal concern and respect is impossible if global injustices are
routinely tolerated or ignored. Finally, recognition of the good of human
security is necessarily implied by commitment to global human community;
the human race cannot be a community if it no longer exists, or if it can no
longer flourish in any meaningful sense.
Finally, collective human wisdom is a good that nearly anyone can
appreciate, for the following reason: The first two decades of the 21st
century have made it abundantly clear that the social, political, economic,
and environmental conditions under which any one of us must live, along
with those we most care about, are increasingly subject to great disturbance
by failures of collective human wisdom.
The global financial crisis of 2008 and the failure of international efforts to
mitigate the effects of climate change supply striking examples, but many
smaller scale failures can have similarly profound effects. Indeed, no one
on the planet today is fully insulated from the failures of human beings to
jointly and wisely deliberate about the collective impact of their actions. We
need only consider the environmental dimension of this looming problem to
see that those humans still blissfully unaware of their exposure will,
unfortunately, learn of it all too soon. Thus confidence in the cross- cultural
resonance of each of these goods is magnified by the growing worldwide
recognition of political, economic and environmental problems that require
massive human coordination to solve; by these lights, commitments to foster
global human community, understanding, justice, security, and wisdom
appear not only morally desirable, but morally necessary for the good life
in the 21st century— and possibly for any meaningful life at al .
54

5 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
2.3.2 Ethical Pluralism as a Response
to the Cultural Challenge
Here we turn our attention to the second, more daunting objection— for it is
simply true that different cultures and groups will have different
understandings of what a global community should look like, what
'understanding' someone from a different cultural standpoint amounts to,
what constitutes 'justice'
or 'wisdom,' or what would count as a 'secure' existence of the human
species. If the adherents of a moral practice cannot agree on a substantive
description of the goods they collectively seek, then they will not be able to
effectively coordinate their activity to achieve those goods, nor will they
agree about when these goods have been successfully secured.
In order to develop an adequate response to this objection it will help to
draw upon the work of philosophers of technology who have extensively
considered the prospects for an intercultural or global ethics of technology,
and who have weighed the force of similar objections.37 Among them, I
highlight here the work of philosopher Charles Ess, who has arguably
devoted the greatest share of his work to this question. As Ess has argued in
various scholarly fora, there is a plain and compelling need for a global
ethic that addresses the growing role of technology in our lives. He notes
that just as the global network of ICTs requires a shared body of technical
standards in order to function, so also its functioning will increasingly
require certain shared ethical standards among the networked citizens of
this new and diverse "global city."38
Yet as we have noted, the plurality of seemingly incommensurable moral
traditions and cultures is a daunting obstacle for a global technosocial
ethic. Ess explores the prospects for a form of ethical pluralism that can
overcome this obstacle, while avoiding the unworkable alternatives of
ethical absolutism or ethical relativism. He rejects as unsatisfying those

philosophical accounts of ethical pluralism that call for mere tolerance or
appreciation from a distance of ethical differences, as well as accounts that
would ultimately elide such differences by appealing to a common moral
identity or single set of standards that underlies them. Instead, Ess
advocates a delicate middle position inspired by Plato and Aristotelian
metaphysics, what he describes as an "interpretive pluralism" in which
agents from diverse moral traditions can recognize the Other as someone
connected to, but not identified with, their own moral perspective.39 The
nature of their connection is their diverse interpretations of the Good. Just
as Aristotle acknowledged that we talk about existence in many
incompatible ways that nevertheless each point 'toward one' ( pros hen)
phenomenon, Ess argues for the possibility of a "pros hen pluralism."40
The idea here is that while we each encounter others in our world talking
about the good life in diverse, even incompatible ways, we can still
recognize that such talk is all pointing 'toward one' ( pros hen)
55
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
55
overarching aim that we have in common— finding some way to live well
with one another.
One might think this common ground a mighty thin ledge on which to stand.
Yet the cultural diversity of virtue traditions, when combined with their
overarching commitments to moral self- cultivation, habitual practice,
discerning judgment, and flourishing relationships, offers strong prospects
for a pluralistic ethical discourse about living well with emerging
technologies. Ess supports this claim by showing that even in the culturally
and legally contentious domains of online trust and information privacy,
agents having diverse and incommensurable cultural interpretations of
what is right and good in these matters nevertheless display a certain
ethical resonance in their mutual expectation that agents operating in these
arenas will exhibit certain virtues. These include honesty, respect, empathy
and, most of al , a discerning judgment of the moral situation. The latter is
the virtue that Aristotle calls phronēsis or practical wisdom, arguably the

top candidate for a universal moral virtue if there is one. Still, what the
appropriate display of any one of these virtues looks like in a given
circumstance will depend upon the cultural and relational context in which
one is operating, as well as one's own particular identity in that context.
There will certainly, then, be unavoidable disagreements between agents
from different cultural and relational contexts about what ought to be done
in any given case. When the impact of the agent's conduct is purely local,
these disputes usually can be safely tolerated, or recognized through
intercultural dialogue as complementary and instructive. For example, Ess
notes that East Asian youth's attitudes about privacy and the self that are
rooted in Confucian and Buddhist values seem to be taking cues from
Western narratives on these subjects and vice versa.41
At other times, more robustly cooperative global deliberations are needed
in order to secure a moral result. If we are dealing with matters of
Facebook privacy options, Twitter policies for shielding users from sexist or
racist abuse, or protocols for verification in e- commerce, we are
confronting choices that impact users networked together across the globe
and that can't be left up to individuals to independently decide for
themselves. When we debate whether to fund the development of a radically
new and potentially dangerous biomedical technology, whether to
decommission or build more nuclear reactors, or whether to employ,
restrict or ban automated lethal systems in our military campaigns, the
stakeholders of the debate simply cannot assume that their own culturally
or locally situated interpretations of ethics will decide the issue. Yet if this
means that ethical considerations have to be set aside, then it looks like
such debates will simply be decided by considerations of economic,
political, or kinetic might rather than right. The cynical realist will note
that this is precisely how such debates are settled. The moral philosopher
will reply that the human race and state
56
5 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s

of the Earth are almost certainly the worse today for it, and that continuing
this particular practice for the next one hundred years will result in a state
of global human flourishing that is at best gravely suboptimal, and at worst,
nonexistent.
Fortunately, the intercultural resonance of virtue ethics suggests an
alternative. As I argue in the next chapter, diverse virtue traditions appeal
to strikingly similar structures and methods of moral self- cultivation, and
this provides robust resources for bringing ethical considerations into
global technomoral debates in a productive way, one not doomed to the
global imposition of the values of dominant actors or to parties talking
entirely past one another. Instead, we can begin such debates by appealing
to common hopes or expectations that the relevant actors will pattern their
inquiry and deliberations after the broadly recognizable habits of virtuous
or 'morally cultivated' persons. These common patterns of activity are
articulated in Part II.
But that is not al . We can reasonably ask that actors who are party to the
debate agree to protect and promote goods critical to global human
flourishing when those are determined to be at stake and within practical
reach. Of course, there will still be disagreement among the parties about
how those goods are defined. So it may seem that the second objection has
come around to bite us once more. Fortunately, the wound is not fatal. For
even robust and long- standing virtue traditions make room for
disagreement about how to define their common goods; Aristotelians offer
different accounts of happiness or eudaimonia; Mengzi and Xunzi argued
about whether the cultivated state of the junzi was a development or a
reformation of human nature; and a host of Buddhist schools developed
different views of what constitutes enlightenment. Moreover, such
disagreements have profoundly enriched the content of these traditions,
making them more nuanced, active, and responsive to criticism. If perfect,
universal agreement upon a fine- grained description of the goals to be
reached is necessary for a meaningful virtue ethic, then there has never
been a meaningful virtue ethic. Assuming this reductio is accepted as
yielding a false conclusion, then we need only consider what level of
agreement is necessary in order for members of a virtue tradition to
effectively coordinate their moral activities with broadly salutary results.

Finally, as we determined in our analysis of the internal goods of global
technomoral practice, the ability of human actors to adequately and
reliably secure such goods in coordinated action with others will depend on
our cultivation of the particular technomoral virtues likely to be conducive
to such success. Why should we think that such cultivation is practically
possible? Consider that the alternatives are to surrender any hope for
continued human flourishing, to place all our hope in an extended string of
dumb cosmic luck, or to pray for a divine salvation that we can do nothing
to earn. I am confident I am not alone in finding these alternatives
unappealing.
57
The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
57
Moreover, if Aristotle had even some success in fostering the cultivation of
civic virtues, if Buddhism has encouraged any more compassion and
tolerance, or Confucianism more filial care and loyalty, what is to prevent a
new tradition from emerging around the technomoral virtues needed for
human flourishing today? As Ess notes, what we need is something like a
renewed account of the German notion of Bildung; that is, a guide to the
personal and social cultivation of those virtues conducive to a more
humane and enlightened technological society.42 A fuller articulation of
twelve of these virtues will be given in chapter 6, along with practical
suggestions for encouraging and strengthening their global cultivation.
First, however, chapters 3, 4, and 5 will extend our comparison of the
classical virtue traditions, in order to develop from their accounts of moral
self-cultivation an idea of how 21st century humans might acquire the
technomoral virtues we so desperately need.
58
59
PART II

Cultivating the Technomoral
Self
Classical Virtue Traditions
as a Contemporary Guide
60
61
3
The Practice of Moral
Self- Cultivation in Classical
Virtue Traditions
w e h a v e s e e n why we need a globally accessible account of
technomoral virtue.
But what would that actually look like? The first three chapters in this
section draw upon Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist theories of moral
self- cultivation to construct a framework of habits and practices that any
person or institution can use to support the cultivation of technomoral
character. Chapter 6, the final chapter of this section, identifies the specific
technomoral virtues that make up this character— traits that 21st century
humans must cultivate more successfully if we want to be able to live well
with emerging technologies. Our tour of technomoral virtue will then be
complete, and we will be ready to apply it to the emerging technologies that
are the subject of Part III.
As the reader, you may wonder why it is necessary to undertake the deeper
comparative analyses of classical virtue traditions that constitute chapters
3, 4, and 5. Knowing our larger task, why not simply reveal our list of the
technomoral virtues and get on with the business of determining how they
can be usefully applied?

3.1 Learning from Other Virtue Traditions
For one thing, we would be foolish to neglect the rich resources for our task
already available to us within the classical virtue traditions of Aristotelian,
Confucian, and Buddhist ethics. These resources are of more than historical
interest, as the shared conceptual pillars of these systems will turn out to be
critical to the successful management of our own present condition.
62
6 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
We should also recognize that every human understanding of moral
excellence bears the traces of one or more past traditions, and humans have
always sought insight from the moral sages of history, who likewise sought
to lift themselves and their own communities out of shortsighted, base,
ignorant, and destructive patterns of activity. As Alasdair MacIntyre notes,
when inheritors of one moral tradition survey the resources of another,
nothing stands in the way of learning from that rival view, either by finding
in it previously underappreci-ated aspects of their own tradition, or by
encountering values or moral insights
"which by their own standards they ought to have entertained, but did
not."1 Our present understanding of how to realize the goods of
technomoral practice is still profoundly immature, as noted in chapter 2,
and almost certainly inadequate. If we want it to reach maturity, we should
seize any opportunity to learn from other moral traditions how we might
strengthen its foundations and refine its insights.
Additionally, the diversity of norms embodied by classical virtue traditions
should remind us that identifying the good life is not, as most of these
traditions have assumed, a matter of discovering the one eternally 'true'
way to live well.
The principle of charity suggests that we should assume that each of the
distinct paths to flourishing articulated by Aristotelian, Confucian, and

Buddhist ethics more or less worked, or continue to work, in those cultural
and historical settings where they find purchase. In Aristotle's Athens, a life
of civic justice, friendship, and engaged political wisdom would have likely
been a good one— far better than most— but was it really the best, or even
the next best sort of life possible for a human being? After al , if Aristotle
really was mistaken about the rational and moral capacities of women and
non- Greeks, then clearly his vision of human flourishing in political society
left considerable room for improvement.
We should also be willing to believe that at various times and places,
including some places in the present, a good life— far better than most—
has been achievable through a Confucian ethic of filial love and piety, or
the Buddhist practice of mindful and compassionate detachment from the
causes of suffering. Yet these ways of life are no less legitimate subjects of
critical reflection and refinement than was Aristotle's. Moreover, each of
these distinct conceptions of human flourishing is embedded in a
nonfungible cultural and historical context. What sense would it make to
claim that a 4th century bce Chinese politician, or a modern one, would
have lived better if he had mirrored the conduct of the phronimoi of Athens?
Or that the phronimoi would have flourished more, had they adopted the
practices and precepts of the monastic Sangha?
Thus we will not attempt to assess the relative merits of these classical
visions of the good life, a project of highly dubious value. Fortunately, we
have no need for such an assessment. We are not asking which classical
vision of virtue should guide us in our present technomoral condition. None
of them fully can, for
63
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 63
they did not develop out of this condition. Instead we ask what conceptual
and practical resources they can provide for the journey we need to make
from our contemporary condition toward the good life for us, where 'us'
refers to the increasingly interdependent technomoral community now being
constituted on a global scale.2 Given the enduring and widespread
influence of all three traditions, it is reasonable to expect that the resources

they can offer us will be significant, allowing our new technomoral ethic to
establish links with many existing moral cultures and communities around
the globe.
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 unfold the core of these resources: a set of remarkably
similar claims, not about what moral excellence or a good life is, but about
how human beings become excellent. As we recover this shared wisdom, we
should expect these classical virtue traditions to occasionally challenge our
own contemporary biases and dogmas about moral development and the
good life. As we will see, living well in the 21st century may in fact require
the reactivation of some classical habits and virtues that have suffered from
modern neglect. Paradoxically, while humanity today faces challenges of a
wholly unprecedented sort, a close look at how premodern traditions
understood moral cultivation might in fact be our best preparation for what
lies ahead.
3.2 Cultivating the Technomoral Self
As we saw in chapter 2, diverse virtue traditions share a deep conceptual
unity accounted for by MacIntyre's notion of a virtuous practice. Yet his
analysis of that unity assumes that the content of any particular virtuous
practice is always relative to a distinctive form of life, one embedded in a
specific cultural and historical context that is in key respects
incommensurable with that of other traditions.
While this is right insofar as it goes, there is at least one moral practice that
is claimed as central by most, perhaps al , classical virtue traditions,
however diverse these may be in their moral worldviews. This is the
practice of moral self-cultivation itself. Moreover, the different versions of
this practice are linked by significant structural commonalities and
conceptual resonances worthy of exploration in light of our present needs.3
As we saw in chapter 1, moral self- cultivation is understood by virtue
ethicists as a developmental practice that, if pursued properly and under
favorable social and environmental conditions, will lead a person to a
virtuous and good life. It is a voluntary practice, one freely embraced in
order to slowly and painstak-ingly transform oneself into the sort of human
being that one aspires to be, one who is capable of living well. As Stanley

Cavell states, drawing upon the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson, moral self-
cultivation is a fundamentally human quest for my "further, next, unattained
but attainable, self."4 It presupposes key facts
64
64
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
about human beings: that we can freely choose an aspirational path of
moral development; that such a choice can be effective in shaping one's
moral character; and that we are unlikely to acquire virtuous character
without a self- directed, habitual, and enduring effort to improve ourselves.
Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist ethics each articulate strikingly
similar (while not identical) practices of moral self- cultivation informed by
a philosophical anthropology of this sort. It stands to reason that these
similarities do not result from arbitrary coincidence, but are rooted in basic
truths about what it takes for human beings to become virtuous. If this basic
anthropology is correct, its implications reach beyond classical systems of
ethics to inform our own project, as they entail that acquiring technomoral
virtue will require that we commit ourselves to a similar practice.
In the chapters that follow, we turn to seven core elements of the practice of
moral self- cultivation that emerge from these culturally and historically
distinct traditions. Together they offer us a shared frame of reference and a
developmental scaffold for a technomoral virtue ethic of global scope. They
are: 1. Moral Habituation
2. Relational Understanding
3. Reflective Self- Examination
4. Intentional Self- Direction of Moral Development
5. Perceptual Attention to Moral Salience
6. Prudential Judgment

7. Appropriate Extension of Moral Concern
This framework is never formally articulated in Aristotelian, Confucian, or
Buddhist ethics, much less all three. Among them, only Buddhism explicitly
formalizes the practice of moral self- cultivation (e.g., the Eightfold Path),
and the framework above is not the Eightfold Path. Given sufficient
articulation, however, each element of this framework would be recognized
by a studious devotee of Aristotelian, Confucian, or Buddhist ethics as a
conceptual near- relative of some essential feature of his or her own
tradition. Put another way, the sketch above compiles a set of shared
conceptual resonances that bind the three accounts of moral self-
cultivation into a single family of ethical thought.
For the purposes of cooperative discourse, this means that if I were to
engage in a conversation about the practice of moral self- cultivation with
someone well-versed in one of these traditions, bringing any one of these
seven concepts into the conversation would help us to illuminate or make
common sense of the subject of our shared concern, namely, how moral
self- cultivation occurs. This framework thus provides a shared frame of
reference upon which a pluralistic, globally accessible account of
technomoral virtue can begin to be constructed.
65
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 65
3.2.1 The Open Circle of Moral Self- Cultivation
The framework analyzed in the coming chapters does not exhaust the
content of any classical account of moral self- cultivation; nor do these
traditions perfectly mirror one another in their understanding of the
practice. Yet all classical virtue traditions understand the practice of moral
self- cultivation as having a temporal dimension, in which certain habits of
the practice are a focus of the early stages of moral cultivation while others
are more closely associated with mature moral practice. However, in none
of these traditions is this developmental process seen as rigidly fixed; the
specific manner in which an individual moves through the process is
understood to be relative to the particular capacities and moral psychology

of that individual. For example, a person who is strongly family- oriented
might find it much easier to cultivate relational understanding than to learn
to appropriately extend moral concern beyond her kin; on the other hand,
for a person whose early family life was profoundly troubled, cultivating a
deep and refined understanding of close human relationships may be a
lifelong struggle.
In all three traditions, moral habituation must be taken up at a very early
stage, since the process of moral self- cultivation involves increasing
refinements and enrichments of this habitual practice. All three regard the
reliable exercise of prudential judgment as a mark of advanced moral
development. Likewise, in all three traditions, the ability to appropriately
extend moral concern requires a combination of emotional sensitivity and
cognitive discernment that must be acquired in earlier stages of the
practice. Still, conceptual and structural differences between the models of
self- cultivation will remain. For example, Buddhism's commitment to 'right
understanding' ( samyag- drsti) as the first step on the Eightfold Path may,
depending on how it is interpreted, conflict with the Aristotelian view that
proper habituation to right action in youth must precede the acquisition of
moral understanding. Likewise, Aristotle's view of moral habituation as a
corrective to naturally disordered human impulses appears to be in tension
with the view of the Confucian philosopher Mengzi, who claimed that moral
habituation and practice bring our naturally good impulses to their full and
proper expression.5
Such differences entail that the family resemblance among classical virtue
traditions will never col apse into identity. We must remain attentive to the
important divergences in the moral, metaphysical, and/ or psychological
commitments that inform each view. However, differences in how each
classical tradition orders the various elements of moral self- cultivation (to
the extent that they do explicitly order them) are not as significant as they
may appear, because these are elements of a unified practice rather than a
series of discrete 'stages' through which the individual passes on their way
to acquiring a virtuous character.
66
6 6

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
While certain parts of moral practice are more commonly associated with
early or late phases of self- cultivation, the ultimate aim is for them to be
cultivated in an integrated and harmonious way, and expressed together in
the more or less perfected character of a virtuous person. How does this
come about? According to all three traditions, the maturation and
refinement of each element of moral self- cultivation continually informs
and enriches the others. In the words of the Buddha: "the preceding
qualities flow into the succeeding qualities; the succeeding qualities bring
the preceding qualities to perfection, for going from the near shore to the
far shore."6
Not only must the individual elements of moral self- cultivation be jointly
pursued, but in order for the practice to enable a good life, each element
must necessarily become a lifelong habit, an enduring component of one's
moral personality. These habits are not used as mere means to become
virtuous; rather, they become constitutive and enduring elements of virtue
itself. None is a ladder to virtue that the cultivated person then kicks away.
Indeed, we will see that each of these habits will be implicated not only in
the cultivation, but also in the retention and gradual perfection of the
specific technomoral virtues to be highlighted in chapter 6. For the virtues
are conceived as endlessly perfectible; barring the possible exception of
'moral saints,' ordinary human beings are never finished with the work of
becoming virtuous.7 Indeed the 'cultivated person' is typically called so
only in relation to her earlier, uncultivated self, or in relation to other, less
cultivated persons— not in the sense of a task of moral becoming that has
been completed and set aside. Thus the temporal order of moral self-
cultivation is secondary to its cohesion as a holistic practice.8 We can
conceive of each element as part of an open circle that is to be repeatedly
retraced, deepened, and expanded.
With this in mind, we can now turn to deeper analyses of the seven basic
elements of moral self- cultivation. Each analysis uncovers shared
conceptual resonances among Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist
understandings of these elements, as well as important discordances. Each

analysis closes with a brief summary of the common resonances and their
implications for the 21st century cultivation of technomoral virtue.
3.3 Moral Habituation
In all virtue traditions— classical, modern, and contemporary— the
practice of moral self- cultivation is, at its core, a transformative process of
moral habituation.
It begins with the initial setting down of some basic patterns of moral
activity that in turn open up the possibility for more specific, refined, and
intentionally directed habits of moral activity to develop. Before we go any
further, however, the concept of 'habit' we are employing here must be
carefully defined.
67
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 67
'Habit' within the Aristotelian virtue tradition must be understood in terms
of the Greek word hexis, from which the meaning of the contemporary
English term 'habit' departs considerably, as we shall see. Aristotle himself
discusses hexis in multiple senses, such that its meaning varies with context
and in conjunction with closely related terms, such as ethos.9 Seeking
equivalents for the term 'habit'
in Confucian and Buddhist thought introduces even more semantic
complexities. Thus to arrive at a clear idea of what we mean, we must
exclude meanings of the term that are incompatible with or irrelevant to
moral virtue, in any classical context.
The most important thing to grasp about habits of moral practice is that
they are never mindless appetites of the sort we might associate with a
smok-ing or drinking 'habit.' Nor are they involuntary, uncontrollable
reflexes like blinking or breathing. Moral habits imply motivating reasons.
If I always take a certain route to my favorite restaurant, and my spouse
says "Why do you always go this way?" I might respond "No reason, I
guess it's just a habit"—

meaning that I did it without a motivating reason. I could have done just as
well had I taken a different route. This cannot be what we mean when we
speak of moral habits.
What moral habits do share with other sorts of habit is that they arise, at
least in part, from the repetition of a pattern of action. An act does not
become a habit until I do it repeatedly, and for it to be a habit I must do it
more or less consistently when invited by the relevant situation. Thus as
with other types of habit a moral habit is a practical disposition that
emanates from past behavior; however, unlike other sorts of habits:
a) the habituated action is done for motivating reasons;
b) the action is normatively valued as positive, such that there is a
(defeasible) expectation that I should perform it in the relevant situation(s);
c) the action pattern shapes, and continues to shape, my cognitive and
emotional states in a manner conducive to the broader practice of moral
self- cultivation.
Aristotle is clear that we first become moral not by studying moral
philosophy or listening to moral arguments, but by repeatedly doing moral
things until they become habitual: "it is by doing just acts that the just man
is produced ... "10
An already well- habituated person can enrich their excellence by acquiring
a philosophical understanding of ethics, but no poorly habituated and
intemperate person could be "made well in soul by such a course of
philosophy."11 With the exception of those rare "gently born" individuals
naturally inclined to virtue, he thinks most of us find it exceedingly difficult
to be virtuous, and must be gradually acclimated to it.12
68
6 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s

On Aristotle's view, basic moral habituation helps to remove the most
fundamental obstacle to human flourishing— namely, our naturally
intemperate responses to pleasure and pain, for "it is on account of
pleasure that we do bad things, and on account of pain that we abstain from
noble ones."13 Yet in contrast to the Buddhist conception of moral
habituation, the idea is not to acquire an appropriate detachment from
pleasures and pains. Rather, it is to gradually condition ourselves to "use
these well"— that is, to feel the right kinds of pleasure and pain, in the
right amounts, at the right times and places, and with regard to the right
objects.14 Thus the goal is to become habituated to responding to pleasure
and pain in a way that strikes the appropriate mean, relative to the
circumstances.
For example, we should want to be pained by "things that are terrible and
to stand our ground against them," for that is virtuous; but one who is
pained by nothing, or pained by everything, would be deficient in
character.15
How does one know where the virtuous mean lies? Here is where one's
access to human models of moral excellence becomes important. The mean
is defined by what a truly virtuous person would do in the same situation;
so the imitation of exemplary persons is a crucial component of early moral
habituation.16 As a first step to becoming good, I should study what is done
by truly good people (in Aristotle: the phronimoi: cultivated persons with
practical wisdom), and consistently try to do the same.17 In young children,
the process will not be wholly voluntary in the beginning: laws and the
oversight of parental and other authorities must compel or elicit obedience
to virtuous (or at least nonvicious) patterns of action. Even though Aristotle
holds that genuinely virtuous actions are voluntary, and done purely for the
sake of what is noble, he thinks that instruments of social compulsion such
as laws and incentives (when intelligently employed by virtuous authorities)
actually enable, rather than obstruct, the process of deliberate self-
cultivation that eventually leads to genuine virtue.18
This is because laws and other sources of external moral authority
gradually acclimate the young person to noble actions that are naturally

painful (or at least not naturally pleasant), such as honoring debts or
respecting the status of elders.
As Aristotle notes, noble actions become less painful as one becomes more
accustomed to doing them.19 Eventually, such actions start to become
pleasant to the morally habituated person, and an attraction to nobility for
its own sake gradually emerges. Consider the way in which a child is often
pained by sharing food with his or her siblings, and has to be induced by
rewards or punishments to do so. Yet by the time we are mature adults, we
may take great pleasure in baking a cake for a beloved sister or gifting her
with a bottle of rare whisky, even when we do not expect to be able to
consume any ourselves. At this stage, the natural obstacles to a deliberate
undertaking of moral self- cultivation have been greatly diminished, as the
person has already begun to acquire the essential moral virtue of self-
control or temperance ( sôphrosunê).20
69
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 69
Aristotle acknowledges, however, that the majority of people are highly
resistant to making this transition to "noble joy and noble hatred," and
wonders if
"perhaps we must be content if, when all the influences by which we are
thought to become good are present, we get some tincture of excellence."21
Moral habituation, then, is a process that approaches its aim by small
degrees, and that can easily stall well short of the ultimate goal of genuine
virtue. Moreover, as we will see, for Aristotle habituation to noble acts is a
necessary but not a sufficient condition of moral virtue; it must be
complemented and enriched by further refinements of moral practice, most
notably those that help to cultivate the intellectual virtue of practical
wisdom or phronēsis.
✥   ✥   ✥
Confucian moral philosophy contains no direct equivalents of Aristotle's
terms hexis or ethos, nor of the English term 'habit.' However, robust

conceptual resonances can be found between the role of habituation in
Aristotle's ethics and the Confucian discourse on the concept of li, where li
denotes ritual action and its power to shape moral character. Outside of the
context of moral self-cultivation, the term li can simply represent socially
and/ or religiously mandated conduct, such as the elaborate rituals in
traditional Chinese cultures that govern the proper conduct of births,
marriages, and funerals. When employed by Confucian thinkers, the
concept of li as ritual practice retains its link to social custom but also takes
on a richer set of meanings, many of which resonate with the Aristotelian
discourse on habit. For ritual practice not only functions to express moral
motivations, attitudes, and conceptions of the world, "but it also helps
cultivate those attitudes in us."22 Thus whether we are naturally
disinclined to have moral attitudes and motivations, as the Confucian
philosopher Xunzi believed, or whether those attitudes and motivations
simply need proper nur-ture to develop from their natural 'seeds,' as his
Confucian rival Mengzi claimed, repeated ritual action or li can make it
easier to cultivate what Aristotle called
"noble joys and noble hatreds."
As Kongzi (Confucius) himself said, "By nature people are similar; they
diverge as the result of practice."23 Ritual practice, then, gradually brings
human thoughts, feelings and desires into better alignment with the Way (
Dao), the cosmic pattern with which the actions of a virtuous person
harmonize. This function invites a comparison to Aristotelian
habituation.24 However, there are significant differences to be noted. First,
and most obviously, the concept of the Dao has no application in Aristotle's
cosmology. Second, the Aristotelian concept of a moral habit does not carry
the implication of sacred tradition that is essential to the Confucian notion
of li. Moreover, the Aristotelian notion of 'habit' offers little in the way of
action- guiding content. At best we can say that a moral habit is a
disposition to act in a way that "strikes the appropriate mean for the
situation at hand, especially as
70
7 0

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
regarding pleasures and pains." The concept of li as 'ritual practice,' on
the other hand, is inseparable from a second sense of li as the 'rites,' which
embody a vast repository of culturally specific, standardized, and highly
formal social practices with action- guiding content spelled out in rich
detail, often carried out with musical and other aesthetic modes of
expression. As comparative scholars have noted, there is simply nothing like
this in Aristotle's account of virtue.25
Kongzi's disciple Mengzi employs the concept of li in a third sense, to
represent a specific virtue of 'propriety' or 'respect.' Here we find an
unanticipated conceptual resonance. As Lee Yearley has noted in his
comparison of Mengzi and Aquinas, there is no virtue comparable to li in
Aquinas' account, which is largely based upon Aristotle. But Yearley
describes the virtue of li as a disposition toward yielding or deference, one
that corrects a certain deformation in human character, namely, "people's
love of mastery and movement to self- aggrandizement."26 If we remember
that li in the first sense is a ritual practice of conforming to li in the second
sense (the rites themselves), then it seems that it is this repeated action of
yielding to others, as mandated by the rites, which produces the 'yielding
disposition' of li as a virtue in the third sense.
The only plausible way to understand this process is to explain it in a
manner similar to Aristotle's account: yielding to others is something that
in an uncultivated state I find difficult or unpleasant to do, because it
opposes the natural pleasure I take in mastery and self- aggrandizement.
But the repeated practice of yielding, which I am socially compelled to do
by the rites (in a manner culturally distinct from, but comparable to the
laws in Aristotle's account), gradually corrects this problem by getting me
in the habit of yielding to others, a habit that becomes gradually less
unpleasant as I become more accustomed to doing it. If I engage in ongoing
efforts of self- cultivation, I may even begin to find it pleasant to yield to
others when morality calls for it, and at that stage my character will
embody the full virtue of li in the third sense. In this way, ritual conduct not
only expresses who one is and what one values, but as Kongzi states, taking
up the habit of ritual practice is what first allows me to

"overcome myself " as the human I am, enabling me to then consciously
choose to become more "humane."27 This emphasis on ritual practice as
restraining and corrective of the uncultivated state strongly mirrors the
Aristotelian account of moral habituation.28
Another conceptual resonance with Aristotle is found in Kongzi's 'Doctrine
of the Mean,' which, as in Aristotle's account, suggests that a cultivated
person strikes an appropriate balance between extreme courses of action.29
We should recall that the uncultivated person in Aristotle's account lacks
the moral discernment to recognize the mean relative to particular
circumstances. He must initially look to moral experts ( phronimoi) who
have this discernment and try to imitate their conduct. In
71
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 71
this way he becomes more habituated to and comfortable with moderate
actions, which enables the gradual emergence of his own perception of the
Mean.
This highlights one final Confucian resonance with Aristotle's account of
habituation— namely, the role played by the 'humane' or cultivated person
( junzi), who serves as an exemplar for the uncultivated. In the Analects,
Kongzi compares the virtue of the junzi to the wind, which sets the direction
in which the grass (the common people) will bend.30 He advises that "when
you see a person of worth, concentrate upon becoming their equal."31 The
rites cannot be learned solely from sacred texts; they are only fully
embodied in their social practice, and observing their practice by a more
cultivated person helps me to appreciate not only their deeper meaning, but
also the great sensitivity, nobility, discernment, beauty, and harmonious
ease displayed in their successful fulfillment.32 Like the phronimoi, then,
the junzi (or those who approximate that ideal) serve to illustrate not only
what should be done, but how and why. The admirable and attractive moral
spectacle that such exemplary persons create makes the path of virtue seem
pleasant to pursue, sustaining the uncultivated person's will to become
more consistent in moral practice.33

Thus the concept of li in the first sense, as ritual practice that follows a
pattern expressed in the actions of exemplary, cultivated persons in one's
community, enabling a self- transformation through which one may himself
become cultivated, has a powerful semantic relation and a similar
developmental function to the Aristotelian notion of habit, despite being far
richer in action- guiding content and having associations with sacred
tradition not found in Aristotle.
✥   ✥   ✥
The Buddhist framework for moral self- cultivation, as formalized in The
Noble Eightfold Path, contains no direct equivalent of li. Buddhist religious
practices do incorporate many types of ritual— that is, conduct which is
understood to be both sacred and rooted in tradition. Yet by rejecting the
Hindu inscription of Vedic belief in a fixed social order, the Buddha
detached the idea of spiritual action from conventional action. Although
individual schools of Buddhism vary so widely in cultural and religious
practice that our analysis can only have general applicability, a Buddhist
does not primarily cultivate virtue by learning and embodying social
conventions. While a Buddhist is not typically required to oppose the
patterns of action mandated by custom, law or other social authorities, her
path to moral self- cultivation does not naturally begin by following these
channels, as it does for both Kongzi and Aristotle.
Yet there are clear resonances in Buddhist ethics with the Aristotelian
notion of habit and the Confucian concept of li. Perhaps the clearest
involves the concept of ś īla, often translated as 'morality, 'virtue' or 'right
conduct.' The latter is nearer to the primary meaning of ś īla as 'that which
accords with the precepts
72
7 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
of Buddhism,' where these precepts take the form of a set of rules
proscribing certain forms of speech (for example, gossip), bodily actions

(such as stealing and killing), and livelihood (trading in weapons, meat, or
human slaves).34 Śīla has a modest resonance with the Confucian's second
sense of li as 'rites,' insofar as both offer a fixed body of action- guiding
content. Still, li are far more numerous, specific, and prescriptive than ś īla,
insofar as they define the appropriate fulfillment of a wide range of
traditional social roles and obligations. Śīla, on the other hand, offers only
a few highly general prohibitions of conduct, which are intended to govern
Buddhist practitioners without regard to their social role or status. In this
respect ś īla may function in a manner nearer to that of Aristotle's
conception of law, as an instrument that primarily restrains the uncultivated
person from becoming habituated to vicious actions that might naturally
seem pleasant or otherwise attractive.
As we noted in chapter 2, Buddhist scholars regard the precepts of ś īla not
as constitutive of moral goodness but as defeasible, contextual, and
dependent rules which supervene upon a deeper conception of virtue as a
cultivated state of enlightened existence. This explains why, as comparative
scholars David E. Cooper and Simon P. James note, ś īla is just one of the
'three trainings' ( trishiksha) that make up the basic structure of the Noble
Eightfold Path.35 It is joined by prajñā
(wisdom) and samādhi (concentration), each with its own component
elements that, together with the three abovementioned components of ś īla,
make up the full eight steps on the path. The first two steps— 'right view'
and 'right resolve'—
together compose prajñā, while the last three steps— 'right effort', 'right
mindfulness,' and 'right attention'— compose samādhi. As Cooper and
James note, moral implications infuse these other dimensions of Buddhist
practice as well.36 Thus it is at this more encompassing level of the three
trainings ( trishiksha) that the strongest conceptual resonances with moral
habituation and ritual practice begin to emerge.
Indeed the concept of habitual practice infuses the entire Eightfold Path, so
much so that there is no single concept matching it. The nearest concept
captur-ing the entire action- guiding content of the Path is the Dharma, the
full body of Buddhist teachings and doctrine, but this is ultimately too
broad, as we wish to highlight not the teachings and doctrines themselves,

but the way in which habitually following their guidance gradually
transforms who the individual is and what she can readily and reliably do.
As in Aristotelian and Confucian ethics, each component of the Path
enables a person to train herself to think, believe, act, and feel in ways that
appear difficult or unappealing in her uncultivated state, but are performed
with increasing ease and joy as her practice of moral self- cultivation
continues.37 As in the other two virtue traditions, the Path is also
understood to lead a person along a 'Middle Way' that avoids destructive
extremes.38 Given the
73
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 73
scope of the Dharma, however, the total habits to be acquired extend well
beyond the conventionally approved social behaviors that can be encoded
in traditional rites or mandated by law. Habits of meditation,
understanding, and other forms of disciplined, self- controlled activity (
yoga) gradually reshape the affective and cognitive life of the individual
until she is the sort of being who can enter into the enlightened state of
nirvāna, or, if that state is not yet attained, can at least reduce her own
suffering and that of other beings. We shall return to these more refined
habits of moral practice as we carry out the remaining six stages of our
analysis of moral self- cultivation.
There is one final resonance to highlight here: the role of exemplary and/ or
cultivated persons in Buddhist moral habituation. As with the phronimoi
and the junzi, human examples of moral excellence play an important role
in Buddhist ethics. While the Buddha himself, and others who have attained
Buddha- nature, are certainly the exemplary persons who ultimately
constitute the goal of moral self- cultivation, both the ordinary, uncultivated
person ( prthagjana) and the devoted aspirant on the Eightfold Path (the
bodhisattva) may lack direct access to a living Buddha. The moral
exemplars who provide uncultivated persons with living models of virtuous
conduct are the Sangha. These are traditionally members of the monastic
community of monks and nuns, although sufficiently enlightened laypersons
are also among the Sangha. As one of the "Three Jewels"

(along with the Buddha and the Dharma) enabling moral self-
transformation, the Sangha are those living persons who, as comparative
Buddhist scholar Peter Harvey puts it, "have been permanently changed, to
some degree, by insight" into Dharma. 39 He goes on to describe the
inspiration provided by these socially revered and attractive examples of
human flourishing as motivating the uncultivated person to make the initial
commitment "to develop virtue, a generous and self- controlled way of life
for the benefit of self and others."40 Here we see once more the role of
exemplary persons who motivate the initial desire to transform oneself for
the better, who illustrate for the beginner the mean state where virtuous
conduct lies, and who encourage the extended commitment to the practice
of self- cultivation (in Mahāyāna Buddhism, the bodhisattva vow) that a
person needs in order to form mature moral habits. It is this habituation
that begins to restrain, correct, reshape, or otherwise transform the
uncultivated state into one from which a virtuous life appears not only
possible, but increasingly attractive.
Where Buddhism appears to depart from Aristotle, and to a lesser extent
from Confucianism, is in the view that this initial move to self-
transformation must also be motivated by a certain understanding or
knowledge concerning the nature of reality, that is, "some acquaintance
with the Buddhist outlook and an aspiration to apply it."41 The reason for
the difference is plain: unlike the phronimoi, who may manifest civic
excellence without pursuing theoretical wisdom, or even
74
74
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the Confucian junzi, who are highly learned concerning the rites in relation
to Dao but require no further metaphysical philosophy, the admirable
qualities of the exemplary Sangha are simply inseparable from the
metaphysical teachings of Buddhism. Unlike the phronimoi and the junzi,
many of the Sangha live a monastic life starkly different from that of the
masses, and the only explanation for this way of life is that they hold a very
different view of reality from everyone else. The motivation to emulate them

simply cannot arise without some basic understanding of why they have
chosen to live as they do. Yet as Harvey and others note, the purpose of this
initial wisdom ( prajñā) is primarily to motivate the immediate taking up of
the habitual practice of right conduct (ś īla) and thereafter concentration (
samādhi), which begin to transform the individual such that deeper wisdom
can be attained. This in turn enables more refined cultivation of the
virtues.42 Thus the initial habituation to moral activity remains, if not the
starting point of Buddhist moral self- cultivation, at least very near to it.
Moral Habituation: Shared Resonances
and Technomoral Implications
The complex interaction and mutual enrichment of the seven elements of the
practice of moral self- cultivation, across all three classical accounts, will
be increasingly evident as the analyses in Part II continue. For now, let us
summarize the conceptual resonances among our three classical
conceptions of moral habituation. Despite their considerable differences, in
all three the practice of moral self- cultivation requires:
1) A gradual transition from an uncultivated state to a morally habituated
one: 2) One typically motivated and guided by moral exemplars in the
community; 3) One effected by repeated moral practice of right (or nearly
right) conduct that strikes the appropriate mean relative to the
circumstances;
4) A practice that gradually accustoms the individual to actions which were
previously seen as painful or unattractive;
5) Which eventually leads to greater comfort, ease, pleasure, and even joy
in performing moral action, enabling the cultivation of the virtue of
temperate self-control or discipline;
6) Which in turn enables and strengthens the ongoing commitment to moral
self- cultivation required for more specific moral habits to be developed and
integrated;

7) The full development and integration of which constitute the achievement
of, or increasing approximation to, a genuinely virtuous character— that is,
a cultivated state of moral excellence that promotes a life of flourishing
with others.
75
The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue Traditions 75
Does this also describe how we may begin to cultivate the technomoral
virtues? If so, we will want to learn from the coming chapters what kinds of
repeated practices can produce the moral habituation that makes virtuous
conduct in the technosocial domain more comfortable, attractive, and even
enjoyable. We will also want to know how we may identify those moral
exemplars who can show us how to engage in technosocial practices well,
and in a way that strikes the appropriate mean relative to our
circumstances.
Given the condition of acute technosocial opacity diagnosed in the
Introduction, we will also want to know how our moral habits can be made
sufficiently flexible and responsive to emerging and unanticipated
technosocial developments. We also must ask how moral habituation can
engender greater self- control and discipline, such that we, and not our
technologies, become the authors of our habits and desires. Finally, given
our special concerns about collective human wisdom concerning
technosocial practices on a global scale, we will want to know how we can
habituate ourselves to effective moral deliberation in the global commons,
and how we, to use Kongzi's phrase, can 'overcome ourselves' as beings
naturally inclined to make selfish, narrowly tribal, provincial, and
shortsighted decisions concerning the use of technology.
76
4
Cultivating the Foundations
of Technomoral Virtue

t h i s c h a p t e r c o n t i n u e s our exploration of the seven habits of
moral self-cultivation shared by classical virtue traditions, habits that can
also guide and inspire a new and much- needed global practice for the 21st
century: the cultivation of technomoral virtue. In chapter 3 we saw that the
human practice of moral self- cultivation always presupposes a process of
general habituation to moral acts, which gradually weakens or removes
natural impediments to becoming virtuous. As these obstacles fall away, the
deliberate and sustained pursuit of virtue becomes possible, by cultivating
the more advanced moral habits of relational understanding, reflective self-
examination, and intentional self- direction of moral development upon
which virtue is founded.
4.1 Relational Understanding
To see what relational understanding is and why it is essential to the
practice of moral self- cultivation, it helps to recognize how classical virtue
traditions conceive of the human person: namely, as a relational being,
someone whose identity is formed is through a network of relationships.
While some virtue traditions regard one's relationships with other living
things, objects, places, or deities as part of one's unique identity, all virtue
traditions acknowledge the central importance of our formative
relationships with other human beings: our family, friends, neighbors,
citizens, teachers, leaders, and models. In contrast, both Kantian and
utilitarian ethics portray the self as an independent rational agent who can
and ought to act autonomously, without relying on the external guidance of
others.
On this view, a child's agency will remain bound by relational ties, but an
adult exercising his own reason is an independent being, free to decide
entirely for himself how to live. Moreover, on such a view, the ideal moral
agent will adopt a universal
77
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
77

and impersonal moral perspective— in critical parlance, the 'view from
nowhere.'1
This means they act from the same motivations and principles as would any
other ideal moral agent— as opposed to acting from a unique moral
situation defined by the agent's own personal obligations and relational
ties.
In contrast, most classical virtue traditions view the self as partly or wholly
constituted by concrete roles and responsibilities to specific others in one's
moral community.2 The responses of others to my actions continually
inform, and often correct, my sense of who I am in the world. Though these
responses can often be unfair or misguided, reliable self- knowledge could
not be formed or maintained in their absence.3 Contrary to Kant (and
Nietzsche), the purely autonomous agent can never be a fully realized, self-
aware human being. Indeed the ideal moral agent is not the person who
most successfully detaches her deliberations from her own relational
context, but rather the one who understands and responds to that context
most fully— that is, a person of practical wisdom. Social ties constitute the
very field upon which ethics plays out, and ethical norms exist to preserve
and enrich the flourishing of dependent human beings in community, not in
isolation. In most classical virtue traditions, then, the cultivated person
always acts from within her own unique context of important relations,
roles, and responsibilities, while seeking perpetually more refined
understandings of these relations and the moral obligations and ideals to
which they give rise.4 In this context, 'relational understanding' is not a
noun but a verb, not a possession but an active and sustained achievement.
Aristotle gives us a glimpse of what relational understanding looks like in
his accounts of justice and friendship. In explaining the nature of justice, he
states that, because "man is by nature a 'political animal,' " a person
without a political community is either "a bad man or above humanity."5
Indeed, he says, because justice is the full extension of human excellence
toward others, not just toward oneself, the political virtue of justice "is not
part of excellence but excellence entire ..."6 He goes on to distinguish
justice, understood as excellence or virtue of character, from individual acts
of justice. Of course, the person with a just character will be able, far better

than most, to discern what is just in a particular case and what is unjust. As
it turns out, however, this presupposes a nuanced and accurate
understanding of the particular relationships at stake in each case; for what
one person owes to another in a particular case is highly dependent on the
kind of relational ties that bind them. As mentioned in chapter 1, Aristotle's
view is complicated by his belief in the natural appropriateness of unequal
relations between elite Greek men and everyone else (e.g., slaves, women,
non- elites, and non- Greeks)— assumptions that from a contemporary
standpoint we have good reasons to reject. Nevertheless, even his remarks
on this topic reveal the way in which no exemplary person could ignore the
deep structure of distinct kinds
78
7 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
of human relations; rather, such a person would understand such matters in
far more depth and with greater nuance and precision than the ordinary
person.7
In his extensive analysis of friendship in Books Eight and Nine of the
Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle continues to highlight the essential
connection between the cultivation of virtue and relational understanding.
At the start of Book Eight, Aristotle employs the term 'friendship' ( philia)
as a kind of generic catch- all for relationships of affinity, covering kinship
(including the parent-child relationship), civic or political friendship, and
even the most attenuated form of affinity between strangers who share
nothing in common but their humanity.
As his analysis continues, however, it becomes clear that friendship in any
robust form is more demanding than mere affinity, and requires a reciprocal
and mutually recognized wish for the other's good that emerges from shared
activity.8
For Aristotle a human relationship is not a formal category but a worldly
fact; it is a form of living together ( suzên) in an active sense. It is this

active living together from which emerge the reciprocal obligations,
affections, and concerns that make up the field of ethics. After al , he notes,
even if (contrary to fact) a human being could be wholly self- sufficient,
"the good man will need people to do well by."9
Thus for Aristotle, the virtuous person will not only enjoy friendship, he will
understand what friendship is, not just in its essence but in its fine- grained
variations and ethical nuances.10 This is why Aristotle devotes a
considerable portion of his discussion of friendship to describing the
various hierarchies and differential obligations that mark different types of
friendly relations; for example, he insists that a person cannot become
virtuous without learning along the way why
"it is a more terrible thing to defraud a comrade than a fellow citizen, more
terrible not to help a brother than a stranger, and more terrible to wound a
father than anyone else."11
Of the three main types of friendship Aristotle analyzes (friendships of
utility, friendships based on shared pleasure, and complete or 'perfect'
friendships), only virtuous persons are capable of enjoying the third and
most rewarding type.
In this most intimate relationship between two people, the joint pursuit of
virtue enables each friend to function as a "second self " for the other: a
mirror of noble character that provides the self- knowledge essential to
one's ongoing moral refinement, and the reinforcing pleasure of seeing
one's own moral successes reflected in the excellent actions of one's
friend.12 Indeed, it is the sharing of virtuous activity that defines such
friendships. This means that for Aristotle, understanding the ethical duties
and concerns generated by human relations requires more than a grasp of
the formal classifications of relational ties (brother, neighbor, wife) and
their general patterns. It also requires understanding the nature of the
activity actually shared in any particular relationship. Thus he notes that
while the relationship between husband and wife is generally unequal and
often based merely on
79

Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
79
utility or pleasure, "this friendship may be based also on excellence, if the
parties are good ..."13
In conclusion, Aristotle holds that virtue presupposes that one habitually
seeks to understand the fine- grained structure and implications of
particular human relations. Yet it is interesting that in his analysis of these
implications, Aristotle regards kin relationships as a species of the more
fundamental category of friendship and its various forms; and in general
seems to treat familial ties as simply one especially close type of civic bond.
Indeed, Aristotle explicitly states that the State is prior to the family and the
individual.14As we are about to see, this aspect of his view is
incommensurable with the Confucian moral tradition, in which ethics
begins with and remains, even in its political forms, a direct extension of
moral relationships within the family.
✥   ✥   ✥
Youzi, a disciple of Kongzi, is quoted in the Analects as saying: The
exemplary person ( junzi) applies himself to the roots. Once the roots are
firmly established, the Way will grow. Might we not say that filial piety (
xiao) and respect for elders constitute the root of virtue ( ren)?15
This quotation introduces two core Confucian virtues: xiao and ren. Neither
has a direct conceptual parallel in Aristotle, or any other classical virtue
tradition, but these distinctive virtue concepts help to explain why
Confucians also believe that the development of a virtuous character
presupposes the active exercise of what I have called 'relational
understanding.'
The concept of xiao is generally translated as 'filial piety': it refers to a
reliable disposition toward appropriate respect and loving treatment of
one's own family, especially one's parents. It is noteworthy that there is a
special virtue- concept associated with this behavior, especially since there
are other Confucian virtue-concepts that might be thought to do the same

moral work, such as respectful yielding or propriety ( li) and benevolence (
ren). In the Confucian worldview, however, the family really is the 'root' of
moral virtue, and not simply because families have direct influence over the
moral education of children. Family is central in Confucian moral
philosophy because all ethical action, even between unrelated adults, is
seen as an extension or modification of natural family love and respect.
Thus a Confucian cannot become morally cultivated without first acquiring
a nuanced and fine- grained understanding of family relations and the
various obligations, affections, and cares they engender. Indeed, study of
the rites ( li) functions in large part to educate persons about the proper
expression of xiao.
The concept of ren is the subject of much debate among comparative
Confucian scholars; it is most commonly translated as either 'benevolence'
or
80
8 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
'humanity,' or sometimes simply as 'human excellence.' It is a linguistic
composite of the Chinese characters for 'person' and 'two,' and has
associations with earlier terms for 'manliness' and 'nobility,' but in the
moral context of Confucianism it appears to have two special meanings:
first, as a specific virtue of benevolence toward others, and second, as a
complete or perfected state of general human virtue ( de).16 The use of a
single term to capture both meanings is revealing. For the perfection of
human virtue in classical virtue ethics just is, for reasons noted at the start
of this chapter, a perfection of the person as a relational being. To know
how to be excellent is ultimately to know how to treat well those others to
whom one is related by kinship, civic, or other ties. As Kongzi sums up the
'ren-
minded' junzi: "He cultivates himself in order to bring comfort to
others."17 All other Confucian virtues, including wisdom ( zhi), courage (
yong), honesty ( cheng xin), propriety ( li), appropriateness ( yi), and

empathy ( shu) are ultimately aspects of this good treatment of others (
ren).18
This brings us back to the family, where we first learn how to treat others
well and in which our moral motivations to do so have their deepest roots.
Indeed this is what Youzi means in telling us that the junzi or cultivated
person 'applies himself to the roots.' Thus xiao or filial piety turns out not
to be something different from human excellence ( ren), but its grounding
achievement. Moreover, it is not easy to treat one's family well, for the most
demanding and enduring moral obligations (and frustrations) arise in
precisely this context.19 Thus it is not as if xiao is an elementary virtue that
is transcended in later stages; the practice of moral self-cultivation requires
constant efforts to preserve and refine it. Nor is it the task entire; for the
moral lessons of family virtue must be extended into the political
community.20 If the Way ( Dao) is to be followed, ren must eventually
encompass all meaningful human relationships, even interactions between
strangers.21 Thus working to understand the nature of human relationships,
starting with those of the family and extending into the political realm,
becomes a core habit of the person seeking to cultivate herself. As Kongzi
states, while the substance of ren is to "love others," the substance of
wisdom ( zhi) is to know others— for only through relational understanding
can I know how properly to love them.22 As he advises one seeking to
cultivate himself: "Do not be concerned about whether or not others know
you; be concerned about whether or not you know others."23
As did Aristotle, Confucians assert a relational hierarchy of graded moral
obligations and affections, such that a morally cultivated person is not the
one who treats everyone the same, but the one who best understands how
particular human relationships generate weaker, stronger, or qualitatively
different moral requirements.24 Kongzi's most celebrated disciple, Mengzi,
devoted much effort to defending this view against the claims of the rival
Chinese philosopher Mozi, who argued for a moral policy of indiscriminate
and equal love of al .25 In
81
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue

81
defending the importance of understanding and respecting relational
distinctions in moral life, something he held to be rooted in human nature,
Mengzi describes Mozi's advocacy of indiscriminate love as an extreme
position, one no less in violation of the virtuous Mean than is radical
egoism.
Yet Mengzi also criticizes any form of discriminating love that would ignore
the special circumstances of each case. As did Aristotle and Kongzi, Mengzi
routinely calls for the use of prudential judgment in applying fixed moral
principles such as 'honor one's elders above al .' As Mengzi notes in a
discussion with one of his disciples, the cultivated person has the
discernment to suspend or modify customs of relational hierarchy (for
example, to honor a younger brother before an uncle, or a village elder
before an elder brother) when the occasion demands it.26 Blind, unthinking
conformity to the conventional social order does not bring relational
understanding— indeed it 'cripples' the Way by singling out one thing
"to the neglect of a hundred others."27 Genuine virtue is never rigid; it is
an active, discerning and contextually sensitive appreciation of human
relationships, and the particular claims they make upon us.
✥   ✥   ✥
Thus the pursuit of a nuanced and flexible understanding of human
relationships, especially their distinctions and gradations within the State
or family, is a core habit of the practice of moral self- cultivation in both
Aristotelian and Confucian virtue ethics. When we look for this element in
Buddhism, however, we might seem to encounter a problem. While the
pursuit of understanding or
'right view' is the first step on the Eightfold Path, in Buddhism this 'right
view'
holds that all beings are causally interconnected ( pratītya- samutpāda, or
'dependent co- arising') and that all sentient creatures ultimately embody
the same Buddha nature. This appears to undermine the moral importance

of understanding particular relational distinctions. The ethical doctrine of
Buddhism is, in fact, far less wedded than Aristotelian and Confucian ethics
to the conventional social order and its attendant roles. Indeed the Buddhist
virtue of equanimity ( upeksā) seems to require the cultivated person to
practice ethical "neutrality" and to extend loving kindness ( maitrī) and
compassion ( karunā) to all creatures.28 Is this a serious obstacle to the
claim that all three virtue traditions share a family resemblance, with
respect to the importance of understanding the specific moral claims that
issue from our relationships?
While these differences are real and profound, they do not render the habit
of relational understanding unnecessary for a Buddhist who aspires to
become cultivated and eventually enlightened. Quite the opposite: a
Buddhist must pursue a correct understanding of human relationships with
even greater vigor and dedication, precisely because on this account, the
correct view of human relationships
82
8 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
contradicts the one reflected in conventional family and political
hierarchies. The Lankāvatāra Sutra of Mahāyāna Buddhism states that:
in this long course of transmigration here, there is not one living being that
... has not been your mother, or father, or brother, or sister, or son, or
daughter ... let people cherish the thought of kinship with [living beings],
and, thinking that all beings are [to be loved as if they were] an only child,
let them refrain from eating meat.29
The relational understanding presented in this passage is part of the
transformation in belief and affection that a Buddhist must undergo in order
to become cultivated. Thus it turns out that Buddhists too see the habitual
pursuit of relational understanding as essential to the cultivation of moral
virtues such as compassion and equanimity. Moreover, the passage does not
ask the aspiring practitioner to abandon her preexisting understanding of

the moral importance of human relations such as kinship. To the contrary,
the passage asks the practitioner to dwell cognitively and affectively on the
full moral weight of those relationships, to cherish rather than abandon that
thought of filial love, and then to combine it with an important new fact (the
metaphysical kinship of all beings) that allows the prior motivation of
familial love to be correctly extended.
The same pattern appears in the Jātaka story no. 68, where two elderly
strangers ask the Buddha to extend to them the kindness ordinarily reserved
for elderly parents, for as they explain, they have been already been his
parents, and his grand-parents, hundreds of times over.30 In chapter 5 we
will have cause to discuss the important element of 'extension' of moral
concern in the practice of moral self-cultivation. But for now, simply notice
that the conceptual link between moral self-cultivation and refined
relational understanding is not, as we first feared, weaker in the Buddhist
virtue tradition than in other traditions; it may even be stronger.
Furthermore, the interest in particular human relations and the distinctions
among them is in no way made irrelevant to ethical life by this move; they
are simply placed in a larger context. For one thing, Buddhists strongly
value social cohesion and equitable flourishing, and must therefore be
highly attentive, rather than indifferent, to the structure and harmonious
functioning of particular social and political arrangements.31 Also, proper
Buddhist equanimity cannot be attained without a lengthy process of moral
habituation that must begin with an understanding of how to act ethically in
particular relationships.
For example, part of the initial 'right view' to be accepted by the Buddhist
aspirant is the following assertion: " 'there is mother and father': it is good
to respect parents, who establish one in this world."32 While it offers a
limited perspective,
83
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
83

it is not false, nor does it contradict the lesson of the Jātaka story. It also
conveys more useful ethical guidance to the person first seeking to improve
her character than would be the case if she were told right off the bat that
her parents in metaphysical fact had no unique claim on her respect or
gratitude. Indeed Buddhist practice is exquisitely sensitive to the gradual
character of personal transformation; the early aspirant cannot absorb or
usefully apply the same form of truth as can a learned member of the
Sangha.33 Thus one always starts from what one already knows: here, the
natural importance of family relations; once one has learned to do well
with that, one is gradually able to understand more profound relational
truths, which in turn enables even more refined practice and learning.34
As in Aristotelian and Confucian ethics, the Buddhist habit of relational
understanding will ideally be exercised in conjunction with another habit of
moral self- cultivation, discussed in chapter 5: prudential judgment in
responding to the morally salient features of particular situations.
Prudential judgment is part of all Buddhist practice, but most explicitly
articulated in the Mahāyāna tradition, which reserves for sufficiently
cultivated and adept practitioners the practice of
'skillful means' ( upāya)— that is, the ability in unusual or challenging
circumstances to suspend or modify the precepts in unconventional ways,
where made necessary in the interests of compassion and the enlightenment
of others.35 Thus striving for relational understanding does not mean
adhering to rigid relational scripts, but rather aiming to exercise superior
relational judgment.
Relational Understanding: Shared Resonances
and Technomoral Implications
We may now summarize the conceptual resonances found among the three
classical conceptions of relational understanding. In all three,
notwithstanding significant differences, the practice of moral self-
cultivation requires: 1) The habitual pursuit of an increasingly nuanced and
accurate yet holistic understanding of how one is bound to other members
of one's moral community by friendship, kinship, political, metaphysical, or
other morally salient ties; 2) A lifelong effort to progressively improve one's

understanding of these relationships and the distinctive moral obligations,
affections, and concerns they generate— in turn fostering character virtues
such as justice, empathy, care, and civic friendship;
3) The use of this understanding in increasingly prudent judgments that
respond ably to the particular moral claims that these relationships make
upon us in actual circumstances.
84
84
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
In what way might this part of moral self- cultivation assist us in developing
technomoral virtues? How can a deeper and more nuanced understanding
of our relations to others improve our conduct and motivations in the
contemporary technosocial arena? Would our practices become any more
just, caring, civil, or compassionate, any more likely to promote human
flourishing, if more of us had a deep understanding of how our technomoral
choices affect others across the globe, and how our fates increasingly
depend on the technomoral choices of other global actors? Could this sort
of understanding foster the moral perspective needed to see our lives as
given meaning by a larger moral whole? Can this perspective be sought not
as an academic exercise, but as part of a sincere and habitual effort to
understand the pull that our relationships have, or ought to have, on our
natural moral sentiments and sense of obligation to others? It will not
surprise the reader to hear that I believe the answer to all these questions to
be "Yes."
In Part III we shall see concrete indications of how today's emerging
technologies, from social media and digital surveillance tools to social
robots, can both challenge and enable the contemporary moral pursuit of
relational understanding. For now, let us turn to the third foundational
habit of the practice of moral self- cultivation.
4.2 Reflective Self- Examination

This component of moral self- cultivation has well- known roots in classical
Greek philosophy. After all, it was Socrates who stated to his Athenian jury
that
"the unexamined life is not worth living for a human being."36 By this
Socrates meant that a good life presupposes a lifelong habit of reflective
self- examination, in which one turns a critical eye upon one's actions and
dispositions, and measures them against the moral norms and virtues to
which one aspires. Socrates warns his fellow citizens that their desperate
efforts to be happy by means of caring for their social reputations, bodies,
and personal property are doomed to fail because in devoting all their
energies to these, they neglect the one form of self- care that actually has
the power to deliver a good life: the lifelong improvement of the soul.
While Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics identifies key points of disagreement
with Socrates (for example, on the topic of weakness of will or akrasia), it
does not directly address the topic of the examined life. On some level,
Aristotle seems to assume that his readers already accept the Socratic
mandate of reflective self- examination. This is perhaps a not unreasonable
assumption, given that the lectures from which the Nicomachean Ethics are
composed were addressed to committed students of philosophy rather than
the broader Athenian populace.
85
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
85
Still, a close reading of the Ethics does tell us something about how
Aristotle saw the activity of self- examination contributing to the cultivation
of moral virtue.
For instance, in his discussion of the difficulty of striking the appropriately
virtuous mean that characterizes right actions, Aristotle notes that the
difficulty is magnified by the fact that where the mean lies in any given
case, and how best to strike it, is relative not only to particular
circumstances and to general human flaws, but also to the distinctive

weaknesses of the individual seeking to act rightly. As he points out, even
though in the abstract the mean lies 'in between'
two vicious extremes, such that we would seem to want to try equally hard
to avoid either extreme, in practice we must make a more vigorous effort to
pull away from that one extreme that embodies our own weaknesses of
character.37
Thus most of us, when facing a moral situation in which fear is a relevant
factor, must try harder to avoid cowardice than rashness if we are to get the
right result.
For example, consider the massive emissions software fraud that
Volkswagen per-petrated on its customers and environmental regulators for
years before it was uncovered in 2015. What kept the software engineers
involved in the fraud from blowing the whistle? It wasn't likely a lack of
moral knowledge; it would have been obvious to anyone that the fraud was
unlawful, malicious, even contrary to the long- term interests of company
shareholders. Yet for most, doing the right thing would have required pul
ing hard against a strong natural fear of betraying a powerful entity from
whom one receives a livelihood. A virtuous person would have recognized
this weakness in themselves, and the need to muster the moral will to
counteract it.
But this is not true of everyone; some people are naturally prone to being
rash, and more likely to do wrong by needlessly blundering into danger
than by trying to avoid it. A few VW engineers might have had little or no
fear of their employer's wrath, but found themselves impulsively drawn to
the risky high- wire act of perpetuating such a massive con. It is thus of
critical importance to my practice of moral self- cultivation that I know
which kind of person I am. For if I am among the minority who are
naturally rash, but I rely in matters of courage on the general advice of
moral experts aimed at the timid majority, I am certain to fail. Reflective
self- examination not only of past actions, but also of my values, beliefs,
and priorities can help me to identify those vices to which I have in the past
tended to succumb, and hence aid me in devising more effective strategies
for self- improvement.

The importance of the habit of reflective self- examination is also in the
background of Aristotle's discussion of moral incontinence in Book VII of
the Nicomachean Ethics, where he distinguishes this from mindless self-
indulgence.
In the realm of pleasures and pains the truly virtuous state is called
temperance ( sôphrosunê); this is the state in which one is attracted only by
pleasures that are
86
8 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
truly good. But this is a very rare excellence; most modestly cultivated
persons are, at best, continent— that is, we still have desires that we know it
would be bad to indulge, but we exercise self- control and typically refrain
from doing so. In the contrary condition of incontinence, I know that I
desire what is not good, but I lack the self- control to refrain from pursuing
such things.
A different condition of vice would be self- indulgence, in which I do not
know that my desires are bad, and I therefore do not even try to restrain
them.
Now notice that the difference between incontinence and self- indulgence is
one of knowledge; in the case of incontinence I have engaged in sufficient
self-examination to at least know which desires of mine I ought to control,
while in the case of self- indulgence I could not begin to cultivate myself
even if I wanted to, for I do not know which of my moral habits need
correcting. Aristotle states that the latter condition, though it makes one
helpless to improve, is the result of a failure of moral habituation that is
itself blameworthy, for "they are themselves by their slack lives responsible
for becoming men of that kind..."38
For the practice of moral self- cultivation to succeed, then, I must at an
early stage of the process get in the habit of actively 'taking care'— that is,

engaging regularly in the sort of reflective self- examination that Socrates
describes as the highest form of self- care.39 Interestingly, however, the
function of reflective self-examination in Aristotle is not exclusively critical.
In his discussion of friendships among virtuous persons, he notes that one
of the great joys of such friendships is the way in which, as I contemplate
the virtues of my beloved friend, I am also able to see a reflection of my
own excellence. This is because through living together ( suzên), our virtues
have largely developed in tandem by performing noble activities together,
whether these be acts of public or private generosity, heroic military
courage, wise legislation, or philosophical discussions of the Good itself.40
Whether or not this is a realistic vision of contemporary friendships,
especially those in which joint activity often happens in online or virtual
spaces, it suggests that, for Aristotle at least, reflective self- examination
allows me to do more than learn from my failures— it also allows me to
recognize and find joy in my moral achievements. Even further, he suggests
that self- examination ought to produce only moral pride in the
exceptionally cultivated and "great- souled" person (the megalopsuchos),
as moral shame is desirable only in those who have yet to learn to avoid
shameful actions.41
✥   ✥   ✥
When we turn to the Confucian tradition, it is far less clear whether the
cultivated person will allow himself much latitude to contemplate his own
virtue; after al , Kongzi himself repeatedly denies his own achievement of a
cultivated state.42 Yet he does demonstrate a willingness to chart his own
moral progress, as when he describes how he gradually moved from the
moment when he first
87
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
87
dedicated himself to self- improvement at age fifteen, to his acquisition of a
temperate character more than five decades later, when at last "I could

follow my heart's desires without overstepping the boundaries of what is
right."43
Still, the majority of Kongzi's extensive remarks on reflective self-
examination emphasize its critical power— that is, the importance of being
able to identify one's moral shortcomings.44 As he says, "the real fault is to
have faults and not to amend them."45 Perhaps the best interpretation of
Kongzi's attitude toward the habit of reflective self- examination is that it
should seek the mean between excessive self- criticism and excessive self-
praise, but, as with Aristotle's admonition to pull harder against the extreme
to which we are more naturally subject, we must restrain our natural
tendency for self- praise and make far greater efforts to be humble. After al
, Kongzi laments, "I have yet to meet someone who is able to perceive his
own faults and then take himself to task inwardly."46 Given his repeated
encouragement of this very practice, it is clear that Kongzi does not mean
to suggest that reflective self- examination is humanly impossible to
practice; only that to do this sincerely, consistently, and accurately is an
ideal of which virtually all humans fall somewhere short. Only a junzi
('exemplary person') "does not grieve that people do not recognize his
merits; he grieves at his own incapacities."47 This interpretation also
explains why Kongzi repeatedly encourages his disciples to see virtue in
others, since our excessive tendency toward self- aggrandizement happens
to be paired with an excessive tendency to find fault with others.48
Reflective self- examination, then, is an uncommon and difficult practice for
most. As Mengzi says, even though 'watching over one's character' is a
fundamental moral duty akin in importance to caring for one's parents, "the
multitude can be said never to understand what they practice, to notice
what they repeatedly do, or to be aware of the path they follow all their
lives."49 Later we will explore how some of our current technological
fixations seem to exacerbate this age- old problem. But for Mengzi, the
problem is not that we are constitutionally unable to consistently examine
ourselves; for if that were true, morality would be an unat-tainable goal for
any of us. Rather, the real obstacle is our overall lack of interest in being
good— that is, in our own moral cultivation.50 Once we acquire that
interest, nothing stands in the way of taking up a habitual, lifelong practice
of reflective self- examination. One of Kongzi's earliest disciples, Master

Zeng claims that: Every day I examine myself on three counts: in my
dealings with others, have I failed to be dutiful? In my interactions with
friends and associates, have I in any way failed to be trustworthy? Finally,
have I in any way failed to repeatedly put into practice what I teach?51
This passage should also remind us that the practice of reflective self-
examination is far less likely to deliver reliable or useful self- knowledge if
practiced
88
8 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
at a level of high generality ('Am I courageous?' 'Am I loyal?' 'Sure I am!')
than if it is practiced at the level of concrete moral choices that engage
specific relational obligations ('Was I brave enough in speaking out against
that injustice?'
'Did I behave like a loyal son when my father's reputation was slandered by
my friends?'). Thus the habit of reflective self- examination cannot be
separated from the habit of relational understanding, since what I need to
examine is whether I have adequately attended to those to whom I am
connected in any number of different ways. It should be increasingly
apparent from our analysis that the core elements of moral self- cultivation
mutually implicate and reinforce one another— not as stages of a
sequential process but as interlinking and interdependent parts of a
continuous circle.
✥   ✥   ✥
Is there in Buddhist ethics a conceptual resonance with the practice of
reflective self- examination? Given the extensive Buddhist literature on
'mindfulness,'
a practice of attending closely to one's own changing mental and physical
states, it seems obvious that there is. However, the resonance is not a simple

correspondence, for several reasons.
First, since Buddhists generally deny the substantial reality of the personal
self ( ātman), one might think that a Buddhist cannot commit to a practice
of reflective self- examination. After all, without a concept of the self, what
is there to examine? Fortunately, this obstacle evaporates on deeper
inspection. While it is true that Buddhists do not accept the reality of a
substantive self, they fully acknowledge the apparent self— the self as an
appearance that others encounter and interact with in the world. And since
Buddhist ethics is a practical concern with human suffering in this world, it
in no way ignores or denies the ethical significance of the (apparent)
personal self.52 Moreover, since each of us has his or her own unique
history of incarnations and karmic interactions with others, the practice of
moral self- cultivation must be tailored to the needs of that unique history,
even if the goal of enlightenment toward which we strive is the same.53
With the obstacle of the 'no- Self ' doctrine ( anātman) cleared away, it is
evident that Buddhism does recognize habits of reflective self- examination
as an essential part of the practice of moral self- cultivation. As in
Aristotelian and Confucian ethics, the Buddhist practitioner is explicitly
encouraged to examine the moral quality of her interactions with others; to
identify her own particular and general human faults and to learn from
them; to take responsibility for correcting her faults so that her actions may
find the virtuous mean relative to her circumstances; and to examine and
take appropriate joy in her moral successes.
89
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
89
In truth, the habit of reflective self- examination plays a more expansive
role in Buddhism than in the other two virtue traditions. Whereas the
aspiring Aristotelian phronimos will exercise the habit of regularly
examining his actions and desires to see if they are in conformity with
accepted standards of virtue, and the Confucian junzi will regularly
examine his interactions with others to see whether they express the

cardinal virtues of ritual respect ( li), appropriateness ( yi). and
benevolence ( ren), the Buddhist field of self- examination is far more
encompassing.
We can see this from a quick review of The Noble Eightfold Path. The
concept of reflective self- examination resonates most closely with the third
of the
'three trainings' that compose the path: samādhi or 'concentration.' As
noted in chapter 3, this section of the path is composed of three steps: 'right
effort,'
'right mindfulness,' and 'right attention.' Right effort represents the
conscious striving to avoid or overcome unhealthy states of mind and
replace them with healthy ones; right mindfulness represents a habit of
discerning awareness of the mental and physical states I experience, as well
as their interrelations; while right attention represents a habit of calming
and clearing the mind with meditative practice. Reflective self-
examination, in the sense we have developed thus far, seems to resonate
quite closely with the first two habits of samādhi: right effort and right
mindfulness. Together, these habits allow me to monitor and improve upon
my actions and character. It must be noted that many, perhaps even most,
lay Buddhists do not engage in dedicated habits of meditative and reflective
practice; and Buddhism does not rule out the ability of rare individuals to
become enlightened without such methods. Still, for the vast majority of
devoted bodhisattvas and Sangha, such habits are core elements of self-
cultivation.
These habits have as their objects not moral conduct alone, but every
component of the Eightfold Path. I must make an effort to remain aware not
only of whether my speech, actions, and livelihood are conforming with
ethical precepts ( śīla), but also to maintain awareness of the two aspects
that constitute wisdom or prajñā: namely, whether the views and beliefs
that occupy my mind are true ('right view'), and whether my attitudes,
desires, and emotions are appropriate ('right resolve'). Beyond this, these
habits of right effort and right mindfulness are directly reflexive upon the
domain of samādhi itself: I must make an effort to be mindful of whether I
am striving to be (and continuing to succeed at being) mindful! Now before

one dismisses this task as impossible, or at least well beyond the ability of
nearly every living person, it should be emphasized that the practice of
samādhi is assumed to develop gradually and very slowly; an ordinary,
relatively uncultivated person who tried to leap into a state of total
mindfulness would fail
90
9 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
instantly.54 The point is simply that the vast majority of persons cannot
progress very far along the path of moral self- cultivation without
undertaking and gradually building the reflective practice of samādhi.
While Buddhism's account of reflective self- examination extends well
beyond the explicitly ethical realm, we should remember that both Aristotle
and Kongzi required virtuous actions to be accompanied by appropriate
moral feelings, thoughts, and beliefs. Thus the conceptual resonance among
the three remains quite strong, since in all virtue traditions the practice of
self- examination must be directed not only at what I do, but also what I
feel, think, and believe.
Reflective Self- Examination: Shared Resonances
and Technomoral Implications
This leads us naturally into the fourth core habit in the practice of moral
self-cultivation, namely, the intentional self- direction of moral
development. But first, let us summarize the shared conceptual resonances
we found in the third: 1) In order to make reliable progress toward a
morally cultivated state, one must develop a habit of reflective self-
examination;
2) This habit must evolve into a lifelong practice that aims to discern how
well one's actions, feelings, thoughts, and beliefs conform with the moral
self to which one aspires;

3) It should identify and pay close attention to those particular weaknesses
and faults to which one is generally subject as a human being, as well as
those which are distinctive of one's individual character; it should foster the
virtues of humility and honesty.
4) The practice should engender a sense of responsibility for correcting the
faults identified so that one's actions may more reliably strike the virtuous
mean; 5) The practice should also engender appropriate joy in the ongoing
experience of moral self- improvement and increasingly virtuous living.
Could more widespread habits of reflective self- examination today help
human beings take more personal and collective responsibility for the
global consequences of their technomoral vices? Could it engender more
honesty and humility with respect to the current limits of our moral vision?
Might this habit gradually refine our moral judgment of the best courses of
technosocial action, and allow us to experience greater joy in living with
the technologies we create?
Only by understanding how this habit fits into a complete practice of moral
self-cultivation will we be able to answer these questions, so let us continue
our study of that practice.
91
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
91
4.3 Intentional Self- Direction
of Moral Development
Given the mutually implicating and enriching structure of the elements of
moral self- cultivation, each subsequent habit will have been anticipated in
some way by our explication of the preceding ones. Indeed, the fact that
moral self- cultivation must be intentionally self- directed may seem quite
trivial now. Yet its core dimensions have yet to be made explicit.

In the Aristotelian model of moral development, which explicitly addresses
the moral habits of young children, intentional self- direction is not possible
at the beginning of the process. For it presupposes four things that children
necessarily lack in Aristotle's view: the mature exercise of deliberative
reason, reliable knowledge of general moral principles, accurate perception
of the proper ends of a human life, and habituated self- control of the
emotions and appetites. These deficiencies can only be corrected over time,
by a combination of proper parental influence, wise laws, guidance from
moral exemplars, accumulated experience and understanding of human
relationships, and maturation of the rational faculties. Even those rare
children who possess naturally virtuous dispositions and need less in the
way of moral habituation face the remaining obstacles of limited practical
experience and immature cognitive powers. Thus even the most naturally
precocious youth are incapable of directing their own moral cultivation.
Gradually, however, young people become able to exercise the faculties of
both practical and theoretical reason, and given sufficient moral
habituation and experience, a young person becomes increasingly capable
of forming both the independent will to cultivate himself and the ability to
direct his own moral progress as a form of self- care (with the continued
support of virtuous friends and exemplars). At some point, he may finally
embody the prerequisites for genuine moral virtue: namely, that he acts
well, "from a firm and unchangeable character,"
by choice and with knowledge [of the goodness of the acts], choosing those
virtuous acts for the sake of virtue itself.55 Once these achievements are
joined with that part of practical wisdom described in Book VI of Aristotle's
Ethics as perception of the proper ends of a human life, one is fully capable
of directing one's own moral improvement.56 Unfortunately, Aristotle thinks
that the majority of adults fail to reach this stage of moral maturity, mostly
due to a lack of the initial moral habituation needed to develop self- control
and temperance.57
Those who do reach this final stage have an intrinsic motivation to pursue
their own moral improvement. For the exemplary person or phronimos, this
motivation takes shape in the virtue of magnanimity ( megalopsuchia): a
form of moral ambition or 'greatness of spirit' that finds pleasure in one's

truly superior moral achievement.58 Although this virtue is distasteful to
many modern readers, it is
92
9 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
important to remember that while the phronimos is motivated by the
pleasure he takes in noble actions, this does not reduce his virtue to mere
hedonism. For the pleasure is taken in the noble activity itself, not from the
activity. It is the act and not the pleasure that is the desirable thing.59 Nor
does this pleasure in his own moral superiority make him an egotist:
Aristotle points out that while the phronimos in seeking the good life
"assigns to himself the things that are noblest and best," the pursuit of the
good life is not the zero- sum game it is commonly thought to be, for "if all
were to strive towards what is noble and strain every nerve to do the noblest
deeds, everything would be as it should for the common good, and every
one would secure for himself the goods that are greatest, since excellence is
the greatest of goods" (emphasis added).60 If being a noble and morally
cultivated person is what you value most, Aristotle has good news for you—
that's an unlimited resource we don't have to fight over.
Such moral striving marks my transition to awareness of my responsibility
for the state of my moral being and the total quality of my life. It represents
a commitment to a project of lifelong self- perfection, since as Aristotle
notes, the full moral measure of a life cannot be taken until that life is
complete.61 This commitment not just to moral acts but to a moral life
presupposes both courage and ambition, as well as an imaginative
broadening of perspective to one's being in the world, taken as a moral
whole.
✥   ✥   ✥
The importance of intentional self- direction of moral development is
equally explicit in Confucianism. Kongzi famously claimed that he would
only continue to teach the kind of student who, after having Kongzi lift up

one corner of a problem for him, returned with the other three.62
Otherwise, the student would never learn how to solve moral problems for
himself, he would forever rely on the Master to give him the answers. Moral
cultivation requires our own personal effort to develop morally, and
following the example and instruction of others will only get you so far.
Even Mengzi and Xunzi, who disagreed sharply over the question of
whether the basic moral orientation of human nature is good or bad, agreed
upon one central aspect of moral self- cultivation: it requires a lifelong,
cumulative effort of self- improving activity, a habit that requires a far
greater and more sustained commitment than merely willing oneself to be
good (what Mengzi dismisses as an attempt to become good by an illicit
"seizure of righteousness").63
Like Aristotle, Mengzi identifies a passive element in moral development,
such that certain environmental conditions are ordinarily needed in order to
bring a person to a point in their natural development where they have the
motivation, habituation, and preliminary understanding needed to actively
direct their own moral cultivation. These conditions include exposure to the
Way ( Dao)
93
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
93
via the rites and appropriate social models of virtue, the experience of
familial love and concern, and protection from abject poverty and
violence.64 Yet even where the environmental conditions are suboptimal,
the individual is encouraged to actively take up the effort to improve
herself: "When the Way prevails everywhere, use it to pursue your personal
cultivation. When the Way does not prevail, use your personal cultivation to
pursue the Way."65
The active component of moral self- cultivation is described by Mengzi as a
form of attention ( si), in which one maintains a focused awareness not
simply on potential impediments to moral improvement (such as
inappropriate desires), but also on the ultimate goal of that process: the full

maturation of the 'sprouts' of virtue that he claims are naturally present in
all of us.66 We may say, then, that for Mengzi, si combines two mental
functions. The first is the mental habit of reflective self-examination
discussed above, through which I discern the extent to which my actions,
thoughts, and feelings align with the moral ideal (for Confucians, the Dao).
The second component of si is the goal- oriented activity of steering these
actions, thoughts, and feelings in the morally desirable direction. This
activity requires one to begin to grasp the meaning of one's own existence
in relation to a moral whole—
that is, to cultivate a perspective on one's own life in relation to the Dao
itself.
It is important to note that, for Mengzi, the intentional self- direction of
moral development must respect the natural integrity of the process, and
cannot be achieved by overly self- conscious or contrived efforts. He likens
the latter to the disastrous attempts by a farmer to help his crops grow
faster by constantly tugging at their sprouts.67 The Confucian tradition
describes fully virtuous actions as performed with harmonious ease. Yet this
is compatible with lifelong moral striving. As Kongzi notes, "the task of
self- cultivation might be compared to the task of building up a mountain: if
I stop even one basketful of earth short of completion, then I have stopped
completely. It might also be compared to the task of leveling ground: if I
have only dumped one basketful of earth, at least I am moving forward."68
Among classical Confucians Xunzi emphasizes this striving the most, since
he holds that moral self- improvement requires violating and wholly
remaking (with the guidance of li) one's 'ugly' inborn nature. He describes
this as requiring a lifelong campaign of unwavering focus, one that
progresses not by moral leaps but by many small steps. Yet even he claims
that the result is joyful ease in living well: When he has truly learned to
love what is right ... his mind will feel keener delight than in the possession
of the world. When he has reached this stage, he cannot be subverted by
power or the love of profit; he cannot be swayed by the masses; he cannot
be moved by the world. He follows this one thing in life; he follows it in
death. This is what is called constancy of virtue. He who has such
constancy of virtue can order himself, and having

94
94
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
ordered himself, he can then respond to others. He who can order himself
and respond to others— this is what is called the complete man.69
One may rightly question when one can realistically expect to reach the
stage Xunzi describes here, and what this stage actually entails; is the
complete man perfected? It seems not, since Xunzi suggests that moral
learning ends only in death.70
Even Kongzi states that the junzi's burden of becoming humane ( ren) is
heavy, and ends "only with death."71 If this is right, then does the junzi,
who can 'order himself ' with apparent ease, still make an intentional effort
to be good? The tension here can be reduced if we recall that moral self-
cultivation happens by degrees.
Since we are never fully perfected, even the cultivated person must still
make an effort to order herself. But not every effort is a brutal, desperate
struggle; compare the elegant, joyful effort expended by an accomplished
pianist or gymnast with that of an amateur. The process of moral cultivation
is a self- overcoming, but the self I have to overcome at the start is far more
opposed in her thoughts, feelings, and desires to my ideal self than is the
self that I am trying to overcome after having finally 'learned to love what
is right.' Thus the complete human is not perfected; rather, he is complete in
that the whole of his actual being— his beliefs, attitudes, values, desires,
feelings, and even physical movements— is at last engaged in the effort of
becoming his ideal self. This is what Mengzi means when he says that "A
junzi steeps himself in the Way because he wishes to find it in himself. When
he finds it in himself, he will be at ease in it; when he is at ease in it, he can
draw deeply upon it; when he can draw deeply upon it, he finds its source
wherever he turns."72
We may say, then, that the intentional self- direction of moral development
is a long, uphill, and endless climb, but that the path's incline becomes less

steep, the footing more secure, the trail better marked, and the scenery more
lovely, familiar, and welcoming the further I go.
✥   ✥   ✥
Buddhist ethics offers similar ideas about the intentional self- direction of
moral development. While these ideas resonate with the Aristotelian and
Confucian traditions, they do not correspond perfectly. For one thing,
Buddhist metaphysics entails that persons do, if only rarely, accomplish
total self- perfection (that is, the achievement of nirvāna or the Buddha-
nature) in their own lifetimes. However, we have said that for our purposes
we will be concerned only with the 'ordinary'
paths of moral self- cultivation consistent with engaged family and political
life, as opposed to the extraordinary lives of monastic or philosophical
contemplation that many Buddhists and Aristotelians respectively regard as
highest.73
According to the philosopher Asanga, co- founder of the Yogacara school of
the Mahāyāna tradition in Buddhism, we can only pursue intentional
95
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
95
self- direction of moral development after having received correct guidance
from the habituating power of the moral precepts of śīla, along with the
initial 'right views' of the self and its relation to others and to the world. Yet
once this foundation is set, one must activate this wisdom with one's own
proper resolve and sustained mental efforts to cultivate oneself (i.e., "to
have a quite purified intention, to make correction after failure, and to
avoid failure by generating respect and remaining mindful after that.")74
If we examine this quote, we find that it resonates with the idea of reflective
self- examination as a habit of self- care that entails minding and correcting
one's moral failures. Moreover, a 'purified intention' aims to perfect oneself

not for the sake of social approval or expedience, but for the sake of moral
nobility itself. Such 'right resolve' is in fact the second step on the Noble
Eightfold Path.75 Among our three virtue traditions, the likeness in moral
resolve or intention is somewhat stronger between Buddhist (especially
Mahāyāna) and Confucian ethics, since both emphasize the motivating
power not only of the noble quality of the virtuous path, but also its power
to bring comfort to others.76 While Aristotle regards virtuous living as
incomplete without friends to benefit and do good by, it is primarily the
other two virtue traditions that emphasize the reduction of others' suffering
as a central part of the cultivated person's moral resolve.
Yet in Buddhist ethics, the mere resolve or will to perfect oneself is
insufficient. We must also actively 'remain mindful,' in the sense intended by
the 'right effort' that is the Eightfold Path's sixth step. More specifically,
this means that we must make an enduring effort to actually oversee and
steer our moral progress in the right direction. How this is done resonates
in some strong respects with the Aristotelian and Confucian virtue
traditions, while departing in others. In their analysis of Buddhist self-
cultivation, David E. Cooper and Simon P. James use the term 'self-
mastery' to characterize this process. As they note, it is not that one is
somehow trying to enslave or degrade his true self (after al , there is
ultimately no
'self ' to master). Rather, through gradually liberating one's mind from
unhealthy and base thoughts, desires, and feelings, a person gains mastery
"over what, so to speak, renders him less than a person and obstructs his
development into a rational, self- directing being, no longer at the beck and
call of whim, caprice, and
'craving.' "77
Cooper and James note here another strong resonance with the Aristotelian
(and, it turns out, Confucian) tradition insofar as the long- term goal of
Buddhist self- cultivation is to eventually move beyond the merely continent
condition that comes from submitting my desires to conscious restraint,
attaining instead a state of temperate desire (in Aristotle, sôphrosunê).78
Such discipline is characterized not by white- knuckled conformity to virtue
but a

96
9 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
"relaxed" and "graceful" dwelling in it— what in the Confucian tradition
is referred to as "harmonious ease." Yet there remain ways in which the
Buddhist tradition stands apart from Aristotelian and Confucian accounts
of self- directed moral improvement. First, as Cooper and James note, the
very advanced Buddhist practitioner is often encouraged to cultivate
himself in greater soli-tude than Aristotle would have thought necessary or
ideal.79 The tension with the Confucian tradition here is even stronger,
since the complete virtue of ren is only acquired with others.80
Moreover, Buddhism advocates "guarding the sense doors": turning the
mind away from or recontexualizing ordinary sense- perceptions so that
one's understanding of reality as fleeting and inconstant is not obstructed
by illusions of sensory power and permanence.81 Nothing like this effort is
discernible in the Aristotelian or Confucian moral traditions; whatever part
it could play in Aristotle would belong to theoretical rather than practical
self- cultivation, and it could find no conceptual home in the moral
worldview of Confucianism, which largely takes the world of sensory
appearance as it is given.82 Still, at a more abstract level, 'guarding the
sense- doors' does resonate with the other virtue traditions, as it conveys
the idea that the self- direction of moral development must be guided by a
truer, more complete moral perspective on reality— a view of one's life and
its meaning as part of a larger whole.
This resonance can be further explicated if we return to the earlier
quotation from Asanga. He refers to "generating respect," and gives this a
causal role in avoiding moral failure. Peter Harvey analyzes this remark as
related to the concept of self- respect or hri, a state of moral
conscientiousness "which causes one to seek to avoid any action which one
feels is not worthy of oneself and lowers one's moral integrity." Along with
apatrapya, a sense of moral shame for the potentially harmful
consequences of my actions, hri is seen by Buddhists as "the immediate
cause of virtue" in the world.83 The concept of hri resonates strongly with

the emphasis in Aristotelian and Confucian ethics on discerning what sort
of future self is actually worthy of my becoming in this world— that is,
acquiring a proper perception of what sort of life and activity is fitting for
the kind of worldly
[human, sentient] being that I am. As we saw in chapter 3, all three
traditions hold that I am incapable of reliably directing my own moral
improvement until I have acquired at least a glimpse, and eventually a
steady view, of the proper ends of a human life. Moreover, this cannot be a
purely intellectual grasp of what it is good for me to become; this ideal of
the self living nobly must engage my affections, as something to be loved
and enjoyed for its own sake. This love and joy in the good becomes the
moral motivation to pursue my own self- perfection, and to courageously
persevere in the considerable and lifelong efforts that I must dedicate to its
ongoing achievement.
97
Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
97
Intentional Self- Direction of Moral Development:
Shared Resonances and Technomoral Implications
In this habit of moral practice, we can identify the following conceptual
resonances:
1) It presupposes attainment of a certain degree of moral habituation,
relational experience and understanding, and a habit of reflective self-
examination.
Certain material and social deprivations or misfortunes can inhibit the
attainment of these conditions.
2) The activation of intentional self- direction as a form of self- care implies
a genuine moral desire or resolve to attain moral goodness; such resolve

must arise not from mere social expedience or passive submission to
external authority, but from a sincere, internal desire to become morally
cultivated for its own sake.
3) Moral intention is insufficient without some accompanying insight into
the type of being that is worthy of my becoming in this world; this
achievement of a holistic moral perspective upon my existence must
eventually be joined with a temperate and magnanimous character that
enjoys existing and acting nobly.
4) The active exercise of this intention entails a lifelong effort to attend to,
or be mindful of, my moral development and courageously direct it along
the path I have chosen;
5) The enduring exercise of this intention may not lead one to moral
perfection, but does lead one by degrees to a more graceful, relaxed,
harmonious, and joyful way of life.
What does all this mean to us in the technosocial context? First, we should
ask how emerging technological practices and institutions can foster the
basic material and social conditions needed to enable the above- described
capacity. We should also ask more broadly how modern technosocial life
affects our resolve to cultivate ourselves, or our ongoing motivation to
continue with the effort. For example, how might certain emerging
technologies, in specific use contexs, inhibit our ability to remain attentive
to our moral development? How might other emerging technologies, or
other use contexts, be used to strengthen our moral attention? Are modern
technosocial culture and its dominant liberal values compatible with the
idea that only some types of life or activity are actually worthy of human
attainment and enjoyment? Finally, is the goal of living in a more graceful,
relaxed, harmonious, and joyful way consistent with modern technosocial
habits?
If not, how should we address these conflicts?
Building upon the early foundation of moral habituation described in
chapter 3, chapter 4 has articulated three more cornerstones of the practice
of

98
9 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
moral self- cultivation: relational understanding, reflective self-
examination, and intentional self- direction of moral development. Together,
these four habits can be understood as providing the foundation upon which
moral character is built. Yet as Aristotelians, Confucians, and Buddhists all
recognize, genuine moral wisdom, of the sort found in persons of exemplary
moral character, requires still further efforts.
In chapter 5, we will review the final three habits essential to the shared
practice of moral self- cultivation, which together transform the
foundations of morally virtuous character into a robust and mature moral
wisdom. This is a critical part of our inquiry, for it is the global cultivation
of technomoral wisdom, above and beyond mere technical knowledge or
even moral discipline, without which 21st century humans facing an
increasingly unsettled, risky, and opaque future may have little chance of
learning how to live well— or perhaps even how to continue living at al .
99
5
Completing the Circle
with Technomoral Wisdom
t h e f i n a l t h r e e habits of moral self- cultivation that we will explore
(moral attention, prudential judgment, and extension of moral concern),
along with the foundational habits analyzed in chapters 3 and 4, enable
what is called moral or practical wisdom. Practical wisdom is often
classified as an intellectual virtue because it involves cognition and
judgment; yet it operates within the moral realm, uniting cognitive,
perceptual, affective, and motor capacities in refined and fluid expressions
of moral excellence that respond appropriately and intelligently to the

ethical calls of particular situations. While the acquisition of practical
wisdom does not conclude the effort of moral self- cultivation, it represents
its summation as a complete practice.
5.1 Moral Attention
The importance of moral attention is easy to miss from a cursory reading of
Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, yet it is deeply embedded in his account of
practical wisdom ( phronēsis). In Book VI of the Ethics, he describes
practical wisdom as involving a form of moral perception. That is, a person
of practical wisdom can almost always discern and attend to those features
of a particular situation that are most salient for the purposes of ethical
judgment. Turning to geometry for an anal-ogy, Aristotle explains that, just
as a geometrically wise person will 'see' that what is mathematically
significant about three intersecting lines is that they form a triangle, a
practically wise person (a phronimos) will reliably 'see' and attend to the
morally significant facts of concrete situations.1 For example, we can
expect that a phronimos would notice that the elderly widower whom he
passes on the street every day appears increasingly gaunt and in tatters,
and in need of someone's— at this moment, his— active concern and
generosity. Almost all of us have some capacity to perceive
100
10 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
and attend to moral salience in the world. How many of us would fail to
see, for example, that what is significant about the sight of a starving coyote
stalking an unattended toddler is that it calls for the observer's courageous
and immediate intervention? What distinguishes the well- cultivated person
or phronimos from those who are morally ordinary is how reliable and
accurate his faculty of moral attention has become, as a result of habitual
moral practice and considerable experience. The practically wise will
notice and respond to morally significant phenomena to which the rest of us
will often be oblivious or indifferent.2

This perceptual capacity of moral attention, what John McDowell calls a
"reliable sensitivity" to the morally salient features of the given situation in
which I am called to act, does not by itself constitute the encompassing
virtue of practical wisdom.3 A person of exemplary virtue exercises her
moral attention jointly with other habits of practical wisdom, especially
those analyzed later in this section: prudential judgment and appropriate
extension of moral concern. Of course practical wisdom also assumes the
foundational elements of moral character, such as proper habituation,
relational understanding, self-examination, and moral intention. The
perceptual element of moral attention thus serves as a bridge between my
understanding of the general aim of moral action (to promote the goods
proper to a human life); my knowledge of the particular facts of my
circumstances; and my judgment of the best course of action toward that
goal that is available to me in these circumstances. It is only by attending to
the salient features of this moral situation confronting me that I am able to
discern how to act in a manner that is prudent and appropriate to my
immediate context, while also effective in promoting the ultimate ends of a
good life.4
By cultivating a knack for perceiving the moral contours of any situation
around us, we are better armed for the unexpected and often confounding
moral dilemmas that life inevitably brings. The world does not give us
advance notice of every kind of moral scenario it might throw at us, and
there is no definitive moral playbook that tells us in advance how to read or
respond to any situation. As Martha Nussbaum explains, only the skill of
attending to moral salience can ready us "for the actual flow of life, and for
the necessary resourcefulness in confronting its surprises."5
What better skill to cultivate for an opaque future in which the only
predictable thing is more surprises? Moral attention, as a type of sensitivity
to changes in one's moral environment, is also far better suited than
abstract principles or fixed rules to accommodate the many contextual
subtleties of actual human relationships, something we have said the
virtuous person will understand well. Such a sensitivity promotes justice
and moral care by allowing for the different ways in which the 'right and
the good' can be expressed by particular people, in particular
relationships.6

Finally, when we consider the important role that empathy plays in the
perception of human relations and their moral salience, we recognize that
Aristotelian virtue
101
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
101
ethics avoids the al - too- common trap of treating our emotions as either
irrelevant to, or hived off from, the intellectual virtue of moral wisdom.7
✥   ✥   ✥
In Confucian ethics we find strong resonances with the concept of moral
attention.
Already in chapter 4 we encountered a term employed by Mengzi, si, often
translated as 'attention.' There si seemed to play two key roles in moral
self- cultivation: attending to the self in reflective examination, and
attending to the goal or aim of one's moral development (for Confucians, a
life lived according to the Dao/ Way.) But moral perception in Aristotle does
something different. Its primary focus is neither the self, nor the intended
goal of the self 's cultivation, but rather the features of the particular
situation that call to the self to respond in a moral way. Is there any
indication in the Confucian literature that si plays a similar role in moral
life?
We may find one in Arthur Waley's analysis of Kongzi's remark in Analects
2:15 that "if one learns without thinking ( si), one will be confused. If one
thinks without learning, one will be in danger." Kongzi is drawing a
distinction between thinking and the learning of ritual, not unlike Aristotle's
distinction between knowing moral particulars and knowing general moral
principles. Though he translates si as 'thinking' rather than 'attention,'
Waley explains that in this context, si should be understood as "a fixing of
the attention ... on an impression recently imbibed from without and
destined to be immediately re- exteriorized in action."8 One way of

unpacking this is that si is the cultivated person's attention to the morally
salient features of his or her present circumstances (that "impression
recently imbibed from without"). These features call upon the virtuous
person to form, with the help of prudential judgment, an appropriate moral
response (one "destined to be immediately re- exteriorized in action").
Thanks to si, this response will be context- sensitive but still informed by
ritual 'learning' ( li). If this interpretation is roughly correct, then there is a
strong conceptual parallel in Kongzi with the attentive moral perception
central to Aristotle's account.
This interpretation gains further support from repeated references in the
classical Confucian canon to cases in which a cultivated person or junzi
was able to perceive a morally salient feature of a given situation, one that
prompted him to modify the standard application of ritual learning ( li) in a
manner that a) responded appropriately and skillfully to a situational
novelty; b) could not have been specified in advance by the ritual itself; c)
was seen as perplexing or im-proper by less cultivated persons who clung
rigidly to the letter of the ritual teachings; and d) was evoked by the
cultivated person's affective response to the salient fact, seen against the
background of a larger moral whole (the Dao). Each of these factors
parallels Nussbaum's analysis of the advantages of Aristotle's perceptual
account. The cases in which they appear also show how the habit of
attending to
102
10 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
moral salience fosters appropriate flexibility in one's responses and a richer
moral perspective that takes in the total meaning of the situation.
While it would consume too many pages to survey the relevant cases in
detail, they include Kongzi's observations that in a certain case declining a
salary would not be principled but wasteful ( Analects 6:5); that truthful
speech desperately needed by one man is wasted on another (15:8; 16:6);
that compassionate respect for a blind person is more important than

honoring one's social station (15:42); and that withdrawing from politics to
protect one's moral purity is essential at times but foolhardy at others
(18:8). In the last case, he notes that he holds "no preconceived notions of
what is permissible and what is not"; an astonishing remark from someone
who spent his life championing the importance of full adherence to the rites
( li). This suggests that for Kongzi, the action- guiding content of ritual
learning becomes fully manifest only after one has attended closely to the
morally salient facts of the case at hand. Similar cases are emphasized by
Mengzi: from the man who must perceive that ritual propriety does not bar
him from grabbing his drowning sister- in- law; to the man who rightly
conceals his marriage from his abusive parents; to Mengzi's resolute
defense of his own gossip- inducing decision to spend more on his mother's
funeral than on his father's.9 In each of these cases, attention to morally
salient facts enables a prudentially wise response but does not itself
constitute or determine the appropriate action. The action itself issues from
a skillful judgment of what should be done in light of this moral salience, a
form of judgment that we shall take up in the next section.
Whether it is best captured by the concept of si or by the related Confucian
term zhi,variously translated as 'moral wisdom' or 'intelligent awareness,'
moral attention in Confucianism has both cognitive and affective
components, as in Aristotle's ethics.10 One must grasp why a particular
fact is morally salient while also having that salience evoke the appropriate
moral emotions. In the Confucian tradition this sensitivity may be
associated less closely than in Aristotle with immediate, quasi- perceptual
moral 'seeing,' since the moral agent aspiring to be cultivated is often
encouraged to reflect upon these salient similarities or differences for an
extended period of time.11 Yet there is debate on this point: Stephen Angle
has argued for a view of Confucian moral attention as the intuitive and
unreflective exercise of a morally perceptive faculty, while P.J. Ivanhoe
argues that the sensitivity in question is more akin to a connoisseur's
deliberately cultivated sense of taste.12 This may simply be a difference
between an ordinary person and a highly cultivated one; the junzi may
directly perceive the moral salience that a less cultivated person requires
considerable training and reflection to discern.
✥   ✥   ✥

To what extent do we find in Buddhism conceptual resonances with the
concept of moral attention? As we might expect given the already- noted
importance of
103
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
103
mindfulness in Buddhism, cultivating moral attention is perhaps even more
central to Buddhist ethics than to other traditions. However, it is difficult to
find a single concept to which it may be assigned. The Buddhist concept of
the mind and its functions ( citta) is notoriously complex. Several of its
associated terms might be properly translated in ways that implicate
attention to moral salience, but seeking an exact equivalence to the concept
is probably a fool's errand.13 For one thing, the cultivated Buddhist directs
her primary efforts of concentration inward— not in order to turn away
from the moral or spiritual salience of the world, but rather to purify the
mind of illusions and preoccupations in such a way that this salience can
finally break through.14 This habit of moral attention in Buddhism enables
the cultivation of a virtuous perspective in which particular moral saliences
are properly related and scaled with respect to a larger moral whole. While
the result of an attentive mind in all three virtue traditions is a more
ethically sensitive being, each tradition describes the mental activity that
gets one to that state somewhat differently, with the Buddhist account
standing furthest apart.
Moreover, Buddhism's emphasis on the reduction of suffering means that
the cultivated Buddhist's moral attention has a more specific aim. Whereas
a cultivated person in the other two traditions attends to everything from
situational calls for filial obedience to the political need to respond
appropriately to an expensive gift, the kind of moral attention most valued
in Buddhism is a "heightened sensitivity to the suffering of these beings"
that fosters empathy or compassion ( karunā).15 The ability to perceive and
attend to the presence of suffering is a capacity without which one could
never hope to become an enlightened Buddhist. If I do not see the suffering
of others I cannot work to reduce it, no matter how much I might wish in the

abstract to be compassionate and caring. Still, for the cultivated Buddhist,
compassion will not be a blind, unthinking emotional response, nor a
detached and merely cognitive appreciation of a duty to relieve suffering;
rather it will synthesize moral feeling with that 'right view' and
understanding that puts suffering into its proper perspective.16
A concept closely related to karunā (compassion) is muditā ('empathetic
joy'). Here the idea is to be able to attend to others' happiness and to
respond with appropriate moral co- feeling (consistent with a cultivated
understanding of such emotions as transient phenomena.) Since karunā and
muditā require moral attention be paid to all beings, including strangers
and animals, their scope of application is far broader than in Aristotelian
and Confucian ethics, where the moral calls to which I am supposed to
attend arise almost exclusively from local human relationships. This
difference is of deep metaphysical significance to Buddhists, given the
principle of dependent co- arising ( pratītya- samutpāda) that holds all
beings to be causally interconnected. It is also of great significance for
104
10 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
those moral saints on a supramundane ( lokottara) path to moral
enlightenment.
Still, for the ordinary moral aspirant, attending more fully and generously
to all whom I encounter in daily living may be a suitable short- term goal.
While all three accounts regard moral attention as an essential capacity of
the cultivated person, none fully articulate how this perceptual capacity
might develop and be habitually refined— that is, how it can best be
cultivated. Aristotle states only that it is a 'natural' capacity, insofar as we
are cognitively and affectively 'fitted' by nature to develop it, but notes that
it only does develop with sufficient practical experience.17 Nor do
Confucians spell out precisely how the junzi comes by his superior moral
sensibility. How much experience is required to develop it, and more

importantly, what kinds of practical experience best enable its mature and
habitual exercise? Does it require a deliberate effort to cultivate and fully
refine? Or does it develop passively, given sufficient time and experience?
How do we learn to pay moral attention? These questions receive some
answers in Buddhism, in the form of meditative and moral practices that
heighten one's attention to the suffering and joys of others, but in general
this aspect of moral self- cultivation remains undertheorized in classical
virtue ethics.
Moral Attention: Shared Resonances
and Technomoral Implications
Here are the conceptual resonances we found among the three accounts: 1)
The practically wise person displays, in addition to the foundational habits
of moral development, a heightened attention or sensitivity to the morally
salient features of particular situations and circumstances in her
environment; 2) Moral attention integrates a cognitive grasp of why certain
facts of the situation are morally salient with an appropriate emotional
response to that salience. The habit of paying moral attention directly
fosters virtue by making us appropriately sensitive to the specific features of
our environments that call for morally excellent action.
3) The deliverances of moral attention inform our practical judgment of
how to concretely respond to a given situation; they also enrich and enlarge
the moral perspective that enables us to successfully contextualize and
adapt the rules, conventions, or normative principles that would generally
apply. Moral attention thus allows the cultivated person to respond more
quickly, flexibly, and appropriately to novel, fluid, or unpredictable
situations.
In our emerging global condition of acute technosocial opacity, the value of
moral attention is clear. If this habit helps humans respond better to
changing,
105

Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
105
unpredictable, or unanticipated moral environments, then we need it to be
as widely cultivated among us as possible. But how can attention to moral
salience be more reliably and consistently cultivated in technosocial life?
Which emerging technological practices can be used to aid its development,
and which will tend to impede it? What sorts of moral attention should 21st
century humans most want to cultivate? Greater attention to the joys and
suffering of all creatures, as called for in Buddhist practice? Closer
attention to the demands of justice and merit, as Aristotle would suggest?
More attention to human needs for familial respect and benevolence, as the
Confucians would emphasize? Or are there other dimensions of moral
salience even more relevant to contemporary technosocial life? We'll take
up these questions in Part III.
5.2 Prudential Judgment
The term 'prudential judgment' is sometimes used interchangeably with
'practical wisdom.' In our account, however, while prudential judgment
presupposes the foundational development of good moral character, it is
just one of the habits that refine this character into practical wisdom, the
exemplary virtue of the morally cultivated person. Thus far we have said
that the person engaged in moral self-cultivation must begin from 1) a state
of preliminary habituation to moral acts, and must go on to acquire; 2) a
habit of seeking relational understanding; 3) a reflective habit of self-
examination; 4) the habit of intentionally steering one's activity and
character toward the aims of a humanly good and noble life; and 5) an
attentive environmental sensitivity to moral salience. We have also said that
cultivation of each of these five habits enriches and further perfects the
others.
Yet these five elements would be wholly incapable of producing reliably
ethical action without the habit of prudential judgment, defined as the
cultivated ability to deliberate and choose well, in particular situations,
among the most appropriate and effective means available for achieving a
noble or good end. As technical as that may sound, most will recognize this

ability in someone we know. Some people have 'good moral sense'— they
often seem to judge just how to make a bad situation better, and they rarely
if ever make things worse. They are not overly distressed by unexpected or
novel problems to which existing moral rules and conventions do not easily
apply, nor do they fall victim to 'analysis paralysis' when those rules or
conventions appear to conflict. They reliably display self- control and
flexibility, and maintain appropriate moral perspective. They rarely if ever
overreact or 'go overboard'; they seem to know how to strike the
appropriate mean relative to the situation, which means that they are also
capable of a mount-ing a firm and vigorous response when it is called for.
106
10 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
We have seen references to this habit already in this chapter, but let us now
bring it into focus. For Aristotle, prudential judgment is the very core of
phronēsis or practical wisdom, even though phronēsis also incorporates
and presupposes other elements. Of practical wisdom generally, he says
that the person who has it aims, deliberates, and calculates well concerning
how what is "best for man" can be attained by action in the present.18
Prudential judgment, the core skill we are speaking of now, is the
deliberative and calculative part. It presupposes the moral discipline and
understanding needed to have the right 'aim' at what is 'best for man'
overal . It also assumes a correct perception of the salient moral goods,
attainable in my present situation, which may promote that aim. Yet it
remains necessary to judge and choose a course of action— the specific
means by which those goods can be most effectively attained.
Aristotle describes this prudential judgment as involving reasoning rather
than simple intuition or guesswork, but it is the kind of reasoning that is
both correct and expedient— that is, effective within the time allowed for a
decision.19
Thus a person who always calculates the right course of action, but not
before the window of opportunity to put that decision into practice has

closed, is not prudent. Deliberative prudence is a habit of judgment which
is 'discriminating of the equitable' relative to the situation— that is, it
strikes the correct mean between excessive and deficient response. It is also
appropriately flexible judgment, insofar as it recognizes when particular
circumstances drive the mean or 'equitable' course of action in a direction
that requires, for example, forgiveness rather than legalistic standing on
principle.20 Deliberative skill alone is not practical wisdom, since the
latter integrates the full range of moral habits that we have been analyzing.
Skill in choosing the best means to a perceived good is meaningless unless I
am habituated to aim at the correct good in the first place, and it isn't
virtuous unless I am motivated to choose that good for its own sake. A
person who skillfully selects means to attain ends that are not actually good
ends for a human being to seek, or who aims at the right ends but for the
wrong reasons, is merely clever, not wise.21
✥   ✥   ✥
When we turn to the Confucian moral tradition, we find that this habit of
prudential judgment is also recognized, though not explicitly theorized to
the extent we find in Aristotle. It is embedded within a Confucian concept
often translated as moral wisdom: zhi. Bryan Van Norden identifies zhi as
having four basic components:
(1) the disposition to properly evaluate the characters of others and
oneself; (2) skill at means- ends deliberation: the ability to deliberate well
about the best means to achieve given ends, and to determine the likely
107
OceanofPDF.com

Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
107
consequences of various courses of action; (3) an appreciation of and
commitment to virtuous behavior; and (4) intellectual understanding [as of
ritual].22
We can see from this that (1), (3), and (4) have already been discussed in
the context of other habits of the practice of moral self- cultivation, and
they also resonate closely with other components of practical wisdom
identified by Aristotle.
It is (2), skill at means- ends deliberation, which closely approximates the
specific part of practical wisdom that Aristotle calls "deliberative
excellence" or prudential judgment. This skill is highlighted frequently in
the Confucian tradition by means of parables and historical cases,
including those briefly summarized in our earlier discussion of moral
attention, and in this remark by Mengzi: Wisdom is like skill, shall I say,
while sageness is like strength. It is like shooting from beyond a hundred
paces: it is due to your strength that the arrow reaches the target, but it is
not due to your strength that it hits the mark.23
Here we see the archery metaphor so often used in classical virtue
traditions to represent the combination of right aim and skillful execution of
moral action.
The metaphor is especially helpful insofar as it helps us to see how all the
ingredients of practical wisdom are integrated: the knowledge or learning
of the basic principles behind the art; the habituated desire to practice it;
the love of doing it well; the understanding of what 'doing it well' amounts
to (Where is the target?/
What is genuinely good for a human being?); the knowledge of what my
particular strengths or weaknesses are in this area (Do I tend to pull left or
right?/

Do I tend to excessive anger or fear?); the perception of the salient features
of the particular situation (Where is the wind blowing from today?/ Is my
typical policy of being direct and honest unusually dangerous in this
case?); and, finally, the skillfulness in putting together an action that will,
given all these other considerations, most likely yield a successful result.
In addition to wisdom ( zhi), comparative Confucian scholar Jiyuan Yu
regards deliberative skill as strongly associated with the virtue of yi or
"appropriateness."
Yu describes the power of yi as ensuring that the moral course of action is
not obscured from my view by my benevolent love for others ( ren) nor by
my respectful adherence to ritual propriety ( li).24 It finds a "fitting"
balance between these basic moral attitudes, which is another way of
saying that it discerns the virtuous or
'equitable' mean for the situation. As noted in the previous section, this also
depends upon the cultivated person's ability to see when the salient moral
features of the situation invite or necessitate a modification,
reinterpretation, or suspension of accepted moral norms. The case in
Mengzi of the drowning sister- in- law
108
10 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
is perhaps the best known example. Although ritual propriety ( li) prohibits
a man from touching his brother's wife, to stand on ritual principle and
refuse to pull her out of the water not only fails to appropriately balance the
moral attitudes of love and ritual respect, it violates the very moral
meaning of the ritual! The ritual principle in question exists to ensure that a
man respects the sanctity of his brother's relationship with his wife; but how
does he respect it by allowing it to be destroyed by her untimely death?
This reminds us that prudential judgment can be exercised without the full
possession of practical wisdom; one does not need to be an especially

cultivated person to recognize what is called for in the kind of case Mengzi
is discussing.
That said, a person who is not highly cultivated will very often err in the
other direction— that is, they will excuse themselves too readily from
important moral duties for reasons of mere expedience or comfort, falsely
chalking it up to 'extenuating circumstances' that make such an exception
permissible. It was this sort of tendency, in fact, that led Immanuel Kant to
insist that affective desires and emotions (our 'inclinations') cannot reliably
guide or inform our moral deliberations.
Kant had a point, though he pushed it too far. Practical wisdom, which
merges cognitive and affective modes of moral sensibility with finely
cultivated habits of moral reasoning and judgment, offers more reliable and
useful action- guidance in a greater variety of circumstances than Kant's
abstract categorical imperative.
But while some people are practically wise, not very many are, even though
very many people would falsely label themselves as such, or are so labeled
by others.
Thus the trick is to be able to distinguish those with genuine practical
wisdom from those who possess what comparative Confucian scholar Lee
Yearley calls
"semblances of virtue."25 A practically wise person, then, is one who in
addition to the deliberative skill of prudential judgment also possesses the
other cognitive and affective elements of a highly cultivated moral nature—
elements that allow prudential judgment to be exercised reliably and well.
✥   ✥   ✥
Explicit reference to this exemplary power can be found in the Mahāyāna
Buddhist doctrine of 'skillful means,' or upāya kaushalya. This doctrine has
a far broader scope of meaning than the concept of prudential judgment,
but it does include something like a (limited) license to use skilled and
careful judgment to modify or even violate established moral precepts (
śīla), though only when demanded by the broader interests of morality

itself.26 This license is highly restricted to practitioners of considerable
moral and spiritual cultivation, for precisely the reason mentioned above:
only a person of genuinely virtuous character and deep moral wisdom can
be trusted to modify, reinterpret, or suspend such precepts. As comparative
Buddhist scholar Damien Keown notes, while the doctrine of skillful
109
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
109
means preceded the emergence of the Mahāyāna tradition, it originally
allowed only relatively minor departures from accepted rules of conduct.
Only in certain Mahāyāna texts did the view emerge that a sufficiently
advanced bodhisattva or spiritual adept could, in extraordinary
circumstances, commit occasional violations of even the most important
moral precepts (for example, prohibitions of lying, stealing, and killing).
However, these texts do not imply that the highly cultivated person has
somehow transcended or earned her freedom from the duties of morality.
Indeed, as Keown notes, the very same text that asserts that "even what is
forbidden is allowable" for an advanced bodhisattva also claims that such
a person will "strive unfailingly not to violate the precepts" (emphasis
added).27 The point is that the employment of skillful means or upāya is
itself a form of striving to meet the ultimate demands of morality, namely, to
seek above all things "the welfare of others with compassion."28 Only
when keeping to the letter of the precepts would gravely endanger others'
welfare am I licensed to violate them, and only if I am sufficiently cultivated
to genuinely know what I am doing, why I am doing it, and how to do it
well. Even then the cultivated person must take responsibility for the
profound consequences of this violation. Consider the story of the Buddha
who, when faced with a 'lose- lose' moral situation as a bodhisattva in a
former life, chose in the interests of compassion to kill a robber bent on
murder, even though he knew that the karmic cost to him would be a
"hundred thousand aeons" of being reborn in hell, while the would- be
robber/ murderer would find himself reborn in heaven.29

Prudential judgment is not therefore a license to shed moral constraints; it
is a way of making sure that the ultimate aims of morality remain control
ing.
Prudential Judgment: Shared Resonances
and Technomoral Implications
Let us summarize the family resemblance among the three classical virtue
traditions concerning prudential judgment:
1) The practically wise person must express (in addition to the other habits
of a morally cultivated person) a well- honed capacity for prudential
judgment.
2) Prudential judgment can be defined as the cultivated habit of
deliberating and choosing well, in particular situations, among the most
appropriate and effective means available for achieving a noble or good
end.
3) The prudential judgment of the morally cultivated person enables her to
deliberate and act well even in cases involving unanticipated, novel, or
rapidly evolving circumstances for which established rules or scripts of
conventional moral behavior do not prepare us.
110
1 10
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
4) In exceptional circumstances, a sufficiently cultivated person may
employ prudential judgment to modify, reinterpret, or suspend accepted
moral norms, rules, and conventions, but only when the more encompassing
interests of morality require it.
Along with the habit of moral attention that informs it, prudential judgment
is essential to coping with the circumstantial novelty, rapid change, and
uncertainty about the future that humans increasingly face in the 21st

century, a condition I have called acute technosocial opacity. As noted in
chapter 1, there are no fixed rules, systems, or principles of ethics existing
today that can offer sufficient action- guidance for the long- term ethical
development of emerging technologies such as artificially intelligent robots,
or the ethical use of new media or pervasive digital surveillance systems, or
the ethical reengineering of our biology. Each of these emerging domains,
not to mention future technomoral domains that we cannot even anticipate
today, presents challenges far too complex, dynamic, and context- sensitive
to be resolved simply by applying standing moral rules or principles
intended to govern all possible cases.
That said, important questions are left unresolved by our examination of
prudential judgment. First and most broadly, how can this kind of
deliberation, along with the other dimensions of practical wisdom, be more
widely cultivated in the human family? Most importantly, how can this
deliberative excellence be employed not just in the realm of private
judgments but in collective moral deliberations regarding the global
development and use of emerging technologies?
Finally, how can we keep our deliberative skill from being exercised outside
of practical wisdom, in ways that serve the interests of personal, national,
or corporate expedience rather than the broader aims of human flourishing
in our technosocial environment? We'll take on these and other related
questions in Part III.
5.3 Appropriate Extension of Moral Concern
This final habit of moral self- cultivation is perhaps the simplest to
articulate, yet the most difficult to put into practice. By 'concern,' we mean
not mere worry but an actively caring aim, an authentic decision to do well
for others. By 'appropriate extension,' we mean the ability to expand one's
basic attitude(s) of moral concern (whether in the form of fairness, love,
respect, or compassion) to the right beings, at the right time, to the right
degree, and in the right manner. In keeping with the holistic account we
have given, the development of this ability does not mark the cessation of
moral cultivation, but continues to inform and enrich the entire process,
improving our habits; our relational and self- understanding; and our
moral intention, attention, and prudential judgment, which then individually

111
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
111
and jointly aid us in further improving our extension of moral concern. Still,
the ability to extend moral concern in a virtuous manner marks a certain
kind of completion of the moral self; not a perfection of the self, in the sense
of having no more work to do, but a completion in the sense that every
active moral potential of a person has been directed toward the project of
self- cultivation. In this sense, the completion of the moral self may be
thought of as the closing of an endless circle that now runs with
increasingly less resistance, since no active element of one's intellect, affect,
or desire naturally impedes it.
While the extension of moral concern is a central and explicit theme in both
Confucian and Buddhist thought, its role in Aristotle's ethics is more
obscure.
Nevertheless, it does play an integral part in the core Aristotelian virtue of
justice, and in the activity that for Aristotle makes justice redundant and,
among practical activities, is most closely associated with the good life:
complete friendship. On Aristotle's view, complete friendship is the most
intimate and enduring form of friendship. Unlike friendships based solely
on mutual pleasure or utility, this form of friendship can only emerge
between virtuous persons who pursue together the noblest activities in life.
A friend of this sort becomes a 'second self,'
someone in whom my own life's worth is reflected, and whose well- being
matters to me as much as my own.
The connection between justice and complete friendship in Aristotle's
account is highly complex, but the basic conceptual link is reciprocity. 30
For Aristotle, justice entails that people get from one another the good that
they deserve. What people deserve from one another is relative to the
circumstances between them, and to the individuals in question; perfect
reciprocity is not perfect equality.31

For example, justice between an apprentice and a mentor entails reciprocity
—
each owes something to the other— but it does not prescribe perfect
equality. The mentor deserves a form of respectful deference that would be
inappropriate for the apprentice to receive, and the apprentice deserves a
form of nurturing concern that the mentor would be wrong to expect in
return. Laws and other moral norms exist in order to compel and/ or reward
reciprocation with one another in appropriate ways. When Aristotle says
that "complete friends have no need of justice,"
he simply means that in this type of relationship the appropriate sharing of
the good need not be compelled, nor rewarded from without; it is already
guaranteed by the noble character of the individuals and the moral care
they spontaneously extend to one another.32
This spontaneous care, which he identifies as "love" ( philia), is something
that Aristotle took great pains to explain; he characterizes it as emanating
from a kind of self- love, but one that is neither blameworthy nor selfish.
Much has been written about this aspect of Aristotle's account, and it
suggests a strong resonance with the concept of 'moral extension.' Love,
well- wishing, and pain or joy for my friend
112
1 1 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
in virtue seem to well up from within as spontaneously as do these emotions
for myself.33 If I do not want to describe my love for another as a weaker,
less spontaneous, and derivative form of affection, then one way of avoiding
that is to conceive it as essentially the same original love— just extended
outward and broadened in scope to include two persons rather than one.
This fits well with Aristotle's description of complete friendship as an
empathetic bond between a virtuous person and his "second self."34 It also
explains why he regards parental love as extending outward from the
original recognition of my child as a literal "part of myself."35

Whether or not we are comfortable with these accounts of friendship or
familial love, they suggest that Aristotle indeed validates the extension of
moral concern.
For Aristotle, then, the highly cultivated person will readily extend
appropriate moral concern to all those that deserve it, that is, he will be
just. His justice will also involve care, for "it is fitting to go unasked and
readily to the aid of those in adversity."36 Furthermore, he will be just and
caring in the way of a temperate man— that is, he will find it easy to
genuinely desire justice for its own sake and not for personal expedience or
reward. However, he will not typically extend to others more than they
actually deserve, for this would be inequitable, excessive, and therefore
unjust. That is to say, his judgments with regard to extending concern will
be prudent and honest, informed by attention to the morally salient features
of the situation cal ing for concern.
For Aristotle, limitless moral concern for another does not extend further
out than the realm of virtuous or complete friendship, which he regards as a
selective, rare, and nearly exclusive bond. A virtuous person will, if he is
sufficiently lucky, have friends who are a "second self " to him; but he will
not be able to have more than a few; perhaps no more than one.37 While
citizens who are not friends of this sort will not be bound by mutual love
and limitless empathy, if their State is a just one they will still extend to one
another that broader moral concern for the welfare of their fellows that is
manifest in the virtue of civic friendship, or philia politikē.
✥   ✥   ✥
The Confucian account of 'moral extension' reveals important conceptual
resonances but also striking differences. Unlike Aristotle's account, where
the general moral concern to be extended is one of benevolent justice
between friends (i.e., an equitable fairness in giving to others what they
deserve), in the Confucian tradition the moral attitudes of concern to be
extended are those of familial love and respectful yielding. Hence in
Confucian ethics, family care is the affective model for all other human
bonds, including political relationships between fellow citizens and between
ruler and subject. Still, while the moral quality of the attitude remains that
of filial care ( xiao), its intensity must be appropriately modulated when

extended outside the biological family (so one should extend the same
caring attitude
113
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
113
to one's elderly neighbor that one naturally has for an elderly uncle or
grandfather, but it should not be of the same degree). The Confucian model,
then, does not seem to allow for the unbounded mutual care between
unrelated persons that we find in Aristotle's account of virtue friendship.
This is because in the Confucian model, the ideal moral attitudes to be
extended do not originate in relationships among equals, but between child
and parent, or older and younger siblings.
The doctrine of appropriate extension of moral concern is most explicitly
articulated in the teachings of Mengzi, who repeatedly cites it as the key to
the moral perfection of virtue and the mark of a highly cultivated person.
The most notable discussions of extension occur in the context of Mengzi's
visits with King Xuan of Qi.38 The king opens the discussion to his personal
shortcomings as a ruler, such as his incontinent weaknesses for wealth and
women, and his tendency to overtax his subjects and expose them to
unnecessary military campaigns. The discussion between Mengzi and the
king is not really about moral knowledge, for the king is fully aware that he
should be a more caring and compassionate ruler.
The discussion is about why he finds it so difficult to actually extend this
moral concern to his subjects.
Mengzi points out that the king is not incapable of empathy or care, for he
was once famously moved to spare a terrified ox that was headed to
slaughter, replacing it with a lamb. As Mengzi puts it to the king, "all you
have to do is take this very heart here" [the king's heart, the one moved by
the suffering ox] and "apply it to what is over there" [the suffering
people].39 Nor should this be difficult, since if he can be overtaken by
spontaneous compassion for the suffering of a mere animal, he can

certainly be moved by the suffering of his own people. The problem is not
an inability to have the right kind of moral experience, but rather the king's
refusal to allow himself that experience with his people (since allowing it
would mean being moved to curtail his own indulgences and ambitions).
Although the king claims to see the point, Mengzi ultimately fails to move
him to change his ways, and much of the secondary literature on this story
is concerned with whether this reveals a flaw or an inconsistency in
Mengzi's account of moral motivation.40
For our purposes, however, what matters is the success of this story in
highlighting how a very simple norm— extend your existing moral attitude
of concern from its natural or current target(s) to all those who deserve it—
is nevertheless one of the most challenging moral habits to practice. Of
course one general source of difficulty is determining who deserves our
moral concern, and how much of it. As with Aristotle, classical Confucian
thinkers like Mengzi did not think that
'appropriate' extension entailed caring for all others to the same degree, or
in the same manner. Since some people have a far stronger moral claim on
our concern than others, one has to apply one's relational understanding,
moral attention, and prudential judgment to the situation to inform the
judgment of who in particular
114
1 14
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
deserves our moral concern, and how much. This is especially challenging
in novel, highly complex, or changing social situations.
But King Xuan is not struggling with this kind of case. Even in the absence
of prudential judgment and moral attention, his basic ritual learning
regarding political relationships is sufficient to tell him that his own
subjects deserve much better care than he is giving them. The king also has
sufficient awareness of his own moral failings to be interested in discussing
their causes with Mengzi, so a lack of honesty or humility isn't the chief

obstacle. Self- control is clearly a problem area for him (hence the wealth
and women), but is this the real issue?
As Mengzi notes, the king could cherish wealth and still share it with the
people if he was simply willing to extend to his people his own care; for
then providing comforts for them would seem appealing in the same way
that providing comforts for himself and his own family appeals to him.41
He just seems unwilling, or unable, to be moved by empathy to take them
into his care.
Mengzi repeatedly addresses this tension between the immense moral power
of becoming humane ( ren: a power which "subdues inhumanity as water
subdues fire,") and our individual and collective failures to make the
necessary effort ("Nowadays those who practice humanity do so as if with
one cup of water they could save a whole wagonload of fuel on fire.").42 As
contemporary Confucian scholar Tu Wei- Ming notes in his commentary on
Mengzi's metaphor, our only hope for counteracting the "dehumanizing
tendencies in society" today that all too easily convince us that our species
is hopelessly evil (or at best, hopelessly weak to resist evil), is to throw our
individual and collective energies into the effort to expand our moral
concern: "If we really want to save a whole wagonload of fuel on fire (or
our world from being incinerated), we have no other long- term recourse
but to educate ourselves to increase our supply of humanity."43
✥   ✥   ✥
Perhaps it is fitting that the appropriate extension of moral concern,
perhaps the most powerful moral tool we can hope to command, is the most
challenging to cultivate among the seven moral habits of self- cultivation
that we have considered. In the coming chapters we will have cause to
return to this difficulty as a special challenge for 21st century life, one that
has a complex and evolving relationship with emerging technologies.
Before we can consider this, however, we should see if Buddhist ethics can
shed further light on the habit of moral extension and how it can be more
effectively and reliably cultivated. After al , the duty of moral extension is
arguably the overarching ethical principle of Buddhism. As we will recall
from our discussion of 'skillful means' ( upāya kaushalya), the only possible
justification for a bodhisattva's skillful suspension of the precepts of

morality ( śīla) would be that this course of action was the only way for her
to extend generosity ( dāna), loving- kindness ( maitri), compassion (
karunā), sympathetic joy ( muditā), and equanimity ( upeksā) toward all
creatures.
115
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
115
Yet this reveals a fundamental difference between the ideal practice of
extension in Buddhism and its ideal practice in Aristotelian and Confucian
ethics.
Buddhism does require the extension of moral concern to be
'appropriate'— for example, compassion and loving- kindness must always
be expressed in a mindful, morally attentive, and prudent way. To express
compassion by refusing to give a lifesaving injection to a child terrified of
needles would not be a virtuous act.
'Appropriate' will also still be relative to the particular situation; I have to
be flexible enough to adjust my compassionate treatment of others to what
they need relative to their particular stage of moral and spiritual
development, their distinctive karmic history, and their present material
circumstances. But for the most highly cultivated person, an 'appropriate'
extension of moral concern no longer entails a discriminating calculation
of graded love or degrees of concern based on who the subject of my
compassion is in her worldly relation to me. All other things being equal, a
Buddhist will not be more concerned with extending her compassion to her
cousin than to a new neighbor or stranger on the road, nor will her
compassion for her cousin be more intense. Indeed, a key story of the
Buddha in a former life has him giving away his own wife and anguished
children to wandering brahmins— just for the sake of the future awakenings
of other suffering beings, for whom he had endless compassion.44
We saw earlier that the Buddhist principle of dependent co- arising (
pratītya-samutpāda) refers to the causal interconnectedness of all beings.

To embed this principle concretely in ethical life, Buddhist practice
encourages you to remember that all beings have at one time been in a
familial or other important relation to you; so again, the idea here is not to
deny or devalue the natural bonds of concern that cement human
relationships, but to extend and multiply those caring bonds among the
entire human family, or even to all beings, past, present, and future.45 This
goal would have appeared clearly absurd to Mengzi or Aristotle, for whom
the natural human affinities into which we are born reflect a stable pattern
or moral order, the integrity of which must not be destroyed. Let us set aside
the question of who is right. Still we must acknowledge that a failure to
extend sufficient concern to those impacted by our own technosocial habits
has brought our planet to the brink of a sixth mass extinction; permitted
untold environmental, political, and economic injustices against the least
empowered among us; and endangered the futures of billions not yet living
— humans and nonhumans alike. This jarring reality brings us back to the
problem that challenged Mengzi and the king: how can we make it easier
for ourselves to put the proper extension of moral concern into practice?
Buddhism offers a novel strategy for moral development that helps us face
this challenge. As comparative scholars Cooper and James note in their
analysis of Buddhist virtue and its applications to environmental ethics, we
can cultivate the ability to appropriately extend compassion and care
through meditations specifically designed with this aim. In the Mahāyāna
Buddhist canon, one is called "Exchanging Self and Others."46 It
presupposes that one
116
1 1 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
has first meditated on the idea that "all beings are alike in wanting
happiness and wanting to avoid suffering." It follows from this that it is
unreasonable to consider only one's own happiness, but how does one
convert this intellectual insight into practical motivation? The practice of
Exchanging Self and Others involves an exercise in which one actively
imagines oneself as another, and then takes a perspective upon one's own

real self from that vantage. Examples of this practice include "identifying
with another being and from that perspective engendering jealousy towards
oneself ... "47
The point of such exercises is that it is not enough for a virtuous person to
intellectually grasp her moral duty to extend compassion, or even to
understand that it would be irrational not to do so. We must also find ways
to feel compassion, which is an experience that goes beyond the intellect. As
Mengzi found in his interactions with the king, this experience cannot be
summoned simply by the knowledge that you should have it.48 To this
knowledge, Buddhism adds the habitual practice of perspective- taking, an
act that recruits moral attention (hence the emphasis on 'viewing' from the
'eyes' of another being), but broadens the scope of ordinary empathic
response with the help of moral imagination.49
Still, even the most dedicated meditative practice will fall short of an easy
fix. At best, we can gradually strengthen and expand that basic capacity for
empathic concern that belongs to any person who is not morally vicious. If I
am filled with compassion for my mother or my child when they are visibly
in pain (rather than being moved only by my own motivation to restore
quiet, or to look like a dutiful daughter or parent) then perhaps, if I desire, I
can habituate this basic capacity to become more easily activated in other
situations that call for it, through the repeated mental and emotional
exercise of moral imagination and perspective- taking. More will be said in
the next chapter about the potential relationship between this practice and
many of the technomoral virtues, including honesty, humility, justice,
courage, empathy, care, civility, flexibility, and moral perspective. For now,
however, let us summarize the results of this section, and its implications for
technomoral wisdom.
Appropriate Extension of Moral Concern:
Shared Resonances and Technomoral Implications
We found a close but imperfect family resemblance among classical virtue
traditions with respect to the appropriate extension of moral concern:

1) A cultivated person will be capable of extending natural moral attitudes
of caring concern (such as love, fairness, benevolence, respect, or
compassion) beyond their initial scope, as called for by the general and
situational demands of morality.
117
Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
117
2) A fully cultivated person with practical wisdom will be able to extend her
moral concern appropriately— that is, to the right beings, at the right time,
to the right degree, and in the right manner.
3) The proper extension of moral concern presupposes the effective
integration of the other habits of the practice of moral self- cultivation,
especially moral attention and prudential judgment. Perhaps for this
reason, it is the most demanding requirement of the practice. In fact, the
ability to extend one's moral concern reliably well is arguably a necessary
and sufficient condition for practical wisdom: the cultivated state of the
exemplary person with complete (though not perfected) virtue.
Having seen how important moral extension is for the cultivation of the
moral self, we must ask how our present capacity for this extension is
impacted by emerging technosocial developments. Are certain kinds of
emerging technology expanding or narrowing the scope of our moral
concern, or do they exert no influence on this aspect of moral practice?
Might some emerging technologies change how we express our moral
concern for others? Might they allow some forms of care, compassion, and
civility to be expressed more easily than others?
Could some emerging technologies exacerbate moral tribalism, neglect, or
incivility, shrinking the circle of our moral concern for others? Might other
technologies have the opposite effect, encouraging the exercise of moral
imagination and perspective- taking that enrich our capacities for moral
extension? How can we drive more resources into development of the latter,
rather than the former?

What is the potential risk to human flourishing if we can't, or won't?
Glaring lapses in collective and individual practical judgment have led to
widespread and growing environmental degradation and resource
depletion, global economic and climate instability, and an increasingly
chaotic and violent geopolitics, all of which point to the fragility of human
flourishing in our present moral condition. Against this backdrop, the
chances of the human family being able to live well with emerging
technologies such as social media, artificial intelligence, social robots,
biomedical enhancement, and ubiquituous surveillance— as well as any
number of disruptive future technologies whose emergence we cannot
possibly hope to anticipate— seem to depend upon our ability to encourage
the wider, even global, cultivation of the technomoral virtues. In chapters 3,
4, and 5, we examined seven habits of moral self- cultivation that diverse
virtue traditions have held to facilitate the cultivation of moral wisdom and
human flourishing. In the next and final chapter of Part II, we will look at
twelve specific virtues that will best characterize 21st century people of
technomoral wisdom— those with an exemplary ability to cope, and even
flourish, in the uncertain and chaotic technosocial environment that is
rapidly becoming the global norm.
118
6
Technomoral Wisdom
for an Uncertain Future
21st Century Virtues
s o f a r i n Part II we have seen that among three classical virtue
traditions, rooted in diverse cultures and embodying very different visions
of human excellence and the good life, there is a shared family resemblance
that goes well beyond a thin commitment to the notion of moral character.
This family resemblance can be articulated as a framework for the practice
of moral self- cultivation, with seven core elements: moral habituation,
relational understanding, reflective self-examination, intentional self-

direction of moral development, moral attention, prudential judgment, and
the appropriate extension of moral concern. As these seven elements of
moral practice become well- developed and integrated, they jointly enable
the attainment of practical wisdom. Concrete expressions of practical
wisdom will always reflect particular cultural and historical views of
human flourishing. Yet the path to becoming practically wise remains
marked by these seven habits of moral practice in each of the three moral
traditions examined in Part II.
If cultivating these same habits is a viable path to a new kind of practical
wisdom— technomoral wisdom— then we can meet the cultural challenge
for a global virtue ethics articulated in chapter 2, and with more resources
than the thin tissue of abstract concepts previously recognized as shared by
virtue ethical traditions. These resources are embedded in a framework of
moral practice that provides any human person seeking to become
cultivated with robust action-guidance. Without ignoring the profound
cultural differences among virtue traditions, this action- guidance focuses
upon the roots of virtue rather than its ultimate deliverances. This
framework does not tell us what it is for a human to live well, to flourish in
a particular culture or community. Rather, it specifies the how: a set of
behavioral, cognitive, perceptual, and affective habits needed to
119
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
119
cultivate oneself in any moral world. So we still have to ask: "Who qualifies
as an exemplary human being, and what does a 'life lived well' look like, in
our present technosocial context?"
While the how of becoming virtuous provides a great deal of general
guidance for living well, the what of virtue must reflect the specific setting
of the moral practice. For the first time since our protohuman ancestors
diverged out of Africa, we each find ourselves today situated not only in our
familiar cultural and regional settings, but also in a new setting: a globally
networked and increasingly interdependent human community marked by

rapid, complex, and ever more unpredictable technosocial and planetary
change. Even those still systematically excluded from meaningful
participation in this new global information society are subject to its
economic, political, and environmental effects. Having explored how a
human becomes a person of moral character, we must now ask what
particular sort of human character we require to flourish in this newly
shared community. We need an account of technomoral virtue.
6.1 A Taxonomy of Technomoral Virtues
For better or for worse, global technosocial practices and their effects
increasingly bind the fate of the human family together, in all our
multiplicity and difference.
Whatever virtues of character are most likely to increase our chances of
flourishing together in these conditions we shall call the technomoral
virtues. As noted in the Introduction, these will not be character traits
unlike any seen before. Any plausible virtue ethic must be rooted in a more
or less stable range of human moral capacities, and in the absence of some
radical alteration to our basic psychology, there is no reason to think that
humans will suddenly acquire a wholly new reper-toire of moral responses
to the world.1 Indeed this underlies our assumption that classical accounts
of our moral capacities still have much to offer us.
Yet 21st century virtues, even those bearing old names such as wisdom and
courage, must be cultivated with a new and explicit adaptation to our
emerging global technomoral environment. As Martha Nussbaum has
argued, while the core meaning of a virtue such as wisdom, courage, or
justice is fixed by reference to some enduring domain of human experience
(e.g., knowledge, or hardship and risk, or the distribution of goods), the
concrete or 'thick' meaning of each virtue is determined by the distinctive
shape of that domain in our present cultural context, and what specific
dispositions enable us to flourish there.2 Our present moral context, the one
to which our virtues must be more effectively adapted, is one of increasingly
rapid, transformative, global, unpredictable, and interdependent
technosocial change. Of course the virtues needed to flourish in these
conditions cannot simply replace local and settled conceptions of human
excellence, for it is

120
1 2 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
unreasonable to think that we can live well globally without also flourishing
in our own families, states, and cultures. There will inevitably be tensions
between those expressions of technomoral virtue that aid our pursuit of the
global human goods highlighted in chapter 2, and those that promote more
locally and culturally circumscribed visions of the good life. Still, given our
increasing technosocial interdependence, both global and local visions of
human excellence and flourishing must begin to be better integrated into
our lives, and our character.
As with all taxonomies of virtue, ours remains subject to open- ended
elabora-tion and revision, for two reasons.3 First, as technosocial
conditions change over time, our virtues will have to evolve with them.
Secondly, even if it were possible to give an exhaustive account of every
single character trait likely to promote human flourishing in our present
condition, limitations of space would preclude our giving it here. We must
be content with pointing out the virtues plausibly most crucial to such
flourishing; especially those under pressure from our contemporary
technosocial practices. The twelve technomoral virtues that shall be our
focus are:
1. Honesty
2. Self- Control
3. Humility
4. Justice
5. Courage
6. Empathy
7. Care

8. Civility
9. Flexibility
10. Perspective
11. Magnanimity
12. Technomoral Wisdom
Let us now examine them in depth.
6.2 Honesty: Respecting Truth
[Related Virtues: Trust, Reliability, Integrity]
Honesty is among the most culturally universal virtues. Aristotle identifies
honesty ( aletheia) as a cardinal virtue. The Confucian term ( cheng), often
translated as 'honesty,' also incorporates broader meanings of integrity or
"self- completion"
as the highest good to be attained by moral practice.4 In Buddhism, honesty
is
121
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
121
embodied in the joint exercise of 'right view' ( samyag- drsti) and 'right
conduct'
( śīla), which includes the precept of truthful speech. The reasons for the
importance of this virtue are fairly obvious. Flourishing in interactions with
other people, which is the primary task of ethics and all social life, would
be virtually impossible without a general expectation of honesty, as Kant
famously noted.

While there is tremendous cultural variance among human conceptions of
when honesty is demanded, to whom, and what degree or form of candor
suffices for it, virtually every human community values the distinction
between the honest and the dishonest person.
Why then describe honesty as a technomoral virtue? After al , if honesty has
been a moral ideal in almost all societies, regardless of their technosocial
complexity, then one might not expect it to have any special significance for
our inquiry. Yet the virtue of honesty is powerfully challenged by the
technosocial developments of the last century, and those to come. This
becomes clear as soon as we grasp the conceptual links between honesty,
information, and communication. Honesty is about the appropriate and
morally expert communication of information. Yet this practice has been
and continues to be radically and globally transformed by ICTs, to use the
conventional shorthand for information and communication technologies.
ICTs, especially those founded on digital computing, have revolutionized
how we communicate and how we expect information to be communicated
to us. The exploding literature on the problem of trust in online
environments— including e- commerce, e- government, and social media—
is just one aspect of this worldwide phenomenon.5 The new communication
habits enabled and fostered by ICTs are shaping how we define the truth,
when and how often we tell it, when we expect to be told it, where and in
whom we expect to find it, how we package it, how we verify it, and what we
do with it and are willing to have done with it. ICTs have also created a
fierce global debate about privacy norms, which are placed in a profound
tension with new digital ideals of 'transparency,' 'sharing,' and 'open
community.' From the international controversy about the United States
NSA's spying and exposures by Wikileaks, Anonymous, and Edward
Snowden; to the EU's 'right to be forgotten'; to debates about online
anonymity and self- censorship on social networks; to the fallout from the
Ashley Madison hack and data dumps, human beings around the globe have
never been less certain what honesty as a virtue looks like.
Technomoral honesty is not just a personal concern but a social and
political one. ICTs have transformed the nature and reliability of evidence
in scientific, political, and media contexts, along with public perceptions of

whose information, if anyone's, warrants trust. Indeed public trust in
information supplied by traditional media outlets, academic researchers,
governmental bodies, and
122
1 2 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
religious leaders has fallen precipitously in recent years as new media
practices and ICTs widen the gap between the availability of information
and traditional notions of expertise and authority. In the United States, for
example, public trust of mass media hit an al - time low in 2015.6
Meanwhile, the Internet continues to function well as a space for loudly
contesting the informational claims of others, but far less well as a medium
for building reliable public consensus.
Yet we cannot surrender the moral ideal of honesty. Arguably, the future
flourishing of humanity depends more than it ever has on our ability to
obtain, verify, and share reliable information concerning problems such as
global climate change; infectious disease and public health; threats to air
and water supplies; depletion of energy resources; and ongoing existential
threats from nuclear, biological, and other weapons as well as cosmic perils
such as near- Earth objects. Thus as traditional norms, standards, and
habits of appropriate disclosure crack under the weight of radical changes
in information and communication practices, it is essential that we consider
what norms, standards, and habits will replace them.
Human flourishing in social environments has never been able to endure
without established norms of honesty, and there is no reason to think that
this has ceased being the case. So what does the virtue of honesty look like
in an increasingly digi-tized information environment? What does a person
who handles information in a 'morally expert' way look like now? What will
she look like tomorrow? What is the 21st century technomoral virtue of
honesty?

Let us define the technomoral virtue of honesty as an exemplary respect for
truth, along with the practical expertise to express that respect
appropriately in technosocial contexts. Recall that merely telling the truth,
even reliably so, is never sufficient for the virtue of honesty, which requires
that we tell the truth not only to the right people, at the right times and
places, and to the right degree, but also knowingly, and for the right
reasons. As philosopher Harry Frankfurt's On Bullshit so concisely
explains, honesty is not the same as mere true speech, which can be issued
for any number of amoral or vicious purposes, including deliberate
obfuscation.7 How respect for truth gets cashed out in particular
technosocial contexts will be a central question for us in chapters 7 and 8,
when we examine the ethical implications of new social media and
surveillance technologies. But recall that knowing how to express a virtue is
largely mediated by our experience of those who are already doing it. So
who today do we regard as exemplifying honesty in the information society?
Edward Snowden and Glenn Greenwald? Rachel Maddow? David Brooks?
Bernie Sanders? Donald Trump?
John Oliver? "Curator of the Internet" George Takei? Mark Zuckerberg?
The
'Impact Team' hackers who dumped the Ashley Madison data? If these are
not our best models of technomoral honesty, then we had better ask
ourselves who is.
Even better than asking ourselves would be asking those outside our local
circles
123
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
123
of trust— initiating a global intercultural dialogue about the role of
technomoral honesty in living well.
6.3 Self- Control: Becoming

the Author of Our Desires
[Related Virtues: Temperance, Discipline,
Moderation, Patience]
This virtue is the ability to reliably and deliberately align one's desires with
the good. There is a long- standing ambiguity in this notion, which is why
Aristotle in Nicomachean Ethics Book VII carefully distinguishes
temperance ( sôphrosunê or right desire) from mere continence ( enkrateia
or willful restraint of wrong desire).
Likewise, we have seen that Confucian and Buddhist moral traditions also
emphasize self- discipline and the cultivation of right desire, giving the
latter higher esteem than the suppression of wrong desire.
Yet we saw in chapters 3 and 4 that the willful restraint of wrong desire—
aided by moral education, law, or human exemplars— is the first step on
the path to developing right desire. So for our purposes, let us define the
virtue of self- control as an umbrella notion that captures both the self-
restraint of moral continence and the deliberate cultivation of right desire
that yields genuine temperance. That said, why should we consider self-
control to be a distinctly technomoral excellence of character? Self- control
is a requirement for any person of virtue, even a monk living on a remote
mountaintop entirely cut off from modern technology.
Consider, however, how emerging technologies increase the number and
variety of potential objects of our desire. Compared with past eras, ICTs in
combination with global transportation systems grant us access to a vastly
expanded range of available goods, more aggressively advertise to us their
selection and enjoyment by others, and increase the speed with which we
can attain, consume, and replace them. New media advertising techniques
fueled by the power of 'Big Data' subject us to a constant flow of
solicitations custom- tailored to inflame our desire, to strengthen our
existing consumption habits and expand them to new types of goods, and to
convince us that our wants and needs are one and the same.

The ethical implications of these phenomena are significant on individual,
local, and global scales. Our desires and consumption habits reflect the
physical and emotional health of our persons and our societies. They shape
the activities that bind our family and community lives; the kinds and
amounts of natural resources that are extracted, used, priced, and
distributed; and the type and amount of environmental waste that is
produced by those activities. Not only material goods but increasingly,
virtual goods, relationships, and experiences fill
124
1 2 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the ever- expanding catalog of things we are invited to desire and pursue.
Online app and game developers encourage us to spend collective billions
of human hours growing virtual crops in Farmville, massacring pigs with
Angry Birds, or solving new puzzles in the Candy Kingdom. Advanced
techniques of software design psychology magnify the addictive (the
preferred software no-menclature is 'sticky') qualities of apps, driving users
to make more and more in- app purchases, share our monetizable
information or contacts, or just keep playing into the wee hours of the night
to reach whatever surprises await us on the next game level.
The problem of how to evaluate the worth of these virtual goods in relation
to others will only be exacerbated by the increasing sophistication of digital
environments and artificial intelligence. Life online already challenges our
self- control on multiple levels, causing many of us to resort to software
lockout tools such as Freedom to keep us out of the digital cookie jar for a
fixed period of time. Such tools allow us to complete an important task or
spend time with people we highly value without being seduced away by the
apparently irresistible distractions of Facebook, Gmail, Minecraft, and
Instagram. Others simply surrender to the jug-gernaut of technosocial
distraction. But what does all of this say about our state of personal
discipline and self- control?

Let us define the technomoral virtue of self- control as an exemplary ability
in technosocial contexts to choose, and ideally to desire for their own sakes,
those goods and experiences that most contribute to contemporary and
future human flourishing. As we noted in chapter 1, flourishing is not mere
self- satisfaction or pleasure, states of mind easily attained by a sociopath
or a heroin addict with a steady supply. Flourishing means actively doing
well as a human being; it involves facts about how our lives are going
socially, politically, physically, intellectually, and emotionally. This invites
the question: how do we determine which goods and experiences help us to
live well? Consider the much- discussed digital fragmentation of cultures.
Gone are the days in which one could safely assume that one's local peers
had read the same books, seen the same movies or news shows, engaged in
the same leisure activities, or visited the same places. Even if we look only
toward people we admire as intelligent, discerning, and culturally literate,
we will be hard- pressed to find much uniformity in their consumption
habits. As a result, cultural narratives about what desires individuals
should try to cultivate in order to facilitate not only a good life for
themselves, but a good shared life in community, are rendered increasingly
incoherent— as are the institutions of cultural education, art, and ritual
that traditionally steered individuals onto the path of right desire.
Of course, these developments have positive aspects, not least among them
a great proliferation and global exchange of diverse ideas and images of
the good
125
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
125
life. There are very, very many things in life worth wanting, and global
information networks bring ever more attractive options into our view. Yet it
is impossible to choose them al . So the question remains: how do persons
develop the virtue of self- control in this new technosocial environment? A
virtuous person in any time or place must be able to discern and eventually
become the author of right desires— that is, self- conscious and authentic
desires for goods that promote her flourishing with others, as opposed to

those that diminish her life. As global information technologies dilute or
blunt the effect of those cultural mechanisms that previously assisted us in
making these distinctions, what new mechanisms for shaping human desire
are taking their place? In short, how will 21st century humans acquire the
individual and collective virtue of self- control, and what are the short and
long- term global consequences if we cannot? Our discussions of new
media in chapter 7, surveillance technologies in chapter 8, and biomedical
enhancement in chapter 10 will engage this question.
6.4 Humility: Knowing What We
Do Not Know
[Related Virtues: Modesty, Reverence, Wonder]
Compared with honesty and self- control, the moral importance of humility
is less universally acknowledged. While humility was often recognized in
ancient Greece as a check on destructive hubris, for Aristotle the virtuous
mean was nothing like humility, but rather the justified pride of the man
who correctly recognizes himself as 'great of soul' ( megalopsuchia). For
Aristotle, to abase oneself is dishonest if one is actually a good and noble
man, and if one is not a good and noble man, one's primary aim should be
to improve one's character, not to lower one's self- regard.
The influence of Christian perspectives restored humility to prominence in
the medieval virtue- ethical tradition; in the 13th century, St. Thomas
Aquinas described humility as "keeping oneself within one's own bounds,
not reaching out to things above one, but submitting to one's superior."8
Since then humility's reputation as a virtue has fluctuated; it was celebrated
by Kant, famously rejected by Nietzsche, and in the late 20th century came
to be increasingly displaced by psychological discourse on the importance
of "high self- esteem."9 In the East, regard for humility as an important
character virtue has been more stable. Our prior analyses showed that for
Confucians, humility issues from the habit of reflective self- examination
and expresses itself in the yielding disposition that constitutes the cardinal
virtue of ritual propriety or respect ( li). We saw that for Buddhists humility
is part of the understanding of anātman (not- self ) that corrects one's

126
1 2 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
distorted sense of personal importance and ego- attachment, both of which
obstruct the cultivation of right view ( samyag- drsti) and right action (
śīla).
What role should humility play in a 21st century account of technomoral
virtue? Arguably, 21st century life demands greater humility than we
presently enjoy. Insofar as the global political, cultural, economic, and
environmental consequences of emerging technologies are proving
themselves to be increasingly complex and difficult for us to predict,
increasingly systemic and far- reaching in scope, and increasingly
challenging for us to mitigate or undo, we can no longer afford the modern
illusion that our technosocial innovations are conducive to human mastery.
For example, the 20th century confidence that modern medical technologies
would soon grant humans permanent mastery over disease has been
progressively undermined by the rapid rise of antibiotic- resistant bacteria;
the spike in the emergence and global reach of formerly unknown
pathogens; and the persistent spread of 'lifestyle' diseases associated with
technosocial changes in our diet, air quality, physical activity, and exposure
to chemical compounds. Rising infant mortality and stagnant or declining
projected lifespans in technologically advanced nations like the United
States are a signal that far from ensuring our mastery of human health, our
present technosocial practices may be pushing this goal further from our
grasp.
Similarly, our attempts to master the new technosocial frontier of the
Internet have proven equally weak: cyberbullying, cybercrime,
cyberespionage, 'hacktivism,' and even the potential for cyberwarfare are
expanding rapidly, and not even the most powerful nations and institutions
are presently able to prevent their spread.10 The intentional conduct of
'bad actors' is not the only source of unpredictable ICT phenomena;
consider the aggregate effects and complex interactions of otherwise benign

electronic agents, such as the high frequency trading algorithms that
contributed to the "Flash Crash" of May 2010 and the Knight Capital
fiasco in August 2012. Limited understandings of human- technology
relations also produce massive design failures such as Microsoft's notorious
AI 'teen' chatbot Tay, which began spewing neo- Nazi propaganda on
Twitter within a day of her 2016 release. Given that new algorithmic
techniques for machine 'deep learning'
resist thorough human inspection or prediction, it should be clear that the
digital domain— to which human beings are increasingly linking their
material, political, cultural, and economic resources— is no more the
subject of human 'mastery'
than are the organic domains of human health, ecology, or climate. We must
come to terms with the challenge of acute technosocial opacity. Among
character traits likely to promote human flourishing in this condition,
humility is high on the list.
Let us define technomoral humility as a recognition of the real limits of our
technosocial knowledge and ability; reverence and wonder at the universe's
127
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
127
retained power to surprise and confound us; and renunciation of the blind
faith that new technologies inevitably lead to human mastery and control of
our environment. Not only is this faith undermined by present conditions, it
prevents us from honestly confronting the hard choices we must make about
technosocial risk. For we cannot evade present risks to human flourishing
simply by forgoing technosocial innovation. As Nick Bostrom notes, that
path exposes us to equally profound, even existential risks.11 In truth, risk
to the future of humankind cannot be eliminated. A humble appreciation of
this radical exposure to risk is essential to the ability to make prudential
judgments about how best to proceed in our present state of technosocial
opacity: judgments not only of which technosocial risks to take, but also

how to plan for inevitable technosocial failures, and especially how to
preserve the resources, resilience and flexibility needed to cope in
midstream with the unforeseen consequences of our failures and successes.
Technomoral humility, like all virtues, is a mean between excess and a
deficiency. The deficiency is blind techno- optimism, which uncritically
assumes that any technosocial innovation is always and essentially good
and justified; that unanticipated negative consequences can always be
mitigated or reversed by 'techno-fixes' (more and better technology); and
that the future of human flourishing is guaranteed by nothing more than the
sheer force of our creative will to innovate.
The other extreme, techno- pessimism, is equally blind and uncritical: it
assumes that new technological developments generally lead to less
'natural' or even 'inhuman' ways of life (ignoring the central role of
technique in human evolution), and that the risks to which they expose us
are rarely justified by the potential gains.
This attitude sells short our creative potential, our adaptability, and our
capacity for prudential judgment. Humility, then, is the intermediate state: a
reasoned, critical but hopeful assessment of our abilities and creative
powers, combined with a healthy respect for the unfathomed complexities of
the environments in which our powers operate and to which we will always
be vulnerable. The importance of technomoral humility will be a central
topic of discussion in chapters 9 and 10, when we examine emerging
developments in robotics and biomedical enhancement, respectively.
6.5 Justice: Upholding Rightness
[Related Virtues: Responsibility, Fairness,
Reciprocity, Beneficence]
The virtue of justice is perhaps the broadest and most varied in its
interpretation; in chapters 4 and 5 we discussed the important role of
justice ( dikaiosunē)
128

1 2 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
in Aristotle's ethics, where it represents ethical excellence writ large and,
more narrowly, the appropriate extension to others of what is deserved. We
contrasted this with a Confucian account in which just treatment of others,
especially in the political realm, is subsumed under a broader conception of
humane benevolence ( ren). In classical Buddhism, the topic of political
justice is neither as central nor as well developed as one finds in Aristotle
or Confucian literatures.12 Still, a universal sense of justice may be
considered equivalent with the Dharma itself: the complete body of
Buddhist learning that mandates unconditional concern for the welfare and
dignity of all creatures.
Our present concern is the kind of justice most critical to flourishing in the
global technosocial environment. Let us call this technomoral justice. This
is di-visible into two interrelated but distinguishable character traits. The
first is a reliable disposition to seek a fair and equitable distribution of the
benefits and risks of emerging technologies. The second is a characteristic
concern for how emerging technologies impact the basic rights, dignity, or
welfare of individuals and groups.
Technomoral justice entails reliably upholding rightness (values of non-
harm and beneficence), along with fairness (moral desert), and
responsibility (accountability for the consequences of one's actions).
The absence of technomoral justice is an increasingly destabilizing social
phenomenon. Consider the rising tensions in San Francisco, Silicon Valley,
and other communities worldwide where the ballooning wealth of high-
tech investors and workers has had dramatic effects on the standard of
living enjoyed by long- term area residents and workers. In 2013, local
activists in the Mission district of San Francisco, protesting rising rents and
evictions by landlords looking to capital-ize on cash- rich tech renters,
repeatedly surrounded and blocked the corporate luxury shuttles that
transport tech employees of Google, Apple, and other Silicon Valley
companies to and from their work campuses. Local and national media
wrote about the growing perception of an insular tech community

indifferent to the well- being of their fellow citizens. Adding fuel to the fire
were a series of objectionable public statements by tech entrepreneurs such
as startup AngelHack CEO Greg Gopman. He shared his disgust at the
homeless "degenerates" and
"trash" of San Francisco who fail to observe the self- segregating ideal of
cities where the "lower part of society keep to themselves. They sell small
trinkets, beg coyly, stay quiet, and generally stay out of your way. They
realize it's a privilege to be in the civilized part of town and view themselves
as guests."13 Such sentiments are, if nothing else, suggestive of a vicious
deficiency of technomoral justice as defined above.14
Other emerging deficiencies of technomoral justice include the average
technology consumer's detachment from the profound environmental,
economic, and political harms created by the mining and disposal of rare
earth elements (REE's)
129
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
129
used in electronic devices, and countless other harmful externalities
generated by global technosocial development yet imposed on the most
disenfranchised residents of the planet. Socially destabilizing asymmetries
of power are magnified by large- scale data mining, pervasive digital
surveillance and algorithmic profiling, and robotic and drone warfare. Still
we must not ignore the potential for emerging technologies to expose,
mitigate, or remedy injustice. For example, digital surveillance tools are
used by oppressive regimes and powers and against them.
Deciding how such tools can be developed and used more fairly and
responsibly, on both an individual and a collective human level, is the
domain of technomoral justice. In chapters 7, 8, and 9 we will take a closer
look at the effects of new social media, digital surveillance, and military
robotics on this domain.

6.6 Courage: Intelligent Fear and Hope
[Related Virtues: Hope, Perseverance, Fortitude]
The moral excellence of courage is much discussed in virtue ethics, though
its meaning varies widely by cultural and historical setting. In Book III of
the Nicomachean Ethics, Aristotle defines courage ( andreia) as the mean
between cowardice and rashness— the disposition to fear "the right things
and with the right motive, in the right way and at the right time."15 The
model of physical and martial courage found in soldiers and athletes was
central to Aristotle's understanding of this virtue. Yet later discussions of
courage in the Western philosophical tradition, such as that of Aquinas,
placed greater emphasis on spiritual or moral courage. Such courage is a
reliable tendency to fear grave wrongdoing and a compromised character
more than one fears the other dangers or injuries that one might invite by
acting rightly, and in general to intelligently balance measured and justified
fears with measured and justified confidence and hope.
Unlike self- control, which guides one to pursue only those things that are
actually good for oneself to obtain, courage necessitates risk and sacrifice.
In all forms of courage, the courageous agent is willing to endure some
injury, forgo some legitimate good, or otherwise incur a real loss in order to
do what is necessary and right.16 This willingness distinguishes genuine
courage from its pale facsimiles: acts of seeming bravery by persons
blinded by passion or ignorance of the danger, overconfident in their ability
to evade it, or motivated by some greater personal advantage they expect to
gain, such as social acclaim.17 What is distinctive about the virtue of
spiritual and moral courage is that it must manifest itself in an enduring
orientation to one's world, not just in rare moments of mortal danger such
as those presented in battle. Aquinas emphasizes this 'steadfastness'
130
1 3 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s

of courage ( fortitudo) as the backbone of all other virtuous dispositions; to
live rightly is to maintain the fortitude to make sacrifices, take risks, or
incur injuries (even death) in the name of the good, when that good is not
trivial but of considerable spiritual or moral gravity.18 Lee Yearley's
analysis of Aquinas's account of courage is particularly helpful here; he
notes that it has both a positive and a negative aspect. Courage demands
positive perseverance in one's active and hopeful pursuit of the good, and
forbearance and patience in enduring the pains and losses inevitably
associated with this lifelong pursuit.19 The virtue of spiritual and moral
courage is thus a constant renewal of the choice to live well rather than
badly, whatever else this may cost us.
As Yearley notes, courage also plays a central role in Confucian ethics.
Kongzi describes courage ( yong) as a virtue not in isolation, but only when
supportive of moral rightness ( yi); yet it seems that the virtuous person
cannot do without it, since Kongzi more than once identifies it as part of the
threefold essence or Way ( Dao) of the cultivated person ( junzi): "The wise
are not confused, the Good do not worry, and the courageous do not
fear."20 Historical commentaries on these passages suggest that this was
interpreted to mean that the junzi is marked not by narrowly martial
courage but by moral courage.21 As Yearley notes, Mengzi's discussions of
courage diverge still further from the martial conception, even more so than
Aquinas, who is still influenced by the heroic Aristotelian model.22 In
Mengzi, martial bravery is a mere "semblance" of courage, while the only
genuine article is moral courage, the tendency to fear no evil more than one
fears failing to live rightly: "Life I desire, righteousness too I desire; if I
cannot get to have both, rather than life I choose righteousness. ... That is
why there are troubles I do not avoid. ... Not only men of worth have a mind
which thinks like this, all men have it; it is simply that the worthy are able
to avoid relinquishing their hold on it."23
Mengzi is rebutting the objection that moral courage is psychologically
unrealistic. While he paints a picture of moral self- sacrifice that few of us
are confident we could mirror, his point that 'all men' have this original
inclination is significant. As Yearley notes, Mengzi sees this as the root of
natural self- respect, the unwillingness to allow oneself to be debased. In
the rest of the passage, Mengzi notes that a starving beggar will refuse food

given with abuse. Why? Because his self- respect and dignity, already
endangered by his low social status, in the end are more precious to him
than mere survival. He can endure more hunger, even death, but he will not
endure his own further debasement. How does this relate to moral courage?
In Mengzi's view, the majority of human beings are numb to the threat to
our own dignity posed by the ethically compromised ways in which we
allow ourselves to live. We all share the beggar's natural inclination to
preserve his own dignity, but due to the relative comfort of our lives this
inclination is no longer actively
131
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
131
engaged, it is not part of our daily awareness. This failure to habitually
care for our self- respect and moral dignity results in a lack of moral
courage; when presented with a choice between giving up some material or
social comfort to which we are accustomed, and surrendering even more of
our moral respectability, our will to endure the former to save the latter is
lacking. I expect that many readers will find Mengzi's point no less resonant
in our contemporary world.
The Buddhist virtue tradition also grants an important role to moral
courage.
Of the 'Six Perfections' of moral character in the Mahāyāna canon, one is
often translated as courage ( vīrya) or vigor, but others in the list are also
associated with moral courage as we have defined it, especially
forbearance ( ksānti) and strength ( bala). Buddhist courage also critically
depends on the interaction of two related virtues discussed in chapter 4:
hri, the disposition to be ashamed of doing evil, and apatrapya, the fear of
doing evil. The proper habituation and intelligent application of hri and
apatrapya produce a disposition of moral courage, insofar as such a person
will reliably and correctly fear living in a morally debased manner more
than she fears having to endure the worldly consequences of living rightly.

What role does moral courage have to play in 21st century technosocial
life?24
Certainly the rise of robotic warfare and biomedical engineering confronts
us with many new moral and material fears. It has never been more
important that humans be able to judge rightly what we should most fear,
what we can and must hope for, how much to fear or hope, how best to act
on our fears and hopes, and how much confidence we should have in our
efforts to manage the risks presented by our technosocial choices. This is
even more true given what we have said earlier in this chapter about
humanity's increasing self- exposure to existential danger. No longer must
we simply weigh the relative risks of our own material extinction or moral
debasement, or even that of our near kin or nation; the material and moral
fate of the entire human family is now implicated by many of our individual
and collective technosocial choices.
Thus it is highly unlikely (barring some astonishing run of blind luck) that
our species will continue to flourish on this planet for very long unless
communities have at least some success in encouraging their members to
individually and collectively cultivate the virtue of technomoral courage. By
this I mean a reliable disposition toward intelligent fear and hope with
respect to the moral and material dangers and opportunities presented by
emerging technologies. As with ordinary moral courage, technomoral
courage presupposes the tendency to give proper priority to the
preservation of our moral well- being and dignity over the preservation of
material comfort and ease, or in some cases, even our physical safety.
However, there is a critical difference between the classical forms of moral
courage and technomoral courage. Someone with moral courage in the
classical sense could safely assume that life in general would endure, even
if his or her own did
132
1 3 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s

not. The choice to risk one's own life rather than accept profound moral
debasement was therefore of a different nature than many of the choices
21st century humans face, as we collectively confront choices of
technosocial policy having planetary implications.
For example, imagine that you are confronted with the choice of supporting
or resisting a global geoengineering initiative that has a fair chance of
dramatically reducing the existential risk to the biosphere posed by rapid
global climate change. Assume that putting this plan into action would
necessarily involve committing various grave injustices: the forced
displacement of certain indigenous peoples from their lands; the imposing
of taxes and other material externalities on communities who were not
themselves responsible for the reckless degradation of the environment that
the plan aims to mitigate; the destruction of certain ecosystems in order to
improve the conditions for human settlement, and so on.
Your support of this plan would implicate you in all of these injustices and
thus debase your moral character; but assume for the sake of argument that
in resisting the plan you would be accepting a significantly increased risk to
future human survival. If no better options existed, which would you judge
to be the more morally courageous course of action?
Contemplating such challenging scenarios should make clear why it is
essential that we begin seeking now a better understanding of what counts
as courage in our contemporary technomoral situation, and determining
how this virtue of intelligent hope and fear can be more widely cultivated
among us. In Part III, discussion of the importance of cultivating
technomoral courage will be central to chapter 9 on robotics and chapter
10 on biomedical human enhancement.
6.7 Empathy: Compassionate
Concern for Others
[Related Virtues: Compassion, Benevolence,
Sympathy, Charity]

The virtue of empathy has a strong pedigree in Confucian and Buddhist
virtue traditions, and we will see that seeds of this virtue are planted in
Aristotle's ethics.
Yet it is not always classified as a virtue by contemporary thinkers, and is
defined in so many ways that it invites especially careful discussion.25
Before exploring its classical and technomoral significance it will be
helpful to first establish a conventional distinction between empathy and
sympathy.
Although these terms are used in a variety of contexts, and translate a
range of closely related concepts in other languages, for the most part
"sympathy" refers to a form of benevolent concern for another's suffering.
"Empathy," on the other
133
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
133
hand, is often used to describe a form of co- feeling, or feeling with another,
synonymous with compassion. Empathy may include sharing feelings of
pain, fear, shame, excitement, joy, or other passions. Though we can speak
of purely cognitive empathy (i.e., the correct belief that another is
experiencing a certain emotion), empathy is often associated with bodily
passivity, an experience of being physically affected by another's emotion. It
is an intimate, personalized form of relation; I can have sympathy for the
misfortunes of a group of anonymous individuals who are more or less
interchangeable in my mind, but I typically can only empathize with a
specific person or set of persons. Even a stranger with whom I empathize
will appear in my experience not as an abstraction, but as a concrete,
nonfungible individual with specific emotional experiences.
Empathy and sympathy often interact; once I find myself empathizing with
the specific frustrations and suffering of a wounded veteran in my
community who is struggling to adjust to returning home, I may be more
inclined to sympathize with the millions of other veterans facing similar

challenges. Likewise, a well- cultivated and informed general sympathy
toward victims of cyberbullying may make me more likely to empathize with
a student in my child's school suffering severe depression and anxiety as a
result of online harassment— even if my own child is one of the bul ies.
Empathy and sympathy can also stimulate and be stimulated by caring
activity; thus they are intimately connected with the virtue of care described
in the next section. Yet one form of empathy qualifies as a moral virtue in its
own right. This is empathy understood not as simple shared affect, nor as
mere understanding of another's mental state, but as a cultivated
disposition reliably uniting these affective and cognitive aspects in active
concern for others.
Following psychologist C. Daniel Batson, we can classify this "empathic
concern"
as "a motivational state with the ultimate goal of increasing another's
welfare."26
Defined as a technomoral virtue, it is a cultivated openness to being
morally moved to caring action by the emotions of other members of our
technosocial world.
There is empirical evidence for the claim that empathic concern can be
actively cultivated as a disposition; as with any virtue, empathy can be
expressed more or less wisely.27 It makes a great difference to my character
whether I am moved by empathic concern at the right time and places, by
the right people, and with the right intensity. For example, if my brother is a
malicious hacker facing harsh punishment for intentionally defrauding
millions of vulnerable senior citizens, my own moral excellence in this
situation requires my mental and emotional energies to be adequately
attuned to and moved by the suffering of his victims, and not
inappropriately consumed by concern for my brother's troubles. On the
other hand, to be wholly indifferent to my brother's present and future
suffering would also be vicious. The appropriate cultivation of empathy is a
particular challenge in our present technomoral condition and deserves
special emphasis. We
134

1 3 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
will say more about this shortly. But given that Western ethicists often
neglect the virtue of empathy, it is worth saying a bit more about its
classical roots in virtue traditions, and how we might defend our
characterization of it as a technomoral virtue.
Empathy occupies a critical role in the life of virtue Aristotle describes,28
yet he did not classify it as one of the virtues, because he lacks a concept of
empathy as a cultivated state or disposition. That said, not only does his
account recognize empathy as a capacity for 'feeling with' others, he makes
it a constitutive element of friendships of virtue. In empathy, a virtuous
person "grieves and rejoices with ( sunalgounta kai sunchaironta)" his
friend, in a manner that contributes to his experience of that person as a
"second self."29 Still, Aristotle sees empathy as a spontaneous passion
erupting naturally rather than by choice.30 Virtues, on the other hand, are
states of character arising from deliberative choice and amenable to
rational direction, adjustment, and cultivation of expression. In contrast, he
describes empathy as a natural feeling affecting not only rational beings
but other animals.31
Why then does Aristotle make empathy a distinctive mark of virtue
friendship, noting that this passion is impossible among those lacking in
virtue who, due to the absence of a soul worthy of love, cannot even
"rejoice or grieve with themselves," much less with a friend?32 How does
it happen that for Aristotle human mothers and even birds can empathize,
but a bad man cannot? Aristotle's strong association between empathy and
virtue is undeniable, yet puzzling. Note that for Aristotle mere mutual
goodwill, in the absence of empathic feeling, is insufficient for friendships
of virtue.33 He says that with those for whom we have only goodwill, we
wish them well but "we would not do anything with them ... nor take
trouble for them."34 Empathy here seems to be a motivating factor behind
our decision to engage in caring activity with or for another. But is Aristotle
right to assume that empathy is never cultivated by choice or directed by
reason?

This seems implausible if we consult our own experiences. For most
humans, empathy is a quivering flame that is always near to being
extinguished by apathy or cynicism, or our desire to shield ourselves from
suffering. To allow the full experience of empathy is to open oneself up to
being moved by the joys but also the pains of others, and many of us
choose, often regrettably, to turn away from this experience— either by
avoiding circumstances that might bring it on, or by alter-ing our thoughts
('putting up a wal ') to create emotional distance, perhaps while
maintaining a façade of caring behavior. Even after opening ourselves to
empathy, we must continually choose whether to allow ourselves to remain
moved by the other's situation, or to withdraw emotionally and close
ourselves off. The latter can be psychologically necessary, even morally
justified— thus discerning deliberation is called for in the expression of
empathy, as with all virtues. Still, with
135
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
135
repetition of the choice to remain open, we may become more accustomed
to or even welcoming of the emotional weight.
Empathy as compassionate concern, then, must be exquisitely and quite
consciously cultivated if it is to endure and thrive rather than wither on the
vine.
Alasdair MacIntyre makes a similar point with respect to the virtue Aquinas
characterized as pity ( misericordia). MacIntyre reminds us that "our
affections and sympathies are generally, if not always, to a significant
degree in our control, at least in the longer run."35 According to
MacIntyre, not only is misericordia a virtue, it is one of the "virtues of
acknowledged dependence" most crucial to our flourishing as human
animals, one that Aristotle mistakenly devalues from his illusory standpoint
of masculine invulnerability and privilege.36

Had Aristotle realized this, he would have recognized empathy as a virtue
essential to a good life. For without appropriate empathy, we could not
participate in the highest forms of human fellowship, as even he admits. We
must make a distinction that Aristotle did not: between empathy as a
natural, uncultivated, and unchosen passion, and the deliberate enrichment
of this basic capacity into a moral virtue of empathic concern, one that
presupposes the natural capacity to be affectively moved by another but
requires intelligent choice and habituation to be properly directed and
reliably expressed. This distinction has the further advantage of resolving
the earlier puzzle: that is, how a bird can empathize (in the first,
uncultivated sense), while a bad person cannot (in the second, morally
cultivated sense).37 In short, Aristotle would likely have recognized
empathy as a virtue had he enjoyed a better view of the integration and co-
development of moral emotion and moral reason in human beings, as well
as the essential nature of human vulnerability in grounding ethical human
relations.
In Asian virtue traditions the virtue of empathy is more straightforward. In
the Confucian moral tradition, the virtue of shu is generally translated as
"empathy,"
"empathic reciprocity," "sympathetic concern," or "understanding,"
where 'understanding' means not detached intellection but the ability to
place oneself in the situation of another, to intuitively grasp not only what
they are going through but what it demands as a moral response.38 The
Confucian concept of the 'heart- mind'
( xin) does not artificially divide empathic feeling from moral intelligence,
and Confucians readily conceive of empathy as a cultivated virtue.39 In the
Analects, shu is described as "one word that can serve as a guide for one's
entire life," temper-ing the fixed requirements of duty or loyalty ( zhong).40
It thus plays an essential role in practical wisdom, by motivating the
discerning flexibility in the application of moral conventions that is
essential to the junzi's exemplary character.
Shu plays a critical role in Mengzi's account of virtue as well; he tells us
that "in seeking to be humane ( ren) ... there is nothing that comes closer to

it than working hard at shu."41 Here we see a parallel with our distinction
between empathy as a
136
1 3 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
natural, spontaneous passion and empathy as a deliberately cultivated
state. For while empathy is something that we must 'work hard' to acquire
as a virtue, Mengzi famously claimed that any normal human being will
experience compassionate horror at the sight of a child about to fall down a
well, and that "all human beings have a heart/ mind ( xin) that cannot bear
to see the sufferings of others."42 This "commiser-ating heart/ mind" is the
natural "seed" or "sprout" of empathic response from which the mature
virtue of shu may be cultivated, given proper habituation and effort.43
The concept of empathy also resonates strongly with two Buddhist virtue
concepts we encountered previously: compassion ( karunā) and sympathetic
joy ( muditā). Their pairing addresses an element of empathy too often
neglected in the West— namely, the moral importance of being moved by
the joys of others as well as their pains. As distinct from loving- kindness (
maitri), which is a universalized benevolence without the implication of
emotional attachment to a specific other, karunā and muditā imply the
emotional passivity of being affected by another's state of being. They
therefore convey the emotional concreteness required by our concept.
However, from a Buddhist standpoint, the more cultivated one is, the more
inclined one is to extend karunā and muditā without discrimination.
While it is still concrete beings who elicit the bodhisattva's empathic
concern, for her the distinctions of kinship and political affiliation are
increasingly irrelevant to her moral affections.44
Buddhist teachings are explicit that empathic concern is a virtue that must
be actively cultivated through moral practice. As Buddhist scholar Dale
Wright notes:

For the most part, compassion is something we learn to feel ... we cannot
feel compassion simply by deciding to feel it, or by telling ourselves that it
is our responsibility to feel it. We do, however, have the capacity to develop
compassion by cultivating our thoughts and emotions in ways that enable it.
This is the function of the practice of giving. Making generosity of
character
[ dāna] an explicit aim of self- cultivation, we sculpt our thoughts,
emotions, and dispositions in the direction of a particular form of human
excellence.45
Contrary to Mengzi, this suggests that whatever innate compassion or
empathy we have is extremely limited in its moral power. Yet even here,
natural empathy's appropriate expansion is seen as the primary goal of
moral practice.
Over time, such practice gradually habituates me to outward- facing
concerns and exposes me more intimately to others' sufferings and joys. For
a Buddhist, these gradually "soften" and eventually erase formerly hard
boundaries between self/
other, kin/ stranger, citizen/ alien, human/ animal, and other dualistic
gradations of empathic concern.46 Yet Confucians still hold these
distinctions as morally
137
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
137
significant. Thus we see that there is great cultural variance concerning
empathy's appropriate expression, but a strong case for it as a cultivated
moral virtue.
Is it however a technomoral virtue? In scholarly and media circles it is
common to lament the apparent paradox of worsening social isolation,

political apathy, and intercultural and religious hatreds in a world that,
thanks to information technology, has never been more connected.47
Whether the paradox is real or just a media projection, and if real, whether
and to what extent it implicates technology, are serious questions for future
empirical study. Most would agree, however, that the global information
commons has certainly not solved the problem of moral indifference to the
suffering or happiness of others. Such indifference perpetuates the greatest
obstacles to human flourishing: war; oppression; sexual, religious and
racial hatred and violence; abuse of women, children, and the elderly; and
widespread poverty, famine, disease, and environmental degradation.
Not only has digital culture not alleviated the world's empathy deficit, but
consider the controversial claim by some researchers that 'digital natives'
raised on information technology and new media are increasingly deficient
in empathic concern and/ or prone to pathological narcissism.48 Such
reports are embraced by many who feel increasing alarm at a society of
people constantly absorbed in their screens, declining to make eye contact
or respond to requests for assistance or companionship, even from friends
and family members. Were further empirical research to bear out some
version of the 'digital narcissism hypothesis,' it would certainly bode poorly
for the future of human flourishing in the absence of some effective
intervention. Of course, even if the hypothesis is correct, it asserts only a
correlation. It does not identify the cause of this supposed trend. Suspicions
that digital culture itself may be partly to blame are understandable, but at
this point far too broad and untethered to reliable data to be of much use.
Assuming for now that digital culture does not make us into narcissists, can
it facilitate the wider cultivation of empathy? After al , the information
society enables us to be virtual firsthand witnesses to human tragedies and
joys in a manner never before possible. That said, many lament new media's
allowance of emotionally low- investment acts of 'click- concern' and
'hashtag activism,' such as
'liking' or retweeting stories, as socially acceptable responses to events that
would normally call for more robust expressions of empathic concern and
care. Others worry that digital culture encourages a form of 'empathy
burnout,' where endless social media stories and video feeds of suffering

and tragedy, as well as the stream of joyous life events shared by our peers,
eventually lead to emotional overload, numbness, or resigned indifference.
Fortunately, we do not need to know if digital culture contributes to
declining human empathy in order to take action. We already know that
future human flourishing is unlikely without a great expansion of empathic
concern— for we
138
1 3 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
have said that the global empathy deficit is a major obstacle to human
flourishing today, and has been for millennia. The moral need for more
human empathy is not a novelty of the digital age. But the need is growing,
not just because some new habits of the information society might deplete
or inhibit empathy, but because the increasingly networked and
interdependent nature of the human family entails that we shall find
ourselves exposed to ever more circumstances that seem to call for it.
Consider the global soul- searching following the 2014 outbreak of Ebola
about which victims of the disease we ought to have been moved to take into
our care, and where, by whom, how soon, and how well; the same questions
arose in the Syrian refugee crisis of 2015. Determining who we ought to feel
empathy for, when, and to what degree, is a moral problem that is getting
ever harder, not easier, to get right. If human flourishing on an increasingly
networked and interdependent planet is going to be virtually impossible
without the broader cultivation of empathy as a virtue, then we had better
start working a lot harder at it.
Chapters 7, 8, and 9 take a closer look at how we might begin to do this in
light of the unique challenges for technomoral empathy posed by new
media, pervasive digital surveillance, and advanced robotics.
6.8 Care: Loving Service to Others
[Related Virtues: Generosity, Love, Service, Charity]

Now we come to a virtue with no perfect equivalent in classical traditions,
though it has close relatives in Christian virtues such as love and charity.
Another near analogue is the cardinal Confucian virtue of ren, not in its
broader sense as
'complete virtue' but in its narrower meaning of 'humane benevolence': a
reliable tendency to actively foster the good of others to whom one is bound
by familial or political ties. In Buddhism the virtue closest to what is meant
by 'care' is dāna, usually translated as 'generosity.' As one of the Six
Perfections of character in the Mahāyāna tradition, dāna expresses itself in
habits of material and spiritual giving, which simultaneously foster
liberation from personal attachments and deep concern for the welfare of
others.49 The virtue of care corresponds nearly to al , but exactly to none of
these classical concepts, although the Confucian virtue of ren may be
nearest, due to its foundation in the moral responsibilities of familial
love.50 The concept of care as a virtue is also associated with the late-20th-
century emergence of care ethics, an approach rooted in feminist critiques
of traditional rights- based theories of ethics.51
We will define technomoral care provisionally as a skillful, attentive,
responsible, and emotionally responsive disposition to personally meet the
needs of those with whom we share our technosocial environment. Care is
closely related to the virtue of
139
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
139
empathy as compassionate concern, yet these virtues are not the same.
Someone may be morally moved by empathy to alleviate another's suffering
but lack the moral skill, knowledge, or resources to offer effective care—
indeed this is a key reason why charitable organizations and caring
professions exist, in order that we may enable others to care for those for
whom we empathize or sympathize but are ill- positioned to care ourselves.
Conversely, a virtuous person's exercise of moral care need not, in every
case or context, be motivated by immediate empathic concern. Caring

virtue can be exercised toward beings physiologically incapable of suffering
or joy, or in ways that are routine rather than provoked by immediate
compassion.
However, there is a sense in which virtuous care, even when not attended by
immediate experiences of empathic concern, must still be motivated by a
general feeling for the importance of loving service to others. Skillful
caring practices and dispositions are often thought to grow out of the
labors of maternal, paternal, and filial care; hence the view of many care
ethicists that the common experience of women as primary family
caregivers is an especially relevant source of ethical understanding. There
is much debate about whether an ethics of care should be subsumed under a
more encompassing framework of virtue ethics, or whether it represents a
theoretically independent way of thinking about ethics.52 This book takes
the former view; care may well be a cardinal virtue, but it is not clear that
all other virtues can be satisfactorily defined as extensions of a caring
disposition.
What special relevance does the virtue of care have to contemporary
technosocial life? Why have we chosen it as a technomoral virtue?
Consider how systems of social and economic privilege have long allowed
individuals to divest themselves of the responsibility for caring practices by
delegating these responsibilities to hired substitutes or, increasingly, by
using technology to meet needs that previously could only be met by the
active labor of human caregivers. On care ethicist Joan Tronto's view,
human beings who enjoy such privilege risk becoming less and less capable
of competent care, less emotionally comfortable with close proximity to
vulnerability and weakness, less attentive and responsive to need, and less
responsible for themselves and others.53 Insofar as the practice of skillful
caring is a formative experience in cultivating the moral self, this
degradation of care is potentially devastating to our collective flourishing.
Is the use of technology to relieve us of labors and burdens a bad thing?
Few would object to the modern use of cranes to lift and position massive
objects, mechanical filters to clean wastewater, or to the invention of the
cotton gin. Future technological innovations will continue to reduce human
exposure to the 'three D's': work that is

'dul , dirty, and/ or dangerous.' Yet the work of human caring can itself be
dul , dirty, and even dangerous; from the rocking of a crying child to the
changing of an aging parent's diaper to the efforts of a medic or aid worker
in a war zone. Technology promises relief of these labors too; many middle-
class parents today already own a
140
14 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
mechanical rocking cradle or swing to soothe their infant, and the predicted
rise of
'carebots' may soon allow Dad's or Junior's diaper to be discreetly changed
by a robot.
Likewise, military research agencies such as the United States' DARPA have
funded research into robotic field medics, and NGO's are looking to use
cheap drone aircraft to safely deliver food and medicine to war- torn
villages.
It is hardly necessary to point out that less exhausted and stressed parents,
fewer wounded medics, and fewer aid- workers taken hostage by militant
warlords would all be good things. However, if we recall the view of care
ethicists that we become moral selves largely by teaching ourselves to
actively respond to and meet the needs of others, we see the attendant moral
cost of a trend toward expanding technological surrogates for human
caring. Without intimate and repeated exposure to our mutual dependence,
vulnerability, weakness, concern, and gratitude for one another, it is
unclear how we can cultivate our moral selves.54 Even Aristotle, whose
moral point of view is famously deficient in its acknowledgment of
'feminine' virtues and human vulnerability, notes that moral excellence and
flourishing requires the opportunity to meet the needs of others, not in
distant or mediated acts of assistance but in close relations such as those of
friendship.55

Yet an enriched understanding of 21st century care must intelligently
incorporate the assistance of technology rather than dismiss it out of hand;
will a caring person of exemplary practical wisdom refuse the opportunity
to deliver lifesaving medicine or food by drone simply because it is not
given with the touch of a hand?
Is such a delivery that much less intimate in its care than having boxes of
food and medicine shoved from the back of an aid truck as it moves on to
the next village?
In each of the chapters that constitute Part III of this book, we will take
great care not to reflexively regard emerging technologies as the enemy of
caring virtue, but instead to consider how emerging technologies can
promote human flourishing by being successfully integrated within our
caring practices. That said, the danger remains that our current cultural
trajectory will bypass this integration, and instead seek only the most
technologically expedient routes for meeting others' needs without concern
for our moral need to cultivate ourselves as fully caring persons.
This delicate relationship between emerging technologies and technomoral
care will be the central focus of chapter 9's treatment of social robotics.
6.9 Civility: Making Common Cause
[Related Virtues: Respect, Tolerance,
Engagement, Friendship]
Civility has close associations with both classical and contemporary virtue
concepts.56 Yet the challenges of 21st century life demand a new
conception of
141
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
141

technomoral civility. Provisionally, let us define this as a sincere disposition
to live well with one's fellow citizens of a globally networked information
society: to collectively and wisely deliberate about matters of local,
national, and global policy and political action; to communicate, entertain,
and defend our distinct conceptions of the good life; and to work
cooperatively toward those goods of technosocial life that we seek and
expect to share with others. It is a disposition to 'make common cause'
with all those with whom our fates are now technosocially intertwined.
This virtue is much more demanding than what the narrow use of the
English term 'civility' implies, namely self- restrained and polite
engagement. Technomoral civility is a far more robust form of cosmopolitan
civic- mindedness, a reliably and intelligently expressed disposition to value
communal ethical life in a global technosocial context and to act
accordingly. A habit of mere politeness does not entail this virtue, for a
person who wishes that she did not have to suffer the political opinions of
others, or invite their input, or share the goods of technosocial life with
them, may remain politely 'civil' if behaving rudely or obstinately toward
them is likely to frustrate her own aims. Genuine technomoral civility would
ob-viate such a strategy: I would remain polite precisely because my
sincere wish is to construct and share the good life with others in my world.
And while the virtue of civility often involves politeness, this is a defeasible
relation. In some cases, the aims of technomoral civility may necessitate
behavior that is conventionally impolite, but essential to the vitality of
deeper civic connections.
Civility resonates strongly with the Confucian concept of ren in its political
context— that is, the extension beyond the biological family of humane
benevolence toward others in one's political community. As we noted in
chapter 5, for Confucians civic virtue retains the emotional tones of love,
respect, and care that mark familial bonds, although political affections
must be appropriately ta-pered so as not to obscure the special priority of
family life. In Buddhist ethics civic virtue is less explicit, insofar as it is
folded into broader moral obligations to others. As we noted in chapter 5,
the universality of Buddhist benevolence aims to foster a fundamental
transformation and enlargement of one's sense of who counts as fellows of

one's moral community. Thus on the one hand, Buddhism would seem to
license the movement toward a more cosmopolitan, global conception of
civility such as the one we have articulated. Yet our conception would not
go far enough for a Buddhist. While technomoral empathy and care can
and should be extended well beyond civic and even human circles, civility is
necessarily restricted in scope to those with whom we can deliberate about,
share conceptions of, and engage in cooperative activity to together attain
the good life.
In this respect our concept of civility remains close to Aristotle's. Aristotle
emphasizes the importance of civic friendship ( philia politikē) in the
Nicomachean Ethics and in the Politics, noting that it "seems to hold states
together, and
142
14 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
lawgivers seem to care for it more than justice."57 Much has been written
about the relationship between civic friendship and other forms of
friendship in Aristotle; less has been written about how Aristotle's notion of
civic friendship might apply to contemporary political life. A likely reason is
the assumption that Aristotle's notion of civic friendship has limited
application to modern liberal societies; after al , his notion is rooted in a
classical conception of political flourishing in which civic friendship can be
predicated on the close intimacies of a shared life ( suzên) in near proximity
with citizens with whom we have much in common.58
How could this notion possibly carry over to large liberal states predicated
on tolerance of cultural diversity and individual pursuits, much less to a
globally networked planet?
Among those who have explored this question is Sibyl Schwarzenbach, who
argues that civic friendship is in fact essential to the functioning of liberal
states.

She asserts that much of the work of civic friendship that holds liberal
states together is the politically invisible work of women who habitually
reproduce relationships of civic affection through practices of care.59
Moreover, she points out an important and often sidelined dimension of
Aristotle's concept of philia politikē: namely, that it involves not only
citizens' concern for one another's welfare, but more specifically a concern
for one another's character. That is, "citizens of the best polis care about
what 'kind of persons' their fellow citizens are."60 They do this not merely
as a matter of instrumental advantage (i.e., because vicious neighbors pose
a threat), but because they see intrinsic value in sharing life with
'good people.'61
Schwarzenbach also notes the importance for civic friendship of the mutual
trust and goodwill secured by social justice or fairness, which supports a
public perception that all are "in this together."62 On Schwarzenbach's
view, this has clear implications even for large liberal states. She notes that
nothing in Aristotle's account requires that I actually know or interact with
al , or even most, of my civic friends. What it does require of each citizen is
that he be "informed" about the nature, history, and standard of living of
citizens in other parts of the state, and be actively "concerned" about their
welfare.63 A citizen shows this concern by educating himself about their
local hardships (malnutrition, poverty, floods, tornadoes, disease); being
supportive of collective assistance (not begrudging the effective use of his
tax dol ars for their aid); and being willing to perform direct public service
as appropriate. Cultivating such sentiments and habits would be an
essential part of the virtue of technomoral civility.
One might question how such a virtue can be compatible with the
pluralistic norms of toleration and individualism that define modern liberal
societies. How can these cohere with a civic virtue that, as we have said
above, entails a strong interest in the moral character of one's fellow
citizens? Whose moral character?
143
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future

143
Which cultural norms of human excellence shall prevail? Schwarzenbach's
answer is that in a tolerant liberal society, civic virtue no longer entails a
special interest in the private morality of others, but rather a narrower
interest in their public moral character. That is, a civil person will have a
strong interest in supporting and maintaining her fellow citizens' capacities
for excellence in public deliberation and action. For this only a shared
legal system and constitution, effective and widespread civic education, and
shared public norms of mutual goodwill, concern, and toleration would
appear to be essential.64
When we think on a global scale, many of these commonalities are lacking
or infeasible, but is it unreasonable to think that some minimal set of norms
could emerge for global technosocial discourse and action? Don't we
already have widely shared ideas of who are the worst civic actors on this
stage— those who are least capable, cooperative and expressive of a desire
to enjoy the goods of technosocial life together? If we have sufficient
exemplary cases to generate a roughly shared concept of global civic vice,
why think it impossible to cultivate a rough sense of global civic virtue— a
state of public moral character expressed by those international actors who
are most admirable, reasonable and reliable in their cooperative
technosocial endeavors? Let us not forget that while humans are not among
the most cooperatively inclined creatures, we are far from the least.
From the International Space Station to the Large Hadron Col ider to the
near-eradication of polio, we are clearly animals capable of effective,
extended, and complex international cooperation on a massive scale when
we are sufficiently motivated. We demonstrably do not lack the ability to
make common cause with others, even on a global scale. We do lack the
consistent will.
Unfortunately, contemporary technosocial life is not reliably conducive to
the formation of civic will, nor to the social, economic, and political justice
that it presupposes. As Schwarzenbach notes, contemporary liberal states
do not reliably and explicitly support those acts of public care that would
constitute the expression of civility among a people. Instead, she argues, the
norms of social and political life are presently still oriented primarily

toward production of goods and services rather than reproduction of
supportive civic ties and friendships. They are also, she claims, still
reflective of a distorted view of caring practices that sees these as
exclusively personal and domestic, rather than public and political.65 She
suggests that this was in fact not the view of Aristotle, who repeatedly spoke
in the Ethics and the Politics of care ( epimeleia) and of public or common
care in particular ( koinon epimelein).66
Indeed many if not all of the technomoral virtues we have named fit
together as aspects of a potentially public technomoral character conducive
to flourishing in a globally networked society. The cultivation of this
character is arguably an essential precondition of the successful pursuit of
the technomoral goods of global
144
14 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
human security, community, understanding, wisdom, and justice highlighted
in chapter 2. Unfortunately, our present condition is one of widening
political and economic inequality in low- and high- tech societies alike, as
well as a disturbing coarsening and fragmentation of civic discourse at all
levels. The handwringing of political and media experts has done little to
mitigate civility's decline, as we can see on Twitter, political talk shows,
blogs, and news sites (many of which have famously had to disable their
online comments sections as a result.) A global atmosphere of civic
insecurity and distrust has been amplified by recent revelations about
massive data collection, cyberespionage, and cybersabotage by
governments, corporations, and other non- state actors.
At the same time, emerging technologies have a clear potential to foster the
rekindling of civility and the skills of making common cause. Social media
are powerful tools for stimulating our interest in the character, history, and
welfare of distant others. They can help us to educate ourselves about
hardships others in our local or global community have faced. For
example, public education regarding the hardships faced by lesbian,

bisexual, gay, and transgender persons has been greatly furthered by social
media campaigns such as the "It Gets Better" project, as well as many
smaller- scale uses of technology to convey the stories of LGBT
people. These are often credited with contributing to a surprisingly rapid
boost in public support for LGBT rights in the United States and other
countries. Even surveillance technologies can foster civility by provoking
public outrage and joint action against forms of pervasive and profound
injustice that these technologies make newly visible. In recent years such
tools have been used to motivate a broad range of civic actions against the
surreptitious abuse of racial minorities, women, the homeless, children, the
elderly, the disabled, and other vulnerable populations.
ICTs and new media also offer newly expedient means of rendering global
assistance to those whose needs have become known; consider the surges in
online donations to victims of earthquakes, typhoons, and floods, or the
phenomenon of 'crowdfunding' via sites like Kiva and others that finance
small local projects around the world for social benefit. For better or for
worse, social media are also used as means of collectively policing
emerging norms of global public character; consider the 2015 Internet
uproar over the illegal killing of a lion in Zimbabwe by a Minnesota
dentist; or the 2013 'Tweet heard 'round the world' of Justine Sacco, the
American public relations executive whose Twitter joke about African AIDS
victims just prior to getting on a plane to Johannesburg ignited a gleeful
Internet countdown to her inevitable firing and global humiliation,
facilitated by the hashtag #HasJustineLandedYet. Such practices are all too
often infected with the vices of vigilantism, including malice and reckless
disregard, and have a long way to go to become morally mature. Yet for all
their immaturity they are gestures of collective desire for a more civil, just,
and caring global society.
145
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
145

Chapters 7 and 8 will further examine the complexity of emerging
interactions between new social media, surveillance technologies, and the
cultivation of civility in technomoral life.
6.10 Flexibility: Skillful Adaptation to Change
[Related Virtues: Patience, Forbearance,
Tolerance, Equanimity, Mercy]
'Flexibility' is a funny name for a virtue. When we think of someone who is
'morally flexible,' we usually mean someone wholly lacking in virtue! Yet
the reader will recall that flexibility was an important characteristic of the
morally expert person in Aristotelian, Confucian, and Buddhist virtue
traditions, and will not be wholly surprised to see it appear as a
technomoral virtue. In the technomoral context, let us provisionally define it
as a reliable and skillful disposition to modulate action, belief, and feeling
as called for by novel, unpredictable, frustrating, or unstable technosocial
conditions. This virtue is critical to our ability to cope with acute
technosocial opacity.
Flexibility is closely related to other moral virtues, including patience or
forbearance. Aristotle defines patience ( praotes) as a "slowness to anger";
more broadly, a disposition to moderately forbear frustration,
disappointment, injury, or insult (though extreme forbearance would be
deficient, since there are things which will make a just and virtuous man
rightfully angry.)67 Another trait related to flexibility is tolerance of the
shortcomings of others. As we saw in chapter 4, Kongzi was described as
wholly free of the vice of rigidity or intolerance ( gu).68
As he says in explaining his own willingness to be employed by an imperfect
minister, the junzi is "so hard that grinding will not wear him down, so pure
that dyeing will not stain him black."69 The virtuous person can afford to
be flexible and tolerant when particular circumstances warrant it, without
becoming morally compromised himself. Thus flexibility as a virtue is not
opposed to integrity or moral uprightness— it is enabled by them.

Like Aristotle, however, Kongzi thought this virtue had limits; as shown by
his firm rejection of the idea of repaying injury with kindness. He asks,
"With what, then, would one repay kindness?" Instead, he suggests, one
should repay injury with "uprightness," and repay kindness with
kindness.70 Kongzi rejects any form of flexibility that indulges the vicious
rather than leading them toward rightness, or that indicates an
unwillingness to make moral distinctions. Thus for both Aristotle and
Kongzi, flexibility is a virtue that must remain attuned to and upholding of
the correct moral standard, even if the manner in which this is done must be
patient, sensitive to circumstances, and generous in spirit.
146
14 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Buddhist virtue ethics has its own virtue of flexible tolerance, patience, or
forbearance: ksānti, one of the Six Perfections of character in the
Mahāyāna tradition. Ksānti reflects a disposition to patiently endure
suffering, including injuries to body or ego caused by others, and to endure
without fear or anger those new, truer perceptions of reality to which
Buddhist practice exposes one.71 The Mahāyāna poet Śāntideva says that
"no spiritual practice is equal to tolerance ( ksānti)."72 This is because the
experience of anger is intrinsically anathema to mental clarity and
enlightened perception; in this way, the exemplary Buddhist practitioner
must be far less inclined to it than the Aristotelian phronimos, in whom
praotes makes room for appropriate, intelligent, and measured anger. Even
the Confucian junzi will probably be less flexible and patient than the
Buddhist sage, though he will eschew the volatility of anger for something
more like sternness.
Ksānti adds an important new dimension of flexibility, beyond mere
tolerance for imperfect people. Ksānti requires that one also be flexible
enough to accommodate new and uncomfortable truths or realities. One
must not only be able to bend for others when appropriate, but also to bend
to newly revealed or emerging dimensions of the world. This enables that
practice of upāya kaushalya or 'skillful means' encountered in chapter 5,

which permits the morally expert Buddhist to adapt to the uncommon moral
reality of a given situation in ways that may require the modulation or even
suspension of the moral conventions of śīla. We saw this flexibility in
Aristotle as well, where practical wisdom enables prudential judgments
when standing moral conventions are inadequate.
Likewise, Confucians eschew rigidity and praise flexibility in adapting to
uncommon dimensions of moral life— as in Mengzi's case of the man who
must not let ritual propriety stop him from laying hands on his brother's
drowning wife.
Classical virtue traditions value flexibility as a way to honor moral truth,
that which is based on reality rather than delusion. It grants no license to
yield to falsehoods or morally alien norms. Here we confront the boundary
between classical and liberal notions of tolerance, and the 'hard problem'
for cultivating a flexible public technomoral character. As we have noted,
emerging technologies from global transportation networks to ICTs
increase our exposure to a plurality of conceptions of the good life, many of
which are incommensurable with one another in part or in whole. Mere
exposure to such conflicts is nothing new. The existence of incompatible
systems of moral life was a well- known and widely discussed classical
phenomenon; Confucian literature reflects on the junzi's potential
engagement with 'barbarian' tribes, and Aristotle reflects on the starkly
different value- conceptions expressed in the political constitutions of
Athens and Sparta— not to mention the vast moral distance he perceived
between Greek and non- Greek ways of life. The truly novel challenge of
our
147
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
147
contemporary technosocial environment is the extent to which 21st century
technology networks— the speed, range, and power of which have grown by
many orders of magnitude in mere decades— ensure the radical and

virtually irreversible interdependence of these morally incommensurable
cultures and communities.
The result is a qualitative shift in the problem of moral and cultural
diversity. Although our species has been dangerously slow to realize it, the
stakes are no longer limited to our ability to form temporary al iances
against hostile political actors, nor to our short- term economic
productivity and access to capital in a global financial system. The extent of
our new interdependence even goes beyond the increasingly global
character of scientific, literary, and artistic endeavors, or our access to
worldwide information networks and an encompassing
'Internet of things.' Today our access to even the most basic necessities of
biological existence— breathable air, clean water, minerals, protein- rich
foods, dry land, and a livable climate— depends inextricably upon the
technosocial practices, beliefs, and attitudes of global others.
Given this shift, the disposition to be flexible only with those with whom we
share a distinctive conception of the good life is no longer viable. Not even
the liberal mantra 'live and let live' captures the newly flexible disposition
we need to cultivate if we are to continue to flourish as a species; for that
outdated mantra assumes that we still have the practical luxury of leaving
others to their own devices, and just staying out of their way. Instead, we
face a changed world in which our individual and local fates are largely
conditioned by what humans collectively and globally practice. The good
life cannot be reliably secured for any of us without the global coordination
of practically wise courses of technosocial action that unfold in a stable
and intelligently guided manner over the comparatively long-term, in many
cases on timescales significantly longer than the average human lifespan.
Yet we continue to live out our individual lives in local communities
grounded in differently sedimented histories of moral meaning and value.
What role can a new, technomoral virtue of flexibility play in all of this?
At the start of this section, we defined technomoral flexibility as a reliable
and skillful disposition to modulate action, belief, and feeling as called for
by novel, unpredictable, frustrating, or unstable technosocial conditions.
We now add that today, this entails something not seen as virtuous by
classical traditions: an intelligent and habituated disposition to forbear

those cultural value- systems and beliefs that do not significantly impair the
ability of their possessors to cultivate and exercise practical wisdom in
matters of global technosocial concern. In chapter 6
we have been building up a constellation of virtues that can together
constitute global public character, and technomoral flexibility is a critical
part of it.
Thus the capacity for global technomoral agency is one plausible criterion
for deciding which differences in cultural norms warrant mutual
forbearance in the
148
14 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
interests of global civility and flourishing, and which norms cannot safely
be tolerated because they are objectively inimical to such agency and thus
to the flourishing of our species and planet. For example, any local
conception of 'feminine virtue'
that is incompatible with the education or civic visibility of women is
globally intolerable on this criterion. Women shape the technosocial
practices and habits of every culture— thus their systematic exclusion from
deliberative processes that aim to prudently guide such practices is globally
self- defeating. Likewise, a cultural norm that enables only a small wealthy
or technocratic elite to acquire and exercise the virtues of public character
is globally intolerable; for again, it is entire peoples, not simply the
powerful few, who carry out in daily life the technosocial practices and
habits that must now be intelligently steered. Global technosocial policy
created without robust stakeholder input and deliberative participation will
be grossly ineffective at best and harmful at worst, not to mention
profoundly unjust. We can find evidence of this on a smaller scale in the
litany of ineffective or counterproductive laws regulating the Internet that
have been passed by legislative powers lacking either the technical

expertise or the expansive user knowledge base needed to craft a prudent
law governing the Internet.
There are of course many other, arguably stronger, moral reasons not to
tolerate the systematic disenfranchisement of women or the poor. My point
is simply that the emerging need for the cultivation of global technomoral
agency and wisdom gives us all a new incentive to push back on those who
would inhibit that cultivation among their people. In contrast, the parties to
a cultural disagreement about whether individual data privacy is an
inviolable human right (a view widely held in the European Union) or a
selfish luxury (a common view in some East Asian countries) can afford to
acknowledge and at least temporarily forbear these philosophical
differences in the interests of good faith negotiations of international
agreements and global technology standards that necessarily affect the
personal privacy of their peoples. Here, flexibility makes room for diverse
cultural interests and values to have a voice in the debate, without the
implication that any compromise ultimately reached decides the underlying
value question or declares invalid the sincerely held value commitments of
any particular group.
We must therefore aim to cultivate technomoral flexibility, a child of the
liberal virtue of tolerance that aims to enable the co- flourishing of diverse
human societies. Yet unlike a version of liberal tolerance that merely
counsels us to 'live and let live,' technomoral flexibility requires that we
cultivate a global capacity to actively deliberate together and agree upon
prudent courses of technosocial action, even with people whose conceptions
of the good life vary substantially from our own. This will produce
inevitable conflict, insofar as we may disagree on where the human ship
should be heading, so to speak. The defining feature of our present
technosocial reality, however, and the one that distinguishes it from
149
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
149

the liberal dilemma, is that no one's community can choose to 'get off the
ship.'
Our immediate fates are now inextricably interlinked with those of the other
passengers. In each of the remaining chapters we will have an opportunity
to reflect on the challenges of technomoral flexibility in an age of new
media, surveillance, robotics, and human enhancement technology.
6.11 Perspective: Holding on to the Moral Whole
[Related Virtues: Discernment, Attention, Understanding]
The notion of moral perspective as a virtue has no precise classical
analogue.
Proper moral perspective is implied by the more comprehensive virtue of
practical wisdom ( phronēsis) in Aristotle, as well as by the virtue of
wisdom or 'intelligent awareness' ( zhi) in Confucian ethics, and the
concept of wisdom ( prajñā) in Buddhism. Yet it also has associations with
the perceptual faculties of moral attention we discussed in chapter 4. Moral
perspective can be roughly defined as a reliable disposition to attend to,
discern, and understand moral phenomena as meaningful parts of a moral
whole. The technosocial applications of moral perspective will hold our
interest here, but because moral perspective is holistic by definition, its
exercise cannot be limited to narrowly technosocial phenomena.
Comparative Buddhist scholar Nicolas Bommarito has developed a helpful
account of moral perspective as an outlook that grounds familiar virtues
such as patience and modesty. In his discussion of the perceptual dimension
of Buddhist patience ( ksānti), Bommarito describes moral perspective as
entailing not a personalized outlook on the world and its value (in the way
an English speaker might say
"well, that's my perspective,") but rather a morally proper "sense of
scale."73 For example, this scale is engaged when I react patiently to the
delayed boarding of my flight because reading on my laptop about the one
that just crashed into the ocean has

"given me some perspective." Moral perspective helps us to estimate the
relative importance of competing values and desires and offers us "a sense
of our place in a larger context," as when a soldier might say, "When I see
that photo of my unit, it gives me some perspective and I feel I'm part of
something more important than myself."74
Moral perspective allows me to see how my own desire at a given moment
(say, my desire to board 'my' flight sooner) is more properly scaled within a
holistic picture of desires and values that I hold in view. It is this 'holding in
view'
that is the exercise of moral perspective. In our example, a virtuous person
would be able to hold in view her own standing desire not to be a selfish,
impatient, or rude person, as well as the desires and values of the equally
frustrated gate agent and fellow passengers, and the mechanics and crew
who rightly value safety over on- time departures. Moral perspective is an
essential disposition of a virtuous
150
15 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
person; I cannot be a patient, honest, compassionate, or just person unless I
act in these ways fairly reliably, and it does not seem that I will be able to
do so unless I can reliably maintain moral perspective when I think and act.
As Bommarito emphasizes, keeping moral perspective is a lot harder than
retaining moral knowledge. I can intellectually know and believe that my
needs and desires are not all that special or important in the 'big picture,'
but that doesn't mean that I will actually be able to see the world in that
light when my desires are activated.75
Yet my perspective does need to be cognitively successful— that is,
responsible to the reality of the moral whole it keeps in mind. For example,
Bommarito notes that a person who is characteristically meek and never
puts her needs above those of others is not virtuous, because she fails to

keep in proper perspective those needs and desires of hers which really are
important in her moral environment.76
Such a person might risk her own physical safety just to avoid
inconveniencing or irritating a close relative, and this would be the vice of
servility, not virtue.
At the end of chapter 5 we discussed those Buddhist exercises in
imaginative
'perspective- taking' that foster the moral practice of appropriately
extending empathic concern. We also referred to other, secular techniques
of narrative and artistic expression as ways of stretching our sense of the
moral whole; of seeing and 'holding in view' more of the important
relations, obligations, and interdependencies between ourselves and others;
of conceiving and feeling the moral meaning of others' needs, desires, and
interests alongside our own. Thus a reliable disposition to hold an
appropriate moral perspective is, in addition to enabling other virtues, a
virtue that can be deliberately cultivated in its own right.
Still, what is a proper moral perspective? Doesn't this presuppose a single
correct view of moral reality, one true scale by which the importance of
ours and others' desires and interests should be judged? Isn't this obviously
incompatible with the global ethical pluralism we have endorsed? Yes, but
really no. Yes, because there is far more widespread agreement about moral
scales than we acknowledge. The clinical sociopath's moral scale will be
agreed to be wildly off by the vast majority of informed judges. So will the
pathological narcissist's. So will the person who throws violent tantrums at
gate agents whenever 'her' flight gets delayed, who quietly and knowingly
dumps gallons of toxic sludge into a local stream rather than taking it for
safe disposal, or who knowingly builds a grade school with substandard
concrete in order to skim a few extra bucks. While the consensus will never
be perfect, even locally, there is a well- established global sense of proper
moral perspective and a large number of human behaviors and judgments
widely regarded as contrary to it.
And yet, despite all this agreement, there are individual, local, and cultural
differences in moral perspective that cannot be elided, and that we arguably

should not merely tolerate, but welcome. At the finest levels of
discrimination there is no
151
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
151
single true scale of desires, values, and interests, nor need there be in order
for us to have widely shared, even globally resonant conceptions of virtue.
All we need for the latter is an understanding of what habits are generally
conducive to human self- cultivation, which material and technosocial
conditions are most essential to our flourishing together as a global and
interdependent human family, and which among our various visions of the
good life are consistent with that end. What, then, is the distinctly
technomoral significance of the virtue of moral perspective?
Our growing interdependence in a networked world entails that we will
confront more and more choices the implications of which are global in
scope. The need for proper moral perspective becomes ever more apparent
as our actions and their consequences magnify in scale; as the potential
impact of our technosocial choices widens, the desires, values, and interests
that come into view become more numerous and more challenging for us to
rank. Such considerations are of far greater moral significance than ever
before, up to and including the immediate and long-term survival and
vitality of ours and other species— even the ability of the planet to support
life at al . In the 21st century, the job of keeping proper moral perspective is
both more difficult, and more important, than it has ever been.
Moreover, emerging technologies offer ever- new ways to both undermine
and enrich our moral perspective. From the rise of the ubiquitous 'selfie'
enabling grinning self- celebrations at funerals and, notoriously, even
concentration camps, to self- tracking apps that allow you to obsess over
everything from the number of steps you take in a day to the number of
people who 'like' your cat photos, technosocial life can make our
perspective seem suffocatingly smal . Yet it can also be used as a tool to
enlarge our moral perspective with humor— as with the widely popular

Twitter hashtag lampooning #firstworldproblems— or with intimacy, as
with the many uses of social media and even digital surveillance to make
the experiences, desires, and interests of marginalized peoples and classes
globally visible and more immediately visceral. Our aim in Part III will be
to take a closer look at how greater moral perspective might improve our
use of these and other technologies, and in turn how the ethical use of
emerging technologies might aid us in our efforts to enlarge and enrich our
moral perspective.
6.12 Magnanimity: Moral Leadership
and Nobility of Spirit
[Related Virtues: Equanimity, Courage, Ambition]
The Aristotelian virtue of magnanimity, or megalopsuchia (greatness of soul
or spirit), has been the object of much modern critical scorn. It is often
associated with an entitled sense of political and personal superiority, and
the idea that a
152
15 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
virtuous person ought to believe and feel himself 'above' the troubles and
concerns of others. Understood in this sense, we might see magnanimity as
inimical to the technomoral virtues of justice, empathy, care, civility, and
perspective we highlighted above, and thus a better candidate for a
technomoral vice. So what should the reader make of its presence here?
First, we should note that while the characterization given above might well
have described some members of the Athenian polis that Aristotle greatly
admired, this would be the result of a failure by Aristotle to correctly apply
his own concept. First, his concept of magnanimity or 'greatness' is an
explicitly moral one, thus excluding political and economic status as
conditions of its satisfaction, except insofar as in a particular society these

happen to be contingent prerequisites for one's moral development (as
Aristotle thought some degree of material and political fortune were). The
point here is that an inflated sense of superiority, or one that is based on
one's political or economic status rather than one's character, is by
definition contrary to the virtue of magnanimity. Only a morally excellent
person who has cultivated virtue to an exceptional degree (is unusually just,
honest, wise, etc.) can be a megalopsuchos ('great- souled man').
Furthermore, the sense in which the 'great- souled' or magnanimous person
is 'above' the common person is chiefly concerned with their lack of
pettiness— their unwillingness to defile their virtue by scrabbling in the dirt
over trivial advantages, honors, titles, prizes, or other ego- boosting trifles.
The great- souled person does not ignore these things because he wishes to
be above others, rather he is above others just because he tends to ignore
these things. The things the great- souled person values are more valuable.
The magnanimous person is the one who has a sense of nobility and self-
worth founded in a lifetime of moral and social efforts rather than relatively
meaningless zero- sum contests of ego. The magnanimous person can afford
to be generous in spirit where others are not. He can absorb a petty insult
without having to repay it.
He can warmly greet the person who has pretended not to notice his arrival.
He can let the other car swoop into 'his' parking space at the mall without
responding like a rabid dog.
Of course there is no doubt that Aristotle's conception of magnanimity is
rid-dled with indefensible gender, ethnic, and class bias. Property- owning
Greek men could be great- souled. Women, Persians, and slaves could not.
It is also true that ancient Greek culture would have fostered specific acts of
magnanimity that many contemporary citizens of more egalitarian societies
would rightly find obnoxious or obscene. But does that make a
contemporary re- conception of the 'great- souled'
or magnanimous person incoherent? I hope my readers will admit that, no
matter how unenlightened Greek thinkers may have been on the subject of
who can or cannot qualify as magnanimous, they were right in this respect:
there is much to

153
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
153
admire in a person whose ego is neither a giant sucking black hole of need,
nor packed to the brim with a bunch of morally vacuous honors and
'successes.'
A similar sense of moral nobility is embodied in the Confucian ideal of the
junzi, who is repeatedly described as above pettiness and who neither
overestimates nor undervalues his moral worth. In Buddhism the notion is
more problematic, as the very concept of 'self- worth' or being 'great in
soul' is metaphysically misleading and hence morally destructive. Yet there
is a behavioral equivalent of magnanimity in the Buddhist image of the
exemplary person, who is certainly
'above' petty concerns and ego contests, and who has cultivated the moral
resources to absorb the pettiness of others without being ruffled or moved
from calm equanimity ( upeksā).
What, then, is the relevance of this classical ideal for 21st century life?
Who talks or thinks about being 'noble' any more? This is precisely my
point.
Magnanimity enables and encourages moral ambition and moral
leadership, two things sorely lacking in our contemporary technosocial
milieu. Moral ambition can be described as the ability to 'think big' in one's
moral aims. The magnanimous, those with justified moral ambition, are
able to go beyond what most of us can afford in the moral realm (often little
more than 'I'm going to try to be slightly less of a selfish jerk today.') The
magnanimous can pursue and lead others in moral projects that require
enduring courage, deep wisdom, expansive empathy, extraordinary care,
and tolerance for great frustration and conflict— because they have
successfully cultivated these virtues as resources for such projects.

Of course most who view themselves as great moral leaders more likely
suffer from a self- aggrandizing messiah complex, one reason that many of
us regard anyone who identifies himself as a moral beacon with
understandable suspicion.
Nor is anyone born or destined to be great- souled, although some people's
native psychology or life circumstances might offer more favorable
conditions for extraordinary moral development. Still, those who have
managed to cultivate themselves well can take on, in concert with others,
projects that would be impossibly daunting for the morally average person
to lead: fostering peace and goodwill between warring groups with a
lengthy record of mutual atrocities; transforming a whole culture's
prejudices about a despised ethnic group, women, or LGBT persons; ending
practices of slavery or the poaching of wild animals. Persons of ordinary
moral character can and should contribute much to these aims, and the vast
majority of us involved in such efforts are just morally ordinary people
doing our best, and getting out when the frustrations and disappointments
become too much for us to bear. Yet it is hard to see how such projects can
be reliably sustained and coordinated over the long- term without the moral
energies of the truly magnanimous.
The magnanimous are those who have rightly earned the moral trust of
others, who can inspire, guide, mentor, and lead the rest of us at least
somewhere in the
154
15 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
vicinity of the good. It is not an unrealistic ideal. There have been many
such people in history, some famous, most unfairly forgotten, people who
were still imperfect but far better than most, and who helped others to be
better and do better. Yet does our contemporary technosocial world foster
and support the ambitions of genuine moral leaders? Can we name specific
living individuals who we trust to lead us wisely and morally through the
thicket of global technosocial dilemmas facing humanity? Who can reliably

guide us in making prudent choices about the expansion of global digital
surveillance tools, armed robots, brain- computer interfaces, or the
replacement of millions of human laborers with automated software
systems? I will let that question hang in the air, rather than attempt to
answer it. If the reader sees clear evidence that global technomoral
leadership is in great or even adequate supply, then I am happy to be
wrong. But if I am not wrong, then it is time to ask how human flourishing
in the 21st century can benefit from a revival of magnanimity as a
technomoral virtue, and how we might be able to achieve it.
6.13 Technomoral Wisdom: Unifying
the Technomoral Virtues
The greatest of the virtues is the one we will say the least about, for it
encompasses the totality of what has already been said. Whole books have
been written on Aristotle's concept of practical wisdom or phronēsis, but as
with Kongzi's notion of ren in its broader use, moral wisdom is best
understood as a term for 'complete virtue,' representing the successful
integration of a person's moral habits, knowledge, and virtues in an
intelligent, authentic, and expert manner. Thus a person of moral or
practical wisdom just is a person who reliably puts into practice the seven
moral habits articulated in Part II, and who has used those habits to
cultivate and integrate the virtues essential to flourishing in their given
moral world. Such a person is not perfect but nevertheless exemplary—
flawed but far better than most, finding more pleasure and joy in living well
and rightly than most of us get from living badly or thoughtlessly, and
exhibiting flashes of authentic moral beauty in action that give the rest of us
pause.
Technomoral wisdom is therefore a virtue in a different sense from the
others. It is not a specific excellence or disposition, but a general condition
of well- cultivated and integrated moral expertise that expresses
successfully—
and in an intelligent, informed, and authentic way— each of the other
virtues of character that we, individually and collectively, need in order to

live well with emerging technologies. Each of the other eleven technomoral
virtues
155
Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future
155
find their highest expression when integrated in the actions of a person with
technomoral wisdom.77
Having already laid down the justification, conceptual framework, and
content for an account of the technomoral virtues, our concern in Part III
will be narrowly practical and applied: identifying how the technomoral
virtues individually, and technomoral wisdom in general, can aid us in
coping with the rapid emergence of new technological powers from an
increasingly opaque and unpredictable technosocial horizon.
156
157
PART III
Meeting the Future
with Technomoral Wisdom,
Or How To Live Well
with Emerging Technologies
158
159
7

New Social Media and
the Technomoral Virtues
i n p a r t i i i we investigate how various forms of emerging technology,
depending upon how we choose to develop and engage them, may enable or
frustrate our efforts to individually and collectively become virtuous: to
make ourselves into the sorts of human beings able to live truly good lives.
Here our framework of technomoral habits and virtues is put to work.
Since humans and technologies evolve in tandem, we will be asking not only
how these emerging technologies shape our moral character for better and
for worse, but also how cultivating technomoral virtue can help us to
develop better technologies and wiser technosocial practices. Our aim is
constructive: we will not hesitate to criticize suboptimal human- technology
relations and effects, but the goal is to think about how those relations can
be changed for the better, and how our technologies, communities, and
selves can be made better in the process.
For the ultimate engineering task is the fragile, endless, and sublime human
project of using the culture we produce to make ourselves into the beings we
wish to become. The main topic of this and subsequent chapters is whether
and how emerging digital, robotic, artificially intelligent, or biomedical
technologies can assist us in this task.
7.1 New Social Media and the Good Life
The scope of this chapter is limited in its precision by the constantly shifting
forms and increasingly permeable boundaries of the digital media
technologies that are its subject matter. Our focus, however, will be the
innovations most responsible for the rise of 21st century digital culture:
mobile media devices and software applications, online social networking
platforms, and the encompassing architecture of Web 2.0.1 In the early
2000's Web 2.0 standards transformed the Internet from a large
160
1 6 0

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
collection of relatively static personal, institutional, and commercial
webpages to a highly interactive and dynamic multimedia environment.
Social networking and media sharing sites such as Facebook, Twitter,
YouTube, and Instagram dominate this new landscape, along with Google,
Apple, Amazon, and other corporate titans.
But the distinctive feature of Web 2.0 is that it is users who create and share
the vast majority of its content: the videos, music, photos, stories, mashups,
satires, reviews, comments, complaints, opinions, hashtags, jokes, and
memes that make up our new digital media culture. Just as essential to Web
2.0 as digital content is the distinctly social character of new media
consumption. It is the constant stream of new connections and exchanges
between billions of individual content creators and sharers that gives the
Internet its present character as a global social network.
The unrestrained, even irrational early hype trumpeting the Internet's
power to cure all the world's ills ( or, in the eyes of its most careless critics,
to destroy everything true, beautiful, and good) has thankfully given way to
more realistic and nuanced assessments of its many benefits, dangers, and
trade- offs. Most researchers today prefer a critical posture reflected
succinctly in the title of leading Internet researcher danah boyd's book on
teens and new social media: It's Complicated.2 Yet there is still a strong
conviction among many that the social Internet is a powerful force for
human well- being, a silicon- paved path to the good life. Among those
championing this view most loudly, we should not be surprised to find those
technology leaders and innovators whose pockets are lined by public faith
in the Internet.3 But resolutely positive assessments of digital culture's
impact on human well- being have also been voiced by many scholars
presumably less invested in the verdict.
In their 2012 book Networked: The New Social Operating System,
sociologist Barry Wellman and technology researcher Lee Rainie
championed the new "networked individualism" as a force destined to
engender a more educated, creative, productive, and happier society. Their
core research metric is social capital— a sociological construct used to
quantify the amount of social support from which an individual can draw in

order to solve problems and meet her needs. Empirical research suggests
strong links between social capital and psychological well- being or 'life
satisfaction.' Yet the empirical measures of well- being privileged by
sociologists and psychologists are simply not measurements of the same
type of well-being with which virtue ethics is concerned, the type of human
flourishing that Aristotle called eudaimonia and that is the motivating aim
of ethical life.
Empirical studies of well- being often employ instruments such as the
Diener Satisfaction With Life Scale (SWLS) or the Diener Flourishing Scale
(FS). These are simple 5- to- 8- item questionnaires that take no more than
one or two minutes for a typical subject to complete. On the Flourishing
Scale, for example, subjects rank items such as "I lead a purposeful and
meaningful life" on a scale of 1 to 7,
161
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
161
from "strongly disagree" to "strongly agree."4 As useful as these
instruments may be for many purposes, they do not tell us whether these
subjects are actually living well or flourishing— at best they tell us whether
the subjects believe themselves to be living well, based on a cursory review
of a small number of criteria. That one is living well in the ethical sense is a
fact that one can be mistaken about. A successful sociopath, a violent and
unrepentant serial abuser, or an oblivious narcissist may readily score their
own lives highly on such scales without actually meeting any of the
requirements of a good life. If this isn't obvious, consider the fact that most
parents' greatest desire is that their children flourish and live well, yet most
would be horrified at the thought of having raised a self- satisfied and
unrepentant sociopath.
Living well in the ethical sense, then, is an external and holistic condition
that is not entailed by subjective reports or feelings of personal happiness
and life satisfaction. Although most virtue ethicists regard living well in the
ethical sense to strongly support such positive feelings, even to be the most

reliable means of attaining them, it is psychologically possible for a person
to be satisfied with a terrible, ignoble life. A person can also be dis
satisfied, at least temporarily, with a life that is objectively noble and
choiceworthy.5 This means that the sorts of empirical data often used as
evidence of a strong correlation between new social media and the good life
are instructive, but not adequate for our inquiry. We need to look more
deeply at the relationships between particular new media practices and the
moral habits and virtues that enable and even constitute living well in the
fullest possible sense.
OceanofPDF.com

7.1.1 New Media Habits and Rituals: The Virtues
of Communicative Friction
My career as an emerging technology ethicist started with new social media
for a simple reason: No technology that I had ever encountered had a
comparable power to so rapidly and profoundly transform people's
communicative habits, and given the communicative structure of moral life,
it seemed obvious that these shifts had clear implications for human
character development, and especially for the cultivation of our moral
capacities. I began to write about how new social media habits might
impact the development of what I called 'communicative virtues' such as
honesty, patience, and empathy.6
Compared with traditional media, new social media foster communicative
acts that are more rapid, flexible, concise, varied in style and content, and
fluid in tone, pace, scope, and structure. Yet they also promote a dubious
ideal: frictionless interactions that deftly evade the boredom, awkwardness,
conflict, fear, misun-derstanding, exasperation, and uncomfortable
intimacies that often arise from traditional communications, especially
face- to- face encounters in physical space.
162
1 6 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Of course, such frictions still do arise in digital media connections. Yet
when they do, the emerging norms of new media increasingly afford me or
my interlocutor a quick and easy escape. We text 'gotta go,' log off
Facebook, or close an app, tab, or window and quickly open another, safer,
more attractive, and less demanding connection. And who can resist
availing themselves of such escape routes, given that doing so is socially
accepted, even increasingly expected?

We shall see later in this chapter the extent to which the new digital norm of
frictionless sharing can imperil civic life. But intimate contexts of family
and friendship are also impacted, in ways that may profoundly challenge
character development. This risk came into sharp focus during the
controversial 2013
Facebook Home ad campaign, which featured persons using the app to
evade undesirable interactions at home, at work, and on an airplane.
Technology ethicist Evan Selinger criticized the ads as "social engineering
spectacles" that implicitly advocate "transforming vice into virtue."7 Is
this fair? Consider the 'Dinner'
ad targeted by Selinger. It approvingly depicts a savvy teen's use of her
phone's Facebook Home app to tune out a tiresome relative's story at a
large family dinner.
The ad asks us not only to sympathize with the teen's plight (and who
doesn't?), but also to admire her bold solution. While her tablemates suffer
and squirm, praying for deliverance, she smiles serenely into the glowing
screen in her lap.
Yet what might she have done if using Facebook at a family dinner was
simply beyond the social pale? She might have mustered the courage to
inter-rupt and change the subject. She might have engaged in sympathetic
eye- rolling with a fellow family hostage across the table. She might have
started a quiet side conversation. She might have just sucked it up and
patiently waited it out. What is important to recognize is that selecting well
from these options calls for the skillful deployment of a range of moral
habits, including attention (What is the offender droning on about? How
engaged are others at the table?); relational understanding (Who is the
offender? What is her position or status in the family? Is this a typical
family dynamic?); reflective self- examination (Am I being a jerk here?);
discerning and prudent judgment (How much deference does the offender
deserve? When is the moment to act? What's the most defensible strategy?
What technique will cause the least harm or insult?); and moral extension
(Who should my solution benefit besides myself ?). The person who has
cultivated these habits and learned to respond reliably well in such
situations possesses admirable virtues: self- control, social courage,

empathy, care, flexibility, moral perspective— perhaps even practical
wisdom. Where does our young Facebook Home user find her chance to
practice these moral habits and cultivate these virtues?
Of course it would be silly to blame new media for the timeless ills of
teenage boorishness, social haplessness, or self- absorption. Yet it is
anything but
163
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
163
silly to ask which new media habits will help teens grow out of that
condition successfully, and which of today's new media habits tend to delay
or impede that maturation. Empirical studies of the effects of new social
media on youth lend increasing support to what is called the 'rich get
richer' thesis: young people who are already well on their way to mature
social competence and who have acquired above- average skills of social
discernment, empathy, care, self- control, social courage, and confidence
tend to thrive and gain important benefits from new social media
practices.8 On the other hand, young people who lack social competence,
or who report high levels of social anxiety or loneliness, not only have less
positive experiences online but in many cases seem to suffer increased
anxiety and loneliness as a result of their new media habits. This 'rich get
richer' hypothesis is entirely consistent with our account of moral self-
cultivation thus far. It is not technologies themselves that determine whether
or not we flourish socially, but rather the habits, skills, and virtues we have
cultivated, with or without their help. Once we acquire those habits, skills,
and virtues, we are not only better able to avoid harm in new social media
environments, we are able to use new media in ways that further enrich our
well- being.
Yet how did the already socially 'rich' get that way? Where did they acquire
the social skills and warranted confidence that allowed them to flourish in
the same new media environments that further impoverished their socially
'poorer'

peers? While this topic has yet to be adequately researched, I venture the
hypothesis that youth who flourish online acquired the lion's share of their
social competences in environments that 1) did not permit or reward quick
and easy escapes from social friction, challenge, or discomfort; 2) allowed
considerable freedom to experiment with different communicative strategies
for managing and coping with communicative friction; and 3) tempered that
freedom with virtuous constraints— norms or rituals of communication
designed to habituate them to social respect, competence, care, and
wisdom.
Returning to the Facebook Home case, the girl in the ad is not forced to try
out any of the techniques that we considered for negotiating the boring,
alienating experience of the family dinner— she can simply nul ify the
experience by means of her social media escape pod. The problem is not the
technology alone, but the technology plus the lack of an appropriate virtue-
inducing constraint—
such as a rule or strong social expectation that one does not use Facebook
at family dinners. It is illuminating to consider that many high- tech leaders
impose a surprising level of restraint upon their childrens' technology and
new media usage at home, banning electronic screens from the family table,
child bedrooms, and/ or on school nights.9 Such constraints are not plainly
not the refuge of the techno-phobic; if anything, they are the rituals of the
technologically wise.
164
1 64
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
As Selinger points out in his scathing commentary on the Facebook Home
campaign, communicative norms that foster vice don't only impoverish the
young and immature:
Ignored Aunt will soon question why she's bothering to put in effort with her
distant younger niece. Eventually, she'll adapt to the Facebook Home-
idealized situation and stop caring. ... Selfishness is contagious, after al .

Once it spreads to a future scene where everyone behaves like Selfish Girl,
with their eyes glued to their own Home screens, the Facebook ads por-tend
the death of family gatherings. More specifically, they depict the end of
connecting through effort.10
Selinger notes that the ad campaign idealizes a world where we tune out
anyone whom we did not ourselves select as a social connection on the
basis of shared interests and their personal entertainment value. Aside from
the deep disrespect for family bonds that this evokes, it is a profoundly
immature moral viewpoint. Indeed it reflects a value- system suited to
Facebook's own origins: the narrow social aims of college undergrads
away from home and, for the first time, free to assemble their own social
network from a pool of strangers on the sole basis of their own personal
desires and tastes. This is a liberating experience and an important stage in
a young person's development. But its generalization as a universal norm of
social life would be devastating. A frictionless world where every social
bond and duty was conditional upon the ongoing ability of others to keep us
stimulated and pleased would diminish us al .
In particular, it would render meaningless technomoral virtues such as care
— the skillful, attentive, and emotionally responsive disposition to labor to
meet the needs of other members of our technosocial world. The moral
world of adulthood, in any culture, is one in which relational bonds of
family, friendship, work, and civic life require us to care for, understand,
and engage deeply with people who we at least initially find to be boring,
weird, irritating, alienating, or exasperating. Some of those people we will
learn to enjoy with ease. Others will always require more effort to be
around, but we will come to respect, admire, and even love many of them
anyway. A world where this kind of care and flexibility is not expected or
even desired is one that very few of us would want to live in, and that none
of us should want. It is a world without true friendship or love.11 As
Selinger points out, the Facebook Home campaign shields us from this
horror by ensuring that in each ad, there is only one lucky soul using the
app; everyone else in the room is still doing the heavy lifting of keeping the
social fabric whole. But the campaign doesn't target just one family
member, or one airplane passenger, or one person in the boring

165
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
165
business meeting. The ads target us all— and therein lies their fundamental
dishonesty.
This is why it is essential that we pay closer attention to the ethical impact
of new social media on human character in different contexts, avoiding
mindless celebration or demonization of these technologies. One important
context involves the individual. As we have seen, socially well- habituated
individuals are more likely to use new media to enrich, rather than to
diminish, their flourishing. Another kind of context is the concrete situation.
If our Facebook Home girl had a close friend undergoing life- saving
surgery, we would not question her need to periodically check for updates
on her phone, assuming she had explained to her family the legitimate
reason for her distraction. A third kind of context is cultural— for the
specific moral norms, habits, and rituals that structure one's environment
help to determine the moral meaning of one's actions in that space.
For example, philosopher of technology Pak- Hang Wong argues that
today's new media architectures flatten relational structures in ways that
are inconsistent with Confucian values centered on family roles and
hierarchies. He claims that the personal freedom to manage one's own
social media presence, without constant supervision and approval by family
elders, might be genuinely unethical in a Confucian home— even though
most Western virtue ethicists would find such oversight and control unduly
intrusive.12
Context also drives ethical issues with new media that are increasingly hard
to regulate, such as privacy, copyright, and cyberbullying. As Helen
Nissenbaum notes, respecting privacy online requires acknowledging the
contextual integrity of situations in which the disclosure of personal data is
a factor. What users reasonably expect to happen with their data in one
context may be entirely different in another, even where the covering laws
are the same. Exclusive control over the use and reproduction of creative

digital property is in some cultural contexts an inalienable right of the
author, and in others a selfish inclination to hoard the fruits of one's
creative efforts.13 Speech that is hateful cyberbullying in one online context
may be edgy humor in another. These contextual challenges cannot simply
be resolved by imposing fixed rules or principles of a universal order. They
require effective moral communication, sincere cooperation, and prudent,
flexible negotiation, often across cultural lines. It is time for a closer look at
the technomoral virtues that can best facilitate such exchanges in personal,
local, and global contexts.
7.2 New Social Media and
the Virtue of Self- Control
In chapter 6, we saw that the technomoral virtue of self- control is an
exemplary ability in technosocial contexts to choose, and ideally to desire
for their own sakes, those
166
1 6 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
goods and experiences that most contribute to our and others' flourishing.
It is a reliable disposition to discern and eventually to author right desires,
those compatible with the good life. And as we saw in chapter 3, self-
control begins in childhood with socially imposed habituation to right
action. Ideally, this eventually gives us the moral continence to act only on
desires that we correctly discern to be good, and to restrain ourselves from
acting on vicious desires that often arise spontaneously.
As moral understanding, experience, and motivation grow, restrained
continence can mature into virtuous temperance, a state in which we
become increasingly free to act on our desires, because our dominant
desires have themselves become good.

Perhaps the greatest 21st century challenge to self- control is a culture in
which consumption itself is the most valued activity of citizens. But new
media deepen this challenge by means of the vastly expanded range of
goods now available for our consumption through digital channels, and the
associated fragmentation of social consensus about which goods and
experiences are worthy of our consumption. These developments have a
clear benefit: instead of cultures curated by a handful of state- owned or
corporate gatekeepers, we have a newly enriched and constantly changing
global tapestry of offerings at our fingertips. No longer can monolithic
powers so easily restrict what citizens see, hear, discuss, or buy, or dic-tate
which goods, topics, events, or creative acts are worthy of their attention.
This is a benefit we should not wish to surrender. The trade- offs, however,
have been considerable. Moreover, our digital liberation from cultural
hegemony is itself endangered by multinational media consolidation and
the deliberate design of 'sticky' digital media delivery systems that exploit
neurological and psychological mechanisms to undermine our self- control.
Concerns about new media and self- control are often expressed by
psychologists in terms of Internet 'addiction' or compulsion. While
empirical research is ramping up, reliable studies of the true scope,
severity, and causes of online media
'addiction' remain in short supply.14 Early indications of a problem are not
so hard to come by. A quick Google or Amazon search reveals a rapidly
expanding cottage industry of books, blog posts, editorials, and software
tools devoted to helping consumers diagnose, treat, or mitigate the harms
produced by their new media addictions. Apps such as Freedom, Anti-
Social, and SelfControl allow you to lock yourself out of part or the whole
of the Internet for a fixed period of time, serving as modern- day Faraday
cages for new media addicts like myself who are self- aware enough to
know that they have a problem. These are less radical versions of the
solution Nicholas Carr was compelled to adopt to finish his 2010
book on the Internet's impact on our brains, The Shallows: move to an
isolated mountain town with no cell service or broadband connection.

What is interesting is that neither myself nor Carr, nor the many other
scholars and creative professionals who seek such measures, can easily
restrain ourselves
167
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
167
from excessive and unproductive new media consumption. This is
remarkable in a population of people who earlier in life proved themselves
disciplined enough to write lengthy technical dissertations or other creative
works requiring intensive concentration and self- discipline. Even Carr,
whose book details the ways that new media change our brains in ways we
do not choose, admitted that he slipped back into his new media habits once
his book was done; voluntarily (or perhaps not?) surrendering the mental
clarity, focus, and power he says he re-gained during his digital media
sabbatical.15 Perhaps Carr and I are in fact not self- disciplined at al ;
perhaps we are viciously incontinent or self- indulgent. But I venture that
many readers know from personal experience that some new media habits
pose an unusually strong challenge to our faculties of self- control.
Neuroscientific explanations of Internet addiction tell a story about oper-
ant conditioning, reward schedules, and dopamine receptors.16 But the
underlying social mechanism is rarely discussed: the techniques of those
who develop, market, and measure the success of new media technologies.
From the popular software industry site Re/ Code, here is a remarkably
frank admission of the deliberately addictive design of new media, in a post
from Suhail Doshi, the CEO of Mixpanel— an analytics firm that sells
developers tools for measuring how users interact with their software. The
title of the post is "Mixpanel: How Addictive is Your App?":
Whether you're building a game, a social network or a CRM tool, your
ideal customers are the people who engage with your product at least once
every day — better still if they're using it constantly. We've taken this a step
further by introducing a new analytics report — Addiction — which will be
available to users soon, and which tells companies how frequently people

use their apps throughout the day. For example, if you've built a game, and
a customer plays once in the morning, once at lunch, and once on the
commute home, they've engaged with your product during three separate
hours: As such, they'll fall into the three- hour bucket. (For the record,
about 22 percent of actual game players fall into the three- hour addiction
bucket, which makes sense — only a very lucky few can spend the entire day
gaming.) ... Social apps have a stable, consistent and thoroughly addicted
user base, with 50 percent of people engaging with social networks for
more than five hours a day, and even a small percentage logging time
during every waking hour. (emphasis added)17
If it's not already obvious that an addicted user base is the explicit design
goal for many app developers, Doshi reminds his audience that if users
aren't logging on multiple times a day, they are doing something profoundly
wrong, but if "most
168
1 6 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
users are lighting up your Addiction report by using your app for 10 hours
every day, you're doing something very, very right."18
If self- control is as essential to human well- being today as it was in
Aristotle's, Kongzi's, or the Buddha's time, then we have a serious ethical
problem on our hands. On the one hand, the pleasures of new media culture
are vast and unprecedented; not many that have tasted them, even among
the highly educated and culturally literate, would wish to surrender them.
Thus new media seem to survive John Stuart Mill's test for discerning true
goods— after al , he tells us, "What is there to decide whether a particular
pleasure is worth purchasing at the cost of a particular pain, except the
feelings and judgment of the experienced?"19 On the other hand, many
new media pleasures are consciously designed to be delivered to us in ways
that undermine our cognitive autonomy and moral agency. They make it
harder, not easier, for us to choose well. Even a utilitarian such as Mill
understood the role of character, especially the virtue of self- control, in

sustaining our ability to not merely know, but actually choose the good life:
Capacity for the nobler feelings is in most natures a very tender plant,
easily killed, not only by hostile influences, but by mere want of sustenance;
and in the majority of young persons it speedily dies away if the
occupations to which their position in life has devoted them, and the society
into which it has thrown them, are not favourable to keeping that higher
capacity in exercise. Men lose their high aspirations as they lose their
intellectual tastes, because they have not time or opportunity for indulg-ing
them; and they addict themselves to inferior pleasures, not because they
deliberately prefer them, but because they are either the only ones to which
they have access, or the only ones which they are any longer capable of
enjoying.20
If I were a more temperate person, I would still choose to use new media
technologies— but I would do so consciously and selectively, not at times
when it disrupts family life, not at times when I need to focus for an
extended period of time on a single creative or intellectual effort, and not at
times when I need to attend closely to my physical and moral environment.
The question is: How do I and others become temperate or even adequately
continent in our use of new social media? There is no simple answer, but an
adequate solution must go beyond the habits of the individual consumer. I,
like many others, can already manage to grit my teeth and activate my
Freedom app when I am at home writing alone, and perhaps over time such
individual practices can make us all more continent in this regard. Perhaps
someday I will be able to turn on Freedom without gritting my teeth.
Perhaps one day I will stop trying to open my browser every 15 minutes
even
169
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
169
though I know that I am still locked out. It helps that I have a small but
supportive community of fellow writers with the same struggles, who
directed me to the app in the first place. Our struggle, however, is greatly
intensified in social environments where there is no such support: such as

conferences where not only do fellow scholars openly use social media
while presenters are speaking, but where we are asked by conference
organizers, or even speakers themselves, to tweet the event in real time!
Likewise, setting a no- phones rule at your own table is easy enough, but
what does one do at a dinner out with friends or colleagues that is already
lit up by six different glowing, beeping screens? At that point imposing your
own self- control seems pointless, since there is no one present enough to
receive your undivided attention, and even self- defeating, as it leaves one
stewing in a morally unhelpful mix of resentment, boredom, and holier-
than- thou superiority. Of course, one can just seek new dinner companions,
but most of us can't avail ourselves of this nuclear option easily or often.
Instead, satisfactory solutions to digital media
'stickiness' will have to involve collective cultural agreements to seek
healthier digital norms or social rituals, which will be specific to particular
contexts but globally concerned with promoting the cultivation of
technomoral self- control.
An early example of this was the spread of the restaurant 'phone stack'; but
such remedies remain thin and inconsistently practiced.
Another part of the solution will require engaging more assertively with
software industry professionals on the social and moral impact of their
designs. As Evgeny Morozov notes in his recent book To Save Everything,
Click Here, this is a challenging hurdle to clear, given the false but
widespread and resilient belief that
"The Internet" in its current form (and by extension, the structures of the
diverse technologies of which it is really composed) is a fixed given— an
Archimedean point with which it is either futile or disastrous to tinker. He
asks us why is it that when we find ourselves harmed by the digital media
environment, the only responses we can think of are to block our access to
our own digital tools, or flee their reach?21 Or as I have asked elsewhere:
Why must we choose between debilitating tools, and digital lockboxes to
keep us away from them? Why not demand useful tools that do not
debilitate us?22

While ethics in the software industry is a hot- button issue, too many new
social media investors, developers, and engineers still believe that ethics is
not their business— or even that it is inimical to innovation and
productivity. In response to a media question about whether his company
had ever thought of hiring an ethicist to consult on their decision to conduct
secret experiments on their users, Christian Rudder, co- founder of the
online dating site OK Cupid, joked "To wring his hands all day for
$100,000 a year? ... No, we have not thought of that."23 Such attitudes in
the software industry need to change, and
170
17 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
soon— not just for users' sake, but for the sake of the health and growth of
digital media culture itself. Too many inside the Silicon Valley 'thought
bubble' are oblivious to the fact that ethics matters, not because academics
or media critics say so, but because people will always want good lives, and
will eventually turn on any technology or industry that is widely perceived
as indifferent or destructive to that end. It only took a few decades for
cigarette companies to go from corporate models of consumer loyalty and
affection to being seen as merchants of addiction, sickness, and death,
whose products are increasingly unwelcome in public or private spaces.
Only extravagant hubris or magical thinking could make software industry
leaders think they are shielded from a similar reversal of fortune.
The cultivation of self- control requires more support from industry and
social norms, but it also remains within the reach of our own moral
practices, especially the habit of moral attention. Indeed, executive
attention, the ability to notice what in our physical or mental environment
we are thinking about and consciously modify or redirect that thinking, is
an essential part of self- control, involving the ability to delay gratification,
moderate our emotional impulses, and restrain reflexive, unthinking
actions. If new social media habits challenge our self- control, it likely has
much to do with our attentional capacities in technosocial environments.

How do new social media shape our habits of paying moral attention, and
the virtues such habits foster?
7.3 Media Multitasking, Moral Attention,
and the Cultivation of Empathy
Much has been written on the topic of new media and attention;
unfortunately the news is not very encouraging. A growing body of
empirical evidence suggests that new media practices, especially the
ubiquitous habit of media multitasking, have profoundly negative effects on
attention, along with other cognitive faculties including problem- solving,
task switching, knowledge transfer, working memory, and memory
consolidation. Many of these effects appear to endure for some time after
multitasking exposure has ceased.24 This has obvious implications for
learning and productivity, but less often noted are its ethical implications.
Attention subserves our moral capacities no less than our narrowly
cognitive ones. Reviewing the research on attention and empathy,
psychologist and science writer Daniel Goleman notes that while
sociopaths can often reason quite competently about human emotions, they
lack the affective sensitivity to others'
emotions that stimulates emotional empathy from the bottom up. Goleman
describes affective empathy as a neurological process that begins with a
form of attention, in which the anterior cingulate 'tunes in' to another's
emotional state and
171
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
171
activates the anterior insula and amygdala to produce genuine affective
pairing or co- feeling.25 This brain activity makes possible the feeling of
'being moved' which, as we saw in chapter 6, is essential to the virtue of
empathic concern. Unfortunately for media multitaskers, their resulting

distractibility may be a significant obstacle to this experience, for there is
evidence that the neural mechanisms of attention that produce empathic
moral concern require considerably more time to activate than others.26
Moreover, empathic concern relies heavily on the ability to read emotional
cues from the faces and bodies of others, since it is this embodied
perception that activates the bottom- up circuitry of affective empathy.27
Simply being told of a person's emotional state does not produce the same
affective response in us as does directly perceiving that state. But how can I
discern the emotional cues on my friend's face if, as he describes his
weekend for me over coffee, I am simultaneously glancing at the texts,
Twitter, and email notifications popping up on my phone? How can I read
the emotional state of my patient if I spend the majority of the appointment
attending to my handy medical records app, designed like most apps to
maximize attention capture and user engagement?
Looking up every few minutes to make a second or two of eye contact is
unlikely to be sufficient either to accurately read another's emotional state
or to activate the higher- order moral circuitry of empathic concern.
Moreover, there is evidence that in addition to empathy, bottom- up
processes of moral attention facilitate other important virtues, such as
flexibility, care, and perspective.28
One way of responding to these worries returns us to the virtue of self-
control.
If I can muster the discipline to put my phone or laptop away in the relevant
circumstances, I should find it easier to be more attentive and more
appropriately empathic. But we said above that executive attention is a
prerequisite for self- control; so how do we first break out of the vicious
circle of distraction?
Fortunately, the executive ability to notice and manage our own mental
states can be cultivated from a young age, by techniques that encourage
children to envision and anticipate longer- term outcomes, show them how
to direct attention away from immediate attractors, and teach them to
experiment with modifying their own perspectives and emotions.29 These
are in fact not unlike the mindfulness trainings central to Buddhist practice.

Thus one constructive response to a new media age is to devote
considerably more educational and parenting resources than we do now to
the active cultivation in children of techniques of executive attention, and in
particular, to reward children for practicing those techniques in new media
environments. It goes without saying that media multitasking adults can
likely benefit from these same techniques, but the rewards are likely to be
greater the earlier these habits are formed. Indeed, such attentional habits
in
172
17 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
childhood have been shown to be as strongly correlated with adult well-
being as IQ, family wealth, or social class, and in some cases more so.30
Yet another technique shown to restore depleted attentional capacity is
contact with nature; this is known as the "attention restoration thesis."31
When compared with work spaces, coffee shops, or even a 'relaxing' walk
down an urban street, spend-ing time around trees, flowers, animals, and
water seems to have far more restorative effects on our cognitive powers.
Social media addicts can likely benefit greatly from habits of nature-
walking and park- sitting to replenish our bottom- up attentional capacities.
Finally, as noted earlier, cultural norms can be powerful constraints. What
if it were socially anathema not to look others in the eye when we speak
with them, or to make them compete for our attention with five other digital
channels? The most extreme media habits are antisocial enough to make
one a deserving subject of kind but firm interventions. A person who shows
no interest in reforming their habits sufficiently to make them morally
responsive to others should arguably be considered undateable, unhireable,
even unfriendable. This is a harsh remedy, however. Rather than have to
punish those whose moral capacities are already damaged by their new
media habits, would it not be better to ask how new media practices
themselves can be made more compatible with human flourishing?

For example, what about creative moral uses of mixed media technologies
that include video and narrative? Such techniques are heavily relied upon
by nonprofit organizations and activists to focus attention on, and stimulate
empathic concern for, human and animal suffering that would otherwise go
unrecognized— soldiers maimed by war, children in famine- ridden
countries, women in violently patri-archal societies, disabled persons
denied social accommodations, captive whales and elephants, abused dogs
and cats in shelters. It is too easy to forget that new media afford
communications much richer than 140- character tweets. Still, the sheer
number and range of these calls for compassion on our various media feeds
can produce an empathic overload that leads to withdrawal and apathy.
Alternatively, such appeals risk being reduced to viral social memes with a
shelf life far shorter than the moral need— remember KONY 2012? Some
critics of new media 'slacktivism' likewise challenged the moral depth and
discernment of the viral (and arguably water- wasting) 'ice bucket
challenge' for ALS research in 2014— a short- lived meme that nevertheless
raised over $115 million.32 Empathy, like any virtue, must be carefully
modulated and intelligently calibrated according to the facts of the
situation. We must be empathic at the right time, in the right way, to the
right degree, and toward the right beings. Too much or too little empathic
concern will leave us emotionally and morally crippled, and concern
expressed foolishly will miscarry.
Perhaps our social media channels could be modulated to better focus our
attention on empathy- demanding information, such that as we actively take
up
173
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
173
a particular moral concern, the delivery of competing solicitations is
slowed for a period of time. Or perhaps new media sites and apps could
actively reward consumption of extended moral narratives, incentivizing

habits of reading that counteract those fostered by a steady media diet of
listicles and slideshows.
Indeed, our current distractibility (well captured by the popular acronym
'TL; DR'— 'too long, didn't read') can be tempered by some of the same
technologies that feed it today. For example, a site might permit comments
only from those whom, the software judges, took the time to thoughtfully
read a longform piece (using a digital measure known as 'dwell time'). Or a
site might offer discounted subscriptions or exclusive content for readers
with an average dwell time above a certain threshold. Rebuilding these
attentional habits is key to enabling empathic concern, since empathy and
moral perspective- taking are strongly facilitated by longform narratives,
especially fiction.33 In these formats, solicitations of empathy are
embedded in a broader human context in which even profound suffering or
joy is tempered by humor, wisdom, beauty, and the mundane. In addition to
being less emotionally overwhelming, these enrich our moral perspective
on the causes and lived meaning of suffering and joy as elements of a larger
moral whole. The fact that current new media practices disfavor attention
and empathy- sustaining formats is much lamented by media critics, and
rightly so— but this is not a law of nature. It can be changed, especially if
our flourishing depends upon it changing.
We must also realize that there is no 'collective moral intelligence' living in
the cloud that can substitute for genuinely attentive and empathic human
perceptions. Contrary to the vision of Web 2.0 enthusiast Clay Shirky and
others, billions of half- read webpages and hastily skimmed e- books do not
magically add up to a wise or even informed body.34 So whatever we do, let
us not concede our most basic moral capacities to the contingencies of the
market or the illusion of a hive mind. As noted by the authors of The Online
Manifesto, the EU- funded project on digital society, our attentional
capabilities are in fact as essential to our personhood as our bodies:
To the same extent that organs should not be exchanged on the market
place, our attentional capabilities deserve protective treatment. Respect for
attention should be linked to fundamental rights such as privacy and bodily
integrity ... the default settings and other designed aspects of our
technologies should respect and protect attentional capabilities.35

Markets, as human institutions, are legitimized only by their promotion of
human flourishing. To sacrifice the latter to the former is neither
pragmatism nor realism— it is insanity.
174
174
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
7.4 New Social Media and Virtuous
Self- Regard: Humility, Honesty, and Perspective
Attentional capabilities enable empathy with others, but also awareness of
ourselves in the world. We saw in chapter 4 that moral self- cultivation
presupposes effective habits of self- appraisal, yet these are easily distorted
by new media practices. On the one hand, our friends' carefully self- edited
streams of personal and career triumphs on Facebook can make our own
real, but inconsistent records of achievement seem paltry. Such comparisons
have been shown to be a significant cause of emotional distress in social
media users, especially those who already suffer from low self- esteem.36
Yet social media tools and practices can also artificially inflate our sense of
personal worth and importance. People predisposed to narcissism are
among those most inclined to maladaptive uses of social media, but few of
us are wholly immune to social media's enabling of self- preoccupation.37
It has become routine to ridicule the 'here is a photo of my breakfast'
crowd, and new words such as 'humblebrag' are coined for social media
practices seen as transparently ego- driven. Yet many users remain
compelled to post photos of their breakfast and to humblebrag, so much so
that few of us still bother to be all that bothered by it. Narcissism in a new
media age is a moving target.
New social media seem to act on our self- regard as a hall of funhouse
mirrors—

all manner of distortions are possible, but the common thread is that these
media in their current forms fail to deliver reliable feedback for self-
appraisal.
That said, psychologists have long known that humans are generally
terrible at self- assessment— with or without new social media. Some self-
distortions can be psychologically protective, but it is not easy to find the
mean between the positive and negative poles of self- delusion. An honest
respect for the truth about one's own character, and an accurate perspective
on the value of one's life within a larger moral whole, are rare conditions of
virtue. Yet precisely because honesty, humility, and moral perspective with
regard to one's own life are such challenging virtues to cultivate, we need to
resist media habits that make these valuable qualities any harder to
cultivate than they already are.
Technologies are not stone tablets delivered from on high. They are
malleable human creations that can be reshaped in the service of living well
if our collective will demands it. So what shall we demand? As a starting
place, we can look to those methods traditionally used to foster virtuous
self- appraisal in other domains of our lives. In most societies, people
expect and thrive upon honest feedback from loving family members and
teachers. Trusted friends, lovers, and colleagues can offer the same benefit,
though not always with the same authority. Exposing ourselves to moral
narrative can help; comparing ourselves with fictional or historical others
may put our own virtues and vices in proper perspective, as can reading the
175
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
175
philosophical meditations of those working through their own projects of
moral self- cultivation and reflection, as one finds in the writings of Marcus
Aurelius, Boethius, and many others. How can new media be adapted to
similar purposes?

We have already discussed the need for new media to be more conducive to
extended moral narratives; but consider that many existing social media
already function as meditations on the challenges and rewards of self-
cultivation.
Self- reflective blogs on the experience of being a morally imperfect parent
are legion, and inspire many readers to have the courage to continue to try
every day to get the job of parenting right, despite the certainty that we will
continue to do very many things wrong. Such blogs also do something
traditional literary meditations do not— namely, allow the authors to give
and receive real- time encouragement and enjoy ongoing, honest feedback
from their readership. Although comment spaces are almost always
sprinkled with banality and random abuse, many bloggers develop strong
mutual relationships of moral support with their dedicated readers.
Moreover, blogs such as Allie Brosh's beloved Hyperbole and a Half can
inspire millions of people to persevere under psychological hardships not
articulated by the likes of Marcus Aurelius, conditions in which just getting
dressed and cleaning some things, or returning a halfway convincing smile,
are hard- won moral victories. What is often lumped in with 'new media
narcissism'— a blogging culture in which people of no great fame or
achievement share their mundane struggles and victories— also contains
many more types and exemplars of moral cultivation than readers of past
ages could ever have hoped to access.
Yet social media are also rife with apps designed to disengage one's online
activity from the creation of an enduring and stable moral narrative. Apps
such as Secret and YikYak use anonymity to enable sociality without
relationship accountability. Snapchat and Sobrr allow users to send photos,
videos, or messages to friends or nearby strangers that 'self- destruct' after
a certain period of time; these apps use the power of ephemera to
guarantee users that the history of their interactions through the app will
not be preserved. The co- founder of Sobrr, Bruce Yang, proclaims that the
app "promotes sharing only the most refreshing contents and leading a
casual relationship with no strings attached."38 There are many contexts in
which it is perfectly appropriate, even beneficial, to enjoy superficiality,
unaccountability, and ephemerality in social behavior. Yet as we can infer
from our Facebook Home example, and Secret and YikYak's reputations for

fostering hateful abuse and cruelty, new media platforms too often obscure
the contextual limits of that appropriateness in a good life.
While seeking new media tools more conducive to moral self- cultivation,
we must not forget that our virtues can also be cultivated independently,
then leveraged as cultural pressures for more morally supportive
technologies. As Mengzi
176
176
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
says, "When the Way prevails everywhere, use it to pursue your personal
cultivation. When the Way does not prevail, use your personal cultivation to
pursue the Way."39 The seven habits of moral self- cultivation outlined in
Part II are still with us, and nothing in the world of new social media stops
us from reclaiming their importance for our time, as Aristotle, Kongzi, and
the Buddha did in theirs. In the next section we shall see why this is
essential not only for personal flourishing, but also for preserving and
enlarging the civic potential of new social media.
7.5 New Social Media, Civic Virtue,
and the Spiral of Silence
The civic potential of new social media has been championed since the
dawn of Web 2.0, and while reality has since dampened the most naïve
predictions of a global Internet utopia, many still embrace these
technologies as humanity's best hope for expanded global democracy,
freedom, enlightenment, and community.
Among them are Google leaders Eric Schmidt and Jared Cohen, who
breathlessly assure us that: "With so many people connected in so many
places, the future will contain the most active, outspoken, and globalized
civil society the world has ever known."40 Not only will the new global

citizen be active and outspoken, she will be informed, enlightened, and
constructively engaged in building better civic institutions:
The data revolution will bring untold benefits to the citizens of the future.
They will have unprecedented insight into how other people think,
behave and adhere to norms or deviate from them, both at home and
in every society in the world. The newfound ability to obtain accurate and
verified information online, easily, in native languages and in endless
quantity, will usher in an era of critical thinking in societies around the
world that before had been culturally isolated. In societies where the
physical infrastructure is weak, connectivity will enable people to build
businesses, engage in online commerce and interact with their government
at an entirely new level. ... Citizen participation will reach an al - time high
as anyone with a mobile handset and access to the Internet will be able to
play a part in promoting accountability and transparency.41
Perhaps the best- known prophet of a newly empowered and enlightened
global media commons is writer and social media theorist Clay Shirky, who
tells us that thanks to new social media, "we are living in the middle of a
remarkable increase in our ability to share, to cooperate with one another,
and to take collective action, all outside the framework of traditional
institutions and organizations."42
177
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
177
Yet in his book's epilogue, Shirky confronts the reality that online collective
action in the civic domain has fallen far short of fulfilling this promise. He
admits that beyond the organization of coordinated protests, relatively few
sustained civic projects of significant scale have resulted from the use of
these tools, which seemed in the body of his book to be invested with nearly
magical powers to enable spontaneous social change for the better. In the

epilogue, he concludes that the solution is to supply citizens with yet
another kind of tool, namely, new laws for incorporating online collectives
so that they may benefit from formal civic standing.
This reflects a fundamental error in the thinking of Shirky and other heralds
of a digital civic renaissance such as Kevin Kelly, Jeff Jarvis, Eric Schmidt,
and Nicholas Negroponte: the assumption that you will get a thriving civil
society simply by supplying citizens with the proper tools. 'If cooperative
and fruitful civic action online is not forthcoming,' so the thinking goes,
'then we obviously have not yet given our would- be citizens of the global
digital polis the right instruments with which to construct it.' The mantra
seems to be: if we equip them, they will build it. What is missing is any
attention to the particular civic characters, motivations, and capacities of
the 'them' in question. The collective desire, skill, and virtue necessary to
cooperatively wield new media technologies for civic aims are all (wrongly)
assumed by this model.
Evgeny Morozov, who is among the harshest critics of such models, has
argued that the ideology of technological solutionism reflected in these
visions will fail for two reasons. First, it treats technologies as neutral tools
for producing things and solving problems, rather than as extensions of the
human value contexts in which they operate. Giving people a new media
platform cannot 'solve' the
'problem' of civic apathy if the platform's affordances and values are
shaped by the same political conditions as the problem. The ideology's
other failure is its treatment of people as essentially identical and
interchangeable nodes in a network of rational agents, rather than as the
complex, diverse, and constantly developing creatures that we are.43 The
ideology seems to be that if technocrats just wire up all the human nodes in
the right way and enable information flows between them in the proper
directions and at the necessary speeds, the 'system' will magically self-
optimize for the relevant values (in the case of Western technocrats things
like efficiency, freedom, transparency, democracy, etc.).44 But we are not
identical nodes in a network. We don't all respond to or exchange
information in the same fashion or with the same abilities, and most

importantly, we aren't all trying to optimize the same set of values, or
balance values in the same way.
Nor will the obstacles to a flourishing global commons be removed simply
by raising greater awareness of them. Internet scholar Maria Bakardjieva
calls for expanding critical research to illuminate the details of new media's
sometimes
178
17 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
beneficial and sometimes "impoverishing effects on the lives of users,"
enabling users to "navigate the Internet both tactically and strategically in
ways that defy oppression and advance emancipation."45 Bakardjieva is
right to call for a more granular approach to new media ethics, one that
eschews global judgments about the effects of new media in favor of a more
empirical and particularist approach.
For example, we might study some of the more 'tactical and strategic' uses
of cellphone video amplified by social media to expose police brutality and
racial injustice in the United States. During the protests that followed the
2014 police shooting of Michael Brown— an unarmed black teen in
Ferguson, Missouri—
such techniques were effective in reinvigorating, at least temporarily, a
long-neglected discussion of these simmering civic issues in traditional
media outlets, schools, and homes across the country.46 Yet sustaining civic
awareness through new media in a manner that produces substantial and
lasting social change will require more than a heightened awareness of how
the Internet can be used for civic purposes, and more than improved new
media tools; it will require deliberately cultivated skills and virtues.
If people are going to use social media for cooperative civic purposes to
reliably and effectively promote human flourishing, then these will need to
be not just any kind of people, but people with strong civic virtues of the

technomoral variant. Contrast the most effective civic uses of new media in
the aftermath of Ferguson, those that exposed the deeper structural patterns
of racial and economic injustice in the county of which Ferguson is a part,
with the actions of the Anonymous hacker(s) who tweeted the name of an
officer they had recklessly misidentified as responsible for the Ferguson
shooting. The hacker responsible for the misidentification was abetted by
other 'doxxers'— people who collect personal information on individuals
for online release— exposing an innocent man to grave risk of vigilante
violence.47 Such actions not only show a morally blameworthy lack of
judgment, they also weaken public faith in the reliability and moral
legitimacy of social media activism, undermining their own professed
cause. Civic practices of using new media to promote justice and
accountability cannot stabilize in a moral vacuum; they require intelligent
and skillful guidance by people of technomoral virtue.
We need the technomoral virtues in order to ensure that civic cooperation
and flourishing are mutual and sincere aims of those involved, and that
those who cooperate for this purpose have the habits and skills to enable
their joint success. How might these virtues also aid us in realizing the
untapped civic potential of new media technologies? Consider the
technomoral virtue of honesty, which we defined as a respect for truth in
technosocial contexts. How is it related to the civic use of new media? On
the one hand, such media seem to be custom-made to expand truth seeking
and sharing. Web 2.0 technologies enable citizen
179
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
179
journalism, foster vast knowledge- building projects such as Wikipedia, and
allow anyone to generate and share data on an unprecedented scale. New
social media have fostered new norms of institutional transparency and
'open government.'
Truth can also be served by allowing a wider range of perspectives to have
a public voice, and Web 2.0 technologies promote this goal. But of course,

this is all too simple. Honesty as a virtue is a discerning respect for truth,
not a mindless fetish for transparency or context- free data dumps.
Moreover, the relevant facts about many topics (quantum physics, global
climate, evolution, high- frequency trading) are not equally accessible from
all perspectives, so if adding more perspectives in these cases merely dilutes
the views of those few who have reliable knowledge, the result will not be
truth but confusion.
Consider the global spread via social media of false and exceedingly
dangerous beliefs about a causal link or correlation between autism and
vaccines, which persists despite an overwhelming global scientific
consensus that the totality of years of research shows no such link. Not only
do these false beliefs persist, but the millions of parents who have acted on
the social media advice of entertainment figures and conspiracy theorists
have put others at grave risk by not vaccinating their children against fatal
or disabling infectious pathogens. Is this the fate of truth- seeking 2.0? Or
can we admit that cultivating respect for truth in the 21st century will
require more than just handing everybody a louder microphone?
With respect to the volumes of 'big data' being mined from the new media
'social graph' and our associated online activities, it is far from obvious
that more data always yields more knowledge, or more reliable access to
truth. For one thing, data's relationship to knowledge and truth is still ruled
by the enduring principle of 'garbage in, garbage out.' How much can a
social scientist, politician, or public health researcher reasonably infer
about human values, beliefs, needs, and preferences from inputs to a
database that merely reflect superficial social media behaviors such as
'likes,' 'clicks,' and 'follows'? Furthermore, large datasets can and usually
must be manipulated to yield any useful analysis, and these manipulations
can mislead and obfuscate as much as they reveal. Every assumption, every
highlighting or discounting of a variable is a human value judgment that
does not come to the surface when the result is presented as the mechanical
output of an unbiased, infal ible algorithm. Finally, in our obsession with
mining truth from the mountains of data embedded in the social graph, we
risk a disastrous reduction of the meaning of truth to data. We forget that

truth always has a context. We cannot respect truth by stripping it of all
reference to the concrete worldly situations that make it true.
A further challenge to truth in social media environments is the cluster of
concerns related to 'filter bubbles,' 'cyberbalkanization,' and 'echo
chambers.'48
Filter bubbles are the predicted effect of personalized browser search
algorithms,
180
1 8 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
such that, based on your online behavioral history, when you search for any
given term— for example, 'vaccines,' 'climate,' 'Democrats,' 'guns,' or
'drones,'— you will be shown only those results that the algorithm predicts
you want to see. This sounds like a good thing until we consider that respect
for truth among an informed citizenry would likely be served better by
inviting people to visit sites that they do not already want or expect to see.
The worry is that personalized search algorithms magnify our existing
cognitive biases and blind spots, and by ensuring that we encounter more
and more perspectives that echo our own, reinforce in-flexible belief
patterns inconsistent with a civic environment that fosters respect for truth.
This effect has not yet been empirically demonstrated to follow from
personalized search alone, but in combination with other types of online
personalization, the worry remains significant.
This is because social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter also
use sophisticated algorithms to determine what shows up on users' feeds;
contrary to many users' belief that they are seeing an uncurated, real- time
stream of all their friends' posts and shares, they are actually seeing a
highly selective col age deliberately arranged by the platform to maximize
their engagement with the platform.

The problem is, what will maximize your engagement is likely to involve
activity that closely aligns with your own existing values, beliefs, and
affiliations. There is no 'dislike' button on Facebook, and no 'Unfavorite'
on Twitter, so the permitted forms of engagement ensure that most users see
limited content that disturbs, confuses, or disgusts them.
For example, the social media images and posts you see regarding conflict
in the Middle East largely depend on your existing political and religious
views and al iances. If you are a strong supporter of Israel, your feeds are
curated in a way that deemphasizes pro- Palestinian posts and images, and
vice versa.49 Whether you see any content on this topic at all depends on
your demonstrated interest in current events, religion, or politics. Nor are
Facebook and Twitter alone in this practice; virtually all new media
platforms, including the online presences of major news outlets such as the
Wall Street Journal and the Washington Post, have developed such
customization tools. These personalization algorithms and their effects are
not disclosed to the public. To find out just how powerful they are, Wired
contributor Mat Honan experimented with 'liking' every single item on
Facebook for two days; he was stunned to find his feed overtaken by
increasingly polarized and uninformed content:
This is a problem much bigger than Facebook. It reminded me of what can
go wrong in society, and why we now often talk at each other instead of to
each other. ... We go down rabbit holes of special interests until we're lost
in the queen's garden, cursing everyone above ground. ... But
181
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
181
maybe worse than the fractious political tones my feed took on was how
deeply stupid it became.50
It seems, then, that the new Eden of social media has yet to fulfill its
promise.

Or perhaps it has; after all, wasn't Eden its own filter bubble of blissful
ignorance? Does this mean that social media technologies are by nature the
enemy of truth and civic wisdom? Hardly. For one thing, not all social
media platforms are alike; their algorithms, users, and design interfaces
vary, and the environments for truth vary with them. Facebook is not
Twitter, Twitter is not Instagram, and Instagram is not Vine. A platform such
as Reddit is hardly a harmonious Eden of bland 'likes'— it can be a chaotic
and morally bankrupt place, but it can also foster intellectual controversy
and challenge. Of course technomoral honesty, like all virtues, is a mean
between extremes. Overexcited Redditors can be more irresponsible in their
relationship to truth than the most incurious and com-placent Facebook
users, as when a 'crowdsourced' Reddit search for the Boston Marathon
bombers went horribly awry, targeting innocent citizens as collateral
damage.51
Yet Reddit's management was quick to issue a thoughtful and self- searching
public apology. It is noteworthy that unlike Facebook, Reddit has an
explicit ethical code ['Reddiquette'] that asks users to, among other things,
"Remember the human," "Moderate based on quality, not opinion," "Look
for the original source of content," and "Actually read an article before you
vote on it."52 Such distinctions matter, whether or not they are enforceable
or have the immediate results we would like. Reddit, Facebook, and Twitter
are not fixed givens but fluid human creations whose norms, structures, and
affordances are constantly being tinkered with. The question is, what moral
ends will inform that tinkering? The point here is that new media do not
offer a single path to the truth or a uniform threat to it; they are varied and
ongoing human experiments with it and other values.
Once again, social media technologies are not neutral tools for seeking the
good life, such that the only ethical question is whether we have got the
right tool in our hands. Just as important as the tool is the question of
whose hands the tool is presently in, and what the present character of that
person allows them to build with it. What are the virtues of the people who
most closely approach in practice the ideal Redditor? What sort of online
platform could those persons create with an even better technomoral
character? What are the vices of those who embody the ugliest side of that
community? How do they inhibit the flourishing of the site and its best

possibilities? Remember, the virtues and vices of humans wielding
technologies shape how the technologies themselves evolve; thus let us ask
not what social media technologies are doing to us and our world, but what
our technologies are doing with us, and what we ought to do with them.
182
1 8 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Among the early hopes for new social media was that they would enrich the
quality of scientific, cultural, and political discourse, and foster a newly
global, open, vibrant, and engaged public sphere. There were of course
early skeptics; philosopher Albert Borgmann was among the first to claim
that no true civic life can flourish in the social shallows of the Internet,
where persons are necessarily drawn to commodify themselves as
"glamorous and attractive personae" rather than citizens committed to
working out together our "reasons for living."53 As the dust has settled,
however, most scholars have begun to acknowledge that the reality of civic
life online is far more complicated than either the techno- optimists or
techno- pessimists predicted.
On the one hand, online community is everywhere, in a dizzying and
constantly evolving array of forms. Yet open, civil, and reasonable online
discourse is a rarity. In the United States and United Kingdom, large
majorities of users decline new media's political and civic opportunities.54
One factor is the scourge of anonymous trolls dedicated to disrupting or
preventing reasoned online discourse by means of deliberate provocation,
misinformation, and abuse. Despite site hosts' efforts to restrain them, trolls
have been successful in persuading millions of sincere participants to flee
online comment boards, and many hosted discussion communities have had
to be shut down. The cure would initially seem to be a technological one:
simply restrict or eliminate anonymity in online civic fora, and hold
people's local identities personally accountable to their fellow citizens for
what they say. Certainly this might be part of the solution; our technologies
have specific affordances that condition our behavior, and in many contexts,

anonymity in online communities with civic aims is an 'unaffordable
affordance'
to trol ing behavior.
However, things are not so simple. Paradoxically, making people socially
accountable for what they say online can have an effect contrary to the
aims of robust civic discourse. The Pew Research Center, which has
historically conducted research that dispels negative prejudices about
social media and the Internet, has released a worrisome study suggesting
that social media platforms not only fail to reliably foster open civic
discourse, they often inhibit it.55 The study found that social media users
are generally much less likely than non- users to be willing to discuss a
controversial political issue with others, online or offline. Among the
specific findings: "86% of Americans were willing to have an in- person
conversation [about the issue]", but just 42% of Facebook and Twitter
users were willing to post about it on those platforms."56
Reinforcing earlier worries about echo chambers, filter bubbles, and
cyberbalkanization, the study found that, compared with non- users, social
media users in the United States were more likely to believe that their
friends, family, and acquaintances shared their own opinions, and more
reluctant than non- users to
183
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
183
discuss a political or civic issue if they felt their audience might not hold
the same view. With remarkable consistency across the study metrics, the
researchers found that social media users seem to be disproportionately
inclined in civic life to fall victim to the phenomenon known as the 'spiral of
silence.' This is the tendency of holders of a minority viewpoint to become
increasingly inclined to self- censor in order to escape the social penalties
for disagreement, which in turn artificially boosts the perceived strength of
the majority opinion across the community, further quieting dissent. The

study authors hypothesize that in online contexts, this heightened self-
censorship might be tied to social media users' greater awareness of the
opinions of others in their network (on this and other topics). Thus, they
could be more aware of views that oppose their own.
If their use of social media gives them broader exposure to the views of
friends, family, and workmates, this might increase the likelihood that
people will choose to withhold their opinion because they know more about
the people who will object to it.57
One of the most disturbing features of the study is that this effect appears to
spill over into offline civic contexts such as the family dinner table, the
workplace, or a night out with friends. Thus it appears that social media
practices may have a 'chilling effect' on civic discourse more broadly.
Overall social media platforms were not seen as more welcoming or safer
spaces for civic discourse: of 14% of responders who would not discuss a
political issue in person, only 0.3% of them were willing to post about it
online. Social media platforms may therefore distort our perceptions of
others' values and interests, making political and civic issues, especially
those that draw controversy, appear to us to be far less important to our
fellows than they actually are.
This is a potentially serious obstacle to the cultivation and maintenance of
technomoral virtues central to civic flourishing, including justice, courage,
civility, flexibility, and moral perspective. My ability to reliably respond to
injustices- especially those involving controversial issues such as race,
gender, class, and religion-
will be hampered if those platforms through which I learn about my world
cause me to fear and avoid public expressions of concern about these very
injustices.
How can I cultivate and express technomoral civility, the disposition to
cooperate successfully with others to pursue civic goods in technosocial
contexts, if those same contexts obscure how many of my fellows share my
interest in civic issues?

How can I cultivate the tendency to make appropriately flexible civic
judgments if I am shielded on social media from the true diversity of beliefs,
values, and aims of my fellow citizens and stakeholders? How can I
possibly cultivate an accurate perspective on the world as a moral whole if
those social media platforms that
184
1 84
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
promise me a wider view of that world actually deliver a view that is
politically and morally denatured in the ways we have described?
Here we see the importance of designing technologies that afford habits
between vicious technosocial extremes. For example, a civil person will
resist aggressive and unyielding impositions of her political worldview, but
also resist the habit of polite docility that encourages silence on issues of
critical public concern.
Furthermore, civility is expressed differently at different times and places,
in a situationally intelligent manner. What is virtuous civility at a wedding,
where the mildly ignorant prejudices of one's table companions are suffered
in favor of social harmony (unless, perhaps, they are directed at other
guests), may well be vicious if one tends to remain silent when those same
common but harmful prejudices are voiced at town meetings or in
classroom discussions. For millennia humans have negotiated nuanced and
flexible practices of civility in offline spaces. The same situational
intelligence must now be embodied in technomoral civility online. Yet we
have a lot of learning to do in this new arena of civic virtue.
For example, when in 2014 the Chancellor of the University of Il inois,
under pressure from donors and trustees, rescinded an offer of tenure to
scholar Edward Salaita on the basis of his 'uncivil' use of Twitter to
criticize Israel and its policies, she ignited a firestorm of debate about the
potential conflict of a 'civility litmus test' for scholars with the norms of
academic freedom and intellectual honesty.58

Neither Twitter nor the classroom are appropriate places for the kind of
bland civility one might maintain at a wedding, and the academic
community was vocal and well- justified in its objections to what appeared
to be the Chancellor's rhetorical abuse of the concept of civility for political
ends. Yet this does not mean that Twitter or academia should be 'civility-
free' zones. Just as we would be right to deem a scholar civilly unfit for the
academic profession if he or she were in the habit of using their fists at
conferences, or shouting down students with pro-fanities and threats, we
must recognize that on Twitter one can behave in a sufficiently uncivil
manner as to warrant having one's tweets deleted or one's account blocked.
Indeed, Twitter itself has adapted, if slowly, to evolving social expectations
that users will be protected from threatening abuse and cyberstalking.59
What are we to make of all this? More importantly, what should we do
about it? We must resist the easy temptation to lay the blame for civic
docility or incivility at the feet of new social media platforms, as if their
impact is independent of our moral agency. Yet it would be equally
misguided to let them off the hook as neutral tools with no impact upon that
agency. Technologies neither actively determine nor passively reveal our
moral character, they mediate it by conditioning, and being conditioned by,
our moral habits and practices.60 New social media can shape our civic
habits for better or for worse. At present, they too often shape it for the
worse, by promoting both vicious extremes of abusive incivility and
185
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
185
docile civic quietude. But let us resist the natural tendency to focus upon
those for whom social media networks appear to be a barrier to civic
flourishing; let us focus instead on the virtues of the few who seem to have
overcome this barrier.
Let us return to the Pew study discussed above. Among those 42% of users
who were willing to post online about a political issue, we can assume a
large number did so only because they anticipated robust agreement from a

like- minded audience. Let us set them aside. Who are the minority who
ventured their opinions in the online public sphere even when they knew
they would be challenged, and what is their civic character? Assume that
some were abusive trolls— insincere or uncivil enemies of cooperative civic
engagement. Set them aside too. Certainly some nonnegligible subset of our
original group remains. How did they come by the distinctive habits and
virtues that allow them to use physical spaces and social media platforms
effectively for civic purposes? What habits and practices, on and offline,
cultivated in them the technomoral excellence to courageously resist the
'spiral of silence' and speak up on important and controversial matters of
global justice, security, and community? Such people play a significant role
in launching those waves of political and moral consciousness that
periodically sweep through social media and mobilize civic action. We can
benefit from closer study of the character of such individuals, and, more
importantly, how, where and from whom they began to acquire the
technomoral virtues of honesty, courage, civility, and perspective they seem
to exercise more readily than most. We might also learn how they would
design or modify social media platforms to be more conducive to civic
flourishing than they are at present.
7.6 Technomoral Wisdom and Leadership
in a New Media Age: Looking Forward
Among those who recognize the intersection between new media practices
and virtue is media scholar Nick Couldry, who has repeatedly called for a
new emphasis on the role of character in global media ethics.61 Arguing
that accuracy, sincerity, and care are not just ethical norms of media
practice but virtues to be cultivated in them, he writes:
If we agree that media ... are integral to the life conditions that humans
now encounter, that is, lifeworlds of complex interconnection across large
scales, then media are plausibly part of the practices that contribute to
human excellence. Conducting the practice of media well— in accordance
with its distinctive aims, and so that, overal , we can live well with and
through media— is itself part of human excellence.62

186
1 8 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
Couldry's core media virtues of accuracy, sincerity, and care are consistent
with a broader framework of technomoral virtue such as the one suggested
in this book.
Moreover, he reinforces the distinctively global character of emerging
technomoral problems. As he notes, global interconnectivity forces the
entire human family to pose to one another the following question: "How
can we live sustainably with each other through media, even though media
unavoidably expose us to our moral differences?"63
To answer Couldry's important question, living sustainably and well with
emerging media technologies, especially social media, will require more
than just finding the right media tools to put into human hands. We must
also pay attention to the technomoral character of the diverse stakeholders
wielding those tools. We must look at the different ways in which new media
practices condition the habits through which technomoral character
develops, such as moral attention, relational understanding, reflective self-
examination, and prudential judgment. At the next level of analysis, specific
technomoral virtues (e.g., self-control, honesty, empathy, care, justice,
civility, flexibility, and perspective) need to be identified and empirically
studied in action across a range of local and global media contexts and
cultures.
Of course, studies of new media practices will uncover patterns of vice
more often than virtue; virtue is always rarer, and takes more time to
emerge and stabilize in social practices. Yet when confronted with the
problem of fostering virtue in morally confused or apathetic times, neither
Aristotle, Kongzi, nor the Buddha saw the practical obstacles as
insuperable. Each offers us a compelling lesson in moral hope. None
allowed the abstractions of moral theory to cloud the need for action, or the
perfect to become the enemy of the good. Instead, each turned to the
concrete question of how moral education and habituation could be

strengthened in their respective worlds, in the contexts of family, political,
religious or monastic life. They and their followers then moved to put these
views into practice, with powerful and lasting effects, both on local moral
cultures and the many other global cultures with which each eventually
interacted. To begin to foster global technomoral virtue, we must follow
their lead.
First and foremost, we must create more and better practical spaces for
technomoral education, places where people may apply the habits of moral
self-cultivation to the contemporary challenge of living well with emerging
technologies, and the inevitable surprises awaiting us in our technosocial
future.
Technomoral education must eschew passive learning of fixed rules and the
associated 'compliance mindset' in favor of active habituation and practice
across a variety of technosocial contexts, fostering habits of technomoral
reflection, the study of technomoral exemplars, and the skills of moral
discernment and judgment needed to adapt and flourish in new and
evolving technosocial circumstances.
187
New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
187
We also need to become more adept at recognizing worthy targets of moral
admiration and emulation in media practice— individuals and groups who
already promote human flourishing, locally and globally, through their use
of these technologies. Such models not only inspire and guide others toward
living well with existing new media, but help us to develop better media
technologies and practices.
Here we need the rarest of technomoral virtues: magnanimity and wisdom.
Among the most commonly bemoaned effects of the new media age is a loss
of mature moral expertise and leadership. While men like Walter Cronkite
and Edward R. Murrow were humanly imperfect media leaders, they
embodied for many the media vocation's nobler ideals, and inspired many

other minds to follow. Today, radical changes in the economic model of the
industry have led to widespread col apse of public trust in the media, and in
our age of increasing information- dependence, it is difficult to overstate
the global social price of this col apse.
New social media and the broader Web have yet to fill the moral vacuum
left by the traditional venues whose departure they hastened. Hans Jonas
lamented in 1979 that "we need wisdom the most when we believe in it
least."64 Indeed, many today find more reliable moral leadership in media
satirists than in those who seriously profess the vocation. Unless this
changes soon, our hopes of meeting the challenge of living well together in
a globally networked media society will be greatly dimmed. We must ask
ourselves how we as new media consumers and producers can start to
deliberately foster, identify, and encourage ambitious moral leaders with
the courage, nobility, and wisdom to use and shape these technologies for
our common good.
188
8
Surveillance and
the Examined Life
Cultivating the Technomoral
Self in a Panoptic World
s u r v e i l l a n c e t e c h n o l o g i e s a r e nothing new. For as long as
there have been creative minds, people have used them to find ingenious
ways of watching, listening, and tracking one another, and their motives
have been as various as the means. The implications of the topic for
questions of ethics, justice, and human nature have also magnetized the
philosophical imagination. Among the most famous thought experiments
concerning surveillance are Plato's Ring of Gyges, which imagines how
human character might be corrupted by perfect immunity from surveillance.
At the other extreme is Jeremy Bentham's notorious design for the

Panopticon, a prison designed to allow constant surveillance of its inmates
in order to pacify them with the ever- present possibility of being watched.
In the 20th century, Michel Foucault famously reflected in Discipline and
Punish upon Bentham's Panopticon as an illustration of a broader
philosophy of social control: panopticism.1 Panopticism employs a range of
political, material, psychological, and economic techniques to establish
maximally effective and far- ranging forms of social discipline with minimal
obtrusiveness, expenditure, force, and risk.
8.1 Virtue in the Panopticon: Challenging
the New Cult of Transparency
Many decades into the digital computing revolution, networked devices for
pervasive and unobtrusive surveillance are now well established in
countless millions of homes, schools, cars, workplaces, parks, playgrounds,
government buildings, shops, restaurants, airports, and sporting arenas.
They are in phones we carry in
189
Surveillance and the Examined Life
189
our pockets, in medical devices implanted in our bodies, embedded via
RFID
chips in our credit cards and clothing tags, in the invisible geofences
around our children's schools, in the high- powered satellites that orbit us,
and even in camera traps and webcams installed in the most remote swaths
of terrestrial wilderness, allowing monkeys and rare mountain pal as cats
to unwittingly record 'selfies' for our awe and amusement.
Today's means, motives, forms, and uses of surveillance are, as they have
always been, as varied as the human imagination. What is genuinely new is
the way in which massively networked data storage banks and powerful

algorithms now allow us to integrate, aggregate, compare, and extrapolate
from the output of these diverse and globally distributed surveillance tools,
producing an unprecedented and seemingly unfathomable ocean of
discretely retrievable data about people, places, things, and events. What is
more, most of this data is not originally created by surveillance mechanisms
as such. Most of it becomes material for surveillance simply by means of
the potential commercial and security value of every piece of digital
information your life generates. Since, relative to its potential value, data is
cheap to collect, transmit, and store, your credit card purchases, turnstile
exits, emails, web searches, phone contacts, social media 'likes,' personal
photos, family health risks, prescription history, favorite vacation spots,
college essays, movie rentals, music listening history, driving habits, and
dental hygiene are most likely all stored somewhere, and potentially
linkable to any other piece of information about you and others you know.
This is the phenomenon known as dataveillance.
Dataveillance complicates Foucault's account of a panoptic society in
several ways. First, much of the data we surrender appears to be freely
given. Even if we discount data unknowingly surrendered under opaque
digital 'terms of service'
or end- user license agreements (EULAs), many of us routinely post our
physical locations, consumption habits, political and religious affiliations,
voting intentions, health conditions, and romantic histories with the
conscious belief that the overall benefits of sharing these data outweigh the
privacy risks. We often fail to see, or care, that data which individually
seems trivial and harmless can, when aggregated by powerful algorithms,
be profoundly revealing of our selves. Is this the ultimate triumph of the
panopticon's invisible social discipline? Or an indicator that dataveillance
is driven by spontaneous, bottom- up forces rather than political control?
Additionally, in a world where our exposures to surveillance are so varied
and many, it is not clear to what extent surveillance still functions as an
effective means of control; perhaps we will become increasingly numbed to
surveillance's inhibitory effects.
Moreover, the lines between watchers and watched have never been so
fluid.

Fears of pervasive government surveillance, aka 'Big Brother,' endure;
indeed, in
190
1 9 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the wake of Wikileaks and Edward Snowden's revelations about the NSA
and GCHQ, they are more acute than ever. Yet global networks of
'hacktivists' and citizen watchdogs are using their own digital tools to
watch the watchers from below. Also growing are practices of lateral
surveillance: ordinary citizens watching and recording one another's
activities for any number of purposes, from the relatively benign to the
criminal. When we add to these the growing movement of personal or self-
surveillance discussed in the next section, it becomes clear that the lines of
power, discipline, and control that Foucault tried to articulate in his
account of a panoptic society have become increasingly tangled and diffuse.
Some employ the term sousveillance to encompass this contemporary
culture of expanding, reflexive, and manifold forms of watching and being
watched.2 The newest hardware innovations associated with the emerging
sousveillance culture are wearable personal computing and recording
devices. Examples include fitness and health trackers such as the Fitbit and
Jawbone, the Apple watch, and Google's controversial Project Glass.
Driving this culture are powerful advances in algorithms for geolocational
tracking, facial and speech recognition, and aggregat-ing and processing
large datasets. A sousveillance society's predominant cultural value is
transparency. One of the earliest forecasters and most avid defenders of
'the new transparency' is futurist David Brin, whose 1998 book The
Transparent Society called for a radical extension of liberal enlightenment
philosophies of social and political openness. Arguing that the interests of
justice and equality can only be served by a culture in which their
violations can be openly observed by anyone, Brin admiringly cites J.
Robert Oppenheimer's remark that "We do not believe any group of men
adequate enough or wise enough to operate without scrutiny or without

criticism. We know that the only way to avoid error is to detect it, that the
only way to detect it is to be free to inquire. We know that in secrecy error
undetected will flourish and subvert."3
Oppenheimer's view echoes the oft- quoted sentiment of U.S. Supreme
Court Justice Louis Brandeis that "Sunlight is said to be the best of
disinfectants," but all too often it is forgotten that the author of this quote
was the Court's most effective advocate of individual privacy, arguing in
1928 in the dissent to Olmstead v. United States that privacy, or "the right
to be let alone," is "the most comprehensive of rights and the right most
valued by civilized men."4 Brandeis's remarks do not contradict one
another, but acknowledge important asymmetries in power between
individual citizens who require privacy as a means of preserving what
liberty they have, and those political institutions and groups which require
regular 'disinfection' by public inquiry. A similar point is made by Brin
critic Bruce Schneier: "Forced openness in government reduces the relative
power differential between the two, and is generally good. Forced openness
in laypeople increases the relative power, and is generally bad."5 Brin
responds, however, that this falsely
191
Surveillance and the Examined Life
191
presumes a society in which there is reliable information about who has the
power that warrants watching, and who does not.6 In an increasingly
oligarchic society where a small number of private citizens amass vastly
disproportionate shares of wealth and quietly convert it to unprecedented
social and political influence on commercial and government institutions,
Brin may have a point.
Yet is the ethical question about surveillance only about power and public
corruption? Or does the growing 'cult of transparency' that drives the
vision of many futurist and tech leaders challenge the good life in other,
more personal ways?

When Brandeis remarked that privacy was the right "most valued by
civilized men," did he think this was simply because civilized men happen
to be fondest of their political liberties? Perhaps becoming or remaining
'civilized' requires that I enjoy some creative license to experiment with
thought and action in arenas that are not immediately subject to judgment
by others, especially when those 'others'
represent the cultural status quo. In her 2012 book Configuring the
Networked Self, privacy law scholar Julie Cohen writes extensively on
privacy's role in preserving spaces for free moral and cultural play, a
critical element in the development and maturation of selves and
communities. Likewise, and in a manner that intersects with Jaron Lanier's
concerns about technological 'lock- in,' Evgeny Morozov warns of the
profound risk of choosing technologies which, rather than encouraging
deliberation and experimentation with new moral and political patterns of
response, reify standing norms by enforcing and rewarding rote moral and
political habits.7 Surveillance technologies that work too well in making us
act 'rightly' in the short term may shortchange our moral and cultural
growth in the long term.
If this seems to overstate the risks of a sousveillance culture, consider that
many defenders of a transparent society anticipate and explicitly welcome
its salutary ethical impact on private, not merely political conduct. Brin's
favorite example of the power of transparency is the way in which the
visibility of other diners in a restaurant helps to ensure that they refrain
from reading our lips, or leaning in to overhear our conversations. The
moral ideal is that of having 'nothing to hide,' and thus nothing to lose from
a transparent society. As Google CEO and Chairman Eric Schmidt
famously said in a candid news interview, "If you have something that you
don't want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the first
place."8 Aside from its outrageous conflation of discretion and vice, this
philosophy overlooks the fact that information about me is also usual y
information about the others with whom I share my life, and thus to focus
only on the question of whether I have something to hide is a profoundly
solipsistic attitude to privacy concerns, one incompatible with the virtue of
moral perspective.9 Stil , there are many who would gladly impose this cost

on others in order to promote a supposedly greater end: a perfectly good
society, or as close as technology will
192
1 9 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
let us get. David Friedberg, CEO of a big data analytics firm owned by
Monsanto, recently summed up the emerging mantra of a morality of
transparency: "What happens when every secret [is exposed], from who
really did the work in the office, to sex, to who said what, is that we get a
more truthful society. ... Technology is the empowerment of more truth, and
fewer things taken on faith."10
Implicit in this statement is the unquestioned privilege of truth over other
moral values, including trust, respect, compassion, humility, and flexibility.
Better to always have the 'truth' about who on the team "really did the
work" than to permit the guy who was up all night soothing a colicky child
to quietly slack off at work one afternoon without risk of exposure. Better to
have the 'truth' about the name your husband called you in the heat of
anger than to allow him the protective shield of a friend's discretion, or the
liberty to substitute a gentler word in confessing the tirade to you later.
Here what Aristotle, Kongzi, and the Buddha celebrated as practical
wisdom, the ability of the virtuous person to perceive the moral world in
richer, subtler tones than others, is turned on its head: the technocrats
would have the moral world rendered in the stark black and white of binary
thought— truth or falsehood, faith or fact, good or bad.
Thus even the moral value of truth is distorted here by a profoundly
antihumanistic form of what Morozov calls information reductionism,
rightly scorned by Nietzsche as the delusion that there is a " 'world of truth'
that can be mastered completely and forever with the aid of our square little
reason."11 One can grant the existence of objective truths while
recognizing that reality, and especially moral reality, will always overflow
any concrete human representation of it. The moral truth about a situation

is always richer and more complex than our first glimpse reveals, and the
ethical response to that limitation is not simply to gather more 'bits' of
morally salient information but also to cultivate better ways of seeing,
questioning, thinking about, and listening to it.
These are exactly the talents missing in the morally rigid and passively con-
formist 'village honest man' who Kongzi held to be the 'enemy of virtue.' It
goes without saying that the village honest man cannot remediate his
deficient moral vision simply by donning a pair of Google glasses.
Moreover, his (or her) rigid, binary moralism often ends in tragedy.
Consider the indiscriminate data dumps by the hackers of the Ashley
Madison website in 2015, in which the exposure of an unethical business
model and legions of would- be marital cheaters was carried out with
breathtaking hubris and recklessness— endangering the lives of closeted
gay and lesbian citizens living under oppressive regimes, handing foreign
intelligence agencies mountains of leverage for blackmail of military and
government workers, and leaving a trail of unspeakable devastation in the
col ateral damage of suicides and family dissolutions. This is what a
transparent society looks like when untempered by humility, justice, care,
empathy, moral perspective, or wisdom.
193
Surveillance and the Examined Life
193
This is why the moral and political challenges facing humanity cannot be
met simply by equipping societies with more sophisticated tools or more
advanced STEM skills, independently of the virtues of the people who will
wield them.
Just as you do not make me a good surgeon by handing me a fancy surgical
robot, or a good soldier by sitting me at the controls of a remote UAV, you
do not produce more honest or discerning human beings simply by
supplying them with more powerful technologies for surveillance.
Technology ethicists Evan Selinger and Woodrow Hartzog further
illuminate this flaw in the logic of sousveillance culture by pointing to the

many empirical studies showing that people do not, in fact, reliably respond
to the supply of more information by making more ethical or rational
judgments. Just as often, in ways that are highly context- dependent, they
respond to increased information flows by becoming more passive, less
responsible, overwhelmed, and more likely to fall back on dangerous
cognitive biases and shortcuts in ethical judgment.12 For example, the
notorious 'backfire effect,' which psychologists have demonstrated in
media, political, and healthcare contexts, causes people with entrenched but
false beliefs to respond to 'corrective infor mation'— that is, reliable facts
that undermine that belief— in an entirely counterintuitive and nonrational
way. Such persons tend to respond to corrective information flows not by
abandoning or revising their false belief, but by becoming even more
confident in its truth!13
Newly data- driven powers of surveillance can also project dangerous
illusions of technological neutrality. Consider the increasing reliance of law
enforcement and other authorities on facial recognition software and
biometric surveillance in public spaces, in combination with predictive
algorithms for individual behavior and risk profiles. 'Big Data'- driven
'predictive policing' is often cited as the future of law enforcement and anti-
terrorism efforts, and a more objective, less biased methodology for crime
prevention.14 Yet the datasets upon which predictive algorithms are trained
reflect many of the same blindspots, flawed assumptions and biases of the
humans that generated and labeled that data—
biases all too easily disguised and reinforced by the power of data
anonymization and aggregation.
Many defenders of the cult of digital transparency fall victim to a distinctive
cognitive bias of their own, namely techno- fatalism, which preempts
rational consideration of otherwise compelling social, political, or ethical
critiques of emerging technological development. Brin expresses this bias
repeatedly in The Transparent Society, telling readers to surrender the
naïve fantasy of regulatory or cultural constraints on emerging surveillance
technologies, or any effective steering of their course. This is a bizarre
stance for a champion of Enlightenment liberalism, given that tradition's

hostility to unchecked powers. But Brin seems to have decided that 21st
century technology, although massively dependent on
194
1 94
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
political subsidy and regulatory and consumer support, has somehow
acquired a quasi- magical power to defy the public will:
Those cameras on every street corner are coming, as surely as the new mil-
lennium. Nothing will stop them. Oh, we can try. We might agitate,
demonstrate, legislate. But in rushing to pass so- called privacy laws, we
will not succeed in preventing hidden eyes from peering into our lives. ... As
this was true in the past, so it will be a thousandfold in the information age
to come, when cameras and databases will sprout like crocuses— or weeds
—
whether we like it or not.15
Such fatalism in emerging technology discourse is patently false as a claim
of logical necessity, and it fails to be compelling even on historical
grounds; after al , humans have managed through intensely cooperative
efforts to keep germline engineering as well as nuclear, chemical, and
biological weapons from proliferat-ing like unregulated 'weeds.' Yet if
enough people are convinced by such rhetoric to surrender any hope of
intelligently steering the course of emerging technologies, it becomes
truth.16 Moreover, without the virtues of technomoral character outlined in
chapter 6, our attempts to steer the sousveillance culture and other
emerging technosocial developments in ways compatible with our long-
term flourishing will most likely fail— not out of fatal necessity, but out of
careless indifference to our ongoing development as moral agents.
But this is not a counsel of despair. For two- plus millennia the human
family has, in diverse cultural traditions spanning the globe, developed
sound practices of moral self- cultivation. When properly nourished by

individuals and institutions, and applied in the relevant domains, they yield
remarkable, if humanly imperfect and inconsistent, results. No one can
reasonably doubt that Confucian moral education— when habitually,
sincerely and thoughtfully enacted— has been successful in cultivating
stronger moral dispositions toward filial care and loyalty, even if these
practices remain subject to extramoral influences and error.
Only a wholly uncharitable mind could doubt that millions of Buddhists
have, over the centuries, managed by means of their practices to expand
their capacities for flexible tolerance, moral perspective, and compassion,
even if these capacities remain limited and imperfect. And few would doubt
that Aristotle's philosophy, in those communities where its influence on
moral education endured, shaped the virtues of civic affiliation and
political friendship so cherished, if imperfectly realized, by Greco- Roman
and later European cultures. If devoted, sincere Confucians have cultivated
stronger filial respect; if devoted, sincere Buddhists have cultivated
enlarged compassion and generosity; and if devoted, sincere Aristotelians
have cultivated more active civic friendship, then
195
Surveillance and the Examined Life
195
why should we now doubt our own potential to cultivate greater
technomoral virtues in ourselves?
The emergence of a digital sousveillance culture thus invites two questions.
First, how might this culture influence, for better or for worse, the
cultivation of technomoral virtues such as honesty, empathy, justice, and
self- control? Second, and flipping the first in a way that should by now be
familiar, how can cultivating the technomoral virtues outlined in chapter 6
help us to improve our chances of flourishing together in an increasingly
panoptic technosocial environment? Let us begin by delving into an aspect
of sousveillance culture that poses an especially strong challenge to

traditional practices of moral self- cultivation: namely, the quest for the
quantified self.
8.2 Technologies of the Examined Life
In the 4th century bce, the Greek philosopher Socrates asserted that "the
unexamined life is not worth living for a human being."17 In that same
century, the Chinese philosopher Mengzi quoted Kongzi (Confucius) as
saying, "If I examine myself and am not upright, although I am opposed by
a common fellow coarsely clad, would I not be in fear? If I examine myself
and am upright, although I am opposed by thousands and tens of
thousands, I shall go forward."18 How might a 21st century sage pursue
this age- old ideal of the 'examined life'? Will she employ the very same
methods of conscious reflection, meditation, and critical questioning used
since classical antiquity? Or will she lean on new technologies to better
understand who she is, and how well she is living? Consider this alternative
vision of the examined life, proposed by contemporary futurist Kevin Kelly:
Through technology we are engineering our lives and bodies to be more
quantifiable. We are embedding sensors in our bodies and in our
environment in order to be able to quantify all kinds of functions. Just as
science has been a matter of quantification— something doesn't count
unless we can measure it— now our personal lives are becoming a matter
of quantification. So the next century will be one ongoing march toward
making nearly every aspect of our personal lives— from exterior to interior
— more quantifiable. There is both a whole new industry in that shift as
well as a whole new science, as well as a whole new lifestyle. There will be
new money, new tools, and new philosophy stemming from measuring your
whole life. 'Lifelogging' some call it. It will be the new normal.19
In chapter 4 we saw that a habit of reflective self- examination is an
essential part of the practice of moral self- cultivation, a practice that cuts
across cultural
196
1 9 6

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
and historical boundaries.20 In addition to enabling us to periodically take
stock of our character and assess the moral trajectory of our lives thus far,
habits of self- examination can help us to respond appropriately in novel
and unfamiliar circumstances, which increasingly define 21st century life.
While a person of mature character moving through familiar moral
territory can summon her virtues automatically and effortlessly, a
practically wise person can also work her way through unfamiliar moral
territory, in part by cal ing upon her explicit knowledge of her own moral
competencies and limitations as they relate to the practical challenge
confronting her.
For classical philosophers, the imperative of self- examination answered a
practical rather than a theoretical question— namely, how can we best
secure the good life for ourselves and others? Today a growing number of
people embrace new technology- driven habits of self- examination in the
hope of attaining the good life by means of the 'quantified self.' The
quantified self is a picture of one's own existence produced by perpetual
surveillance via biometric and mobile sensors, which yield unprecedented
volumes of streaming data about one's psychological and physical states
and activities. The movement's motto? "Self- knowledge through numbers."
Is this simply the next phase of humanity's historical quest for the examined
life? Is it an entirely new vision of the good life and the path leading to it?
Or does it embody a profound misconception of the human self and its
potential to flourish?
The Examined Life and the Ethical Ideal
As we have seen, a person leading an examined life historically sought
reflective self- knowledge not as an end in itself, but as a means to
something else: the cultivated self. A cultivated self is one that has been
improved by conscious, lifelong efforts to bring one's examined thoughts,
feelings, and actions nearer to some normative ideal. The examined life was
thus part of a broader practice of self- care, what Plato called the 'care of
the soul.' In classical thinking, this care involves philosophical habits of
self- awareness that enable a gradual realignment of one's actions, values,

emotions, and beliefs with the Good. We explored three cultural variants of
this element of self- care in chapter 4.
Yet leading an examined life is a struggle for most. We are frequently blind
to our own failings, unable to distinguish between true and false or higher
and lower goods, or distracted from virtuous aims by nonmoral needs and
desires.
As a result, says the Confucian philosopher Mengzi, "the multitude can be
said never to understand what they practice, to notice what they repeatedly
do, or to be aware of the path they follow all their lives."21 If Mengzi is
correct, then few of us can hope to live well without some kind of
philosophical intervention. If our
197
Surveillance and the Examined Life
197
path to a good life is blocked by these obstacles to moral self- cultivation,
then we require one or more practical remedies that can help us move over,
around, or past them. Reflective self- examination is one such remedy.
Of course, the habit of self- examination must itself be carried out wisely,
with appropriate flexibility and moderation. We should not indulge the kind
of obsessive self- examination that produces paralyzing anxiety and endless
self-recrimination, and/ or a narcissistic overestimation of the worldly
significance of one's own moral being. That said, developing this habit in a
measured way is an essential part of preserving individual and collective
human moral character in new technosocial domains, and will help us to
identify and cultivate the technomoral skills and virtues we need in order to
flourish in increasingly unstable and opaque practical environments.
Unfortunately, making this virtue a lasting habit requires more than simply
recognizing its importance. As with all moral practices, it is vulnerable to
disruption, neglect, corruption, and replacement by counterfeit. To see how
this might be a particular danger in today's technosocial environments, let
us recall what is most essential to self- examination as a moral practice.

8.2.1 Technologies of the (Cultivated) Self
In his 1982 lectures of the same name, Foucault called such practices
"technologies of the self " ( techniques de soi): methods by which members
of a given culture
"effect by their own means or with the help of others a certain number of
operations on their own bodies and souls, thoughts, conduct, and way of
being, so as to transform themselves in order to attain a certain state of
happiness, purity, wisdom, perfection, or immortality."22 'Technologies of
the self ' commonly associated with philosophical practice include the
Socratic habit of dialectical questioning; the careful study and emulation of
exemplary persons (e.g., Aristotle's phronimoi or the Confucian junzi);
immersion in philosophical and moral education; the cultivation of
narrative habits of confession, letter writing, and meditation; reflective
examinations of conscience and memory; and the testing of one's decisions
according to general moral principles.
In talking about these philosophical practices as "technologies of the self,"
we hearken back to the ancient Greek concept of techné as a craft by which
a product (here, the cultivated ethical self ) is gradually constructed and
shaped. Yet to be authentic, techniques of self- care must be consciously and
reflectively embraced by the moral agent being cultivated. While others
may help, the agent must actively examine and evaluate her own conduct.
Even Foucault, who emphasizes the construction of the self by impersonal
cultural, historical, and political forces, holds that the very thing such
forces ultimately produce is a self- conscious agent who assumes moral
responsibility for herself.
198
1 9 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
In Discipline and Punish, Foucault uses Bentham's design for the
Panopticon prison tower to show how social, economic, and political
structures can effectively internalize the normalizing power of surveillance,

such that the subject of power willingly creates herself within the confines
of her culture's dominant ideals. Foucault's account reflects a postmodern
suspicion of such processes, which bring individual thought and behavior
into alignment with cultural or political norms. Such suspicion is hardly
groundless; we need not rehearse the many ways in which normalizing
powers can inflict not only bodily but psychological violence upon human
persons.
But it would be rash to assume that technologies of the self are inherently
oppressive. To do so I would have to deny that actively striving to configure
myself for a flourishing life could be an authentic choice, and this seems to
unduly demean human agency. Furthermore, technologies of the self do not
function as pure constraints on my development— they also reveal richer
possibilities for living that may otherwise go unseen and unrealized. For
example, by exposing myself to the moral questioning of others, or by
comparing my actions with those of someone whose character I deeply
admire, I might discover that I am far less forgiving of others than I
imagined myself to be, and that I hold onto petty resentments far longer
than is reasonable. In discovering this, I reopen the possibility of becoming
a person less consumed by anger and judgment, freer to love, and to bond
more deeply with other imperfect souls. My life is not restricted by this
result of self- care— it is greatly enhanced and enlarged.
Thus while the accepted aims and means of self- cultivation are shaped by
powerful cultural forces, these need not impose any single universal image
of the
'cultivated self,' or any one best technique for pursuing it. To justify the use
of philosophical technologies for an examined life, we need only assume
that for any individual, the decision to pursue a developmental path by such
means can be authentic and justifiable. Yet not every technology of the self
is philosophical. The Quantified Self movement, embodied in Kevin Kelly's
assertion that life "doesn't count unless we can measure it," aims to use
emerging technologies to transcend the limitations of philosophical and
other qualitative methods of self- examination.
8.3 'Smart' Surveillance and the Quantified Self

Adherents of the Quantified Self movement, as well as an increasing number
of average consumers, employ mobile, wearable, and/ or biometric sensors
such as the FitBit and Jawbone devices, smartphone apps such as Moves
and Chronos, video cameras, and a range of other devices to measure,
track, analyze, and store volumes of recorded data concerning an ever-
expanding list of personal
199
Surveillance and the Examined Life
199
variables. Weight, blood pressure, muscle mass, sleep patterns, mood,
physical activity, energy levels, creativity, and social and cognitive
performance are just a few variables of common interest. Among the more
active and vocal adherents of the movement is statistician Konstantin
Augemberg, author of a blog called Measured M e (www.measuredme.com)
where he posts the results of his efforts to quantify and track everything
from alertness and sleep efficiency to happiness and life satisfaction.
Among his most ambitious projects is a quest to quantify
'living well,' under which he subsumes measures of physical activity
expended, healthy eating, diversity and engaged 'flow' of his daily
experiences, and time spent 'recharging' with sleep and meditation.
The Quantified Self movement claims thousands of followers across the
world, with hundreds of local meetup groups and an annual global
conference at which enthusiasts share information on the latest gadgets for
self- surveillance and tracking. Yet these numbers are dwarfed by the
millions of casual consumers who compose the market for affordable and
user- friendly self- tracking devices. Is this just another phase in the
evolution of technologies of the self, in Foucault's sense?
Or does the move from philosophical to digital methods of self- examination
represent a more profound moral shift?

A satisfactory answer would require deeper inquiry, but let us weigh some
preliminary considerations. As Foucault explains at length in his 1982
lectures, the concept of the examined life is historically fluid. Classical,
medieval, and modern visions circulated between the ideal's first
incarnation as a form of self-care that maintains the overall excellence of
one's life activity, and an alternative conception of self- care as a way to
preserve the integrity of the soul. Foucault observes that by the 20th
century, the classical vision of self- care as a tool for setting youth on the
right path to political life had evolved into a medical- psychological model,
in which the task of self- care is seen as a lifelong duty to take continual
stock of one's moral health.
Nevertheless, certain core notions endure across these historical changes.
One common thread is the idea that a good human life presupposes my
ability and intentional choice to habitually reflect upon and attend to my
own moral development or trajectory. A second commonality, implicit in the
first, is the requirement that I take steps to actively cultivate or steer that
trajectory in the desired direction. This is so even if I reject the idea of a
fixed end or destination toward which my life must aim. For even if I may
freely invent the form of life to which I aspire, that choice implies a
commitment to actively shape my own person into the sort of being that can
achieve such a life. Lastly, the idea of self- care has historically included a
duty to be concerned with those aspects of my life and activity that are
central to my moral character (i.e., my virtues and vices). All of these
common habits of moral self- care appeared in our examinations of the
practice
200
2 0 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
of moral self- cultivation in chapters 3, 4, and 5. While Platonists,
Confucians, Buddhists, Aristotelians, Stoics, medieval Christians, and
moderns all had very different ideas of what one's moral constitution ought
to be like, none would have been satisfied with habits of self- surveillance
that left the moral virtues largely unexamined.

While one might simply reject the notion that a good life is an examined
one, let us assume for the sake of argument that it is and see what follows
from it in relation to the Quantified Self movement. Let's start with the
requirement to pay conscious attention to one's developmental trajectory. It
may seem that the movement not only satisfies but exceeds this requirement
by encouraging a kind of hyperattention to, even obsession with, that
trajectory. A quick perusal of blog posts, websites, and essays produced by
Quantified Self enthusiasts conveys an atmosphere of fevered excitement
about finding ways to track ever more personal variables, with ever greater
degrees of mathematical precision and reliability. Yet as the number of
tracked variables expands, we must ask whether the act of 'attending' to
oneself becomes more difficult and how many of the factors being tracked
are actually meaningful. As any philosopher of perception or cognitive
scientist knows, attention is as much about the ability to screen out
information as it is about taking it in; in fact, the former capacity enables
the latter.
Consider the Measured Me project mentioned earlier, which posted weekly
'lifestream' updates for years before taking a hiatus in Fall 2014. Its
author's published personal dataset for October 2012 included sixty- six
daily datapoints, taken for twenty- one personal variables ranging from
'mental energy' to 'charisma' and
'self- esteem' (along with six variables for the weather). The previous
month's dataset included still other variables, such as calories consumed/
expended and personal 'entropy,' a measure of how "chaotic" a particular
morning, afternoon, or evening was. Now to be fair, these are early
experiments in self- surveillance and quantification, rather than a honed
practice of self- cultivation. But it is worth asking whether the latter can be
served by habits that aim primarily at expanding the range of self-
surveillance rather than selecting for and attending to the most salient
features. Indeed, the obsessive quality of many Quantified Self habits evokes
the philosopher Mengzi's warning against hyperactive, overly self-
conscious efforts at self- improvement, which he compared to the self-
defeating habit of the farmer who tried to help his plants grow faster by pul
ing at their sprouts.23

This brings us to the second core element of an examined life: the decision
to use the results of self- examination to cultivate or steer one's own
personal development in a desired direction. This is a form of philosophical
'perfectionism,'
what Stanley Cavell has described (taking Emerson's phrase) as a
fundamentally human quest for my "further, next, unattained but attainable
self."24 There is
201
Surveillance and the Examined Life
201
little evidence that this is a central aim of devotees of the Quantified Self. It
is true that they seek correlations between tracked variables precisely
because these could aid prediction and control of one's personal states. For
example, if I discover that my happiness or resilience tends to decrease
sharply as local temperature or humidity rises, I might think to move to a
different climate and see if my well- being improves.
Yet few Quantified Self enthusiasts express a clear sense of what kind of self
they wish to cultivate overal ; nor is the 'cultivated self ' an explicit and
recognized goal of the movement. Indeed the perceived value of the practice
appears more epistemic than developmental, as indicated by their motto,
"Self- knowledge through numbers." The Quantified Self website claims
that the movement's aim is "to help people get meaning out of their
personal data." But this is profoundly vague; what sort of meaning? To
what end, if any? While Quantified Self enthusiasts are developing
techniques that could perhaps someday be placed in the service of a
philosophical practice of self- cultivation, this is not presently their goal.
Since it isn't aimed in that direction, the movement in its current form does
not offer nor even promise a new road to the cultivated self.
Does a quantified life display the third core feature of an examined life?
Can it attend to the specifically moral features of one's character and

activity? On this score, we find the greatest tension between a quantified
life and an examined one.
The moral dimensions of the self are among the most difficult to translate
into numbers. In contrast with variables such as calories, muscle mass, or
sleep hours, the moral features of my person seem to be difficult to
formalize into a tidy list of variables, much less variables that can be
assigned discrete values. Yet as Kevin Kelly's quote makes clear, the
Quantified Self movement is committed to a form of self- surveillance that is
both encompassing and scientific, where 'scientific' entails 'quantifiable.'
Its enthusiasts readily assign numbers to philosophically rich concepts
associated with the good life, such as 'happiness' and 'living well.' Yet even
these are not interpreted in moral terms; rather, Quantified Self enthusiasts
use them to describe a subjective sense of well- being and engaged 'flow'
that is quite compatible with morally weak character or practice.
These preliminary analyses suggest that Quantified Self practices do not
currently constitute technologies of the self in Foucault's sense, nor do they
fulfill the aims of an examined life needed to cultivate virtue and promote
sustained human flourishing. It remains to be seen how the movement will
evolve. It may prove to be a technological fad with transient appeal. Or it
may grow and endure as a distinct cultural practice of self- surveillance
unrelated to the aims of an examined life. In that case, however, it would
likely be viewed as an alternative to moral technologies of the self, as it is
difficult to see how the habits of self-tracking promoted by the Quantified
Self movement can coexist happily with
202
2 0 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the philosophical and spiritual habits of an examined life. After all, each
practice demands a considerable investment of time and mental energy; can
one imagine a Quantified Self devotee faithfully cataloguing and analyzing
dozens of daily datapoints on their behavior and mental states, while also

exercising the daily habits of narrative self- examination practiced by the
likes of Marcus Aurelius or Emerson?
Still, why not just conclude that philosophical technologies of the self are
hopelessly outdated, destined to be replaced with more 'objective,'
'scientific,'
and user- friendly tools for living the examined life? Indeed, a central aim
of the movement is to rely more and more on technological devices to
record, store, and analyze these datapoints for us. Its advocates expect that
within a few short decades, nearly everyone will use such devices to collect
unprecedented amounts of data about ourselves in real- time, including
data that are inaccessible to conscious reflection. Furthermore, such data
will be far more precise and less vulnerable to subjective distortion than the
contents of reflective self- examination. Feedback from artificially
intelligent life coaches will be able to tell us what adjustments we need to
make to our behavior or thinking. Technological practices of self-
quantification may thus appear to offer a superior replacement for moral
technologies of the self. So why reject this thinking?
The answer is straightforward enough: this thinking commits a profound
category mistake. The most accurate and comprehensive recording of your
past and present states would not constitute an examined life, because a
dataset is not a life at al . As Aristotle reminds us, my life includes my
future, and thus the examined life is always a project, never an
achievement. It is the future toward which we live, and for the sake of which
we examine and cultivate ourselves. We prize the examined life not for the
'data' that reflective philosophical practice yields, but for the
transformative nature of the practice itself and the dignity it confers upon
those who take it up. The examined life is worth living because it embodies
those chosen habits of mind and conscience that constitute a person who
takes responsibility for her own being, and in particular her moral being.
This capacity may or may not be uniquely human (can a dolphin reflect
upon what kind of dolphin it is, and how far it is from the dolphin it wants
to be?); but it is the capacity that most uniquely defines a moral agent, and
a person in the fullest sense.
8.4 Surveillance and Moral 'Nudges'

Converging with sousveillance culture is another emerging technosocial
alternative to the conscious practice of moral self- cultivation. This is the
phenomenon known as nudging. The idea behind 'nudges' is to use
technology to foster prosocial behavior in ways that require little or no
conscious effort from users. Some
203
Surveillance and the Examined Life
203
nudges are built into physical environments: just as speedbumps promote
safe driving, one might design a building's stairwell to be more accessible
and attractive than the elevator as a means to promote residents'
exercise.25 Today, digital surveillance and self- tracking technologies
afford far more personalized and responsive forms of nudging. Apps on
your phone can now remind you to text your girlfriend, call your mother,
and eat more fiber. Your 'smart' pill bottle can ask you to take your diabetes
medicine. Your ToneCheck software can tell you to write a nicer email to
your boss, and your Apple Watch can tell you to calm the hell down during
a family argument. Ten or twenty years from now, it is hard to imagine a
domain of practice in which you won't be able to have an artificially
intelligent behavioral monitor if you want one. In many places, such as the
workplace, it is unlikely you will be offered the choice.
These are astonishing possibilities, and used selectively and in moderation,
they could contribute a great deal to human flourishing. Unfortunately, we
are not today cultivating ourselves, or educating our children, to attain the
technomoral virtues needed to steer such practices wisely and intentionally.
It is essential for human agency that our moral practice, whether supported
by philosophical or digital technologies of the self, remain our own
conscious activity and achievement rather than passive, unthinking
submission. Imagine if Aristotle's fellow Athenians had been ruled by such
perfect laws that they almost never erred in moral life, either in individual
or collective action. Imagine also that Athens' laws operated in such an
unobtrusive and frictionless manner that the citizens largely remained
unaware of their content, their aims, or even their specific behavioral

effects. Our fictional Athenians are reliably prosocial, but they cannot begin
to explain why they act in good ways, why the ways they act are good, or
what the good life for a human being or community might be. For they have
never given a moment's thought to any of these things, yet they go on every
day behaving reliably justly to one another. Would we want to say these
hypothetical Athenians are moral beings? Do they live well? Do they
flourish in the way that we would most want our own children and friends
to flourish?
How do our hypothetical Athenians differ from the 'pod people' or 'Stepford
Wives' described in all manner of modern science fiction dystopias, where
moral conformity is achieved through a process of social transmission that
operates independently of deliberation and choice? In such fictions, the pod
people often retain intellect or consciousness— they converse with one
another about everything from sports to business to war to childrearing. It
is what we cannot imagine them talking about that makes them dystopian
horrors. They cannot talk about how they themselves might become better
people, what obstacles, trade- offs, and choices they face in doing so, or
what that project of moral self- cultivation would mean to them or the
world.
204
2 0 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
The real Athenians were not pod people, and fortunately neither are we.
Nor will apps, wearable computing, or 'smart' environments make us into
mindless moral zombies. Yet this does not make them harmless. From the
risks of 'helicopter parenting,' in which the agency of children and young
adults is tightly constrained to prevent them from making mistakes or
missing opportunities, to the seductive pull of political and religious
groupthink, humans already struggle to habitually exercise their own moral
agency, a struggle that is millennia old. If surveillance and nudging
technologies are marketed and embraced as yet one more social license to
relinquish this struggle, so that our moral lives may be quietly and
seamlessly molded into the shapes programmed by Silicon Valley software

engineers and technocrats, we may not become pod people— but will we
become more or less like the human beings we wish to be?
8.5 Flourishing with Emerging
Surveillance Technologies
The practices of moral self- cultivation we articulated in Part II— and
human flourishing itself— face serious challenges from the rapid
emergence of a global sousveillance culture. If one were a techno-
pessimist, one might conclude that the technologies driving this
phenomenon promise only to magnify asymmetries of political and
economic power; to diminish the space for moral play and authentic
development; to render trust in human relations superfluous; to reduce
embodied moral truth to decontextualized information; and to replace
examined lives with datasets. On top of this, we hear from futurists and
technocrats that the course of our sousveillance society is already out of
our hands, and that our only hope is to adapt to whatever shapes new
surveillance technologies impose upon on our lives.
Fortunately, the latter claim is entirely false, and not one of the pessimistic
scenarios we have mentioned is fated. Nor is there any reason to think that
the only alternative to those scenarios is to simply reject all new
surveillance and 'smart'
technologies, or to resist every one of the cultural transformations they
engender.
Of course, effective resistance very probably would be impossible in the
absence of more widespread global cultivation of the technomoral virtues
that enable prudent civic deliberation and collective action in
contemporary life. But let us imagine that through improved technomoral
education and practice such virtues were to be more widely cultivated. In
that case, their use in prudent technosocial action would be far more
discerning, subtle, and flexible than any indiscriminate refusal of new
technologies. Possessors of technomoral virtues would recognize, for
example, the ways in which emerging surveillance technologies can be

redesigned, experimented with, applied differently, restricted to appropriate
contexts,
205
Surveillance and the Examined Life
205
made accountable and responsive to social and political critique, and used
as extensions and reflections of our moral virtues rather than substitutes for
them.
Let us consider an example. Even in a society where technomoral education
for civic virtue is reasonably effective, political corruption and abuses of
power will exist. The need for some degree of transparency in government
and other centers of power is real, and new technologies of sousveillance
can be helpful means of holding those powers accountable— if and only if
they are used wisely.
As Morozov notes, it is naive to think that government and other large civic
institutions would be improved by recording every detail of their operations
and making them available to all on demand. Not only would the glut of
data produce more confusion among citizens than clarity, but it would likely
change institutional behaviors for the worse. If representatives and leaders
knew that every word and act would be made available for public
inspection and criticism, they would be discouraged from reaching difficult
but necessary compromises, voicing uncertainty, taking important risks, and
making the painful trade- offs that prudent governance requires.26 Just as
privacy secures an important space of free play and experimentation for
individuals, it also secures this for institutions.
Thus human flourishing requires cultivating technomoral honesty, a respect
for truth in its diverse appearances across the range of technosocial
contexts, rather than the flattened, grossly reductive account of truth offered
by the defenders of a 'transparent society.' An institution, politician, or
citizen who records or shares information without discernment or
contextual sensitivity is not virtuous but vicious. Imagine a politician who

records sensitive details of diplomatic negotiations and then disseminates
the unedited footage on social media, with disastrous results for global civic
flourishing. This is not an honest politician, because she is not exemplary in
her treatment of political truth. Compare this contextual role with that of an
academic, where in general the norms of exemplary conduct will be more
conducive to plain truth- telling. Yet even here, people must be discerning in
the treatment of information; an honest scientist must know her audiences
and venues, and there are times when excessive precision or transparency
will obscure the truth rather than reveal it. Should we imagine that it would
be exemplary or truth- serving for a scientist to embed in her articles a
computer- generated tran-script of every mundane minute of laboratory
activity leading up to publication, including that morning when she, due to
an error in preparing some slides for dis-section, spent hours analyzing and
remarking upon a completely contaminated sample?
Still, there are circumstances in the life of government, academia, business,
and other institutions— even the private lives of citizens— that justify
opening the books for inspection, so to speak. We need the technomoral
wisdom to make more intelligent and practically discerning use of the new
technologies that can
206
2 0 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
make opening the books in such circumstances easier. For example, we
might insist upon the maintenance of encrypted electronic recordings of
certain legislative sessions or high- level government meetings, but require
these records to remain encrypted unless the courts declare a compelling
public interest in the information. We might expand the rights of private
citizens to safely record their interactions with law enforcement, but look
toward designing technologies for doing so that are less intrusive than
having multiple cell phone cameras held up in the face of every officer
trying to do her job. We might require that wearable recording devices
audibly announce when a photo or video is being captured. We might
discourage or ban their use in public recreation or wilderness areas.

To balance the interests of child safety with the developmental importance
of parent- child trust, those who wish to use RFID tags or other geo-
enabled devices to track the locations of their children could be encouraged
to have the data stored in third- party systems that are inconvenient to
access, lowering the temptation to monitor children in non- emergency
circumstances. Children in state custody or new foster homes could be
supplied by courts with digital means of documenting and reporting abuse
or neglect. To tackle the cognitive biases and blindspots that commonly
impede accurate moral self- assessment, future self- surveillance
technologies could be designed to provide new forms of moral biofeedback,
allowing us to better discern unflattering, destructive, or antisocial habits
and traits that evade traditional introspective methods of self- examination.
We might also look to design the outputs of self- surveillance technologies
in ways that resist reductive quantification; instead of yielding sets of raw,
decontextualized numbers or graphs, we might design such technologies to
display their results in a more descriptive or holistic form that requires
integration within a moral narrative of the good life.
Of course, such proposals are conditioned upon cultural and technical
feasi-bility, and some may just be bad ideas; but the point is that without
technomoral virtues, we will lack the ability to determine individually or
collectively which goals and means of surveillance are wise and worth
pursuing. In particular, the global goods of human flourishing described in
chapter 2 will be virtually impossible to secure in these virtues' absence. We
have already spoken of technomoral honesty, which is of clear relevance to
the prudent guidance of surveillance technologies, but let us consider a few
others:
Living well in the 21st century will require enhancing our capacities for
deliberative self- control in technosocial contexts. Which specific
surveillance and nudging practices will aid us in this effort? Which are
more likely to induce greater moral passivity in the manner foretold by
Orwell's 1984 or Huxley's Brave New World, weakening our ability to
deliberate upon and mold our own desires? Which modes of education and
cultural expression can strengthen our
207

Surveillance and the Examined Life
207
self- control in technosocial contexts, allowing us to intelligently steer
rather than passively adapt to the emerging sousveillance phenomenon?
Additionally, could cultivating technomoral humility help us to acquire
more modest and realistic expectations of how rationally and effectively
humans respond to surveillance practices? How might surveillance
technologies be redesigned with this in mind, and used to help us to grasp
the limits of, and form more reasoned hopes for, our informational
capacities? Could such practices help us to more honestly confront, accept,
and adapt to a technosocial future that will continue to outstrip human
mastery?
With respect to the virtue of technomoral justice, how can we use
surveillance technologies to enhance our awareness of unjust asymmetries
in the global benefits and risks of technosocial developments, and the
impositions of technosocial power on the basic rights, dignity, or welfare of
others? Could we then put this new awareness to work in educational and
cultural practices that foster more just uses of surveillance technology?
Can more discerning applications of surveillance technologies foster
greater technomoral empathy with the suffering and joys of others outside
our immediate view, and better moral care and loving service of their
needs? Can discerning surveillance practices foster more flexible responses
to local and global technosocial change and opacity? Or more holistic and
less fragmented moral perspectives?
Of course, considerable technomoral virtue is already required in order to
frame and execute ethically constructive applications of surveillance
technologies. We must ask ourselves where such exemplary virtues can be
found today.
If they are widely lacking in the relevant institutions and cultures, then the
most pressing question for us is this: How can we begin to design and
implement now educational and cultural projects to enhance the cultivation
of technomoral virtue? For this is the only way to ensure that new

surveillance technologies are wisely deployed to promote human flourishing
in an increasingly opaque future— as opposed to the indiscriminate,
extreme, and reductive uses of these technologies all too often favored by
defenders of a new, radically transparent surveillance society.
208
9
Robots at War and at Home
Preserving the Technomoral
Virtues of Care and Courage
t o d a y w e s t a n d on the threshold of welcoming robots into domains of
activity that will expand their presence in our lives dramatically, extending
well beyond the primarily industrial contexts in which robots have for
decades been working alongside or in place of us. The integration of
machine robotics with biomechanical engineering and artificial intelligence
(AI) software has vastly expanded the range of human functions that robots
will be able to perform in the coming decades. Many predict a 21st century
labor incursion of robotic and AI systems that compete with or even
outperform human workers in jobs that even a decade ago seemed
unthinkable targets for automation.1 If these predictions are right, then we
may soon be served (and many of us disemployed) by a wave of artificially
intelligent legal assistants, accountants, pharmacists, drivers, lab tech-
nicians— perhaps even teachers, artists, and composers.
Investment in these technologies is driven by a host of factors, not the least
of which is that robots and software 'employees' don't need vacations,
health care, or workers' rights. Nor will they sexually harass each other,
yell at clients, or question their managers. Their sheer computational
power, speed, and accuracy in many tasks will also be increasingly
impossible for humans to match. Robotic
"surgeons" already conduct or assist in medical procedures with a
precision well beyond the capabilities of human hands, while IBM's Watson

computer is hyped as soon to be the "best diagnostician in the world."2
Sophisticated robotic drones already assist or take the place of human
soldiers in critical and dangerous military operations. Millions of
consumers have embraced the commercial rise of personal and social
robots that promise to do more than clean our floors and mow our lawns—
today they promise to entertain, educate, bathe, feed, play, and chat with us,
and do the same for those we love.3
209
Robots at War and at Home
209
These developments naturally give rise to a broad range of philosophical
questions. Some are metaphysical (Could artificially intelligent robots
become conscious or self- aware? Could they have emotions or moral
agency?); others are economic (What do robots mean for the future of
human labor and capital?) or political (Can/ should robots have rights?);
some are existential (What purpose will human lives have in a hypothetical
future when our intelligence has been superseded by machine
intelligence?); but arguably, most are ethical questions (Is it ethical to take
a robot lover? To develop autonomous 'killer' robots? To hire a robot
nanny?).
9.1 Robot Ethics as Virtue Ethics
Fortunately, the study of robot ethics (sometimes abbreviated as roboethics)
is already well underway.4 Although robotics and artificial intelligence are
distinct technologies, their convergence in today's marketplace means that
roboethics is an increasingly eclectic field, addressing ethical questions that
arise from AI research and development as well as the study of human-
robot interaction (HRI).
Our study here is guided, as the reader will by now expect, by concerns
about robots and the cultivation of virtue. This is a good thing, because
much work in roboethics operates within deontological (rule- based) or
utilitarian ethical frameworks. As we noted in Part I, such frameworks can

struggle to accommodate the constant flux, contextual variety, and
increasingly opaque horizon of emerging technologies and their
applications. This is not to say that such approaches are never useful in
robot ethics; it is only to say that they remain incomplete.
Allow me to illustrate the point with utilitarian ethics. Utilitarians
recognize just one fixed and universal moral principle: the duty to promote
the greatest overall happiness or net pleasure. So, when judging the ethics
of robot childcare, a utilitarian must determine whether robot nannies will
produce the greatest overall happiness, over the long term, for parents,
children, and other affected stakeholders. Whether it is ethical to build or
buy a robot nanny is supposed to be answered by this calculus. Let's
simplify the problem. Imagine that the utilitarian only has to judge the
ethics of using a robot nanny herself, not robot childcare as a broad social
practice. However, as Sherry Turkle and other researchers have discovered,
human- robot interaction demonstrably changes how humans feel about
robots in ways that are not easily predicted, and that evolve in complex
ways over time.5 Thus a person who finds the idea of using a robot nanny
deeply repugnant or alienating cannot know whether she will still have
those unpleasant feelings after a month, or a year, of using one. The sum of
happiness she and her children will get from a robot nanny will be affected
by the robot's presence in ways she cannot readily predict. The point is that
whatever utilitarian calculation
210
2 10
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
one makes at a given point in time is radically destabilized by the power of
social robots to alter our likes and dislikes in ways that continually surprise
us. And how do we judge which of our sentiments we should trust? Those
we have when a social robot first enters our lives? Or the very different
feelings we may come to have later?
Moreover, the capacities and behaviors of robots themselves are continually
evolving; how much happiness I and my child get from Nannybot Version

1.0
tells me very little about how much happiness the robot might bring us by
the time it has auto- upgraded to Nannybot Version 6.0. Of course, this
might just mean that I constantly have to revise my calculations of the
robot's expected utility, but this will not be a simple task, since the robot's
powers will change qualitatively with each substantial upgrade, and again,
I cannot predict how future interactions with the robot will alter my, or my
children's, likes and dislikes. How then can I ever reliably assess the robot's
expected utility to my family? In this fluid moral landscape, what we need is
an ethics that relies on the presence of flexible, discerning, and practically
wise human agents, who actively cultivate the very traits needed to judge
wisely and well in such unstable conditions. This, of course, is where virtue
ethics begins. Whereas utilitarians and Kantians offer us a fixed formula or
recipe to use in every moral judgment, virtue ethicists would rather we
learn how to become good judges.
Moreover, strictly deontological and utilitarian approaches to roboethics
tend to shortchange or even bypass the question of what sorts of goods, and
what activities and contexts of receiving them, are in fact good for humans
to enjoy. This can be starkly illustrated by the case of robot abuse or
torture, one that is not merely speculative, as we already have some striking
real- world examples.6 Consider a future subculture of humans with a habit
of torturing social robots— they get immense pleasure from the robots'
screams, writhing, and desperate pleas for mercy.
We can assume that these robots are not sentient— they only mimic pain
and don't 'truly' suffer. However, since humans who interact extensively
with social robots commonly project robust mental states onto them, assume
that the torturers vividly perceive that their robots do suffer greatly.7 Let us
also imagine, simply for the sake of the argument, that this sadistic habit
will not spill over into the robot owners' treatment of their human fellows—
a consequence that would otherwise make it easy for almost any moral
theory to label this habit as unethical.8
If we come to it from a Kantian perspective, the scenario described above
does not appear to violate the categorical imperative. That moral rule
requires only that a practice be universalizable, and that it not treat a

rational agent as mere means to an end. A universal practice of robot
torture is not impossible to conceive, nor are these particular robots
genuinely rational, autonomous beings with dignity, deserving of being
treated as 'ends in themselves.' From a utilitarian standpoint,
211
Robots at War and at Home
211
torturing these robots seems not only permissible, but ethically positive
activity for the sadists, for it produces pleasure without causing anyone
pain. These conclu-sions reveal why such ethical theories are incomplete.
Neither framework has the resources to ask what human practices or traits
of character are noble, admirable, and worthy of our aspirations. From the
perspective of virtue ethics, people who spend most of their free time getting
immense pleasure from torturing robots, even if they increase the net
pleasure in the world by their own harmless enjoyment, are not living well
or flourishing, because they are not by this activity cultivating any of the
character traits, skills, or motivations that constitute human excellence and
flourishing. Nothing about the torturers' favored activity makes them better
human beings, and because a good human being embodies character traits
and patterns of activity directly contrary to sadism, our robot abusers are
less noble for their sadistic habits even if no living persons are injured by
those habits.
This is not to deny utilitarian and deontological standpoints a place in
roboethics. We must continue to ask how 'killer robots' can ever be
consistent with the principles of just war theory and international
humanitarian law; whether drone warfare is increasing or decreasing
civilian suffering; whether the number of lives potentially saved by
autonomous cars means that we must surrender the pleasures of driving;
and whether robot caretakers violate the privacy rights or dignity of the
elderly. But there are other important ethical questions about robots that
only virtue ethics readily allows us to pose: How are advances in robotics
shaping human habits, skills, and traits of character for the better, or for
worse? How can the odds of our flourishing with robotic technologies be

increased by collectively investing in the global cultivation of the
technomoral virtues? How can these virtues help us improve upon the
robotic designs and practices already emerging?
Among the many types of robots and human- robot practices that demand
our ethical attention, in this chapter we shall focus on just two, military
robots and carebots, along with two excellences of character of special
relevance to these: the technomoral virtues of courage and care.
9.2 Autonomous Military Robots: Courage
and Hope for the Human Future
The rapid global development and deployment of advanced military
robotics, especially autonomous and semiautonomous robotic systems, has
greatly outpaced attempts by public policy experts, international human
rights advocates, and ethicists to bring moral and legal clarity to the
phenomenon. The technological capacity arrived before anyone could
predict and assess its implications; one would be hard pressed to find a
better illustration of our condition of acute technosocial opacity.
Fortunately, vigorous scholarly and civic responses to the phenomenon
212
2 1 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
are catching up, ranging from mass media and political critique; to books,
journals, and conferences aimed at both popular and scholarly audiences;
to organized global coalitions such as the Campaign to Stop Killer Robots.
While there is considerable fluidity to the concept of a 'robot,' and even
more fluidity to the concept of an 'autonomous robot,' we can define the
class of semi-or fully autonomous military robots broadly as:
1. mechanical systems designed and/ or used to support and/ or carry out
tasks associated with, or constitutive of, military operations,

2. with the power to sense, process, and act upon information in the
physical environment in ways that alter said environment, and
3. that have the capacity to calculate, select, and initiate particular courses
of action independently of human judgment or oversight.
Such robots differ from familiar non- autonomous military robots such as
PackBots and Talons, commonly used to destroy improvised explosive
devices (IEDs). Human soldiers manipulate these with joysticks or other
remote controls, although attempts to make autonomous versions of such
robots are underway.9 The best- known semi- autonomous military robots
are unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs or 'drones'), which may be armed or
unarmed. These can typically fly, navigate, and/ or track targets with some
degree of independence, but require human oversight and do not target or
fire autonomously. Unmanned ground and underwater vehicles have similar
semi- autonomous capacities. Examples of robustly autonomous military
robots already in use include automated sentry robots such as South
Korea's Samsung Techwin SGR- 1, which can select and shoot at targets
without human oversight (though these do not currently operate in
autonomous mode); 'fire and forget' systems such as Israel's Harop/ Harpy
2
anti- radar UAV; and antiaircraft/ antimissile systems such as the U.S.
Phalanx and Israel's Iron Dome, which can in principle identify, track, and
fire upon targets autonomously. Countless other variants of autonomous
military robot are being designed, developed, tested, and deployed by
militaries around the globe. Many also have civilian applications, such as
the delivery of medicine, food, or other emergency supplies to otherwise
inaccessible locations.
Advances in conventional robot mechanics are accelerating thanks to rapid
convergence with advanced artificial intelligence research, as well as
biomechanical research involving the integration of robotic and human or
other animal systems. As a result, military ethicists are starting to ask not
just how robotic systems can be responsibly used by humans as tools of war,
but also how robots themselves will alter, cooperate, or compete with the
agency of human soldiers. Military-funded researchers are working hard to
develop robot soldiers with artificial

213
Robots at War and at Home
213
moral intelligence, robots more restrained and trustworthy in battle than
human soldiers will ever be.10 Modern militaries already rely upon
increasingly powerful software algorithms for ranking the value of potential
human and property targets, assessing the col ateral damage of strikes, and
evaluating strategic options—
all formerly the exclusive province of human judgment by officers presumed
to possess the experience, perspective, and practical wisdom needed to
make such high- stakes ethical decisions.11 Due to the rapidly increasing
speed and precision of algorithmic 'intelligence,' we are told that the
human soldier will soon be "the weakest link in the military arsenal."12
Many believe that the demands of military efficiency, force protection, and
mission success make the global development and use of fully autonomous
weapons a foregone conclusion, in the absence of a firm and enforceable
international commitment to renounce them.13
For fairly obvious reasons, then, the global debate about military robotics
has focused almost exclusively on robots with the capacity for autonomous
lethality.
As important as this debate is, it has diverted public attention from the
many nonlethal and potentially morally beneficial uses of military robotics.
Consider Vecna Technologies' BEAR (Battlefield Extraction Assist Robot)
prototype, which could evacuate wounded soldiers from the field without
requiring addi-tional human troops and medics to expose themselves to
mortal risk. Here we have a military robot with clear ethical applications
and few apparent ethical downsides. Yet the BEAR has been starved for
funding, forcing its makers to turn their attention to other, less noble
projects, as Vecna's Chief Technology Officer Daniel Theobald admits:
"had we gotten a whole bunch of R&D dol ars from

[the military,] it probably would have kept our focus on that rather than big
commercial products."14
We must recognize that as with all technologies, military robots are neither
'good' nor 'bad' in themselves; yet they afford or invite human choices and
habits of varying virtue or vice. Moreover, context matters. Assigning an
autonomous lethal sentry robot to help secure a nuclear waste disposal
facility in a desolate, uninhabited region might under certain circumstances
be a prudent option, but the temptation to install one at the periphery of an
army base in an occupied territory with an already alienated and angry
civilian populace is another matter.
The point is that promoting indiscriminate global resistance to advanced
robotics, even military robotics, would be morally blind and
counterproductive. What we need instead is the technomoral wisdom to
ensure that future robotic applications prioritize the promotion rather than
the degradation of global human flourishing— including in military
contexts.
While the ethical issues in this domain are thus not exhausted by concerns
about 'killer robots,' the rise of autonomous robotic lethality is both
imminent and morally grave, warranting our urgent attention. Let us see
what our
214
2 14
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
technomoral virtue ethic can add to the conversation. For now, let us set
aside important deontological questions about whether lethal robots will
ever be able to satisfy the principles of just war theory or the requirements
of international humanitarian law.15 We also set aside the utilitarian
question, no less relevant, of whether autonomous lethal robots will
ultimately prevent or cause more combatant and civilian suffering. Instead
we will ask a different question: How might the development of autonomous

lethal robots impact the ability of human soldiers and officers to live nobly,
wisely, and well— to live lives that fulfill the aspirations to courage and
selfless service that military personnel pledge?
We saw in chapter 6 that the virtue of courage takes multiple forms. People
with physical courage have a context- sensitive disposition to appropriately
modulate fear of physical injury or death, in a manner that reliably avoids
the extremes of rashness and cowardice. Another type of courage is a
context- sensitive disposition to appropriately fear moral injury or ruin.
Both forms of courage fall under a more general description, still captured
well in Aristotle's words: "[to fear] the right things and from the right
motive, in the right way and at the right time,"16
and both are often called for in military life.17 Moral courage in particular
we defined as a "reliable tendency to fear grave wrongdoing and a
compromised character more than one fears the other dangers or injuries
that one might invite by acting rightly," a virtue that requires the intelligent
balancing of measured and justified fears with measured and justified
confidence and hope. We said that courage presupposes that living well
sometimes requires genuine sacrifice and acceptance of great loss. While
virtues are typically conducive to subjective, psychological happiness, the
specific virtue of courage entails one's willingness, when called upon, to
give up things of real subjective worth in order to preserve one's happiness
in the objective, eudaimonistic sense— that is, living well rather than badly.
Chapter 6 defined technomoral courage as "a reliable disposition toward
intelligent fear and hope with respect to both the moral and material
dangers, and opportunities, presented by emerging technologies." Consider
the BEAR prototype again. A sensible way to explain its failure to attract
sufficient investment, despite immense moral promise to save the lives and
limbs of wounded human soldiers and medics, is in terms of technomoral
cowardice. The U.S. Defense Department declined to gamble funds on an
emerging technology that warranted great moral hope, despite their
repeatedly demonstrated willingness to bet far greater sums on riskier and
less morally promising technologies such as the RAH- 66 Comanche
helicopter, a massive boondoggle cancelled only after twenty- two years
and seven billion wasted dol ars.18 Along with technomoral justice, civility,

and magnanimity, modern moral leadership requires the private and
institutional cultivation of technomoral courage: the disposition to wisely
balance our technosocial fears and hopes, and risks and rewards, in the
service of human flourishing. Educating for
215
Robots at War and at Home
215
and rewarding technomoral courage in voters, lawmakers, contractors, and
military leaders is therefore essential to realizing the legitimate promise of
robotic and other emerging defense technologies. But how is this virtue
itself being affected by the emergence of these technologies?
9.3 'Killer Robots' and Technomoral Courage:
The 'Troubles We Do Not Avoid'
To begin— what does the global race to develop autonomous robot
warriors say about our greatest fears, or our greatest hopes? The most
obvious fear that it expresses is our profound and very natural fear of
human death and mutilation, and, more specifically, our fear of exposing
ourselves, our children, neighbors, and fellow citizens to such grievous
harms. Better to have robots be shot out of the air or torn up by an IED
than to see it happen to our own people. This is not our only legitimate fear,
however. There is also our fear of moral injury, a concept all too familiar to
veterans, their families and friends, and to the overwhelmed mental health
providers who struggle to help veterans cope with the psychological
aftermath of engaging in conflict that profoundly violates the norms of
civilian life.
Not only is this moral injury worth fearing, but virtue traditions tell us that
great moral injury ought in general to be feared more than physical injury
or death. If robots can do our killing for us, and if this could spare us and
our fellows from the profound moral injury that often results from our

participation in the horrors of war, wouldn't the virtue of technomoral
courage require us to develop and deploy such technologies?
Of course, the moral reality is far more complex. First, robotic mediation
does not always prevent moral or psychological injury. For example, the
prediction that remote drone pilots would be spared psychological harm has
been disproved.
Drone pilots often track targets for days or weeks before witnessing their
deaths essentially in real time, and they suffer stress disorders like PTSD to
at least the same extent as conventional pilots.19 Perhaps this might be
prevented by taking them even further 'out of the loop.' If armed drones
were fully autonomous, we would not need humans to trigger, approve, or
possibly even witness the use of lethal military force, as drone pilots do
today. Imagine mechanical creations ef-ficiently and dispassionately
visiting death around the globe, without having to trouble any of their
creators in the least. If this spectacle gives you pause, then it is clear to you
that perhaps the moral injury we should fear most from war is not the shock
and trauma of witnessing war's horrors ourselves.
In reflecting on the importance of moral courage, Mengzi says, "That is
why there are troubles I do not avoid ... "20 Is war one of the troubles that,
if it cannot be prevented, a good human being will not avoid? One way of
thinking about
216
2 1 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
this is to consider the specter of profound injustice presented by a century
in which the majority of the world's soldiers are among the youngest,
poorest, and most disenfranchised members of their societies. Can a good
human being avoid the 'trouble' of sending his Ivy League son or daughter
to war to defend his own nation in a war he voted for, while parents on the
other side of the tracks watch their sons and daughters go— and die— in
droves? Another way to pose the problem brings it back to our concern in

this chapter. Can a good human community avoid the trouble of paying its
share of the global human price that war commands by sending armies of
replaceable robots in their stead? Or does goodness, as I am clearly
suggesting, require each of us to either work tirelessly to prevent and
oppose war, or to courageously accept some share of the devastation and ir-
revocable loss that our failure to prevent war brings about?
Perhaps, you might think, the wars of the future will not involve moral
horrors at al — perhaps they will be fought between robot armies,
eliminating human suffering and evil from the picture altogether. Let us set
aside the question of what the stakes could possibly be in such a scenario
unless humans were threatened (i.e., how this would be war rather than an
expensive and pointless international game of chess). We can set it aside
because, in the concrete global reality in which we live, only a small
portion of the planet's population has the wealth and resources to marshal
robot armies, and thus the trend we see is increasingly asymmetrical
warfare such as that seen in the global 'war against terror': drone strikes
versus beheadings.21
In fact, asymmetrical warfare arguably doubles the types of moral horror
for which the human family is accountable. On the one hand, we have a
mechanical and impersonal technics of killing, one that fosters a military
psychology in which the most grievous human suffering of innocent
civilians can be reduced to the vocabulary and calculus of 'bugsplats.'22
On the other side, we witness surges of increasingly gruesome and
indiscriminate violence from those who pursue their low- tech methods of
brutality without even the merest semblance of moral restraint. The oft-
promised ability of drone warfare to minimize civilian casual-ties from
airstrikes has yet to be empirically demonstrated by any neutral observer,
but if the asymmetry that modern warfare fosters plays any role in feeding
the warped psychology and recruitment successes of groups like ISIS and Al
Qaeda, then the claim that robotic warfare will make innocent civilians
overall safer from the horrors of war is plainly dubious. Thus the
development of lethal military robots that promise to allow a minority of
privileged human beings to detach even further from the physical,
psychological, and moral horrors of war endured by the rest of humanity is

deeply inconsistent with the technomoral virtue of courage, not to mention
justice, empathy, and moral perspective.
It must be noted that moral concern for the cultivation and preservation of
virtue operates within the military profession; it is not merely a critical
pressure
217
Robots at War and at Home
217
imposed from without. As I have argued elsewhere, the modern military
profession is, like all genuine professions, defined by a special moral
commitment explicitly professed to the public it serves.23 The core
profession of the modern military vocation is the ideal of "selfless
service."24 "Selfless service" expresses the moral virtues of care and
courage, for military culture is rooted in our most basic moral
understanding of our duty to care and make sacrifices for the security and
well- being of those who depend on us most. A soldier is distinguished from
a criminal, mercenary, or 'barbarian' only by virtue of this selfless service.
In most contemporary contexts this entails fighting with courage, loyalty,
honor, and other accepted martial virtues while accepting the norms of
international humanitarian law.25 That many soldiers fall short of this goal
does not change its centrality to the modern military vocation.
Relinquishing this commitment as incompatible with the technological
expedience of autonomous lethal robots would destroy the integrity of the
military profession, severing the always tenu-ous link between soldiers and
the moral life of their communities, and the even more delicate link between
warmakers and the human family writ large. The long history and moral
significance of this link is reflected in centuries of recorded accounts of
soldiers treated with mercy and even respect by foreign enemies, military
and civilian, who recognized them as members of a shared and noble
human vocation of selfless service to country.

Finally, we must address the role of hope, which attends all forms of
courage, but including and especially military courage. Of course, military
courage entails the hope of victory, or, if that cannot be had, the hope of
honor in defeat. But there is a far deeper kind of hope that must be retained
in the heart of military virtue.
The highest ideals of the military vocation are haunted and challenged, as
they must be, with the fundamental and undeniable immorality of warfare
as a global human practice. What can make warfighting a morally
necessary means to the immediate survival and security of a people is the
very immorality of war as a human way of being in the world. Because we
cannot always avoid those who would make war against us, our children,
and civic fellows, we cannot forego all defensive wars without failing in our
most basic moral duties of human care. But we do not by such means
excuse ourselves from the stain of the worst kinds of human vice. Thus the
military profession, in order to remain a moral vocation, must also have
peace as its distal aim; it must retain hope for the end of war as a
meaningful possibility.
What does our rush to invest massive resources in autonomous lethal robots
say about our moral hope for peace? Consider the danger of technosocial
'lock-in' highlighted in Jaron Lanier's You Are Not a Gadget.26 Lanier
warns us to be alert to the gradual hardening of certain technical design
choices that over time become increasingly difficult to undo, modify, or
improve upon, as other systems, tools, and practices are built to work with
that initial choice. The technosocial
218
2 1 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
evolution of warfare has in fact been a gradual 'lock- in' of martial human
culture.
The more we invest our critical resources in manufacturing bullets, tanks,
battle-ships, or, today, autonomous killing machines, the more we are

invited to war by their standing presence. Expensive things beg to be used.
So do things that reflect back to us our own growing technosocial
cleverness. Only the unthinkable consequences of global nuclear
destruction gave us the resolve to gradually decommission those great
mirrors of human ingenuity, and even this task we have not allowed
ourselves to finish. The mid- 21st century may be humanity's last window
for meaningful hope to relinquish a technics of perpetual war. Massive
global investment in technologies of automated robotic lethality, already
underway, may well ensure the closing of that final window of hope. Only
an equally massive counterinvestment in technomoral practices that pursue
the goods of global human community, justice, security, and wisdom will
force it back open.
As we argued in chapter 2, early signs of an emerging, if comparatively
weak, counterinvestment in these technomoral goods of global human
flourishing are already visible. Thus despite the immense obstacles, this is
not the time to surrender our moral hope. Rather it is time to cultivate
renewed technomoral courage: the ability as a species to, at last, fear most
that injury which is truly most fearful, and hold out hope for the greatest,
perhaps now the only hope for the human family: an enduring and stable
moral technics of peace.
Next we turn to a far quieter and more intimate setting of emerging robot
presence in our lives, though one no less central to our moral identities and
hopes for living well.
9.4 Carebots and the Ethical Self
'Carebots' are social robots designed for use in home, hospital, or other
settings to assist in, support, or provide care for sick, disabled, young,
elderly, or otherwise vulnerable people.27 The kind of support they may
provide varies widely, but most actual or potential functions of carebots fall
into one of the following categories: performing or directly assisting in
caregiving tasks (for example, bathing, dressing, turning, administering
medication to, or transporting persons under care); monitoring the health
or behavioral status of those receiving care, or the provision of care by
human caregivers; and providing companionship to those under care.28

One primary motivation for the development of carebots is the emerging
deficit of care providers in nations such as Japan, Germany, Israel, and the
United States, where demographic, political, and cultural factors converge
to strain these societies' capacities to adequately care for a rapidly
expanding population of aged or otherwise vulnerable persons. Related to
this are economic pressures upon individuals, private and public
institutions to reduce the growing costs of care,
219
Robots at War and at Home
219
social pressures to reduce growing institutional failures to provide quality
human care, and recognition of the need to reduce the often- overwhelming
physical and psychological burdens placed upon individual human
caregivers.
Development and implementation of carebots is in a relatively early stage.
Prototypes such as AIST's Paro Therapeutic Robot, a bionic fur- covered
harp seal now classified in the United States as a Class 2 medical device to
provide companionship in nursing home settings, have had notable success.
Paro robots are in hundreds of care facilities and homes around the world,
and their therapeutic effects on patients are the subject of ongoing
empirical study. The Robear nurse robot developed by Japan's RIKEN- TRI
Col aboration Center for Human-Interactive Robot Research (RTC) is
among the more advanced carebot prototypes; it can lift a patient from a
bed to a wheelchair, and vice versa. Since 2010
GeckoSystems International Corporation has been conducting limited in-
home trials of its CareBot. Combining a mobile- service robot base with
interlinked AI modules for navigation, tracking, scheduling, reminders (e.g.,
medications, food, etc.), and "chat," the CareBot is marketed as having
commercial potential for both elder care and child care. In 2013,
GeckoSystems told their shareholders that "[we]

forecast, with a high level of confidence, that we can manufacture and
market a $5000 personal robot, our CareBot, in the near term."29 In
addition to smaller firms such as GeckoSystems, robotic industry leaders
such as Honda, iRobot, and Toyota are investing heavily in social robotics,
including carebot development.
While it may be some time before practical, safe, and affordable carebots
are available for widespread consumer or institutional use, their
development is likely to continue to advance, given the grave deficiencies in
care systems in many developed nations. Previous chapters have caused us
to question the growing global appetite for 'techno- fixes' to what are, at
bottom, social, political, and/ or moral de-fects. Yet we have also warned
against uncritical rejection of new technologies. The lock was, and remains,
a 'techno- fix' for social and moral failures. Does it follow that the
invention and use of locks was unethical? Naïve technophilia and
reactionary technophobia are equally blind and unthinking responses to
technosocial challenges. What we need is a measured, careful examination
of the specific ethical risks and opportunities created by the imminent
emergence of carebot technology.
One obvious concern is the safety of carebots should they be introduced.
However, given the presence in most nations of social mechanisms for
monitoring product safety (mechanisms which, one must grant, are far from
perfect), let us assume for the sake of argument that safety concerns can be
well- managed.
Many issues remain. Many ethicists worry that carebots objectify the
elderly and other patients as "problems" to be solved by technological
means. Others highlight the effects carebots could have on the capabilities,
freedom, autonomy, and/
or dignity of those being cared for, effects that include possibilities both
welcome
220
2 2 0

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
and worrisome. Another question is whether carebots will enhance or
reduce patients' engagement with their physical and social surroundings,
and whether their meaningful contact with families and friends will be
reduced. Particularly for carebots with tracking and monitoring
functionality, carebots could also either preserve or intrude upon the
privacy of patients. It goes without saying that we must also be concerned
about the quality of physical and psychological care robots can realistically
be expected to supply. Finally, carebot- human relations have the potential
to be deceptive or infantilizing. 30
Philosopher of technology Mark Coeckelbergh has helpfully separated
questions of "roboethics" into three categories.31 The first pertains to the
minds and moral realities of robots themselves. Here we would place
concerns about whether artificially intelligent robots could ever properly be
considered moral agents, whether they might one day deserve "robot
rights," and so on. The second pertains to the application of traditional
ethical theories to human- robot interactions. In this category belong
questions about robots' impact on the privacy, liberty, dignity, autonomy,
health, and safety of humans. Coeckelbergh then suggests a new, third kind
of roboethics— moving beyond what he calls "external" ethical criteria,
and toward consideration of the "good internal to practice" that may be
realized through robot- human interaction.32 That is, he wishes to ask how
such interactions change us, what they "do to us as social and emotional
beings."33
As we saw in chapter 2, references to goods internal to practices belong to
the language of virtue ethics. So do concerns about how robot- human
interaction conditions the social and emotional character of human beings.
Such concerns suggest that 'carebot ethics' is not exhausted by asking what
carebots will mean for those cared for. The safety, happiness, rights, dignity,
and capacities of the people cared for by robots must remain of central
ethical concern— but not our only concern.34
OceanofPDF.com

Nor is this subject exhausted by asking how best to "reduce the care
burden" on caregivers and society in ways that liberate caregivers from
rote, tiring, stressful, or dangerous tasks while decreasing the numbers of
undercompensated, overworked, and ill- trained human caregivers.35
Carebot ethics remains incomplete until we have also considered the
possible impact of carebot practices on human habits, virtues, and vices,
especially those of caregivers. That is, we must understand how carebots
might affect our own abilities to flourish as persons capable of care,
creatures whose moral status is deeply rooted in relations of caring virtue.
9.5 Technomoral Care in Relations
of Human Dependence
Let us recall what it means to say that care is a virtue. 'Care' is an
ambiguous word. Sometimes it refers to a mere attitude: ("My doctor really
cares.") But 'care'
221
Robots at War and at Home
221
can also be understood as an activity of personally meeting another's need,
one that, if properly habituated and refined into a practice, can also become
a manifestation of personal excellence. Such care meets all the
requirements of a virtue.
Caring for people well is not easy. We must learn how to care in the right
ways, at the right times and places, and for the right people. Uncultivated
caring activity often goes wrong despite our best intentions: we somehow
make things worse, or we leap in too quickly and offend others' autonomy
and dignity, or we wait far longer than we should to help. It takes a lot of
effort and acquired moral intelligence to become even halfway good at
caring, and even then we may screw it up royally. But people who care for
others well are among those examples of human excellence that we

recognize and respect most readily. In chapter 6 we defined the virtue of
technomoral care as a "skillful, attentive, responsible and emotionally
responsive disposition to personally meet the needs of others who share our
technosocial environment." How might carebots degrade or enrich our
ability to cultivate this virtue?
Anyone who has cared for an elderly parent, chronically ill spouse, or
disabled child for any significant length of time knows that reducing the
'care burden' on caregivers is something often to be desired, even a social
obligation, assuming it can be accomplished by ethical means. It will also
be clear to most who have spent time in skilled nursing facilities or other
underfunded and overburdened institutional settings that, as ethicists Jason
Borenstein and Yvette Pearson state all too mildly, " ... it is difficult to
support the notion that current caregiving conditions ought to be
preserved."36 Yet the goal of 'reducing the care burden'
is profoundly ambiguous. Do we mean that we wish to liberate caring
practices from the sorts of physical, emotional, and financial burdens that
can diminish the quality of our care of others, or that prevent us from
continuing to care for them?
Or do we mean that caring itself is a burden that we should wish to reduce
for ourselves and other human beings when possible? The first goal seems
an uncontroversial good. As we will see, the second goal is deeply
problematic, making the ambiguity of talk about the 'burden' of care
ethically perilous.
Given the widely acknowledged and grave deficiencies of the status quo in
human caring practices and institutions, let us stipulate that carebots,
properly designed and implemented, could improve the lives of both those
being cared for and caregivers in ways that would be ethically desirable
and, in the absence of better alternatives, ethically mandated. Yet before we
pursue this possibility, we must reflect more deeply on the moral value of
caring as a human practice, not only for recipients of care, but also for
caregivers. We must resist well- motivated but one- sided portrayals of
caregiving as a social requirement or burden that people (especially
women) are unjustly expected to bear.37 Even the provision of

companionship and emotional support is all too easily characterized as a
"task" in
222
2 2 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the same way as one describes the work of vacuuming floors.38 Martha
Nussbaum rightly notes that contemporary societies still tend to assume
that women in particular will give care "for free, 'out of love,' " her scare
quotes directing us to the injustice of caregiving as an unfairly distributed
and uncompensated labor.39 Yet if there are no further dimensions to
caregiving practices that draw our attention, it would seem to follow that in
the absence of injury or insult to those receiving care, we could have no
reason to hesitate to surrender our caregiving practices to carebots, and to
encourage others to do the same.
Intuitively, it seems this cannot be right, and few of the philosophers who
have reflected on the ethics of robot care would endorse such a conclusion.
Nevertheless, we must ask why the potential losses to caregivers who
surrender such practices have not been more expressly considered. It is, of
course, acknowledged by philosophers that caregiving may be freely
chosen, indeed, this is presented as the ideal state of affairs. Borenstein and
Pearson, following Nussbaum, assert that "those who provide care in non-
emergency contexts should have the freedom to choose the extent, type, and
manner of caregiving."40 While putting it this way obscures the extent to
which even nonemergency care is often a robust human obligation rather
than simply one life choice among others, the reasons why one might freely
choose to give care are not explored here, and these reasons matter a great
deal to our inquiry.
Some such choices are motivated by ethical heroism, a decision to take on
the burdens of care so that others do not have to. Others are motivated by a
sense of personal and nontransferable duty, such that one would rather
bear the burden of care than the guilt of shirking it. Still others are

motivated by external rewards that outweigh care's burden: financial
compensation, or expressions of gratitude and admiration from the
recipient of care and other observers. But all of these reasons presuppose
that the practice of caregiving itself is still only a burden, the free
acceptance of which must be justified by something external to the practice.
If this is right, then nearly all of the conditions that warrant freely giving
care could be rendered superfluous by the introduction of carebots. We can
transfer caring tasks to entities that will not experience them as a burden,
and hence require no moral, social, or financial compensation. Yet there are
moral goods internal to the practice of caregiving that we should not wish
to surrender, or that it would be unwise to surrender even if we frequently
find ourselves wishing to do so. For example, most ethicists would agree
that "the elderly need contact with fellow human beings," and that if the
use of carebots led us to deprive the elderly of this contact, this would be
ethically problematic.41 But rarely does one hear an ethicist ask whether
caregivers need contact with the elderly! (Here we may substitute
'children,' 'the sick,' 'the injured,' the 'poor,' or any other likely subject of
care).
223
Robots at War and at Home
223
We have falsely assumed that the provision of care is a one- way street. Let
us recall from our earlier discussion of courage Mengzi's suggestion that a
cultivated person has 'troubles [he or she] will not avoid.' Is care one of
those troubles that a cultivated human does not avoid? Moreover, will a
truly virtuous, exemplary person experience caregiving as only a trouble,
one that entails heroically sacrific-ing one's own good, rather than
receiving or sharing in a good? It seems this cannot be so, if there really
are goods internal to the practice of caring. If there are, then I lose these
goods if I give up the practice to a robot— even if that robot can do a better
job of caring than I can. It is of course possible that caregivers will choose
to share caring practices with robots rather than surrender them. However,
given the physical, psychological, and financial costs of giving care, we

cannot discount the fact that many humans will, once they trust the safety
and skill of carebots, be tempted to transfer the lion's share of their caring
duties to them.
What are the goods internal to the practice of caring? Let us consider what
caring teaches us. First, it teaches us the moral meaning and importance of
reciprocity. We learn in caregiving practices to see how reciprocity holds
human relations together and allows other kinds of goods to flow across
those connections. This may not be immediately evident if we focus on the
asymmetry of need between the vulnerable person who receives care, and
the one who gives it. Yet the elderly parents we hand- feed once fed us. The
older sister whose radiation sickness we comfort perhaps nursed us through
a childhood flu— and the moral meaning of that care endures even after the
tables are turned. Even in institutional settings, nurses, doctors, and
therapists are themselves, at times, the patients. We learn in a time of need
that others are there for us now, and just as importantly, we learn through
being there for others to trust that someday someone will be there for us
once again. For once I perceive that I, who am not a moral saint but an
often selfish and profoundly imperfect creature, can reliably give care to
others, then I can more easily believe and trust that equally imperfect
humans can and will care for me when the time comes. Of course, this trust
in human care can be violated— indeed, the very fact of such violations
drives carebot development.
But those who lose all trust in the human bonds of care, or never acquire it,
are profoundly damaged beings.
Caregiving practices also foster the internal good of empathy, the
emotional connection that moves us to 'take trouble' for others, as Aristotle
notes.42 It is through giving care that I learn to recognize in concrete
others those expressions of need and desire that can motivate empathic
concern. Even as a child I come to this attitude through caring practices:
looking after a younger sibling, feeding and watering a pet, fetching
Kleenex for a flu- afflicted parent, or listening to the problems of a friend. It
is through caring activity that I come to fully appreciate the goodness of the
caring role and of caring well. As someone cared for, I can see
224

2 2 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the goodness of having my needs met— but I cannot fully grasp the
goodness of meeting needs until I have taken on that role myself and
experienced its challenges and rewards. Without exposure to caregiving
practices, my grasp of the goodness of caring relations remains
impoverished and one- sided. Moreover, it is only through repeated and
intimate exposures to human need and care that I develop the abstractive
capacity to "imagine the situation of another" outside my local circle of
care, and to be moved to extend my concern to them. For those with whom I
empathize in this way, I may indeed "take trouble."
Roboethicists Robert and Linda Sparrow have stressed the importance of
empathy in caregiving as a means of showing the irreplaceability of human
caregivers by carebots, claiming that "entities which do not understand the
facts about human experience and mortality that make tears appropriate
will be unable to fulfill this caring role."43 Although I do not wish to
challenge this claim, I would stress a different implication. It is primarily in
fulfilling these caring roles that humans put their capacity for empathy to
work, practicing and gradually cultivating empathic concern as a virtue of
their character.44 Without enough such opportunities, the development of
this virtue may stal . The concern is that the availability of carebots as a
substitute for human care may be all too appealing to those who have not
yet become comfortable with the exposure to suffering that is involved in
caregiving practices, leading them to abandon early on, or greatly limit,
their exposure to caregiving. If carebots allow us to feel that our obligations
to care are being met even when we have quietly removed ourselves from
the suffering of our loved ones and fellows, is this only an injury to them?
Or is it also an injury to us?
Like all moral habits and virtues, the capacity to care well is not something
we are born with or that happens automatically, but something we have to
cultivate and maintain in ourselves. Here we can draw upon the resources
of care ethics discussed in chapter 6, as a way of more fully articulating the
role of caring relations in moral excellence and human flourishing. As we
noted there, care ethics shares with virtue ethics an orientation to the goods

internal to practices, and the belief that morality arises from the enactment
of such practices in concrete human relationships. While virtue ethicists
and care ethicists differ on whether human flourishing or the caring
relation is the ultimate good, they occupy considerable common ground
when it comes to the question of how the ethical self is cultivated. Care
ethicist Nel Noddings asserts that through our memories of being cared for,
we acquire our first and ultimate understanding of goodness. The natural
caring relation thus comes to function as regulative in human social
behavior, motivating us to seek to restore it when it becomes deficient or
disrupted.
From this impulse we acquire our first ethical ideal, a notion of the "ethical
self "
as a personal commitment to meet others, especially those within our
intimate
225
Robots at War and at Home
225
circle, from within the caring attitude. Noddings notes that, "This caring
for self, for the ethical self, can emerge only from a caring for others."45
While the memory of being cared for spurs the development of the ethical
self as a regulative ideal for my life, it is my committed practice of caring
for others that sustains and enriches this ethical self.46
Noddings identifies two central criteria for a genuinely caring commitment:
engrossment and motivational displacement.47 Engrossment is an empathic
orientation to the reality of the other, as opposed to my own. It allows the
needs of the other to be foregrounded in my field of awareness, rather than
as the background of my own needs and desires outside the caring attitude.
Motivational displacement is the associated feeling that "I must do
something," I must actively address the other's reality, "to reduce the pain,
to fill the need, to actualize the dream."48 These criteria, of course, create
quite a high standard for genuine care.

They exclude care offered by proxy, or though routine tasks that may
"secure credit" for caring from others, but do not solicit or require my
engrossment in the needs and sufferings of the other.49
To see why, it helps to reflect upon the moral psychology of the person who
never becomes comfortable or skilled in caregiving. This person may refuse
the caring role due to anxiety about being exposed to the pain, fear, or grief
of the one needing care; or being made helpless in the face of the other's
longing to be made strong or whole; or becoming intolerably angry,
frustrated, depressed, humbled, or exhausted by the work that care entails.
Most of us will find these fears recognizable— we have seen them expressed
by others, and had them ourselves. When called, one takes on the caring
role in spite of such fears, or one abdicates it— leaving it empty or to be
filled by someone else. A person who consistently abdicates the caring role
out of fear lives as a distant, "checked- out"
parent, especially during a child's illness or disability. Such persons will
find excuses not to answer phone calls from depressed or grieving friends.
They will cite a hatred of hospitals as a reason not to visit the sick and
dying. They may withdraw from a terminally ill spouse, or attempt to
"care" for others in less intimate, risky ways— working overtime to help
with medical costs, sending flowers and food baskets by courier,
researching treatments online, planning a trip to Disneyland. These too are
morally meaningful acts. But as long as one continues to avoid the practice
of caregiving— drawing upon the full range of one's emotional, intellectual,
and physical capacities to support someone who is suffering, dependent, or
vulnerable— one's capacity to flourish as a moral being remains stunted
and impoverished.
It is not fear that consigns such a person to this fate— we all have such
fears.
But the consistent abdication of caring practices allows those fears to be
engraved into a person's emotional character, foreclosing possibilities for
emotional and
226

2 2 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
moral growth. Meanwhile, the person who takes up caring practices— even
if initially out of guilt or social shame— is forced to meet these fears with
courageous action. Caring requires courage because care will likely bring
precisely those pains and losses the carer fears most— grief, longing, anger,
exhaustion. But when these pains are incorporated into lives sustained by
loving and reciprocal relations of selfless service and empathic concern,
our character is open to being shaped not only by fear and anxiety, but also
by gratitude, love, hope, trust, humor, compassion, and mercy. Caring
practices also foster fuller and more honest moral perspectives on the
meaning and value of life itself, perspectives that acknowledge the finitude
and fragility of our existence rather than hide it.
Thus if I transfer my full obligation of care to a carebot, I have "done
something" to care, but not in a manner that will sustain my self as a
moral, caring being. Still, Noddings warns that in all caring situations,
there is a risk that "the one- caring will be overwhelmed by the
responsibilities and duties of the task and that, as a result of being
burdened, he or she will cease to care for the other ..."50
Since ethical care is not a mere attitude but an activity, I can only care
within the limits of the practically possible, and a host of environmental,
social, or institutional conditions can constrain or impoverish my care.
Engrossment in the need of another is impossible when one has had so little
rest that it strains one's limits even to sleepwalk mindlessly through the
motions of care— changing the bedpan, remembering to give medication,
cleaning the wound. What more can one give?
The unmitigated stress, anxiety, and physical and mental exhaustion of un-
supported caregiving often results in impaired judgment, depression,
apathy, emotional withdrawal, or extreme emotional volatility— any or all
of which can result in significant harm and fractured relations with others,
including those for whom we struggle to care. As Mengzi and Aristotle
understood very well, certain kinds of deprivation are deeply poisonous to
moral practice. Environments that lack supportive resources for caregivers

are likely to drain caregivers of emotional power, and starve empathic
responses rather than cultivate them. Indeed, too many modern care
facilities are 21st century equivalents of the ruined social environments
Mengzi refers to in his famous parable of 'Ox Mountain': places so
desolate and barren, so empty of human compassion, reciprocity, trust,
empathy, and hope, that one might be forgiven for thinking that such virtues
never existed.51
Rather than inviting us to be 'liberated' from care, if carebots can provide
limited but critical forms of support that draw us further into caregiving
practices, able to feel more and give more, freed from the fear that we will
be crushed by unbearable burdens, then the moral effect of carebots on
human character and flourishing could be immensely positive. Carebots in
such contexts can sustain rather than liberate human caregivers, saving
them from the degradation of their own ideal ethical self. Certainly
caregivers need support to come in many more
227
Robots at War and at Home
227
forms than smart and shiny robots— they need better support from extended
family, friends, employers, lawmakers, healthcare providers, and insurance
companies. They need better and more affordable care facilities. They need
more financial security. They need access to effective caregiver education,
training, and support networks. But in more than a few practices and
contexts, caregivers might get significant 'moral support' from carebots as
well.
For example, carebots could easily monitor vital signs, medication, and
pain levels while caregivers sleep. They could warn of medication
interactions or new symptoms that often escape human notice. They could
answer caregivers' questions, link them to medical or legal resources and
support groups, and keep track of financial and other documents. Carebots
could detect signs of caregiver exhaustion, peak stress, and burnout, and
recommend taking a break or rest. Caregivers might even take such advice

more readily from a robot than from a human being who is capable of
passing moral judgment on their 'weakness'— a fear that may inhibit
caregivers from admitting to others when they have reached their emotional
or physical limits, often with tragic results. Carebots could also help with
tasks beyond the physical capacity of many human caregivers, such as
moving heavy medical equipment, lifting and turning a disabled spouse in
bed, helping parents in and out of wheelchairs, or supporting the weight of
an unsteady friend as she walks to the bathroom.
Imagine how many physically petite, infirm, or elderly human caregivers
might then be able to confidently and safely care for their loved ones in
circumstances that were previously impossible for them to manage. Imagine
how many people might be able to remain in their homes receiving care
from loved ones, if the physical strains and dangers of care were mitigated
by carebots. We have already said that living well, in ways that allow us to
cultivate our ethical selves as caring beings, requires being able to
successfully take care of those around us.
It seems, then, that carebots could make the goods internal to caring
practices accessible to many more human beings, and for far longer periods
of time, than ever before.
As with all virtues, care is an appropriate and contextually sensitive
disposition to the mean between extremes. As Aristotle said, of two extreme
vices on either side of a virtue, there is usually one extreme that seems more
ignoble to us. Relative to the virtue of care as loving service to others, the
more obvious and ignoble vice is the carelessness of those who never learn
to attend willingly or well to others' needs. But the reckless overextension of
our abilities to care is also a vice. Whether from pride or cowardice,
refusing to acknowledge that we need help when our caring skills,
judgment, or strength are irretrievably degraded puts those we love most at
grave risk of being harmed by us. An extreme, unmodulated disposition to
care not only risks injury to others, but also unjustly perpetuates
228
2 2 8

t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
their dependence on us (hence the phenomenon of 'codependence' often
seen in caretakers; we might also consider the harm to children done by
extreme forms of
'helicopter parenting'). Moreover, unbalanced dispositions toward caring
roles, especially in women, can serve as an excuse not to develop our other
fundamental human capacities and virtues. Carebots can and ought to be
developed and employed in ways that help us to avoid either extreme,
supporting our self- cultivation as successfully caring beings, who provide
care in the right ways, at the right times, toward the right persons, and to
the right extent.
Yet is this the most likely outcome in our current technosocial climate?
Earlier in this chapter we encountered the claim that humans are, or soon
will be, the
'weakest link' in the technosocial network. If we are exhorted by carebot
market-ers or nursing home managers to 'let the robot do its job,' to hand
over caring practices to a being which will never forget a pill, never lose its
patience, and never let a loved one fal , we might be convinced that both we
and our loved ones are best served by the full surrender of care. I may
accept remote assurances of my loved one's well- being, or visit from
another kind of distance, where I enter the physical presence of a loved one
without ever allowing myself the experience of touching and being touched
by her weakness, her sickness, her need. Yet Noddings is right, I think, that
"I enslave myself to a particularly unhappy task when I make this choice.
As I chop away at the chains that bind me to loved others, asserting my
freedom, I move into a wilderness of strangers and loneliness, leaving
behind all who cared for me and even, perhaps, my own self."52
If this is right, it has clear implications for how we assess the ethics of
carebot uses. Many ethicists emphasize consulting the recipients of care
about what levels of human/ robot interaction they prefer.53 Such
preferences are highly salient, and any ethical assessment must take them
into account. Yet imagine that a century from now, carebots are not only
cheap, safe, and skilled, but good at keeping the elderly, children, and the

convalescent happy— amused, comforted, and distracted from their needs
or pains. Imagine that a great many people in this future prefer to be cared
for by carebots rather than imperfect human caregivers, who still at times
become impatient, dul , or angry in their company. How would honoring
those preferences, and greatly restricting human involvement in caregiving
practices, impact human moral development and flourishing in the long
run? Alternatively, imagine a future in which most care recipients prefer, for
aesthetic or tradition- bound reasons, not to have robots involved in their
care, despite our having clear evidence that (1) limited uses of carebots for
supportive tasks allow human caregivers to sustain and enrich their own
caring practices to a significant degree; and (2) such uses have no negative
impact on those being cared for except to offend their aesthetic and
traditional preferences. Is it obvious that the sincere preferences of people
on the receiving end of care would be morally
229
Robots at War and at Home
229
decisive in either case? The virtue of technomoral care is a basic good in its
own right, and not just for those on the receiving end. Any ethical
assessment that fails to account for this good is profoundly inadequate.
What might technomorally wise proposals for carebot development look
like?
Aimee van Wynsberghe has developed a relational approach to carebot
ethics, rooted in the ideas of care ethicist Joan Tronto, which offers specific
design guidance to robot developers. Her approach emphasizes four norms
of caring practice: attentiveness, responsibility, competence, and
reciprocity. She asks roboticists to weigh how their designs impact these
norms of skillful caring relations in a variety of contexts, with the goal of
developing carebots that "safeguard the manifestation of care values,"
rather than displace them.54 For example, van Wynsberghe emphasizes the
importance of eye contact and touch in skillful caring relations.

Describing a robotic patient lift, she notes that even if the robot is safe and
efficient, a nurse 'lifting' a patient with its help is not engaged in skillful
caring if the nurse's attention during the activity must be devoted to
monitoring the machine controls instead of the patient. A superior design
might be a mechanical exoskeleton that ensures a safe result while allowing
the nurse to maintain eye contact with the patient, discuss his or her
comfort level, and offer reassuring touch throughout the process.
Yet are we likely to see these nobler, wiser possibilities win out in the
absence of a widespread and sustained cultural effort to preserve and
cultivate technomoral virtue? Are today's roboticists taking pains to ensure
that carebots foster the cultivation of excellence in human caring? Or will
they overwhelmingly follow the path of least engineering and economic
resistance, driven exclusively by efficiency, expedience, and the
contingencies of the law and the market? If the latter is the most plausible
answer, is a future of fully mechanized caregiving therefore inevitable?
It is far from inevitable— and not just because safe, cost- effective carebot
development still has many technical hurdles to overcome. The global
market will welcome this future only if we as a human family widely accept
the dangerous idea that care— skillful and loving service to the needs of
others— is no longer our ineradicable human responsibility. If this idea is
accepted, however, there will no longer be such a thing as the human
family, except in the thin-nest genetic sense. Once the bonds of human care
are not merely frayed but severed, once our ideal ethical selves as caring
beings are forgotten, ethics itself dies at the root. We are not there yet, and
there is still time— time to recover our hope for living well in the fully
ethical sense; time to demand that our institutions reaffirm the practices of
moral self- cultivation and the value of exemplary lives; time to demand, as
other cultures have before us, the pursuit of human virtue.
230
10
Knowing What to Wish For
Technomoral Wisdom and Human

Enhancement Technology
i n t h i s a n d coming centuries, nanoscale, biological, information, and
cognitive (NBIC) sciences are expected to converge in ways that enable the
development of powerful new technologies for human enhancement.1 We
can define
'human enhancement' as the technological improvement and expansion of
various 'species- typical' qualities and capabilities of human beings in ways
that differ importantly from existing therapeutic uses of medical technology.
Enhancement can be sought by a variety of means, alone or in combination,
including genetic, biomechanical, nanomedical, and/ or pharmacological
techniques. The precise scope and essential characteristics of enhancement,
and even its coherence as a concept in contrast with medical therapy, are
hotly contested.2 What is not in question is the considerable market
potential of these technologies, which may offer radical life extension and
slowed aging; enhanced bodily strength, endurance, resilience, size, or
appearance; enhanced memory, attention, sensory perception, judgment,
mood, or wakefulness; and enhancement of our moral faculties or
dispositions.
Some enhancements are already available, such as the controversial but
common 'off- label' uses of pharmacological agents such as Adderall or
Modafinil to enhance attention, wakefulness, memory, mood, or endurance
in healthy people. Other enhancements are in development and likely to
emerge in the near future, thanks to brain- computer interfaces, genome
editing, and biomechanical implants to enhance both cognitive and physical
capacities. Still other enhancements envisioned by futurists fall into the
realm of wild speculation: for example, the digital 'uploading' of human
consciousnesses into 'cyber- immortality,' or the creation of transgenic
human- animal hybrids.
231
Knowing What to Wish For
231

10.1 Competing Visions of Human
(or Posthuman) Flourishing
The most enthusiastic promoters of these developments call themselves
'transhumanists.' Transhumanists expect the obstacles to human flourishing
presented by age, death, disability, and disease, as well as 'normal'
cognitive and physical limitations, to be partly or wholly transcended by
means of emerging technologies. Many speak of a coming 'posthuman' era
that will fully liberate us from the straitjacket of our biological heritage.3 A
diverse community of scholars, technologists, and futurists of various
philosophical and political stripes, transhumanists are united by four
widely shared convictions: 1) that enhancement technologies have the
potential to greatly improve the quality of our existence; 2) that research
and development of such technologies should generally be fostered rather
than banned or discouraged; 3) that decisions about the wisdom of
enhancing ourselves, or about what constitutes a genuine 'enhancement,'
will often be best left to private individuals; and 4) that many or even most
individuals will have good reasons to choose enhancement for themselves
and/ or their children.
Bioconservative ethicists, on the other hand, reject human enhancement on
several grounds. Chief among them is the belief that the transhumanist
vision poses a grave threat to human dignity, and depreciates the meaning
and value of human nature.4 Other concerns include worries about existing
global socioeconomic inequalities being magnified by a split between
enhanced and unenhanced social classes, fear of the physical and
psychological risks of enhancement, and theological concerns about
'playing God.' Like transhumanists, bioconservatives are motivated by
diverse philosophical, political, and spiritual convictions. They differ, for
example, in the degree and scope of their opposition to existing genetic and
reproductive technologies such as in- vitro fertilization and pre-
implantation genetic diagnosis. Yet they share the view that transhumanism,
far from promising unprecedented levels of well- being, in fact threatens to
undermine the most basic moral and material conditions of human
flourishing embedded in our biological nature. Limitations of space
preclude a full survey of the debate over the ethics of human enhancement.5

There is, however, one fundamental question, largely ignored on both sides
of this debate, which we need to ask: what technomoral virtues would
humans need to have in order to enhance themselves wisely and well?
Of course, if human enhancement is always unethical in principle,
regardless of the character and motivations of those who pursue it, then our
question will be moot. However, as we will see, bioconservative arguments
for an unconditional rejection of human enhancement technologies are
deeply problematic,
232
2 3 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
even philosophically incoherent. Too often, transhumanists treat the
weakness of these arguments as a free pass to overlook thornier and more
nuanced ethical worries about enhancement, including those motivating our
question. To reach those worries, let us first clear the road ahead by
exposing the problems with the extreme bioconservative position. Only then
can we confront the more daunting ethical challenge for transhumanists,
and assess the wisdom of pursuing human enhancement from within our
present technomoral condition.
10.1.1 Bioconservatism, Human Dignity, and Virtue
Many arguments against human enhancement are of a socially and
technically contingent, rather than principled, sort. For example, concerns
about the biological or socioeconomic risks of human enhancement depend
heavily upon the particular worldly conditions under which such
technologies will be developed, tested, and disseminated. If those conditions
can be suitably controlled, the risks of enhancement could perhaps be
mitigated or greatly reduced. Yet most bioconservatives offer a single a
priori principle as justification for a blanket rejection of any and all human
enhancement proposals, regardless of the specifics of those proposals or
their social implementation. Bioconservatives typically claim that any

proposal for human enhancement involves a profound violation of the moral
imperative to respect human dignity.
Yet it is far from clear what bioconservatives mean by 'human dignity.'
Francis Fukuyama notoriously defines it as the possession of an ineffable
"Factor X," an
"essential human quality" defying description that lies behind "a person's
contingent and accidental characteristics."6 This is problematic for a
number of reasons, not the least of which are its vagueness and reliance on
a questionable and apparently ad hoc metaphysics. Fukuyama defends his
view on the grounds that the cultural and political ideals of Western
liberalism depend for their intellectual coherence upon the existence of this
universal and essential human quality. One could easily dispute this
assertion, but regardless, it is not clear how Fukuyama can defend a
metaphysical claim simply by observing that it happens to sit better with his
political and cultural ideals.
Leon Kass, in his essay 'Defending Human Dignity,' attempts to overcome
the lack of specificity that he admits tends to plague bioconservative
appeals to this concept.7 He defines human dignity as fundamentally
connected with human aspiration. Here dignity depends upon our species'
conscious striving to realize our natural potentialities through excellent
activity, in order to flourish in our given biological form. Thus he equates
dignity with the very capacity for moral self- cultivation we explored in Part
II. Yet Kass links this aspiration to fulfill our natural potential for
excellence to another aim: namely, a "self- denying aspiration
233
Knowing What to Wish For
233
for something that transcends our own finite existence."8 Here we
encounter a deep and perhaps irreconcilable tension in the bioconservative
position. The first aspiration is deeply and inextricably linked to our
biological heritage and the finite contours of natural existence that it marks

out for us. This is the aspiration consistent with Fukuyama's emphasis on
the "species- typical" features of embodied human existence, and fellow
bioconservative Michael Sandel's insistence on appreciation for the "gifts
of our natural finitude."9 It implies a commitment to not only embrace but
to preserve the biological integrity of the human condition.
Kass frames his second aspiration, on the other hand, as a desire to
transcend our finitude in the direction of something understood as higher,
even if this requires some element of self- forgetting or self- denial. Now
Kass has in mind the kind of religious self- denial in which one sacrifices
one's natural desires in order to close the gap between, and establish a
relationship with, a higher being that embodies the "good, the true, and the
beautiful."10 Yet why could this reading not be reconstructed to accord
with the secular aspiration to attain a qualitatively different and higher
form of being— that is, to 'deny' one's given, biological form in order to
remake it into something recognizably more beautiful and good? Here the
relationship sought with a higher being is not one of communion, but
identity. That Kass would reject such hubris does not prevent his account of
dignity from technically permitting this aspiration; in fact, he arguably
invites it by celebrating the "god- like" quality of humans to "articulate a
future goal and bring it into being by their own purposive conduct," along
with our freedom to "quit the state of nature" and establish ourselves under
laws of our own making.11 Here a deep tension emerges between the claim
that human dignity is inextricably linked to the natural givens of our
biology, and the claim that it is inextricably linked to the conscious striving
to transcend what is naturally given, in search of the beautiful, the true, or
the good.
This tension is not merely abstract; it comes into play when we consider
how bioconservatives might evaluate various concrete proposals for human
enhancement. Imagine two possibilities. One is a hypothetical technique for
germline modification and gene insertion to bioengineer humans with
canine DNA, giving them olfactory capacities well beyond the species-
typical range. With proper training, these capacities can greatly enhance
the work of soldiers, airline security personnel, police officers, firefighters,
and health workers. The second proposal is a biomechanically engineered,
permanent subdermal implant that releases a neurochemical agent to

stimulate species- typical feelings of self- esteem and satisfaction at the
user's command. Present these proposals to two bioconservatives, one
primarily motivated by respect for the integrity of humanity's biological
givenness, and the other primarily motivated by respect for effortful human
striving toward excellent activity and virtue. It is reasonable to think that
they may come
234
2 3 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
to very different judgments about which proposal poses a greater threat to
human dignity.
Notice that the first proposal employs germline modifications of human
DNA to alter our species- typical capacities in a manner that clearly fails to
preserve the integrity and finitude of our biological givens. Yet for the
humans altered with nonhuman DNA, as well as for others who depend
upon their work, the changes would appear to enhance and expand, rather
than reduce, their human potential for virtuous activity. Such enhanced
humans could attend to a far greater range of morally significant
phenomena— for example, previously undetectable olfactory markers of
fear, anxiety, aggression, decomposition, contamination, infection, cancer,
fire, or airborne toxins. They would thus be able to glean more information
related to core human goods such as security, justice, and health.
Moreover, learning to use their new sensory powers in these excellent ways
would require just the same sorts of education, practice, and deliberate
striving that professionals undertake now in order to refine their
professional discernment and perception. Thus at least some radical human
enhancements could not only be compatible with, but might even enrich our
aspirations to moral self- cultivation, our attainment of virtue and the
goods internal to practices, and our consequent flourishing. How could this
offend human dignity?

Now consider the second proposal. Though the implant is an alien presence
in the human body, it is no more so than a pacemaker or stent, neither of
which alarm bioconservatives. Imagine also that the neurochemical agent
released by the implant is biologically identical to a substance naturally
produced in the human body. No alterations have been made here to our
genetic heritage, nor would such an implant produce any experience
beyond the 'species- typical' capacity of an unenhanced human. By one
bioconservative standard, then, the change seems fairly benign. Yet the use
of this implant, which produces on- demand feelings of contentment
regardless of one's circumstances, could radically reduce the motivation for
effortful human striving, and the achievements of excellence that often
result from such efforts, by dampening the desire to transform one's life
situation, and/
or one's own character, into something more satisfying. By the other
bioconservative standard, then, this proposed enhancement would appear to
present a far more profound threat to human dignity than the former.
Most bioconservatives articulate a concern for biological integrity and for
human striving.12 However, the tension between them renders such
accounts problematic, both conceptually and practically. If the human
aspiration to cultivate ourselves is the root of our dignity, and if human
enhancement can open up new paths of cultivation and higher states of
cultivated excellence, then at least some imaginable enhancements could
reinforce our dignity by removing biological obstacles to those higher
states. Thus bioconservatism appears incoherent
235
Knowing What to Wish For
235
as long as these disparate moral intuitions are conflated and packaged
together under the amorphous heading of 'human dignity'. Why has this
tension not been purged from the bioconservative position?

Fukuyama's account of dignity provides an important clue. Beyond his
unhelpful invocation of 'Factor X,' he tells us that human dignity is rooted
in a coherent biological whole that is more than the sum of its parts,
incorporating reason, consciousness, the capacity of moral choice, and
"the distinctive gamut of human emotions."13 Now, some higher animals
also appear to possess consciousness, instrumental reason, and a rich
emotional life. Why is there not also, say, 'chimp dignity' or 'elephant
dignity'? Are the champions of human dignity motivated only by what
transhumanist James Hughes labels "human racism," a special moral
regard for humankind grounded in no relevant moral facts?14 Fukuyama
could avoid this objection by noting the one item on his list not widely
acknowledged as appearing in other higher animals: the faculty of
'moral choice.' This is the capacity to reflect upon, select, and freely carry
out a course of action guided by a cognized moral ideal. A person can say
to herself, 'what kind of person do I want to become?' or even 'what kind of
person should I become?' and can consciously act on the answers she finds
in reflection.
Perhaps elephants, gorillas, or whales meditate on things like this and act
accordingly, but there is no compelling evidence to date that this is so. It
might seem odd, then, that Fukuyama has not made this capacity the
linchpin of his account of human dignity, particularly since it could save
him from Hughes' charge of
'human racism.'
This is no oversight on Fukuyama's part, however. He does not make this
argument because he rejects Kant's idea that moral choice liberates us from
our natural inclinations.15 If dignity arose only from the capacity of
autonomous moral choice, as Kant believed, then respecting dignity would
only require preserving that capacity, not other given elements of our
biology. In fact, we might be obligated to ignore, modify, or override our
natural heritage in the interests of our own moral and intellectual
development. Such a view supports transhumanist claims that human
enhancement has already been taking place for millennia by means of
cultural enterprises such as art, philosophy, and education, and that
enhancement is, in the words of transhumanist Ronald Bailey, the "highest

expression of human dignity and human nature."16 A celebration of moral
choice as the locus of human dignity is simply too amenable to deliberate
projects of self-transformation to sit well with the bioconservative
position.17
It is worth noting that while bioconservatives tend to self- identify as
humanists, their conflicted attitudes toward humanity's creative moral
freedom embody a different strain of humanism than that found in many
voices from the past. Consider a much older tradition of philosophical and
religious humanism,
236
2 3 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
captured in 1486 by Pico della Mirandola's Oration on the Dignity of Man,
in which he imagines God giving this charge to Adam:
We give you no fixed place to live, no form that is peculiar to you, nor any
function that is yours alone. According to your desires and judgment, you
will have and possess whatever place to live, whatever form, and whatever
functions you yourself choose. All other things have a limited and fixed
nature prescribed and bounded by our laws. You, with no limit or no bound,
may choose for yourself the limits and bounds of your nature.
We have placed you at the world's center so that you may survey everything
else in the world. We have made you neither of heavenly nor of earthly stuff,
neither mortal nor immortal, so that with free choice and dignity, you may
fashion yourself into whatever form you choose. To you is granted the
power of degrading yourself into the lower forms of life, the beasts, and to
you is granted the power, contained in your intellect and judgment, to be
reborn into the higher forms, the divine.18
For della Mirandola, it is this capacity for self- transformation that makes
humanity deserving of respect: "Who could not help but admire this great
shape-shifter? In fact, how could one admire anything else?... "19 A broad

range of philosophical, scientific, religious, and artistic perspectives have
resonated with della Mirandola's vision, from Condorcet to Nietzsche to
Teilhard de Chardin to Shaw. Its embodiment on the front lines of
transhumanism is simply its newest expression. Why, then, do
bioconservatives, who portray themselves as humanistic insofar as they
wish to celebrate the special majesty of our species above all others, shrink
from the newest invocation of this vision?20
For one thing, the prospects of 21st century technological convergence
raise the stakes of this vision by several orders of magnitude. Classical and
medieval possibilities of self- transformation were limited to those habits,
passions, and aspirations that could be remade by unaided reason. Despite
della Mirandola's evocation of unlimited creative freedom, our physical
embodiment was, until very recently, still largely beyond the scope of our
choice. Certainly, cultural traditions of body modification, meditative
control of autonomic functions, and asceticism testify that humans have
tested the boundaries of our corporeal givenness for millennia. The
possibilities, however, were always quite limited. Today, through the
potential of converging technologies, it appears that any part of us might
someday be made responsive to our creative whims. Confronted with this
dizzying power, many contemporary humanists understandably experience
deep unease.
Yet della Mirandola insists that bodily transformation is no threat to human
dignity so long as our reflective and aspirational nature endures:
237
Knowing What to Wish For
237
Bark does not make a plant a plant, rather its senseless and mindless nature
does. The hide does not make an animal an animal, but rather its irrational
but sensitive soul. ... Who would not admire man, who is called by Moses
and the Gospels "all flesh" and "every creature," because he fashions and
transforms himself into any fleshly form and assumes the character of any
creature whatsoever?21

That bioconservatives do not share this liberality with regard to the flesh is
plain. Yet it is worth asking why. By Kass's logic it would seem that as long
as we transform our minds and bodies according to a clear vision of the
"good, the true, and the beautiful," the dignity of human aspiration to a
higher form should remain intact. One can also enumerate a host of
conventional modifications of the flesh, done for both medical and aesthetic
reasons, to which most bioconservatives offer no objection. What aspect of
the transhumanist program of modification presents a moral difference
sufficient to justify the bioconservative reaction?
I suggest that there is no sufficient moral difference. Instead, resistance to
human enhancement becomes persuasive only when framed not in terms of
an a priori argument from dignity, but a contingent argument from virtue,
one that appreciates the contemporary practical obstacles to acquiring that
"clear vision" of the good needed to guide transhumanist aspirations to
their successful realization.
10.2 Technomoral Humility, Wisdom,
and the Argument from Hubris
Our contingent argument from virtue takes seriously one objection to the
transhumanists that we have not yet considered: that they are guilty of
technomoral hubris. This objection can take many forms. Arguments from
hubris are often muddled by vague warnings about the dangers of 'playing
God' or trying to
'become Gods'; but as C.A.J. Coady notes, such warnings are highly
ambiguous.
They can refer to specific theological concerns likely to be dismissed by
nonreli-gious parties to the debate, but such phrases are frequently used in
a secular context as shorthand for the limits of human virtue, both
intellectual and moral.22
Arguments from hubris, at least as old as the myth of Daedalus and Icarus,
can represent more than just blind conservatism or an irrational fear of
change.

They can also reflect enduring concerns about human aspirations to
transcendence becoming excessive or pathological. Is the transhumanist
project guilty of such excess? By joining the vision of transcendence with
the promise of virtually unlimited technological powers, the transhumanist
vision exponentially raises
238
2 3 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
the moral and material stakes of human aspiration. For perhaps the first
time in history, della Mirandola's remark about degrading ourselves to a
subhuman form of life becomes a literal possibility, should we wield these
new technologies unwisely. This danger calls forth a need for technomoral
humility: the ability to make an honest and clear- headed assessment of the
present limits of our ability to wield these powers wisely and well.
Among transhumanists, Nick Bostrom has been the most transparent about
the considerable risks of human enhancement technologies. While
optimistic that there is likely "more distance to rise than to fal ," he
acknowledges potentially grave risks of these technologies. There are non-
negligible risks that we might foolishly or unwittingly use them to "clip the
wings of (our) own souls," losing
"hold of our ideals, our loves and hates, or our capacity to respond
spontaneously with the full register of human emotion."23 Perhaps through
ignorant and misguided tinkering with the human genome we may even
bring about our own extinction. Against the backdrop of these very real
risks, the old argument from moral hubris, waved off by many
transhumanists as the counsel of cowardly or unimaginative souls, acquires
renewed force.
Remember that courage, in our case technomoral courage, is a mean
between cowardice and rashness. If the libertarian transhumanists who
champion unrestrained experimentation in this arena do not represent the
vicious extreme of rashness, who does? Yet having rejected the

bioconservative argument for a priori restraint, doesn't that view look now
like the extreme of moral cowardice, or at least an unreasonable and even
anti- humanist affinity for the status quo? Where, then can we find the
appropriately virtuous mean with respect to human enhancement
technologies? How do we find the delicate balance of moral attitude in
which both technomoral humility and courage are embodied, and
integrated in a holistic moral perspective? Someone who can achieve this
delicate calibration and integration of multiple technomoral virtues is an
exemplar of technomoral wisdom. Looking at the parties and stakeholders
to the enhancement debate, how many such exemplars can we confidently
identify at present? Who among them are the 21st century equivalents of the
phronimoi, the junzi, or the Sangha?
But why, the transhumanists will argue, should we exercise cautious
restraint now, when centuries of technosocial innovation have repeatedly
demonstrated the triumph of futurists and 'imagineers' over the naysayers
and spreaders of moral panic? It may seem that the new always wins out
over the old, but if we ask ourselves honestly just how reliably our
innovations have served us in a century marked by global economic,
environmental, public health, and military disasters, we will admit that our
recent record of human ingenuity has some shining successes; but arguably
as many misfires and more than a few horror stories. The transhumanists
are right that our time calls for bold action, not for clinging to
239
Knowing What to Wish For
239
the status quo, but that is precisely because the status quo is already
destabilized by our past and ongoing technomoral failures. Before we push
on blindly as we have, we ought to heed della Mirandola's warning that
humanity's creative destiny is not to be taken lightly, but embraced only
with the greatest possible virtue, lest we spoil our opportunity and allow
ourselves to become "animals and senseless beasts":

Above al , we should not make that freedom of choice God gave us into
something harmful, for it was intended to be to our advantage. Let a holy
ambition enter into our souls; let us not be content with mediocrity, but
rather strive after the highest and expend all our strength in achieving it.24
Let us not forget that proposals to chemically tinker with our moral
faculties, to replace neurons with silicon, or to modify the content and
emotional tone of our memories, all carry some risk of rendering us, if not
"animals and senseless beasts," at least something even less noble than our
present selves. For example, it is tempting to embrace proposals to enhance
the brains of soldiers so that they are less vulnerable than ordinary humans
to post- traumatic stress. If successful, we could spare soldiers often
crippling psychological and moral injuries strongly associated with
increased risks of suicide, substance abuse, anxiety, rage, and depression.
Such injuries tear apart individuals, families, and communities every day,
around the globe. If we have the technological means to shield soldiers'
minds from such injuries, it would seem inhumane not to use them.
And yet, to dampen the moral horrors of war for individual soldiers would
also dampen these same horrors on the civic level, where decisions to make
war are collectively made, endorsed, and funded. Historically, our wish to
spare our sons and daughters the grave physical and mental harm that
comes with war has served as one of the strongest impediments to casual
warmaking. As with the robotic means of warfare discussed in chapter 9,
lowering the psychological barriers to waging war could have devastating
results around the globe.25 How should a moral society, in a world where
war is sometimes necessary to restrain genocide or similar evils, resolve
this tension? How many political leaders, biomedical researchers, or
transhumanist scholars can you name whom you are confident could
resolve this profound moral dilemma wisely, at this very moment? What
about your fellow citizens— how confident are you that a popular vote
today would yield the right result? How confident are you that you can
discern the right result?
In such a case, and many others like it that arise from various human
enhancement proposals, any virtuous response has to begin from a stance of
technomoral humility. There are few easy answers to be found, and the

consequences of choosing wrongly are likely to be among the most
devastating and potentially irreversible
240
2 4 0
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
that we face. Yet we also need technomoral courage to act; even rejecting
an enhancement is a choice for which we will be accountable. We cannot
evade moral responsibility with passivity or self- imposed ignorance. In the
example of enhancing soldiers' mental and emotional resilience, a virtuous
response must meet demanding conditions: it must embody appropriate
empathy for all those who suffer from war, actively take care of those for
whose welfare we are most responsible, display civility in reaching a
decision cooperatively with other local and global stakeholders, and attain
a moral perspective in which the moral meaning of our global human and
planetary situation is held in view. Any person or body actually capable of
such a response would have to take an ambitious stance of magnanimous
moral leadership with respect to the various medical, commercial, political,
and other institutions with the power to produce and distribute such
enhancements. All of this together requires the cultivation and exercise of
exemplary technomoral wisdom.
Even if we adopt della Mirandola's religious verbiage as only a metaphor,
how many of us today are filled with such a 'holy ambition,' or embody the
deep individual or collective technomoral wisdom needed to justify and
exercise it? It was precisely this challenge of steering biomedical
enhancement in an era of moral confusion and apathy that led Hans Jonas
to lament that, in a cynical postmodern age, "We need wisdom most when
we believe in it least."26 Nor was he the first to judge his own era ill-
equipped for moral ambition. George Bernard Shaw apparently despaired
of the 'Creative Evolution' celebrated in passages of Man and Superman
ever being realized in an age given to moral laziness, waste, and senseless
destruction.27 Even Nietzsche's Zarathustra, hardly a voice of conservative
caution, warned his disciples against liberating themselves from the
constraints of society's given norms without a clear vision of the future for

which they would liberate themselves, and the virtue to actually realize that
vision: You call yourself free? Your dominant thought I want to hear, and
not that you have escaped from a yoke. Are you one of those who had the
right to escape from a yoke? There are some who threw away their last
value when they threw away their servitude. Free from what? ... But your
eyes should tell me brightly: free for what?28
Historically, then, the argument from hubris is not owned by timid
defenders of the status quo. It also reflects the insight that visionary human
projects, especially those that involve great risk to ourselves and others,
require actual visionaries— people with a clear vision and the considerable
moral and intellectual virtue needed to realize that vision with others. Thus
the greatest barrier to successful human enhancement is not the dubious
technical means often
241
Knowing What to Wish For
241
proposed to achieve a posthuman future,29 nor is it our inability to
anticipate all of the effects or challenges we will face along the way— that
is, the inherent technosocial opacity of the project.30 Challenges will
declare themselves and be overcome, or not, as our ingenuity and resources
permit. No, of all the difficulties transhumanism faces, the real problem is
knowing what it is that we ought to wish for. It is not that transhumanists
simply wish for the wrong things. Rather, the libertarian philosophies that
pervade the transhumanist community seem to preclude them from wishing
for any clear ends at al , only the widespread availability of certain
technological means, to be used however free individuals and groups see fit.
Consider Nietzsche's warning once more. We hear much from
transhumanists about what they want to free us from: sickness, aging,
death; the limitations of our bodily form; the tyrannies of entropy, space,
and time. But do we hear as clearly what they want to free us for? They
offer a host of possible scenarios for our consideration, but these form no
comprehensible whole. We are told we might choose to constantly renew

and rebuild our human bodies, or switch them out for non- biological or
virtual ones; we might choose to adopt new bodies and personalities at will
or form a global 'hive' mind. We might chase immortality or we might just
choose to live to a modest age and pull the plug. We might use these
technologies to make ourselves more emotionally stable, more emotionally
free and capricious, or to enjoy emotions inconceivable in our current state;
to create better lives for our children, or to shed biological reproduction as
an outmoded relic; to make the Earth whole again, or to abandon the Earth
for the stars.
The problem is not the unforeseeable technological possibilities, but a
problem that defines our time and our world: in a neoliberal age, who
among us has the courage and genuinely magnanimous moral leadership to
point the way to a positive vision of the human future? Among the
transhumanists we find many negative visions, by which I mean visions of
liberation from constraint. In a posthuman future one can choose anything,
any physical form or mental constitution, as long as the technological
means and social opportunity exist. The posthuman future is one of free
play, experimentation, a blank canvas upon which individuals can realize
their personal visions of the good without interference from government or
their fellow citizens.31 But this vision itself has little or no positive
substance; it is a moral ghost.32
Transhumanist and science fiction writer Ramez Naam tells us that,
although we may not be able to imagine how our descendants will use
human enhancement technology, "the lesson of history is that they will use
the powers we provide them to make their world a better place."33 One can
debate the extent to which history really warrants this conclusion. Many
would argue that we have used our technological powers to make the world
better in certain respects, and
242
2 4 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s

much worse in others. Yet the statement is a confession that today's
transhumanist visionaries lack a coherent moral vision and resist any call
to provide one, while still assuring us that human enhancement
technologies will indeed yield genuine enhancements— that is, that they
will be conducive to human flourishing and the good life in general, despite
the absence of any clear sense of what this involves.
Transhumanists wish to let the inheritors of this technology "chart their
own course."34 But if we do not trust ourselves to reliably chart a wise
course, what warrants such confidence in the ability of our descendants, the
inheritors of our culture and our wisdom, to do so? What could warrant this
confidence, except a widespread human recommitment to the practice of
moral self- cultivation, embodied in a new culture of global technomoral
education?
The standard transhumanist reply is to reject the demand that any one
course be charted. Naam's book tells us that "We will not all opt for the
same changes. ... Different men and women, different communities,
different ideologies will all select different goals to work toward. ...
Humanity will expand, splinter, and blossom."35 Yet this claim betrays
itself. We are told not merely that we will expand and splinter, but that we
will "blossom"— this is a normative metaphor that presupposes flourishing
in the achievement of some appropriate state or end. Certainly the
metaphor is compatible with a wide range of such ends, but still there must
be criteria for what qualifies as 'blossoming' and what does not. Not all
change or growth in living systems amounts to flourishing. Some change is
rot. Some growth is malignant. What justifies Naam's faith that the free and
undirected pursuit of enhancement is more likely to promote human
'blossoming' than the alternatives? As he goes on, the incoherence becomes
even starker. In the same passage he adds that though our future
descendants might be so different "in ways we cannot imagine" that we
would fail to recognize them, we may be reassured that nevertheless they
"will have the traits most dear to us."36 What could possibly ensure that
result, given what has otherwise been said?
Similarly, famed inventor and futurist Ray Kurzweil, known even among
transhumanists for extraordinarily exotic visions of the future involving

cyborgs and uploaded minds, assures us that our transition to the next
phase of existence will be guided by (unspecified) "human values." He tells
us that our nonbiological descendants "will be even more humanlike than
humans today" and will exhibit the "finer qualities of human thought to a
far greater degree" than do we; that they will cherish knowledge above all
while enjoying the "full range of emotional and spiritual experiences that
humans claim to have."37 It is unclear why a transhumanist cal ing for
radically experimental transformations of human minds and bodies under
conditions of profound technosocial opacity would anticipate, or even
desire, such constancy of values and experience.
243
Knowing What to Wish For
243
This tension recurs again and again in transhumanist writings. Ronald
Bailey tells us that this century "will offer an ever- increasing menu of life
plans and choices" which should allow people maximal freedom "to pursue
the good and the true in their own ways," without the burden of any
prespecified normative ideal.38 Yet he tells us that "the future will see
miracles, cures, ecological restoration, vivid new art forms, and a greater
understanding of the wellsprings of human compassion."39 Set aside the
question of how we are to evaluate this as a positive outcome without some
normative ideal of a good life. Even if we accept that the future so
described is a good one, what justifies our confidence that it will be the
actual terminus of the transhumanist project? Bailey assures us that
"history has shown that with vigilance— not with blanket prohibitions—
humanity can secure the benefits of science for posterity while minimizing
the tragic results of any possible abuse."40 Is this really what, say, the
history of environmental policy in the modern era tells us? If not, then why
should one be confident that 'ecological restoration' will be a priority of an
enhanced human society? Imagine that new technology greatly reduces the
burden of living in a degraded environment— say, by using nanoscale
robots to repair cell damage from radiation and toxins, or by using clouds
of linked nanobots to form a "utility fog" that cosmetically disguises
unpleasant surroundings, or enabling colonization of other planets, or by

providing a host of pharmacological tonics to compensate for the lost
psychological benefits of pristine wilderness.41 Might ecological
restoration be among the lowest priorities of such a society?
Transhumanist writings seem to assume the unobtrusive operation in
technosocial life of some sort of 'invisible moral hand,' an assumption that
is neither made explicit nor defended. And yet, even without enhancement,
our species already faces a number of grave perils, from extinction risks to
'merely' a miserable and hopeless existence for the vast majority of the
human family. Nick Bostrom is right that stasis is probably not the safest
bet.42 If enhancement can boost our cognitive and moral resources to
confront these perils, along with the inevitable challenges that will result
from enhancement itself, then perhaps throwing our resources behind the
development of such technologies is the least risky alternative. An
'enhanced' future might not be any better than ours, but then again, an
unenhanced future might not be very good either. As Coady notes,
conservatism can be its own kind of hubris.43 Still, is a technologically
aggressive but morally blind 'Hail Mary' pass really our best option?
Inaction is impossible; given the risks of humanity's current status, resisting
innovation requires moral wisdom to justify it too, and if we lack the virtue
to safely push ahead, we also lack the virtue to safely stay put. We are at an
impasse, and the cultivation of technomoral virtue is our only way forward.
While the technological means for human enhancement are already
emerging, we lack the moral
244
2 4 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
means today to reliably answer the question of whether and how it can be
done ethically. We are not ready to answer, though as Hans Jonas warned
us, we should have made ourselves ready long ago. The challenge we face
today is not a moral dilemma; it is rather a moral imperative, long overdue
in recognition, to collectively cultivate the technomoral virtues needed to

confront this and many other emerging technosocial challenges wisely and
well.
Does this mean that the only prudent course is to put all human
enhancement research on indefinite hold until we manage to jump- start a
massive global reinvestment in the practices of moral self- cultivation and
education for technomoral virtue? Not necessarily. We have noted that
forgoing any given technological development carries certain risks just as
does pushing forward. Technomoral humility, courage, perspective, and
wisdom all entail a skilled disposition not to avoid but to confront and
intelligently manage the unavoidable moral risks of technosocial life. In
their 2014 book Unfit for the Future: The Need for Moral Enhancement,
philosophers Ingmar Persson and Julian Savulescu argue that forgoing one
particular type of human enhancement research— in particular, research
aimed at enhancing the moral capacities of human beings— may greatly
amplify the existential risks to human flourishing already posed by the
hitherto glacial pace of our species' collective moral development.
The technomoral failures of existing and past human generations have
already placed the flourishing of future generations in grave jeopardy. How
much more time can we safely allow ourselves to wise up by traditional
means of moral self-cultivation, before we attempt more drastic measures to
artificially accelerate our moral maturation as a species? Persson and
Savulescu argue that we may have very little time, and that biomedical and
pharmacological means of enhancing and extending our capacities for
human empathy, justice, and other moral traits, if successful, could hasten
our species' collective moral development, perhaps enough to greatly
reduce the danger of our self- destruction.44
This will not be easy, since the lion's share of the planet's technological and
scientific resources are controlled by liberal societies operating in cultures
focused on short- term private gains, alienated from any shared conception
of the ultimate moral goods to be realized by collective action in the long-
term interests of the human family. Even the notion that there are such
goods— as opposed to the immediate, subjective, and often arbitrary
preferences of private individuals— is no longer readily granted in many
such cultures. This ethical alienation from a vision of our own higher

flourishing was described by the 20th- Century Spanish philosopher José
Ortega y Gasset as a uniquely modern crisis that inhibits the intelligent and
creative use of technical power.45 This crisis must at least begin to be
mitigated by new and vital programs of technomoral education and
habituation before any part of the transhumanist vision can be wisely
managed. Thus the active pursuit of
245
Knowing What to Wish For
245
human enhancement technologies, including moral enhancement, is
probably indefensible without a concurrent cultural movement to invest
significant resources and energies in the wider cultivation of technomoral
virtues and leadership.
Such a commitment represents humanity's best hope for living, and living
well, in the 21st century and beyond. The human family is not yet up to the
moral task it is facing: finding a way to wisely manage together the
increasing global complexity, instability, plurality, interdependence, rapid
change, and growing opacity of our technosocial future. This book
recommends a classical solution: an energetic (perhaps even desperate)
collective effort to reinvest our cultures in the habits of moral self-
cultivation and education for technomoral wisdom. Notably Persson and
Savulescu, although they are proponents of human enhancement, endorse
the very same effort. They write, "We are not envisaging that moral
bioenhance-ment will ever reach a point at which traditional methods of
moral education—
or other social strategies like institutional redesign using incentives— will
ever be redundant ... we think that these methods will need to be used well
and, indeed, that they should be employed more extensively than they are
today."46
Given, however, that traditional methods of moral education and self-
cultivation alone may not work well enough, or fast enough, to save us from

the shortsighted and selfish habits that have already brought our planet to
the edge of ruin, they conclude that biomedical technologies of moral
enhancement, should they become available, may be necessary and prudent
accelerants. They could amplify and sustain the impact of traditional moral
practices and character education on our habits and virtues, especially the
virtues of care and empathic concern. While the technical path to effective
moral enhancement is not well marked, and the obstacles to it hard to
foresee, Persson and Savulescu note that
"the predicament of humankind is so serious that all possible ways out of it
should be explored."47
Yet in the absence of new cultural reinvestments in moral education and
practice adapted for contemporary technosocial life, the wise use of moral
enhancement is unlikely, given that we need it precisely because moral
wisdom among our species is in such dangerously short supply. Persson
and Savulescu thus call for a new educational dedication to "what might be
called a 'science- sophy,' "— that is, a new body of moral wisdom about
appropriate and justified uses of scientific and technical power.48 The
account of technomoral wisdom developed here is one small step toward
such a philosophy, one that must evolve together with emerging
technologies in ways that will inevitably challenge existing neoliberal
norms of technology development. Short of a long string of dumb luck or
unearned grace, this path is our species' best, and likely only, hope for
continued flourishing.
By philosophical and technological means, then, technomoral virtues such
as self- control, courage, empathy, justice, care, flexibility, civility, and
perspective
246
2 4 6
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
must begin to be explicitly targeted for promotion by researchers,
educators, parents, and policymakers. Such efforts will require private and

public funding, sometimes at the expense of other possible paths of
educational and technological development. Among the paths that must be
sacrificed are human enhancements that would impede our cultivation of
technomoral virtue: enhancements that would weaken our capacities for
self- control and moderation, generate group solidarity even in the absence
of justice or care, or reduce empathic concern by blunting our emotional
response to suffering. Each of these enhancements could be desirable to
many for psychological, commercial, or political reasons. Yet if freely but
widely chosen in an unrestricted market, they would preclude the very
flourishing that transhumanists promise us in a posthuman world.
Indeed, to insist upon neoliberal, free- market norms for human
enhancement or any other new technosocial power is to assume either 1)
that our descendants will, without any wise guidance from us, magically
acquire the moral convictions we lack to build a future worth choosing; or,
2) that our progeny will chart their own arbitrary technosocial course more
or less as we have, without the benefit of any greater moral wisdom or
insight than we enjoy today. The latter world will be what it is, but cannot
be expected to be any better than our own, and given the depleted resources
and compromised environment that we will have left them, it is quite likely
to be worse.
10.3 Technomoral Virtue and Contemporary
Life: A Crisis of Moral Wishing
Before we close this chapter, let us reflect upon the words of José Ortega y
Gasset. His 1939 essay "Meditación de la Técnica" (known in English as
"Man the Technician") expresses his existentialist conception of human life
as autofabrication: a project of self- realization, bringing into being "the
aspiration we are."49 For Ortega y Gasset as for later existentialists, the
freedom of human choice means that a human person is not a thing, natural
or otherwise, but "a project as such, something which is not yet but aspires
to be."50 To those who advocate relinquishment of the power to enhance
ourselves, Ortega y Gasset might have replied that
"in the very root of his essence man finds himself called upon to be an
engineer.

Life means to him at once and primarily the effort to bring into existence
what does not exist offhand, to wit: himself ... "51
Yet he tempers his enthusiasm for human creativity and freedom with a
warning about technology and virtue. He notes that for a human being,
flourishing is the only subjective necessity, and she will often place her
organic life in peril in order to pursue it. Of course, conceptions of human
flourishing are not fixed, but individually and culturally plastic. Yet this
very plasticity exposes a problem at
247
Knowing What to Wish For
247
the heart of our technosocial aspirations. For technology is not an end in
itself; nor is it merely a means to the preservation of organic life— were
that its ultimate aim, advanced technology would be quite redundant, a
duplication of more primitive mechanisms for survival that we already
possess. Rather, technologies are instruments whose ultimate ends must
exist outside the technological sphere.
As Ortega y Gasset puts it, "... technology is, strictly speaking, not the
beginning of things. It will mobilize its ingenuity and perform the task life
is; it will— within certain limits, of course— succeed in realizing the human
project. But it does not draw up that project; the final aims it has to pursue
come from elsewhere. The vital program is pretechnical."52
The unresolved crisis of the 20th century, still with us in the 21st, is a crisis
of meaning— the meaning of human excellence, of flourishing, of the good
life. The transhumanist project pushes this crisis to its absolute limit. What
is the good that radical life- extension will serve? More time, obviously. But
time for what?
Not simply to live, for I desire more than that to live well. What will
maximal detachment from my bodily needs and limitations afford me? More
freedom, certainly. But to echo Nietzsche: freedom for what? Freedom to do

what? Ortega y Gasset tells us that our humanity rests entirely upon the "to
do" of projected action, and hence "the mission of technology consists in
releasing man for the task of being himself."53 But who do we want to be?
Is our vision of this task any clearer than it was for our classical or
Enlightenment predecessors? Or is it in fact more clouded than ever?
It is here that contemporary technosocial culture, especially in the wealthy
nations driving global technology innovation, rings hollow at its core. We
are showered with an endless and ever- deepening deluge of choices. The
distinctions between the thousands of cellphones on Amazon, the millions of
apps in the App Store, the hundreds of kinds of cereal in an American
supermarket, or the dozens of gourmet coffee presses reviewed on a
'lifestyle blog,' are often virtually impossible for us to identify, much less
evaluate. With such choice comes not happiness, but paralysis of the will,
the haunting fear of a suboptimal selection. While Ortega y Gasset did not
witness technosocial desire as it is today, his words still resonate for us:
Desiring is by no means easy. The reader need only remember the
particular quandary of the newly rich man. With all wish- fulfilling means
at his command he finds himself in the awkward situation of not knowing
how to wish. At the bottom of his heart he is aware that he wishes nothing,
that he himself is unable to direct his appetite and to choose among the
innumerable things offered by his environment. He has to look for a
middleman to orient him. And he finds one in the predominant wishes of
248
2 4 8
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
other people, whom he will entrust with wishing for him. Consequently, the
first purchases of the newly rich are an automobile, a radio, and an electric
shaver. As there are hackneyed thoughts, ideas which the man who thinks
them has not thought originally and for himself but blindly and
automatically, so there are hackneyed wishes which are but the fiction and
the gesture of genuine desire.

Ortega y Gasset's point is not the easy condemnation of shallow
consumerism. In his view, the latter is merely the shadow cast by a malady
of far greater significance:
If this happens in the realm of wishing with objects which are there and lie
to hand before they are wished for, one may imagine how difficult the
properly creative wish must be, the wish that reaches out for things yet
nonexistent and anticipates the still unreal. ... If a man is unable to wish for
his own self because he has no clear vision of a self to be realized, he can
have but pseudo wishes and spectral desires devoid of sincerity and vigor.
It may well be that one of the basic diseases of our time is a crisis of
wishing and that for this all our fabulous technical achievements seem to be
of no use whatsoever.54
For Ortega y Gasset, the emergent technosocial crisis is a vacuity of moral
imagination for life, and its chief symptom is an "appal ing restlessness"
that manifests itself in frenzied but directionless seeking.55 This "crisis of
wishing" is a culturally- induced deficiency of practical wisdom, the
absence of authentically motivating visions of the appropriate ends of a
human life. If Ortega y Gasset was right, then in the absence of some
deliberate intervention, contemporary technosocial life is likely to be
marked by a progressive paralysis of practical wisdom, in which our
expanding technical knowledge of effective means receives less and less
direction by meaningful desires and moral ends. Like nerve cells gradually
cut off by a neurodegenerative disease from their directing impulses in the
brain, a technosocial crisis of wishing would result in actions that appear
increasingly spasmodic, uncoordinated, and lacking in purpose.
Ortega y Gasset's diagnosis is an empirical claim; it stands or falls based
upon the social, psychological, and moral phenomena it predicts. The
prediction is clear— that humans in the technologically developed world,
powerful and marginalized alike, will increasingly find themselves
rudderless and impotent to direct their own lives or to discover their own
ends, and in desperation will gradually turn to the compulsive consumption
of ends manufactured for them by mass technosocial culture, consumption
that itself points to no further ends

249
Knowing What to Wish For
249
or aims, and in satisfying only 'spectral desires' leaves them ever searching
for more. The reader may judge for herself the extent to which this
diagnosis has been confirmed.56
My aim in this book has been to shine a light on this all too real disease: a
widening cultural gap between the scope of our global technosocial power
and the depth of our technomoral wisdom. Throughout the book,
culminating with this chapter, I have suggested the only plausible first step
toward a cure: to con-vene new institutions, communities, and cultural al
iances in the service of global techno moral cultivation. This will require
intense, cooperative, and sustained human efforts, many of them on a
worldwide scale. Yet such efforts are not without precedent in a species well
acquainted with fighting massive, protracted world wars for far less happy
gains. A long- overdue commitment to the cultivation of technomoral habits
and virtues may be the human family's only real chance for not merely
continuing to live, but live well in this century and those to come. If we act
now, while there is still time and hope, we may at last discover what kind of
human, or posthuman, future is worth wishing for.
250
Epilogue
t h e e m e r g i n g t e c h n o l o g i e s explored in Part III underscore the
immense challenge of predicting and securing the future of human
flourishing in the 21st century and beyond. From biomedical enhancement
to social robotics and artificial intelligence, technology is opening up a
seemingly infinite number of new trajectories for our species, and those
with whom we share our planet. Some of these possible futures look quasi-
utopian. Most are the usual mixed bag of blessings and curses, but a few
are truly catastrophic for humanity— and it is not only technophobes and
neo- Luddites who are worried about those scenarios. Prominent voices

among the technoscientific cognoscenti, from Stephen Hawking to Elon
Musk to the worldwide community of climatologists, are already issuing
urgent warnings concerning the risks posed by mass extinctions, dramatic
climate shifts, artificial intelligence, and other potentially 'existential'
threats to human survival and flourishing. Similar concerns haunt the
popular imagination, as we can see mirrored in the exploding number of
apocalyptic scenarios in film, television, and literature.
Are the voices that warn of us a coming crisis alarmist, or do we have
actual reasons to worry? Some of the rhetoric is almost certainly
overblown. Those who are predicting an imminent 'rise of the robots' or an
'AI singularity,' in which artificially intelligent beings decide to dispense
with humanity or enslave us, in my view serve as an unhelpful distraction
from the far more plausible but less cinematic dangers of artificial
intelligence. These mostly involve unexpected interactions between people
and software systems that aren't smart enough to avoid wreaking havoc on
complex human institutions, rather than robot overlords with
'superintelligence' dwarfing our own.1 Other existential risks, such as
environmental devastation, nuclear or biological warfare, and massive
cosmic impacts are very, very real, and more importantly, the magnitude of
those risks depends greatly upon what we choose to do today with our
technosocial power. Even with near- earth objects such as asteroids, the
paths of which we do not presently
251
Epilogue
251
control, the existential risk they pose can conceivably be mitigated by wise
investment in science and technology, from improved detection systems to
improvised devices to alter their course. Likewise, the existential risk of
environmental devastation, resource depletion, and food chain col apse on
a planetary scale will depend greatly on how we choose to confront the
technosocial challenges of clean and renewable energy, ocean acidification,
and a rapidly warming planet.

We may or may not be the first intelligent species in the universe to face
such crucial tests. Unfortunately, there is reason to believe that if we are not
the first, most of those who have gone before us have failed. I'm speaking
here of something known as "Fermi's Paradox" and the hypothesis of the
"Great Filter." Fermi's Paradox, posed by the physicist Enrico Fermi in
1950, refers to the curious absence of detectable signals from alien
civilizations in a universe that appears to host so many suitable planets for
intelligent life, and is, in the words of one contemporary astronomer,
"bulging at the seams with ingredients for biology."2 One commonly
proposed solution to Fermi's Paradox is a hypothesis that is deeply
disturbing, precisely because it is so intuitively plausible: the possibility
that the universe is silent because technologically advanced species
typically don't last very long before they self- destruct— for example, by
draining and toxifying their nonre-newable resources through uncontrolled
industry, or by developing weapons of planet- killing power. This hypothesis
holds that humanity may be quickly approaching a "Great Filter," one that
may have prevented other intelligent civilizations in the universe from
surviving their own sudden explosions of technosocial innovation.3
A "Great Filter" need not be of our own making— some of the things that
could tend to 'filter out' advanced species from the galaxy, such as large
asteroids, are simply markers of our universe as a dangerous place.
However, the scenario in which advanced species tend to bring a Great
Filter upon themselves is plausible precisely because the only instance of a
technological civilization that we have as a data point, our own, has
already been endangered in precisely these ways. Historians of the Cold
War have documented multiple occasions during that period in which the
likely devastation of the human race by intercontinental nuclear
bombardment was narrowly prevented, not by advanced technological
controls and failsafes, but only by the extraordinary prudence, courage, and
critical judgment of a few people, or in some cases, just one.4 Later,
international treaties successfully brought at least a temporary pause to the
nuclear arms race, but the existential risk of a global nuclear holocaust
endures, and on some accounts, is again increasing.5 Unfortunately for us
and for the planet, global environmental devastation, mass extinctions, and
resource depletion cannot, unlike an im-pending nuclear launch, be called

back by the virtue of one or two wise souls in key positions of responsibility.
They can only be halted by the cooperative efforts
252
2 5 2
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
of millions, even billions of humans willing to countenance the sacrifice of
significant short- term positional gains in wealth and power in the interests
of the long- term survival of the species. Nor is survival our sole concern.
Even if our descendants have the good fortune to make it through the
technosocial growing pains of the next few centuries, what are their
chances of not merely living, but living well?
All of this underscores the claim articulated in this book— that better
technical systems alone will not secure the future of human flourishing.
Only with the broader and more intensive social cultivation of technomoral
virtues such as wisdom, courage, and perspective can this aim be
accomplished. Regardless of how high or low one estimates the existential
risks to humanity to be, reason compels us to lower that risk if we can. Yet it
would be the height of foolishness to attempt to lower that risk by a
reactionary campaign against further scientific and technical developments,
for these innovations in knowledge and practice offer us new ways of
preserving and enhancing human flourishing, not just tools to destroy it.
Consider the significant natural risks to humanity posed by asteroids,
massive radiation bursts from the sun, and the mutation of dangerous flu
strains; then ask yourself if you want your children to forego the
technoscientific innovations that will be necessary to manage and mitigate
those future dangers.
In any case, José Ortega y Gasset was right; the human family may be
many things, but in essence we are a family of engineers. We engineer
ourselves, in various modes: science and craftsmanship, but also
humanistic education, art, literature, music, spiritual practice, physical
exertion, and of course, the practice of philosophy. Over the millennia these
modes have produced many new tools and many visions of the future; today

it happens to be the tools of the digital era that shape most powerfully our
sense of what is possible for the human family.
Yet this book concerns the one tool that humanity must finally master, if we
and those with whom we share our world are to have any solid hope of
living well in the 21st century and beyond. This tool is not an artifact of
silicon but of cultural wisdom; its repeated invention is documented in the
histories of moral practice that are the legacy of philosophical cultures
around the globe, including those explored in this book. Now we must use it
to hammer out a new culture of technomoral virtue, in which human
individuals, families, communities, and institutions consciously work to
inculcate the specific moral skills and capabilities that intelligent life needs
in order to responsibly direct and wisely manage the use of technoscientific
power.
If we estimate the likelihood of humanity successfully meeting these
challenges by looking at our recent record, we will be given pause—
indeed, many of the environmental problems we face today are the result of
a record of exceedingly poor management of our technoscientific powers, in
ways that repeatedly underestimate their risks and discount the value of the
future, prioritizing
253
Epilogue
253
modest short- term gains, often for the wealthy few, over long- term harms
to the home that we and future generations must all share. Fortunately,
humans are not doomed to repeat the mistakes of the past. Our cognitive
powers of reflection, imagination, creativity, and judgment, not to mention
our capacities for moral ambition, empathy, and hope, have already
enabled us to resist many of our most cruel and self- destructive impulses.
We still live in a world where fear, hatred, and violence based on race, sex,
gender, religion, and nationality are rampant— but we no longer live in a
world where these evils are uncontroversial, and in many countries both the
laws and the will of the majority now oppose them. We still live in a world

with nuclear weapons— but no longer one in which these instruments of the
apocalypse proliferate with impunity. We still live in a world with poverty,
disease, and famine. But we no longer live in a world without tools to fight
them, and scientific, political, and economic advances can deliver even
more powerful tools in the future. We also know that humans are capable of
massive and sustained col aboration in immensely complex and challenging
tasks. Consider the construction of the Large Hadron Col ider in
Switzerland, the largest machine on the planet, built over ten years by a
cooperative effort of 10,000 scientists from more than one hundred different
countries. Is it beyond our imagination to think that cooperative efforts of
this kind, on even greater scales, are possible if the stakes are the survival
of meaningful human life on this planet?
Even if most other intelligent civilizations in the universe have failed to
meet this challenge, we need not despair at our prospects of doing so. Our
species enjoys a long, rich, and diverse cultural history of successfully
harnessing and disseminating our creative power, our capacity for
philosophical insight, our nobler ambitions, and our sheer will to flourish,
with astounding results— from space flight, to vanquishing polio and smal
pox, to building global networks and institutions dedicated to higher
learning and moral and spiritual practice. So there is cause for much hope
— but not much comfort, for there is a lot of work for us to do if we are to
equip ourselves for the existential challenges that lie ahead. And as we all
know, we humans are chronic procrastinators, especially when the hard
work that has to be done today will only pay off— if it pays off at al — in a
distant tomorrow. This may be the hardest weakness for us to overcome.
Can we cultivate the will, and the wisdom, to do today what is needed for
tomorrow?
For human beings, nothing is written in stone; yet in a perplexing irony, it
is often those most welcoming of technosocial innovation who succumb to
the false belief that present patterns of moral, economic, and political
practice are permanent fixtures, rather than what they are— malleable
cultural habits with a long history of adapting to changing social
conditions.6 While the funhouse mirrors of internet comment boards,
nationalistic politics, religious extrem-ism, and corporatized mass media
produce a distorted image of the human

254
2 5 4
t e c h n o l o g y a n d t h e v i r t u e s
being as incorrigibly selfish, petty, violent, paranoid, and foolhardy, most
humans have always made an effort to be something far better than that,
using millennia- old habits of moral and intellectual cultivation encoded in
virtually every stable culture. Updating these codes for technosocial life in
the 21st century, and renewing our attention to their importance for our
survival and flourishing on 'Spaceship Earth,' is not an idealistic fantasy—
it is a practical necessity staring us in the face, and a task for which our
history offers important cultural resources to be reclaimed and renewed, as
I have suggested in this book. As important as they are, the engineers of the
21st century who fashion code for machines are not as critical to the human
mission as those who must fashion, test, and disseminate technomoral code
for humans— new habits and practices for living well with emerging
technologies.
Thus instead of seeking solace in the post- apocalyptic fantasies of the
cultural present, which express a yearning for a global calamity that will
press the 'restart button' for humanity and erase our past mistakes along
with our triumphs, I urge the reader to embrace a far more courageous
hope and ambition, one embedded in another popular entertainment vision
of the future— Star Trek. In the words of its philosophical and creative
voice, Gene Roddenberry:
Star Trek speaks to some basic human needs: that there is a tomorrow—
it's not all going to be over with a big flash and a bomb; that the human
race is improving; that we have things to be proud of as humans.7
In the original series, the humans of the 23rd century repeatedly reference a
critical leap in moral development made by 21st- 22nd century humans; a
cultural transition that enabled their narrow escape from self- destruction
in internecine wars fueled by new technoscientific powers. In the future
Roddenberry envisioned, humanity passes through its Great Filter not by

inventing warp drives and transporters, nor by enduring a global
apocalypse that erases our weakened cultures and broken institutions, but
by consciously cultivating the technomoral virtues needed to improve them:
the self- control, courage, empathy, civility, perspective, magnanimity, and
wisdom to make humanity worthy of its greatest technoscientific
aspirations. Such a future has not been promised to us; but it is the only
future worth wanting.
255
Notes
Introduction
1. Hawking et al. (2014).
2. See the July 28, 2015 open letter on autonomous weapons at the website
of the Future of Life Institute (www.futureoflife.org/ ai- open- letter/ ) with
which Tegmark, Hawking, Musk, Russell, and Wilczek are now associated.
The website states their aim as working to "mitigate existential risks facing
humanity," while "focusing on potential risks from the development of
human- level artificial intelligence." Their broader mission: "To catalyze
and support research and initiatives for safeguard-ing life and developing
optimistic visions of the future, including positive ways for humanity to
steer its own course considering new technologies and challenges."
3. Much contemporary philosophy of technology reflects this view; see
Verbeek (2011) for one influential account of how technologies and human
social practices are co- constitutive. In this book the adjectives technosocial
and technomoral reflect this perspective.
4. de Waal (2007), 23.
5. The reference here is to the widespread emissions software fraud by
Volkswagen publically exposed in September 2015.
6. The ubiquity of the opposite complaint is highlighted by Turkle (2011),
167.

7. Post- industrial visions of a technocratic future are found in the works of
Henri Saint- Simon, Auguste Comte, Thorstein Veblen, and John Dewey, to
name just a few.
8. See Packer (2013).
9. Ray Kurzweil (2005) is the radical standard- bearer for the former,
techno- optimist camp of futurists; Bill Joy (2000) is often cited as the
contemporary voice of techno- pessimism. Garreau (2005) gives a thorough
account of these competing visions, along with several alternatives.
10. See Allenby and Sarewitz (2011) for a related claim.
256
256 Notes
11. Kant ([1785] 1997). The rule has another well- known formulation,
which forbids treating rational beings as mere means to our own ends.
Though more helpful in certain cases, this too fails to address the
technomoral complexities of a world in which, for example, an intelligent,
autonomous robot or software agent challenges our concept of a 'rational
being.'
12. Persson and Savulescu (2012), 46.
13. Lewis et al. (2014).
14. Mill ([1861] 2001), 23- 25.
15. Although I reject Martha Nussbaum's view that the label of "virtue
ethics" is so broad as to be vacuous, in this book I take her advice that we
who wish to make use of the rich practical resources of virtue traditions not
get wrapped up in the art of defining our unique kind, and get on with the
business of "figuring out what we ourselves want to say." Nussbaum
(1999), 163.
16. Mine, then, is an explicitly pluralistic account— one that willingly
sacrifices some theoretical unity in exchange for practical cash- value in

addressing collective problems of technomoral wisdom. It is also a human-
centered account, insofar as I take humans to be the only agents presently
capable of deliberating together about the good life; yet an ability to attend
and respond to all forms of moral worth, including that of nonhumans and
the environment, is explicitly identified with the technomoral virtues of
empathy, care, and perspective in Chapter 6.
17. These virtues do not function exclusively for this purpose; individually,
they each serve other ethical functions in the various cultural traditions for
which they are meaningful. Yet when cultivated together they may also serve
a global function in helping us to address a global human problem of 21st
century life: namely, how to flourish in a condition of acute technosocial
opacity and increasing existential risk.
chapter 1
1. For an excellent analysis of the historical trajectory of this concept in
classical ethical discourse, see Annas (1993). I have chosen to bypass the
debate about whether classical ethics engages the specifically moral
domain of modern ethics (see Anscombe 1958 and Williams 1985).
However, I share Annas' view (1993, 120- 131) that it does.
2. See Boodberg (1953).
3. Keown (1992), 49.
4. Aristotle (1984), Nicomachean Ethics (hereafter NE), 1103a20- 35. This,
of course, allows us to distinguish human virtues of character from the type
of virtue described earlier as possessed by an excellent knife. Furthermore,
as noted by Foot (1978), virtue of character entails an agent's habitual
willing of the good in a sense that involves moral discernment and is not
narrowly instrumental. Hence physical health is not a virtue of character
even though it can to a significant degree be deliberately cultivated as a
rationally chosen state of human excellence.
257
Notes 257

5. See Aristotle, NE 1103a15- 35; 1106b15- 25; 1144b25. The integration of
cognitive, affective, and desiderative states in virtuous dispositions is
discussed extensively by McDowell (1998).
6. See Aristotle, NE Book VI for his account of practical wisdom and its
role in ethics.
7. See McDowell (1998), 39. Complete or 'ful ' virtue is an aspirational
ideal rather than a minimum standard for ethical behavior; thus we may
properly refer to degrees of virtue, and to its gradual cultivation rather than
its achievement.
8. NE 1106b20.
9. There are ongoing debates among ethicists about the extent to which the
virtues can be successfully integrated; how attainable virtue is for the
ordinary person; to what extent the cultivation of virtue requires external
goods or luck; whether and under what circumstances a person's virtue can
coexist with vice; and how to distinguish clearly moral virtues such as
justice from apparently nonmoral virtues such as cleverness, creativity, and
perseverance. For an overview of these debates, see Crisp (1996); Crisp
and Slote (1997); French et al. (1988); and Statman (1997). Some of these
debates will be directly engaged in this book, while others fall outside the
scope of our inquiry. Despite the open questions, most virtue ethicists agree
upon the general conceptual profile of the term 'virtue' presented above.
10. Cafaro (1997) rebuts the charge that virtue ethics is narrowly agent-
focused.
Regarding the conceptual linkage between virtue and happiness/
flourishing, some virtue theorists deny this eudaimonist implication— for
example, Michael Slote (1992). Such theorists explicitly acknowledge,
however, that in doing so they depart from a core principle of the classical
virtue ethical tradition.
11. Aristotle, NE 1098b30. Controversies over the translation of
eudaimonia as 'happiness' have resulted in the term 'human flourishing'

being preferred by some; I will use both terms depending on context. On the
distinct advantages of each, see Hursthouse (1999), 9- 10.
12. Insufficient because, as Aristotle notes at NE 1101a, humans are
vulnerable to devastating misfortunes from which not even great virtue can
provide complete protection, although virtuous persons will bear such
misfortunes better and preserve more of their happiness than will the
vicious.
13. Nussbaum (1999) rejects this standard description of virtue ethics as a
distinct
"third approach" in ethics; while she is right to note the rich diversity of
contemporary views that fall under this label, her assertion that the use of
rule or decision principles in virtue ethics is indistinguishable from that of
other approaches is unconvincing.
14. See Louden (1984) and Schneewind (1990). The canonical form of the
latter objection appears in Henry Sidgwick's influential The Methods of
Ethics (1884), in which he claims that at best, Aristotle's ethics "only
indicates the whereabouts of Virtue. It does not give us a method for finding
it" (375).
15. For a careful survey of the first wave of philosophical responses to
Anscombe's cal , see Pence (1984); also French et al. (1988).
258
258 Notes
16. MacIntyre (1984); McDowell (1998); Hursthouse (1999); and Annas
(2011) are examples of prominent neo- Aristotelian accounts. Baier (1985);
Becker (1998); and Swanton (2003) offer accounts of the second sort, while
Slote (1992) and Driver (2001) are among the best- known adherents of the
third strategy.
17. Hursthouse (1999) provides an overview of and response to such
criticisms; see Harman (2000) and Doris (2002) for the situationist critique

of the empirical validity of character traits; excellent responses to the
situationist challenge are made by Kupperman (2001); Kamtekar (2004);
and Annas (2005).
18. See Miller (2014) for a helpful discussion of this point.
19. Badhwar (2014a).
20. For a review of contemporary developments in Confucian virtue ethics,
see Tiwald (2010). For examples of these developments, see Yearley (1990);
Ivanhoe (2002a); Van Norden (2007); Yu (2007); and Angle (2009). For
examples of contemporary work on Buddhist virtue ethics, see Keown
(1992); Whitehill (2000); Harvey (2000); Cooper and James (2005); and
Bommarito (2014).
21. See Tiwald (2010), 57- 58 on the opportunities presented by
comparative virtue ethics.
22. Wong (2013).
23. See Wal ach and Allen (2009); Lin, Abney, and Bekey (2012).
24. See Annas (1993) and Hursthouse (1999).
25. Ibid.
26. Such claims are made by O'Neill (1990) and Sherman (1997), and
applied to computer ethics by Grodzinsky (1999); yet ineliminable
differences remain that I will argue constrain Kantian deontology's
application to emerging technological practices.
27. The story is recounted in Makos (2012).
28. Yearley (2002), 256.
29. See NE Book II Chapters 8- 9, see also chapter 5, section 6 in this
volume.
30. Nussbaum (1990), 73- 74.

31. NE 1094b16.
32. See NE Book VI, Chapter 13, especially 1144b20- 30. See also
MacIntyre (1984), 150- 152. This commitment to the dependent status of
rational principles of ethics distinguishes Aristotle's view from those who
grant the virtues an essential place in ethics, but regard their practical
content as derivable from fixed ethical principles; see for example O'Neill
(1996).
33. Indeed, in their book The Techno- Human Condition, Braden Allenby
and Daniel Sarewitz (2011) argue that consequentialist and deontological
ethics are crippled by the unprecedented and irremediable ignorance of the
future that marks this condition— what I have termed acute technosocial
opacity. Despite their correct diagnosis, Allenby and Sarewitz fail to
explicitly acknowledge that the solution they call for is, in fact, not a
"reinvented Enlightenment" ethic (187) but a technosocial virtue ethic
heavily indebted to classical conceptions of practical wisdom.
259
Notes 259
34. See Bainbridge and Roco (2006), also Khushf (2007), and Nordmann
(2004).
35. See Ess (2010a); Vallor (2010; 2012); Volkman (2010); Wong (2012);
and Couldry (2013a and 2013b).
36. See anthologies by Scharff and Dusek (2003); Kaplan (2004); and
Hanks (2010) for an overview. See also Mitcham (1994).
37. For critical perspectives on first- wave philosophy of technology, and
the thesis of technological determinism in particular, see Feenberg (1999);
Achterhuis (2001); and Verbeek (2005).
38. Jonas (1979), 28.
39. Jonas (1984), 21.

40. Jonas (1979), 28.
41. Jonas (1984).
42. Ibid., 12.
43. Ibid., 6.
44. Jonas's account is not beyond criticism— for example, he vastly
underestimates the extent to which Aristotle saw virtue as a matter of
political (and hence collective) concern rather than private interest, and the
extent to which management of novel and unpredictable circumstances is an
essential component of phronēsis. Stil Jonas is correct that Aristotle's whole
account as given is not adequate to our contemporary situation.
45. Jonas (1984), chapter 1.
46. Ibid., 26.
47. Ibid., 203.
48. Borgmann (1984).
49. Ibid., especially chapters 9 and 18.
50. Ibid., chapter 25.
51. Ibid., 233.
52. See Feenberg (1999); Achterhuis (2001); Ihde (2004); and Verbeek
(2005).
53. See Brey (2004); Tavani (2005); and Moor (2008). Luciano Floridi's
The Ethics of Information (2013) is perhaps the best- known candidate for a
new technosocial ethic, although as a principle- based and universalist
framework it is vulnerable to many of the same objections as other
deontological systems, as detailed by Volkman (2010). For a more
enthusiastic take on the relationship between information ethics and an
Aristotelian ethic of flourishing, see Bynum (2006).

54. See the debate between Ihde (2010) and Scharff (2012) about whether
philosophy of technology needs strong normativity.
55. Such a person would also probably be recognized as vicious in other
historical and cultural settings; hence a new framework for technosocial
virtues will not be wholly discontinuous with traditional conceptions of
virtue, differing mainly in its prioritization and interpretation of the virtues.
This is also why such a framework can resonate even with those who
remain culturally wedded to, say, traditional Confucian or Buddhist values.
260
260 Notes
56. See Oakley and Cocking (2001); Sandler and Cafaro (2005); Cooper
and James (2005); Walker and Ivanhoe (2007); and Couldry (2013b).
chapter 2
1. To give just one example, the important Aristotelian virtue of
megalopsuchia, which entails a (deserved) sense of moral superiority to
others, is thought by many to be inconsistent with modern liberal norms.
But see Kristjánsson (1998), who claims that this in fact tells against
modern liberal conceptions of morality. See also chapter 6, Section 11 in
this volume.
2. MacIntyre (1984), 159.
3. See MacIntyre's powerful critique of Aristotle on this point in Dependent
Rational Animals (1999).
4. Closely related views are found in the NE's likely predecessor, the
Eudemian Ethics, as well as his Politics and the Magna Moralia, the
authorship of which is contested. For contemporary analyses of Aristotle's
ethics, see Annas (2011) and Hursthouse (1999).
5. For excellent English- language analyses of Confucian virtue ethics, see
Ivanhoe (2000) and (2002a); Van Norden (2002) and (2007); and Yu

(2007).
6. This is not entirely the case for neo- Confucianism, a robustly influential
school of Chinese thought marked by strong Buddhist influences that
significantly transformed the classical core. However, our focus in this book
will be on the classical form of Confucianism.
7. Yearley (1990), 71.
8. Yu (2007), 82- 83.
9. On 'semblances of virtue,' see Yearley (1990), 19, 124- 125.
10. See Yu (2007), 101- 102, 124- 125 for a fuller discussion of the
contrasts between Aristotelian and Confucian ethics.
11. See Yearley (1990), 38- 41 and Yu (2007), 150- 152.
12. See Yearley (1990).
13. For English- language accounts of Buddhist virtue ethics, see Keown
(1992); Harvey (2000); Cooper and James (2005); and Wright (2009).
14. Buddhism's denial of an enduring, substantive self as a metaphysical
entity remains entirely compatible with the existence of an ethical self
whose habits and beliefs can be cultivated over time.
15. Gethin (1998), 82.
16. See Wright (2009) on the importance of character cultivation in
Buddhism.
17. Cooper and James (2005), 83.
18. The qualification 'might' here is essential, as the virtuous person's
decision would result from the application of practical wisdom to the salient
features of the particular situation, as opposed to being decided at a higher
level of abstraction by uncritically applying general principles such as
'always honor your father and king'

or 'show equal compassion for the suffering of strangers.' One could
imagine such
261
Notes 261
a dilemma with special circumstances that motivated a virtuous Buddhist to
honor kin preference, or a virtuous Confucian to oppose his corrupt king's
cruelty to citizens of a neighboring kingdom.
19. See Kristjánsson (1998).
20. On Confucianism as a virtue ethic, see Ivanhoe (2002a), 4- 10; Van
Norden (2007), 15- 23; and Yu (2007), 226 ff. 5, where he notes that "the
virtue ethics approach to Confucianism has become prevailing in recent
years." For similar responses with respect to Buddhism, see Keown (2002),
193- 227; Harvey (2000), 49- 51; and Cooper and James (2005), 85- 89.
21. See Van Norden (2007), 17, 20 on the roots of this distinction and its use
in comparative ethics.
22. Ibid., 33, 37- 59. Van Norden's analysis serves his comparison of
Confucian and Aristotelian ethics, but is intended to encompass all virtue
ethical accounts.
23. Of course, MacIntyre is primarily concerned with the Western moral
tradition and with recovering its Aristotelian and Thomistic heritage. My
task here is more ecu-menical, and although it is beyond our scope to
defend this aim against MacIntyre's narrower commitments, I believe that
the possibility and reasonableness of such a defense is implicit in the
arguments of this chapter.
24. MacIntyre (1984), 187.
25. Ibid.
26. It goes without saying that global technosocial activity has also
produced significant harms, and that some of these alleged goods (e.g.,

efficiency) have been identified by critics of modern technology such as
Jacques El ul (1964) and Herbert Marcuse (1964) as injurious to human
freedom and/ or happiness.
27. MacIntyre (1984), 191.
28. Ibid., 188.
29. Ibid., 190.
30. Ibid., 218- 220.
31. Ibid., 191.
32. See Yearley (1990) for a comparative treatment of courage in Confucian
and Western thought.
33. Peterson and Seligman (2004), Chapter 2.
34. Van Norden (2002), 7.
35. See Singer (2011); Pinker (2011); and Floridi (2013) for predictions of
such expansion.
36. NE 1155a20; Kongzi (Confucius), Analects 13:19 and 15:5; and Cooper
and James (2005), 108, where they argue that Buddhism's locus of moral
concern, while global in scope, remains the human family. It should be
noted that I have not ruled out a technosocial practice that pursues goals
framed in nonanthropocentric terms; however, it remains the case that
while nonhumans can and must be subjects of moral concern, at present
only human agents can constitute a moral practice and tradition in the
sense defined by virtue ethics.
262
262 Notes
37. Those who have explored such possibilities (Ess 2006, 2009, 2010a;
Hongladarom and Ess 2007; Hongladarom 2008; Capurro 2008; Floridi

2006) often frame their goal as a global, cross- cultural, or intercultural
information ethic. I suggest that this label may unduly, if unintentionally,
limit the scope of our attention to information technologies as narrowly
construed (excluding, say, technologies for biomedical enhancement), and
as abstracted from their social context— hence my choice to reframe the
goal as a global technosocial ethic.
38. Ess (2006), 216.
39. Ibid., 218.
40. Ibid.
41. Ibid., ff. 37; also Ess (2010a), 112.
42. Ess (2014).
chapter 3
1. MacIntyre (1984), 276.
2. As noted in chapter 2, this global community is composed of members of
other communities bound by more deeply shared and local concerns,
practices, and values; thus a technomoral virtue ethic cannot replace the
existing plurality of local conceptions of the good life and moral excellence.
At best it can supervene upon them in a manner that addresses the need for
more globally coherent human responses to moral dilemmas involving
technosocial practices.
3. See Ess (2010a), 115.
4. Cavell (1990), 57.
5. Van Norden (2007), 50- 51. Van Norden claims that Aristotle's view of
moral habituation is nearer to the perspective of Mengzi's Confucian rival,
Xunzi, who held that ritual practice corrects and radically reshapes human
nature. In all likelihood Aristotle's view lies somewhere in between the two
Confucian alternatives, as he argues that virtues arise "neither by nature ...
nor contrary to nature." ( NE

1103a25) See also Liu and Ivanhoe (2002) on Mengzi's moral philosophy.
6. Anguttara Nikāya 10.2; translation from Cooper and James (2005), 82.
7. In Aristotelian and Buddhist ethics, moral sages may seek contemplative
lives largely detached from practical problems of the sort with which we are
concerned.
In the Confucian tradition, the sage ( shengren) functions as a regulative
ideal rather than a demonstrable example like the junzi, though even a true
Confucian sage would be fully engaged in political life. However, since
technomoral virtues must enable cooperative ethical discourse concerning
global problems of the sort described in chapter 2 and Part III of this book,
we will be more interested in what classical virtue traditions can tell us
about cultivating excellence in ordinary human beings than in what these
traditions say about exceedingly rare specimens of moral sagehood.
8. See Harvey (2000), 39.
263
Notes 263
9. See Lockwood (2013) for a nuanced account of habituation in Aristotle's
ethics.
10. NE 1105b8.
11. NE 1105b17.
12. NE 1179b5- 10.
13. NE 1104b10.
14. NE 1104b15- 1105a15.
15. NE 1104b1- 3.

16. The apparent circularity of this definition has been much discussed in
the literature, but the circle is generally regarded by virtue ethicists as
nonvicious (no pun intended). In any classical account, a virtuous person is
understood as responsive to the salient moral features of his or her
practical environment (see chapter 5); virtue is not defined internally (or
externally) to the agent, but by a 'fit' between the possibilities for human
flourishing afforded to the agent by the moral environment and the
intelligence and effectiveness with which he or she enacts those
possibilities.
In practice, however, the not- yet- virtuous person is unable to reliably
perceive the moral possibilities in the environment or discern how best to
seize them; hence the necessity of relying upon moral exemplars.
17. NE 1141a 25- 1141b20. There is much dispute among Aristotle scholars
concerning the phronimos or man of practical wisdom ( phronēsis); for
example, over whether there are different types of phronimoi, whether they
manifest practical wisdom in varying degrees, how rare they might be, and
why Aristotle believed that women and slaves naturally lack the rational
faculties needed to become a phronimos.
18. NE 1120a24.
19. NE 1180a1.
20. See chapter 6, Part 2 for a discussion of this virtue.
21. NE 1179b15- 25. Compare with Kongzi, Analects 7:26.
22. Van Norden (2007), 106 ff. 58.
23. Slingerland (2003), 200. Hereafter references to the Analects of Kongzi
(Confucius) appear in the following style: Analects 17:2. Translations
generally follow Slingerland (2003); occasional minor departures from
Slingerland's translation are my own, except where otherwise noted.
24. Van Norden (2007), 338. See also Analects 8:2.

25. Ibid., 107.
26. Yearley (1990), 41.
27. Analects 12:1. Here 'humane,' rendered as 'Goodness' by Slingerland
(2003), is a translation of ren or ' ren- minded,' a term we shall have cause
to discuss in the following sections.
28. Ibid., 12:15; 13:13; see also Yu (2007) 116- 117 on the similar role of
habit in Aristotle and Kongzi. This notion of correction is, however, in
tension with Mengzi's account of self- cultivation as developing our natural
sprouts of human goodness.
29. Ibid., 6:29; 13:21; 11:16; 17:8; 20:2.
30. Ibid., 12:19.
264
264 Notes
31. Ibid., 4:17. See also Analects 4:1, 4:25, and 7:22. As with debates about
the phronimoi, it is unclear whether Kongzi regarded the ideal of the
perfected junzi as practically achievable. At a minimum it seems clear that
a perfected junzi would be, like the sage ( shengren), exceedingly rare. Still,
given that Kongzi describes himself as constantly emulating virtuous
persons ( Analects 7:22), despite regarding his own time as remarkably
corrupt ( Analects 7:26), it is safe to say that he believed that moral
exemplars worthy of emulation were common enough, even if they were not
yet fully perfected.
32. Ibid., 1:12.
33. Ibid., 9:14. See Ivanhoe (2002b) on the role of joy in ritual practice as
motivating self- cultivation.
34. Harvey (2000), 48.
35. Cooper and James (2005), 48.

36. Ibid.
37. Buddhists distinguish between pleasures and joy; the former involve the
mental and physical cravings that are inimical to the cultivated state, while
the latter can be consistent with equanimity and relinquishment of the fruits
of action ( karma).
A related distinction appears in Confucian thought, where Kongzi says of
the Way that "One who knows it is not the equal of one who loves it, and
one who loves it is not the equal of one who takes joy in it." ( Analects
6:20) See also Ivanhoe (2002b), 224, on the distinction in Mengzi between
moral joy and pleasure. In all three classical traditions, however, the
cultivated person finds a profound type of happiness in acting well, whereas
the uncultivated person may do good acts only with reluctance, discomfort,
or displeasure.
38. Harvey (2000), 37, 68.
39. Ibid., 39.
40. Ibid., 41.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid., also Keown (1992), 44- 56. See also Yu (2007), 148- 154 on the
complex and mutually reinforcing interactions of ethical wisdom, habit,
choice, and feeling in Aristotelian and Confucian ethics.
chapter 4
1. Van Norden (2007), 320. See Hursthouse (1999), 224- 226, and 240 for
her criticisms of Kantian and utilitarian forms of the impersonal, universal,
or neutral moral point of view. For a detailed account of the emergence in
Stoic virtue ethics of the demand for moral impartiality or neutrality, and
the debate between this view and Aristotle's, see Annas (1993), chapter 12.
It is worth noting that the Stoic position merely radicalizes the demand of
virtue ethics for the moral extension of natural relational concerns, as

described later in this chapter. Thus Stoicism is still rooted in a relational
understanding of the self, rather than a monadic one.
265
Notes 265
2. See Yu (2007), 210- 212 for a detailed discussion of the Confucian self as
"relational"
and its close affinity with the political self in Aristotle's ethics. Yu further
defends these views from the objection that a relational self would lack
moral independence or in some other way be dissolved into the social
context. See also Shun and Wong (2004) on the relational self in Confucian
ethics.
3. As MacIntyre notes in Dependent Rational Animals, reliable knowledge
of oneself is made possible only by "those social relationships which on
occasion provide badly needed correction for our own judgments. When
adequate self- knowledge is achieved, it is always a shared achievement"
(1999, 95).
4. For a detailed contemporary defense of key aspects of this account, see
MacIntyre (1999); classical virtue traditions generally assume this
viewpoint rather than explicitly defending it. As we will see in later
chapters, even the more contemplative and solitary states of practice found
in Buddhist and Aristotelian ideals of philosophical enlightenment must be
understood as relational.
5. Aristotle (1984), Politics 1253a1- 5. Hereafter P.
6. NE 1130a9.
7. NE 1134b10- 17. See also Aristotle's P 1262a1- 1262b35, where he
rejects Plato's proposal in the Republic to col apse the fine- grained
structure of kinship and other traditional human relations.
8. NE 1156a1- 5.

9. NE 1169b13.
10. See NE 1158b10- 30.
11. NE 1160a1- 8. See also NE 1158b10- 35; 1161a1- 1162a30.
12. NE 1171b30- 1172a15.
13. NE 1162a25. Even in this case Aristotle thinks that man and woman will
display different kinds of excellence, but sufficiently complementary that
their enjoyment of virtue can be shared.
14. P 1253a19.
15. Analects 1:2.
16. Yu (2007), 33 and 77; also Van Norden (2007), 117- 118.
17. Analects 14:42.
18. See Yu (2007), 94 where he argues to this effect.
19. See Analects 4:18 and 2:7.
20. Ibid., 2:21. See also Mengzi, Mencius 7A15, and chapter 5 in this
volume on moral extension.
21. Ibid., 1:6.
22. Ibid., 12:22.
23. Ibid., 1:16.
24. Van Norden (2007), 115. See also Analects 13:28.
25. See Mencius 3A5, 7A26, and 7B26; also Wong (2002), 203- 204; Van
Norden (2007) offers extensive analysis of the debate between Mohists and
Ruists on the subject of graded love.

266
266 Notes
26. Mencius 7A26 and 6A5. See also chapter 5 herein, on prudential
judgment.
27. Mencius 7A26.
28. Harvey (2000), 104- 109; Cooper and James (2005), 95- 96.
29. In Cooper and James (2005), 133, where they explore the implications
of Buddhist relational understanding for environmental ethics.
30. In Harvey (2000), 29.
31. See Ibid., 109- 118. See also chapter 5 herein on moral attention.
32. Ibid., 12.
33. Ibid., 51.
34. See ibid., 108- 109, on the developmental progression from acting
virtuously toward those for whom it is easiest to do so, to radiating outward
to more and more difficult personal contexts until one's virtuous practice is
properly extended to al . The process involves many of the features of moral
habituation described in the previous chapter, especially the gradual
overcoming of affective and cognitive obstacles to acting well.
35. See Keown (1992), 150- 163; Harvey (2000), 134- 140; and Cooper
and James (2005), 76. Further discussion of this point can be found in
chapter 5 concerning prudential judgment.
36. Plato, Apology 38a.
37. NE 1109b1- 5.
38. NE 1114a5.

39. For more detailed discussion of the history of self- examination as a
technique of self- care in Western thought, see Foucault (1988); Cavell
(1990); and Nehamas (1998).
40. NE 1170a1- 3; 1171b30- 1172a7.
41. NE 1128b15- 35. This disdain of moral humility is one reason why
Aristotle's virtue of magnanimity ( megalopsuchia) has attracted much
modern critical scorn; but see Kristjánsson (1998) for a defense of
magnanimity as a contemporary virtue, see also chapter 6, section 12 in
this volume.
42. See Analects 7:32, 7:33, 9:7; also Van Norden (2007), 19- 20 on
Confucian humility.
43. Ibid., 2:4. See also 7:16 and 9:15.
44. Ibid., 1:14, 4:17, 9:24, 15:14.
45. Ibid., 15:29. (Chai translation). See also Mencius 4A4; 4A19.
46. Ibid., 5:27.
47. Ibid.,14:32 (Waley translation); see also 15:19 and Mencius 4B28.
48. Ibid., 12:16, 4:7, 4:17, 7:22, 13:13, 15:20.
49. Mencius 7A5 and 4A19.
50. See Analects 4:6, 6:12, 7:30; and Mencius 6A11, 7B21.
51. Analects 1:4. See also 19:5, and Xunzi (2003), p. 15.
52. This is not to say that it need only be this, of course; simply that any
ethical philosophy, even one with metaphysical and/ or religious
underpinnings, has practical worldly action as its central subject matter.
267

Notes 267
53. Harvey (2000), 36- 37.
54. An exception would be certain forms of Pure Land Buddhism that allow
for immediate enlightenment by something akin to grace. See ibid., 143.
55. NE 1105a30- 1105b5.
56. NE 1140b1- 10.
57. NE 1105b15.
58. More will be said about this virtue in chapter 6, section 12.
59. This issue is discussed throughout the NE, but especially in Books IX
and X. See also Annas (1993), chapter 12.
60. NE 1168b30, NE 1169a5- 10.
61. NE 1098a18.
62. Analects 7:8.
63. See Van Norden (2007) 227, on this remark in Mencius 2A2. See also
Nivison (1996).
64. As Van Norden (2007) notes on page 228- 229, it is unclear whether
Mengzi saw these environmental factors as crucial to childhood moral
development, as is made explicit in the Greek virtue tradition.
65. Mencius 7A42. Translation by Dobson in Mencius (1963), 189, there
listed as 7.18.
Translations of 7A42 vary widely.
66. See Van Norden (2007), 231- 232.
67. Mencius 2A2.

68. Analects 9:19. See also 4:5.
69. Xunzi (2003), 23.
70. Ibid., 19.
71. Analects 8:7. See also Yu (2007), 168 on the resonance with this point in
Aristotle's view, and 177- 182 on self- completion ( cheng) in Confucian
thought.
72. Mencius 4B14.
73. See Harvey (2000) 61, 91- 92, on the distinction between the mundane
path of the Buddhist layperson or 'householder' and the supramundane
path of the monastic Sangha.
74. In Harvey (2000) 11, from Tatz 1986, 47.
75. Ibid., 37, 80.
76. See Cooper and James (2005), 60- 61; and Analects 14:45.
77. Cooper and James (2005), 94.
78. Ibid., 95.
79. Ibid.
80. See Analects 16:11; 18:7; 18:8.
81. Cooper and James (2005), 95.
82. Although see Van Norden (2007), 231, on the use of si to focus attention
away from sensual desires.
83. Harvey (2000), 11.
268

268 Notes
chapter 5
1. NE 1142a25- 30.
2. NE 1142a10- 20; 1143b10- 15.
3. McDowell (1998).
4. As both McDowell (1998) and Nussbaum (1990) have noted, this element
of moral practice is missing from deontological or consequentialist
accounts of ethics in which sufficient action- guidance can be obtained
simply from applying standing rules or principles of morality to the present
facts of the case. For such accounts ignore the way in which moral
attention selects from among all the available facts those that most acutely
call for a moral response; a selection which, as we will see in the next
section, may require a modification, nonstan-dard implementation, or even
suspension of a moral rule or principle that would otherwise apply.
5. Nussbaum (1990), 38.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid., 40- 42.
8. Waley (1989), 45. The Chinese term rendered in Pinyin as si is written as
ssu by Waley, using the traditional Wade- Giles romanization.
9. Mencius 4A17, 5A2, and 2B7, respectively.
10. See Yearley (1990), 62- 70, on the relationship between zhi and si (Like
Waley, Yearley also uses Wade- Giles romanization, rendering these as chih
and ssu).
11. See Van Norden (2007), 234- 245.
12. Angle (2014), 173.This is part of a larger debate about how much
automaticity is present in virtue.

13. See Keown (1992), 206- 217 on the comparison between Buddhist and
Aristotelian psychology.
14. Ibid., 70- 82.
15. Cooper and James (2005), 98.
16. Ibid., 100.
17. NE 1143b6- 9.
18. NE 1141b12- 15.
19. NE 1142b1- 30.
20. NE 1143a19- 24.
21. NE Book VI, Chapter 12.
22. Van Norden (2007), 123. Here he notes one key difference from
Aristotle's account: that zhi cannot, as does the intellectual virtue of
phronēsis, represent complete virtue, since for Kongzi this also requires the
virtue of ren (humaneness). On the other hand, Van Norden acknowledges
(124- 125) that zhi seems to entail an appreciation or love of ren. In that
case the parallel is nearer, since Aristotle also requires the man of
phronēsis to have a love of moral virtue. The remaining difference is that
for Aristotle moral virtue is centered more on acting justly toward others
269
Notes 269
than on acting benevolently toward them. How this will translate into
different moral behavior is an interesting question, but beyond the scope of
our inquiry.
23. Mencius 5B1; see Van Norden (2007), 277 for his interpretation of this
passage as highlighting skill in means- ends deliberation.

24. Yu (2007), 94.
25. Yearley (1990), 19- 23. A related phrase in Confucian moral thought is
the "village honest man," who is thought to be well cultivated but in fact is
simply a pale imitation of genuine virtue.
26. See Harvey (2000), 134- 140.
27. Keown (1992), 151.
28. Ibid. See also Cooper and James (2005), 63- 64, and 76, where they
note that the presence of the doctrine of skillful means is a powerful
argument for classifying Buddhism as a virtue ethical tradition.
29. Harvey (2000), 135.
30. See Becker, (1986).
31. See NE Book V.
32. NE 1155a26.
33. NE 1166a20. See Vallor (2012) on the role of empathy (the sharing of
joys and pains) in Aristotelian virtue friendship, and its implications for
friendship in the age of new social media.
34. NE 1166a30- 35.
35. NE 1161b17- 35. He suggests that this is why a mother's love is stronger
than that of a father (i.e., since on his view mother and child are literally of
common matter, whereas the father contributes only form).
36. NE 1171b20.
37. NE Book VIII, Chapter 10.
38. Mencius 1A7, 1B5.
39. Ibid.

40. See Nivison (1980); Ivanhoe (2002a); Wong (2002); Yu (2007), 119-
120.
41. Mencius 1B5.
42. Mencius 6A18. Translation from Chan (1963), 60.
43. Wei- Ming (1984), 381- 382.
44. Harvey (2000), 64.
45. Cooper and James (2005), 40, 61.
46. Ibid., 61.
47. Ibid.
48. Yu (2007), 120.
49. This strategy resonates with much contemporary literature on the
narrative exercise of moral imagination and its role in moral motivation, as
well as contemporary work in moral psychology on the cognitive, affective,
and perceptual underpinnings of empathy. See Slote (2007); Batson (2011);
and Trivigno (2014).
270
270 Notes
chapter 6
1. See Snow and Trivigno (2014) on the psychology of virtue; see also
chapter 10 herein for a discussion of the possibility of biomedical
enhancement of these capacities.
2. Nussbaum (1988).
3. See Peterson and Seligman (2004) for an interesting attempt to give a
comprehensive taxonomy of six "core virtues" and a list of supporting

"character strengths" that facilitate each virtue.
4. Yu (2007), 177.
5. See Ess (2010b) and Ess and Thorseth (2011).
6. See 2015 Gal up pol : http:// www.gal up.com/ poll/ 185927/ americans-
trust- media-
remains- historical- low.aspx?
7. Frankfurt (2005).
8. Aquinas (1975), Summa Contra Gentiles, Book IV, Ch. Lv.
9. See Grenberg (2005).
10. See Floridi and Taddeo (2014).
11. Bostrom (2002).
12. Wright (2009), 135. Wright notes that contemporary Buddhist practice
is likely to show an increasing concern for social and political justice, given
its increasingly global reach.
13. Oremus (2013).
14. It also indicates a vicious deficiency of other technomoral virtues,
especially care, civility, and empathy.
15. NE 1115b15- 20. Minor variation from the Barnes translation is mine.
16. See Yearley (1990), 114- 116.
17. For an extensive discussion of these 'semblances' of courage, see
Yearley (1990), 124- 129, rooted in Aristotle's account in NE Book Three,
Chapter VIII as well as Aquinas's analyses of that chapter.

18. See Yearley (1990), 130- 132, rooted in Aquinas' Summa Theologiae,
Part 2- 2, Question 123.
19. Ibid., 134- 135.
20. See Analects 9:29, 14:28, and 17:23.
21. See Slingerland (2003), 96 on Miao Xie's commentary on Analects 9:29.
22. Yearley (1990), 146.
23. Mencius 6A10, translation from Nivison (1996). See also 2A2.
24. It is worth noting that while models of heroic martial courage are still
culturally influential in many parts of the world, the modern transformation
of military practice by long- range weapons and automated systems has
placed considerable pressure on this conception (Singer 2009; Vallor
2013a). The predicted expansion of drone and robotic warfare will only
increase this pressure; both globally and locally humans will be challenged
to find new ways to understand martial courage, or else to question whether
and to what extent this form of courage continues to warrant its historical
privilege.
271
Notes 271
25. Significant portions of this section are adapted from Vallor (2012).
26. Batson (2011), 20. See also Goleman (2013), 98.
27. See Trivigno (2014) for a discussion of this.
28. See NE 1106a4, also Vallor (2012).
29. NE 1166a8.
30. NE 1106a4

31. EE 1240a36
32. NE 1166b18. See also NE 1167a5- 20, where Aristotle describes as a
precondition of friendship the finding in each other of some excellence or
worth to admire, which under certain conditions evolves from mere
goodwill into the rare love and empathy between two people that typifies
virtue friendship (NE 1171a5- 15).
33. NE 1166b34
34. NE 1167a2; NE 1167a10
35. MacIntyre (1999), 116.
36. Ibid., 7, 64. However, misericordia as defined by Aquinas and
MacIntyre is narrower than empathy as I, and Aristotle, define it: while
misericordia is ''grief or sorrow over someone else's distress ... just insofar
as one understands the other's distress as one's own'' (Ibid., 125), empathy
includes, in addition, the disposition to rejoice in the joy of another (NE
1166a8). See Vallor (2012) on the importance of this oft- neglected
component of empathy. An exception to this pattern of one- sided neglect is
the Buddhist virtue of muditā (sympathetic joy).
37. Or in the case of a sociopath, in either sense.
38. See Slingerland (2003), 242, also Ivanhoe (2002a), 2- 3.
39. Indeed, the character for shu is composed of the characters for xin
(heart- mind) and ru (comparing). The analogical dimension of shu
prevents it from meaning mere pity or sympathy; I must take on the other's
state of mind or suffering in some way that makes me see the other's
condition as like my own. Seeing another's suffering simply as a deplorable,
sad state of affairs, even one I feel duty- bound to remedy, is not enough.
Hence I have chosen to conceive of shu as nearer to 'empathy' than
'sympathy.'
40. Analects 15:24 and 4:15.

41. Mencius 7A4. Translation adapted from Bloom (2002), 93.
42. Mencius 2A6. Translation adapted from Ihara (1991), 51.
43. See Bloom (2002), 75- 76.
44. This indiscriminate extension of empathy was opposed by classical
Confucians, who, as we saw in chapter 5, vigorously defended the notion of
moral affection as properly graded by kinship and political ties. Philip J.
Ivanhoe notes that neo-Confucian scholars like Wang Yangming (1472-
1529) later tried to reduce this tension with Buddhism, by reinterpreting
Confucianism as cultivating a natural
"sensitivity" or feeling for all parts of the universe as one body: "Those
who don't feel this unbounded connection, who feel no compassion for a
world in pain, are like people with paralyzed limbs who cannot feel an
injury inflicted upon their own
272
272 Notes
hands and feet." Still, Ivanhoe notes that this view is "completely alien" to
the classical Confucian ethos; see (2002a), 28- 29.
45. Wright (2009), 30.
46. Ibid., 31.
47. Turkle (2011, 2015) is perhaps the most widely influential advocate of
this claim.
48. See Twenge et al. (2008); Konrath et al. (2011); and Turkle (2015).
49. Wright (2009), 18- 19.
50. See Li (1994, 2000); Star (2002); and Yuan (2002) regarding the close
proximity and important distinctions between the concepts of ren and care.

51. See Held (2006) and Slote (2007).
52. See Slote (2007); Held (2006); and McLaren (2001) for arguments for
and against regarding care ethics as a form of virtue ethics.
53. Tronto (1993).
54. See Vallor (2011b).
55. See MacIntyre (1999) on Aristotle's failure to fully acknowledge the
ethical import of human dependence and vulnerability; see NE 1169b13 on
the importance of having friends to benefit.
56. Walzer (1974) names it as one of five key civic virtues, along with
loyalty, service, tolerance, and participation.
57. NE 1155a22.
58. NE 1171b32.
59. Schwarzenbach (1996), 102.
60. Ibid., 105.
61. In certain US communities, one hears this in the grammatically odd but
socially important expression "He (or she)'s good people."
62. Schwarzenbach (1996), 106.
63. Ibid., 109- 110.
64. Ibid., 113.
65. Ibid., 122.
66. Ibid. She notes that in modern translations this term is more commonly
rendered as 'attention,' 'discipline,' or 'control,' but suggests that 'care' is a
more appropriate translation.

67. NE 1125b30- 1126a30.
68. Analects 9:4; 17:8; 15:37; 17:24; 19:11.
69. Ibid. 17:7.
70. Ibid. 14:34.
71. Wright (2009), 95.
72. Śāntideva, Bodhicaryavatara, Chapter 6, verse 2, quoted in Wright
(2009), 101.
73. Bommarito (2014), 273.
74. Ibid.
75. Ibid., 274.
76. Ibid., 277. Bommarito does not, however, appear to regard moral
perspective as itself a virtue, for he claims that it "need not be consciously
or intentionally developed."
273
Notes 273
(Ibid., 274). I would respectfully disagree, though the argument cannot
effectively be made here.
77. Exactly how the virtues can be successfully integrated, and how the
person of practical wisdom responds when virtues appear in a given
situation to be placed in tension or conflict, is the subject of much
discussion by contemporary virtue ethicists. Some dismiss the hypothesis of
the 'unity of the virtues,' others continue to embrace it as a regulative ideal.
Yet while important, these theoretical concerns lie beyond the scope of our
present inquiry.
chapter 7

1. See Baym (2011).
2. boyd (2014).
3. See, for example, Google executives Eric Schmidt and Jared Cohen's The
New Digital Age (2014), although even they acknowledge the need for
human wisdom in guiding the technological future.
4. See Diener (2009).
5. See Badwhar (2014b) for a thoughtful defense of objective theories of
well- being.
6. Vallor (2010) and (2012).
7. Selinger (2013).
8. Sheldon (2008); Pierce (2009); and Laghi et al. (2013).
9. Bilton (2014).
10. Selinger (2013).
11. See Vallor (2012) on the incompatibility of effortless connection and
moral friendship.
12. Wong (2013).
13. Nissenbaum (2010); Ess (2013).
14. See Kuss and Griffiths (2011). The scare quotes serve to distinguish the
colloquial notion from the technical term that entails increasing physical
tolerance for and dependence on a chemical substance.
15. Carr (2010), 200.
16. Young and Nabuco de Abreu (2011).
17. Doshi (2014).

18. Ibid.
19. Mill [1861] (2001), 10- 11.
20. Ibid.
21. Morozov (2013), 20- 21.
22. Vallor (2015), 118.
23. Hern (2014).
24. Ophir, Nass, and Wagner (2009); Carr (2010); Wang and Tchernev
(2012).
25. Goleman (2013), 100- 104.
26. Immordino- Yang et al., (2009).
27. Goleman (2013), 115.
274
274 Notes
28. Batson (2011), 49.
29. Goleman (2013), 88- 89.
30. Ibid., 81.
31. Kaplan (1995); Berman et al. (2008).
32. See Walji (2014) and Oremus (2014).
33. See Keen (2007); also Mar et al. (2011). Mark Coeckelbergh (2007) has
written extensively on the use of narrative to enrich moral imagination and
other moral capabilities in technological contexts.

34. Shirky (2008). Regrettably, Daniel Goleman has also fallen victim to
this perni-cious illusion, claiming that "This collective intelligence, the sum
total of what everyone in a distributed group can contribute, promises
maximal focus, the summation of what multiple eyes can notice" (2013, 21).
This is the illusion that knowledge is simply the aggregation of disembodied
factoids rather than the integration of facts into a comprehensive and
responsive worldview.
35. Floridi (2014), Section 4.6.
36. Chou and Edge (2012); Kross et al. (2013); Krasnova et al. (2013) 37.
Davenport et. al. (2014).
38. Gross (2014).
39. Mencius 7A42. Translation by Dobson in Mencius (1963), 189; there
listed as 7.18.
40. Schmidt and Cohen (2013), 121.
41. Ibid., 34
42. Shirky (2008), 20- 21.
43. Morozov (2013), 169, 344.
44. See also Wheeler (2011), 195.
45. Bakardjieva (2011), 76.
46. Consider, for example, the dramatic YouTube cell- phone video
uploaded by Minnesota resident Chris Lol ie depicting his arrest and
Tasering by police, which along with others like it, received widespread
social and traditional media coverage in the weeks after the Ferguson
protests. See Friedersdorf (2014a).
47. Dewey (2014).
48. Pariser (2011); and Sunstein (2007).

49. Lotan (2014).
50. Honan (2014).
51. Bilton (2013).
52. See http:// www.reddit.com/ wiki/ reddiquette.
53. Borgmann (2004), 63- 64.
54. Hampton et al. (2014); Couldry (2012), 127; Couldry, Livingstone and
Markham (2007), 179- 184.
55. Hampton et. al. (2014).
56. Ibid., 4.
57. Ibid., 25.
58. Cohen (2014).
59. Tsukayama (2014).
275
Notes 275
60. See Verbeek (2011).
61. See Couldry (2012, 2013a, 2013b).
62. Couldry (2013b), 49.
63. Couldry (2013a), 17.
64. Jonas (1984), 21.
chapter 8
1. Foucault (1995).

2. See Mann, Nolan and Wellman (2003); and Ganascia (2010).
3. Brin (2014).
4. Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438 (1928).
5. Schneier (2008).
6. Brin (2014).
7. Morozov (2013), 320- 321.
8. See video at http:// www.huffingtonpost.com/ 2009/ 12/ 07/ google- ceo-
on-
privacy- if_ n_ 383105.html. March 18, 2010, updated May 25, 2011.
9. For an illuminating illustration of this point, see Friedersdorf (2014b).
10. Hardy (2014).
11. Morozov (2013), 243.
12. Hartzog and Selinger (2014).
13. Nyhan and Reifler (2010); Nyhan, Reifler and Ubel (2013); Nyhan,
Reifler, Richey and Freed (2014).
14. Perry et. al. (2013).
15. Brin (1996).
16. See Morozov (2013), 213- 214.
17. Plato, Apology, 37e- 38a.
18. Mencius 2A2. Translation from Ivanhoe and Van Norden (2001), 126.
19. Kelly (2011).

20. This and the following section of chapter 8 are adapted from Vallor
(2013b).
21. Mencius 7A5.
22. Foucault (1988), 18.
23. Mencius 2A2.
24. Cavell (1990), 57.
25. See Latour (1999) on the use of speedbumps and other environmental
artifacts as social controls.
26. Morozov (2013), 121- 124.
chapter 9
1. See Ford (2015); Kaplan (2015); Markoff (2015); Osborne and Frey
(2013).
2. Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014).
276
276 Notes
3. Lin, Abney, and Bekey (2012).
4. Ibid. See also Sul ins (2011).
5. Turkle (2011); Scheutz (2012).
6. Consider the unfortunate fate of HitchBOT, the Canadian robot
dismembered in 2015 by vandals in Philadelphia; also the online storm of
visceral repugnance directed toward the 2015 Boston Dynamics video
demonstration of researchers kick-ing their robot dog 'Spot.' See also
Whitby (2012), 240.

7. See Turkle (2011) on the power and resilience of such projections, not
only for children but for rational, educated adults who simultaneously
affirm that they 'know'
that the system is 'just' a machine.
8. Kant, for example, famously argued against animal cruelty on these
grounds.
9. U.S. Army ARL September 27, 2011: "Supersizing robotic system
capabilities: Army's col aborative effort with industry, academia break open
new space for autonomous warfare." http:// www.arl.army.mil/ www/ ?
article=682.
10. Arkin (2010).
11. See Vallor (2015).
12. Heyns (2013), 10.
13. See Sparrow (2009) and Sul ins (2010).
14. Overly (2012).
15. For competing views on these questions, see Sharkey (2012) and Arkin
(2009).
16. NE 1115b15- 20. As noted in chapter 6, while Aristotle regards martial
or physical courage as foundational, Mengzi privileges moral courage. Our
account assumes martial or physical courage as historically prior, growing
out of the basic duties of moral care to protect family and extended kin; but
takes moral courage to be this virtue's mature and ultimate form.
17. While Olsthoorn (2007) suggests that only moral courage should be
seen as essential to military virtue, Sparrow (2013), 90, holds that "for the
foreseeable future,"
military virtue seems to presuppose both forms of courage.

18. Thompson (2011).
19. Otto and Webber (2013); Matthews (2014); and Kirkpatrick (2015).
20. Mengzi 6A10.
21. See Arquilla (2011).
22. 'Bugsplat' is the name of the U.S. Defense Department's software
program for calculating civilian deaths from airstrikes.
23. Vallor (2013a), 180.
24. Vallor (2013a), 11.2.
25. See Sparrow (2013) and (2015).
26. Lanier (2010).
27. Parts of this section and remaining sections of Chapter Nine are
adapted from Vallor (2011b).
28. Sharkey and Sharkey (2012b).
29. GeckoSystems, Investors: Press Release, November 4, 2013. http://
www.gecko-
systems.com/ investors/ press_ releases/ 20131104_ GeckoSystems_
%20Updates_
Shareholders.php.
277
Notes 277
30. See Sparrow and Sparrow (2006); Sharkey and Sharkey (2012a);
Borenstein and Pearson (2010); Coeckelbergh (2010); and Turkle (2011)
for excellent articulations of these concerns.

31. Coeckelbergh (2009).
32. Ibid., 217.
33. Ibid., 219.
34. Carebot ethicists commonly state or imply that this is the primary, if not
the sole ethical concern; see Borenstein and Pearson (2012), 251.
35. Sharkey and Sharkey (2012a), 28. See also Borenstein and Pearson
(2010), 283- 285; and Coeckelbergh (2010), 183.
36. Borenstein and Pearson (2010), 286.
37. Ibid., 284.
38. Sparrow and Sparrow (2006), 152.
39. Nussbaum (2006), 102.
40. Borenstein and Pearson (2010), 284.
41. Sharkey and Sharkey (2012a), 29. See also Borenstein and Pearson
(2010).
42. Aristotle NE 1167a10.
43. Sparrow and Sparrow (2006), 154.
44. See chapter 6 on the distinction between empathy as a basic human
capacity and as a cultivated virtue.
45. Noddings (1984), 14.
46. Jennifer Parks, in her feminist analysis of the prospect of carebots,
endorses a related view of care ethicist Annette Baier: that we only become
"skilled in the arts of personhood through relationships of dependency that
we share with others." (Parks 2010), 111.

47. Noddings (1984), 16.
48. Ibid., 14.
49. Ibid., 24.
50. Ibid., 12, 50.
51. Mengzi 6A8.
52. Noddings (1984), 51.
53. Sparrow and Sparrow (2006); Sharkey and Sharkey (2012a).
54. van Wynsberghe (2013), 424.
chapter 10
1. This chapter is adapted from Vallor (2011a).
2. The use of 'enhancement' as a conceptual distinction from 'therapeutic'
uses of technology has been rightly judged as problematic by many scholars
engaged in the debate over human enhancement, and it is far from obvious
that this distinction can be drawn in a consistent, nonarbitrary, and morally
significant way. That said, it is widely employed in the relevant literature.
See Al hoff et al., (2009).
3. Bostrom (2005a); Savulescu et al. (2011); Hughes (2004); Harris (2007).
For reasons of space, this passes over two key distinctions: the first is
between the strong
278
278 Notes
transhumanist program for enhancement and more modest enhancement
goals that stop short of radical alteration of the human species. The second
is the distinction between 'transhuman' and 'posthuman' philosophies;

some transhumanists explicitly call for a posthuman future, that is, one in
which humanity has been surpassed.
Others, like Kurzweil (2005), reject the notion of leaving our humanity
behind, while simultaneously regarding the nature of our humanity as
almost infinitely malleable. Finally, there are uses of 'posthuman' in literary
theory, gender, and culture studies (see Haraway 1991) that do not map
neatly onto the transhumanist conception of posthumanity. Both distinctions
are important but fluid and contested.
4. Kass (2008); Sandel (2007); Fukuyama (2002).
5. For fine surveys of the debate, see Al hoff et al. (2009), Savulescu and
Bostrom (2009) and Buchanan (2011).
6. Fukuyama (2002), 149.
7. Kass (2008).
8. Ibid.
9. Sandel (2007).
10. Ibid.
11. Ibid.
12. Bioconservatives frequently associate transhumanism with a world in
which "there'd be nobody left to worry about work, or challenge, or
satisfaction, or sweat" (McKibben 2003, 100). Abandoning the argument
from striving in favor of strict respect for the gifts of nature helps little; it
avoids incoherence, but at the price of seeming to suggest that human
dignity would be best served by eschewing medical treatment of con-genital
disability or disease; the engineering of peaceful and egalitarian social
arrangements; or the educational cultivation of new artistic and intellectual
capacities.
13. Fukuyama (2002), 169, 171.

14. Hughes (2004), 78.
15. Fukuyama (2002) 119- 120, 151.
16. Bailey (2005), 61. See also Naam (2005), 228; Bostrom (2005a);
Kurzweil (2005). As Kurzweil argues: "... the essence of being human is not
our limitations— although we do have many— it's our ability to reach
beyond our limitations. We didn't stay on the ground. We didn't even stay on
the planet. And we are already not settling for the limitations of our
biology" (2005, 311).
17. The President's Council on Bioethics (2003), 146- 149. Kass (2008)
states elsewhere: "the dignity of rational choice pays no respect at all to the
dignity we have through our loves and longings— central aspects of human
life understood as a grown- togetherness of body and soul. Not all of human
dignity consists in reason or freedom."
18. della Mirandola (1994).
19. Ibid.
20. Indeed, Kass declines the label 'ethicist' in favor of describing himself
as an "old-fashioned humanist" (Wilkinson, 2008). It is reasonable to ask
why his humanism departs so sharply from della Mirandola's.
279
Notes 279
21. della Mirandola (1994).
22. Coady (2009), 165.
23. Bostrom (2008b), 191. See also Bostrom (2005b).
24. della Mirandola (1994).
25. See Lin et al. (2014) on this point.

26. Jonas (1984), 21.
27. Gibbs (1991), 81- 83.
28. Nietzsche (1968), 175.
29. Stock (2002), 22.
30. McKibben (2003), 92.
31. See Bostrom (2005b) and Bailey (2005), 241. Some with sympathies for
the transhumanist vision accept the necessity of some government
regulation to prevent grave ethical abuses, but even these thinkers generally
defend the liberal ideal, wishing to avoid the promotion of any explicit
moral vision for the human species (Agar 2004).
32. Even Hughes (2004), who rejects the libertarian principles of many
transhumanists, acknowledges the absence of a shared moral or political
vision among them (xv), and limits his characterization of its goals to
essentially negative aims: release from the natural limits of body, age,
intelligence, and suffering. Yet these fail to satisfy Aristotle's demand for a
moral vision beyond the mere pursuit of proximal ends such as health and
strength (1140a28).
33. Naam (2005), 229.
34. Ibid., see also Agar (2004), 87.
35. Naam (2005), 233.
36. Ibid.
37. Kurzweil (2005), 372- 377.
38. Bailey (2005), 51, 245.
39. Ibid., 246.
40. Ibid. See also Bostrom (2008a), 112, and (2008c), 5.

41. See Kurzweil (2005), 310, and Hall (1993).
42. Bostrom (2008b).
43. Coady (2009), 180.
44. Persson and Savulescu (2014).
45. Ortega y Gasset (2002).
46. Persson and Savulescu (2012), 121.
47. Ibid., 123.
48. Ibid.,131.
49. Ortega y Gasset (2002), 113.
50. Ibid.
51. Ortega y Gasset (2002), 116.
52. Ibid., 119, emphasis added.
53. Ibid., 118, emphasis added.
54. Ibid., 120- 121, emphasis added.
280
280 Notes
55. Ibid.
56. Even if this diagnosis were a form of cultural hypochondria, a delusion
of moral incapacity, the delusion itself may, as is often the case in
hypochondriacs, produce the very incapacity it imagines.
epilogue

1. See Bostrom (2014).
2. Astronomer and 'exoplanet- hunter' Geoffrey Marcy made this claim at a
news conference for the Breakthrough Listen initiative backed by Russian
philanthropist Yuri Milner; the project provides new funding for the so- far
fruitless international effort known as SETI (Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence). The quote and its relevance to the Fermi Paradox is
mentioned in Overbye (2015).
3. The 'Great Filter' concept is credited to Hanson (1998); Nick Bostrom
(2008d) has recently employed it in his discussions of the existential risks
posed by emerging technologies, especially artificial intelligence.
4. A recent Chatham House Report of The Royal Institute of International
Affairs (Lewis et al. 2014) lists thirteen such cases since 1962; of these, the
most widely known are the events of the Cuban Missile Crisis as well as the
false alert of incoming U.S.
ICBM's received by a Soviet satellite early warning station in 1983, in
which disaster was averted only by the actions of a single Soviet
commander, Lieutenant Colonel Stanislav Yevgrafovich. Yevgrafovich broke
protocol by failing to report the alert to his superiors, gambling that it was
a false alarm produced by a technical glitch (indeed, sunlight had confused
the satellite's sensors). The authors of the Chatham House report express
concern that the risk of more such close calls (and by extension, the risk
that one of them will not be 'close' but deadly) is rising due to global
political instability. They also note that "individual decision- making, often
in disobedience of protocol and political guidance, has on several
occasions saved the day." This underscores this book's claim that human
flourishing is most crucially contingent upon the cultivation of technomoral
virtues such as wisdom and courage, in the absence of which technosocial
innovations are as likely to be destructive as constructive of our flourishing.
5. Ibid.
6. The contrary attitude is lampooned by the Twitter wag @stopthecyborgs,
who defines a transhumanist as one who "believes that death can be
defeated but that west-ern neoliberalism is unchallengeable." Award-

winning computer scientist Kentaro Toyama (2015) documents this delusion
in his book Geek Heresy: Rescuing Social Change from the Cult of
Technology, where he advances the core thesis reinforced by this book: that
finding ways to develop better people, not just better technology, holds the
key to the future of human flourishing.
7. Roddenberry Interview (20 September 1988), included in Star Trek: The
Next Generation Season 5, DVD 7, "Mission Logs: Year Five," "A Tribute
to Gene Roddenberry," 0:26:09.
281
References
NOTE: The following classical texts used most commonly in the book are
cited as follows, in the standard manner for classical scholarship:
Aristotle: All references are from the (1984) Revised Oxford Translation
edited by Jonathan Barnes unless otherwise noted, and are cited with
abbreviated title and standard Bekker numbers. Example: the Nicomachean
Ethics, Book V, Chapter 4, Section 3 would be abbreviated as NE 1132a1-
7. The Eudemian Ethics is abbreviated as EE, the Politics as P.
Kongzi (non- Latinized from of Confucius): All references are from the
Analects, Slingerland (2003) translation unless otherwise noted, and cited
with book and section number. Example: Analects Book Nine, Section 4
would be abbreviated as Analects 9:4.
Mengzi: (non- Latinized form of Mencius): All references are from Mencius
(1970), D.C. Lau translation unless otherwise noted, cited with the
alphanumerical code for the book, part and chapter. Example: Mencius
Book 2, Part A. Chapter 2 would be abbreviated as Mencius 2A2.
Achterhuis, Hans, ed. 2001. American Philosophy of Technology: The
Empirical Turn.
Translated by Robert P. Crease. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Agar, Nicholas. 2004. Liberal Eugenics: In Defence of Human
Enhancement. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Allenby, Brad and Daniel Sarewitz. 2011. The Techno- Human Condition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Al hof, Fritz, Patrick Lin, James Moor, and John Weckert. 2009. "Ethics of
Human Enhancement: 25 Questions and Answers." Report for US National
Science Foundation. www.humanenhance.com/ NSF_ report.pdf.
Angle, Stephen C. 2009. Sagehood: The Contemporary Significance of Neo-
Confucian Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
282
282 References
Angle, Stephen C. 2014. "Seeing Confucian 'Active Moral Perception' in
Light of Contemporary Psychology." In The Philosophy and Psychology of
Character and Happiness, edited by Nancy E. Snow and Franco V.
Trivigno, 163- 180.
New York: Routledge.
Annas, Julia. 1993. The Morality of Happiness. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Annas, Julia. 2005. "Comments on John Doris' Lack of Character."
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 71 (3): 636- 642.
Annas, Julia. 2011. Intelligent Virtue. New York: Oxford University Press.
Anscombe, G.E.M. 1958. "Modern Moral Philosophy." Philosophy 33
(124): 1- 19.
Aquinas, St. Thomas. 1975. Summa Contra Gentiles. Book Four, Salvation.
Translated by Charles J. O'Neil. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press.

Aristotle. 1984. The Complete Works of Aristotle: Revised Oxford
Translation. Edited by Jonathan Barnes. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Arkin, Ronald C. 2009. Governing Lethal Behavior in Autonomous Robots.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC.
Arkin, Ronald C. 2010. "The Case for Ethical Autonomy in Unmanned
Systems."
Journal of Military Ethics 9 (4): 332- 341.
Arquilla, John. 2011. Insurgents, Raiders and Bandits: How Masters of
Irregular Warfare Have Shaped Our World. Lanham, MD: Ivan R. Dee.
Badhwar, Neera K. 2014a. "Reasoning about Wrong Reasons, No Reasons,
and Reasons of Virtue." In The Philosophy and Psychology of Character
and Happiness, edited by Nancy E. Snow and Franco V. Trivigno, 35- 53.
New York: Routledge.
Badhwar, Neera K. 2014b. "Objectivity and Subjectivity in Theories of
Well- Being."
Philosophy and Public Policy Quarterly 32 (1): 23- 28.
Baier, Annette. 1985. Postures of the Mind: Essays on Mind and Morals.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Bailey, Ronald. 2005. Liberation Biology: The Scientific and Moral Case
for the Biotech Revolution. Amherst, NY: Prometheus.
Bainbridge, William Sims and Roco, Mihail C., eds. 2006. Managing Nano-
Bio-Info- Cogno Innovations: Converging Technologies in Society.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Bakardjieva, Maria. 2011. "The Internet in Everyday Life: Exploring the
Tenets and Contributions of Diverse Approaches." In The Handbook of
Internet Studies, edited by Mia Consalvo and Charles Ess, 59- 82. Malden,
MA: Blackwell.

Batson, C. Daniel. 2011. Altruism in Humans. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Baym, Nancy. 2011. "Social Networks 2.0." In The Handbook of Internet
Studies, edited by Mia Consalvo and Charles Ess, 384- 405. Malden, MA:
Wiley- Blackwell.
Becker, Lawrence C. 1986. Reciprocity. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Becker, Lawrence C. 1998. A New Stoicism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Berman, Marc G., John Jonides, and Stephen Kaplan. 2008. "The
Cognitive Benefits of Interacting with Nature." Psychological Science 19
(12): 1207- 1212.
283
References 283
Bilton, Nick. 2013. "Knowing Where to Focus the Wisdom of Crowds."
Bits, New York Times, April 22. http:// bits.blogs.nytimes.com/ 2013/ 04/ 22/
knowing- where- to-
focus- the- wisdom- of- the- crowds/ .
Bilton, Nick. 2014. "Steve Jobs Was a Low- Tech Parent." Disruptions,
New York Times, September 10. http:// www.nytimes.com/ 2014/ 09/ 11/
fashion/ steve- jobs- apple-
was- a- low- tech- parent.html.
Bloom, Irene T. 2002. "Mengzian Arguments on Human Nature (Ren
Xing)." In Essays on the Moral Philosophy of Mengzi, edited by Xiusheng
Liu and Philip J. Ivanhoe, 64- 100. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Bommarito, Nicolas. 2013. "Modesty as a Virtue of Attention."
Philosophical Review 122

(1): 93- 117.
Bommarito, Nicolas. 2014. "Patience and Perspective." Philosophy East
and West 64
(2): 269- 286.
Boodberg, Peter A. 1953. "The Semasiology of Some Primary Confucian
Concepts."
Philosophy East and West 2 (4): 317- 332.
Borenstein, Jason and Pearson, Yvette. 2010. "Robot Carers: Harbingers of
Expanded Freedom for Al ?" In Special Issue: Robot Ethics and Human
Ethics. Edited by Anthony Beavers. Ethics and Information Technology 12
(3): 277- 288.
Borenstein, Jason and Pearson, Yvette. 2012. "Robot Caregivers: Ethical
Issues Across the Human Lifespan." In Robot Ethics, edited by Patrick Lin,
Keith Abney, and George Bekey, 251- 265. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Borgmann, Albert. 1984. Technology and the Character of Contemporary
Life.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Borgmann, Albert. 2004. "Is the Internet the Solution to the Problem of
Community?"
In Community in the Digital Age, edited by Andrew Feenberg and Darin
Barney, 53- 67. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Bostrom, Nick. 2002. "Existential Risks: Analyzing Human Extinction
Scenarios and Related Hazards." Journal of Evolution and Technology 9
(1): 1- 30.
Bostrom, Nick. 2005a. "In Defense of Posthuman Dignity." Bioethics 19
(3): 202- 214.

Bostrom, Nick. 2005b. "Transhumanist Values." Review of Contemporary
Philosophy 4
(1- 2): 87- 101.
Bostrom, Nick. 2008a. "Why I Want to be a Posthuman When I Grow Up."
In Medical Enhancement and Posthumanity, edited by Bert Gordijn and
Ruth Chadwick, 107-
136. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Bostrom, Nick. 2008b. "Dignity and Enhancement." In Human Dignity and
Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President's Council on Bioethics,
173- 207.
Washington, DC: US Independent Agencies and Commissions.
Bostrom, Nick. 2008c. "Letter from Utopia." Studies in Ethics, Law and
Technology 2
(1): 1- 7.
Bostrom, Nick. 2008d. "Where are They? Why I Hope the Search for
Extraterrestrial Life Finds Nothing." MIT Technology Review, May/ June
issue.
284
284 References
Bostrom, Nick. 2014. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
boyd, danah. 2014. It's Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Bradbury, Ray. 1951. "The Veldt." In The Illustrated Man. By Ray
Bradbury, 9- 27.

New York: Doubleday.
Brey, Philip. 2004. "Disclosive Computer Ethics." In Readings in
Cyberethics, edited by Richard Spinello and Herman Tavani, 55- 66. 2nd
ed. Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Brey, Philip. 2007. "Is Information Ethics Culture- Relative?" International
Journal of Technology and Human Interaction 3 (3): 12- 25.
Brin, David. 1996. "The Transparent Society." Wired 4 (12) http://
www.wired.com/
1996/ 12/ fftransparent/ . Accessed September 4, 2014.
Brin, David. 1998. The Transparent Society: Will Technology Force Us to
Choose Between Privacy and Freedom? Cambridge, MA: Perseus.
Brin, David. 2014. "In Defense of a Transparent Society." http://
www.davidbrin.com/
tsdefense.html. Accessed September 4, 2014.
Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee. 2014. The Second Machine Age:
Work, Progress and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New
York: W.W. Norton.
Buchanan, Allen. 2011. Better Than Human: The Promise and Perils of
Enhancing Ourselves. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bynum, Terrell W. 2006. "Flourishing Ethics." Ethics and Information
Technology 8
(4): 157- 173.
Cafaro, Philip. 1997. "Virtue Ethics (Not Too) Simplified." Auslegung: A
Journal of Philosophy 22 (1): 49- 67.
Capurro, Rafael. 2008. "Intercultural Information Ethics: Foundations and
Applications." Journal of Information, Communication and Ethics in

Society 6 (2): 116- 126.
Carr, Nicholas. 2010. The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our
Brains. New York: W.W. Norton.
Cavell, Stanley. 1990. Conditions Handsome and Unhandsome: The
Constitution of Emersonian Perfectionism. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Chai, Ch'u and Winberg Chai, eds. and trans. 1965. The Sacred Books of
Confucius and other Confucian Classics. New Hyde Park, NY: University
Books.
Chan, Wing- Tsit, trans. 1963. A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chou, Hui- Tzu and Nicholas Edge. 2012. "They are Happier and Having
Better Lives Than I am: The Impact of Using Facebook on Perceptions of
Others' Lives."
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 15 (2): 117- 121.
Coady, C.A.J. 2009. "Playing God." In Human Enhancement, edited by
Julian Savulescu and Nick Bostrom, 155- 180. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Coeckelbergh, Mark. 2007. Imagination and Principles: An Essay on the
Role of Imagination in Moral Reasoning. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
285
References 285
Coeckelbergh, Mark. 2009. "Personal Robots, Appearance and Human
Good: A Methodological Reflection on Roboethics." International Journal
of Social Robotics 1 (3): 217- 221.

Coeckelbergh, Mark. 2010. "Health Care, Capabilities, and AI Assistive
Technologies."
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 13 (2): 181- 190.
Cohen, Jodi S. 2014. "'Civility' a Divisive Issue in U. of I. Faculty
Decisions." Chicago Tribune, August 29. http:// www.chicagotribune.com/
news/ local/ ct- salaita- ayers-
backlash- 20140829- story.html#page=1.
Cohen, Julie. 2012. Configuring the Networked Self: Law, Code and the
Play of Everyday Practice. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Cooper, David E. and Simon P. James. 2005. Buddhism, Virtue and
Environment.
Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Couldry, Nick. 2012. Media, Society, World: Social Theory and Digital
Media Practice.
Malden, MA: Polity.
Couldry, Nick. 2013a. "Why Media Ethics Still Matters." In Global Media
Ethics:Problems and Perspectives, edited by Stephen J.A. Ward, 13- 29.
Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Couldry, Nick. 2013b. "Living Well and Through Media." In Ethics of
Media, edited by Nick Couldry, Mirca Madianou, and Amit Pinchevski, 39-
56. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Couldry, Nick, Sonia Livingstone, and Tim Markham. 2007. Media
Consumption and Public Engagement: Beyond the Presumption of
Attention. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Crisp, Roger, ed. 1996. How Should One Live? Essays on the Virtues. New
York: Oxford University Press.

Crisp, Roger, and Michael Slote, eds. 1997. Virtue Ethics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Davenport, Shaun W., Shawn M. Bergman, Jacqueline Z. Bergman, and
Matthew E.
Fearrington. 2014. "Twitter Versus Facebook: Exploring the Role of
Narcissism in the Motives and Usage of Different Social Media Platforms."
Computers in Human Behavior 32: 212- 220.
de Waal, Frans. 2007. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex Among Apes.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
della Mirandola, Giovanni Pico. 1994. Oration on the Dignity of Man,
Paragraphs 1- 7.
Translated by Richard Hooker. www.fordham.edu/ halsall/ med/
oration.html.
Accessed December 9, 2009.
Dewey, Caitlin. 2014. "Hackers Have the Names and Social Security
Numbers of Ferguson Police. But Should They Share Them?" Washington
Post, August 14.
http:// www.washingtonpost.com/ news/ the- intersect/ wp/ 2014/ 08/ 14/
hackers-
have- the- names- and- social- security- numbers- of- ferguson- police- but-
should- they-
share- them/ .
Diener, Ed. 2009. "Overview of Subjective Well- Being Scales," http://
internal.psychol-
ogy.illinois.edu/ ~ediener/ scales.html. Accessed April 2, 2016.
286

286 References
Doris, John. 2002. Lack of Character: Personality and Moral Behavior.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Doshi, Suhail. 2014. "Mixpanel: How Addictive is Your App?" Re/ Code,
March 6. http:// recode.net/ 2014/ 03/ 06/ mixpanel- how- addictive- is-
your- app/ .
Driver, Julia. 2001. Uneasy Virtue. New York: Cambridge University Press.
El ul, Jacques. 1964. The Technological Society. New York: Knopf.
Ess, Charles. 2006. "Ethical Pluralism and Global Information Ethics."
Ethics and Information Technology 8 (4): 215- 226.
Ess, Charles. 2009. "Floridi's Philosophy of Information and Information
Ethics: Current Perspectives, Future Directions." The Information Society
25 (3): 159- 168.
Ess, Charles. 2010a. "The Embodied Self in a Digital Age: Possibilities,
Risks, and Prospects for a Pluralistic (Democratic/ Liberal) Future?"
Nordicom Information 32
(3- 2): 105- 118.
Ess, Charles. 2010b. "Trust and New Communication Technologies:
Vicious Circles, Virtuous Circles, Possible Futures." Knowledge,
Technology and Policy 23 (3- 4): 287- 305.
Ess, Charles. 2013. Digital Media Ethics. 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Ess, Charles. 2014. "Selfhood, Moral Agency and the Good Life in
Mediatized Worlds? Perspectives from Medium Theory and Philosophy." In
Mediatization of Communication, edited by Knut Lundby, 617- 640. Berlin:
de Gruyter.
Ess, Charles and May Thorseth, eds. 2011. Trust and Virtual Worlds. New
York: Peter Lang.

Feenberg, Andrew. 1999. Questioning Technology. London: Routledge.
Floridi, Luciano. 2006. "Four Challenges for a Theory of Informational
Privacy." Ethics and Information Technology 8 (3): 109- 119.
Floridi, Luciano. 2008. "Information Ethics: A Reappraisal." Ethics and
Information Technology 10 (2- 3): 189- 204.
Floridi, Luciano. 2013. The Ethics of Information. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Floridi, Luciano, ed. 2014. The Onlife Manifesto: Being Human in a
Hyperconnected Era.
New York: Springer.
Floridi, Luciano and Mariarosaria Taddeo, eds. 2014. The Ethics of
Information Warfare.
New York: Springer.
Foot, Philippa. 1978. Virtues and Vices. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ford, Martin. 2015. Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a
Jobless Future.
New York: Basic Books.
Foucault, Michel. 1988. Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel
Foucault. Edited by Luther H. Martin, Huck Gutman, and Patrick H.
Hutton. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Foucault, Michel. 1995. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison.
Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: Vintage.
Foucault, Michel. 1998. Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel
Foucault.

Edited by Luther H. Martin, Huck Gutman, and Patrick H. Hutton.
Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
287
References 287
Frankfurt, Harry G. 2005. On Bullshit. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
French, Peter A., Theodore UehlingJr., and Howard Wettstein, eds. 1988.
Ethical Theory: Character and Virtue. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 13.
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Friedersdorf, Conor. 2014a. "Man Arrested While Picking Up His Kids:
'The Problem is I'm Black.'" The Atlantic, August 29. http://
www.theatlantic.com/ national/ ar-
chive/ 2014/ 08/ the- problem- is- im- black/ 379357/ .
Friedersdorf, Conor. 2014b. "This Man Has Nothing to Hide: Not Even His
Email Password." The Atlantic, August 26. http:// www.theatlantic.com/
politics/ archive/
2014/ 08/ this- man- has- nothing- to- hide/ 379041/ .
Fukuyama, Francis. 2002. Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the
Biotechnology Revolution. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Ganascia, Jean- Gabriel. 2010. "The Generalized Sousveillance Society."
Social Science Information 49 (3): 1- 19.
Garreau, Joel. 2005. Radical Evolution: The Promise and Peril of
Enhancing our Minds, Our Bodies— and What It Means to be Human. New
York: Doubleday.
Gethin, Rupert. 1998. The Foundations of Buddhism. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

OceanofPDF.com

Gibbs, A.M. 1991. "Shaw and Creative Evolution." In Irish Writers and
Religion, edited by Robert Welch, 75- 88. Savage, MD: Barnes and Noble.
Goleman, Daniel. 2013. Focus: The Hidden Driver of Excellence. New
York: Harper Collins.
Grenberg, Jeanine. 2005. Kant and the Ethics of Humility. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Grodzinsky, Frances. 1999. "The Practitioner Within: Revisiting the
Virtues."
Computers and Society 29 (1): 9- 15.
Gross, Doug. 2014. "Meet Sobrr, the Anti- Facebook App." CNN, August
21. http://
www.cnn.com/ 2014/ 08/ 21/ tech/ mobile/ sobrr- app/ .
Hal , John Storrs. 1993. "Utility Fog: A Universal Physical Substance." In
Vision 21: Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of
Cyberspace, 115- 126.
Proceedings of a Symposium Cosponsored by the NASA Lewis Research
Center and the Ohio Aerospace Institute and Held in Westlake, Ohio, March
30- 31, 1993.
Westlake, OH: NASA Conference Publication 10129.
Hampton, Keith, Lee Rainie, Weixu Lu, Maria Dwyer, Inyoung Shin, and
Kristen Purcell. August 2014. "Social Media and the 'Spiral of Silence.'"
Pew Research Center, Washington, DC. http:// www.pewinternet.org/ 2014/
08/ 26/ social- media-
and- the- spiral- of- silence/ .
Hanks, Craig, ed. 2010. Technology and Values. Malden, MA: Wiley
Blackwell.

Hanson, Robin. 1998. "The Great Filter: Are We Almost Past It?" http://
mason.gmu.
edu/ ~rhanson/ greatfilter.html. Accessed August 30, 2015.
Haraway, Donna. 1991. Simians, Cyborgs and Women. New York:
Routledge.
Hardy, Quentin. 2014. "How Urban Anonymity Disappears When All Data
is Tracked." New York Times, Bits, April 19. http:// bits.blogs.nytimes.com/
2014/ 04/
288
288 References
19/ how- urban- anonymity- disappears- when- all- data- is- tracked/ ?_
php=true&_
type=blogs&_ r=0.
Harman, Gilbert. 2000. "The Nonexistence of Character Traits."
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 100 (2): 223- 226.
Harris, John. 2007. Enhancing Evolution: The Ethical Case for Making
Better People.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hartzog, Woodrow and Evan Selinger. 2014. "Two Reasons Why Extreme
Social Surveillance Doesn't Replace Privacy." Forbes, September 1. http://
www.forbes.com/
sites/ privacynotice/ 2014/ 09/ 01/ two- reasons- why- extreme- social-
surveillance-
doesnt- replace- privacy/ .

Harvey, Peter. 2000. An Introduction to Buddhist Ethics: Foundations,
Values, and Issues.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Hawking, Stephen, Stuart Russell, Max Tegmark, and Frank Wilczek. 2014.
"Transcendence Looks at the Implications of Artificial Intelligence - But
Are We Taking AI Seriously Enough?" The Independent, May 1. http://
www.independent.
co.uk/ news/ science/ stephen- hawking- transcendence- looks- at- the-
implications-
of- artificial- intelligence- but- are- we- taking- 9313474.html.
Held, Virginia. 2006. The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political and Global.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hern, Alex. 2014. "OKCupid Experiments are Standard 'Scientific
Methods,' Says Founder." The Guardian, August 4. http://
www.theguardian.com/ technology/
2014/ aug/ 04/ okcupid- dating- ethics- facebook- experiments.
Heyns, Christof. 2013. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial,
Summary or Arbitrary Executions. United Nations General Assembly,
Human Rights Council.
Office of the High Comissioner. http:// www.ohchr.org/ en/ issues/
executions/
pages/ srexecutionsindex.aspx. Accessed November 21, 2013.
Honan, Mat. 2014. "I Liked Everything I Saw on Facebook for Two Days.
Here's What It Did To Me." Wired, August 11. http:// www.wired.com/ 2014/
08/ i- liked-

everything- i- saw- on- facebook- for- two- days- heres- what- it- did- to-
me/ .
Hongladarom, Soraj. 2008. "Floridi and Spinoza on Global Information
Ethics." Ethics and Information Technology 10 (2- 3): 175- 187.
Hongladarom, Soraj and Ess, Charles, eds. 2007. Information Technology
Ethics: Cultural Perspectives. Hershey, PA: Idea Group.
Hughes, James. 2004. Citizen Cyborg: Why Democratic Societies Must
Respond to the Redesigned Human of the Future. Cambridge, MA:
Westview.
Hursthouse, Rosalind. 1999. On Virtue Ethics. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Ihara, Craig. 1991. "David Wong on Emotions in Mencius." Philosophy
East and West 41 (1): 45- 54.
Ihde, Don. 2004. "Has the Philosophy of Technology Arrived? A State- of-
the- Art Review." Philosophy of Science 71 (1): 117- 131.
Ihde, Don. 2010. Heidegger's Technologies: Postphenomenological
Perspectives. New York: Fordham University Press.
289
References 289
Immordino- Yang, Mary H., Andrea McCol , Hanna Damasio, and Antonio
Damasio.
2009. "Neural Correlates of Admiration and Compassion." Proceedings of
the National Academcy of Sciences 106 (19): 8021- 8026.
Ivanhoe, Philip J. 2000. Confucian Moral Self- Cultivation. 2nd ed.
Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.

Ivanhoe, Philip J. 2002a. Ethics in the Confucian Tradition: The Thought of
Mengzi and Wang Yangming. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Ivanhoe, Philip J. 2002b. "Confucian Self- Cultivation and Mengzi's Notion
of Extension." In Essays on the Moral Philosophy of Mengzi, edited by
Xiusheng Liu and P.J. Ivanhoe, 221- 241. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Ivanhoe, Philip J. and Bryan W. Van Norden, eds. 2001. Readings in
Classical Chinese Philosophy. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Jonas, Hans. 1979. "Toward a Philosophy of Technology." Hastings Center
Report 9 (1): 34-
43. http:// greatbooksojai.com/ Hans- Jonas- Toward- a- Philosophy- of-
Technology.pdf.
Jonas, Hans. 1984. The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics
for the Technological Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Joy, Bill. 2000. "Why the Future Doesn't Need Us." Wired 8 (4). http://
www.wired.
com/ 2000/ 04/ joy- 2/
Kamtekar, Rachana. 2004. "Situationism and Virtue Ethics on the Content
of Our Character." Ethics 114 (3): 458- 491.
Kaplan, David M., ed. 2004. Readings in the Philosophy of Technology.
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Kaplan, Jerry. 2015. Humans Need Not Apply: A Guide to Wealth and Work
in the Age of Artificial Intelligence. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kaplan, Stephen. 1995. "The Restorative Benefits of Nature: Toward an
Integrative Framework." Journal of Environmental Psychology 15 (3):
169- 182.
Kant, Immanuel. [1785] 1997. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals.
Translated by Mary Gregor. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Kass, Leon. 2003. "Ageless Bodies, Happy Souls." The New Atlantis Spring
(1): 9- 28.
Kass, Leon. 2008. "Defending Human Dignity." In Human Dignity and
Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President's Council on Bioethics,
297- 332. Washington DC: The President's Council on Bioethics.
Keen, Suzanne. 2007. Empathy and the Novel. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kelly, Kevin. 2011. "The Quantifiable Self." The Technium, June 26. http://
kk.org/
thetechnium/ 2011/ 06/ the- quantifiabl/ .
Keown, Damien. 1992. The Nature of Buddhist Ethics. London: Macmillan.
Khushf, George. 2007. "The Ethics of NBIC Convergence." The Journal of
Medicine and Philosophy: A Forum for Bioethics and Philosophy of
Medicine 32 (3): 185- 196.
Kirkpatrick, Jesse. 2015. "Drones and the Martial Virtue of Courage."
Journal of Military Ethics. 14 (3- 4): 202- 219.
Konrath, Sara, Edward H. O'Brien, and Courtney Hsing. 2011. "Changes
in Dispositional Empathy in College Students Over Time: A Meta-
Analysis." Personality and Social Psychology Review 15 (2): 180- 198.
290
290 References
Krasnova, Hanna, Helena Wenninger, Thomas Widjaja, and Peter
Buxmann. 2013.
"Envy on Facebook: A Hidden Threat to Users' Life Satisfaction?" 11th
Annual Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik, Leipzig, Germany March
2013. 92- 108.

Kristjánsson, Kristján. 1998. "Liberating Moral Traditions: Saga Morality
and Aristotle's Megalopsychia. " Ethical Theory and Moral Practice 1 (4):
397- 422.
Kross, Ethan, Phillippe Verduyn, Emre Demiralp, Jiyoung Park, David
Seungjae Lee, Natalie Lin, Holly Shablack, John Jonides, and Oscar
Ybarra. 2013. "Facebook Use Predicts Declines in Subjective Well- Being
in Young Adults." PLoS ONE 8
(8): e69841. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0069841. http:// journals.plos.org/
plosone/
article?id=10.1371/ journal.pone.0069841.
Kupperman, Joel J. 2001. "The Indispensability of Character." Philosophy
76 (2): 239- 250.
Kurzweil, Ray. 2005. The Singularity is Near: When Humans Transcend
Biology.
New York: Penguin.
Kuss, Daria J., and Mark D. Griffiths. 2011. "Online Social Networking
and Addiction: A Review of the Psychological Literature." International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 8 (9): 3528- 3552.
Laghi, Fiorenzo, Barry H. Scheider, Irene Vitoroulis, Robert J. Coplan,
Roberto Baiocco, Yair Amichai- Hamburger, Natasha Hudek, Diana
Koszycki, Scott Miller, and Martine Flament. 2013. "Knowing When Not to
Use the Internet: Shyness and Adolescents' On- line and Off- line
Interactions with Friends." Computers in Human Behavior 29 (1): 51- 57.
Lanier, Jaron. 2010. You Are Not a Gadget: A Manifesto. New York: Knopf.
Latour, Bruno. 1999. Pandora's Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science
Studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lewis, Patricia, Heather Williams, Susan Aghlani, and Benoît Pelopidas.
2014. "Too Close for Comfort: Cases of Near Nuclear Use and Options for

Policy." Chatham House Report of the Royal Institute of International
Affairs, April 28, 2014.
http:// www.chathamhouse.org/ publications/ papers/ view/ 199200?dm_
i=1TY5,2
EIQH,BHZJ2P,8Q9SA,1.
Li, Chenyang. 1994. "The Confucian Concept of Jen and the Feminist
Ethics of Care: A Comparative Study." Hypatia 9 (1): 70- 89.
Li, Chenyang. 2000. "Confucianism and Feminist Concerns: Overcoming
the Confucian 'Gender Complex.'" Journal of Chinese Philosophy 27 (2):
187- 199.
Lin, Patrick, Keith Abney, and George Bekey, eds. 2012. Robot Ethics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lin, Patrick, Max Mehlman, Keith Abney, Shannon French, Shannon Vallor,
Jai Gal iott, Michael Burnam- Fink, Alexander R. LaCroix, Seth
Schuknecht. 2014.
"Super Soldiers (Part 2): The Ethical, Legal, and Operational
Implications." In Global Issues and Ethical Considerations in Human
Enhancement Technologies, edited by Steven J. Thompson, 139- 160.
Hershey, PA: IGI Global.
291
References 291
Liu, Xiusheng, and Philip J. Ivanhoe, eds. 2002. Essays on the Moral
Philosophy of Mengzi. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Lockwood, Thornton C. 2013. "Habituation, Habit and Character in
Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics." In A History of Habit from Aristotle to
Bourdieu, edited by Tom Sparrow and Adam Hutchinson, 19- 36. Lanham,
MD: Lexington.

Lotan, Gilad. 2014. "Israel, Gaza, War and Data: Social Networks and the
Art of Personalizing Propaganda." Medium, August 4. https://
medium.com/ i- data/
israel- gaza- war- data- a54969aeb23e.
Louden, Robert. 1984. "On Some Vices of Virtue Ethics." American
Philosophical Quarterly 21 (3): 227- 236.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1984. After Virtue. 2nd ed. Notre Dame, IN: University
of Notre Dame Press.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1999. Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human
Beings Need The Virtues. Chicago: Open Court.
Makos, Adam. 2012. A Higher Call. New York: Berkley Books.
Mann, Steve, Jason Nolan, and Barry Wellman. 2003. "Sousveillance:
Inventing and Using Wearable Computing Devices for Data Collection in
Surveillance Environments." Surveillance and Society 1 (3): 331- 355.
Mar, Raymond A., Keith Oatley, Maja Djikic, and Justin Mul in. 2011.
"Emotion and Narrative Fiction: Interactive Influences Before, During and
After Reading."
Cognition and Emotion 25 (5): 818- 833.
Marcuse, Herbert. 1964. One- Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of
Advanced Industrial Society. Boston: Beacon.
Markoff, John. 2015. Machines of Loving Grace: The Quest for Common
Ground Between Humans and Robots. New York: HarperCol ins.
Matthews, Michael D. 2014. "Stress Among UAV Operators: Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder, Existential Crisis, or Moral Injury?" Ethics and
Armed Forces 1 (1): 53- 57.
McDowell, John. 1998. Mind, Value and Reality. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

McKibben, Bill. 2003. Enough: Staying Human in an Engineered Age. New
York: Times Books.
McLaren, Margaret. 2001. "Feminist Ethics: Care as a Virtue." In
Feminists Doing Ethics, edited by Peggy DesAutels and Joanne Waugh,
101- 118. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Mencius. 1963. Mencius. Translated by W.A.C.H. Dobson. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Mencius. 1970. Mencius. Translated by D.C. Lau. London: Penguin.
Mill, John Stuart. [1861] 2001. Utilitarianism. 2nd ed. Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett.
Miller, Christian B. 2014. "The Real Challenge to Virtue Ethics from
Psychology."
In The Philosophy and Psychology of Character and Happiness, edited by
Nancy E.
Snow and Franco V. Trivigno, 15- 34. New York: Routledge.
292
292 References
Mitcham, Carl. 1994. Thinking Through Technology: The Path Between
Engineering and Philosophy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Moor, James. 2008. "Why We Need Better Ethics for Emerging
Technologies." In Information Technology and Moral Philosophy, edited by
Jeroen van den Hoven and John Weckert, 26- 39. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Morozov, Evgeny. 2011. The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet
Freedom.
New York: PublicAffairs.

Morozov, Evgeny. 2013. To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of
Technological Solutionism. New York: PublicAffairs.
Naam, Ramez. 2005. More than Human: Embracing the Promise of
Biological Enhancement. New York: Broadway Books.
Nehamas, Alexander. 1998. The Art of Living: Socratic Reflections from
Plato to Foucault.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1968. The Portable Nietzsche. Edited and translated
by Walter Kaufmann. New York: Viking.
Nissenbaum, Helen. 2010. Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy, and the
Integrity of Social Life. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Nivison, David S. 1980. "Mencius and Motivation." Journal of the
American Academy of Religion 47 (3): 417- 432.
Nivison, David S. 1996. The Ways of Confucianism: Investigations in
Chinese Philosophy.
Edited by Bryan W. Van Norden. Peru, IL: Open Court.
Noddings, Nel. 1984. Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral
Education.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Nordmann, Alfred. 2004. Converging Technologies: Shaping the Future of
European Societies.Luxembourg: EUR- OP, 2004. www.ntnu.no/ 2020/
final_ report_ en.pdf.
Accessed March 24, 2016.
Nussbaum, Martha C. 1988. "Non- Relative Virtues: An Aristotelian
Approach."

Midwest Studies in Philosophy 13 (1): 32- 53.
Nussbaum, Martha C. 1990. Love's Knowledge: Essays on Philosophy and
Literature.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nussbaum, Martha C. 1999. "Virtue Ethics: A Misleading Category?"
Journal of Ethics 3 (3): 163- 201.
Nussbaum, Martha C. 2006. Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality,
Species Membership. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nyhan, Brendan, and Jason Reifler. 2010. "When Corrections Fail: The
Persistence of Political Misperceptions." Political Behavior 32 (2): 303-
330.
Nyhan, Brendan, Jason Reifler, and Peter A. Ubel. 2013. "The Hazards of
Correcting Myths about Health Care Reform." Medical Care 51 (2): 127-
132.
Nyhan, Brendan, Jason Reifler, Sean Richey, and Gary L. Freed. 2014.
"Effective Messages in Vaccine Promotion: A Randomized Trial."
Pediatrics 133 (4): e835- 842.
Oakley, Justin, and Dean Cocking, eds. 2001. Virtue Ethics and
Professional Roles.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
293
References 293
Olsthoorn, Peter. 2007. "Courage in the Military: Physical and Moral."
Journal of Military Ethics 6 (4): 270- 279.
O'Neill, Onora. 1990. Constructions of Reason: Explorations of Kant's
Practical Philosophy. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

O'Neill, Onora. 1996. Towards Justice and Virtue: A Constructive Account
of Practical Reasoning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Ophir, Eyal, Clifford Nass, and Anthony D. Wagner. 2009. "Cognitive
Control in Media Multi- Taskers." Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 106
(37): 15583- 15587.
Oremus, Will. 2014. "Take the 'No Ice- Bucket' Challenge." Slate. August
12. http://
www.slate.com/ blogs/ future_ tense/ 2014/ 08/ 12/ icebucketchallenge_
you_ don_ t_
need_ an_ ice_ bucket_ to_ donate_ to_ als_ research.html.
Ortega y Gasset, José. 2002. Toward a Philosophy of History. Translated by
Helene Weyl.
Urbana and Chicago: University of Il inois.
Osborne, Michael and Carl Benedikt Frey. 2013. "The Future of
Employment: How Susceptible are Jobs to Computerisation?" Working
paper of Oxford Martin Programme on the Impacts of Future Technology,
1- 72. http:// www.oxfordmar-
tin.ox.ac.uk/ downloads/ academic/ The_ Future_ of_ Employment.pdf.
Accessed August 20, 2015.
Otto, Jean and Bryant Webber. 2013. "Mental Health Diagnoses and
Counseling Among Pilots of Remotely Piloted Aircraft in the United States
Air Force." Medical Surveillance Monthly Report 20 (3): 3- 8.
Overbye, Dennis. 2015. "The Flip Side of Optimism About Life on Other
Planets." Out There. Space and Cosmos. The New York Times, August 3.
Overly, Steven. 2012. "At Vecna Technologies, Low Funding for BEARs
Leads to Building Bots." Capital Business. The Washington Post, April 8.

Packer, George. 2013. "Change the World: Silicon Valley Transfers its
Slogans— and Its Money— To The Realm of Politics." A Reporter at Large.
The New Yorker, May 27.
Parks, Jennifer. 2010. "Lifting the Burden of Women's Care Work: Should
Robots Replace the Human Touch?" Hypatia 25 (1): 100- 120.
Pariser, Eli. 2011. The Filter Bubble: What the Internet is Hiding From You.
New York: Penguin.
Pence, Gregory E. 1984. "Recent Work on Virtues." American
Philosophical Quarterly 21 (4): 281- 297.
Perry, Walter L., Brian McInnis, Carter C. Price, Susan Smith, and John S.
Hollywood.
2013. Predictive Policing: The Role of Crime Forecasting in Law
Enforcement Operations. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation. http://
www.rand.org/ pubs/
research_ reports/ RR233.html. Accessed April 3, 2016.
Persson, Ingmar and Julian Savulescu. 2012. Unfit for the Future: The
Need for Moral Enhancement. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peterson, Christopher and Martin E.P. Seligman. 2004. Character
Strengths and Virtues: A Handbook and Classification. New York: Oxford
University Press.
294
294 References
Pierce, Tamyra. 2009. "Social Anxiety and Technology: Face- to- face
Communication versus Technological Communication among Teens."
Computers in Human Behavior 25 (6): 1367- 1372.
Pinker, Steven. 2011. The Better Angels of Our Nature. New York: Penguin.

The President's Council on Bioethics. 2003. Beyond Therapy. Bioethics
Research Library. Georgetown University. Washington, DC. http://
hdl.handle.net/ 10822/
559341.
Rainie, Lee, and Barry Wellman. 2012. Networked: The New Social
Operating System.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sandel, Michael. 2007. The Case Against Perfection: Ethics in the Age of
Genetic Engineering. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sandler, Robert, and Philip Cafaro, eds. 2005. Environmental Virtue Ethics.
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Savulescu, Julian, and Nick Bostrom, eds. 2009. Human Enhancement.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Savulescu, Julian, Ruud ter Meulen, and Guy Kahane, eds. 2011.
Enhancing Human Capacities. Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Scharff, Robert C. 2012. "Empirical Technoscience Studies in a Comtean
World: Too Much Concreteness?" Philosophy and Technology 25 (2): 153-
177.
Scharff, Robert C., and Val Dusek, eds. 2003. Philosophy of Technology:
The Technological Condition. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Scheutz, Matthias. 2012. "The Inherent Dangers of Unidirectional
Emotional Bonds Between Humans and Social Robots." In Robot Ethics,
edited by Patrick Lin, Keith Abney, and George Bekey, 205- 222.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schmidt, Eric and Jared Cohen. 2014. The New Digital Age: Transforming
Nations, Businesses, and Our Lives. New York: Vintage.

Schneewind, J.B. 1990. "The Misfortunes of Virtue." Ethics 101 (1): 42-
63.
Schneier, Bruce. 2008. "The Myth of the Transparent Society." Wired,
March 6. http://
archive.wired.com/ politics/ security/ commentary/ securitymatters/ 2008/
03/ secu-
ritymatters_ 0306.
Schwarzenbach, Sibyl. 1996. "On Civic Friendship." Ethics 107 (1): 97-
128.
Selinger, Evan. 2013. "Facebook Home Propaganda Makes Selfishness
Contagious." Wired, April 22. http:// www.wired.com/ 2013/ 04/ facebook-
home- ads- make- selfishness-
contagious/ .
Sharkey, Noel. 2012. "Killing Made Easy: From Joysticks to Politics." In
Robot Ethics, edited by Patrick Lin, Keith Abney, and George Bekey, 111-
128. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sharkey, Amanda, and Noel Sharkey. 2012a. "Granny and the Robots:
Ethical Issues in Robot Care for the Elderly." Ethics and Information
Technology 14 (1): 27- 40.
Sharkey, Noel, and Amanda Sharkey. 2012b. "The Rights and Wrongs of
Robot Care."
In Robot Ethics, edited by Patrick Lin, Keith Abney, and George Bekey,
267- 282.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
295
References 295

Sheldon, Pavica. 2008. "The Relationship Between Unwillingness- to-
Communicate and Students' Facebook Use." Journal of Media Psychology
20 (2): 67- 75.
Sherman, Nancy. 1993. "The Virtues of Common Pursuit." Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 53 (2): 277- 299.
Sherman, Nancy. 1997. Making a Necessity of Virtue: Aristotle and Kant on
Virtue.
Cambridge,UK: Cambridge University Press.
Shirky, Clay. 2008. Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing
without Organizations. New York: Penguin.
Shun, Kwong- loi and David B. Wong, eds. 2004. Confucian Ethics: A
Comparative Study of Self, Autonomy, and Community. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Sidgwick, Henry. 1884. The Methods of Ethics. 3rd ed. London: Macmillan
and Co.
Singer, Peter. 2011. The Expanding Circle: Ethics, Evolution and Moral
Progress.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Singer, Peter W. 2009. Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict
in the 21st Century. New York: Penguin.
Slote, Michael. 1992. From Morality to Virtue. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Slote, Michael. 2007. The Ethics of Care and Empathy. New York:
Routledge.
Slingerland, Edward. 2003. Confucius: Analects. Indianapolis: Hackett.

Snow, Nancy E., and Franco V. Trivigno, eds. 2014. The Philosophy and
Psychology of Character and Happiness. New York: Routledge.
Sparrow, Robert. 2009. "Building a Better WarBot: Ethical Issues in the
Design of Unmanned Systems for Military Applications." Science and
Engineering Ethics 15 (2): 169- 187.
Sparrow, Robert. 2013. "War Without Virtue?" In Killing by Remote
Control, edited by Bradley Jay Strawser, 84- 105. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Sparrow, Robert. 2015. "Drones, Courage, and Military Culture." In
Routledge Handbook of Military Ethics, edited by George R. Lucas, Jr.,
380- 394. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Sparrow, Robert, and Linda Sparrow. 2006. "In the Hands of Machines?
The Future of Aged Care." Minds and Machines 16 (2): 141- 161.
Star, Daniel. 2002. "Do Confucians Really Care? A Defense of the
Distinctiveness of Care Ethics: A Reply to Chenyang Li." Hypatia 17 (1):
77- 106.
Statman, Daniel, ed. 1997. Virtue Ethics: A Critical Reader. Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Stock, Gregory. 2002. Redesigning Humans: Our Inevitable Genetic Future.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Sul ins, John P. 2010. "RoboWarfare: Can Robots Be More Ethical Than
Humans on the Battlefield?" Ethics and Information Technology 12 (3):
263- 275.
Sul ins, John P. 2011. "Introduction: Open Questions in Roboethics."
Philosophy and Technology 24 (3): 233- 238.
Sunstein, Cass R. 2007. Republic.com 2.0. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

Swanton, Christine. 2003. Virtue Ethics: A Pluralistic View. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
296
296 References
Tatz, Mark. 1986. Asanga's Chapter on Ethics with the Commentary of
Tsong- Kha-Pa: The Basic Path to Awakening. Lewiston, NY: Edwin
Mellen.
Tavani, Herman T. 2005. "The Impact of the Internet on our Moral
Condition: Do We Need a New Framework of Ethics?" In The Impact of the
Internet on our Moral Lives, edited by R.J. Cavalier, 215- 237. Albany:
SUNY Press.
Thompson, Loren. 2011. "How to Waste $100 Billion: Weapons That Didn't
Work Out." Forbes, December 19.
Tiwald, Justin. 2010. "Confucianism and Virtue Ethics: Still a Fledgling in
Chinese and Comparative Philosophy." Comparative Philosophy 1 (2): 55-
63.
Toyama, Kentaro. 2015. Geek Heresy: Rescuing Social Change from the
Cult of Technology.
New York: PublicAffairs.
Trivigno, Franco V. 2014. "Empathic Concern and the Pursuit of Virtue."
In The Philosophy and Psychology of Character and Happiness, edited by
Nancy E. Snow and Franco V. Trivigno, 113- 132. New York: Routledge.
Tronto, Joan. 1993. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of
Care.
New York: Routledge.
Tsukayama, Hayley. 2014. "Twitter Vows to 'Improve Our Policies' after
Robin Williams'

Daughter is Bul ied Off the Network." The Switch. Washington Post, August
13.
Turkle, Sherry. 2011. Alone Together: Why We Expect More from
Technology and Less from Each Other. New York: Basic Books.
Turkle, Sherry, 2015. Reclaiming Conversation: The Power of Talk in a
Digital Age.
New York: Penguin.
Twenge, Jean M., Sara Konrath, Joshua D. Foster, W. Keith Campbell, and
Brad J.
Bushman. 2008. "Egos Inflating Over Time: A Cross- Temporal Meta-
Analysis of the Narcissistic Personality Inventory." Journal of Personality
76 (4): 875- 902.
Vallor, Shannon. 2010. "Social Networking Technology and the Virtues."
Ethics and Information Technology 12 (2): 157- 170.
Vallor, Shannon. 2011a. "Knowing What to Wish For: Human Enhancement
Technology, Dignity and Virtue." Techné: Research in Philosophy and
Technology 15 (2): 137- 155.
Vallor, Shannon. 2011b. "Carebots and Caregivers: Sustaining the Ethical
Ideal of Care in the 21st Century." Philosophy and Technology 24 (3): 251-
268.
Vallor, Shannon. 2012. "Flourishing on Facebook: Virtue Friendship and
New Social Media." Ethics and Information Technology 14 (3): 185- 199.
Vallor, Shannon. 2013a. "Armed Robots and Military Virtue." In The Ethics
of Information Warfare, edited by Luciano Floridi and Mariarosaria
Taddeo, 169- 185.
New York: Springer.

Vallor, Shannon. 2013b. "Examined Lives." The Philosophers' Magazine 63
(4): 91- 98.
Vallor, Shannon. 2015. "Moral Deskilling and Upskilling in a New Machine
Age: Reflections on the Ambiguous Future of Character." Philosophy of
Technology 28 (1): 107- 124.
297
References 297
van Wynsberghe, Aimee. 2013. "Designing Robots for Care: Care Centered
Value-Sensitive Design." Science and Engineering Ethics 19 (2): 407- 433.
Van Norden, Bryan W., ed. 2002. Confucius and the Analects: New Essays.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Van Norden, Bryan W. 2007. Virtue Ethics and Consequentialism in Early
Chinese Philosophy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Verbeek, Peter- Paul. 2005. What Things Do: Philosophical Reflections on
Technology, Agency and Design. University Park: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Verbeek, Peter- Paul. 2011. Moralizing Technology: Understanding and
Designing the Morality of Things. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Volkman, Richard. 2010. "Why Information Ethics Must Begin with Virtue
Ethics."
Metaphilosophy 41 (3): 380- 401.
Waley, Arthur, trans. 1989. The Analects of Confucius. New York: Vintage
Books.
Walji, Moneeza. 2014. "Slacktivism: Truth or Cynicism?" Canadian
Medical Association Journal Blog, August 28. http:// cmajblogs.com/ tag/
als- ice- bucket- challenge/ .

Walker, Rebecca and Philip J. Ivanhoe, eds. 2007. Working Virtue: Virtue
Ethics, and Contemporary Moral Problems. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wal ach, Wendell, and Colin Allen. 2009. Moral Machines: Teaching
Robots Right from Wrong. New York: Oxford University Press.
Walzer, Michael. 1974. "Civility and Civic Virtue in Contemporary
America." Social Research 41 (4): 593- 611.
Wang, Zheng, and John M. Tchernev. 2012. "The Myth of Media
Multitasking: Reciprocal Dynamics of Media Multitasking, Personal Needs,
and Gratifications." Journal of Communication 62 (3): 493- 513.
Wei- Ming, Tu. 1984. "Pain and Suffering in Confucian Self- Cultivation."
Philosophy East and West 34 (4): 379- 388.
Wheeler, Deborah. 2011. "Does the Internet Empower? A Look at the
Internet and International Development." In The Handbook of Internet
Studies, edited by Mia Consalvo and Charles Ess, 188- 211. Malden, MA:
Blackwell.
Whitby, Blay. 2012. "Do You Want a Robot Lover? The Ethics of Caring
Technologies."
In Robot Ethics, edited by Patrick Lin, Keith Abney, and George Bekey,
233- 248.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Whitehill, James. 2000. "Buddhism and the Virtues." In Contemporary
Buddhist Ethics, edited by Damien Keown, 17- 36. Richmond, UK: Curzon.
Wilkinson, Francis. 2008. "The Discover Interview: Leon Kass." Discover
29 (2): 62.
Williams, Bernard. 1985. Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy. London:
Fontana.

Wong, Pak- Hang. 2012. "Dao, Harmony and Personhood: Toward a
Confucian Ethics of Technology." Philosophy and Technology 25 (1): 67-
86.
Wong, Pak- Hang. 2013. "Confucian Social Media: An Oxymoron?" Dao
12 (3): 283- 296.
Wright, Dale Stuart. 2009. The Six Perfections: Buddhism and the
Cultivation of Character. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
298
298 References
Xunzi. 2003. Basic Writings. Translated by Burton Watson. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Yearley, Lee H. 1990. Mencius and Aquinas: Theories of Virtue and
Conceptions of Courage. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Yearley, Lee H. 2002. "An Existentialist Reading of Book Four of the
Analects." In Confucius and the Analects, New Essays, edited by Bryan Van
Norden, 237- 274.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Young, Kimberly S. and Christiano Nabuco de Abreu. 2011. Internet
Addiction: A Handbook and Guide to Evaluation and Treatment. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley and Sons.
Yu, Jiyuan. 2007. The Ethics of Confucius and Aristotle: Mirrors of Virtue.
New York: Routledge.
Yuan, Lijun. 2002. "Ethics of Care and Concept of Jen: A Reply to
Chenyang Li."
Hypatia 17 (1): 107- 130.
299

Index
acute technosocial opacity, 6- 10, 23, 27,
artificial intelligence, 1, 48, 110, 124, 126,
75, 100, 104, 110, 126- 27, 145, 155,
202- 3, 208- 9, 250, 255n2, 280n3
207, 209, 211, 241- 45
convergence with robotics, 208- 9,
addictive design of new media, 166- 68.
212, 256n11
See also Internet: addiction
artificial moral intelligence, 212- 13, 220
affordances, 2, 48, 162, 177, 181- 82, 213
Asanga, 94, 96
algorithms, 179- 81, 189- 90, 213
aspiration, moral, 63- 64, 84, 89- 90, 102,
high frequency trading, 3, 126
168, 199, 211, 214, 238, 246, 254, 257n7
profiling with, 3, 129, 180, 193
in Buddhist practice, 41, 73, 81- 83, 104
Allenby, Braden, 258n33

and human nature, 232- 34, 236- 37
Angle, Stephen, 102
asymmetrical warfare, 216
anonymity online, 175, 182
attention, 72, 82, 88- 89, 139, 162, 170- 74,
Anscombe, G.E.M., 20- 21
200, 229- 30
apatrapya (fear of doing evil), 96, 131
effects of new media on, 162- 64,
applied ethics, 22, 27, 33
168- 73, 186
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 20, 70, 125, 129, 135
and empathy, 170- 72
arête (excellence or virtue), 17, 37
executive, 170- 71
Aristotle, 18- 19, 26, 29, 35- 37, 54, 62,
moral, 99- 107, 110- 18, 149, 170- 71,
66- 69, 104, 125, 129, 140, 145, 152,
234, 268n4 ( see also habits: of moral
202, 214, 227, 256n4, 257nn11- 12,

attention)
262n5, 265n7
to one's own moral development, 90,
and empathy, 134- 35, 223
93, 97, 199, 200- 1
on friendship, 53, 77- 79, 86, 111- 12,
See also si
134, 141- 43, 271n32
autofabrication, 246
on practical wisdom ( phronēsis), 18- 19, automation
55, 99, 106- 7, 263n17
and unemployment, 208
theoretical comparisons with, 39- 42,
in warfare, 23, 50, 55, 211- 18, 255n2
65, 69- 73, 101- 2, 112- 13, 115, 128,
( see also robotics: military uses of )
145, 268n22
See also artificial intelligence
300
3 0 0 Index

backfire effect, 193
technomoral virtue of, 133, 138- 40,
Bailey, Ronald, 235, 243
164, 171, 185- 86, 220- 21, 229,
Bakardjieva, Maria, 177
245, 256n16
benevolence, 107, 132, 141. See also ren
care ethics, 138- 40, 224, 272n52, 277n46
Bentham, Jeremy, 188, 198
carebots, 140, 211, 218- 21, 223, 226- 29
Big Data, 123, 129, 144, 179, 189- 90, 193
Carr, Nicholas, 12, 166- 67
bioconservatives, 231- 34,
Cavell, Stanley, 200
237- 38, 278n12
character, 18, 21, 32, 37, 41, 44, 50, 83, 98,
biomedical technology, 3, 7, 10, 29, 46, 55,
119, 142
131, 233, 244- 45. See also enhance-
development of, 37- 38, 64, 74, 79,

ment; transhumanism
161- 62 ( see also moral development)
blog culture, 144, 175, 200, 247
public, 143- 44, 146- 48, 185
bodhisattvas, 41, 73, 89, 109, 114, 136.
( see also civic virtue)
See also Sangha
technomoral, 186
Bommarito, Nicolas, 149- 50, 272n76
charity, 132, 138
Borenstein, Jason, 221- 22
civic friendship, 37, 112, 141- 42, 194.
Borgmann, Albert, 30- 31, 182
See also philia politikē
Bostrom, Nick, 238, 243
civic virtue, 143- 44, 176- 78, 181, 185,
boyd, danah, 160
194, 204- 5, 272n56. See also
Brin, David, 190- 91, 193
character: public

Buddha, 39, 66, 71, 73, 82, 109, 115
civility, 31, 49- 50, 140, 148, 245, 254
Buddha- nature, 81, 94
technomoral virtue of, 141- 44,
Buddhist virtue ethics, 39- 43, 62, 71- 74,
183- 84, 214, 240
81- 83, 88, 103, 108- 9, 114, 128, 131,
Coeckelbergh, Mark, 220, 274n33
136, 146
cognitive biases, 11, 21, 180, 193, 206
moral practices in, 72, 83, 115- 16,
Cohen, Julie, 191
150, 171
collective moral action, 9- 11, 22, 29- 33,
theoretical comparisons with, 64, 68,
48, 51, 53, 75, 110, 131- 32, 141,
71- 74, 81- 83, 88- 90, 94- 98,
147- 48, 244
103, 111, 115, 136, 141, 153,
communicative habits and virtues,

264n37, 271n36
121, 161
comparative ethics, 43- 44
care, 12, 23, 50, 83, 100, 111- 17, 137- 38,
compassion, 42, 57, 115- 16, 132- 39, 150,
141, 153, 162- 63, 207, 217- 29,
172, 192, 194, 226, 271n44. See
240, 246
also karunā
as a burden, 139, 220- 22
complete or full virtue, 94, 96, 111, 120,
filial, 57, 112, 139, 194
138, 154, 257n7, 268n22
practices of, 134, 139- 40, 142- 43,
compliance mindset in ethics
194, 221, 223- 28, 276n16 ( see also
education, 186
self- care)
Confucian virtue ethics, 37- 39, 52, 62,
public or common, 143, 272n66

69, 79- 81, 86- 88, 92- 94, 101- 2,
(see also koinon epimelein)
106- 8, 112- 14
301
Index 301
theoretical comparisons with, 41- 43,
deontological and consequentialist
65, 69, 71- 74, 79, 81, 89, 94- 96,
ethics, 20, 211, 214
103, 112- 13
criticisms of, 7, 23- 24, 26, 29, 76,
See also neo- Confucianism
209- 11, 264n1, 268n4
Confucius. See Kongzi
See also Kantian ethics;
consumption, technology's role in, 28, 30,
utilitarian ethics
123- 24, 166- 67, 247- 48
dependent co- arising. See
contextual integrity, 165

pratītya- samutpāda
continence, moral, 85- 86, 166, 168, 123,
Dharma (sacred duty), 40- 41, 72- 73, 128
167. See also self- control
dignity, human, 128, 130- 31, 202, 210- 11,
converging technologies, 5, 8, 27, 209, 212,
219- 21, 231- 37, 278n12, 278n17
230, 236
discernment, 37, 55, 70, 81, 89, 149, 162- 63,
Cooper, David E., 95, 115
179, 186, 205, 234, 256n4
copyright, 165
discipline, moral, 74- 75, 95, 106, 123- 24,
Couldry, Nick, 185- 86
167. See also self- control
courage, 49- 50, 85, 92, 119, 129- 32, 151,
doxxing, 178
153, 162, 175- 76, 187, 214, 217, 226,
drones, 129, 140, 208, 211- 12, 215- 16,
241, 251

270n24. See also robotics: military
martial, 86, 129- 30, 217,
uses of
270n24, 276n16
moral, 97, 129- 31, 214- 15, 218, 238,
education, moral, 37, 79, 123, 186, 194, 197
240, 276nn16- 17
techno- , 11, 186, 204- 5, 244- 45
technomoral virtue of, 131- 32, 183,
El ul, Jacques, 28, 31, 261n26
214- 16, 218, 238, 240, 254, 280n4
empathy, 55, 100, 103, 112- 16, 132- 39,
crisis of wishing, 244, 246- 48
162, 170- 71, 173- 74, 216,
crowdfunding, 144
223- 26, 240, 244- 46, 269n49,
cultivated person. See exemplars of moral
271n36, 277n44
cultivation
and sympathy, 132- 33, 271n39

cyberbalkanization. See filter bubbles
technomoral virtue of, 137- 38, 141,
cyberbullying, 126, 133, 165, 184
207, 254, 256n16
cybercrime, 126
See also shu
cyberespionage and cybersabotage, 144
enhancement, 28, 230- 46, 250
cyberwarfare, 126
as a conceptual distinction from ther-
apy, 230, 277n2
dāna (generosity), 42, 136, 138, 194.
moral, 244- 45
See also care
See also biomedical technology;
Dao (Way), 38, 44, 69, 74, 80, 92- 94,
transhumanism
101, 130, 176, 264n37
enkrateia (continence), 123. See also
de (power of virtue), 17

self- control
deliberative excellence. See prudential
enlightenment. See nirvāna
judgment
Enlightenment ideals, 20, 193. See also
della Mirandola, Pico, 236, 238- 40
liberalism
302
3 0 2 Index
environmental degradation, 48, 53, 115,
of the cultivated person, 25- 26, 81,
117, 122- 23, 126, 128, 132, 137, 238,
102, 105, 115, 135
250- 52. See also existential risks to
technomoral virtue of, 145- 51, 183, 207
humanity
of virtue ethics, 32
equanimity. See upeksā
See also forbearance; ksānti
Ess, Charles, 54- 55, 57

Foot, Philippa, 256n4
essentialist narratives
forbearance, 130, 145, 147. See also flex-
about human nature, 44, 232- 35
ibility; ksānti; patience
about technology, 3, 29, 31- 33
fortitude. See courage
ethical pluralism, 44, 54- 55, 64, 146, 150, Foucault, Michel, 188- 90,
197- 99, 201
256n16, 262n2
fragmentation, social and political, 5, 124,
ethical self, 197, 224- 26, 229, 260n14
144, 166, 207
ethics, goal of, 2- 3, 6, 55, 62, 161. See also
Frankfurt, Harry, 122
good life; human flourishing
frictionless interaction, ideal of, 161- 64
eudaimonia. See human flourishing
friendship, 46, 50, 53, 62, 77- 79, 95,
examined life, 84, 195- 202. See also
140- 43, 164

habits: of reflective self- examination
in new media, 162, 269n33
exemplars of moral cultivation, 17- 18,
between virtuous persons, 86, 111- 12,
41- 42, 44, 56, 68, 73- 75, 91, 100,
113, 134, 271n32
117, 119, 154, 175, 196- 97, 201,
See also civic friendship; philia
221, 229, 238, 263n16, 264n31.
Fukuyama, Francis, 232- 33, 235
See also junzi; moral expertise;
future generations, 3, 29, 244, 253.
phronimoi; Sangha
See also human flourishing: future of
existential risks to humanity, 8, 23,
122, 127, 131- 32, 127, 243- 44,
generosity, 86, 99, 138. See also dāna
250- 53, 255n2. See also human
genetic engineering. See biomedical
flourishing: future of

technology
extension of moral concern, 65, 82,
geoengineering, 8, 132
110- 17, 141, 150, 162, 224, 264n1,
geolocational tracking, 189- 90, 206
266n34, 271n44
global commons, 47, 63, 75, 119, 124, 137,
176- 77, 262n2
facial recognition software, 190, 193
networked nature of, 1- 5, 22, 33, 46,
fatalism about technology, 28, 193- 94
84, 119, 138, 141- 47, 151, 186- 87, 190
fear, 107, 146, 183, 195, 225- 27, 247, 253
global technomoral practices, 45- 48, 75,
and courage, 50, 85, 129- 32,
119, 143, 147, 217
214- 15, 218
coordination and cooperation in, 11,
of emerging technology, 1, 4, 29- 30,
22- 23, 46, 51, 54- 56, 64, 143, 147,

131- 32, 189, 219, 231, 237
240, 253
Fermi's Paradox, 251
goods internal to, 46- 53, 56, 62, 120,
filial virtue. See xiao
143- 44, 185, 205- 7, 218, 262n2
filter bubbles, 179
global technomoral virtue, 34, 36, 43- 44,
flexibility, 127, 162, 164, 194, 197
51, 118, 148, 151, 186
303
Index 303
cultivation of, 9- 11, 31- 32, 76, 98, 117,
hri (moral shame), 96, 131. See also respect:
143, 204, 211, 249, 252
for the self
education for, 11, 204, 242, 244
hubris, 125, 170, 192, 237- 38, 240, 243
ethical framework of, 23, 34, 49, 51, 54, Hughes, James, 235, 279n32
61, 64, 118, 151, 262n37

human dependence on technology, 2, 22
and public character, 143- 44, 147- 48
human family, 30, 110, 115, 138, 186, 194,
( see also civic virtue)
216- 18, 229, 244- 45, 252, 261n36
Goleman, Daniel, 170, 274n34
interdependence of, 9, 22, 51, 63,
good life, 2- 3, 6, 55, 62, 161, 168, 196,
84, 119, 135, 138- 41, 147, 149- 51,
242, 247
220, 245
goods internal to practices, 45- 49, 51,
human flourishing, 22, 37, 39, 42, 44,
220- 24, 227, 234
49, 56, 62, 73, 117- 18, 122, 211,
Great Filter, 251, 254, 280n3
246, 263n16
greatest happiness, principle of, 7, 24.
as eudaimonia, 19, 36- 37, 68,
See also utilitarian ethics

160, 257n11
future of, 11- 12, 56, 124, 127,
habits, 11- 13, 20, 25- 27, 37, 40- 42, 56, 92,
137- 38, 194, 213, 244, 250, 252,
142, 184- 85, 191, 199- 202, 210- 13,
280n4, 280n6
236, 253
global, 56, 213, 218
information and new media, 121- 24,
of the human family, 52, 117, 119, 131,
138, 161- 65, 167, 170- 74, 186
151, 194, 216- 18, 243- 45, 249
of moral attention, 97, 99- 105,
See also ethics, goal of
110, 113, 117, 170, 186 ( see also
human nature, 21, 38, 44, 56, 81, 92, 231,
attention: moral)
235, 262n5
of reflective self- examination,
humane, 57, 70- 71. See also ren

84- 90, 93, 95, 125, 162, 174,
humanism, 12, 235- 36, 252, 278n20
195- 97, 202
human- robot interaction, 209, 211, 220
of relational understanding, 76- 84,
humility, 41, 90, 125, 174, 192, 266n41
88, 98, 100, 105, 113, 162, 186
technomoral virtue of, 126- 27, 207,
See also moral habituation; moral
237- 39, 244
self- cultivation: habits of
hacktivism, 46- 47, 126, 190, 192
ICTs, 121- 23, 126, 144, 146
harmonious ease in moral action, 19, 71,
individualism, 142, 160
93, 96- 97
integrity, 96, 120, 145, 199
Hartzog, Woodrow, 193
intercultural or global ethics, 51- 56
Harvey, Peter, 73, 96

Internet, 47, 122, 126, 148, 159- 60,
Heidegger, Martin, 28- 29, 31
169, 253
honesty, 50, 55, 90, 120, 161, 174, 193
addiction, 166- 70, 172 ( see also addic-
as a technomoral virtue, 120- 23,
tive design of new media)
178- 81, 185- 86, 205
civic uses of, 176- 78, 182
hope, 129, 131, 186, 214, 217- 18,
of Things, 1, 147
249, 252- 23
Ivanhoe, Philip J., 102, 271n44
304
3 0 4 Index
James, Simon P., 95, 115
Lanier, Jaron, 12, 191, 217
Jonas, Hans, 28- 29, 31, 187, 240,
leadership, moral. See magnanimity
244, 259n44

li (ritual propriety), 71, 93
joy, 90, 93- 94, 96- 97, 154, 264n37.
as the rites, 38, 69- 72, 79,
See also pleasure
102, 114
judgment. See prudential judgment
as ritual practice, 40, 69- 71,
junzi (exemplary person), 38, 56, 71, 74,
101, 262n5
79- 80, 87, 89, 94, 101- 2, 104, 130,
as a virtue of ritual propriety or re-
135, 145- 46, 153, 264n31. See also
spect, 39, 70, 79- 80, 89, 107- 8,
exemplars of moral cultivation
112, 125
just war theory, 211, 214
See also respect
justice, 46- 47, 54, 62, 100, 105, 112, 115,
liberalism, 142- 49, 190, 193, 232, 244,
119, 132, 142- 44, 178, 183, 190,

260n1, 279n31
192, 244
neo- , 241, 245- 46, 280n6
as dikaiosunē, 77, 111- 12, 127, 142
See also Enlightenment ideals
as a global good, 47- 49, 52- 53, 185,
libertarian ideals, 12, 238, 241, 279n32
218, 234
lock- in, technological, 191, 217- 18
political, 128, 143, 270n12
love, 80, 96, 107- 8, 111- 12, 116, 138, 164,
technomoral virtue of, 127- 29, 152,
198, 226, 271n32
183, 186, 195, 207, 214, 216, 245- 46
filial, 4, 62, 79, 82, 93, 112, 138, 141
graded expression of, 42, 80- 81, 115,
Kant, Immanuel, 7, 25, 77, 108, 121, 125,
265n25, 271n44
235, 276n8
See also maitrī; philia; ren

Kantian ethics, 7, 19, 23- 24, 27, 76, 210, 264n1
loyalty, 25, 57, 194, 217, 272n56. See
categorical imperative of, 7, 20, 23- 24,
also zhong
29, 108, 210, 256n11
See also deontological and consequen-
machine deep learning, 126. See also
tialist ethics: criticisms of
artificial intelligence
karunā, 42, 81- 83, 103, 136. See also com-
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 21, 45- 46,
passion; empathy
49- 50, 62, 135, 261n23, 265n3,
Kass, Leon, 232- 33, 237, 278n17, 278n20
271n36, 272n55
Kelly, Kevin, 177, 195, 198, 201
magnanimity, 97, 151- 53, 266n41
Keown, Damien, 108- 9
technomoral virtue of, 153- 54, 187,
koinon epimelein, 143. See also care: public

214, 240- 41, 254
or common; philia politikē
See also megalopsuchia
Kongzi, 25, 37- 38, 42, 53, 69- 71, 80,
maitrī (loving kindness), 81, 114, 136
86- 87, 92- 94, 101- 2, 130, 145,
Marcuse, Herbert, 28, 31, 261n26
192, 195, 264n31, 264n37. See also
market forces in technology develop-
Confucian virtue ethics
ment, 23, 46, 173, 229, 246
ksānti (patience), 131, 146, 149. See also
mastery, human, 70, 126- 27, 207
forbearance; patience
of self, 42, 95
Kurzweil, Ray, 242, 255n9, 278n3, 278n16
McDowell, John, 100, 257n5, 268n4
305
Index 305
mean, appropriate, 19, 26, 39, 68- 75, 81,

moral motivation, 67, 69, 73, 80,
85, 87, 90, 105- 7, 127, 174, 181, 184,
92- 96, 113, 134, 224- 25, 248,
227, 238
264n33, 269n49
media multitasking, 170- 71
moral perfection, 18, 66, 80, 92, 94,
meditation, practices of, 73, 89, 104,
96- 97, 111, 197, 200
115- 16, 171, 175, 195, 197, 199, 236
moral perspective, 77, 84, 96- 97, 102- 5,
megalopsuchia, 86, 91, 125, 151- 52, 260n1,
149- 50, 173- 74, 194, 226, 272n76
266n41. See also magnanimity
exercises for, 116- 17, 150
Mencius. See Mengzi
technomoral virtue of, 149, 151, 162,
Mengzi, 38, 70, 87, 93- 94, 101- 2, 107- 8,
183, 191- 92, 207, 216, 238, 240
135- 36, 175- 76, 195- 96, 200, 226

moral salience, perception of, 26, 29,
on courage, 130- 31, 215, 223, 276n16
64, 83, 99- 107, 112, 192, 200, 234,
on human nature, 38, 56, 65, 69,
260n18, 263n16
92, 263n28
moral self- cultivation, 33, 41- 42, 44,
on moral extension, 113- 16
55- 57, 87, 163, 174, 203, 232, 234
against Mozi, 80- 81
habits of, 18- 19, 66- 76, 83, 97- 118, 151,
Middle Way, the. See mean, appropriate
154, 176, 186, 196, 200, 244- 45, 249
Mill, John Stuart, 7- 8, 168. See also
practice of, 38, 63- 67, 72- 76, 80- 90,
utilitarian ethics
98, 107, 117- 18, 136, 194- 95, 202,
misericordia (pity), 135, 271n36
229, 242, 244
moderation. See self- control

See also self- care
modesty, 125, 149. See also humility
morally supportive technologies, 11,
moral attention. See attention: moral
159, 175
moral development, 104, 115, 144, 152,
Morozov, Evgeny, 12, 169, 177,
191, 194, 199, 228, 254, 267n64
191- 92, 205
intentional self- direction of, 42,
muditā (empathetic joy), 103, 136, 271n36.
64, 91- 98
See also empathy
open circle of, 11, 65- 66, 88, 110
moral emotions, 37, 90, 101- 3, 135
Naam, Ramez, 241- 42
moral expertise, 11, 24- 26, 70, 85, 122,
narcissism, 137, 161, 174- 75, 197
145, 154, 187
narrative, moral, 150, 172- 75,

aesthetic style of, 25, 42
206, 269n49
See also exemplars of moral cultivation
neo- Confucianism, 22, 260n6, 271n44
moral extension. See extension of moral
neutrality, thesis of technological, 177,
concern
181, 184, 193
moral habituation, 65- 66, 74, 82, 86,
new media, 3, 122- 23, 137- 38, 144,
262n5, 266n34, 263n9, 263n28.
159- 61, 165, 168, 171- 72, 177
See also moral self- cultivation:
civic uses of, 176- 85
habits of practice of
ethics of, 178, 185- 86
moral imagination, 116- 17, 248, 253,
habits and practices, 161- 63, 165, 167,
269n49, 274n33
172- 75, 186- 87

moral injury, 214- 15, 239
See also Internet; media multitasking
306
3 0 6 Index
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 18, 77, 125, 192,
and pains, 68- 70, 85
240- 41, 247
See also joy
nirvāna (enlightenment), 40- 42,
politeness, 31, 141, 184
44, 73, 94
posthumanism, 231, 241, 246, 249, 278n3
Nissenbaum, Helen, 165
power, 9, 17, 46, 52, 55, 93, 129, 166, 191,
Noble Eightfold Path, 40, 64- 65, 71- 72,
193, 198, 205, 252
81, 89, 95
asymmetries of, 129, 190, 204
Noddings, Nel, 224- 26, 228
technoscientific, 5, 8, 11, 27, 147,

nudging technologies, 3, 202- 4, 206
155, 160- 61, 193, 207, 236- 38,
Nussbaum, Martha, 21, 100- 1, 119, 222,
241, 244- 52
256n15, 257n13
of virtue, 69, 84, 95, 108, 114
practical wisdom, 19, 24- 26, 29, 33, 38,
Ortega y Gasset, José, 244, 246- 48, 252
45, 77, 91, 99- 100, 104- 10, 117- 18,
135, 154
panopticism, 188- 89, 195
in technomoral contexts, 140, 147, 162,
patience, 18, 123, 130, 145, 149, 161.
192, 196, 210, 213, 248, 273n77
See also ksānti
See also phronēsis
Pearson, Yvette, 221- 22
prajñā (spiritual wisdom), 40, 72, 74,
perfectionism, 200
89, 149

perseverance, 50, 129- 30
pratītya- samutpāda (dependent co-
personalized browser search, 179- 80
arising), 40, 81, 103, 115
perspective. See moral perspective
precepts of morality. See śīla
Persson, Ingmar, 8, 244- 45
predictive policing, 193
pettiness, 152- 53, 198, 254
privacy, 22, 28, 55, 121, 148, 165, 173,
philia (love), 78, 111. See also friendship
189- 91, 194, 205, 211, 220
philia politikē, (political friendship),
proper ends of a human life, 13, 37,
37, 112, 141- 42, 194. See also civic
91, 96, 100, 106, 181, 241- 42,
friendship
247- 48, 279n32
philosophy of technology, 23, 28- 30, 54
prudential judgment, 65, 81, 83, 105- 10,

empirical turn in, 31- 33
113- 14, 117, 127, 146, 162, 186
phronēsis (practical reason), 18, 24, 37, 55,
99, 106, 149, 154, 259n44. See also
Quantified Self movement, 195- 96,
practical wisdom
199- 202
phronimoi (exemplary persons), 37, 41,
62, 68, 70- 74, 197, 238. See also ex-
reciprocity, 42, 52- 53, 78, 111, 127, 223,
emplars of moral cultivation
226, 229
phronimos (person of practical wisdom),
reductive approaches to technology, 12,
37, 89, 91- 92, 99- 100, 146,
192, 205- 7
263n17, 268n22
reflection. See habits: of reflective
Plato, 17, 36, 54, 188, 196, 265n7
self- examination

pleasure, 46, 68, 70, 78, 91- 92, 124, 154,
relational understanding of the
168, 209, 211, 264n37
self, 76- 77, 80, 264n1, 265n2
307
Index 307
ren (humane benevolence), 39, 42,
Savulescu, Julian, 8, 244- 45
79- 80, 107, 114, 128, 135, 138, 141
Schwarzenbach, Sibyl, 142- 43
as complete virtue, 80, 94, 96,
second self, 78, 111- 12, 134. See also
154, 268n22
friendship: between virtuous
See also humane; love
persons
reproductive technologies, 231
security, human, 47, 49, 51, 53, 144.
respect, 52- 53, 55, 79, 83, 95, 102, 110, 140,
See also human flourishing:

163, 173, 217
future of
for human dignity, 232- 33, 236,
self- aggrandizement, 70, 87, 153
278n12, 278n17
self- care, 84, 86, 91, 95, 97, 131, 196- 99.
for the self, 96, 130, 131 (see also hri)
See also technologies of the self
for truth, 120- 22, 146, 174, 178- 81,
self- control, 68, 74, 86, 105, 114, 129,
205 ( see also honesty)
163, 166
See also li
as sôphrosunê, 85, 91, 95, 123
responsibility, 77, 109, 127- 28, 139,
technomoral virtue of, 75, 124- 25, 162,
229, 240
165- 71, 206- 7, 245- 46, 254
for oneself, 88, 90, 92, 197, 202
See also temperance

rigidity, moral, 33, 38- 39, 81, 83,
self- indulgence, 85- 86, 113, 167
145- 46, 192
self- knowledge, 77- 78, 87, 196, 201,
roboethics, 209- 11, 220, 224
265n3. See also habits: of reflective
robot caregivers. See carebots
self- examination
robotics, 1, 3, 22, 28, 193, 208- 11,
Selinger, Evan, 162, 164, 193
250, 256n11
semblances of virtue, 39, 108, 130, 270n17.
autonomy and lethality in, 23, 50,
S ee also village honest man
55, 211- 18
service, 138, 142, 272n56
military uses of, 23, 129, 131, 140
loving, 138- 39, 207, 227, 229
social uses of, 7, 27- 28, 140, 208, 210,
( see also care)

218- 19, 227- 29
selfless, 214, 217, 226
See also artificial intelligence; carebots shared life, 78, 124, 142- 43. See
Roddenberry, Gene, 254
also suzên
Shirky, Clay, 173, 176
sages, moral, 32, 62, 146, 262n7, 264n31
shu (empathic reciprocity), 39, 42, 80,
samādhi (concentrated awareness), 40,
135- 36, 271n39. See also empathy
72, 74, 89- 90
si (attention), 93, 101- 2, 267n82, 268n8,
samyag- drsti (right understanding or
268n10. See also attention: moral
right view), 65, 72, 81- 82, 89, 95,
śīla (precepts of morality), 17, 40- 41,
103, 121, 126
71- 72, 74, 83, 89, 95, 108- 9, 114, 121,
Sangha, 41, 44, 62, 73- 74, 83, 89, 238,
126, 146
267n73. See also bodhisattvas; exem- śīla pāramitā (moral perfections), 18.

plars of moral cultivation
See also Six Perfections, the
Śāntideva, 146
situationist critique of virtue ethics,
Sarewitz, Daniel, 258n33
21, 258n17
308
3 0 8 Index
Six Perfections, the, 131, 138, 146. See also
thick and thin moral concepts,
śīla pāramitā
43- 45, 119
skillful means, doctrine of. See upāya
Three Jewels, the, 41, 73
kaushalya
tolerance, 54- 55, 140, 142- 43, 145- 46,
slacktivism, 172
148. See also flexibility; forbearance
social capital, 160
transcendence, 42, 237

social graph, 179
transhumanism, 231- 32, 235- 47, 277n3,
Socrates, 2, 84, 86, 195
278n12, 279nn31- 32, 280n6. See also
sousveillance, 190- 91, 193- 95, 202,
enhancement; posthumanism
204- 5, 207. See also surveillance
transparency, 121, 176- 77, 179, 188, 190,
Sparrow, Linda and Robert, 224
192, 205
spiral of silence, 183- 85
cult of, 191, 193
Stoic virtue ethics, 21, 35, 264n1
trishiksha (three trainings), 72, 89
superintelligence, 250
trolls, 182, 185
supramundane path of morality,
Tronto, Joan, 139, 229
104, 267n73
trust, 5, 120, 142, 153- 54, 187, 192, 204,

surveillance, 3, 7, 28, 46, 122, 129, 144, 151,
206, 223, 226
154, 188- 98, 203- 7
online, 55, 121- 23
self- , 190, 199- 201, 206 ( see also
truth, 19, 83, 121- 22, 146, 174, 178- 81,
Quantified Self movement)
192, 204- 5. See also honesty
See also sousveillance
Turkle, Sherry, 209, 255n6,
suzên (shared life), 78, 86, 142
272n47, 276n7
sympathy, 132- 33, 271n39
UAVs. See drones
techné, 197
Ultimate Harm, 8
technocracy, 5, 148, 177, 192, 204
upāya kaushalya (doctrine of skillful
solutionism in, 12, 177 ( see also
means), 41, 83, 108- 9, 124, 114,

techno- fixes)
146, 269n28
techno- fixes, 127, 219
upeksā (equanimity), 41, 81- 82, 114, 145,
technological determinism, 28
151, 153, 264n37
technologies of the self, 197- 99, 201- 3.
utilitarian ethics, 7- 8, 20, 23, 76, 168,
See also self- care
209- 10. See also deontological and
technomoral virtues, 2, 10, 50, 117,
consequentialist ethics
119- 20, 254
ethic of, 33- 34, 45, 51- 52, 258n33
Van Norden, Bryan, 43- 44, 106- 7
techno- optimism, 127, 182
van Wynsberghe, Aimee, 229
techno- pessimism, 30, 127, 182, 204
Verbeek, Peter- Paul, 255n3
teleology in classical virtue ethics,

vice, 11, 18, 32, 85, 90, 143, 152, 162, 164,
20- 21, 41
181, 186, 191, 213, 217, 227
temperance, 74, 85, 87, 97, 112, 123- 24,
village honest man, 25, 192, 269n25.
166, 168. See also self- control: as
See also semblances of virtue
sôphrosunê
virtual goods, 123- 24
309
Index 309
virtue ethics, 17, 21, 43
See also phronēsis; practical wisdom;
conceptual unity of, 43, 45
prajñā; zhi
incommensurability among tradi-
wonder, 125- 26
tions of, 45, 50- 51, 54- 55, 63,
Wong, Pak- Hang, 165
79, 146- 47

resonances among traditions of, 53- 56, xiao (filial virtue), 79- 80, 112
61, 63- 66, 69- 74, 83, 90, 97, 104,
xin (heart- mind), 135- 36, 271n39
112, 118
Xunzi, 38, 56, 69, 92- 94, 262n5
vulnerability, human, 35, 50, 127, 135,
139- 40, 223, 225, 257n12, 272n55
Yangming, Wang, 271n44
Yearley, Lee, 70, 108, 130
Way, the. See Dao
yi (appropriateness), 89, 107, 130
wearable and/ or biometric sensors, 190,
yoga (spiritual discipline),
198- 99, 203- 6
40- 41, 73, 95
Wei- Ming, Tu, 114
Youzi, 79- 80
wisdom, 187, 218, 254
Yu, Jiyuan, 107, 265n2
collective human, 11, 33, 48- 51, 53, 75

technomoral virtue of, 11, 98, 116- 18,
zhi (wisdom), 38, 80, 102, 106, 149,
154- 55, 163, 205, 213, 229, 238, 240,
268n22. See also wisdom
245, 249, 280n4
zhong (duty or loyalty), 135
310
311
312
313
314
315
316
OceanofPDF.com

Document Outline
Cover
Technology and the Virtues
Copyright
Contents
Acknowledgements
Introduction: Envisioning the Good Life in the 21st Century and
Beyond
Part I: Foundations for a Technomoral Virtue Ethic
1. Virtue Ethics, Technology, and Human Flourishing
1.1. The Contemporary Renewal of Virtue Ethics
1.2. Virtue Ethics and Philosophy of Technology
2. The Case for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
2.1. Classical Virtue Traditions: Aristotelian, Confucian, and
Buddhist Ethics
2.2. The Shared Commitments of Virtue Traditions
2.3. The Need for a Global Technomoral Virtue Ethic
Part II: Cultivating the Technomoral Self: Classical Virtue Traditions
as a Contemporary Guide
3. The Practice of Moral Self-Cultivation in Classical Virtue
Traditions
3.1. Learning from Other Virtue Traditions
3.2. Cultivating the Technomoral Self
3.3. Moral Habituation
4. Cultivating the Foundations of Technomoral Virtue
4.1. Relational Understanding
4.2. Reflective Self-Examination
4.3. Intentional Self-Direction of Moral Development
5. Completing the Circle with Technomoral Wisdom
5.1. Moral Attention
5.2. Prudential Judgment
5.3. Appropriate Extension of Moral Concern
6. Technomoral Wisdom for an Uncertain Future: 21st Century
Virtues

6.1. A Taxonomy of Technomoral Virtues
6.2. Honesty: Respecting Truth
6.3. Self-Control: Becoming the Author of Our Desires
6.4. Humility: Knowing What We Do Not Know
6.5. Justice: Upholding Rightness
6.6. Courage: Intelligent Fear and Hope
6.7. Empathy: Compassionate Concern for Others
6.8. Care: Loving Service to Others
6.9. Civility: Making Common Cause
6.10. Flexibility: Skillful Adaptation to Change
6.11. Perspective: Holding on to the Moral Whole
6.12 Magnanimity: Moral Leadership and Nobility of Spirit
6.13 Technomoral Wisdom: Unifying the Technomoral
Virtues
Part III: Meeting the Future with Technomoral Wisdom, Or How To
Live Well with Emerging Technologies
7. New Social Media and the Technomoral Virtues
7.1. New Social Media and the Good Life
7.2. New Social Media and the Virtue of Self-Control
7.3. Media Multitasking, Moral Attention, and the
Cultivation of Empathy
7.4. New Social Media and Virtuous Self-Regard: Humility,
Honesty, and Perspective
7.5. New Social Media, Civic Virtue, and the Spiral of
Silence
7.6. Technomoral Wisdom and Leadership in a New Media
Age: Looking Forward
8. Surveillance and the Examined Life: Cultivating the
Technomoral Self in a Panoptic World
8.1. Virtue in the Panopticon: Challenging the New Cult of
Transparency
8.2. Technologies of the Examined Life
8.3. 'Smart' Surveillance and the Quantified Self
8.4. Surveillance and Moral 'Nudges'
8.5. Flourishing with Emerging Surveillance Technologies
9. Robots at War and at Home: Preserving the Technomoral
Virtues of Care and Courage

9.1. Robot Ethics as Virtue Ethics
9.2. Autonomous Military Robots: Courage and Hope for the
Human Future
9.3. 'Killer Robots' and Technomoral Courage: The
'Troubles We Do Not Avoid'
9.4. Carebots and the Ethical Self
9.5. Technomoral Care in Relations of Human Dependence
10. Knowing What to Wish For: Technomoral Wisdom and
Human Enhancement Technology
10.1. Competing Visions of Human (or Posthuman)
Flourishing
10.2. Technomoral Humility, Wisdom, and the Argument
from Hubris
10.3. Technomoral Virtue and Contemporary Life: A Crisis
of Moral Wishing
Epilogue
Notes
References
Index
OceanofPDF.com

