
Contents 
Preface 
XIII 
1 The Origin of Eukaryotes 
1 
Entry into the DNA World 
4 
A viral origin of DNA? 
6 
Membranes early or late? 
7 
The Three Domains of Cellular Life 
9 
Tree, ring, or web of life? 
13 
Eukaryotic gene acquisition from endosymbionts 
14 
The unity of the eukaryotes 
1 5 
The Stem Eukaryote 
16 
The Eukaryotic Radiation 
18 
The unikonts and bikonts 
21 
A eukaryotic big bang? 
22 
Genome Repatterning and the Eukaryotic Radiation 
23 
A Synopsis of the First 2 Billion Years of Biology 
26 

Mutation Pressure and the Diversification 
of Organelle Genomes 
326 
The proliferation of noncoding DNA 
327 
Modifications of the genetic code 
330 
Messenger RNA editing 
333 
Muller's Ratchet and the Mitochondrion 
336 
Insights from More Recent Endosymbioses 
342 
12 Sex Chromosomes 
347 
The Origins of Sex Chromosomes 
349 
The Population Genetic Environment 
351 
Degeneration of the Y Chromosome 
354 
Retailoring the X Chromosome 
358 
13 Genomfart 
363 
The Origins of Modern Evolutionary Theory 
364 
Evolution as a Science in the Post-Darwinian World 
366 
Nothing in Evolution Makes Sense Except in the Light 
of Population Genetics 
370 
The Passive Emergence of Genomic Complexity 
by Nonadaptive Processes 
372 
Do the Roots of Organismal Complexity Also Reside 
in Nonadaptive Processes? 
377 
CONTENTS 
xi 
An Entree to Understanding the Origins of Genomic Determinants 
of Organismal Complexity 
380 
Evolvability 
386 
Closing Comments 
389 
Glossary 
391 
Literature Cited 
401 
Author Index 
471 
Subject Index 
483 

CONTENTS 
VII 
2 Genome Size and Organismal Complexity 
29 
Genome Size and Complexity 
30 
The Selfish-DNA and Bulk-DNA Hypotheses 
32 
The Metabolic Cost of DNA 
34 
Directional Mutation Pressures on Genome Size 
35 
Population Size and the Mutational Hazard of Excess DNA 
39 
3 The Human Genome 
43 
Gene Number 
43 
Introns and Exons 
49 
Regulatory DNA 
51 
Mobile Genetic Elements 
56 
LINEs and SINEs 
57 
LTR elements 
59 
Transposons 
60 
Pseudogenes 
60 
The Unique Trajectory of Human Evolution 
63 
4 Why Population Size Matters 
69 
Random Genetic Drift at a Neutral Locus 
70 
The Effects of Selection 
74 
The Importance of Linkage 
76 
The theory of genetic draft 
78 
Empirical considerations 
81 
The Three Genomic Perils of Evolving Large Body Size 
83 
Smaller population size 
84 
Higher mutation rates 
84 
Reduced recombination in large genomes 
86 

VIII 
CONTENTS 
The Global Effective Population Sizes of Species 
90 
Sources of bias 
92 
Resolution of the "paradox of variation" 
95 
Mutation as a Weak Selective Force 
97 
5 Three Keys to Chromosomal Integrity 
101 
Origins of Replication 
1 02 
ORI specification 
104 
Evolutionary consequences 
105 
Centromeres 
107 
The centromeric-drive hypothesis 
109 
Centromere positioning 
11 2 
Centromere definition 
113 
Telomeres 
116 
6 The Nucleotide Composition Landscape 
121 
The Molecular Spectrum of Mutational Effects 
122 
Biased Gene Conversion 
127 
Evolutionary Consequences of Replication 
133 
Isochores 
136 
The Nonadaptive Basis of Genome-Wide Nucleotide 
Composition Variation 
139 
Codon Usage Bias 
141 
Prokaryotes 
144 
Eukaryotes 
146 
Unsolved problems 
149 
7 Mobile Genetic Elements 
151 
Non-LTR Retrotransposons 
153 
The IR system of hybrid dysgenesis 
157 

CONTENTS 
IX 
LTR Retrotransposons 
159 
The gypsy element 
163 
Transposons 
164 
The P element 
166 
Rates of Insertion and Fitness Effects 
167 
Regulation of Mobile Element Activity 
169 
The opportunity for self-regulation 
170 
Host-encoded mechanisms for mobile element 
containment 
172 
The Population Biology of Mobile Elements 
174 
Conditions for establishment 
174 
Conditions for element number stabilization 
179 
Insights from population surveys 
181 
Mobile elements and species extinction 
185 
Positive Effects of Mobile Element Insertions 
189 
8 Genomic Expansion by Gene Duplication 
The Evolutionary Demography of Duplicate Genes 
194 
Origins of segmental duplications 
199 
Whole genome duplication 
202 
Mechanisms for the Preservation of Duplicate Genes 
209 
Neofunctionalization 
209 
The masking effect of duplicate genes 
213 
Subfunctionalization 
215 
The Fates of Duplicated Protein Sequences 
219 
Patterns of molecular evolution 
220 
The Case for Subfunctionalization 
225 
Speciation via the Divergent Resolution of Duplicate Genes 
228 
9 Genes in Pieces 
The Spliceosome(s) 
238 
237 
The Introns Early-Introns Late Debate 
242 
193 

x 
CONTENTS 
A Group II Origin? 
244 
Mechanisms of Origin and Loss 
247 
The Intrinsic Cost of Introns 
251 
Introns and Population Size 
253 
Rates of Intron Gain and Loss 
256 
Adaptive Exploitation of Introns 
262 
Modifiers of the recombination rate 
262 
Alternative splicing 
263 
Messenger RNA surveillance 
265 
1 0 Transcript Production 
271 
Transcription and Translation Initiation 
272 
The Premature Translation Initiation Problem 
276 
Transcription Termination 
282 
The Deployment of trans Splicing 
287 
Evolution of Modular Gene Organization 
292 
The passive emergence of modularity 
294 
The demise of operons 
297 
11 
Expansion and Contraction 
of Organelle Genomes 
303 
Establishment and Stabilization of Organelles 
305 
The early stages of mitochondrial evolution 
305 
Intergenomic transfer 
308 
The origins of plastids 
310 
Genome Content and Organization 
312 
The Population Genetic Environment 
316 
Mutation 
317 
Transmission and recombination 
321 
Effective population size 
323 

Preface 
We live in one of the most amazing periods of intellectual and technologi-
cal development that has thus far been experienced by the biological sci-
ences. The emergence of methods for the rapid characterization of genomes 
has led to a rate of data proliferation that was literally unimaginable just 
25 years ago, presenting enormous opportunities and challenges for the field 
of evolutionary biology. For several decades, we have had a fairly mature 
theory of evolution in terms of expected gene/ genotype frequency changes 
in response to various evolutionary forces, but owing to the absence of 
detailed information on the raw materials of evolution, much of the theory 
was couched in terms too abstract for the tastes of the average biologist. 
Now, with a picture of the full spectrum of DNA-level resources in hand, 
there is real potential for making quantum-level progress in our under-
standing of the mechanisms of evolution at both the molecular genetic and 
population genetic levels. 
This is a book of advocacy on several fronts. Contrary to common belief, 
evolution is not driven by natural selection alone. Many aspects of evolu-
tionary change are indeed facilitated by natural selection, but all popula-
tions are influenced by the nonadaptive forces of mutation, recombination, 
and random genetic drift. These additional forces are not simple embell-
ishments around a primary axis of selection, but are quite the opposite-
they dictate what natural selection can and cannot do. Although this basic 
principle has been known for a long time, it is quite remarkable that most 
biologists continue to interpret nearly every aspect of biodiversity as an out-
come of adaptive processes. This blind acceptance of natural selection as the 
only force relevant to evolution has led to a lot of sloppy thinking, and is 
probably the primary reason why evolution is viewed as a soft science by 
much of society. 

xiv 
PREFACE 
A central point to be explored in this book is that most aspects of evolu-
tion at the genomic level cannot be fully explained in adaptive terms, and 
moreover, that many genomic features could not have emerged without a 
near-complete disengagement of the power of natural selection. This con-
tention is supported by a wide array of comparative data, as well as by well-
established principles of population genetics. However, even if such sup-
port did not exist, there is an important reason for pursuing nonadaptive 
(neutral) models of evolution. If one wants to confidently invoke a specific 
adaptive scenario to explain an observed pattern of comparative data, then 
an ability to reject a hypothesis based entirely on the nonadaptive forces of 
evolution is critical. 
Because evolution is a population-genetic process, the litmus test for any 
evolutionary argument is the demonstration of its compatibility with basic 
population-genetic principles. Nevertheless, it is still common to hear molec-
ular, cellular, and developmental biologists arguing that we evolutionary 
biologists have missed the boat entirely. Such a view derives in part from 
the mistrust that most biologists have for all things mathematical and the 
consequent failure to appreciate the accomplishments of evolutionary the-
ory, an inherently quantitative enterprise. Nothing of a productive nature 
has yet come from such posturing. If it ever does, biology will have been 
confronted with a crisis of major proportions. 
Such tensions are not confined to a single-lane on the bridge between 
molecular and evolutionary genetics. In the fieJd of evolutionary genetics, 
vague references to molecular / developmental constraints are often invoked 
to explain the limited distributions of observed phenotypes. Such uncer-
tainty is largely a consequence of our rudimentary understanding of the 
genetic architecture of complex traits. At the level of the genome, however, 
we can no longer hide from the facts. Over the past twenty-five years, molec-
ular geneticists have revealed a huge amount of information about the struc-
tural and functional aspects of gene architecture and expression, to the point 
that we really do know the raw material upon which evolutionary forces 
operate. As in population genetics, there are still some gaps in the field of 
molecular genetics, but the knowledge base is so well established that if we 
are to concoct arguments on the matter of genome evolution, they must also 
be compatible with basic principles of molecular genetics. 
The goal of this book is to help bring about a synthesis of our under-
standing of genomic evolution from the standpoint of both population 
genetics and molecular biology, and to outline the major challenges to the 
transformation of the descriptive field of comparative genomics into a more 
explanatory enterprise. The central issues to be explored revolve around the 
question of how the striking architectural diversity within and among 
prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes came to be. This is not to say that the 
biggest questions in evolutionary biology are being addressed here. Those 
questions would include how phenotypic diversity came to be. But given 
that the complexities of cellular and developmental biology are constrained 
by the basic architectural features of genes and genomes, genomic repat-

PREFACE 
xv 
terning underlies all aspects of evolution at higher levels of organization. 
Natural history is important to evolution, and in a very real sense, the cell 
and its contents define the natural historical setting within which the archi-
tectural features of genomes evolve. 
There have been two major challenges to composing this book. First, 
although most biologists find mathematics unpalatable, evolutionary biology 
is one of the most mathematically sophisticated areas in the life sciences. 
Throughout, I have tried to clarify why the quantitative details matter, while 
also resisting the temptation to reveal all the gory details. In contrast, many 
evolutionary biologists find the reductionistic details of molecular biology to 
be arcane and irrelevant. But as noted above, because phenotypic evolution 
derives from change at the molecular level, many of the details matter here 
as well-the key is to figure out just which ones are indeed relevant to evolu-
tionary processes. Second, the rapidity at which the field of genomic biology 
continues to emerge is daunting. I wrote this book over a period of about six 
years, but each time a chapter draft was set down for a few months, dozens 
of key findings had surfaced. Although I believe that a synthetic theory of 
genomic evolution is now possible, we can also be certain that many signifi-
cant embellishments of our understanding will emerge in the very near future. 
Hardcore population geneticists know that I am not a particularly good 
mathematician, and hardcore molecular biologists will easily see my weak 
understanding of subcellular processes. There is an intrinsic element of 
beauty in both of these fields, making it easy for the specialist to become 
sidetracked by the details, so there may be a small advantage of partial igno-
rance. I am hopeful that I know just enough about both fields to begin to 
see which details are essential to building a field of evolutionary genomics. 
As I embarked on this project, my intention was simply to develop a series 
of neutral models to evaluate whether selective explanations for genomic 
evolution were broadly justified. It quickly became clear that they often 
are not. We will soon know if I am right. 
Acknowledgments 
I come from a lineage of janitors, plumbers, cooks, factory workers, and 
clerks, so not a day goes by that I do not appreciate the unusual and unex-
pected opportunities that life has provided to me-the time to think about 
what got us here, and to do so through interactions with an enormous num-
ber of very smart people from a wide number of fields. The work reviewed 
on the following pages is derived from the labors of thousands of investi-
gators in molecular, cellular, and developmental biology, genomic analysis 
and bioinformatics, molecular evolution, and population genetics. Although 
the names of many of these individuals are displayed in the Literature Cited 
section, countless lab technicians, undergraduate students, etc., have labored 
in the background of the more visible side of science. I am grateful to all of 
these people. Throughout the entire period of writing, I have been gener-
ously supported by the National Institutes of Health, the National Science 

XVI 
PREFACE 
Foundation, and the Lilly Foundation funding to Indiana University. Such 
financial support has enabled me to maintain a laboratory containing a 
remarkable series of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoc-
toral fellows, all of whom have played a central role in my education. 
Numerous specific acknowledgments are in order. I entered the field of 
genomic evolution largely as a consequence of early conversations with 
Allan Force on gene duplication. He regularly pushed me to the limits, and 
it is highly likely that this book would have never originated had such a 
Force not been with me at this point in my career. Matt Hahn, Harmit Malik, 
and Sally Otto read the first draft of the entire manuscript and provided 
enormously helpful suggestions regarding content, interpretation, and pres-
entation. Their critical insights are woven throughout the final product. 
Extremely helpful input on one or more chapters was provided by Charlie 
Baer, Nicole Crown, Ben Evans, Mario dos Reis, Laurent Duret, Eric Haag, 
Laura Higgins, Alex Kondrashov, John Logsdon, Tomoko Ohta, Dmitri 
Petrov, Anthony Poole, Aaron Richardson, Sarah Schaack, Doug Scofield, 
Arlin Stoltzfus, and Greg Wray. Earlier comments by Vincent Daubin and 
Nancy Moran prompted me to think more deeply about prokaryotic evo-
lution. Many of these people do not agree with everything that I have writ-
ten, but I greatly appreciate their dissent (and that of others, who will remain 
nameless), as numerous issues regarding genomic evolution certainly 
remain to be resolved. 
Once again, it has been a great pleasure to work with the extraordinarily 
talented staff at Sinauer Associates, Inc.: Andy Sinauer (editor), Sydney Car-
roll and Chelsea Holabird (production editors), Chris Small (production 
manager), Janice Holabird (composition and design), Norma Roche (copy 
editing), Marie Scavatto (advertising), and The Format Group (art produc-
tion). Sitting on top of a hill in Guam, Lewis Rifkowitz (a potter) devised 
the cover. 
Finally, I am especially grateful to Jeff Palmer for providing me with a job 
in the Department of Biology at Indiana University. Hermann Muller spent 
the last half of his productive career in this department, formulating among 
other things his seminal ideas on the role of deleterious mutations in evolu-
tion, and it has been a very special treat to work in the building III which he 
once walked. The intellectual setting for pursuing cross-disciplinary ques-
tions in the life sciences at Indiana University is truly exceptional. Many of 
the ideas that will be encountered on the following pages crystallized after 
I arrived here, and I doubt they would have ever come to light if I had not 
made such a move. Every aspect of my day-to-day academic life has been 
facilitated by the tolerance and support of the people at lU, from the admin-
istrators at the top to the office staff working behind the scenes to my numer-
ous faculty, graduate student, and postdoctoral colleagues. Most of all, I wish 
to thank Emilia Martins and our son Gabe for their enduring patience, pro-
visioning of distractions, and the privilege of being in their company. 
Michael Lynch 
Bloomington, IN. 

The Origin 
of Eukaryotes 
Approximately 4.6 billion years ago (BVA), a cloud of cosmic gas and dust 
condensed into the solar system that contains our planet (Nisbet and Sleep 
2001). For the next 0.8 billion years, Earth was heavily bombarded by inter-
stellar debris, with some of the more massive impacts generating enough 
heat to sterilize the entire planet (Sleep et al. 1989). Thus, although early 
steps in the origin of life may have been taken prior to 3.8 BYA, the roots of 
modern biology are probably younger than this. The earliest stages of life 
presumably involved simple polymers, perhaps capable of replicating only 
on time scales of days or months and probably doing so quite inaccurately. 
Unfortunately, for obvious physical and chemical reasons, no fossils of non-
cellular life from this period are likely to be found. 
Successful life forms must be capable of acquiring energy while also har-
boring a heritable genotype containing the information for perpetuating 
such abilities. All of today's cellular life employs DNA for information stor-
age, proteins for enzymatic activity and cell structure, and RNA for various 
aspects of DNA processing and protein production. It is implausible that all 
three types of biomolecules appeared simultaneously, but which came first? 
With its complementary double-stranded structure, DNA provides a superb 
substrate for information storage and replication, but is for the most part 
catalytically inert. In contrast, although proteins carry out a bewildering 
diversity of tasks, self-replication is not one of them. This leaves RNA as the 
only reasonable candidate for a starting point in evolution, and with its dual 
capacity for information storage and processing, a consensus has gradually 
emerged that the initial informational component of the biosphere consisted 
entirely of RNA (Woese 1983; Gilbert 1986; Gesteland et al. 1999). 
With no fossil record to restrict our imagination, this earliest phase of 
molecular evolution has inspired much creative thought, often generating 

2 
CHAPTER 1 
testable predictions. For example, numerous laboratory evolution experi-
ments involving diverse populations of RNA molecules have successfully 
selected for a wide variety of catalytic activities, including some key steps 
toward self-replication (Wilson and Szostak 1999; Joyce 2004). Such demon-
strations of the enzymatic potential of RNA support the idea that a primi-
tive metabolism may have existed prior to the evolution of protein synthe-
sis. The central role of RNA in transcript processing and translation in 
modern organisms is presumably a reflection of this early era, and the 
diverse assemblage of viruses with RNA-based genomes provides direct 
evidence that RNA can serve as a reliable information storage molecule. 
If a biosphere consisting entirely of RNA existed, it was relatively quickly 
displaced by life forms that rely on cooperative activities of RNA, DNA, and 
a broad assemblage of proteins. According to one view, a diverse assem-
blage of microbes, including cyanobacteria-like cells, had colonized the seas 
by ~3.5 BYA (Schopf 1993; Schopf et al. 2002). Some aspects of this interpre-
tation of the fossil record have been questioned (Brasier et al. 2002), but other 
signs of biological activity have been found in rocks from 3.4-3.8 BYA (Ros-
ing 1999; Fumes et al. 2004; Tice and Lowe 2004), and unambiguous fossils 
of filamentous organisms deposited around hydrothermal vents have been 
dated to 3.2 BYA (Rasmussen 2000). Thus, cellular life (as we know it) appears 
to have emerged from inorganic materials within a window of just a few 
hundred million years. 
The lack of distinctive morphological features renders the detailed taxo-
nomic composition of the early fossil record quite uncertain, but the first 
0.5-1.0 billion years of life appear to have been dominated by prokaryotes 
(simple cells lacking membrane-enclosed organelles, often referred to as bac-
teria), if not entirely restricted to them. Given the presence of methanogene-
sis as early as 3.0 BYA (Nisbet 2000) and photosynthesis as early as 2.8 BYA (Des 
Marais 2000), we can conclude that the microbial world was quite sophisti-
cated biochemically by this time, perhaps harboring the full repertoire of meta-
bolic/ molecular processes from which all subsequent cellular lineages were 
built. The first evidence of eukaryotes (cells with membrane-enclosed or-
ganelles, including a nucleus) appears in the form of putative diagnostic bio-
markers of membrane components deposited in shale from ~2.7 BYA (Brocks 
et al. 1999). The first presumptive algal fossils date to ~2.1 BYA (Han and Run-
negar 1992), and many other fossils of unicellular eukaryotes with well-devel-
oped cytoskeletons date to 1.7-1.5 BYA (Knoll 1992; Shixing and Huineng 1995; 
Javaux et al. 2001). But despite this gradual addition of eukaryotic diverSity, 
the biosphere continued to be dominated by unicellular and oligocellular (a 
few cell types) species for at least another billion years. 
A dramatic shift occurred ~0.55 BYA, when all of the major groups of mul-
ticellular animals appear essentially simultaneously in the fossil record, in 
what is popularly known as the Cambrian explosion. Shortly thereafter, 
jawed vertebrates arose (~0.44 BYA), as did land plants (~0.40 BYA). The ori-
gin of the major angiosperm (flowering plant) groups came somewhat later 
(~0.14 BYA), followed by the radiation of the major orders of mammals (~0.10 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
3 
BYA). The only species capable of thinkillg about things like this, Homo sapi-
ens, is a very recent arrival (-0.002 BYA), but now dominates the planet eco-
logically to such an extent that much of the global legacy of biodiversity is 
on the verge of extinction. An enormous amount of literature chronicles 
these kinds of events on a finer scale in the context of long-term changes in 
climate, atmospheric composition, and landmass locations (a highly read-
able overview is provided by Knoll 2003). 
The main goal of this chapter is to establish a general phylogenetic set-
ting for the diverse assemblage of organisms that will be encountered in 
succeeding chapters. First, we will consider how a DNA-based genome 
might have emerged out of an RNA world. This issue raises numerous other 
critical questions, including whether true cells arose prior to the reliance on 
DNA for information storage, and if so, whether DNA-based cellular 
genomes evolved more than once. Because these questions address singu-
lar events, they are not subject to traditional hypothesis testing, and some 
may never be fully settled. However, what is not in question is the remark-
able degree to which the descendants of the primordial DNA-based cells 
have colonized Earth (Box 1.1). Second, we will examine the degree of phy-
logenetic affinity between the major functional groups of cellular life: the 
prokaryotes and the eukaryotes. Despite the centrality of this issue to all of 
biology, many questions remain unanswered, including the nature of the 
Box 1.1 How much DNA? 
A crude estimate of the amount of DNA within currently living organisms can be made by 
noting that the length spanned by one base of DNA is -0.3 x 10-12 km (Cook 2001). 
The number of viral particles in the open oceans is _1030 (Suttle 2005). Assuming that 
there are twice as many viruses on land and in fresh water does not change the global es-
timate very much at the order-of-magnitude level. Thus, assuming an average viral 
genome size of 104 bp, the total length of viral DNA if all chromosomes were linearized 
and placed end to end is -1022 km. 
The estimated global number of prokaryotic cells is _1030 (Whitman et al. 1998), and 
assuming an average prokaryotic genome size of 3 x 106 bp (see Chapter 2) yields an 
estimated total DNA length of 1024 km. 
With a total population size of 6 x 109 individuals, 1013 cells per individual (Baserga 
1985), and a diplOid genome size of 6 x 109 bpI the amount of DNA occupied by the 
human population is _1020 km. Assuming there are -107 species of eukaryotes on Earth 
(-6 times the number that have actually been identified), that the average eukaryotic 
genome size is -1 % of that of humans (see Chapter 2), and that all species occupy ap-
proximately the same amount of total biomass (see Chapter 4), total eukaryotic DNA is 
-105 times that for humans, or _1025 km. 
Given the very approximate nature of these calculations, anyone of these estimates 
could be off by one to two orders of magnitude, but it is difficult to escape the conclu-
sion that the total amount of DNA in living organisms is on the order of 1025 km, which 
is equivalent to a distance of 1012 light-years, or 10 times the diameter of the known 
universe. 

4 
CHAPTER 1 
prokaryote(s) that gave rise to eukaryotes. Third, drawing from a wide array 
of comparative studies, we will find that eukaryotes are monophyletic (share 
a most recent common ancestor, the stem eukaryote, to the exclusion of any 
prokaryotic group). The shared presence of a wide array of genomic fea-
tures across all eukaryotes suggests that the stem eukaryote was much more 
complex genomic ally than any known prokaryote, although many of the 
individual peculiarities of the eukaryotic cell can be found in isolated 
prokaryotic species. Finally, we will find that the major phylogenetic line-
ages of eukaryotes diverged within a fairly narrow window of time, and 
some speculation will be offered on the mechanisms that may have pre-
cipitated such a rapid radiation. 
Entry into the DNA World 
Despite its broad appeal, the RNA world hypothesis leaves open the ques-
tion of how and why an RNA-based genome was eventually displaced by 
DNA. There are compelling reasons to think that proteins evolved prior to 
this transition. For example, an early RNA-protein world would imply the 
existence of the genetic code prior to the arrival of DNA, which is consis-
tent with the ubiquitous use of transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and messenger RNAs 
(mRNAs) in translation. In addition, the nucleotide building blocks from 
which DNA is built in today's organisms are derived from RNA precursors 
by use of enzymatic proteins: ribonucleotide reductases are used in the pro-
duction of dAMPs, dCMPs, and dGMPs, while thymidylate synthase cat-
alyzes the production of dTMPs by methylation of dUMPs (Figure 1.1). This 
additional step in dTMP synthesis suggests that the initial transition to a 
DNA-based genome might have involved an intermediate form of DNA 
in which U was used instead of T (as is the case in RNA). Remarkably, the 
genomes of some bacteriophage (viruses that infect prokaryotes) have such 
a structure (Takahashi and Marmur 1963). Equally notable, the fact that two 
unrelated thymidylate synthases with substantially different mechanisms 
of operation are distributed among the primary prokaryotic lineages (Myl-
lykallio et al. 2002) suggests the intriguing possibility that DNA originated 
more than once. Although such a claim may seem rather fantastic, it is con-
sistent with the use of two apparently nonhomologous sets of DNA repli-
cation proteins in different prokaryotic lineages (Edgell and Doolittle 1997; 
Olsen and Woese 1997; Leipe et al. 1999). 
Given the early success of the RNA world, why would the transition to 
a DNA world be so complete as to eradicate all RNA-based genomes (except 
those of RNA viruses)? The answer is probably related to the reduction in 
mutational vulnerability afforded by a DNA-based genome. As an infor-
mation storage molecule, DNA has two significant chemical advantages. 
First, the additional- OH group on ribose renders RNA much less struc-
turally stable than DNA. Second, one of the most common sources of muta-
tion is the production of uracil via the deamination of cytosine (see Chap-
ter 6). In thymine-bearing DNA, uracil can be recognized as aberrant and 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
5 
Base 
RNA precursors 
DNA precursors 
Adenine 
N 
o 
r 
~ 
II 
" 
HO-P-O~o~ 
6- K 
OH OH 
Cytosine 
~ 
cS~ 
HO -P-O~O~ 
0 
6-
~ 
~ 
cS~ 
HO -P-O~o~ 
0 
6- K 
OH OH 
OH 
o 
NH 
~ 
d;:H NH, 
o 
II 
)-NH2 
Guanine 
Uracil (RNA) 
Thymine (DNA) 
HO-P-O~o~ 
6- K 
OHOH 
o 
~ C1 
HO -P-O~ O ~N 
0 
6- K 
OH OH 
HO -P-O~o~ 
6-
~ 
OH 
o 
CH3{ 
o 
I 
NH 
II 
1 
HO-p-O~oro 
6-
~ 
OH 
Figure 1.1 The building blocks of RNA and DNA. The RNA nucleotide precursors 
are enzymatically converted into those for DNA (arrows). 
corrected prior to replication, but such a distinction is impossible in RNA. 
Thus, in an RNA world, an organism that discovered a way to store its 
genome as DNA would have had a substantial advantage in terms of the 
reliable production of progeny genotypes. 

6 
CHAPTER 1 
The arrival of DNA, with its reduced mutational vulnerability, was a 
revolutionary event for evolution, as it provided a more permissive envi-
ronment for genomic expansion and hence for the emergence of more com-
plex biological functions. Because the vast majority of mutations are dele-
terious, an excessively high mutation rate can overwhelm the power of 
purifying natural selection, resulting in a deterministic decline in fitness 
and eventual population extinction. This general principle was first pro-
moted by Eigen and Schuster (1977) in their error catastrophe theory, which 
was later expanded in more formal population genetic terms to describe 
the conditions leading to a mutational meltdown (Lynch and Gabriel 1990; 
Lynch et al. 1995a,b). Depending on the reproductive mode and the dis-
tribution of mutational effects, a population is unable to sustain itself if the 
deleterious mutation rate exceeds one to five per individual per genera-
tion, and once a genome is close to this meltdown threshold, further expan-
sion of genome size is impossible without a mechanism for reducing the 
per-nucleotide mutation rate. As will be seen in many contexts in the fol-
lowing pages, a variant of this principle also applies to the structural fea-
tures of individual genes: in populations of sufficiently small size with suf-
ficiently low per-nucleotide mutation rates, changes in gene architectural 
features with mild mutational costs (such as increases in the length of cod-
ing or regulatory regions) can accumulate with little opposition from nat-
ural selection and without imperiling the survival of the species; and 
although such features need not be of immediate adaptive significance, 
they may eventually contribute to adaptive evolution (Lynch 2002b, 2006a). 
Thus, once the technology for reliable maintenance and utilization of DNA 
evolved, entirely novel pathways for adaptive evolution would have 
opened up, leading to the rapid displacement of the RNA world by DNA-
based genomes. 
A viral origin of DNA? 
With their peculiar genomic architectures and their lack of structural fea-
tures universal to cellular species, the phylogenetic positions of viruses in 
the tree of life have remained enigmatic, and many biologists regard them 
as nothing more than products of ill-defined mechanisms of reductive evo-
lution from cellular species. Forterre (2005, 2006a,b) has challenged this view, 
arguing not only for the early existence of a diverse virosphere, but for a 
central role of viruses in the invention of DNA. The plausibility of this 
hypothesis derives from the fact that viruses exploit hosts from all domains 
of cellular life and can have either RNA- or DNA-based single- or double-
stranded genomes. Under Forterre's hypothesis, DNA first evolved in 
viruses as a means for avoiding recognition in a world of RNA host cells, 
and once established in such cells, began to accumulate host cell gene copies 
until the entire host genome had been transferred. The physical possibility 
of such transfers is not in doubt, as today's viruses commonly encode reverse 
transcriptase, an enzyme that produces complementary strands of DNA 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
7 
from RNA templates. However, Forterre takes things a step further, argu-
ing that DNA takeovers by entirely different viruses occurred in inde-
pendent RNA host lineages, eventually driving them all into the DNA 
world. An extraordinary diversity of DNA processing machinery exists 
among viral lineages, including many mechanisms with no known coun-
terparts in cellular species, so one attractive feature of this argument is its 
potential to explain the use of radically different DNA processing machin-
ery in the major lineages of cellular life (noted above). 
Any hypothesis for the transition to a DNA world requires that such a 
change be either neutral or immediately beneficial, but is it necessary to 
invoke an initial role for DNA as a viral defensive mechanism? The hypoth-
esis that a DNA-based viral genome provided a means for avoiding detec-
tion presupposes the existence in the RNA world of host mechanisms for 
discriminating self from foreign RNA, raising the question of why DNA 
would not be recognized as foreign as well. In addition, the absorption of 
an entire host genome by a parasite imposes some rather stringent require-
ments, not the least of which is the need for the rapid transformation of an 
initially negative host-parasite interaction into a more benign relationship 
so as to keep the liaison stabilized during the potentially millions of years 
of transfer of genetic information. In principle, this could be accomplished 
by the transfer of a single essential host gene to the viral genome, but the 
ability of a cell lineage containing such a rearrangement to spread through-
out the host population would require an advantage to the host exceeding 
the cost of the parasite load. 
Because a reduction in the deleterious mutation rate provides an imme-
diate advantage to any DNA-based genome, there is no clear need to invoke 
the initial establishment of DNA as a viral defensive mechanism, although 
this does not negate the possibility of a viral origin for DNA, with sec-
ondary transfer to host genomes occurring by other mechanisms. At the 
very least, Forterre has forced us to reevaluate the role of viruses in early 
genomic evolution, and the recent discovery of numerous DNA viral 
genomes containing hundreds of genes affirms this view, blurring the dis-
tinction between viruses and prokaryotes (Shackelton and Holmes 2004; 
Claverie et al. 2006). 
Membranes early or late? 
A final significant issue regarding early evolution concerns the stage at 
which individuality evolved (Figure 1.2). Individualization (a strict one-
to-one linkage between genotype and phenotype) is essential for the suc-
cessful operation of adaptive evolution, as it ensures the transmission of 
genotypes by selectively favored members of the population. If a genome 
led to a useful product that diffused broadly, then most members of the pop-
ulation (including those not encoding the product) would receive equal ben-
efits, greatly reducing the efficiency of selection. One view is that the isola-
tion of genomes behind true cell membranes evolved prior to the emergence 

8 
CHAPTER 1 
RNA-based genomes 
Origin of the ribosome, 
proteins, and the genetic 
code 
Origin of DNA-based ) 
genomes 
? 
Origin of cell 
membranes 
Diversification 
of cellular life } 
Figure 1.2 A schematic for the early transition to DNA-based genomes and cellu-
larity. Although the hypothesis that the biosphere initially was composed entirely of 
RNA, with proteins evolving secondarily, has gained wide acceptance, the order of 
events in the transition to cellular life is less clear (as denoted by the question marks). 
According to one view, the major cellular domains of life arose prior to the end of the 
RNA world (Forterre 2005, 2006a,b), but another view postulates that DNA-based 
genomes were well established prior to the evolution of cell membranes (Koonin and 
Martin 2005). Black lines ending in crossbars denote hypothetical extinct lineages. 
of the DNA world (Forterre 2005, 2006a,b), but a major challenge to this 
membranes-early hypothesis is the presence of radically different pathways 
for cell membrane lipid biogenesis in the two major groups of prokaryotes. 
The archaea use isoprene ethers, whereas the eubacteria use fatty acid esters 
(Boucher et al. 2004). It is not immediately obvious how these states could 
evolve from a common ancestor or how one state could make a transition 
to another. However, both difficulties are eliminated under Koonin and Mar-
tin's (2005) hypothesis that cell membranes evolved in independent line-
ages subsequent to the establishment of the DNA world. Under this mem-
branes-late view, the earliest DNA-based genomes were sequestered within 
abiogenic, hydrophobic membranes (which are known to be generated in 
environments such as hydrothermal vents). Although the shared presence 
of several key membrane-associated enzymes across all domains of cellu-
lar life has been viewed as inconsistent with the membranes-late hypothe-
sis (Forterre 2005), Koonin and Martin (2005) make the case that such 
enzymes could have been effective in abiogenic membranes. 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
9 
The Three Domains of Cellular Life 
Although we can only speculate on the earliest steps in the evolution of pre-
cellular life, information on the genealogical relationships of surviving lin-
eages is contained within the genomes of extant taxa. Unlike hard fossils, 
which provide an effectively permanent snapshot of past history, DNA 
acquires nucleotide substitutions and rearrangements over time, which lead 
to gradual divergence of DNA sequences among sister taxa. Quantifica-
tion of such change provides an entree into the relationships of different lin-
eages as, on average, species with higher levels of DNA sequence similar-
ity are more closely related phylogenetically. Based on this logic, numerous 
methods have been developed for estimating phylogenetic trees and dating 
evolutionary events (e.g., Feng et al. 1997; Li 1997; Nei and Kumar 2000; 
Hedges et al. 2001; Felsenstein 2003). 
One of the first applications of such methods led to one of the greatest 
breakthroughs in systematics of the last century: the demonstration of an 
entirely unexpected level of phylogenetic diversity in the microbial world. 
Noting that all cellular organisms use ribosomes to translate messenger 
RNAs (mRNAs), Woese and Fox (1977) reasoned that the entire tree of life 
might be resolved via comparative analysis of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) 
sequences. (Although rRNAs are encoded at the DNA level, at the time it 
was easier to isolate and sequence RNA than DNA). Up to this point, all 
prokaryotes had been viewed as one large, ill-defined, monophyletic group, 
deeply separated from the eukaryotes. However, Woese and Fox found a 
deep phylogenetic furrow within the prokaryotes, implying the existence 
of two species clusters as distinct from each other as they are from eukary-
otes (Figure 1.3). Following Woese et al. (1990), these two prokaryotic groups 
have come to be known as the archaea and the eubacteria. The frequent 
occupation of extreme environments (e.g., hot springs and hypersaline brine 
pools) by archae a has inspired many successful searches for life in envi-
ronments previously thought to be biological deserts (Howland 2000). 
Because the term "prokaryote" is no longer phylogenetically informative, 
it has been argued that its usage should be abandoned entirely (Pace 2006). 
However, as a matter of convenience, the term will be retained in the fol-
lowing text whenever the collective groupings of eubacteria and archaea are 
being referred to. 
The division of prokaryotes into two distantly related domains raises sev-
eral questions about the base of the tree of life. Are the eubacteria, archaea, 
and eukaryotes fully monophyletic, or is one or more clades embedded 
within another? Is the eukaryotic lineage more closely related to the archaea 
or the eubacteria, or does it have affinities with both? Can the possibility 
that eukaryotes are ancestral to prokaryotes be ruled out? The key to answer-
ing these questions is a correctly rooted phylogenetic tree denoting the most 
recent common ancestor from which all species in the tree descend. But, 
herein lies a significant problem: placing a root on a phylogenetic tree 
requires the inclusion of an outgroup (a lineage that is clearly outside the 

10 
CHAPTER 1 
Figure 1.3 The phylogenetic clustering of cellular life, based on se-
quences of the 165 subunit of the rRNA. The branch lengths are pro-
portional to the number of substitutions per site. Although the exact 
relationships of some species within groups have not withstood further 
scrutiny, the distinct nature of the three major domains is well accept-
ed. The presence of mitochondrial and chloroplast sequences in the 
eubacteriallineage provides compelling evidence for the eubacterial 
ancestry of these organelles. The tree is unrooted, as the position of 
the most recent common ancestor of the three major groups is not 
identified. (Modified from Pace et al. 1986.) 
group under consideration, such as a bird for a mammalian phylogeny) in 
the analysis, but that is not an option when the entire tree of life is under 
consideration. 
The only known way to solve this problem is to focus on a pair of ancient 
duplicate genes. If the duplicates are present in each of the three major 
domains of life, then they almost certainly were present in the last common 
ancestor of all life. Each gene can then serve to root the phylogeny of its part-
ner, and the topologies for the two copies are expected to be identical. Fol-
lowing this approach, Gogarten et al. (1989) and Iwabe et al. (1989) used 
anciently duplicated subunits of membrane ATPase to show that archae a 
and eukaryotes consistently group together (as in Figure 1.4). The same 
result was obtained with several other pairs of ancient duplicate genes 

Eukaryotes 
Archaea 
,..--
I 
I 
I 
Eubacteria 
I 
I 
I 
---.. 
Eubacteria 
L. __ 
Archaea 
Eukaryotes 
() 
0 
'"0 
'< 
...... 
() 
0 
'"0 
'< 
N 
THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
11 
Figure 1.4 The reciprocal rooting of a 
phylogenetic tree using a pair of ancient du-
plicate genes. Provided the duplication event 
occurred prior to the divergence of the 
species under consideration (here depicted 
as single members of the eukaryotes, ar-
chaea, and eubacteria) and all lineages retain 
it, two identical topologies are expected for 
each gene, with the connecting branches 
(dashed lines) reflecting the divergence of 
the two copies within the ancestral species. 
(Iwabe et al. 1989; Brown and Doolittle 1995; Baldauf et al. 1996; Lawson et 
al. 1996; Gribaldo and Cammarano 1998), leading to the conclusion that of 
the two branches emanating from the base of the tree of life, one contains 
only eubacteria, while the other contains the common ancestor that later 
diverged into the archaea and eukaryotes. 
Unfortunately, subsequent analyses have raised significant concerns 
about this view. Most notably, the two phylogenies associated with some 
duplicate genes are discordant (Philippe and Forterre 1999). Occasional 
excursions of an archaeal gene into the eubacterial clade, or vice versa, may 
result from horizontal gene transfer (gene acquisition from distantly related 
lineages), which is known to be important in microbes (Ochman et al. 2000; 
Gogarten et al. 2002; Jain et al. 2002), so we should not be overly concerned 
with a few exceptions to a general pattern that associates eukaryotes and 
archaea. However, horizontal transfer is not the only source of ambiguity 
in these kinds of analyses. Reciprocal rooting of phylogenetic trees with 
duplicate genes rests critically on the assumption that no additional gene 
family members existed in the most recent common ancestor of today's 
organisms. If that is not the case, and different gene copies have been lost 
in different lineages, all sorts of illusions can appear (Figure 1.5), and the 
situation is exacerbated if lineage-specific duplications have also occurred. 
The common occurrence of gene duplication in all genomes (see Chapter 8) 
makes this a nontrivial issue. 
Many additional problems can arise in phylogeny reconstruction as a 
simple consequence of sampling error (inadequate numbers of informative 
sites) or of the extraordinary phylogenetic distances among the three major 
domains (long enough to allow for multiple substitutions per site). Unequal 
rates of evolution among phylogenetic groups are particularly sinister in 
this regard, as they encourage branches with exceptionally high rates of evo-

12 
CHAPTER 1 
r---- A 
------- B 
------- A 
n 
B 
0 
'0 
'< 
N 
C 
A 
n 
B 
,g 
'< 
VJ 
C 
~ 
) -
--
..... ---- A 
r---- B 
---
..... -- C 
r---- A 
~ 
..... --- B 
----- C 
n 
o 
'0 
'< 
...... 
"-
N 
n 
o 
'0 
'< 
VJ 
Figure 1.5 Left: Here the ancestral species had three gene copies (the first duplica-
tion led to copy 3 and the ancestor to 1 and 2; and the second duplication created 
copies 1 and 2). Copy 1 was lost in species Band C, and copy 2 was lost in species A 
(dashed lines). Right: Using just the surviving gene copies, a conflicting signal is ob-
tained on the phylogenetic relationships of species A, B, and C, even though the over-
all topology of extant gene relationships is correct. The top cluster incorrectly implies 
a phylogeny in which species Band C are grouped together (as a consequence of an 
incorrect mixture of copy 1 and 2 genes), whereas the bottom cluster correctly 
groups A and B. 
lution to group together due to chance parallel character changes (Felsen-
stein 1988). If, for example, eubacterial genes evolve at higher average rates 
than those of archaea and eukaryotes, the reciprocal rooting technique will 
be biased toward the production of duplicate-gene trees with eubacterial 
outgroups (as in Figure 1.4, where the bases of the two eubacteriallineages 
connect directly to the root of the tree). Ordinarily, one can test whether two 
lineages evolve at different rates by comparing their divergence from a com-
mon outgroup (Figure 1.6), but we cannot rely on this logic here, as it is 
the outgroup that we are trying to discover. 

r"'1----- A 
-tc 
B 
B 
\ /O-
A 
C 
Tree, ring, or web of life? 
THE ORIGIN OF EU KARYOTES 
13 
Figure 1.6 A three-species phylogeny with unequal rates of 
evolution in different lineages (branch lengths are proportional 
to the amount of sequence divergence). Top: When a known 
outgroup species (C) is included, the hypothesis of equal rates of 
evolution in the lineages leading to A and B can be tested by 
comparing the total divergence between A and C with that be-
tween Band (, as both A and B share the path from ( to com-
mon ancestor O. Bottom: The topology here is identical to that 
above, except that the location of the root has been removed. 
With this view, the most similar species pair in terms of sequence 
divergence is Band (, even though the true genealogical rela-
tionship between A and B is closer. 
Conflicting phylogenetic signals from different genes would also be 
expected if any of the three major domains was a hybrid between members 
of the remaining two lineages. Numerous analyses of single-copy genes sug-
gest that this is the case for eukaryotes (Brown and Doolittle 1997; Feng et 
al. 1997; Koonin et al. 1997; Golding and Gupta 1995; Gupta 1998a,b; Rivera 
et al. 1998; Doolittle et al. 2003). Unlike the duplicate-gene studies noted 
above, these surveys rely on the relative similarities of eukaryotic genes to 
those of archae a versus eubacteria as measures of phylogenetic affinity. This 
approach carries the risk that with an unrooted phylogeny, slowly evolving 
lineages can appear to be more similar than they actually are in a genealog-
ical sense (see Figure 1.6). Nevertheless, an emergent pattern from these 
analyses is that eukaryotic genes involved in information processing (e.g., 
transcription and translation) tend to be more similar to those in archae a, 
while those involved in housekeeping functions (e.g., metabolism) tend to 
be more similar to those in eubacteria (Brown and Doolittle 1997; Rivera et 
al. 1998; Leipe et al. 1999; Brown et al. 2001; Horiike et al. 2001; Esser et al. 
2004). In addition, some genes appear to be present in only two of the three 
major domains, and in this context, the pattern of presence and absence 
for information processing versus housekeeping genes is consistent with 
the sequence-based dichotomy (Lake et al. 1999). 
Such observations strongly suggest that the nuclear genome of the stem 
eukaryote arose, at least in part, as an archaeal-eubacterial chimera, as first 
postulated by Sogin (1991) and Zillig (1991). Under this interpretation, the 
base of the tree of life is not a stem but a ring, and further analysis implies 
that the ring was closed by the mixture of eubacterial and archaeallineages 
to form eukaryotes, rather than by the mixture of eukaryotes and one of the 

14 
CHAPTER 1 
Eubacteria 
Eukaryotes 
Archaea 
Figure 1.7 The "ring-of-life" hypothesis for the origin of eukaryotes. Yellow and 
blue lineages denote branches in the phylogenetic trees for eubacteria and archaea, 
respectively. Members of two such lineages fused to form the eukaryotic domain 
(green). (Modified from Rivera and Lake 2004.) 
prokaryotic lineages (Rivera and Lake 2004) (Figure 1.7). Less clear is 
whether the emergence of the eukaryotic lineage was a simple consequence 
of a fusion between single eubacterial and archaeal species or a more grad-
ual result of incremental horizontal transfers from multiple contributors 
(Lester et al. 2006; Doolittle et al. 1998). Doolittle et al. (2003) offer the extreme 
view that the earliest phases of cellular evolution involved such rampant 
horizontal gene transfer, both within and among major domains, that the 
base of the tree of life is more appropriately viewed as a web. 
Eukaryotic gene acquisition from endosymbionts 
There is broad agreement on one source of eubacterial genes in the eukary-
otic domain: almost all eukaryotes harbor one or more minor genomes within 
organelles (mitochondria and chloroplasts) originally derived from endosym-
biotic eubacteria (Delwiche 1999; Lang et al. 1999), as revealed by phyloge-
netic analysis (see Figure 1.3). Although a few arnitochondriate eukaryotes 
exist, they all exhibit vestiges of the prior presence of a mitochondrion (in 
the form of endosymbiont genes transferred to the nucleus; Roger et al. 1998; 
Mai et al. 1999; Dyall and Johnson 2000; McArthur et al. 2001; Tachezy et al. 
2001; Silberman et al. 2002; Dolezal et al. 2005). Thus, we can be confident 
that the stem eukaryote contained a genome-bearing mitochondrion. Phy-
logenetic analysis strongly suggests an a-proteobacterial origin for the mito-
chondrion, which is consistent with the double membrane surrounding this 
organelle. This means that from the very beginning, eukaryotes had a built-
in mechanism for importing eubacterial genes into the nuclear genome. Rad-
ical genomic incompatibilities would be expected to result from full-scale 
contact between two highly divergent genomes, but this would have been 
avoided by the incremental seeding made possible by the sequestration of 
incipient organellar genomes behind membrane barriers. 

THE OR IGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
15 
Several other significant issues regarding the chimeric origin of the 
nuclear genome, including the identity of the host genome(s) and the nature 
of the hybridizing event(s), remain unclear (Gupta 1998a,b; Lake and Rivera 
1994; Margulis et al. 2000; Cavalier-Smith 2002b,c; Hartman and Fedorov 
2002). The simplest explanation for the existing data is that the initial con-
tents of the nuclear genome were derived from an archaeal host cell (Mar-
tin and Russell 2003). Otherwise, one must invoke massive horizontal trans-
fer of archaeal information processing genes in the face of evidence that the 
transfer of such genes among microbes occurs at a much lower rate than 
that of housekeeping genes (Jain et al. 1999). 
How might the ancestral eukaryote have acquired the primordial mito-
chondrion? Under the hypothesis that acquisition involved ingestion, it has 
long been thought that the predatory host cell must have had a cytoskele-
ton (to support phagocytosis), a vesicle transport system (for processing 
prey), and a nuclear membrane (to protect the genome from the shearing 
effects of intracellular movement) (Stanier 1970). The fact that at least one 
eubacterium harbors a eubacterial endosymbiont (von Dohlen et al. 2001) 
raises questions about the necessity of such a morphology, although phy-
logenetic analysis supports it (Richards and Cavalier-Smith 2005). More-
over, although the nuclear membrane is generally viewed as a eukaryotic 
innovation, its presence at the time of mitochondrial colonization cannot be 
ruled out. Some members of the eubacterial Planctomycetes house their 
DNA within a double membrane-enclosed nucleus (Lindsay et al. 2001; 
Fuerst 2005), and although this structure may not be homologous to the 
eukaryotic nuclear membrane (Mans et al. 2004), its mere presence clearly 
indicates that the ancestral eukaryote could have had significant cell struc-
ture prior to the origin of organelles. 
The unity of the eukaryotes 
Although the preceding results strongly support the hypothesis that the 
stem eukaryote was some kind of chimera, even this view has a few detrac-
tors. For example, Poole et al. (1998,1999) have argued that the idea that the 
nuclear genome is derived from a prokaryote is entirely backward, postu-
lating instead that the species at the base of the tree of life was a complex 
eukaryote. The logic underlying this argument derives from the idea that 
all functional RNAs must have emerged in the RNA world. Under this 
assumption, classes of RNA molecules found only in eukaryotes (e.g., those 
involved in the processing of introns, ribosomes, and the telomeres of lin-
ear chromosomes) must be relics of the RNA world that were lost from the 
secondarily derived prokaryotic lineages. The power of this argument would 
be eliminated entirely if the three major domains of life emerged prior to 
the transition to the DNA world, which, as noted above, cannot be ruled 
out. Moreover, the idea that new RNA functions cannot evolve in a DNA 
world is inconsistent with the exploitation of numerous small RNAs in ani-
mal and land plant development (see Chapter 3). 

16 
CHAPTER 1 
In summary, although the phylogenetic reality of the three-domain view 
of life continues to be a contentious issue (Margulis 1996; Gupta 1998a,b; 
Mayr 1998; Woese 1998; Cavalier-Smith 2002b,c), a good deal of the con-
troversy is a consequence of our uncertainty as to whether the unique mor-
phology of the eukaryotic cell arose before or after the unique features of 
the eukaryotic genome. Resolution of the remaining issues will ultimately 
have to come from genealogical information recorded at the DNA level, but 
at this point, no evidence of this kind supports the eukaryotes-first hypoth-
esis. In contrast, the idea that all eukaryotes are contained within a single 
monophyletic lineage is fully consistent with the data (e.g., Ciccarelli et al. 
2006). 
The Stem Eukaryote 
From the shared characters of all extant species, we can be confident as to 
the genomic and cellular characteristics that accumulated in the line of 
descent leading up to the most recent common ancestor of all eukaryotes. 
The assumption here is that highly complex cellular features are unlikely to 
have arisen independently in dozens of deeply branching eukaryotic line-
ages, and therefore must have been present in the ancestor of all eukaryotes. 
Such an exercise tells us that the stem eukaryote was quite sophisticated. 
The most celebrated eukaryotic attributes are physical ones: a membrane-
enclosed nucleus, cellular organelles, and a cytoskeleton. But eukaryotes 
also distinguish themselves in numerous ways at the level of gene structure, 
genome organization, replication, and transcript processing. 
First, as noted above, some genome size expansion must have occurred 
in the stem eukaryote by horizontal transfer from the primordial mito-
chondrion. In principle, such an event could have roughly doubled the gene 
content of the nuclear genome, although many redundant genes were prob-
ably lost at an early stage in the transfer process (see Chapter 8). The stable 
maintenance of a genome-bearing organelle requires a reliable mechanism 
for coordinating the transmission of organellar and nuclear genomes. The 
nuclear genome came to be inherited by mitotic and meiotic mechanisms, 
perhaps even before the arrival of the proto-mitochondrion, and as a by-
product, meiosis also provided a novel means for reassembling genotypes 
by segregation and recombination (Dacks and Roger 1999; Ramesh et al. 
2005). The mitochondrial genome continued to be inherited in the manner 
of its immediate prokaryotic ancestor, with a single circular genome and a 
single origin of replication (see Chapter 11). 
Second, subdivision of a circular ancestral genome with a single origin 
of replication into a nuclear genome containing a series of linear fragments 
raised structural challenges for eukaryotic genome inheritance (see Chap-
ter 5). Chromosome linearity did not necessarily originate in eukaryotes, as 
several eubacteria have single linear chromosomes, including Streptomyces 
coelicolor (Bentley et al. 2002), the plant pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens 
(Goodner et al. 2001; Wood et al. 2001), and the agent of Lyme disease, Bor-

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
17 
relia burgdorferi (Fraser et al. 1997). Nevertheless, chromosome linearity 
imposes requirements for the maintenance of chromosome ends, while chro-
mosome multiplicity imposes the need for a mechanism for transmitting a 
balanced set of chromosomes to each daughter cell. The capping of chro-
mosomes with telomeres and the evolution of the mitotic machinery played 
central roles in solving these problems. 
Third, the processing of transcripts underwent considerable modifica-
tion in the stem eukaryote. Most, if not all, prokaryotes have operons-cas-
settes of often functionally related genes that are cotranscribed-but such 
polycistronic transcription constitutes a significant challenge for a mem-
brane-enclosed genome: a multigene transcript must either be exported from 
the nucleus in its entirety or processed into single-gene fragments that can 
be individually recognized by the ribosome. Although most of today's 
eukaryotes harbor no operons at all, there are a few exceptions in distantly 
related lineages (e.g., trypanosomes and nematodes). In all cases, the same 
trans-splicing mechanism is used to process the transcript prior to export 
from the nucleus: the polycistron is snipped into pieces, and a small leader 
sequence is spliced to the front end of each individual transcript (see Chap-
ter 10). Trans-splicing is also applied to some non-operon-inhabiting genes 
in a few eukaryotic groups (including cnidarians, flatworms, rotifers, and 
hemichordates). The complexity of this process and its wide phylogenetic 
distribution implies that the stem eukaryote likely used trans-splicing to 
process at least some genes. By the same reasoning, the stem eukaryote prob-
ably also initiated transcription well upstream of translation initiation sites, 
as eukaryotic mRNAs typically have 5' untranslated regions (UTRs, usually 
100 bp or more in length; see Chapter 10). In contrast, prokaryotic tran-
scription generally starts just a few base pairs upstream of the translation 
initiation site. In addition, the stem eukaryote processed at least some genes 
by the direct addition of a 5' cap (a modified base) and a 3' poly(A) tail (a 
string of adenines) to mRNAs. Both features are broadly used by eukary-
otes, but generally not by prokaryotes (see Chapter 10). 
Fourth, the stem eukaryote contained intragenic spacers in some protein-
coding genes. Eukaryotic genes are often fragmented into coding exons sep-
arated by noncoding introns. Because introns are transcribed along with their 
surrounding exons, this genes-in-pieces architecture imposes another sig-
nificant challenge for information processing: introns must be neatly excised 
and exons spliced back together (i.e., cis-spliced) prior to the export of mature 
mRNAs to the cytoplasm. This splicing is carried out by a complex molecu-
lar machine unique to eukaryotes, the spliceosome, consisting of five small 
RNA subunits and 150 or more proteins. Not only do all well-studied eukary-
otes harbor the spliceosomaJ machinery, but the fact that numerous distantly 
related lineages utilize two distinct spliceosomes (see Chapter 9) suggests 
that the stem eukaryote also had two such units. In striking contrast, nearly 
all prokaryotic genes consist of a single uninterrupted coding region, and 
in the very few instances in which this is not the case, the introns are self-
splicing (Belfort et al. 1995; Dai and Zimmerly 2002). Eukaryotes generally 

18 
CHAPTER 1 
deposit an exon junction complex just upstream of each exon-exon junc-
tion in mRNAs, and these proteins assist in the flagging of premature ter-
mination codons in aberrant transcripts via the nonsense-mediated decay 
pathway, another unique eukaryotic innovation (see Chapter 9). 
Fifth, although the origin of the nuclear membrane may have greatly 
reduced the incidence of horizontal gene transfer among species, the stem 
eukaryote very likely harbored genetic elements capable of self-mobiliza-
tion and colonization of new genomic locations. The two major classes of 
mobile genetic elements, the cut-and-paste transposons and the copy-and-
paste retrotransposons, are found in nearly all major eukaryotic lineages 
(see Chapters 3 and 7). If not resisted by some physical mechanism or nat-
ural selection, runaway colonization by such parasitic DNAs would even-
tually impose a substantial genetic load on the bost population. Meiotic 
recombination and independent chromosomal segregation helped reduce 
this problem by enabling parents to produce progeny with a reduced genetic 
load, although they also provide a vehicle for tbe transfer of mobile elements 
among bost population members. 
Tbe net implication of all of tbese observations is that an enormous 
remodeling of genome structure and organization occurred in the lineage 
leading to the most recent common ancestor of all eukaryotes. As at least 
vaguely similar traits can be found in isolated prokaryotic lineages (Table 
1.1), some aspects of early eukaryotic design may have arisen via early hor-
izontal transfers, perhaps even from viruses (Bell 2001; Villareal 2005). More-
over, the acquired embellishments of the eukaryotic genome may not have 
been independent events. For example, introns may have been introduced 
into the nuclear genome via the primordial mitocbondrion (see Cbapter 
8), and Martin and Koonin (2006) have argued that this event promoted the 
evolution of the nuclear membrane as a mechanism to ensure the complete 
splicing of precursor mRNAs prior to their exposure to the translation appa-
ratus. A central theme of the following chapters is that many of the peculiar 
features of the eukaryotic genome are w1Hkely to have arisen by natural 
selection, but once establisbed, they would have provided the substrate 
for an evolutionary revolution: the explosion in cell architectural diversity 
that is the hallmark of eukaryotes. 
The Eukaryotic Radiation 
So enormous are the differences in the gross features of the major eukary-
otic groups that traditional approacbes to revealing phylogenetic relation-
ships based on morphology inspire little confidence. Thus, as in investiga-
tions of the prokaryote-eukaryote divide, progress on these issues has 
largely depended on comparative gene sequence analysis. Althougb molec-
ular data have begun to reveal some rigorous phylogenetic groupings, a 
variety of issues (including idiosyncratic changes in rates of evolution, diver-
gent nucleotide compositions across lineages, possibilities of early horizontal 
gene transfer, gene duplications, and inadequate taxon sampling) still con-

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
19 
TABLE 1.1 Some of the features that set eukaryotic genomes apart from 
those of prokaryotes, and their exceptions 
EUKARYOTES 
Presence of a nuclear membrane 
Organelles derived from endosymbionts 
Cytoskeleton and vesicle transport machinery 
Trans-splicing 
Jntrons in protein-coding genes, and a complex 
spliceosomal apparatus for excising them 
Expansion of the untranslated regions 
of transcripts 
Addition of poly(A) tails to all mRNAs 
Translation initiation by scanning for start 
codon 
Messenger RNA surveillance 
Multiple linear chromosomes capped with 
telomeres 
Mitosis and meiosis 
Expansion in gene number 
Expansion of cell size and number 
PROKARYOTES 
Also present in the Planktomycetes 
Also present in the ~-proteobacteria 
Tubulin-related proteins, but not microtubules 
Absent 
Rare self-splicing introns, but almost never 
in coding DNA 
Untranslated regions are generally very 
short 
Rare and nonessential polyadenylation of 
transcripts 
Ribosome binds directly to a Shine-Dalgarno 
sequence 
The nonsense-mediated decay pathway is 
absent 
Single linear chromosomes in a few 
eubacteria 
Absent 
The largest prokaryotic genomes contain 
more genes than the smallest eukaryotic 
genomes 
A few have very large cell sizes (e.g., 
Thiomargarita), and several produce multiple 
cell types 
spire to cloud our view of the basal structure of the eukaryotic phylogeny 
(Graur and Martin 2004; Hedges and Kumar 2004). Two things can be agreed 
on: the primary eukaryotic lineages are deeply branching in time, and the 
major groups on which most biological research is performed (animals, 
fungi, and plants) constitute only a small fraction of eukaryotic phyloge-
netic diversity. In addition, although these three well-studied sets of taxa 
are sometimes viewed as members of a "crown group" of eukaryotes (Knoll 
1992), there is now fairly compelling evidence that they do not constitute a 
monophyletic lineage. 
An attempt to summarize what is known about eukaryotic phylogeny 
is presented in Figure 1.8, with two caveats. First, this description is by no 
means complete, as it contains only the groups that will be encountered 
in the following chapters, and even if all of the major known groups of 
eukaryotes were included, the story would be an abstract at best. In a recent 
search for novel eukaryotes, Dawson and Pace (2002) used degenerate peR 

20 
CHAPTER 1 
Metazoans 
}u~=" 
~ Opisthokonts 
Fungi 
Slime molds 
--I 
Amoebozoans 
Amoebas 
I 
Chlorophytes 
I 
Rhodophytes 
-
Stramenopiles 
-
Ciliates 
Bikonts 
Alveolates 
..... -I 
Apicornplexans 
-i 
Eliglenozoans 
hllglenoids 
I incloplasrids 
-Ir---------- Trichomonads 
.... --------- Diplomonads 
Figure 1.8 An approximate phylogenetic tree for some of the major eukaryotic 
groups, based on the arguments in the text. The branch lengths are not proportional 
to time, although all external branches are expected to be in excess of 700 million 
years in length. Gray lines denote areas of uncertainty. 
primers to isolate rRNA sequences from several anaerobic environments. 
(PCR, the polymerase chain reaction, is a method used to amplify DNA 
from small samples.) As in previous studies with prokaryotes, this survey 
revealed a number of novel sequences far removed from any others ever 
recorded within the eukaryotic tree. Such results indicate that many novel 
lineages of microbial eukaryotes, never before visualized, reside in our 
midst. Contained within these lineages may be the secrets of the origin of 
eukaryotes. 
Second, although the phylogeny presented in Figure 1.8 is largely sup-
ported by analyses based on multiple protein-coding genes (e.g., Burger et 
al. 1999; Baldauf et al. 2000; Forget et al. 2002; Bullerwell et al. 2003; Bhat-
tacharya et al. 2004; Richards and Cavalier-Smith 2005), it is not entirely con-
gruent with earlier phylogenies of rRNA sequences. A broader sample of 
genes should reduce the effects of biases that might be associated with indi-
vidual loci, and a number of recent studies have raised concerns about the 
utility of rRNA sequences in reconstructing phylogenies. As an example of 
such difficulties, consider the phylogenetic affinity of nematodes and arthro-
pods. Based largely on the absence of a true coelom, nematodes were tra-
ditionally thought to reside in a lineage basal to arthropods, chordates, and 
most other metazoan phyla. However, phylogenetic analyses based on 
rRNA sequences place nematodes firmly in a clade with arthropods 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
21 
(Aguinaldo et al. 1997; Van de Peer et al. 2000), leading Aguinaldo et al. 
(1997) to proclaim that all molting animals constitute a single monophyletic 
group (the Ecdysozoa or "molting animals"). This new grouping continues 
to be presented as fact in many major textbooks, even though phylogenies 
based on large numbers of protein-coding genes generally either place nema-
todes in their traditional position or are equivocal on the matter (Mushe-
gian et al. 1998; Wang et al. 1999; Baldauf et al. 2000; Blair et al. 2002; Dacks 
et al. 2002; YI. Wolf et al. 2004; Rokas et al. 2005; Ciccarelli et al. 2006). Given 
such uncertainties regarding the relationships of invertebrate lineages sep-
arated by just 0.7 billion years, difficulties in deciphering phylogenetic rela-
tionships dating to the dawn of eukaryotes should come as no surprise. 
The unikonts and bikonts 
The vast majority of eukaryotes reside in two major clades. The first of these 
groups, the unikonts, is united at the morphological level by the presence 
of cells with single flagella at some stage of the life cycle (Cavalier-Smith 
1998; Steenkamp et al. 2006) and contains the opisthokonts, the now uni-
versally recognized assemblage of animals and fungi (at the top of Figure 
1.8). The microsporidia, a group of animal parasites with reduced genomes, 
once thought to be a lineage deep in the eukaryotic phylogeny, appear to be 
members of the fungal lineage (and hence opisthokonts) (Katinka et al. 2001). 
Filling out this first major clade is the amoebozoan group, which contains 
most of the familiar lobose amoebas as well as the slime molds (Bapteste 
et al. 2002). 
The second major eukaryotic clade is the bikonts (at the middle of Fig-
ure 1.8), all members of which are believed to be ancestrally biflagellate 
(Cavalier-Smith 1998). This large assemblage contains several subgroups, 
one encompassing the green plants (chlorophytes, including the green 
algae) and the red algae (rhodophytes). Another bikont sublineage that will 
be encountered frequently in subsequent chapters is the diverse alveolate 
subclade (united by the presence of alveoli, a system of sacs underlying the 
cell surface), which contains the ciliates (e.g., Paramecium and Tetrahymena), 
the dinoflagellates (a diverse group of aquatic flagellates), and the oblig-
ately parasitic apicomplexans (e.g., the malarial parasite Plasmodium) (Fast 
et al. 2002). A third large sub clade, the stramenopiles, includes the diatoms, 
brown algae, and oomycetes, and still another, the euglenozoans, unites 
the euglenoids (e.g., Euglena) and the parasitic kinetoplastids (e.g., the try-
panosomes Trypanosoma and Leishmania). At least two amoeboid lineages 
(which include the heliozoans, radiolarians, and foraminiferans) also 
appear within the bikonts (Nikolaev et al. 2004). With the dual nuclei of the 
ciliates, the condensed chromosomes of the dinoflagellates, and the mas-
sive RNA editing in trypanosome mitochondria, these latter groups har-
bor some of the most bizarre forms of genomic architecture in all of life, 
highlighting the pronounced diversification that occurred prior to the ori-
gin of multicellularity. 

22 
CHAPTER 1 
Monophyly of the entire bikont group is supported by a unique fusion 
between the genes encoding two key enzymes (dihydrofolate reductase and 
thymidylate synthase), which are encoded separately in all unikonts and 
prokaryotes (Stechmann and Cavalier-Smith 2002). However, two groups 
of protists, the amitochondriate diplomonad (including Giardia) and tri-
chomonad lineages, appear not to contain either gene and so cannot be 
assigned to either of the two major eukaryotic clades on this basis. Most 
molecular phylogenies place these two lineages at the very base of the 
eukaryotic tree, but the long branches associated with both groups may 
cause statistical artifacts, and significant uncertainty remains over their exact 
position (Keeling and Palmer 2000; Philippe et al. 2000; Bapteste and 
Philippe 2002; Dacks et al. 2002; Arisue et al. 2005). 
A eukaryotic big bang? 
The very deep and frequently unresolved nature of the relationships among 
the major eukaryotic groups has inspired a "big bang" hypothesis, under 
which most of the major lineages became established in a period of 10-100 
million years (Philippe et al. 2000; Cavalier-Smith 2002c). On the basis of 
fossil and paleoclimatological evidence, Cavalier-Smith (2002c) argues for 
a major radiation around 800-850 (MYA). However, molecular estimates for 
the divergence times of plants, metazoans, and fungi are twofold deeper, 
falling between 1.6 and 1.7 BYA (Wang et al. 1999; Nei et al. 2001; Yoon et al. 
2004). Given this enormous discrepancy, which type of data is most 
reliable? 
The molecular dates could be inflated if molecular clocks calibrated with 
recent species greatly underestimate the rates of molecular evolution that 
prevailed in the deeper past (Cavalier-Smith 2002c). However, the early rates 
necessary to yield dates in accordance with the fossil record approach lev-
els that defy explanation (Bromham and Hendy 2000). Moreover, molecu-
lar clocks calibrated with recent data are generally more, not less, rapid than 
those based on ancient divergences (Ho and Larson 2006), which should 
downwardly bias divergence time estimates. Thus, there is no compelling 
reason to think that the molecular dates are greatly inflated, although they 
are certainly subject to large inaccuracies. On the other hand, given that the 
initial eukaryotes were probably unicellular, the silence of the early fossil 
record is certainly not unexpected, although recent discoveries of micro-
fossils of algae and bilaterian embryos raise hope that signs of even the ear-
liest phases of eukaryotic evolution will eventually be found in rocks (Xiao 
et al. 1998; Chen et al. 2002). 
Discordant fossil and molecular dates have also been found in analyses 
of the emergence of the major animal lineages. As noted above, nearly all of 
the animal phyla appear in the Cambrian fossil record within a window of 
about 10 million years, focused around 545 MYA (Knoll and Carroll 1999; 
Valentine et al. 1999; Conway Morris 2000). However, although there is sub-
stantial variation among sequence-based dates of the animal radiation, all 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
23 
such estimates greatly predate the animal fossil record. This point was first 
made by Wray et al. (1996), who used multiple protein-coding sequences to 
date the origin of triploblasts (animals with mesoderm) to 1.2 BYA. This study 
generated considerable debate, but although more recent molecular esti-
mates date the emergence of metazoans to 0.6-1.0 BYA, this still substantially 
predates the Cambrian (Ayala et al. 1998; Gu 1998; Lynch 1999; Wang et al. 
1999; Nei et al. 2001; Aris-Brosou and Yang 2003; Peterson et al. 2004). Inter-
estingly, molecular dates of the emergence of the major orders of placental 
mammals, a group with an unusually good fossil record, precede fossil-
based dates by about 30% (Kumar and Hedges 1998), thereby approximat-
ing the situation observed with the major animal phyla. 
In principle, these mixed messages from molecules and fossils might be 
reconciled if the earliest members of radiating lineages tend to be low in 
abundance and I or geographically isolated and hence unlikely to be found 
in the fossil record. Two key events in Earth's history could have induced 
such conditions. Both the emergence of the major eukaryotic groups and the 
subsequent radiation of animals roughly coincide with two of the most 
extreme climatological shifts experienced by Earth's biota. Major episodes 
of global glaciation in which mean surface temperatures approached -50C 
and the oceans were frozen over with up to a kilometer of ice (so-called 
"snowball Earth" effects) occurred -2.4 BYA and -0.7 BYA. For the -35-mil-
lion-year duration of each episode, few habitats with significant sunlight 
would have been coincident with liquid water and oxygen, other than pos-
sible hot springs (Hoffman et al. 1998; Kirschvink et al. 2000; Hoffman and 
Schrag 2002). Such prolonged, intense conditions must have had a major 
effect on Earth's evolutionary history, although details on the matter remain 
controversial (Runnegar 2000; Corsetti et al. 2003). 
Genome Repatterning and 
the Eukaryotic Radiation 
Eukaryotic diversity is reflected not just in the large number of deep line-
ages, but also in the astounding morphological divergence within lineages. 
In total, there are fewer than 10,000 described species of eubacteria and 
archae a (Oren 2004), in contrast to the roughly 1,500,000 named species of 
eukaryotes, about half of which are insects. One might argue that the small 
size and general absence of obvious morphological disparities in prokary-
otes results in their estimated number being biased dramatically downward. 
However, similar arguments can be made for many unicellular eukaryotes, 
and yet there are already about 30,000 described species of protists. Thus, 
although huge uncertainties surround the numbers, one gets the impres-
sion that the eukaryotic domain may be substantially more subdivided than 
either the eubacteria or the archaea. 
Assuming that the major eukaryotic groups arose in a temporally explo-
sive manner, as suggested above, what might have precipitated such an 

24 
CHAPTER 1 
active phase of lineage isolation? Most attempts at explaining evolution-
ary radiations resort to ecological arguments, invoking either a dramatic 
change in the environment or the chance appearance of an evolutionary 
novelty that allows the exploitation of new ecological niches. A prolonged 
snowball Earth certainly qualifies as a dramatic (and global) environmen-
tal shift, and the new "body plan" of the eukaryotic cell in itself may have 
served as a potential launching pad for subsequent diversification. How-
ever, an adaptive radiation requires more than just ecological opportunity. 
In particular, a mechanism is needed to keep new lineages distinct in the 
face of potential gene flow during and after their period of phenotypic 
diversification. 
Opportunities for speciation arise when populations are isolated for long 
periods, as this allows the accumulation of mutational changes in inde-
pendent lineages. Should secondary contact occur and cross-recognition still 
be possible, the viability and fertility of hybrid individuals will then depend 
on the compatibilities of the two parental genomes. Although postrepro-
ductive isolating barriers may arise by many different mechanisms, 
micro chromosomal rearrangements resulting secondarily from gene dupli-
cation are especially worth exploring in the context of the eukaryotic radi-
ation, as the basal eukaryotic lineages may have experienced an unusually 
high level of such activity. 
Consider, for example, the primordial mitochondrion. Because most 
prokaryotic genomes contain a few thousand genes, while most mitochon-
drial genomes contain no more than a few dozen, it is clear that hundreds, 
if not thousands, of organelle-to-nuclear gene transfers occurred early in the 
establishment of mitochondria, although many genes were probably also 
simply lost. The different mitochondrial genome contents across various 
eukaryotes (see Chapter 11) indicate that such events continued to unfold 
stochastically as the major lineages of eukaryotes were developing. Indeed, 
a low level of such gene movement still continues in some organisms (Ric-
chetti et al. 1999; K. L. Adams et al. 1999,2000,2001, 2002; Blanchard and 
Lynch 2000; Millen et al. 2001; Rujan and Martin 2001). 
Intergenomic transfer may have passively promoted the origin of 
genomic incompatibilities at unusually high rates, in part because organel-
lar genomes are generally inherited uniparentally (here we assume through 
the mother). Consider two closely related but geographically separated lin-
eages, both initially with an organelle copy of a key gene. One lineage then 
experiences a duplication of this gene to the nuclear genome, followed by 
its subsequent silencing in the mitochondrion (Figure 1.9). Assuming a 
diploid nucleus and letting small letters denote absentee alleles, the respec-
tive parental genotypes are aa / M and AA / m, and a hybrid cross involving 
a female of the second species would yield Aa / m progeny, half of whose 
gametes would lack a functional gene. Although a single genomic transfer 
of this sort is not sufficient to produce complete reproductive isolation, just 
a few independent transfers would have a powerful effect. Imagine an incip-
ient pair of species experiencing n independent organelle-to-nuclear gene 

Ancestral species 
=8 . 
Gene 
relocation 
___ 0 
Hybridization 
-c=::J- 0 
j 
-c=::J- 0 --- 0 
Gametes 
THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
2~
=8 . 
Figure 1.9 The development of a reproductive incompatibility following the reloca-
tion of an organelle gene. Rectangles and circles denote autosomal and organellar 
gene copies, respectively, with open symbols indicating gene absence. Following a 
geographic isolating event, the incipient species on the left experiences an organellar 
gene transfer to the nucleus. Subsequent hybridization yields presence/absence het-
erozygotes at the autosomal locus, with the status at the organellar locus depending 
on maternal identity. As a consequence of Mendelian segregation of the diploid auto-
somal locus, half of the gametes of the individual in the lower left will lack the gene 
entirely. 
transfers in each lineage. Assuming independent assortment of the nuclear 
genes during meiosis, the fraction of FI gametes that are entirely lacking in 
a functional gene at one or more loci would be 1- 0.5n, which is 0.969 for 
n =5. 
Thus, when one considers the hundreds of organelle-to-nuclear gene 
transfers that may have occurred soon after the colonization of the primor-
dial mitochondrion (see Chapter 11), it is plausible that such gene traffic 
played a significant role in the passive development of isolating barriers 
among the earliest eukaryotes. Moreover, because most transfer events 
involving organellar DNAs generally encompass only a gene or two at a 
time (Blanchard and Lynch 2000), following the first isolation events of this 
kind, substantial substrate would still exist for further nested events. Finally, 
as will be discussed in Chapter 8, these kinds of gene relocations are by no 

26 
CHAPTER 1 
means restricted to organelle-to-nuclear gene transfers, but are expected 
under any type of gene duplication event, induding those involving only 
nuclear genes (Lynch and Force 2002a). A key point here is that these 
processes yield reproductive isolating barriers only in species with multi-
ple chromosomes and sexual reproduction, as both are necessary for the 
independent segregation of unlinked loci. Thus, although the influence of 
an altered adaptive landscape on the dramatic radiation of the primary 
eukaryotic lineages is not precluded, the simple structural consequences 
of two of the defining cytological attributes of the stem eukaryote, a genome-
bearing mitochondrion and meiotic recombination, may have played a cen-
tral role in the passive emergence of reproductive isolation. 
A Synopsis of the First 2 Billion Years 
of Biology 
Given the magnitude of ground that has been covered in the previous pages, 
a brief summary is in order. Although several uncertainties remain, the most 
parsimonious explanation for the earliest steps in evolution involves four 
major stages: 
1. At the dawn of life's history, information storage and all forms of catal-
ysis most likely relied entirely on RNA. In this RNA world, replication 
would have been slow and highly error prone. 
2. Soon thereafter, the basic translation machinery for protein synthesis 
emerged. In this RNA-protein world, RNA continued to be the substrate 
for information storage, but proteins began to supplement the toolbox of 
catalytic activities, expanding the range of metabolic diversity. With an 
increased ability to acquire energy and the refinement of catalytic capac-
ity, both the rate and accuracy of genome replication would have been 
enhanced. 
3. Following the origin of the proteins necessary for producing and assem-
bling DNA precursors, RNA was probably rapidly replaced by DNA as 
a more reliable mechanism for information storage, enabling still further 
genomic expansion. 
4. Biogenic pathways for the construction of cell membranes then appeared, 
giving rise to the era of cellular life, and further expanding the potential 
for morphological and metabolic diversification. The origin of cell mem-
branes would have marked a profound turning point in evolution, as the 
sequestration of genomic ally encoded products would have greatly 
increased the efficiency of natural selection. 
The emergence of eukaryotes involved at least one substantial admixture 
event between the two major prokaryotic lineages: the addition of the eubac-
terially derived mitochondrion to an archaeal host, which may have pro-
vided the seeds for horizontal gene transfer to the primordial nuclear 

THE ORIGIN OF EUKARYOTES 
27 
genome over a period of hundreds of millions of years. Although many 
eukaryotic lineages may have coexisted during this early period, only one 
eventually gave rise to today's eukaryotes-the stem eukaryote. This key-
stone species was extraordinarily unique in terms of its cellular architecture 
and DNA transaction mechanisms, having acquired a genome littered with 
introns and mobile elements and an array of new methods for processing 
transcripts, all of which are difficult to explain with adaptive arguments. 
Although the nuclear membrane, mitosis, and meiosis may have been rel-
atively late innovations in the stem eukaryote, they were probably well 
established prior to the divergence of the major eukaryotic lineages. It 
remains unclear whether any of the physical modifications associated with 
these latter features owe their origins to adaptive processes. However, once 
established, these new mechanisms of chromosome management and assort-
ment may have facilitated the rapid diversification of the eukaryotes. 

Genome Size 
and Organismal 
Complexity 
When the key insights of Crick, Franklin, Watson, and Wilkins led 
to the elucidation of the structure of DNA, half a century ago, little was 
known about the molecular aspects of genome structure. We now know that 
chromosomes, the vehicles of DNA, are enormously versatile in terms of 
content and sequence malleability. Recurrent mutation generally ensures 
that most homologous chromosomes within a species are unique in multi-
ple ways, and this variation provides the fuel for evolutionary divergence 
among species, as revealed in striking detail by whole-genome comparisons. 
For example, the 250 or so fully sequenced prokaryotic genomes contain 
between 350 and 8000 genes packed into 0.5-9.0 megabases (Mb), while all 
well-characterized genomes of animals and land plants contain more than 
13,000 genes and are at least 100 Mb in size. As will be detailed in Chapter 
3, most of the increase in genome size in multicellular eukaryotes is a con-
sequence of the expansion of noncoding forms of DNA, including introns 
and mobile elements. The phylogenetic positions of animals and land plants 
suggest the independent emergence of this complex genomic syndrome in 
both lineages (Meyerowitz 2002), but what is cause and what is effect? 
Across the entire domain of life, there is a moderate positive scaling 
between organism size and number of cell types (Bell and Mooers 1997; Bon-
ner 2004). However, although specific genes playa central role in cellular 
differentiation, there is little evidence that a substantial increase in genome 
size or gene number is essential for the evolution of multicellularity. For 
example, numerous cyanobacteria (Meeks et al. 2002), myxobacteria (Gold-
man et al. 2006), streptomycetes (Bentley et al. 2002), methanogens (Gala-
gan et al. 2002), and other prokaryotic lineages are capable of producing 
multiple cell types, despite having moderate numbers of genes (4000-8000) 
and relatively little noncoding DNA. A number of eukaryotes with complex 

30 
CHAPTER 2 
cell structures and multiple cell types harbor 10,000 or fewer genes, whereas 
the genomes of some unicellular eukaryotes (e.g., Paramecium) harbor more 
genes than those of vertebrates. 
This weak relationship between gene number and organismal complex-
ity suggests that the increased structural innovation and developmental flex-
ibility of the eukaryotic cell must largely be a consequence of the unique 
ways in which genes are deployed. But were new ways of expressing genes 
(such as complex spatial and temporal patterns of transcription regulation 
and alternative splicing) promoted as a direct response to selection for new 
cell types in large organisms? Or did the evolution of large size and/ or mul-
ticellularity induce side effects that provoked nonadaptive changes in 
genomic architecture, which then secondarily paved the way for the adap-
tive origin of new cell functions? In the following chapters, the case will be 
made that the roots of many aspects of eukaryotic genomic complexity are 
likely to reside in nonadaptive processes (in particular, mutation pressure 
and random genetic drift) that are particularly potent in eukaryotes, espe-
cially in multicellular lineages. This chapter reviews some of the historical 
background leading up to this argument. 
First, a broad phylogenetic survey will demonstrate the continuity of scal-
ing of genome content with genome size across the transitions from prokary-
otes to unicellular eukaryotes to multicellular species. This observation leads 
to the conclusion that aspects of cell structure and metabolism are not the 
central determinants of genomic architecture. Second, previous hypotheses 
for the evolution of genome size will be evaluated in this context and their 
limitations outlined. Although it is commonly argued that microbial 
genomes are kept streamlined by efficient selection against the negative 
metabolic costs of replicating excess DNA, there appear to be no data in sup-
port of this contention. Nor is there compelling evidence that an intrinsic 
bias toward deletion mutations is sufficient to prevent runaway genome 
growth. Finally, a brief verbal description of the mutational hazards of excess 
DNA will be given, setting the theme for many of the topics to be consid-
ered in subsequent chapters. 
Genome Size and Complexity 
Many aspects of genomic architecture exhibit continuous transitions within 
and across all cellular domains of life, extending even to DNA viruses (Fig-
ure 2.1). In viruses and prokaryotes, the amount of coding DNA scales nearly 
linearly with total genome size, occupying 80%-95% of the latter, and a sim-
ilar allocation is found in the smallest eukaryotic genomes. However, the 
expansion of coding DNA progressively slows in genomes with total sizes 
in excess of 10 Mb, eventually leveling off at about 100 Mb in vertebrates 
and land plants, in which 90%-98% of the genome is allocated to noncod-
ing DNA. As a consequence, over the lO,OOO-fold range in total genome sizes 
for well-studied cellular species, there is only a 100-fold range in the amount 
of DNA devoted to protein coding. 

GENOME SIZE AND ORGANISMAL COMPLEXITY 
31 
Coding DNA 
lcP 
Intronic DNA 
lcP 
Intergenic DNA 
lcP 
 Land plant nuclear genome 
 Animal nuclear genome 
 Unicellular eukaryote nuclear genome 
 Prokaryote 
 Eukaryotic DNA virus 
 Bacteriophage 
10-2 
Genome size (Mb) 
Figure 2.1 The contributions of protein-coding, intronic, and intergenic DNA to 
total genome size in various organismal groups. The diagonal lines define points of 
equal proportional contribution to total genome size. The intronic DNA depicted here 
does not include introns in noncoding exons (UTRs). Intergenic DNA comprises all of 
the genome exclusive of spans between translation initiation and termination points 
for protein-coding genes. Points residing on the x axis denote situations in which the 
component contribution is zero. (Modified from Lynch 2006b.) 
The two most easily identified classes of noncoding DNA, introns and 
mobile elements, scale similarly with genome size. Although spliceosomal 
introns are confined to eukaryotes, prokaryotes sometimes harbor small 
numbers of self-splicing introns (see Chapter 9), but never at levels exceed-
ing 0.2% of the entire genome (see Figure 2.1). The smallest eukaryotic 
genomes also contain very little intronic DNA, but above total genome sizes 

32 
CHAPTER 2 
of 10-20 Mb, there is an abrupt and progressive increase in investment in 
introns. Genomes that are about 100 Mb in size (all of which are eukaryotes) 
have nearly equal amounts of DNA allocated to introns and exons, whereas 
about 95% of the total length of protein-coding genes is intronic in the large 
(>2500 Mb) mammalian genomes. A qualitatively similar transition is seen 
with the fraction of the genome occupied by intergenic DNA: typically less 
than 20% for genomes smaller than 1 Mb and progressively increasing to 
more than 80% for genomes beyond 10 Mb. Residing within inter genic 
regions are sequences involved in transcription, chromatin packaging, and 
replication initiation (see Chapters 3, 5, and 10), but in species with large 
genomes, the majority of intergenic DNA consists of active mobile elements 
(transposons and retrotransposons) and other debris associated with their 
past activities. 
Two general conclusions emerge from the enormous phylogenetic 
breadth of the patterns in Figure 2.1. First, the common assertion that there 
is essentially no correlation between genome size and organismal com-
plexity (Thomas 1971; Cavalier-Smith 1978; Gregory 2005a), appears to 
derive from a focus on extreme outliers rather than on measures of cen-
tral tendency. Although there is considerable variation in genomic features 
among species with similar levels of cellular / organismal complexity, there 
is a clear ranking from viruses to prokaryotes to unicellular eukaryotes to 
multicellular eukaryotes in terms of genome size, gene number, mobile 
element number, intron number and size, size of intergenic spacer DNA, 
and complexity of regulatory regions (Lynch and Conery 2003b; Lynch 
2006a). Second, despite this gradient, there are no abrupt discontinuities 
in the scaling of genome content with genome size across radically dif-
ferent groups of organisms. This smooth transition in patterns of genome 
content scaling across all forms of life provide compelling evidence that 
the primary forces influencing the evolution of genomic architecture are 
unlikely to be direct consequences of organismal differences in cell struc-
tures or physiologies. 
The Selfish-DNA and Bulk-DNA Hypotheses 
The early idea that genome sizes vary wildly among organisms with simi-
lar levels of cellular and developmental complexity became known as the 
C -value paradox (where the C value denotes the total amount of DNA in a 
haploid genome). Depending on one's point of view, the puzzle was either 
solved or deepened as it became clear that a substantial fraction of many 
eukaryotic genomes consists of noncoding and putatively nonfunctional 
DNA. Two general classes of hypotheses emerged to explain this odd set of 
observations. 
On the one hand, Doolittle and Sapienza (1980) and Orgel and Crick 
(1980) promoted the idea that a good deal of noncoding DNA consists of 
"selfish" elements capable of proliferating until the cost to host fitness 
becomes so prohibitive that natural selection prevents their further spread. 

GENOME SIZE AND ORGANISMAL COMPLEXITY 
33 
This selfish-DNA hypothesis, under which genome size expansion is a sim-
ple pathological response to internal genomic upheaval, draws support from 
the ubiquity of mobile elements across the eukaryotic domain (see Chap-
ter 7). However, other major contributors to genome size, such as spliceo-
somal introns, small repetitive DNAs, and random insertions, are not self-
replicable and hence not subject to selection for proliferative ability within 
host genomes. Thus, a central challenge for the selfish-DNA hypothesis is 
the need to explain why all types of excess D A mutually expand (or con-
tract) in some genomes and not in others. 
In striking contrast to the view that much of noncoding DNA is expend-
able junk, Commoner (1964), Bennett (1972), and Cavalier-Smith (1978) had 
argued earlier that the total content of the noncoding DNA within a genome 
(independent of its information content) is a direct product of natural selec-
tion. This bulk-DNA hypothesis postulates that genome size has a direct 
effect on nuclear volume, cell size, and cell division rate, all of which in tum 
influence life history features such as developmental rate and size at matu-
rity. The supporters of this hypothesis have pointed out an impressive num-
ber of correlations between genome size and cell properties in a diversity of 
phylogenetic groups (Figure 2.2 contains two examples), although the evo-
lutionary mechanisms responsible for such statistical relationships are 
unclear. Cavalier-Smith (1978) suggested that the evolution of large cell size 
imposes secondary selection on nuclear genome size as a physical mecha-
nism for modulating the area of the nuclear envelope and hence regulat-
(A) 
(B) 
106 
 
105 
 
104 
~ 10 
<Jl 
.... 
~ 
::l 
'" 
103 
0 
6 
6 
(l) 
OJ 
5 
~ 102 
] 
;J 
'0 
be 
> 
:3 
:::l 101 
 
(l) 
..0 
U 
::l 
 
0 
0 
 . ,,: ..  Prokaryotes 
10-1 
  
 Unicellular eukaryotes 
 
 Root cells of land plants 
0.5 
10-2  
10 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 106 
10 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
Haploid genome size (Mb) 
Figure 2 .2 Correlations of two cell biological features, (A) cell volume and (B) dou-
bling time, with genome size. Doubling times are measured for cells at 23e. 
(Modified from Shuter et al. 1983.) 

34 
CHAPTER 2 
ing the flow of transcripts to the cytoplasm. One concern with this view is 
that many additional mechanisms for achieving elevated transcript num-
bers exist (e.g., increases in nuclear membrane porosity, gene copy number, 
ribosome number, and transcript longevity), all of which appear to be less 
risky than the expansion of bulk DNA. Indeed, the most strikmg challenge 
for any adaptive hypothesis for the expansion of excess DNA is the nature 
of the filler material itself, predominantly mobile elements, which are known 
to impose a heavy mutational burden in eukaryotes (see Chapter 7). Remark-
ably, there is also a strong positive correlation between cell size and genome 
size in prokaryotes (see Figure 2.2), which cannot be a consequence of either 
cytoskeletal effects (given the absence of nuclear membranes) or of non-
coding DNA expansion (given its near constant proportion; see Figure 2.1). 
Because evolution is a population-level process, any evolutionary expla-
nation for a pattern of variation must be consistent with basic population 
genetic mechanisms (e.g., mutation, random genetic drift, recombination, 
and natural selection), but the failure of prior studies to directly confront 
these issues in a quantitative manner has been a major impediment to sort-
ing out cause and effect in genome size evolution. For example, the logic 
underlying the bulk-DNA hypothesis will remain unconvincing until it is 
demonstrated that: (1) heritable within-population variation in genome size 
significantly covaries with cellular features that are mechanistically associ-
ated with individual fitness, and (2) mobile element proliferation is an easy 
means of achieving such variation with minimal negative side effects. The 
absence of population-level thinking from much of the ongoing debate about 
genome size evolution has fostered the impression that unknown evolu-
tionary mechanisms remain to be discovered, leading some to invoke unde-
fined "macroevolutionary" phenomena (Gregory 200Sc). However, the log-
ical problems with arguments that abandon established microevolutionary 
principles are well known (e.g., Charlesworth et al. 1980), and a central goal 
of this book is to demonstrate that there are very few, if any, aspects of 
genomic evolution that cannot be explained with well-accepted population 
genetic mechanisms. 
The Metabolic Cost of DNA 
Microbial species pose a special challenge for both the bulk-DNA and self-
ish-DNA hypotheses. With its adherence to adaptive arguments, the bulk-
DNA hypothesis invokes a premium on energetic efficiency as an explana-
tion for the diminutive genomes of prokaryotes (Cavalier-Smith 2005), 
whereas adherents to the selfish-DNA hypothesis have argued that small 
genomes are products of strong selection for high replication rates (Doolit-
tle and Sapienza 1980; Orgel and Crick 1980; Pagel and Johnstone 1992). 
With both competing hypotheses conceptually aligned on at least this one 
matter, the metabolic expense of DNA is widely cited as the explanation for 
the streamlining of microbial genomes (e.g., Rogozin et al. 2002; Giovannoni 
et al. 2005; Ranea et al. 2005). 

GENOME SIZE AND ORGANISM AL COMPLEXITY 
35 
Is the cost of maintaining and replicating an additional DNA segment 
of a few base pairs (the typical size of an intergenic insertion/ deletion; see 
below) significant enough to be perceived by natural selection? Because the 
large population sizes of unicellular species magnify the efficiency of nat-
ural selection (see Chapter 4), this possibility cannot be ruled out entirely. 
However, there is no direct evidence that cell replication is ever limited by 
DNA metabolism, and there are several reasons to think otherwise. First, 
within and among prokaryotic species, there is no correlation between cell 
division rate and genome size (Bergthorsson and Ochman 1998; Mira et al. 
2001). Second, during rapid growth phases, prokaryotic chromosomes are 
often present in a nested series of replication stages (Casjens 1998), with 
some species harboring tens to hundreds of chromosomal copies at various 
stages of the life cycle (e.g., Maldonado et al. 1994; Komaki and Ishikawa 
2000). Third, in E. coli and other eubacteria, DNA replication forks progress 
10-20 times faster than mRNA elongation rates (Bremer and Dennis 1996; 
Cox 2004; French 1992). Fourth, D A constitutes 2%-5% of the total dry 
weight of a typical prokaryotic cell (Cox 2003, 2004), and the estimated cost 
of genomic replication relative to a cell's entire energy budget is even smaller 
(Ingraham et al. 1983). Similar conclusions emerge for eukaryotic cells (Rolfe 
and Brown 1997). 
Directional Mutation Pressures 
on Genome Size 
Genome size evolution ultimately depends on two factors: the relative rates 
of mutational production of insertions and deletions, and the ability of nat-
ural selection to promote or eliminate such changes. Thus, if the energetic 
consequences of noncoding DNA are not great enough to be perceived by 
natural selection, species with small genomes must be subject to unusual 
deletional mutation pressures, and/ or excess DNA must be disadvanta-
geous in some other way. 
Several types of mutational activity encourage genome size expansion. 
For example, mobile elements are capable of self-replicating and inserting 
copies elsewhere in the genome at high rates (in excess of 10-5 per element 
per generation; see Chapter 7), and their activities also result in the inser-
tion of pseudogenes (dead-on-arrival copies of otherwise normally func-
tioning genes) (see Chapter 3). In addition, segmental duplications involv-
ing stretches of hundreds to thousands of kilobases (kb) are universal among 
eukaryotes (see Chapter 8), and strand slippage during replication can also 
lead to small-scale insertions (Chen et al. 2005). 
Double-strand breaks of chromosomes are another common source of 
insertions and deletions. Such breaks occur spontaneously in nomeplicat-
ing cells and are also produced when a replication fork encounters a single-
strand nick, severing the entire chromosome. In mammals, 5%-10% of 
somatic cells acquire at least one double-strand break per cell division 

36 
CHAPTER 2 
(A) 
(1) 
(2) ~ 
=:::x 
OX 
(3) ~ U 
==><==-UX~=== 
-------------~ 
(4) 
(B) 
--
/ 
j 
---
--+---
----
---- - ---
---- -
-+--
---+- -
----
==+-~ 
~ 
Exogenous insertion 
Tandem insertion Local deletion 
Figure 2.3 Some ways in which insertions and deletions can be created at double-
strand breaks. (A) Repair by homologous recombination can result in a local conversion 
of one chromosome type to the other. (1) A break appears in one chromatid adjacent 
to an insertion (red) that is absent from the homologous chromosome. (2) The free 
ends of the lower chromosome invade the upper chromosome to initiate formation of 
a recombination junction. Complementary DNA from the two chromatids aligns, leav-
ing loops in each recombination intermediate. (3) This mismatch is resolved by cutting 
the non-looped strands. (4) Synthesis of the missing complementary DNA results in the 
conversion of the top chromatid to the insertion-bearing form. (If the loop-containing 
strands were cut instead, the invading strands could be converted to the insertion-free 
form). (B) Repair by nonhomologous end joining proceeds in the absence of a homol-
ogous chromosome. Such repair requires small regions of microhomology (illustrated 
in red), which are relatively free to align at multiple sites. Black dots serve as points of 
reference, and the starting point is a staggered cut. On the left and in the center, the 
selected regions of homology on the two strands (red) determine whether there is a 
local duplication or deletion. Occasionally, double-strand breaks capture foreign DNA 
(green lines), as shown on the far right. 
(Lieber et al. 2003), and germ line cells that have experienced multiple divi-
sions in the progression toward gamete production can be expected to incur 
even more. To maintain cell lineage viability, such breaks must be stitched 
back together by one of two mechanisms. 
First, if a homologue (in a diploid species) or a sister chromosome (in the 
early stages of mitosis or meiosis) is available as a template, homologous 
recombination can restore the original state of the broken chromosome, pro-
vided the regions involved have near complete sequence identity. However, 
if in the region of the break, one of the chromosomes happens to have an 
insertion that is absent from the partner chromosome, recombination can 
alter the state of one of the chromosomes to that of the other by the process 

GENOME SIZE AND ORGANISMAL COM PLEXITY 
37 
of gene conversion (Figure 2.3A). Some evidence suggests that insertions 
are retained more often than lost (Lamb 1985), although the degree to which 
this is the case depends on the size and structure of the insertion (Bill et al. 
2001). Such biased gene conversion, which is purely a physical process, can 
encourage the spread of insertions throughout a population in a manner 
that is indistinguishable from positive selection (Nagylaki 1983; Walsh 1983). 
Second, in nondividing cells, where templates are less likely to be avail-
able, the error-prone process of nonhomologous end joining, which directly 
ligates the two edges of a break back together, must be relied on (Moore and 
Haber 1996a; Heidemeich et al. 2003; Daley et al. 2005; Puchta 2005). Non-
homologous end joining is initiated by complementary base pairing in 
regions of microhomology (at least 2-3 bp), and the way in which this is 
done can lead to small insertions or deletions (Figure 2.3B). Double-strand 
break repairs can also be accompanied by the capture of exogenous DNA 
derived from the mitochondrial genome, retrotransposons, or rnicrosatel-
lites (small repetitive DNAs, such as dinucleotide repeats) (Moore and Haber 
1996b; Teng et al. 1996; Ricchetti et al. 1999; Yu and Gabriel 1999; Lin and 
Waldman 2001b; Decottignies 2005). 
With large-scale insertion events operating on a recurrent basis, the pre-
vention of runaway genome expansion requires direct selection to prevent 
the fixation of insertions at the population level and! or mutational mech-
anisms for their subsequent deletion. To evaluate whether deletion muta-
tions alone are capable of putting a cap on genome size without any assis-
tance from selection, Petrov and colleagues (Petrov 2001, 2002a,b; Petrov 
et al. 1996,2000) have performed comparative surveys of the numbers and 
sizes of insertions and deletions in various types of pseudogenes in insects. 
Their studies and others (Table 2.1) suggest that the rate of small-scale 
nucleotide losses exceeds that of gains, yielding a net erosion in the length 
of large inserts of nonfunctional DNA over time. Taken at face value, these 
data imply a half-life of nonfunctional DNA in the nematode Caenorhabdi-
tis and the fruit fly Drosophila on the order of the time required for neutral 
DNA to acquire 0.15-0.25 substitutions per site (10 million years or so), 
whereas that for orthopterans (grasshoppers and crickets), mammals, and 
birds (all of whose genomes are much larger) is 15-50 times longer (see Table 
2.1). Mira et al. (2001) also document substantially higher rates of small-scale 
nucleotide losses than gains from pseudo genes in a variety of prokaryotes. 
However, a dramatically different picture emerges in rice (Oryza), where the 
rate of nucleotide gain by pseudogenes exceeds that of loss by a factor of 16 
(Noutsos et al. 2005). 
These kinds of observations have encouraged the view that interspecific 
variation in the mutational tendency to delete excess DNA is a primary 
determinant of genome size, with species with the highest rates of dele-
tion having the smallest genome sizes (Petrov et al. 2000; Mira et al. 2001; 
Ochman and Davalos 2006). However, a number of uncertainties remain. 
Why, for example, should insertion! deletion rates differ so dramatically 
among animals, given the high degree of conservation of their DNA repair 

38 
CHAPTER 2 
TABLE 2.1 Rates and average sizes of deletions and insertions derived from 
observations of nonfunctional DNA in various animals 
RATE 
SIZE (BP) 
NET 
HALF-
DELETION INSERTION 
DELETION INSERTION 
CHANGE 
LIFE 
Caenorhabditis 
0.034 
0.019 
166 
151 
-2.8 
0.25 
Drosophila 
0.115 
0.028 
42 
12 
-4.5 
0.15 
Laupala 
0.070 
0.020 
7 
7 
0.0 
Podisma 
0.060 
0.030 
2 
1 
-D.1 
6.93 
Birds 
0.043 
0.007 
12 
4 
-D.3 
2.31 
Mammals 
0.033 
0.017 
5 
6 
-0.1 
6.93 
Sources: C. elegans, Witherspoon and Robertson 2003; Drosophila, average from Blumenstiel et al. 2002 and 
Petrov 2002b; Laupala (Hawaiian cricket) and Podisma (grasshopper), Petrov 2002b; birds (pigeons and doves), 
Johnson 2004; mammals (mouse, rat, and human), average from Ophir and Graur 1997 and Zhang and 
Gerstein 2003. 
Note: All rates are given relative to the time required for the accumulation of one nucleotide substitution per 
silent site. Net change is defined to be the dilierence between (insertion rate x size) and (deletion rate x size), 
so, for example, -2.8 for C. elegans implies that by the time an average surviving nucleotide site has acquired a 
single substitution, an average net loss of 2.8 nucJeotides per site is expected to occur. Half-life is the number 
of substitutions per silent site that are expected to accrue by the time a nonfunctional stretch of DNA experi-
ences a 50% erosion in length, assuming exponential decay. 
macltinery (Eisen and Hanawalt 1999)? And if species with small genomes 
have evolved increased deletion rates, as Lawrence et al. (2001) have sug-
gested as an adaptive mechanism for the streamlining of prokaryotic 
genomes, how is the increased burden on coding DNA avoided? 
Central to these issues is the matter of whether the long-term behavior 
of pseudogenes provides an unbiased view of the de novo mutation spec-
trum or whether deletions and insertions in pseudogenes are subject to selec-
tion (Charlesworth 1996a). This is a concern because insertion-associated 
disadvantages and/ or deletion-associated benefits will tilt the observed 
spectrum of effects toward deletions relative to the mutational distribution, 
in which case the negative association between observed net deletion rates 
and genome size could simply reflect interspecific variation in the efficiency 
of selection rather than intrinsic differences in mutational properties. As 
noted above, it is unclear whether the energetic advantages of small dele-
tions are ever substantial enough to cause perceptible fitness differences, 
but as will be discussed in the following section, excess DNA can impose 
additional disadvantages. 
Evidence that deletions may not outnumber insertions at the mutational 
level derives from observed excesses of insertions over deletions in several 
laboratory experiments. In Drosophila melanogaster, spontaneous insertions 
greater than 4 kb in length are fourfold more abundant than deletions (Yang 

GENOME SIZE AND ORGANISMAL COMPLEXITY 
39 
et al. 2001), and reporter construct experiments in the yeast Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae suggest a similar insertion/ deletion disparity (Kunz et al. 1998; 
Ohnishi et al. 2004; Hawk et al. 2005). However, although these direct assays 
imply an innate mutational tendency for genome size expansion, above and 
beyond that caused by mobile element activity and segmental duplications, 
such a bias may not be universal. For example, estimates of the human muta-
tional spectrum derived from de novo mutations for genetic disorders sug-
gest that micro deletions are 2.5 times more common than microinsertions, 
with both exhibiting very similar size distributions (Kondrashov 2003; Ball 
et al. 2005). Studies involving reporter constructs in E. coli also reveal a dele-
tion bias (Schaaper and Dunn 1991; Sargentini and Smith 1994). 
In principle, these indirect assays could be biased if deletions and inser-
tions are not equally likely to produce a detectable phenotype, and the only 
truly unambiguous way to ascertain the insertion/ deletion spectrum is to 
randomly sequence genomic regions after a long period of complete relax-
ation of selection. Such a study has been performed with the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans by using long-term mutation accumulation lines taken 
through single-individual bottlenecks each generation to eliminate the effec-
tiveness of natural selection against all mutations except those causing com-
plete lethality or sterility (Denver et al. 2004). This study revealed a 15:4 inser-
tion/ deletion ratio (both types of mutations were of similar size, and none 
were associated with mobile element activity), a dramatically different pat-
tern from the 1:1 ratio derived from phylogenetic analysis (see Table 2.1). 
Thus, despite the clear need for more data of the type procured for C. ele-
gans, these observations, along with the enormous half-life estimates in Table 
2.1, raise significant questions as to whether mutational deletion processes 
are universally sufficient to prevent the runaway growth of genome size. If 
they are not, then some form of natural selection is necessary for genome 
size stabilization, and lineages with a reduced ability to selectively promote 
deletions and/ or purge insertions can be expected to experience nonadap-
tive expansions in genome size. Bennetzen and Kellogg (1997) refer to 
species in this kind of evolutionary situation as having acquired a "one-way 
ticket to genome obesity." However, arguments presented in the following 
chapters suggest that genomic expansion and contraction is really a two-
way street, with the prevailing direction of traffic depending on the current 
population genetic conditions. A key question that remains to be resolved 
is whether the large genomes of multicellular eukaryotes are still in active 
phases of expansion. 
Population Size and the Mutational Hazard 
of Excess DNA 
Although DNA without a function is often assumed to be neutral, this view 
ignores a fundamental genetic observation: that the operation of every gene 
depends on its local physical environment. Thus, even if inert spacer DNA 

40 
CHAPTER 2 
is immune to selection against loss-of-function mutations-i.e., is totally 
expendable-it need not be immune to harmful gain-of-function mutations. 
Many lines of evidence support this view. First, noncoding regions are 
known to be depauperate in short motifs with the potential for generating 
inappropriate transcription factor binding (Hahn et al. 2003), posttran-
scriptional silencing (Farh et al. 2005), and translation initiation (Rogozin et 
al. 2001; Lynch et al. 2005). Selection against mutations causing inappro-
priate gene expression is the likely cause of the maintenance of such 
sequences below levels expected by chance. A dramatic example of this point 
is a human blood disorder in which a single nucleotide substitution cre-
ates a novel regulatory element in an otherwise inert segment of intergenic 
DNA (De Gobbi et al. 2006). Second, insertions of mobile elements into cod-
ing exons will virtually always inactivate a gene, whereas those in non-
coding regions can influence the regulation of adjacent genes (Sorek et al. 
2002; Lev-Maor et al. 2003; Kreahling and Graveley 2004; Shankar et al. 2004). 
Third, introns are a mutational burden for their host genes, as the splicing 
of each intron requires a specific set of local sequences for proper spliceo-
some recognition (Lynch 2002b). Fourth, the fact that the majority of eukary-
otic genomic DNA may be transcribed (Cawley et al. 2004; Kampa et al. 
2004), at least at low levels, raises the question as to whether any segment 
of nonfunctional DNA is truly neutral. 
All of these issues will be explored in further detail in the following chap-
ters. The central point to be understood here is that a primary cost of excess 
DNA is its mutational liability (Lynch 2002b, 2006a; Lynch and Conery 
2003b). Each embellishment of the structure of a gene or of its surrounding 
area increases the risk that the gene will be rendered defective by subse-
quent mutational processes. 
This matter becomes important in the context of comparative genomics 
because the mutational burden associated with most excess DNA is quite 
small, but not so small as to be effectively neutral in all phylogenetic con-
texts. A key theme that will appear repeatedly in the following pages (par-
ticularly in Chapter 4) is that population size is a central determinant of the 
efficiency of natural selection: by magnifying the power of random genetic 
drift, fluctuations in allele frequencies caused by small population size can 
overwhelm the ability of natural selection to influence the dynamics of 
mutations of small effect. A second key point is that although random 
genetic drift is often viewed as simple noise that causes variation in evo-
lutionary outcomes around expectations under selection alone, this is a 
false caricature. The size of a population specifically defines the kinds of 
genomic evolution that can and cannot proceed, with small population size 
facilitating the accumulation of deleterious mutations and inhibiting the 
promotion of beneficial changes. Finally, the tendency for mutationally haz-
ardous DNA to accumulate depends on both the population size and the 
mutation rate: the latter defines the burden of excess DNA, while the for-
mer defines the ability of natural selection to eradicate it. These simple ideas 
provide a potentially unifying explanation for a wide range of observations 
on phylogenetic variation in gene structure and genomic composition. 

ly 
.s. 
re 
19 
1-
2t 
)-
h 
lt 
lC 
1-
\-
1. 
). 
g 
)-
'-
L 
It 
s 
V 
5 
GENOME SIZE AND ORGANISMAL COMPLEXITY 
41 
The basic argument can be summarized with the following example. Sup-
pose that natural selection favors an increase in body size in a particular lin-
eage. A general observation from population ecology is that an increase in 
body size results in a reduction in the number of individuals within a species 
(see Chapter 4). By reducing the efficiency of natural selection, diminished 
population size magnifies the tendency for mildly deleterious insertions to 
accumulate in a genome, while also reducing the ability of selection to pro-
mote advantageous deletions. Thus, genome size is expected to expand in 
organisms of increasing body size, not necessarily because of an intrinsic 
tolerance of excess DNA or because of an increased need for bulk DNA, but 
because of a reduced ability to eradicate it. In contrast, genome size con-
traction can be expected in organisms selected for small size, again not 
because of direct selection for rapid genome replication, but because puri-
fying selection more efficiently eliminates deleterious genomic elements 
from large populations. Thus, contrary to the assertion that "the limited vari-
ation in prokaryotic genome sizes ... presents an important puzzle in its own 
right .. . just as important a question as the enormous genome size variation 
in eukaryotes" (Gregory 200Sc), from a population genetic perspective, the 
uniformly simple genomes of prokaryotes are not surprising at all-they 
are the expecta tion. 
Before we proceed, three fundamental points need to be emphasized. 
First, an increase in body size is not the only mechanism that results in pop-
ulation size reductions. Thus, the theory to be presented below does not rule 
out the possibility of a large genome in a unicellular species, provided that 
the latter has experienced an unusually high level of random genetic drift 
for reasons associated with the breeding system, degree of linkage in the 
genome, or historical long-term population bottlenecks (see Chapter 4). Ran-
dom genetic drift is a fundamental attribute of all species, which in effect 
operates like a rheostat for modulating genomic growth versus contraction. 
Once this is understood, it is relatively straightforward to move beyond the 
rather vague description of excess DNA as being selfish or inert junk to a 
more mechanistic theory of genomic evolution capable of explaining why 
specific phylogenetic lineages are prone to the establishment of certain kinds 
of genetic elements and gene structures. 
Second, because evolution is a stochastic process, subject to numerous 
probabilistic events, we should not expect to find tight deterministic rela-
tionships between all genomic attributes in all lineages. Indeed, when ran-
dom genetic drift is a prominent evolutionary force, substantial deviations 
around overall patterns are expected. For a particular genome size, there can 
often be an order-of-magnitude range of variation among species with 
respect to genomic composition, and near the threshold for intron/ mobile 
element expansion, the dispersion can be even greater (see Figure 2.1). Thus, 
although there is a tendency for those embroiled in the debate over genome 
size evolution to treat every deviation from an overall pattern as a defini-
tive argument for or against a particular point of view (e.g., Cavalier-Smith 
2005; Gregory 200Sb), this strategy can be quite misleading. Returning to 
Figure 2.1, it is fairly easy to pick out two or three points that appear con-

42 
CHAPTER 2 
trary to the overall trend, but much more difficult to do so with five to ten 
points. Consistent patterns are observed both within and among major phy-
logenetic groups, and it is this level of variation that merits explanation. This 
is not to say that outliers to an overall trend are uninteresting. Indeed, as 
will be seen in the following chapters, once the key biological features of 
such oddities are understood, they often provide deeper insights into evo-
lution than might otherwise be possible. 
One final point on the fundamental mechanisms driving genomic evo-
lution merits further attention. As noted above, striking correlations exist 
between genome size and various aspects of cell size, metabolism, and divi-
sion rate. In particular, within many phylogenetic groups, organisms with 
larger cells and lower metabolic rates generally have larger genomes (e.g., 
Gregory 2001, 2002a,b; Vinogradov and Anatskaya 2006). Is there any way 
to reconcile such patterns with the hypothesis that drift- and mutation-asso-
. dated phenomena are the primary drivers of genomic evolution? The ten-
tative answer is yes, in that a plausible case can be made that the evolved 
correlations between genome size and cytological features may be by-prod-
ucts of the shared involvement of intervening factors, rather than outcomes 
of direct causal connections. 
As noted above (and argued more formally in Chapter 4), small popu-
lation sizes and low mutation rates independently encourage the expansion 
of genome complexity. It is noteworthy that both population size and muta-
tion rates tend to decline with increasing cell size. There is, of course, a one-
to-one relationship between cell size and organism size in unicellular species. 
However, increases in cell size often accompany selectively driven increases 
in body size in laboratory experiments with multicellular species (Falconer 
et al. 1978; Riska and Atchley 1985; Stevenson et al. 1995; Calboli et al. 2003), 
and such associations also exist within a variety of phylogenetic groups, 
e.g., nematodes (Wang et al. 2002; Watanabe et al. 2005; Lozano et al. 2006), 
and sea anemones (Francis 2004). Thus, given the nearly universal inverse 
relationship between population size and body size (see Chapter 4), a neg-
ative correlation between cell size and population size is expected within 
many major taxonomic groups, with the causal intermediary being body 
size. In addition, metabolic rates tend to increase with decreasing cell size 
(Kozlowski et al. 2003), and because mutation rates scale positively with 
metabolic rates (Martin and Palumbi 1993; Gillooly et al. 2005), we can 
expect a negative association between cell size and mutation rate within 
broad taxonomic groups, driven by the intermediate factor of metabolic rate. 
Thus, although population size and mutation rate need not be inversely 
related to cell size in all phylogenetic groups, such scaling is likely for at 
least one of these parameters in most groups. This implies that although cor-
relations between genome size and cytological features appear to support 
the causal connections postulated by the bulk-DNA hypothesis, they are 
also compatible with the mutational-hazard hypothesis. 

The Human Genome 
As first highlighted in the landmark papers of Lander et al. (2001) and 
Venter et al. (2001), enormous international effort has led to a refined under-
standing of the basic architectural features of the human genome. At about 
3000 megabases (Mb), the human genome is larger than that of any other 
well-characterized species (although plenty of more massive genomes await 
exploration). Despite the unique aspects of human biology, our genome is 
not particularly noteworthy with respect to gene structure or organization, 
at least from the perspective of multicellular species, and it harbors most of 
the features that are the hallmarks of eukaryotic genomic evolution. Thus, 
a broad overview of our own genetic blueprint and its deviations from those 
of other eukaryotes will provide a useful entree to many of the concepts to 
be explored in the pages to follow. This chapter will also provide some 
insights into the challenges of exploiting genomic information in attempts 
to understand organismal evolution. As will be discussed at the close of the 
chapter, we are still a long way from identifying the molecular-level changes 
responsible for the unique human phenotype. 
Gene Number 
One of the greatest surprises of the Human Genome Project was the dis-
cordance between the count of protein-coding genes (-24,000) and expec-
tations based on perceived phenotypic and behavioral complexity. Only 
about 1 % of the human genome consists of protein-coding DNA (Table 3.1), 
and although the number of human protein-coding genes exceeds that in 
most well-characterized unicellular species, it is only moderately greater 
than that in nematodes and insects and substantially less than that in puffer-
fish and rice (Table 3.2). Because the gene counts reported in Table 3.2 are 

44 
CHAPTER 3 
TABLE 3 .1 Approximate fractional composition 
of the human genome 
TYPE OF DNA 
FRACTION 
Coding exons 
0.008 
Internal introns 
0.308 
5' Untranslated regions 
Exons 
0.045 
Introns 
0.002 
3' Untranslated regions 
Exons 
0.006 
Introns 
0.001 
Intergenic DNA 
0.683 
Conserved noncoding DNA 
0.016 
Pseudogenes 
0.007 
Mobile genetic elements 
0.446 
Note: Derived from various references given in the text. lntergenic DNA is all DNA except 
coding exons and internal introns. The fractions do not sum to one because mobile ele-
ments, pseudogenes, and transcription factor binding sites reside in introns, UTRs, and/ or 
intergenic DNA. 
substantially dependent on gene prediction programs, they should be 
viewed as approximations, and may in some cases be off by as much as 20%, 
but it is clear that the evolution of multiple cell types is only weakly asso-
ciated with an expansion in the number of protein-coding genes. There are 
several hundred noncoding RNA genes with well-understood features 
(specifying transfer RNAs, ribosomal RNA subunits, and small nucleolar 
and nuclear RNAs), but the numbers for humans are not much different 
from those in other eukaryotes. Nor does there appear to be any relation-
ship between organismal complexity and average protein length. Although 
the total coding DNA associated with individual eukaryotic genes is 
10%-15% greater than that for orthologous prokaryotic genes (Wang et al. 
2005), there is no obvious pattern among eukaryotic lineages (see Table 3.2). 
One conceptual matter regarding gene number merits consideration up 
front. Because nearly all eukaryotic genomes contain substantial numbers 
of duplicate genes, many of which may be functionally redundant, gene 
number may be a poor predictor of functional gene diversity. In the human 
genome, about 4000 pairs of duplicate genes (not including members of large 
multigene families) can be readily identified (Lynch and Conery 2003a,b), 
and about 5% of the genome consists of relatively recent segmental dupli-
cations ranging up to 200 kb in size (Bailey et al. 2002; Samonte and Eich-
ler 2002). Using the number of substitutions between silent sites as an esti-
mate of the age of a pair of duplicates (the rationale for which is discussed 

0.50 } 
0.20 
~ 0.15 
c:: 
<lJ 
::l 
0" 
<lJ .t: 0.10 
0.05 
0 
1 
2 
THE HUMAN GEN OME 
45 
Figure 3.1 The age distribution of duplicate genes in 
the human genome, using the number of substitutions 
per silent site as an estimate of the age of a pair of dupli-
cates. The entire profile is based on a survey of 3892 pairs 
of genes. (Modified from Lynch and Conery 2003a.) 
3 
4 
5 
Substitutions/silent site 
below), the age distribution is found to be highly L-shaped in humans (Fig-
ure 3.1) and in several other species (Lynch and Conery 2000, 2003a,b). As 
will be described in more detail in Chapter 8, such age distributions can be 
used to estimate the rates of birth and loss of gene duplicates. For humans, 
the average rate of duplication is -0.01/ gene/ million years (MY), while the 
average half-life of a duplicate is -7.5 MY (Lynch and Conery 2003a,b). Thus, 
on a time scale of -100 MY, most genes within the lineage leading to the 
human genome will have had an opportunity to duplicate, but almost all 
duplicates experience mutational silencing within -10 MY. 
Such observations imply that a significant fraction of genes is nonessen-
tial and simply a reflection of stochastic expansion and contraction processes. 
And this implication in turn raises significant questions about the common 
assumption that the size of a gene family provides information on its adap-
tive significance (Rubin et al. 2000; Lespinet et al. 2002). For example, expan-
sions in gene families associated with reproduction and immunity have been 
taken to imply diversifying selection for new gene functions in the mouse 
(Waterston et al. 2002). Yet the total numbers of genes in the human and 
mouse genomes are nearly equal (Waterston et al. 2002), suggesting that 
expansions and contractions of gene family sizes may be balanced in both 
lineages, perhaps as a simple consequence of a stochastic equilibrium 
birth/ death process (e.g., Nei 2005). Similarly, the reduced number of active 
olfactory receptor genes in humans relative to mice has been taken as evi-
dence for reduced selection on olfaction in humans (Dehal et al. 2001; Gilad 
et al. 2003), but again, the simple possibility that such changes have arisen 
in a neutral fashion has not been ruled out. 
With a fully sequenced genome, it is possible to investigate these issues 
formally by organizing the entire set of protein-coding genes into families 
using a sequence similarity criterion. Family sizes can range from single-
tons with no obvious similarity to any other component of the genome to 

TABLE 3.2 Haploid genome size, number of protein-coding genes, and average 
number of nucleotides per gene for some well-characterized 
eukaryotic genomes 
KILOBASES/GENE 
GENOME 
GENE 
NON-
SIZE (MB) 
NUMBER 
TOTAL 
CODING 
CODING 
Unicellular species 
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 
2.90 
1997 
1.45 
1.01 
0.44 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
12.05 
6213 
1.94 
1.44 
0.50 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
13.80 
4824 
2.86 
1.43 
1.43 
Cyanidioschyzon merolae 
16.52 
5331 
3.10 
1.55 
1.55 
Cryptococcus neoformans 
19.05 
6572 
2.89 
1.62 
1.27 
Plasmodium falciparum 
22.85 
5268 
4.34 
2.29 
2.05 
Entamoeba histolytica 
23.75 
9938 
2.39 
1.14 
1.25 
Leishmania major 
33.60 
8600 
3.91 
2.15 
1.76 
Thalassiosira pseudonana 
34.50 
11242 
3.07 
0.99 
2.08 
Trypanosoma spp. 
39.20 
10000 
3.92 
1.96 
1.96 
Oligo cellular species 
Ustilago maydis 
19.68 
6572 
2.99 
1.84 
1.15 
Aspergillus nidulans 
30.07 
9541 
3.15 
1.57 
1.58 
Dictyostelium discoideum 
34.00 
9000 
3.78 
2.45 
1.33 
Neurospora crassa 
38.64 
10082 
3.83 
1.44 
2.39 
Land plants 
Arabidopsis thaliana 
125.00 
25498 
4.90 
1.80 
3.10 
Oryza sativa 
466.00 
60256 
7.73 
1.18 
6.55 
Lotus japonicus 
472.00 
26000 
18.15 
1.35 
16.80 
Animals 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
100.26 
21200 
4.73 
1.25 
3.48 
Drosophila melanogaster 
137.00 
16000 
8.56 
1.66 
6.90 
Ciona intestinalis 
156.00 
16000 
9.75 
0.95 
8.80 
Anopheles gambiae 
278.00 
13683 
20.32 
1.64 
18.68 
Fugu rubripes 
365.00 
38000 
9.61 
0.93 
8.68 
Bombyx mori 
428.70 
18510 
23.16 
1.66 
21.50 
Gallus gallus 
1050.00 
21500 
48.84 
1.44 
47.40 
Mus musculus 
2500.00 
24000 
83.33 
1.30 
82.03 
Homo sapiens 
2900.00 
24000 
96.67 
1.33 
95.36 
Source: Lynch 2006a. 
Note: The total number of kilobases per gene is equivalent to the reciprocal of the gene density, i.e., total genome 
size divided by gene number, and does not necessarily reflect functional significance. The number of noncoding 
nucleotides per gene contains all noncoding material (including introns and all intergenic DNA). The average 
length of a protein in amino acids is equal to one-third the number of coding nucleotides per gene. All numbers 
are subject to minor revision as the various genome annotation projects mature. 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
(A) D. melanogaster 
(B) C. elegans 
(C) S. cerevisiae 
1 
1 
1 
Q) u C 
Q) .... 
.... :l 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
u 
u 
0 
"'" 
0 
>, 
u 
0.01 
0.01 
0.01 
c 
Q) 
:l 
0" 
Q) 
.... 
"'" 0.001 
0.001 
0.001 
1 
10 
1 
10 
1 
Family size 
Figure 3.2 The frequency distributions of family sizes for genes in D. me/anogaster 
(A) and different protein folds (structural subunit types) in C. e/egans (B) and S. cere-
visiae (C). (Data from Qian et al. 2001 and Luscombe et al. 2002.) 
large multigene lineages. Although the matching criterion deployed in such 
analyses is quite arbitrary, regardless of the stringency of family definition, 
the number of families of a given size virtually always declines with the size 
of the family, with the most common family size being the singleton class 
(Figure 3.2). This sort of scaling holds for entire genes, functional domains 
of such genes (based on protein features), families of pseudogenes, and even 
various oligomers (specific small-nucleotide sequences) in both eukaryotes 
and prokaryotes (Huynen and van Nimwegen 1998; Yanai et al. 2000; Qian 
et al. 2001; Harrison et al. 2002; Koonin et al. 2002; Luscombe et al. 2002). 
Several authors have argued that these kinds of plots obey a power law, 
such that the number of families of size x (i.e., containing x members) is pro-
portional to x-b, with b for protein family sizes typically being -1.5-2.0 (Lus-
combe et al. 2002). Such behavior can be seen in Figure 3.2, where a ten-
fold increase in family size is accompanied by a decline in frequency of one 
to two orders of magnitude. Similar patterns exist in linguistic analysis, in 
which the number of words used in a text is usually inversely related to the 
number of times the words are used (most words are used just once or twice 
in a literary tract, whereas a few words such as "the" and "a" are used many 
times), a relationship generally referred to as Zipf's (1949) law. Although 
such universal patterning has invited speculation that long strings of DNA 
sequence are structured much like a language, there are substantial differ-
ences between the syntax of language and the structure of genomic 
sequences, not the least of which is the constant upheaval in the latter caused 
by duplication, deletion, and substitution events. Moreover, the patterns 
shown in Figure 3.2 do not strictly obey a power law, as there is a clear ten-
dency for group size frequency distributions to bow downward (a power 
law would generate straight lines in logarithmic plots). 
  
10 
47 

48 
CHAPTER 3 
Figure 3.3 Equilibrium probability distri-
butions of gene family sizes generated by 
computer simulations of the stochastic 
birth/death process described in the text. 
The form of the distribution depends only 
on the ratio of 0 and B, not on their ab-
solute values. The patterns describe either 
the temporal distribution of family sizes ex-
perienced by a single gene over evolution-
ary time or the steady-state distribution of 
family sizes for a large number of genes with 
equal O/B. The dashed curve is the average 
of the three solid curves. 
>, 
u @ 
;l 
c:r 
~ 
~ 
1 
ill 
-2.0 
-1.5 
-1.1 
0.1 
0.01 
0.001 '-------'----'---'--'--'--'-'-'-'----'---'--'--'---'-
1 
10 
Family size 
How might we account for this type of pattern? Consider a simple 
birth/ death model, with each gene having a per-generation probability B 
of giving rise to a new copy, such that the average birth rate of a family of 
x members is Bx. If it is assumed that the presence of at least one member 
of the gene family is essential (i.e., complete loss of the gene family is not 
possible), but that all excess copies have a probability 0 of being eliminated, 
the expected number of losses per unit time is zero if x = 1, but Ox other-
wise. Because these are just the expected numbers of gains and losses per 
time interval, and true changes come in discrete units, the number of copies 
(x) will wander over evolutionary time, with an effective upper limit being 
imposed provided that 0> B. Under this model, the equilibrium probabil-
ity of a gene being a member of a family of a certain size at any particular 
time is a simple function of 0/ B (Figure 3.3). Consistent with the observed 
data, this model predicts a bowed negative relationship between family 
number and family size, with the maximum number of families being in the 
singleton class. Although the curvature of the distribution for each 0/ B ratio 
may appear stronger than that seen in Figure 3.2, it should also be noted 
that the curves for individual 0/ B ratios intersect. This means that if data 
were averaged over a heterogeneous pool of genes subject to different rates 
of birth and death, the average frequency distribution would be more lin-
ear than that for an individual O/B ratio (dashed curve in Figure 3.3). 
Although more complicated models for gene family size evolution 
include gene accrual by horizontal transfer or assume fixed initial and/ or 
final genome sizes (Huynen and van Nimwegen 1998; Yanai et al. 2000; Qian 
et al. 2001; Karev et al. 2002, 2005), the need for such embellishments remains 
unclear. The key point here is that with 0/ B ratios consistent with actual 
estimates for eukaryotic genes (see Chapter 8), a simple random birth/ death 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
49 
model, with no direct selection on copy number (other than the maintenance 
of a single copy), readily generates distributional forms like those seen in 
Figure 3.2. Thus, although a number of gene families have almost certainly 
expanded in specific phylogenetic lineages for adaptive reasons (e.g., 
immune system genes in vertebrates), many multigene families may sim-
ply be transient outcomes of the universal stochastic processes of gene dupli-
cation and elimination, with the total gene content being of little or no adap-
tive relevance. As a guard against overinterpreting large gene family size as 
a definitive indicator of unusual biological significance, statistical meth-
ods for formally evaluating the null hypothesis of stochastic expansion/ con-
traction have been proposed (Hahn et al. 2005). 
Finally, a remarkable one-third of the predicted genes in the human 
genome have no identifiable homologue in any other well-characterized 
non-primate species, even other mammals (Dehal et a1. 2001). This poorly 
understood genomic feature is not unique to humans (or primates), as it 
has been repeatedly found in the sequenced genomes of other metazoans. 
The source and functionality of these orphan genes remains unresolved. 
Many might simply be derivatives of ancestral coding sequences subject to 
unusually rapid rates of substitution and/ or rearrangement (Long 2001; 
W. Wang et a1. 2004), and relatively short proteins may fortuitously arise 
de novo from chance open reading frames in noncoding DNA that happen 
to be located near spurious transcription factor binding sites (Begun et a1. 
2006). Still other novel genes originate when partial duplications of pre-
existing genes create chimeric open reading frames at sites of insertion 
(Ka~u and Lynch 2003, 2005). Although it was initially suggested that 
100-200 human genes have been acquired by lateral transfer from prokary-
otes (Lander et al. 2001), the number is closer to 40 after various sampling 
and computational biases are accounted for, and even these are uncertain 
(Salzberg et a1. 2001). 
Introns and Exons 
Although most eukaryotic lineages produce proteins with similar average 
lengths, dramatic variation exists among species in investments in the non-
coding intra genic portions of genes. The average coding region of a human 
gene is subdivided by 7.7 introns, yielding an average ex on length of about 
0.15 kb. Thus, with an average intron length of 4.66 kb, most exons in human 
genes are tiny islands in a vast sea of intronic DNA. In contrast, almost all 
Saccharomyces genes are intron-free, and the average Caenorhabditis gene con-
tains 5.2 introns of length 0.12 kb. With fewer introns, the average inverte-
brate exon is larger than that in humans, but more striking is the strong 
reduction in the variance of exon size in humans, with almost none exceed-
ing 300 bp in length (Figure 3.4). The precise localization of unusually long 
introns by mammalian spliceosomes appears to rely on a scanning mecha-
nism for exon (rather than intron) boundaries, which becomes increasingly 
inaccurate with long exons (see Chapter 9). 

50 
CHAPTER 3 
Figure 3.4 The distribution of 
exon sizes in the genes of humans, 
Caenorhabditis (nematode), and 
Drosophila (fly). (Modified from 
Lander et al. 2001.) 
7 
6 
5 
2 
1 
-
Human 
-
Nematode 
-Fly 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 1000 
Exon length (bp) 
Introns provide potential opportunities for diversifying gene functions 
without increasing gene number. For example, if alternative intron-exon 
junctions can be recognized, it becomes possible to modify the products of 
a gene by including/ excluding or extending/ truncating specific exons. More 
than half of human genes are subject to alternative splicing, with an aver-
age of 2.6 transcript variants per gene (Lander et al. 2001; Modrek and Lee 
2003), and some human genes have dozens of alternatively spliced forms 
(Maniatis and Tasic 2002; Roberts and Smith 2002). Approximately 20% of 
alternatively spliced variants appear to be expressed in a tissue-specific pat-
tern in humans (Xu et al. 2002), and the variants produced involve the inser-
tion/ deletion of complete functional domains of proteins more often than 
expected by chance (Kriventseva et a1. 2003). Thus, there is little question 
that the repertoire of functional human proteins exceeds the number of 
genes. 
Could an enhanced amount of alternative splicing contribute to the 
greater level of cellular / developmental complexity in mammals relative 
to invertebrates? Only about 20% of the genes in C. elegans and D. melano-
gaster are alternatively spliced, with an average of 1.3 transcripts per gene 
(Misra et al. 2002). However, although this suggests a reduction in alterna-
tive splicing in these invertebrate species, the depth of cDNA coverage 
(libraries of mRNAs transformed into more readily sequenced DNA by 
reverse transcription) for humans and mice tends to be much greater than 
that for invertebrates, and hence more likely to reveal rare transcript types 
(Brett et a1. 2002). In addition, it is unclear how many alternatively spliced 
transcripts are actually products of adaptive evolution as opposed to being 
simple accidents of an imperfect splicing process. Modrek and Lee (2003) 
found that about 70% of minor variants of alternatively spliced genes in 
humans and mice contain exons that have arisen since the divergence of 
these species. Such splicing variants may be simple consequences of poorly 

10 
s 
n 
If 
e 
'-
e 
s 
,f 
-
1 
1 
f 
THE HUMAN GENOME 
51 
refined sets of splice signals, unless they represent lineage-specific adapta-
tions, These issues will be covered in greater depth in Chapter 9. 
Summing up to this point, the human genome contains between 1.5 and 
2.0 times more protein-coding genes than the genomes of nematodes and 
flies, and after accounting for the increased number of splicing variants per 
gene, this potentially translates into more than 50,000 additional proteins. 
In terms of protein diversity, the proportional scaling may be even greater: 
in proceeding from yeasts to invertebrates (fly and nematode) to mammals, 
the number of functional domains used as building blocks of proteins 
increases from 1000 to 1200 to 1900, respectively (Li et al. 2001); and human 
proteins have about twice the number of distinct domain arrangements as 
those of invertebrates and nearly six times as many as those of yeasts (Lan-
der et al. 20Gl). Thus, when one adds to these structural differences the sev-
eralfold increase in DNA allocated to the regulation of human genes (see 
below), the potential diversity of ways in which gene products can be 
deployed in mammals appears to greatly exceed that in well-studied inver-
tebrates, although it is far from clear how much of that potential has been 
promoted or exploited by adaptive mechanisms. 
Regulatory DNA 
Given the general lack of correlation of gene number and protein size with 
phenotypic complexity, the roots of morphological diversification may reside 
largely in changes in noncoding D A that influence the regulation of gene 
expression, alternative splicing being one manifestation of such evolution. 
As noted above, the average amount of noncoding DNA per gene varies 
dramatically among species (see Table 3.2), from 0.5 to 2.0 kb in most uni-
cellular eukaryotes to more than 3.0 kb for most multicellular species and 
up to nearly 100 kb for humans, so the potential certainly exists for more 
complex organisms to harbor more regulatory D A. However, because a 
substantial fraction of the noncoding DNA in most species is derived from 
mobile genetic elements, the extent to which multicellular species have accu-
mulated regulatory DNA embellishments is not immediately clear. 
The direct identification of regulatory DNA is difficult because in con-
trast to coding regions, which can be identified by continuous open read-
ing frames (adjacent sets of nucleotide-triplet codons for amino acids), there 
is no general language for regulatory elements. However, functionally sig-
nificant noncoding DNA can be inferred indirectly by comparing ortholo-
gous sequences from different species, capitalizing on the idea that regions 
under purifying selection will appear as islands of conserved sequence on 
a background of more random interspecific divergence. This strategy will 
yield minimal estimates of the amount of functionally relevant noncoding 
DNA for at least two reasons: first, the regions used as measures of back-
ground variation are assumed to be neutral; and second, noncoding DNA 
that is under directional selection and hence rapidly evolving will be missed 
entirely. Application of this approach to mouse and human sequences yields 

52 
CHAPTER 3 
TABLE 3.3 Average amount of DNA per gene [in kilobases) 
associated with coding exons, internal introns, and 
intergenic spacers [outside points of translation 
initiation and termination) 
INTERGENIC 
EXON 
INTRON 
REGULATORY 
OTHER 
Saccharomyces 
1.44 
0.02 
0.11 
0.37 
Aspergillus 
1.57 
0.27 
0.03 
1.55 
Plasmodium 
2.29 
0.25 
0.04 
1.76 
Caenorhabditis 
1.25 
0.64 
0.43 
2.41 
Drosophila 
1.66 
2.93 
1.37 
2.60 
Homo/ Mus 
1.32 
32.27 
1.95 
61.14 
Note: Exonic and intronic DNA includes only that associated with the coding region, i.e., 
excludes UIR regions, which are included in the intergenic categories. Estimates for the in-
tergenic regulatory D A category are based on islands of observed intergenic sequence 
conservation among closely related species: Saccharomyces (Kellis et al. 2003); Aspergillus 
(Galagan et al. 2005); Plasmodium (van Noort and Huynen 2006); Caenorhabditis (Webb et al. 
2002); Drosophila (Bergman and Kreitman 2001; Andolfatto 2005); Homo/ Mus (Shabalina et 
a1. 2001). Intergenic other refers to all DNA between the stop codon of an upstream gene 
and the start codon of the following gene that is not discemable as intergenic regulatory. 
Qualitatively similar results have been obtained with other methods (e.g., Siepel et a1. 
2005). 
a conservative estimate of more than 2.0 kb of intergenic DNA reserved for 
the regulation of the average mammalian gene (Shabalina et al. 2001). 'This 
suggests that the amount of DNA devoted to gene regulation in mammals 
exceeds that associated with coding DNA by about 50%. Similar analyses 
for two fungi (Aspergillus and Saccharomyces), Plasmodium, and two inver-
tebrates (Caenorhabditis and Drosophila) suggest smaller investments in con-
served intergenic DNA (Table 3.3). Although data are available for only five 
taxa, the overall pattern is consistent with a gradient of increasing amounts 
of regulatory DNA with increasing organismal complexity. 
As will be discussed extensively in Chapter 10, the nature of several forms 
of regulatory DNA is fairly well understood. All genes depend on tran-
scription factor binding sites to recruit the machinery for initiating tran-
scription, internal motifs for locating intron-exon boundaries, and down-
stream signals for terminating transcription. However, because most 
sequences of these types consist of only a dozen or so bases, they cannot 
fully account for the more than 2.0 kb of regulatory DNA associated with 
an average mammalian gene. Many regulatory DNA sequences may be so 
diffuse and nonspecific as to be entirely recalcitrant to computational iden-
tification, but some additional aspects of mammalian gene regulation appear 
to be associated with large sequence tracts located deep within intergenic 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
53 
regions. For example, comparative analysis of the mouse and human 
genomes reveals about 66,000 highly conserved blocks of intergenic DNA, 
averaging 150 bp in length (Dermitzakis et al. 2002, 2003a, 2004). Several 
hundred such segments in the human genome have homologous sequences 
that are 100% identical in rodents, 95% identical in chickens, and 90% iden-
tical in fish (Bejerano et a1. 2004; Woolfe et a1. 2005). Despite the general 
absence of assignable functions for these elements, they are clearly under 
much more stringent selective constraints than most coding DNA. 
Because conserved islands of noncoding DNA do not lead to protein pro-
duction, it is likely that they play some sort of role in gene expression, either 
attracting proteins associated with transcription and serving as long-range 
tissue-specific enhancers or repressors (Woolfe et al. 2005; Kamal et al. 2006) 
or being transcribed into functional RNAs. It is well known that not all RNA 
transcripts are destined to become protein. For example, ribosomal RNAs 
and transfer RNAs are essential for translation in the cytoplasm, five small 
nuclear RNAs constitute the heart of the spliceosome used for removing 
introns from precursor mRNAs, several small nucleolar RNAs play key roles 
in directing base modifications during ribosome synthesis, and the enzyme 
that maintains chromosome ends contains a key RNA component. (See Table 
3.4 for a set of definitions for various families of RNAs.) Although none of 
the islands of conserved DNA mentioned above have these particular func-
tions, genome-wide transcription profiles suggest that many of them yield 
products with important cellular roles. 
TABLE 3.4 A glossary of terminology for RNAs 
mRNAs 
Messenger RNAs; mature gene transcripts, after introns have been processed out of 
the mRNA precursor 
miRNAs Micro RNAs; generally 20-30 bp in length, and processed from transcribed "hair-
pin" precursor RNAs; used in the regulation of gene expression by complementary 
binding to nearly identical motifs in the 3' UTRs of transcripts 
ncRNAs 
Noncoding RNAs; loosely defined as any transcript that does not encode protein 
rRNAs 
Ribosomal RNAs; the RNA subunits of the ribosome 
sRNAs 
Small RNAs; a generic term that encompasses miRNAs and siRNAs 
siRNAs 
Small interfering RNAs; generally 20-30 bp in length, and processed from longer 
double-stranded RNAs by the RNA interference pathway; deployed in posttran-
scriptional gene silencing 
snRNAs 
Small nuclear RNAs; a heterogeneous group of small RNAs whose functions are 
confined to the nucleus, including those involved in splicing introns out of precur-
sor mRNAs and in telomere maintenance 
snoRNAs Small nucleolar RNAs; involved in the chemical modifications made in the con-
struction of ribosomes; often encoded within the introns of ribosomal protein genes 
tRNAs 
Transfer RNAs; serve as vehicles for delivering amino acids during the translation 
of an mRNA 

54 
CHAPTER 3 
Further insights into these issues have been acquired from microarray 
technology, which allows the investigator to deposit thousands to millions 
of small bits of genomic DNA onto a microscope slide-sized platform, each 
spot pertaining to a specific genomic region. The pool of RNA transcripts 
can then be extracted from an organism, turned into cDNAs by reverse tran-
scription, and hybridized to the array. The use of fluorescently labeled dyes 
provides a means for quantifying transcript levels associated with each DNA 
sequence on the array. Traditionally, microarrays have harbored only the 
DNA from predicted open reading frames, but arrays that include noncod-
ing DNA (as well as other methods) have revealed the shortcomings of this 
approach (Caminci 2006). For example, Kampa et al. (2004) found that about 
50% of the transcripts associated with the well-annotated human chromo-
somes 21 and 22 are derived from DNA entirely outside of known protein-
coding genes and that about 20% are from antisense strands. Many of these 
noncoding transcripts exhibit differential tissue-specific expression (Caw-
ley et al. 2004). Although it is fair to ask whether putative noncoding RNAs 
are simple artifacts of spurious transcription factor binding sites, the fact 
that homologs of a substantial fraction of human noncoding RNAs are also 
observed in the mouse (Kapranov et al. 2002; Okazaki et al. 2002) suggests 
that this is not universally the case, and it is now generally accepted that an 
enormous number of functional RNAs are transcribed from the noncoding 
regions of mammalian genomes (Eddy 2001; Mattick and Gagen 2001; 
Mattick 2003; Bertone et al. 2004). 
Although the precise functions of the vast majority of noncoding RNAs 
are unknown, numerous noncoding transcripts appear to form stem-loop 
structures (with the stems held together by complementary base pairing) and 
probably have functions associated with the regulation of protein-coding 
genes (Washietl et al. 2005). A diversity of roles in cellular maintenance and 
development appears likely (Lim et al. 2005). One class of small RNAs in par-
ticular is centrally involved in gene regulation. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are 
single-stranded, 20-22 bp products cut from transcribed foldback RNA pre-
cursors (double-stranded RNA stems with a small end loop) by the enzyme 
Dicer (Figure 3.5A). In animals, miRNAs are typically expressed in a stage-
or tissue-specific manner retain, often at very high levels, and their sequences 
have strong complementarity to regions in the 3' UTRs (untranslated regions) 
of the transcripts of many key developmental genes (Eddy 2001; He and Han-
non 2004; Zamore and Haley 2005). By pairing with complementary motifs 
of about 8 bp in 3' UTRs, miRNAs cause translational silencing of the mRNA 
and in some cases tag the mRNA for destruction. By one account, about 20% 
of human genes are regulated in this manner (Xie et al. 2005). The number 
of miRNAs encoded in the human genome may be as high as 800 (Bentwich 
et al. 2005), and at least 100 such genes are highly conserved among nema-
todes, arthropods, and vertebrates (Lim et al. 2003a,b). 
Why and how a system for gene silencing that depends on gene expres-
sion would evolve remains to be determined, but the general mechanism 
may be ancient, perhaps dating to the stem eukaryote. Like animals, all land 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
55 
(A) 
(B) 
miRNA 
Double-stranded RNA 
precursor =8:C 
J 
+ 
Dicer 
Dice~ 
.... 
= 
miRNA 
-
- -
--
= = 
--
= = 
-
~Olym,,,,, 
)H'li'~' 
Transcript 
--"---
AAAAAAAA 
~ 
- -
~ 
-
~ 
~ 
~ 
-
- siRNAs 
rnRNA 
recognition 
Figure 3.5 The effects of small RNAs on gene expression. (A) Gene silencing by 
micro RNA. After developing from a transcript, a micro RNA precursor is folded into a 
hairpin structure (loops denote noncomplementary base positions), which the en-
zyme Dicer recognizes as containing double-stranded RNA. The released single strand 
is largely complementary to a messenger RNA, and by binding to it, blocks transla-
tion. (B) The RNA interference pathway. An initial target double-stranded RNA is 
spliced into small interfering RNAs by Dicer, which are then separated into single 
strands. The siRNAs have perfect complementarity to larger single-stranded mRNAs 
and serve as primers for converting them into new double-stranded RNAs, which 
again elicit the action of Dicer, leading to a self-sustaining loop. 
plants apparently deploy miRNAs in cell differentiation (Bartel and Bartel 
2003; Floyd and Bowman 2004). Although no miRNAs have yet been dis-
covered in unicellular species, the more general use of small antisense RNAs 
(processed by other means than rniRNAs) in gene silencing appears to be 
ubiquitous. Antisense RNAs play important functions in eubacteria (Selinger 
et al. 2000; Wagner and FHirdh 2002; Gottesman 2005) and archae a (Tang et 
al. 2002). Small complementary RNAs of the same approximate size as 
miRNAs are also deployed in gene silencing in the ciliates Paramecium (Gar-
nier et al. 2004) and Tetrahymena (Lee and Collins 2006), and, although their 
functions are unknown, antisense RNAs derived from both genic and inter-
genic regions are common in Plasmodium (Gunasekera et al. 2004) and yeasts 
(Havilio et al. 2005; Samanta et al. 2006). 
Whereas miRNAs simply repress translation of mRNAs that have already 
been transcribed, many of these other small antisense RNAs playa role in 
silencing at the transcriptional level, either by blocking transcription entirely 
or by tagging mRNAs for destruction via the RNA interference (RNAi) path-
way (Figure 3.5B). The same mechanism used in the processing of rniRNAs 
is central to RNAi: upon encountering double-stranded RNA, Dicer splices 

56 
CHAPTER 3 
the target molecule into pieces of essentially the same size as typical 
miRNAs (-21 bp). In their single-stranded form, the resultant small inter-
fering RNAs (siRNAs) can then anneal to complementary regions of homol-
ogous transcripts, marking them for cleavage (again by Dicer), generating 
still additional siRNAs used in further rounds of targeting. Thus, once an 
RNAi cascade is initiated, an intracellular environment for the efficient 
destruction of newly arising complementary single-stranded transcripts is 
maintained, thereby silencing the target gene (Klahre et al. 2002; Timmons 
et al. 2003; Agrawal et al. 2003; Novina and Sharp 2004). The distinction 
between the functioning of miRNAs in transcript silencing and siRNAs in 
transcript elimination is related to the degree of complementarity of the 
small RNA. In general, perfect base complementarity leads to target cleav-
age by RNAi and hence mRNA removal, whereas the slight mismatches 
usually found with miRNAs are insufficient to elicit RNAi and instead lead 
simply to translational repression. 
Although short on technical details, the preceding points make it clear 
that we are still a long way from having an accurate quantitative view of 
the fraction of the genome that is involved in gene regulation. After con-
servatively accounting for putative regulatory D A under purifying selec-
tion, over 95% of the human genome still appears to be associated with 
mobile elements, pseudogenes, introns, and other ill-defined categories of 
potentially nonfunctional DNA. However, with substantial transcription 
occurring across the entire genome, on both sense and antisense strands, 
and with the central role played by the RNAi pathway in the silencing of 
mobile elements (see Chapter 7) and the maintenance of centromeric regions 
(see Chapter 5), the definition of "functional DNA" is by no means straight-
forward. Noncoding RNAs also impose substantial challenges to the enter-
prise of quantifying gene numbers. Arriving at a universally accepted def-
inition of a gene has never been easy, but from a molecular perspective, a 
gene can be viewed as a segment of DNA that is transcribed to provide a 
functional unit. If one adheres to this definition, then the protein-centric 
gene counts outlined in Table 3.2 may be substantial underestimates of the 
true totals. 
Mobile Genetic Elements 
One of the most striking aspects of the human genome is the extraordinary 
abundance of mobile genetic elements-numbering about 100 for every pro-
tein-coding gene and together constituting nearly half of the genome. If 
we add in the large pool of processed pseudogenes that have arisen as by-
products of mobile element activity (see below) and additional intergenic 
DNA that is presumably derived from ancient mobilization events but is no 
longer recognizable as such, then 75% or more of the human genome may 
be a product of past mobile element activities. Because of their mutagenic 
side effects (as agents of insertions and substrates for ectopic recombina-
tion), most mobile elements must have negative consequences for their 

"-
1-
g 
n 
.t 
s 
s 
1 
1 
i 
THE HUMAN GENOME 
57 
TABLE 3.5 Abundances of various general classes of mobile 
genetic elements in the human genome 
CLASS 
NUMBER OF COPIES (1000s) 
FRACTION OF GENOME (%) 
LINEs 
SINEs 
LTR elements 
Transposons 
Source: Lander et al. 2001. 
868 
20.4 
1558 
13.1 
443 
8.3 
294 
2.8 
hosts. However, the maintenance of a population of such elements within 
a host genome is guaranteed so long as the rate of element self-proliferation 
offsets the rate of selective removal (see Chapter 7). 
Mobile elements are generally subdivided into two major categories: 
retrotransposons that travel via an RNA intermediate, and transposons that 
move via genomic excision. The human genome contains plenty of both, 
although the former vastly outnumber the latter (Table 3.S). The retro-
transposons in the human genome can be subdivided further into three 
classes: LINEs (long interspersed elements), SINEs (short interspersed ele-
ments), and LTR (long terminal repeat) elements (Deininger and Batzer 
2002). We will consider these three classes in turn, with special attention 
being given to LINEs, which are capable of both self-replication and inad-
vertent mobilization of nonautonomous SINEs. The discussion will be rather 
generic in nature, as all of the major groups can be subdivided into numer-
ous subfamilies (see Chapter 7). 
LINEs and SINEs 
The dominant retrotransposons in the human genome are the interrelated 
families of LINEs, together constituting nearly 870,000 total recognizable 
copies and about 20% of total genomic DNA (Smit 1999; Ostertag and Kazaz-
ian 2001). Despite these enormous numbers, only about 100 LINEs are 
thought to be retrotranspositionally competent. Approximately 6 kb in 
length, these autonomous elements contain an internalS' promoter (which 
directs transcription initiation to the upstream start of the element), two 
open reading frames (one encoding an RNA-binding protein and the other 
a dual-function protein that acts as an endonuclease and a reverse tran-
scriptase), and a downstream poly(A) tail. Although some LINEs colonize 
via integration into preexisting breaks in the DNA-that is, in an endonu-
clease-independent manner (Morrish et al. 2002), most replicate by a process 
known as target-primed reverse transcription (Luan et al. 1993; Weiner 2002). 
Following the export of the transcript of an active element to the cytoplasm, 
the two translated proteins bind to their associated rnRNA molecule. This 
ribonucleoprotein complex is then imported back into the nucleus, where 

58 
CHAPTER 3 
the endonuclease has an opportunity to nick the genomic DNA, generally 
at a IT I AAAA target site (the bar denotes the insertion point). The exposed 
nick then serves as a primer site for reverse transcription of the rnRNA, after 
which the cDNA of the element is integrated into the genome. 
Retrotransposition of LINEs is known to be a sloppy process, with new 
insertions deviating from their parental elements in numerous ways. First, 
because the polyadenylation signal built into autonomous LINEs is weak, 
occasional transcriptional read-throughs proceed into the 3' flanking DNA. 
This excess terminal sequence is then subject to reinsertion at a new loca-
tion along with its linked LINE, providing a potential mechanism for gene 
duplication (Moran et al. 1999). Second, because reverse transcription is ini-
tiated at the 3' end of the LINE mRNA and frequently fails to reach the 5' 
terminus prior to integration, truncated insertions lead to dead-on-arrival 
elements. Third, for reasons that are not yet understood, new LINE inser-
tions are often accompanied by local rearrangements, including large dele-
tions (up to several kilobases) of adjacent genomic DNA, inversions, and 
even the insertion of chimeric elements derived from two different mRNAs 
(Gilbert et al. 2002; Symer et al. 2002). Fourth, because LINE-encoded pro-
teins do not bind exclusively to the mRNA from which they arise, other 
defective LINEs can be mobilized as long as they are transcribed (Wei et 
al. 2001). By this means, nonautonomous elements can continue to spread 
throughout the genome. 
Because LINEs are incapable of cleaving themselves from the host DNA, 
once fixed at the population level, they are permanently retained until they 
happen to be encompassed by a deletion event. Lander et al. (2001) argued 
that most of the retrotransposons within the human genome are ancient 
relics, and that a dramatic reduction in retrotranspositional activity occurred 
some 50 million years ago. However, this conclusion was reached by deriv-
ing the age distribution of elements from the divergence of each individ-
ual element from an overall consensus sequence thought to approximate 
the ancestral sequence. Because all members of a gene genealogy are equally 
old with reference to the base of the lineage, this technique could be mis-
leading. A more informative strategy is to consider the pairwise divergences 
of members of the extant pool of elements, as a pair of highly similar ele-
ments must denote a recent colonization regardless of the divergence from 
the putative ancestral sequence. Focusing just on the LINE-1 subfamily, 
numerous pairs of elements are less than 2% divergent (Boissinot et al. 2000; 
Myers et al. 2002; Ovchinnikov et al. 2002), and many of the younger ele-
ments reside at sites exhibiting presence/ absence polymorphisms (Bennett 
et al. 2004; Boissinot et al. 2004; Salem et al. 2003), which means that they 
have not yet gone to fixation within the human population. The absence of 
the younger elements from orthologous sites in the genomes of African apes 
further implies an age of less than 5 million years (Hedges et al. 2004). Thus, 
although there may have been an ancient period of explosive LINE colo-
nization in the ancestor leading to apes, this family of elements is still quite 
active. 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
59 
Even more numerically abundant than LINEs are SINEs, which total 
about 1,500,000 copies, 70% of which belong to the primate-specific Alu fam-
ily. With a typical length of only 300 bp, SINEs are much smaller than LINEs. 
Their small size is due to the fact that they do not encode proteins, and there 
is no evidence that they ever have. Thus, SINEs are incapable of self-mobi-
lization, and their abundance is entirely a consequence of their ability to 
hijack the endonuclease/ reverse transcriptase activity of LINEs. Alu ele-
ments specifically parasitize the retrotranspositional apparatus of LINE-1 
family members and exhibit the same IT I AAAA insertion-site preference. 
Like LINEs, a substantial fraction of SINEs are defective in ways that pre-
vent transcription, and these elements have no future retrotranspositional 
possibilities. Also like some LINEs, many Alu elements are recent enough 
arrivals in the human genome to exist as presence/ absence polymorphisms 
(Carroll et al. 2001; Roy-Engel et al. 2001). Such polymorphic insertions are 
present at a density of about 0.7 per million base pairs (Heilig et al. 2003), 
and the total rate of insertion of new Alu elements is estimated to be 
O.05/ host genome/ generation (Cordaux et al. 2006). 
LTR elements 
The main class of human LTR elements is the HERVs (human endogenous 
retroviruses), which, like LINEs, carry genes encoding proteins for reverse 
transcription and integration. The long terminal repeats of these elements 
contain key regulatory sequences for transcription initiation and termina-
tion, as will be described more fully in Chapter 7. Unlike the situation with 
LINEs, however, HERV mRNA contains its own primer site for reverse tran-
scription, which is carried out in the cytoplasm to produce a double-stranded 
DNA molecule that is then transported back to the nucleus. This unique 
mechanism results in the production of newborn elements with identical LTR 
sequences (see Chapter 7), so these retrotransposons carry a built-in record 
of their age, in the form of sequence divergence between the 5' and 3' LTRs. 
The rate of nucleotide substitution per site, about 1.25 x 10-9 per year (esti-
mated from a comparative analysis of homologous human and chimpanzee 
sequences), is virtually the same as that seen elsewhere in the human genome 
for putative neutral sites (see below) (Sverdlov 2000; Hughes and Coffin 
2001). Using this rate as a calibration, it appears that a major expansion of 
the HERV family began in the Old World primate lineage, with a substantial 
acceleration of insertions occurring in the great apes, especially humans. 
A remarkable feature of HERVs is the presence of an env gene, which is 
used only for movement among cells. Analysis of sequence data indicates 
that this gene is under strong purifying selection, which would not be 
expected for a mobile element experiencing only vertical transmission 
(Belshaw et al. 2004). Although a fully active HERV element has not yet been 
discovered, these elements may be capable of moving horizontally, which 
would require transmission from somatic to germ line cells. Such movement 
is known in Drosophila (see Chapter 7). 

60 
CHAPTER 3 
Transposons 
Much less abundant than the "copy-and-paste" retrotransposons in the 
human genome are the "cut-and-paste" DNA-based transposons, which 
comprise a dozen or so families (Smit and Riggs 1996). Such elements gen-
erally have 10-500 bp terminal inverted repeats (Tills) and are flanked by 
small  10 bp) target-site duplications. Autonomous transposons encode a 
transposase that, after translation in the cytoplasm, returns to the nucleus, 
where it binds specifically to TIRs, catalyzing a process that moves elements 
to new genomic locations. Of course, if each gain of an insert were accom-
panied by an excision, it would not be possible for a DNA transposon to 
spread numerically. However, excision of an element results in a double-
strand break, which must be repaired, and this is often accomplished by using 
the homologous chromosome as a template. Transposons are often activated 
during cellular replication, and if mobilization occurs at a late enough stage 
of replication that a sister chromatid is available, the proliferating element 
can simply be back-copied into the gap in the parental chromosome (Engels 
et al. 1990; Gloor et al. 1991). Alternatively, if in an early stage of germ cell 
division a copy transposes from a replicated to a nonreplicated portion of a 
chromosome, even if the donor site of one chromatid were to lose its element, 
this would be offset by the gain of a new element in both descendant chro-
mosomes (in the not yet replicated site) (Chen et al. 1992). 
In contrast to LINEs, where the proteins encoded by an element are inti-
mately associated with its mRNA from the outset, the transposase of a DNA 
element is imported back into the nucleus with no memory of its genomic 
source. Thus, whether they contain a functional transposase gene or not, all 
genomic copies of the element are equally susceptible to mobilization so 
long as they have recognizable Tills. In this sense, the genomic consequences 
of transposons are similar to those of retrotransposons: transposition is usu-
ally, though not always, duplicative, and nonautonomous elements are able 
to expand at the expense of their autonomous sister elements. As defective 
elements accumulate in the genome by this mechanism, hijacking more and 
more of the replicative proteins of active elements, transposition of the 
autonomous members must become less efficient, which may provide a nat-
ural barrier to runaway element proliferation. 
Pseudogenes 
Embedded within the noncoding DNA of the human genome are the decom-
posing remnants of a huge number of failed gene duplication events. These 
pseudogenes can be roughly subdivided into two major classes, defined by 
the mechanism of origin. 
Processed pseudogenes arise when reverse transcription of an mRNA 
intermediate is followed by reintegration of the cDNA into the genome. 
Although such insertions often cover the entire coding region of the ances-
tral gene, they lack introns (which will have been removed from the mRNA 
prior to reverse transcription) and most (if not all) key regulatory elements, 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
61 
and are generally thought to be dead on arrival. Processed pseudogenes are 
also born with a poly(A) tract at the 3' end (added at the time of prior tran-
scription) and flanking direct repeats (gained at the time of insertion). 
Because of its reliance on reverse transcriptase in germ line cells, processed 
pseudogene production is intimately connected with retrotransposons, 
which, as noted above, can inadvertently supply the enzymatic machinery 
for mobilizing other mRNAs (Esnault et al. 2000; Wei et al. 2001). 
Nonprocessed pseudogenes arise at the DNA level, often via local events 
that result in tandem duplications. Because such duplications arise from 
stretches of DNA with arbitrary truncation points that may lie within or 
between gene boundaries, they too will often be dead on arrival. Non-
processed pseudogenes may also simply arise from the inactivation of a ver-
tically inherited gene, in some cases promoted by positive selection (Wang 
et al. 2006). 
Working with the relatively well-curated human chromosomes 21 and 
22, Harrison et al. (2002) estimated that there are 0.4 pseudogenes for every 
annotated protein-coding gene, whereas parallel estimates for chromosomes 
7 (Hillier et al. 2003) and 14 (Heilig et al. 2003) are 0.8 and 0.4, respectively. 
Altogether, there are about 15,000 pseudogenes in the entire human genome, 
at least half of which are of the processed type and nearly all of which are 
younger than the rodent-primate divergence (Zhang and Gerstein 2004). 
Because there are about 0.5 pseudogenes per active gene in the mouse 
(Waterston et al. 2002), about the same number as in humans, this high den-
sity of pseudogenes appears to extend to other mammals. However, ratios 
of pseudogenes to active genes tend to be lower in nonmammalian species: 
just 0.01 for D. melanogaster (Harrison et al. 2003); between 0.10 and 0.20 
for C. elegans (Echols et al. 2002; Mounsey et al. 2002); 0.03 and 0.01, respec-
tively, for the yeasts S. cerevisiae (Echols et al. 2002) and S. pombe (Wood et 
al. 2002); and 0.03 for Arabidopsis (Echols et al. 2002). 
The likelihood of pseudogenization can vary substantially among gene 
classes. For example, a remarkable 13% of all human pseudogenes are 
derived from ribosomal protein-coding genes, with an average of 26 per 
gene (Zhang, Harrison et al. 2002). The age distribution of the 2000 or so 
ribosomal protein pseudogenes, based on their nucleotide divergence from 
still active ancestral genes, peaks at about 9% sequence divergence and there-
after exhibits a nearly exponential decline (Figure 3.6). A similar pattern has 
been found in the mouse genome, except that the intermediate peak is much 
less pronounced (Z. Zhang et al. 2004). Stable age distributions resulting 
from a steady-state birth/ death process necessarily have the form of an 
exponential decay curve (as in Figure 3.1), provided that the probability of 
eradication is independent of age. Thus, one interpretation of these data is 
that all pseudogenes older than 9% divergence experienced an environment 
in which pseudogene birth and death rates were roughly constant, and that 
a decline in the birth rate occurred more recently. 
When might this transition in behavior have occurred? From compara-
tive data on pseudogenes of humans and chimpanzees, Nachman and 

62 
CHAPTER 3 
Figure 3.6 The age distribution of pseudo-
genes for the full set of 79 ribosomal protein 
genes in the human genome. The dashed 
line denotes the fitted exponential decay 
curve y = 322 e-O096x. (Data from Zhang, 
Harrison et al. 2002.) 
140 
Vl 
<lI 
@ 120 
co 
0 
"d 
~ 100 
 
Vl 
 
0., 
"0 
<lI 
80 
Vl 
Vl 
<lI 
u 
 
0 .... 
60 
 
0., 
b 
 
.... 
<lI 
40 
.D 
 
 
Z 
20 
o ~~~~--~--~--~--~~~ 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
Sequence divergence (%) 
Crowell (2000) estimate the rate of substitution of silent sites to be 1.25 x 10-9 
per year. Noting that active ribosomal proteins are nearly invariant across 
all animals at the amino acid level, we can roughly assume that only the 
25% silent fraction of their nucleotide sites is free to accumulate nucleotide 
substitutions, whereas all sites within pseudogenes are free to evolve. The 
approximate rate of divergence of a ribosomal protein pseudogene from its 
active relative is then (1.00 + 0.25) x (1.25 x 10-9) = 1.56 x 10-9 per year, so 9% 
divergence translates to about 58 MYA. Because pseudogene production 
depends critically on the intracellular availability of reverse transcriptase, 
it is notable that this date is close to the 50 MYA point of curtailed retro-
transposon activity suggested by Lander et al. (2001). Remarkably, Bensas-
son et al. (2003) found that there was also a substantial pulse of insertion 
of mitochondrial DNA fragments into the human nuclear genome during 
this period. Thus, three entirely independent sets of analyses point to a dra-
matic phase of genomic upheaval in the lineage leading to humans and other 
primates 50-60 MYA, not long after the mass extinction event that marks 
the boundary between the Cretaceous and the Tertiary (65 MYA). 
Because of the unstable age distribution of human pseudogenes, only a 
rough approximation can be made of the possible rate of pseudogene ori-
gin. However, given that there are 40 ribosomal protein-derived pseudo-
genes with divergence of less than 1 % (0.5% being equivalent to 3 MY) and 
79 active ribosomal protein-coding genes in the human genome, the current 
rate of origin of pseudogenes for this particular class of genes appears to be 
about 17%/ gene/ MY. Extrapolating the exponential curve in Figure 3.6 to 
time zero, a crude estimate of the birth rate prior to 58 MYA is 68%/ gene/ MY. 
These are enormous rates of pseudogene production, 10-100 times greater 
than other estimated rates of gene duplication (see Chapter 8). However, 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
63 
because ribosomal proteins are very highly expressed, constituting about 
5%-10% of the protein in a typical cell (and probably much more in an egg, 
where ribosomes need to be prepackaged for use before transcriptional com-
petence sets in), they provide an unusually large amount of mRNA sub-
strate for reverse transcription. 
How long do pseudogenes remain in the human genome before they are 
rendered unrecognizable by mutational substitution or deletion events? 
From the decline in the right side of the age distribution in Figure 3.6, for 
the period subsequent to 58 MYA, the half-life of pseudogenes is estimated 
to be equivalent to 7.2% divergence at silent sites, or 37 MY. This is sever-
alfold longer than the estimated half-life of putatively functional duplicate 
genes in humans, 7.5 MY (Lynch and Conery 2003a,b), but more than 100 
times shorter than estimates derived from dead-on-arrival retrotransposons 
(see Chapter 2). All of these estimates are quite rough and are based on 
numerous assumptions, but the latter contrast again points to the uncer-
tainty of the generality of estimates of DNA eradication rates based on 
mobile elements (see Chapter 2). 
Finally, it is worth considering whether processed mRNA insertions are 
always simply nonfunctional husks of previously active genes. Few for-
mal investigations of this question have been made at the molecular level, 
but a clear case has been uncovered in the mouse in which a transcribed (but 
untranslated) retroprocessed gene has an important function in regulating 
the expression of the homologous parental gene (Hirotsune et al. 2003). In 
addition, several human genes with testis-specific functions appear to have 
been produced by the retroprocessing of more ubiquitously expressed genes 
(Marques et al. 2005). Such genes have apparently retained function by for-
tuitously acquiring transcription factor binding sites at the time of origin. 
These examples and others (Balakirev and Ayala 2003) provide another 
reminder that what superficially appears to be nonfunctional DNA may 
be quite the opposite. 
The Unique Trajectory of Human Evolution 
Although we humans are fairly ordinary mammals from a metabolic per-
spective, we are also strikingly unique in several key ways, such as our 
braininess and use of language and tools, hairlessness, and bipedalism. Yet 
we differ from our closest living relative, the chimpanzee (Ruvolo 1997), by 
just 1 % at the nucleotide level (Mikkelsen et al. 2005), less than the level of 
divergence among reproductively compatible individuals within many 
eukaryotic species (see Chapter 4). Equally astounding is the substantial 
amount of human variation in morphology, behavior, physiology, and dis-
ease resistance when, at the molecular level, we are one of the most uniform 
species on Earth, with two random chromosomes differing by only 0.1 % at 
the nucleotide sequence level (Cargill et al. 1999; Halushka et al. 1999; Yu et 
al.2004). 

64 
CHAPTER 3 
Two of the primary goals of human genomics are to identify the molec-
ular basis of functionally relevant human genetic variation and the key 
genomic changes that led to the unique human condition. Given the excep-
tionally low amounts of human variation involved, achieving these goals 
should be simpler than with more diverse species, but the challenges are 
still enormous. With a total haploid genome size of -3 Mb, two individual 
humans are expected to differ at -6,000,000 nucleotide sites, whereas 
-30,000,000 fixed nucleotide differences exist between humans and chim-
panzees. A large fraction of these differences are likely to involve inconse-
quential neutral variants, and as discussed below, many are undoubtedly 
maladaptive, so the number of candidate sites of functional significance 
could be in the hundreds or low thousands. It is mind-boggling to think that 
such a tiny number of nucleotides may make all the difference between a 
species that utterly dominates the global ecosystem and a small hairy ape 
inhabiting a few remnant forests in Africa. 
Although a detailed evaluation of what makes us human is beyond the 
scope of this book, a few general points are worth making. One key ques-
tion regarding human evolution concerns the rate of morphological change 
and the extent to which it has been driven by natural selection. It is fre-
quently argued that mammals evolve at unusually rapid rates, with pri-
mates being exceptionally rapid for mammals and humans being extraor-
dinary for primates (e.g., Cherry et al. 1978, 1982; Van Valen 1985). To 
account for this putative gradient in morphological evolution, Wilson and 
colleagues (Wilson et al. 1975; Wyles et al. 1983; Larson et al. 1984) suggested 
two possibilities: (1) the shift of a behaviorally sophisticated organism to a 
new habitat could induce secondary selection on morphology to yield a 
more favorable phenotype in the altered environment; or (2) modifications 
of gene regulation mechanisms, perhaps engendered by chromosomal 
rearrangements, could open up new pathways for adaptive evolution. 
Although a number of the problems with these arguments have been 
pointed out (Lynch 1990), here we simply ask just how impressive the rate 
of anatomical evolution in mammals is. 
An objective means of evaluating this question is to contrast the observed 
rate of evolution with the expectation in the absence of natural selection. 
Under this neutral model, the only evolutionary forces are the recurrent intro-
duction of variation by mutation and the gradual fixation of mutant alleles 
by random genetic drift. The application of such a model requires informa-
tion on the per-generation rate at which mutation introduces new genetic vari-
ation for morphological traits, (3~. Although this rate has not been measured 
directly in humans, it has been determined for mice, and very similar rates 
have also been found for a wide array of morphological traits in a variety of 
other animals (Lynch and Walsh 1998). Letting t be the number of generations 
that have elapsed since two species diverged from a common ancestor (esti-
mated from the fossil record and generation times of extant species), 2(3 ~t is 
the expected amount of divergence between the two species in the absence of 
selection (where divergence is measured as the average squared deviation 
(variance) between the mean phenotypes of two species; Lynch and Hill 1986). 

THE HUMAN GENOME 
65 
When this test is applied to the skeletal measures of a wide variety of mam-
mals, the rate of observed evolution is almost always found to be 10-100 times 
slower than the neutral expectation. The only exception is the human lineage, 
which is evolving at a rate consistent with neutrality (Lynch 1990; Ackermann 
and Cheverud 2004). This tells us, first, that the long-term pattern of mor-
phological evolution in nearly all mammals is relative stability, and second, 
that although skeletal traits do evolve more rapidly in humans than in other 
mammals (including chimpanzees and gorillas), the rate is far lower than 
would be possible with long-term directional selection. 
These types of observations may seem far removed from the field of 
genome biology, but they provide a useful perspective by demonstrating 
that the types of genomic changes leading to our unique human morphol-
ogy are unlikely to be out of the ordinary and may not even have been 
entirely promoted by natural selection. To account for patterns of primate 
morphological evolution, there is no need to invoke either a behavioral-
drive process (which presumably would elevate the rate of evolution beyond 
the neutral rate) or extreme mutational changes in gene regulation mecha-
nisms. In addition, the quantitative genetic methodology developed for mor-
phological traits is directly relevant to comparisons of gene expression 
between chimpanzees and humans, which provide more direct insight into 
matters of regulatory evolution. Because of the high degree of sequence sim-
ilarity between primate genomes, it is possible to use the same micro array 
platform to evaluate relative mRNA levels from different species (at least 
for gene spans that are 100% identical), treating transcript levels as an ordi-
nary quantitative trait. Applying this approach to the transcriptome of blood 
leukocytes, livers, and brains, Khaitovich et al. (2004, 2005) argued that the 
data for humans, chimpanzees, orangutans, and macaques are consistent 
with a neutral model of evolution. 
Although this conclusion appears to be contrary to that derived from 
morphology, the analytical model deployed by Khaitovich et al. is based on 
ideas that are only loosely connected with neutral expectations: an expected 
positive correlation between levels of within- and between-species varia-
tion for the expression of different genes, and a linear increase in between-
species expression divergence with time. Because the genetic components of 
within-species and between-species variance are both driven by mutation, 
they are indeed expected to be correlated under the neutral model (Lynch 
and Hill 1986). However, measures of gene expression are functions of both 
the genetic and the environmental backgrounds of individuals, and unless 
the latter is factored out, they provide little information on the more rele-
vant levels of genetic divergence, because genes whose expression is 
strongly influenced by the environment will naturally exhibit higher lev-
els of variation both within and among samples. In addition, linear patterns 
of evolutionary diversification are entirely compatible with models in which 
selection randomly drives divergence. The only objective way to test for 
neutrality in gene expression divergence is to follow the same procedure 
outlined above for morphology; that is, to compare quantitative levels of 
divergence (measured in a controlled environment) with those expected 

66 
CHAPTER 3 
given the mutation rate and time of divergence. This has been done for both 
C. elegans (Denver et al. 2005) and D. melanogaster (Rifkin et al. 2005), and in 
both cases the neutral hypothesis was strongly rejected in favor of a model 
in which purifying selection eliminates most newly arising mutations influ-
encing gene expression. Thus, it is premature to conclude that primate gene 
expression is evolving in a neutral fashion, although this could be specifi-
cally true in the human lineage. 
Because the vast majority of mutations with phenotypic effects are dele-
terious, a genome-wide elevation in the rate of evolution can simply result 
from an enhanced rate of fixation of mildly deleterious mutations, and there 
are two reasons to think that the human species is unusually vulnerable to 
such events. First, the exceptionally low level of nucleotide variation in 
humans reflects a very small long-term effective population size (see Chap-
ter 4), and hence a high vulnerability to random genetic drift. Second, con-
trary to the situation envisioned under the behavioral-drive hypothesis, 
behavioral sophistication may result in a relaxation of the power of natu-
ral selection. Tool use, dietary flexibility, medical procedures, agriculture, 
and use of domesticated animals are just a few of the ways in which human 
behavior may reduce the intensity of selection against maladaptive mor-
phological and/ or physiological changes. Although the possibility that the 
relatively rapid rate of many aspects of morphological evolution in the 
human lineage is simply a consequence of the reduced efficiency of stabi-
lizing selection may be hard to swallow for those with a high affinity for 
adaptive arguments, several lines of evidence at the molecular level sup-
port this contention. 
First, from a genome-wide analysis of the amounts of divergence at silent 
(synonymous) and replacement (nonsynonymous) sites in protein-coding 
genes, Mikkelsen et al. (2005) found that 77% of amino acid-altering muta-
tions are prevented from going to fixation in the human-chimpanzee line-
age, as compared with 87% in the mouse-rat lineage (see Box 3.1 for the 
rationale underlying such analyses). Second, although a substantial fraction 
of human molecular evolution is associated with changes in gene regula-
tion, contrary to the suggestions of Wilson and colleagues, such alterations, 
appear to have accumulated largely by nonadaptive processes. As in the 
case of replacement sites, regions immediately upstream and downstream 
of coding regions exhibit a substantial reduction in the efficiency of selec-
tion in the human-chimpanzee lineage, suggesting a degradation of regu-
latory elements (Keightley et al. 2005), although the magnitude of this effect 
is uncertain (Bush and Lahn 2005). In addition, human transcription factor 
genes have acquired roughly 50% more amino acid changes than have their 
counterparts in the chimpanzee (Mikkelsen et al. 2005), and the expression 
of such genes has evolved particularly rapidly in the human lineage (Gilad 
et al. 2006). Third, several lines of evidence suggest an expanded accumu-
lation of excess DNA in the human lineage. For example, in a comparative 
study of about 11,000 lineage-specific mobile element insertions in humans 
and chimpanzees, 73% were found to be unique to humans (Mills et al. 
2006), although it is uncertain whether this finding represents differential 

Box 3 .1 Inferring mutation rates and patterns 
of selection from DNA sequences of 
protein-coding genes 
Because of the redundancy of the genetic code, nucleotide sites within the protein-coding 
regions of genes can be subdivided into two categories: silent (or synonymous) sites, 
where substitutions have no influence on the encoded amino acid, and replacement (or 
nonsynonymous) sites, where nucleotide substitutions lead to amino acid changes. For ex-
ample, alanine is encoded by four triplets-GCA, GCC, GCG, and GCT -so the first two 
positions are replacement sites and the third is silent. Complications arise at sites where 
only a fraction of substitutions are silent, but these matters can be accommodated by an 
appropriate weighting of such sites-for example, as one-third silent and two-thirds re-
placement. As a consequence of the structure of the genetic code, approximately 25% of 
the nucleotide sites in coding DNA are silent. 
Silent sites are often assumed to be neutral, given their lack of effect on the encoded 
protein (but see Chapters 4 and 6 for other potential selective effects), in which case they 
provide an entree into the mutation rate when sequences are compared between two 
species. Imagine a diploid population of N individuals, with u being the rate of mutation 
per nucleotide site per generation. There are then an expected 2Nu new mutations enter-
ing the population per generation at any particular site. Because the initial frequency of 
each mutation is 1/(2N), and there is no directional force operating on the mutation subse-
quent to its origin, the probability that a new neutral mutation will eventually drift to fixa-
tion (Le., to frequency 1.0) is also equal to 1 /(2N). The expected rate of nucleotide substi-
tution at a site within a given lineage is simply the product of the mutation rate and the 
probability of fixation, which in the case of neutrality simplifies to 2Nu x 1 /(2N) = u. Thus, if 
two species have been separated from a common ancestor for t generations, each lineage 
will have acquired an expected ut mutations per neutral site, and the total number of sub-
stitutions separating the two lineages will be 2ut at such sites. 
As sequences diverge, the observed frequency of differences among nucleotide sites will 
eventually approach saturation, due to the accumulation of multiple changes per site, but 
numerous methods exist for transforming observed levels of divergence into the total ex-
pected number of substitutions per site (Graur and Li 2000). Because they are linear in time 
(t), such measures provide surrogate estimates of relative divergence times (proportional to 
u), as used in Figures 3.1 and 3.6. In addition, letting 5 be the number of substitutions per 
silent site that have accumulated in the divergence of two species, then if t is known, 5/(2t) 
provides an estimate of u. 
For replacement sites, the rate of accumulation of nucleotide substitutions is modified to 
2Nu x Pt = 2NPtu, where Pt is the average probability of fixation. If such sites are neutral, 
Pt = 1/(2N), but Pt will be above or below the neutral expectation if average mutations are 
beneficial or deleterious, respectively. Because the expected cumulative amount of diver-
gence between replacement sites (R) is 4NPtut, dividing by the expected divergence of 
silent sites at the same locus (5 = 2ut) yields the ratio R/5 with expected value 2NPt, which 
is equivalent to the ratio of the average fixation probabilities at the two types of sites, 
PI /[1 /(2N)]. 
If most mutations are deleterious or neutral, which is usually the case, the quantity 
1 - (R/S) provides an estimate of the fraction of mutations that are opposed by natural 
selection. (The quantity R/5 is often referred to as the width of the selective sieve). In con-
trast, in extreme cases in which selection favors amino acid substitutions, R/5 can be posi-
tive. Aside from the assumption of neutrality for silent sites, such analyses have other limi-
tations; for example, R/5 ", 1.0 is consistent with neutrality, but can also come about if the 
pool of changes at replacement sites involves a mixture of deleterious and positively 
selected mutations. 

68 
CHAPTER 3 
expansion in the human genome, deletion in the chimpanzee genome, or 
both. Relative to the chimpanzee genome, the human genome also appears 
to have accumulated twice as many gene duplications (Fortna et al. 2004; 
Cheng et al. 2005), although the adaptive (or maladaptive) significance of 
this finding remains to be determined. While by no means ruling out the 
operation of adaptive evolution on the human lineage, all of these obser-
vations suggest that the fraction of positively selected mutations separating 
humans from chimpanzees may be very small. 
As noted in Box 3.1, one approach to identifying genes under unusual 
modes of selection is to examine the ratio of rates of change at replacement 
(R) versus silent (5) sites in protein-coding genes. An Rj 5 ratio significantly 
greater than one implies strong selection for change at the protein level 
(because changes are accumulating at the amino acid level at a rate that 
exceeds the rate of mutation), and genes with ratios significantly greater 
than the average are also candidates for such selection in particular pro-
tein domains. When applied to the human-chimpanzee clade, such analy-
ses suggest that the pool of genes under strong directional selection is 
enriched in functions associated with transcription regulation, spermato-
genesis, olfaction, nucleotide metabolism, nuclear hormone receptors, and 
immune responses (Bustamante et al. 2005; Mikkelsen et al. 2005; Nielsen 
et al. 2005). A case has also been made that several key proteins associated 
with the nervous system have evolved at unusually high rates in the great 
ape lineage (Dorus et al. 2004; Evans et al. 2005). There are, however, sev-
eral caveats with respect to the interpretation of these results. First, because 
the types of genes that evolve rapidly in the great ape lineage often exhibit 
rapid changes in other animals as well, it is uncertain whether these obser-
vations tell us anything about unique human attributes. Second, evaluations 
of the prevailing form of selection based on ratios of R and 5 are necessar-
ily confined to the coding regions of genes, and do not necessarily reveal 
anything about evolution at the level of gene regulation. Third, an elevation 
of Rj5 may simply reflect a reduction in the efficiency of selection against 
mildly deleterious mutations, as noted above. 
A novel set of approaches that may prove more useful in resolving some 
of these problems involves the use of information on intraspecific variation 
(Bamshad and Wooding 2003). Loci that have recently been under positive 
selection should tend to be associated with fairly long spans of DNA with 
exceptionally low diversity (as a consequence of an adaptive variant having 
expanded into the population by a selective sweep; see Chapter 4). Using this 
strategy, Voight et al. (2006) have found the pool of candidate loci in the human 
lineage to be enriched for functions associated with spermatogenesis, skin 
pigmentation, olfaction, and alcohol metabolism. Analyses of specific genes 
known to be associated with language development (Enard et al. 2002; Zhang, 
Webb et al. 2002) and perception and memory (Rockman et al. 2005) have also 
revealed the signature of strong directional selection. These types of studies, 
combined with follow-up functional analyses, represent the earliest stages of 
what will soon become a substantial investigative enterprise. 

Why Population 
Size Matters 
Basic principles of Mendelian genetics, supported by decades of empir-
ical observation, tell us that long-term evolutionary change is a consequence 
of the origin of new variation by mutation and subsequent modifications of 
allele frequencies. This fundamental fact has provided a solid foundation 
for the development of a mechanistic framework for understanding evo-
lutionary processes with a level of mathematical rigor that has few rivals in 
the life sciences. Indeed, the general principles of population genetics are 
now so well established that the credibility of any proposed scenario for 
genomic evolution must remain in doubt until it has survived this theoret-
ical gauntlet. Given our primary concern with genomic differences among 
distantly related organisms, the focus here will be on the factors that influ-
ence species divergence. However, because the roots of evolutionary change 
reside in within-species variation, the two issues are by no means inde-
pendent: no matter how beneficial a mutational change might be in the long 
run, it will never contribute to evolutionary divergence unless it is capable 
of first surviving as a transient polymorphism. 
Evolutionary change involves the complex interplay of mutation, recom-
bination, selection, and the chance sampling of gametes from generation 
to generation, raising some of the most difficult theoretical challenges that 
biologists have had to confront. The goal of this chapter is to show why these 
issues must be addressed if comparative genomics is to mature beyond its 
descriptive "natural history" phase into an explanatory framework based 
on known evolutionary mechanisms. An attempt has been made to do this 
in a way that is mathematically rigorous but also transparent from a bio-
logical perspective. In many cases this has meant the presentation of just the 
final results of what may be an intricate tapestry of analytical solutions, first-
order approximations, and computer simulations. The theoretician reading 

70 
CHAPTER 4 
this book will realize that an enormous number of details have been glossed 
over. He/she who abhors all things mathematical will be glad that this is 
the case, but should not lose track of the fact that the technical details do 
matter. 
The key point in the following pages is that the types of evolution that 
can occur within a species depend strongly on population size. Natural 
selection is ubiquitous, but for many aspects of genomic evolution, the forces 
of selection are quite weak. If the population size is sufficiently small, the 
noise associated with random gamete sampling can completely overwhelm 
weak selective forces, yielding a situation in which the population evolves 
as though selection were entirely absent. This idea has long been appreci-
ated in the field of molecular evolution (Kimura 1983; Ohta 1997). However, 
a general theme that will emerge in the following chapters is that although 
small population size promotes the accumulation of mutations that are 
mildly deleterious in the short term, the resultant alterations to gene and 
genomic architecture can provide a potential setting for secondary adaptive 
changes that are unattainable in large populations. Central to this argument 
is a general reduction in the efficiency of selection across the transitions from 
prokaryotes to unicellular / oligocellular eukaryotes to multicellular species, 
which results from the confluence of three factors: a decrease in popula-
tion size, a decrease in the amount of recombination between functionally 
relevant genomic sites, and an increase in the deleterious mutation rate. 
Once one understands these basic issues, the menu of plausible mecha-
nisms for genomic evolution takes on a new complexion. For example, 
although it is almost universally assumed that an expansion of genomic 
complexity was a necessary prerequisite to the origin of organisms with 
multiple. cell types and mechanisms of cell signaling (Raff 1996; Gerhart and 
Kirschner 1997; Davidson 2001; Carroll et al. 2001), the extent to which 
eukaryotic genome expansion was essential for phenotypic diversification 
or even adaptive in nature is far from clear. Although mobile elements may 
occasionally spawn an adaptive mutation, it is unlikely that the millions of 
such elements and their remnants in the human genome have been retained 
for their beneficial effects. Likewise, the massive increase in average intron 
size in some multicellular eukaryotes has no obvious advantage, and we 
will see in the following chapters that even expansions in gene number and 
regulatory region complexity can arise in the absence of any direct selection 
for these features. 
Random Genetic Drift at a Neutral Locus 
Evolution is an inherently stochastic process, starting from the chance events 
that produce single mutations in single individuals and proceeding through 
a series of fortuitous steps that gradually lead to the spread of those muta-
tions to every member of the descendent population. The likelihood that a 
new mutation will successfully complete such a journey is almost never very 
high, although the chances are certainly improved for advantageous muta-

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
71 
tions. However, before invoking the guiding hand of natural selection in 
evolution-as most biologists are prone to do-it helps to understand what 
to expect in the absence of selection. At the very least, such neutral models 
serve as formal null hypotheses for interpreting evolutionary observations. 
But as we will soon see, even non-neutral mutations will behave in an effec-
tively neutral fashion provided the population size is sufficiently small that 
the magnitude of selection intensity is overwhelmed by the stochastic force 
of random genetic drift. In the following pages, this situation will be seen 
to be common in eukaryotic genomic evolution. 
Our point of departure is the classic Wright-Fisher model of population 
genetics, named after two of the founding fathers of the field. We assume a 
population consisting of N diploid individuals, with each member of the 
population contributing equally and synchronously to an effectively infi-
nite gamete pool, from which pairs of gametes are drawn randomly to pro-
duce the next generation. The mating system is idealized in that we assume 
hermaphroditic individuals and ignore complexities associated with over-
lapping generations, spatial structure, environmentally induced variation 
in family sizes, and so on. However, most of these complications can be dealt 
with by redefining N to be a measure of the genetic effective size of the pop-
ulation; that is, the size of the ideal Wright-Fisher population that would 
most closely reflect the evolutionary behavior of the nonideal natural pop-
ulation. In the following pages, we will denote the genetic effective popu-
lation size by Ne. 
An enormous amount of technical theory has been devoted to the con-
cept of effective population size. Although the specific mathematical details 
need not concern us here, one fundamental issue merits emphasis. Most of 
the features of natural populations that violate the assumptions of the 
Wright-Fisher model conspire to ensure that Ne will be less than the total 
number of potentially reproductive individuals (N), often considerably less. 
For example, if adults differ in the number of gametes produced, the effec-
tive population size will be reduced simply because some individuals con-
tribute little or nothing to the following generation. Variable gamete pro-
duction can result from selection or purely from chance ecological events 
(e.g., from some individuals inhabiting microhabitats with more resources 
than others). If a population is spatially structured into semi-isolated 
patches, Ne will be further decreased because the tendency to mate with 
locally related individuals will cause geographic concentrations of partic-
ular alleles, which can then become lost by chance extinction of local demes. 
A sex ratio that deviates from 1:1 will also reduce Ne, because the rarer sex 
(which necessarily contributes half of the next generation's genes) acts as 
the limiting factor. Similarly, population size fluctuations reduce Ne via the 
long-lasting effects of bottlenecks on genetic variation. Readers wishing to 
make side excursions into the more technical side of Ne can find useful 
reviews by Caballero (1994), Whitlock and Barton (1997), and Rousset (2003). 
The main point here is that the power of random genetic drift in a species 
is almost always greater than that expected on the basis of actual numbers 

72 
CHAPTER 4 
of individuals. How large might this deviation be? A number of different 
procedures have been developed to estimate Ne by relating the magnitude 
of generation-to-generation fluctuations in allele frequencies to the expec-
tations based on the sampling of 2Ne effective gametes. In a survey of stud-
ies of mostly low-fecundity vertebrate populations, Frankham (1995) found 
that average Ne is -10% of the total number of breeding adults (N), although 
high-fecundity species in spatially variable environments may have an N/ N 
< 0.001 (Hedrick 2005). Few reported studies have incorporated the effects 
of long-term fluctuations in population size, and almost all have involved 
obligate outcrossers. As many unicellular species have conspicuous phases 
of asexual reproduction, which can encourage the rapid proliferation of a 
small number of clones, NelN ratios even lower than 0.001 are expected to 
be quite common in such species. Indeed, the following discussion will 
demonstrate that even the linkage of genes in sexually reproducing popu-
lations under selection can have effects of comparable magnitude. 
To return to the point at hand, now imagine a newly arisen neutral muta-
tion (Figure 4.1). Because a diploid population contains 2N gene copies at 
each locus (the 2 entering because there are two gene copies per individual), 
the initial frequency of this allele is simply Po = 1 I (2N). Any mutation must 
eventually suffer one of two fates, either being lost entirely from the popu-
lation (declining to frequency 0.0) or gradually drifting to fixation (achiev-
ing a frequency of 1.0). Usually, a new mutation will be quickly lost. For 
example, the probability that the new mutant allele will not be among the 
2N genes randomly incorporated into the very next generation is (1 - PO?N, 
as there are 2N independent draws each with probability (1 - Po) of being 
the nonmutant. Provided N is greater than ten or so, this quantity is closely 
approximated by e-1 :::: 0.368, where e = 2.718 is the base of natural logarithms. 
Thus, the probability of immediate loss of a newly arisen mutation is essen-
tially independent of population size, and in the event that the mutant allele 
does happen to be transmitted to the next generation, it will most likely still 
be present as a single copy, recreating the same scenario. In rare cases, how-
ever, a mutant allele will drift to higher and higher frequencies, entirely by 
a series of chance events, eventually becoming fixed in the population and 
totally displacing the ancestral allele. 
The probability of ultimate fixation of a neutral allele is quite simple. Pro-
vided there are no external forces favoring one allele over another, the prob-
ability that a newly arisen neutral mutation will eventually drift to frequency 
1.0 is always equal to its initial frequency, 1/ (2N). The probability that the 
mutant allele will be lost from the population is I-II (2N). Thus, only a very 
tiny fraction of new neutral mutations becomes permanently incorporated 
into a population, and this fraction is inversely proportional to N. While at 
first glance this result might suggest that neutral changes will accumulate 
more slowly in larger populations, this is not the case. Because the number 
of mutational targets in a diploid population is proportional to 2N, if J.1 is the 
rate of origin of neutral mutations per gene, then the average number of new 
mutant alleles arising per generation is 2NI-I, each of which has the same prob-

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
73 
TIme 
 
0  
0  
.
0
. 
.
0
0 
1 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Figure 4.1 Random genetic drift of a single mutation to fixation (denoted in red). 
The population initially contains two additional alleles (denoted in yellow and green). 
After three generations, the yellow allele has been lost by chance, and the green allele 
is lost soon thereafter. The arrows trace the full gene genealogy of the population at 
generation 5 back to the single mutation at time O. The different numbers of descen-
dants of each gene, in this case between 0 and 4 per generation, are purely a matter of 
chance. 
ability of ultimate fixation, 1/ (2N). The total rate of fixation of neutral alle-
les is equal to the product of the nwnber arising per generation and the fix-
ation probability of individual mutations, and because these two quantities 
depend on 2N in opposing ways, the long-term rate of neutral evolution is 
simply equal to the genic mutation rate J1. Thus, for neutral changes, nei-
ther the absolute nor the effective population size plays a role in the long-
term rate of evolution. This simple result, which holds for virtually any breed-
ing system regardless of the degree of linkage or the mode of gene action, is 
the hallmark of the neutral model of molecular evolution (Kimura 1983). 
One additional issue with respect to the neutral model merits consider-
ation. Although the long-term rate of evolution under neutrality is inde-
pendent of population size, the time that it takes each individual mutation 
to become fixed is not. Because Ne determines the size of sampling fluctu-
ations in allele frequencies across generations, the magnitude of random 
genetic drift per generation is diminished and the time to fixation is 
extended in populations of larger effective size. In one of their many math-
ematical achievements with the neutral model, Kimura and Ohta (1969) 
showed that a neutral mutation that successfully makes a sojourn from gene 
frequency 1/ (2N) to 1.0 does so in 4Ne generations, on average. As will be 

74 
CHAPTER 4 
shown below, the increased residence times of neutral alleles in larger pop-
ulations result in elevated levels of within-population variation. 
The Effects of Selection 
Intuition tells us that the probability of fixation of a beneficial allele must be 
greater than 1/(2N) and of a detrimental allele must be less than 1/(2N), but 
how much so? To see that a mutant allele, no matter how favorable, is never 
guaranteed to go to fixation, we will follow the logic developed above for 
a neutral allele. Suppose that the mutant allele improves the fitness of its 
initial carrier by a fraction s (the selection coefficient, with s = 0 denoting 
neutrality), such that the allele has expected frequency Po = (1 + s) I (2N) in 
the gamete pool leading to the next reproductive episode. At this point, 
the favorable allele can do nothing to further guarantee its transmission to 
the next generation, and the probability that it is not acquired by at least one 
offspring is again (1- PO?N, which is roughly equal to e-(l+s), or (1 - s) e-1 
for small s. Thus, relative to the situation for a neutral allele, selection only 
reduces the probability of an initial exit for a beneficial allele by a fraction 
s. Even for a high selection coefficient of 0.1, the probability of loss in the 
first generation is 0.333 (compared with 0.368 for a neutral mutation). Until 
a favorable mutant allele has successfully avoided chance elimination in the 
first few generations and increased its frequency in doing so, there is little 
assurance that it will successfully go to fixation. 
For the case in which an allele has additive effects on fitness (adding s to 
the fitness of heterozygotes and 2s to that of homozygotes), diffusion theory 
can be used to make a precise statement about the probability of fixation, Pf 
(Kimura 1962). Following the modification of BUrger and Ewens (1995), 
1- e -(2N,s/N)/(l- s) 
Pf "" 
1 
-4N s/(1-s) 
-e 
' 
(4.1) 
To simplify the following discussion, we will assume that s < 0.1 (which in 
practice is almost always true), in which case (1- s) "" 1. Because Ne/N is 
usually much less than 1, the preceding formula then simplifies to 
(2sNe / N) 
Pf""l 
-4N s 
-e 
 
(4.2) 
As 4Nes -7 00, the denominator -71, showing that even in very large popu-
lations, the high degree of stochasticity in the early phase of establishment 
of a beneficial mutation still causes the probability of fixation to reach an 
upper limit of about 2sNe IN. Thus, the probability of fixation of a benefi-
cial allele with additive effects is virtually always less than twice its selec-
tive advantage in the heterozygous state. 
It is useful to consider the ratio of Pf and the neutral probability of fixa-
tion, 1/(2N), which is a simple function of 4Nes, ef "" 4Nes/ (1 - e-4NeS), 
graphed in Figure 4.2, where negative values of s denote deleterious muta-
tions. Note that if the strength of positive selection is sufficiently great rel-

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
75 
Figure 4 .2 Probability of fixation of a new 
mutant allele relative to the neutral expecta-
tion of 1/(2N), given as a function of the 
product of the effective population size (Ne) 
and the selection coefficient (5). The dashed 
line denotes the neutral expectation. 
ative to the power of random genetic drift (i.e., 4Nes  I), then the fixa-
tion probability is inflated by a factor of 4Nes relative to neutrality. How-
ever, if the absolute value of Nes is less than 0.05, the probability of fixation 
is within 10% of the neutral expectation, and the deviation reduces to less 
than 1% if I Nes I < 0.005, where the vertical lines denote absolute value. 
Thus, for any selection coefficient, there is a critical population size, Ne == 
0.005/ I s I, below which the probability of fixation is essentially the same 
(within a factor of 1 %) as that for a neutral mutation. Stated in another way, 
for any population size, there exists a range of selection coefficients for which 
the behavior of mutant alleles is nearly identical to that of neutral alleles. 
Such a condition is generally referred to as effective neutrality. 
In general, expressions for the time to fixation of a mutation under selec-
tion are quite complicated mathematically. However, a remarkable result 
was obtained by Maruyama and Kimura (1974): for a given population size, 
the time to fixation of a beneficial mutation, conditional on the mutation 
actually going to fixation, is identical to the time to fixation of a deleteri-
ous allele with the same selection coefficient (but of opposite sign). This 
rather counterintuitive result comes about because although a deleterious 
allele has a reduced probability of fixation, if such an allele is going to fix, it 
must do so as a consequence of some rather extreme and clumped sampling 
errors in gene frequency. For l4Nes I 1 in an idealized population with 
mutations with additive effects, the mean time to fixation is about 
(4/ I s I )In(2Ne) generations (Crow and Kimura 1970). Thus, mutations under 
efficient selection have much shorter periods of polymorphism than neu-
tral mutations, which, as noted above, require an average of 4Ne generations 
to become fixed. 

76 
CHAPTER 4 
To summarize, in contrast to neutral mutations, whose fixation proba-
bility, l /(2N), declines with population size, the probability of fixation for 
beneficial mutations increases with Ne, eventually reaching an asymptote 
at 2sNeiN. Fortuitously, this same expression applies to a population that 
is changing in size, provided appropriate modifications are made in the def-
inition of Ne (Otto and Whitlock 1997). For a subdivided population in which 
offspring production is constant for all demes (subpopulations), the limit 
needs to be multiplied by (1- F), where the index of subdivision F ranges 
from zero to one, because restricted migration makes it more difficult for a 
mutant allele to diffuse through the entire metapopulation (Whitlock 2003). 
If, on the other hand, deme productivity is a function of local mean fitness, 
the limit needs to be multiplied by (1 + F), because a highly fit deme can 
come to dominate the entire metapopulation (Whitlock 2003). 
Despite the need for some of these modifications, letting Pb be the rate of 
beneficial mutation per gene, such that 2NPb is the beneficial mutation rate 
at the population level, the above results imply that the upper limit to the 
rate of incorporation of beneficial mutations scales as (2sNelN) x 2Np.b = 
4Ne,ubs, which, unlike the situation for neutral mutations, increases with the 
effective population size. In addition, because deleterious mutations with 
-0.3 > Nes > 0.0 go to fixation at rates at least half as great as that for neu-
tral alleles, if the rate of origin of mutations in this range of effects is suffi-
ciently high, we can expect the accumulation of a considerable load of fixed 
mildly deleterious mutations in populations of sufficiently small size (Ohta 
1973,1974). Taken together, these results suggest that the ability of a popu-
lation to incorporate beneficial mutations and to purge deleterious muta-
tions should scale positively with absolute population size, assuming that 
Ne scales positively with N. However, we will now see that something 
beyond the demographic features of the population-the physical structure 
of the genome itself-generally limits the growth of Ne with N in the largest 
of populations, perhaps even imposing an upper limit to Ne and hence to 
the evolutionary potential of a population. 
The Importance of Linkage 
Because tightly linked nucleotide sites are transmitted across generations 
as a unit, to a degree that depends on the rate of recombination, the fate of 
any new mutation depends on the selective forces operating on all loci phys-
ically close to its chromosomal location. The resultant selective interference 
will almost always cause the fixation rates of beneficial mutations to be 
lower and of detrimental mutations to be higher than suggested by the sin-
gle-locus approximations in the previous section. Consider, for example, a 
beneficial mutation that rapidly sweeps through a population to fixation. 
Such a mutation will necessarily drag along any deleterious alleles at tightly 
linked loci with which it happened to be associated at the time of origin (Fig-
ure 4.3). Linked beneficial mutations can also interfere with each other's fix-
ation. To see how, consider a beneficial allele A segregating at one locus, 

(A) Single-linkage group 
 I  
   
! 
 
I e 
 
I e 
 
e 
 
e 
 
I e 
  
  
 
I e 
 
I  
WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
77 
(B) Three chromosomes 
-+- -tlet--
 
--_.--- --+-
 
+--
 
I----
  -+--
  
I----
   
I----
 -+--
e e e e   
e e  
Figure 4.3 The effects of linkage on the fates of alternative alleles. The small red and 
larger green balls denote beneficial mutations at two loci, whereas the black balls de-
note deleterious mutations at a third locus. lick marks denote segregating neutral 
markers. (A) All three selected loci are completely linked, and it is assumed that the net 
advantage of the chromosome with the black and green alleles exceeds that of the 
chromosome with the red allele. In the process of the former chromosome sweeping 
to fixation, the variation at other linked loci is cleansed from the population, one bene-
ficial mutation (red) is lost, and one deleterious mutation (black) is fixed. (B) Each of 
the three mutations is located on a separate chromosome. Independent segregation al-
lows the two beneficial mutations to be promoted and the deleterious mutation to be 
purged, while some variation is retained on the middle chromosome. 
with a second beneficial mutation B arising at a tightly linked locus on an 
a chromosome. If the advantages of each mutation were the same, then the 
Ab and aB linkage groups would compete with each other in the fixation 
process, and in the absence of any recombination between them, one would 
eventually exclude the other. Similar logic leads to the conclusion that linked 
deleterious mutations will interfere with each other's removal, thereby 
increasing their probability of fixation. Linkage need not be absolute for 
these effects to be important, but the stronger the degree of linkage, the 
greater the degree of selective interference. 
Before we explore these issues in more detail, it should be emphasized 
that selection on linked loci has no influence on the long-term rate of fixa-
tion of evolutionary changes at neutral sites (although the fixation times of 
neutral mutations will be altered) (Birky and Walsh 1988). Consider a neu-
tral allele A with current frequency p, and suppose that a beneficial muta-
tion destined to fixation arises at a completely linked locus. With probabil-

78 
CHAPTER 4 
ity p, the beneficial mutation will arise in association with linked allele A, 
driving it to fixation, and with probability (1- p), it will arise in associa-
tion with the alternative allele, preventing the fixation of A. The net effect 
is that the probability of fixation of the A allele remains at p, the neutral 
expectation. 
Now consider a detrimental mutation destined to be purged from the 
population. Such a mutation again arises in association with neutral allele 
A with probability p, in which case one A chromosome is ultimately 
removed from the population and replaced by a random deleterious muta-
tion-free chromosome, reducing the expected frequency of A to (2pN -
1)/ (2N -1). Alternatively, the detrimental mutation will arise in association 
with the a allele with probability (1- p), in which case the frequency of A 
increases, on average, to 2pN / (2N -1). The probability of fixation of A again 
remains at the neutral rate, as 
[P' 2;:~11] + [(1-P)' 2~~1]=P 
(4.3) 
Thus, for fixations that are effectively neutral, the complications added by 
selection on linked sites are no cause for concern. This makes sense because, 
as will be shown below, selective interference from linked loci is essentially 
equivalent to a reduction in the effective population size in the region of 
selected loci, and as noted above, the rate of neutral evolution is completely 
independent of the effective population size. 
The theory of genetic draft 
The reduced efficiency of selection on linked loci is often referred to as the 
Hill-Robertson effect, after the authors who first pointed out the issue (Hill 
and Robertson 1966), and the selective sweep phenomenon is alternatively 
referred to as a hitchhiking effect (Maynard Smith and Haigh 1974; Kaplan 
et al. 1989) or genetic draft (Gillespie 2000). Gillespie (2000) provided an 
elegant explanation for the influence of linkage on the local effective pop-
ulation size of a reference locus, which although relying on a rather ideal-
ized model, captures the essence of the problem in an intuitive way. We 
start by noting that the effective size of a population defines the variance 
of neutral allele frequency change from generation to generation, p(1 -
p) / (2Ne), where p is the current allele frequency and 2Ne is the effective 
number of genes sampled per locus per generation in a diploid population. 
Now imagine a neutrally evolving site completely linked to another site 
experiencing selective sweeps at rate O. As noted above, such a sweep will 
result in the fixation of the neutral allele with probability p and its loss with 
probability (1- p). If we assume that sweeps cleanse a population of linked 
variation essentially instantaneously, then conditional on a sweep occur-
ring, the variance in allele frequency change is p(1- p). Thus, for a neutral 
locus in an ideal randomly mating population subject to periodic selec-

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
79 
tive sweeps, the variance in allele frequency change is approximately 
p(l- p) . {[(I - 8)/ (2Ne)] + 8). 
Equating the term in brackets to 1/(2Nl), we obtain 
N -
Ne 
(4.4) 
1 -1+2Ne8 
where Nl denotes the long-term effective population size, taking into con-
sideration the constraints imposed by linkage. Maruyama and Birky (1991) 
obtained essentially the same result via a different method. 
The preceding formula shows how the degree of linkage can reduce the 
long-term effective population size (Nl), relevant to genomic evolution, 
below the short-term measure (Ne) defined by demographic features alone. 
It also makes a rather nonintuitive point: that different genes within the 
same genome will have different effective population sizes if they are sub-
ject to varying levels of influence from selection on linked loci. 
A key question concerns the way in which 8 scales with population size. If 
8 were to be completely independent of population size, then Nl would 
increase with N at a decreasing rate, eventually reaching an upper limit of 
1/ (28) (top curve in Figure 4.4). However, because larger populations contain 
more mutational targets, the rate of sweeps is likely to increase with increas-
ing population size. For the extreme situation in which fixations occur at the 
selected locus at rate 4Ne,ubs, as predicted by the single-locus theory, then 
N 
Nl "" 
e 
(4.5) 
1 + SN;J1bs 
which asymptotically approaches l/(SNe,ubs) as Ne ~ co, leading to a pecu-
liar situation in which the long-term effective population size eventually 
Actual population size (N) 
Figure 4.4 Hypothetical relationship be-
tween long-term effective population size and 
actual population sizes for ideal randomly 
mating populations with short-term Ne = N. 
The diagonal line denotes the situation in 
which NI = N. The remaining four functions 
make various assumptions about the relation-
ship between population size and the inci-
dence of selective sweeps, and are defined by 
the general formula NI = N/(l + aNfJ), with a 
= 10-9. When f3 = 1, the rate of selective 
sweeps (8 in the text) is independent of popu-
lation size. For f3 > 1, the rate of sweeps in-
creases with population size, as defined by 
8 = (a/2)N(~l). When f3 = 2, the qualitative 
behavior of the model is equivalent to the 
situation in which 8 = 4NPbS, as described in 
the text; that is, the rate of selective sweeps 
increases linearly with N. 

80 
CHAPTER 4 
declines to zero at large Ne (bottom curve in Figure 4.4). There are at least 
three reasons why reality must lie between these two extremes. 
First, the model just described is idealized in that it considers only two 
loci, with a single selected locus dominating the allele frequency dynamics 
at the neutral hitchhiking locus. However, because the selected locus itself 
may be subject to selective interference from still other linked loci, the rate 
of sweeps is necessarily less than the single-locus prediction, 4Neflbs. Sec-
ond, the single-locus prediction for the incidence of sweeps continuously 
grows with increasing Ne, eventually exceeding one per generation. Because 
each selective sweep cumulatively requires ION to lOON selective deaths 
in a population of approximately constant size regardless of the selection 
intensity (Haldane 1957), and because the number of linked sites subject to 
adaptive sweeps is limited, such a condition leads to a biologically impos-
sible situation. Third, in a sexual population, there is always some proba-
bility of recombination between any two linked sites, and there are more 
opportunities for such events in larger populations. Recombination reduces 
the likelihood that a selective sweep will completely purge the variation at 
a linked locus, as it breaks down the statistical associations between the alle-
les at linked sites. Gillespie (2000) showed that recombination modifies the 
expression for the effective population size to 
N '" 
Ne 
] 1+ 2NeC8 
(4.6) 
where C is the average squared frequency of the neutral hitchhiking allele 
after the completion of a sweep at the selected locus. We previously assumed 
that C = I, but C can be substantially smaller, to a degree that depends on 
the recombination rate and the magnitude of selection at the linked locus, 
which mutually determine the breadth and rapidity of the sweep. 
These qualitative arguments do not rule out the possibility that after ini-
tially scaling linearly with increasing Ne and then leveling off, N] eventually 
begins to decline, but we cannot expect N] to decline indefinitely with 
increasing Ne. Rather, N] must eventually reach an asymptote at some level 
in the vicinity of 1/ (2C8max)' where 8max is the limiting value of 8 reached at 
large Ne. In the absence of any direct observations on this matter, a more 
general approximation is to treat C8 as a power function of Net which yields 
a relationship of the form 
N 
N -
e 
]-
l+aN~ 
(4.7) 
where a and f3 are arbitrary scaling coefficients (see Figure 4.4). Here, f3 = 1 
describes the case in which C8 is independent of Ne, as we initially assumed, 
whereas f3 = 2 describes the situation in which the rate of selective sweeps 
is proportional to Ne, as in the single-locus result described above. Although 
f3 is likely to fall in the range of 1 to 2, it must be emphasized that the func-
tions outlined in Figure 4.4 are simply qualitative approximations of 
expected behavior. Nevertheless, despite the uncertainties of the patterns 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
81 
in Figure 4.4, one conclusion cannot be avoided: stochastic evolutionary 
change is by no means restricted to small populations, but in very large pop-
ulations, such noise is more a consequence of genetic draft, a function of the 
chromosomal nature of the genome, than of genetic drift, a function of pop-
ulation size. 
Empirical considerations 
Some insight into the frequency of adaptive substitutions (and a rough 
approximation of 8) may be acquired by considering the distribution of 
replacement-site and silent-site mutations in protein-coding genes. As noted 
in Chapter 3, the rate of substitution per replacement site (R) is expected to 
equal that per silent site (5) in the absence of selection. Thus, the quantity 
1- (R/ 5) for interspecific divergence is often taken to be a measure of the 
fraction of mutations at replacement sites with substantial enough delete-
rious effects to prevent fixation (see Chapter 3). The R/5 ratio can also be 
computed for variation within populations (polymorphisrns), and the con-
trast between the two measures provides some insight into the degree to 
which replacement-site mutations that do become fixed are promoted by 
positive selection (as opposed to being effectively neutral and simply drift-
ing to fixation). 
For example, average R/ 5 for the divergence between humans and Old 
World monkeys is 0.35 (Fay et al. 2001), whereas that for moderately com-
mon (frequencies of at least 0.15) single-nucleotide polymorphisrns (SNPs) 
within the human population is only 0.20. Because the latter ratio is influ-
enced by the residence time of segregating mutations, which is depressed 
by directional forms of selection, the within-population results suggest that 
80% of replacement mutations are either deleterious enough to be rapidly 
eliminated from the population or beneficial enough to be rapidly fixed. The 
remaining 20% of segregating replacement-site mutations must then be 
either neutral or under very mild selection. Some may be so mildly delete-
rious as to be capable of going to fixation, but because selection only pro-
motes the fixation of beneficial mutations, the excess of replacement sub-
stitutions between species (0.35 - 0.20 = 0.15 per fixed silent substitution) 
most likely reflects the action of positive selection. Assuming a 20-year gen-
eration time and extrapolating to a protein of average size, Fay et al. (2001) 
suggested an average fixation rate of 2 x 10-6 adaptive substitutions per pro-
tein-coding gene per generation in this pair of primate lineages. Applica-
tion of a similar approach to two Drosophila species yielded an estimated 
rate of adaptive substitution per protein-coding gene of 2 x 10-7 per gener-
ation (Smith and Eyre-Walker 2002). 
Although these analyses are unable to partition fixed mutations between 
the two lineages being compared, some further insight into this matter is 
possible for primates. In contrast to the analysis of humans and Old World 
monkeys, a human-dUmpanzee comparison reveals virtually identical aver-
age R/ 5 ratios at the within- and between-species levels (Mikkelsen et al. 

82 
CHAPTER 4 
2005). Thus, unless a substantial fraction of segregating replacement muta-
tions is beneficial, which seems unlikely, this observation implies a relatively 
small amount of adaptive evolution within the great apes, which is consis-
tent with the idea that the human lineage has experienced a considerable 
relaxation in the efficiency of selection (see Chapter 3). 
These observations crudely, but conservatively, suggest that 0 for a gene-
sized fragment within an animal genome is about 10-7 -10~ per generation. 
However, extrapolating these results to yield an estimate of the upper bound 
to the long-term effective population size-using, for example, 1/ (2Comax)-
is fraught with difficulties. Some recombination must occur between selected 
sites and flanking neutral sites, and as will be discussed below, unicellular 
species can have much higher rates of recombination per physical distance 
than do multicellular species. Although this difference could cause C (the 
extent of the sweep) to be lower in unicellular species, with their larger Ne 
and greater sensitivity to selection, such species are also expected to expe-
rience higher rates of selective sweeps (larger 0). Despite these considerable 
uncertainties, empirical results to be discussed below suggest that the upper 
limit to the long-term effective population size is at least 109, the value 
assumed for the upper curve in Figure 4.4, although it may not be much 
greater than that. 
These largely theoretical arguments may seem rather unconvincing to 
some readers, but more direct insight into the power of genetic draft can 
be acquired from direct observations on nucleotide polymorphisms. If hitch-
hiking effects have a significant influence on genomic evolution, they should 
leave a strong signature in chromosomal regions that are maximally sensi-
tive to genetic draft. In particular, genes in regions of low recombination 
should exhibit exceptionally low levels of segregating polymorphisms 
within individual species. This hypothesis can be tested by taking advan-
tage of the fact that the rate of recombination per physical distance varies 
by at least two orders of magnitude among chromosomal regions in typical 
eukaryotic species. Population surveys of nucleotide diversity in Drosophila 
(Begun and Aquadro 1992), humans (Nachman 2001; Lercher and Hurst 
2002), nematodes (Cutter and Payseur 2003), tomatoes (Stephan and Lang-
ley 1998; Roselius et al. 2005), and goatgrass (Dvorak et al. 1998) uniformly 
point to reduced levels of variation in regions of low recombination. 
Although these general observations would seem to provide strong sup-
port for the hitchhiking hypothesis, an alternative explanation for such pat-
terns is that the production of new variation is at least in part a mutagenic 
side effect of recombination (Yeadon and Catcheside 1999; Lercher and Hurst 
2002). Because the rate of silent-site divergence is equal to the mutation rate 
under the assumption of neutrality, it was initially argued that the lack of 
a correlation between recombination rate and silent-site divergence between 
species is inconsistent with the mutagenesis hypothesis (Begun and Aquadro 
1992; Nachman 2001). However, if silent sites are not truly neutral, but rather 
subject to weak selection (see Chapter 6), and if regions of high recombina-
tion generate mutations while also serving as relatively effective environ-

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
83 
ments for selection (Hey and Kliman 2002), the two effects would tend to 
cancel each other out. Moreover, studies in humans (Filatov and Gerrard 
2003; Hellmann et al. 2003), mice (Huang et al. 2005), and Caenorhabditis ele-
gans (Cutter and Payseur 2003) reveal positive correlations between inter-
species divergence and the recombination rate, and correlations between 
intra- and interspecies silent-site diversity across loci in maize (Tenaillon 
et al. 2004) and tomatoes (Roselius et al. 2005) also suggest a mutual depend-
ence on heterogeneous mutation rates. Some direct observations point to 
the mutagenicity of recombination as well. In yeasts, mutation rates during 
meiotic cell divisions are about 13 times those during mitosis (in which 
recombination is suppressed) (Magni and von Borstel1962), apparently 
because of the error-prone nature of the DNA polymerase used in the repair 
of double-strand breaks (Strathem et al. 1995; Rattray et al. 2002). 
Although recombination may serve to both reduce sensitivity to indi-
vidual selective sweeps and increase the frequency of such events, numer-
ous additional observations from Drosophila support the idea that the net 
effect of linkage is to constrain the potential for adaptive evolution. For 
example, Drosophila genes with higher rates of putative adaptive amino acid 
substitutions tend to reside in regions of high recombination (Betancourt 
and Pres graves 2002), and the frequency spectrum for segregating poly-
morphisms is consistent with expectations under the hitchhiking model 
(Andolfatto and Przeworski 2001). In D. miranda, one of the autosomes has 
become fused to the Y chromosome, and because male Drosophila lack 
recombination, this neo-Y chromosome is completely non-recombining. Rel-
ative to the neo-X (which undergoes recombination in females), the neo-Y 
exhibits numerous signs of deleterious mutation accumulation, including 
the fixation of mobile element insertions and the silencing of many previ-
ously active genes (Bachtrog 2003). Further attention will be given to the 
evolutionary consequences of recombinational quiescence in organelle 
genomes and sex chromosomes in Chapters 11 and 12. 
The Three Genomic Perils of Evolving 
Large Body Size 
In terms of biomass, a typical single-celled prokaryote is -105-107 times 
smaller than the average single-celled eukaryote, and a similar disparity 
exists between unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes (Bonner 1988). Such 
massive differences in size impose numerous ecological and physiological 
constraints and opportunities, but their implications for the population 
genetic environment are equally as great. As noted above, theory tells us 
that small population size, tight linkage, and high background mutational 
activity reduce the efficiency of natural selection. We will now see that the 
confluence of all three of these conditions in organisms of increasing body 
size induces substantial reductions in average effective population sizes 
across the boundaries from prokaryotes to unicellular eukaryotes to multi-

84 
CHAPTER 4 
cellular eukaryotes. This general pattern will be central to many of the issues 
discussed in subsequent chapters. 
Smaller population size 
As noted above, all other things being equal, the genetic effective size of a 
population should generally increase with the actual number of breeding 
adults (N), possibly leveling off at high N as a consequence of constraints 
from linkage. One of the few established laws in ecology is that a primary 
determinant of N is the average body size of members of the population. In 
general, a doubling of organism size leads to a 50% reduction in population 
density, although ecological factors unique to individual species can cause 
local deviations around this pattern (Damuth 1981; Schmid et al. 2000; 
Enquist and Niklas 2001; Carbone and Gittleman 2002; Finlay 2002). The 
extremes of average densities (individuals per square meter) for eukaryotic 
species are 10-7 for the largest vertebrates and 1011 for the smallest unicel-
lular species, and with the addition of prokaryotic species, the range of vari-
ation in population density exceeds 20 orders of magnitude. 
An inverse scaling between population density (per unit area) and organ-
ism size need not reflect the pattern for total population size, as it does not 
account for total species ranges. However, the total area occupied by ver-
tebrate species is negligibly to weakly positively correlated with average 
body size (Gaston and Blackburn 1996; Diniz-Filho and Torres 2002; Hous-
worth et al. 2003), and the geographic ranges of unicellular species appear 
to be substantially greater than those of multicellular taxa (Finlay et al. 2001, 
2002; Green et al. 2004; Homer-Devine et al. 2004). Thus, in a broad phylo-
genetic sense, there is little doubt that the total number of individuals within 
a species declines with increasing body size, with the exact scaling proba-
bly exceeding that of a strictly inverse relationship. 
The numbers for microbes are particularly staggering. The total num-
ber of prokaryotic cells inhabiting Earth is about 1030 (Whitman et al. 1998). 
Fewer than 104 such species have actually been identified (Oren 2004), so 
if we conservatively estimate that this represents just 0.1 % of the true num-
ber of species (Hammond 1995), the total global population size (N) for an 
average prokaryotic species is 1023 cells. One unnamed marine species has 
an estimated N of 1028 (Morris et al. 2002). 
Higher mutation rates 
Given the central role that mutation plays in evolution and in the genera-
tion of genetic disorders, one would think that the rate of origin of replica-
tion errors would be well understood. However, because of the enormous 
technical challenges in identifying very rare events at individual nucleotide 
sites, the data are extremely sparse and largely confined to indirect obser-
vations. Most estimates of the per-nucleotide mutation rate are derived 
either from surveys of visible mutations at reporter loci (which enhance the 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
85 
detectability of mutations) or from nucleotide sequence comparisons of 
silent sites in distantly related species (which magnify the accumulation of 
mutations). Neither approach is without problems, the first requiring 
assumptions about the fraction of total mutations with observable pheno-
typic effects, and the second requiring assumptions about absolute times of 
interspecific divergence, species-specific generation times, and neutrality of 
the monitored nucleotide sites. The most reliable data obtained from labo-
ratory studies are summarized in Figure 4.5. 
Across a phylogenetically diverse set of species, there is a strong corre-
lation between the base-substitution mutation rate per generation and 
genome size, with average rates for prokaryotes and vertebrates of 5.0 x 
10-10 and 5.4 x 10-8 / bp / generation, respectively. Despite the uncertainties 
in each estimate contributing to this pattern, the validity of the overall rela-
tionship is supported by two observations. First, the estimate for the nem-
atode C. elegans obtained by direct sequence analysis (highest blue point in 
Figure 4.5; Denver et al. 2004) is reasonably consistent with the remaining 
data obtained via reporter constructs. Second, estimates of the human muta-
tion rate obtained from observations of dominant genetic disorders (Kon-
drashov 2003) are very similar to those obtained from comparisons of 
pseudogene sequences in humans and chimpanzees (Nachman and Crow-
ell 2000): 2.6 x 10-8 and 2.2 x 10-8 / bp / generation, respectively. An earlier 
analysis of a more limited database led to the conclusion that the mutation 
rate per nucleotide site per generation is inversely related to genome size in 
microbial species (including viruses) (Drake 1991), but the results in Fig-
ure 4.5 are consistent with such scaling in cellular species. 
The causal determinants of the increase in the per-generation mutation 
rate in larger organisms are not entirely clear, although genome size itself is 
<lJ .... 
'" 
k c:? 
o a 
:P'Jj 
.s ~ 
;:l 
<lJ 
S c: 
<lJ 
c: 
bI) 
0'-
:co... 
.2..0 
.co 
"' ...... 
.0 ... 
;:l 
<lJ 
'f 0... 
<lJ ~ 
'" '" 
r:o 
100 
10 
 
1 
 
0.1 1 
 Vertebrates 
 Invertebrates 
 Unicellular eukaryotes 
 Prokaryotes 
10 
100 
1000 
Genome size (Mb) 
Figure 4.5 The relationship between the 
rate of base-substitution mutations per nu-
cleotide site per generation (u) and genome 
size (C) scales as u = 0.14Co7 8 (x 10-9), with 
the exponent having a standard error of 
0.10 and with genome size accounting for 
79% of the variance in the mutation rate. 
(From Lynch 2006a.) 

86 
CHAPTER 4 
unlikely to be directly involved. Numerous indirect estimates of the muta-
tion rate for quantitative characters from mutation accumulation experi-
ments support the idea that the per-generation mutation rate scales posi-
tively with generation time (Lynch et al. 1999), and organisms with larger 
genomes tend to have larger numbers of germ line cell divisions per gen-
eration: just one for unicellular species, about nine in C. elegans, about 
twenty-five in D. melanogaster, and a few hundred in mammals (Drake et al. 
1998; Crow 2000). The scaling of the per-generation mutation rate with gen-
eration time may be a simple consequence of the greater number of oppor-
tunities for germ line replication errors in species with long generation times, 
although such scaling would also be expected if most mutations derive from 
processes unassociated with replication, such as spontaneous double-strand 
breaks arising at a relatively constant rate per absolute time. 
Reduced recombination in large genomes 
Surveys of high-density molecular markers provide a basis for establishing 
refined genetic maps from observations of meiotic crossover events, which 
in turn allow the estimation of average rates of recombination per physical 
distance. This measure of crossover rate per nucleotide per generation scales 
negatively with genome size, ranging from 3 x 10-10 in the gymnosperm 
Pinus to 3 x 10-{; in the yeast S. cerevisiae (Figure 4.6). Such scaling is due in 
large part to the simple fact that meiosis in virtually all species employs just 
one to two crossover events per chromosome. Because chromosome num-
ber is largely independent of genome size, it naturally follows that there is 
a greater intensity of recombination per nucleotide position in species with 
smaller genomes (whose chromosomes are also smaller). For the same rea-
son, this inverse scaling extends to chromosomes of different sizes within 
species Gensen-Seaman et al. 2004). 
Because there is only a tenfold range in gene number across all eukary-
otes, it follows that species with small genomes also experience increased 
levels of recombination on a per-gene basis. For example, the rate of recom-
bination over the entire physical distance associated with an average gene 
(including intergenic DNA) is about 0.0072 in S. cerevisiae and about 0.0012 
in H. sapiens. As noted above, however, superimposed on these species-spe-
cific differences is up to a hundredfold range of variation in regional recom-
bination rates within chromosomes. The scale of such spatial variation 
ranges from thousands to millions of bases, and highly localized recombi-
national hot spots exist in some species (Petes 2001; Nachman 2002; de 
Massy 2003; Jeffreys et al. 2004; McVean et al. 2004; Myers et al. 2005). Less 
clear is why the decline in average recombination frequency with increas-
ing genome size is twice as rapid in unicellular as in multicellular species 
(see Figure 4.6). This altered scaling is not a consequence of higher num-
bers of chromosomes in unicellular species, as the average (12.2 haploid 
chromosomes) is no greater than that for invertebrates (12.3), vertebrates 
(25.2), or land plants (14.0). One possibility is that mitotic crossing-over 

 
WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
87 
 Unicellular eukaryotes 
Figure 4 .6 The inverse relation-
ship between recombination rate 
per physical distance and total 
genome size in eukaryotes. For ani-
mals and land plants, this relation-
ship scales as y = 0.0019x--{).71, with 
the exponent having a standard 
error of 0.06; for fungi and other 
unicellular species, it scales as y = 
0.045x-1.32, with the exponent 
having a standard error of 0.12. 
Genome size accounts for 70% and 
80% of the variance in recombina-
tion rate in these two cases, respec-
tively. (From Lynch 2006a.) 
 Invertebra tes 
 Vertebrates 
 Land plants 
103 
Genome size (Mb) 
 
 
UP 
prior to gametogenesis contributes to per-generation recombination rates 
in multicellular species. Although mitotic recombination rates are much 
lower than those during meiosis, as noted above, there can be dozens to 
hundreds of mitotic cell divisions during germ line development in mul-
ticellular species. 
The results in Figure 4.6 imply that, depending on the species, chromo-
somal segments of 104-106 nucleotides may remain intact through hundreds 
to thousands of meioses. The best evidence for such conserved segments 
derives from surveys of SNPs (single nucleotide polymorphisms) in the 
human population, which reveal many large regions, tens to hundreds of 
kilobases long, that appear to have experienced little internal recombination 
(Daly et al. 2001; Reich et al. 2001; Dawson et al. 2002; Gabriel et al. 2002). 
The largest haplotype blocks tend to be associated with chromosomal regions 
with low rates of recombination (Greenwood et al. 2004), and in principle 
might owe their origins to partial selective sweeps like those hypothesized 
above. However, with an average rate of recombination of 1.3 x 1O-S /bp / gen-
eration, a 10 kb stretch of human DNA has just a 13% chance of experienc-
ing a recombination event over a 1000-generation period, and this proba-
bility could easily be one or two orders of magnitude lower in regions of low 
recombination (McVean et al. 2004; Myers et al. 2005). Thus, it is unclear 
whether selection needs to be invoked at all in the case of humans. Computer 
simulations demonstrate that the level of current haplotype structure in the 
human population can be generated entirely by random genetic drift, assum-

88 
CHAPTER 4 
ing a bottleneck of Ne ::= 50 or so individuals 1000--2000 generations ago (Reich 
et al. 2001; Wall and Pritchard 2003), or even assuming a constant Ne ::= 104 
over prolonged periods (K. Zhang et al. 2003). 
Although prokaryotes are incapable of participating in conventional mei-
otic recombination and are often viewed as reproducing in a purely clonal 
fashion, they do have a number of mechanisms for uptake and exchange of 
exogenous DNA. A critical issue is whether such activities are rare enough 
to render typical prokaryotic genomes exceptionally sensitive to hitchhik-
ing events. A combination of two types of observations on polymorphic sites 
in natural populations contribute to the idea that they are not. First, as will 
be described more fully in the following section, under the assumption of 
neutrality, the level of nucleotide heterozygosity at silent sites in protein-
coding genes is a function of the composite parameter N,u, with the rate of 
input of variation being governed by the base-substitution mutation rate 
per generation (u) and the rate of loss by the power of drift (l/N,). Second, 
the statistical association between nucleotide polymorphisms across linked 
sites is a function of N,c, where c is the rate of recombination per nucleotide 
site per generation. Such associations, known as linkage disequilibria, 
develop stochastically as a consequence of random genetic drift and sub-
sequently break down via recombination (Ohta and Kimura 1971; Hill 1975). 
Under the assumption of an equilibrium between the forces of mutation, 
drift, and recombination, N{ can be estimated from random samples of gene 
sequences within a species by evaluating the rate of decline of the average 
level of disequilibrium with the physical distance between linked nucleotide 
sites. Numerous technical details are being glossed over here, but the impor-
tant point is that when joint estimates of N,u and N,c are available, their ratio 
eliminates N" providing an estimate of relative rates of recombination and 
mutation per nucleotide site (c/u). A lower c/u ratio implies greater vul-
nerability to hitchhiking effects resulting from the inability of recombina-
tion to separate independently arising mutations, and c/u ratios between 
selected sites greater than 4 or so can largely alleviate problems with 
Hill-Robertson interference (Marais and Piganeau 2002). 
The few available estimates for c/u derived from polymorphism data for 
animals and land plants yield averages of 1.9 (SE = 0.8) and 1.2 (0.4), respec-
tively, somewhat lower than the average for prokaryotes, 3.3 (1.3) (Table 4.1). 
Although such estimates are subject to numerous sources of error, those for 
eukaryotes are quite consistent with inferences that can be derived from the 
more direct estimates of c and u outlined in Figures 4.5 and 4.6. Extrapola-
tion of the fitted functions implies that c/u in eukaryotes should generally 
decrease with increasing genome size (G in Mb), with c/u::= 321,OOOG-2.1 for 
unicellular species and 13,600G-1.5 for multicellular species. These expres-
sions yield expected values of c/u::= 2550,17, and 0.4 for genomes of 10,100, 
and 1000 Mb, respectively, the latter two being in the range of genome sizes 
for most animals and land plants. 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
89 
TABLE 4.1 Estimates of clu, the ratio of the recombination rate to the 
mutation rate per base pair, for various species, derived from 
polymorphism surveys of natural populations 
Animals 
Homo sapiens 
0.6 
Ptak et aI. 2004 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
0.5 
Cutter et aI. 2006 
Chorthippus parallelus 
2.5 
Ibrahim et aI. 2002 
Drosophila spp. 
3.8 
Hey and Wakeley 1997; Machado et al. 2002 
Land plants 
Arabidopsis spp. 
0.7 
Wright et aI. 2003b 
Brassica nigra 
0.3 
Lagercrantz et aI. 2002 
Cryptomeria japonica 
3.0 
Kado et aI. 2003 
Hordeum vulgare 
1.5 
Morrell et al. 2006 
Pinus taeda 
0.3 
Brown et aI. 2004 
Zea mays 
1.6 
Tenaillon et al. 2004 
Prokaryotes 
Bradyrhizobium spp. 
0.9 
Vinuesa et al. 2005 
Neisseria gonorrheae 
1.0 
Posada et aI. 2000 
Neisseria meningitidis 
4.8 
Feil et aI. 2001 
Pseudomonas syringae 
0.3 
Sarkar and Guttman 2004 
Rhizobium spp. 
0.5 
Silva et aI. 2005 
Staphylococcus aureus 
6.5 
Feil et aI. 2001 
Streptococcus pneumoniae 
8.9 
Feil et aI. 2001 
Thus, relative to the background rate of mutation, recombination at the 
nucleotide level does not appear to be exceptionally low in prokaryotes 
when compared with that in multicellular species. Although c / u in prokary-
otes is certainly not as high as the theoretical estimate of 2550 for an aver-
age unicellular eukaryote, it should be noted that the latter calculation 
assumes an obligately sexual life cycle. As most unicellular eukaryotes have 
extended periods of clonal propagation, the true value of c/u for a natural 
population needs to be scaled by the number of asexual generations between 
meiotic events; for example, becoming 25.5 with 100 mitotic cell divisions 
per life cycle (assuming negligible mitotic recombination). Much additional 
evidence of a less quantitative nature supports the idea that prokaryotes 
experience substantial intraspecific genetic exchange (Jiggins 2002; Papke 
et al. 2004; Hughes and Friedman 2005; Baldo et al. 2006; Nesb0 et al. 2006). 

90 
CHAPTER 4 
The Global Effective Population Sizes 
of Species 
Despite the compelling reasons to expect the long-term effective population 
size (NI) to scale positively with absolute population size (N) and recombi-
nation rate and negatively with mutation rate, there are many uncertainties 
about the ways in which these three factors jointly define NI. For example, 
fluctuations in population size can result in a substantial depression of NI 
below average N, but it is unclear whether the magnitude of such fluctuations 
typically increases or decreases with organism size. All other things being 
equal, hitchhiking effects should depress the N/N ratio more in large popu-
lations, where selective sweeps are more common, and as noted above, link-
age might even cause a reduction in NI at very large N. But because the rate 
of recombination (per meiosis) is substantially higher and the mutation rate 
substantially lower in smaller species with large N, the scaling of NI with N 
could be quite different from the theoretical expectations in Figure 4.4. Given 
the many additional factors that can influence NI, quantitative insight into this 
key population genetic parameter requires direct empirical observation. 
One approach to estimating Nl is to consider the amount of nucleotide 
sequence variation at silent sites in protein-coding genes within natural pop-
ulations. Under the assumption that mutations at such sites escape the eyes 
of natural selection, the amount of silent-site variation has a simple inter-
pretation. The rate of divergence per nucleotide site in two randomly com-
pared alleles is 2u (twice the mutation rate per nucleotide), while the 
expected rate of loss of variation by genetic drift is I I (2NI) in a diploid pop-
ulation. At equilibrium, the average number of nucleotide substitutions per 
neutral site in two randomly sampled alleles is simply the ratio of these two 
rates, 4Nlu. For a haploid species, the rate of loss of variation is I/NI, and 
the equilibrium divergence among neutral nucleotide sites becomes 2Nlu. 
Both results have the same meaning: at mutation-drift equilibrium, the 
amount of within-species nucleotide variation at silent sites is equal to twice 
the effective number of gene copies at the locus times the per-nucleotide 
mutation rate to base substitutions. To unify the following discussion, we 
will rely on the concept of the effective number of genes at a locus (N ), 
which is equivalent to 2NI in sexual diploids and NI in haploids (see Tab1e 
4.2 for a summary of definitions). 
An estimate of the composite parameter 2Ngu can be acquired by directly 
observing levels of silent-site variation among random samples of genes 
within a species (hereafter J[J The complex nature of the definition of NI 
introduces some interpretive issues with J[s (Laporte and Charlesworth 
2002), but a fully general definition can be stated in terms of the ancestry 
of alleles in a sample: under the assumption of neutrality, J[s is equal to the 
average age of random pairs of sequences times twice the base-substitution 
mutation rate per nucleotide site. The average number of generations to the 
common ancestor of a random pair of genes is equal to Ng (Hein et al. 2004), 
and multiplying by 2u (to account for mutations down both lineages) recov-

WHY POPULATION SIZE M ATTERS 
91 
TABLE 4.2 A glossary of population size definitions 
N 
Absolute number of individuals in a species 
Short-term effective population size; takes into account features of 
demographic and population structure 
Long-term effective population size; takes into account all of the 
factors that define Ne, as well as the influence of the linked nature 
of the genome on the efficiency of selection 
Long-term effective number of genes at a locus; equal to N] for a 
haploid species, and about 2N] for a diploid species, depending on 
the mating system 
ers 2Ngu. Although an estimate of 2N U may seem undesirable in the sense 
that the separate contributions from 1V$ and U are not immediately trans-
parent, we will see below that the product 2Ngu is actually a more critical 
determinant of the alternative pathways of genomic evolution than are its 
individual components. 
Estimates of silent-site diversity exist for a wide enough phylogenetic 
range of species that some general statements can be made. Across a diverse 
assemblage of over 100 eukaryotic and prokaryotic species, there is an inverse 
relationship between organism size and 7[s (Figure 4.7). For prokaryotes, 7[s 
lies in the broad range of 0.007-0.388, with an average value of 0.104. This 
-----_1--- Prokaryotes 
(0.1044, 0.1113, n = 48) 
---~I"'---- Unicellular / oligocellular 
eukaryotes (0.0573, 0.0777, n = 27) 
-
--+-- Invertebrates 
(0.0265,0.0152, n = 15) 
---....... -- Land plants 
(0.0152, 0.0134, n = 24) 
---~I"'--- Vertebrates 
(0.0041,0.0030, n = 21) 
, , 01 
10-3 
1 
, 
t 
" .! 
I
!
' 
t 
1 
" .t 
10-2 
10-1 
Within-species allelic cliversity 
(substitutions/ silent site) 
" 
, " .I 
Figure 4.7 Average levels of within-species nucleotide divergence for silent sites 
among sampled alleles for protein-coding genes from a phylogenetically diverse as-
semblage of eukaryotic and prokaryotic species. Means, standard deviations, and num-
ber of genera (n) involved in the analyses are given in parentheses; horizontal bars pro-
vide estimates of the 50/0--95% limits to the ranges of values for each group. (From 
Lynch 2006a.) 

92 
CHAPTER 4 
is nearly twice the average value for unicellular eukaryotes (0.057), although 
the range of values among the latter taxa is again very broad (0.01O-D.252). 
For the still larger invertebrates, there is a further reduction in average 1[s to 
0.026, with a range of 0.009-0.047. The average value of 1[s for land plants 
(0.015) is still lower, and that for vertebrates (0.004) is even lower. 
As a consequence of sampling error at the gene, individual, and popu-
lation levels, the mean values for these five functional groups are certainly 
more reliable than the extreme values, and there are other limits to these 
data as well. For the unicellular groups, the bulk of existing surveys involve 
pathogenic species, and because the N g of pathogens may be largely dic-
tated by that of their multicellular host species (Hartl et al. 2002), this prob-
ably leads to a downward bias of average 1[s relative to that for free-living 
species. Two of the three prokaryotes with 1[s less than 0.01 are Serratia 
macrescens (a human pathogen) and Buchnera aphidicola (an obligate en-
dosymbiont of aphids), and the six lowest estimates of 1[s for unicellular 
eukaryotes are derived from pathogens (Candida, Coccidioides, Encephalito-
zoon, Fusarium, Phytophthora, and Plasmodium). 
Although 1[s is a function of the product of Ng and u, the two factors can 
be disentangled by applying the mutation rate estimates described in Fig-
ure 4.4. Assuming the average observed value of u "" 0.5 X 10-9 for prokary-
otes, the average Ng for prokaryotes is 108. When parasitic species are 
removed, application of the average mutation rate for unicellular eukary-
otes (1.6 x 10-9) yields an average N~ of 107 for this group. Similar analyses 
for invertebrates and vertebrates YIeld average estimates of Ng "" 106 and 
104. Finally, a phylogenetic ally based mutation rate estimate of 7.3 x 
10-9 / bp / year for plants (Lynch 1997) yields an average estimate of N g "" 106 
for annual plants and Ng "" 104 for trees (assuming a generation time of 20 
years). Given their approximate nature, the preceding calculations are inten-
tionally given to just the nearest order of magnitude. 
Sources of bias 
Although we now have a well-established theoretical framework for esti-
mating the power of two fundamental population genetic processes, drift 
and mutation, from measures of within- and between-species variation at 
neutral sites, the degree to which silent sites actually fulfill the assumption 
of neutrality is less clear. One notable concern, to be discussed in detail in 
Chapter 6, is that the nucleotide composition of silent sites can be influ-
enced by selection operating on translation efficiency (codon usage) and/ or 
other features associated with mRNA processing and stability, as well as 
by biased gene conversion. By favoring specific nucleotides, anyone of 
these processes can reduce standing levels of variation below the neutral 
expectation, thereby causing 1[s to be a downwardly biased estimate of 2Ngu. 
Such bias might ordinarily be expected to be greater in species for which 
Ng is high, which will increase the efficiency of selection and/ or biased gene 
conversion, but this need not always be the case. In fact, if selection favors 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
93 
a particular nucleotide at a site where mutation is biased in the opposite 
direction-a situation that cannot be entirely ruled out (Kondrashov et al. 
2006)-the standing level of variation resulting from the balance between 
opposing pressures could approximate or even exceed that expected under 
the neutral model (McVean and Charlesworth 2000). 
A second way in which selection might reduce standing levels of silent-
site variation involves the influence of nucleotide heterozygosity on recom-
binational capacity. Because of its role in repairing double-strand breaks and 
ensuring meiotic chromosome disjunction, recombination is critical to the 
production of viable gametes. Recombination events are initiated by the 
invasion of an end of a double-strand break into the homologous region of 
an intact chromosome (see Chapters 2 and 6), and nucleotide sequence vari-
ation is significant in this context because mismatches in the heteroduplex 
DNA can lead to the abortion of recombinant intermediates (Chambers et 
al. 1996; Datta et al. 1997; Vulic et al. 1999; Majewski et al. 2000; Emmanuel 
et al. 2006). The most compelling evidence for such effects derives from 
experiments in which silencing of the mismatch repair pathway leads to ele-
vated levels of exchange in crosses that are otherwise recombinationally 
inactive or suppressed: Escherichia and Salmonella (Rayssiguier et al. 1989); 
divergent strains of yeast (Hunter et al. 1996); and congeneric species of mice 
(Shao et al. 2001). Such observations led Stephan and Langley (1992) to sug-
gest that high nucleotide heterozygosity might inhibit the repair of double-
strand breaks enough to have significant effects on individual fitness. If this 
were the case, then selection against highly divergent alleles (independent 
of their functional attributes) could impose an upper bound on nucleotide 
heterozygosity. 
Are such effects likely to be important at the within-species level? In the 
yeast S. cerevisiae, successful recombination events appear to require at least 
60-250 bp stretches of 100% sequence identity between donor and recipient 
molecules, and recombinational efficiency increases substantially with fur-
ther increases in the length of identical sequence tracts (Ahn et al. 1988; 
Mezard et al. 1992; Sugawara and Haber 1992; Jinks-Robertson et al. 1993). 
The minimum tract lengths for efficient processing in Leishmania 
(Papadopoulou and Dumas 1997) and Trypanosoma (Bell and McCulloch 
2003) are 140-180 bp, and animals and land plants have fairly similar 
requirements (Rubnitz and Subramani 1984; Waldman and Liskay 1988; 
Gloor 2002; Opperman et al. 2004), again with recombination potential 
increasing with further increases in the length of homology. 
These tract length requirements can be compared with the likely situa-
tion in natural populations by extrapolating from observations on lfs in cod-
ing regions. As a consequence of the redundancy of the genetic code, about 
25% of coding sites are silent, and levels of variation at replacement sites are 
almost always less than a third of that at silent sites (Graur and Li 2000). 
This observation implies a total level of average within-population sequence 
divergence of less than [0.25 + (0.75/ 3)]lfs = O.5lfs' Thus, with an average Trs 
of 0.06 for unicellular eukaryotes (see Figure 4.7), the average length of 

94 
CHAPTER 4 
sequence identity is at least 1/ (O.5Jrs) = 33 bp, whereas average identity tract 
lengths for multicellular species are about 140 bp. Because there will be sub-
stantial variation around these average values, these observations imply 
that mismatch inhibition of double-strand break repair is likely to occur in 
eukaryotes, particularly in unicellular species. Without explicit information 
on the fitness effects of double-strand breaks, the degree to which such 
effects might inhibit the accumulation of otherwise neutral variation can-
not be quantified. However, the consequences of unrepaired breaks must 
be greater in species in which a single cell constitutes the entire organism, 
and because of the elevated levels of Jrs in unicellular species, the selective 
effects associated with mismatch repair inhibition must be highest in such 
species. 
These kinds of repair deficiency effects should have less day-to-day rele-
vance to haploid prokaryotes, in which repair of a divergent homologous 
chromosome would be an unusual event. However, high levels of sequence 
divergence might still compromise the recombinational cohesiveness among 
the most extreme genotypes within prokaryotic populations, eventually lead-
ing to complete reproductive isolation (Cohan 1995; Vulic et al. 1997). The 
minimum identity tract length for efficient recombination in eubacteria is 
smaller than that in eukaryotes-only 20-40 bp (Watt et al. 1985; Majewski 
and Cohan 1999; Majewski et al. 2000; Springer et al. 2004)-and yet by the 
above reasoning, for an average prokaryotic Jrs = 0.10, the average length of 
identical coding sequence tracts between random isolates is just 20 bp. 
Although these calculations suggest that mismatch repair inhibition may 
contribute to a downward bias in estimates of 2Ngu in prokaryotes, the 
extraordinary potential for horizontal transfer in such species by mecha-
nisms other than homologous recombination should also be noted (Ochman 
et al. 2000). Horizontal transfer across species boundaries expands the 
genetic resources accessible to prokaryotes in ways that are not accessible 
to eukaryotes, further magnifying the efficiency of selection on alternative 
alleles. This source of diversity is not included in the preceding analyses, 
and the degree to which its inclusion would increase the long-term effec-
tive population sizes of prokaryotes remains unclear. 
The preceding arguments, as well as those to be presented in Chapter 6, 
leave little doubt that all species are subject to some forms of variation-reduc-
ing selection on silent sites. However, the impact of such effects on the mag-
nitude of deviations of 1[s from 2Ngu in various lineages is less clear. In mam-
mals, average rates of interspecific divergence for intron sequences are about 
the same as those for silent sites in coding exons, encouraging the view that 
both are evolving in a neutral fashion, but the fact that the molecular spec-
trum of substitutional changes differs significantly among the two regions 
suggests otherwise (Chamary and Hurst 2004; Mikkelsen et al. 2005). As it 
is unlikely that both types of sequences would evolve at the same rate if 
only one were under selection, this observation strongly suggests that dif-
ferent forces of selection and/ or biased gene conversion fortuitously lead 
to similar divergence rates. 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
95 
Unfortunately, without an unambiguously defined neutral region of 
DNA, the impact of such effects on silent-site diversity cannot be easily 
quantified. A comparison of human and chimpanzee sequences indicates 
a 15% slowdown in the rate of divergence for silent sites relative to that for 
intergenic DNA (Hellmann et al. 2003), but this discrepancy must be an 
underestimate of the level of constraint on silent sites because not all inter-
genic DNA is neutral (see Chapter 3). More telling, perhaps, is the 30% 
reduction in the rate of divergence for silent sites in human, mouse, and 
rat genes relative to that for pseudogenes (Bustamante et al. 2002). How-
ever, because even pseudogene sequences may be subject to gene conver-
sion and some forms of selection, and because levels of polymorphism are 
influenced less by selection than are levels of interspecific divergence, it is 
difficult to say whether the reported estimates of 2N~u for mammals are 
downwardly biased by a factor greater or less than 3. Things are not much 
clearer in Drosophila, in which average levels of both intraspecific and inter-
specific silent-site variation are 2-3 times those for intronic and intergenic 
DNA, and it has again been suggested that both regions are constrained 
by selection (Halligan et al. 2004; Andolfatto 2005). Finally, for prokaryotes, 
some evidence suggests that the divergence of silent sites is at least 10 times 
lower than the expectation based on mutation rates (Eyre-Walker and Bul-
mer 1995; Ochman 2003), and on this basis alone, the 2Ngu estimates given 
above for this group could be as much as 10 times too low. 
One final caveat with respect to estimates of N derived from poly-
morphism data is that they apply only to the past il{ generations for each 
taxon-the average time to fixation of a neutral mutation. Because this time 
scale necessarily increases in species with larger Ng, whereas many of the 
gross features of genomes may require tens to hunrueds of millions of years 
to emerge, one may question the degree to which polymorphism-based 
estimates of Ng inform the field of comparative genomics, at least for species 
with Ng on tne order of 105 or smaller. However, because they reduce 
samplirig idiosyncrasies, it is reasonable to expect that averages of species-
specific estimates of Ng within broad taxonomic groups are representative 
of long-term evolutionary conditions experienced by group members. 
Resolution of the "paradox of variation" 
In the earliest days of molecular population genetics, when variation was 
almost always measured at the level of allozymes (variants of proteins 
revealed by mobility differences on electrophoretic gels), Lewontin (1974) 
noted a peculiar pattern: within-species levels of allozyme variation 
appeared to be nearly independent of population size, contributing to what 
he broadly viewed as the "paradox of variation." Nei (1983) later pointed 
out that allozyme heterozygosity levels are actually positively correlated 
with N, but only weakly so, with the levels of variation in the largest pop-
ulations falling far below the neutral expectation. Because we can expect a 
significant fraction of protein variants to be under selection, these types of 

96 
CHAPTER 4 
observations are difficult to interpret. For example, populations with large 
N would be expected to harbor more neutral variation (higher 2Ngu) but 
less variation involving selectively disadvantageous alleles, and these con-
trasting patterns might roughly cancel each other out, yielding the weak 
association between allozyme variation and N. The use of DNA sequence 
data allows this type of analysis to be restricted to silent sites in protein-cod-
ing genes, alleviating but not entirely removing these types of interpreta-
tive problems. 
With the above caveats in mind, three general conclusions, whose valid-
ity is critical to many of the ideas outlined in the following chapters, appear 
to be warranted: 
 Average long-term effective population sizes vary by at least five orders 
of magnitude between the largest multicellular and the smallest unicellu-
lar species. Assuming that silent sites in low-Ng species are nearly neutral, 
Ng should be about 104 in many large vertebrates and perennial plants. In 
contrast, the largest estimate of Ng for a prokaryote derivable from the 
results in Figure 4.7 is 3 x lOB for Helicobacter pyogenes, a highly recombin-
ing member of the eubacteria. Thus, because of the potentially strong selec-
tive biases operating on silent sites in high-Ng species, it is virtually cer-
tain that Ng is greater than 109 in some prokaryotes. If the downward bias 
in estimates of prokaryotic Ng induced by selection is as much as tenfold, 
then the upper limit to Ng is about 1010. 
 Unless the effects of selection on silent sites are beyond our wildest dreams, 
the scaling of 2Ngu with the absolute population size (N) is much less than 
linear. This pattern is partly a consequence of an increased per-generation 
mutation rate (u) in larger organisms, which compensates somewhat for 
the reduction in N. However, even taking this factor into account, the dis-
parity in Ng across all domains of cellular life is nearly 20 orders of magni-
tude less than the disparity in N. Although once viewed as a paradox, such 
behavior appears to be quite consistent with the significant Valiance-reduc-
ing effects of stochastic hitchhiking events in large populations. 
 Given these results, all deleterious mutations with selection coefficients of 
10-{i or less are expected to accumulate in the genomes of large multicellu-
lar eukaryotes in an effectively neutral fashion (unless accompanied by sub-
stantially stronger biased gene conversion).ln contrast, the critical selection 
coefficient for effective neutrality in a prokaryote may commonly be in the 
vicinity of 10-10-10-9. These numerical estimates are relevant because, as 
will be shown in the following chapters, many mutational modifications of 
gene and genomic architecture have intrinsically deleterious effects with 
selection coefficients in the range of 1O-B-10-{i. This implies that various 
forms of cellular life experience radically different population genetic envi-
ronments-many forms of mutant alleles that are able to drift to fixation in 
multicellular eukaryotes are efficiently eliminated by selection in prokary-
otic species. Without the theoretical and empirical results of population 
genetics, we would be unable to make such statements. 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
97 
Finally, it should be recalled that many unicellular species have life cycles 
with prolonged (and in some cases, continuous) phases of clonal repro-
duction. Because their entire genome acts effectively as a single supergene 
in the absence of recombination, such species can be expected to be 
extremely vulnerable to selective interference. Given that a leading hypoth-
esis for the evolution of sex is that recombination (and segregation) allows 
populations to avoid the accumulation of deleterious mutations while 
enhancing the promotion of beneficial alleles (Muller 1932; Lynch et al. 1993; 
Peck 1994; Barton and Charlesworth 1998; Orr 2000b; Otto and Barton 2001; 
Johnson and Barton 2002; Otto 2003; Martin et al. 2006), why should clonal 
propagation be most pronounced in microbial species? If the hypothesis that 
linkage and hitchhiking events impose an upper limit on the long-term effec-
tive population size of 1010 is correct, then asexual populations with absolute 
sizes well beyond the level at which draft overwhelms drift might experi-
ence little or no change in evolutionary potential after a transition to sex-
ual reproduction. Other considerations, including the enhanced likelihood 
that parallel mutation alone can produce advantageous multilocus geno-
types in sufficiently large populations, lead to a similar conclusion (Kim and 
Orr 2005). Thus, the general association of sexual reproduction with multi-
cellular species may largely be a consequence of their reduced effective pop-
ulation sizes. That is, like many aspects of genomic architecture that we will 
encounter below, the evolution of sex may be a "small population size" 
phenomenon. 
Mutation as a Weak Selective Force 
Population geneticists have historically treated selection and mutation as 
independent forces in the dynamics of evolutionary change, with mutation 
producing the variation on which natural selection acts, but having no fur-
ther influence on the fates of alleles. However, in the context of the evolu-
tion of the architectural features of genes and genomes, there are numerous 
ways in which mutation can act indirectly as a selective agent. As discussed 
at the close of Chapter 2, alleles with more elaborate structural embellish-
ments (e.g., more or larger introns, larger UTRs, and/or larger intergenic 
regions) are larger targets for degenerative mutations. The resultant burden 
of an excess mutation rate operates in a fashion analogous to natural selec-
tion, as it results in a smaller fraction of successful progeny alleles. The selec-
tive disadvantage associated with any single aspect of gene complexity need 
not be very large, as it is roughly equivalent to the product of the mutation 
rate per nucleotide per generation (u) and the excess number of nucleotide 
sites in the more complex allele that are critical to gene function (n) (Lynch 
2002b). As we have already seen, u is of the magnitude 10-9_10-7, and argu-
ments presented in later chapters suggest that n often falls in the range of 
1-50. As a consequence, expansions of gene architectural complexity are 
unusually vulnerable to fixation by random genetic drift in populations with 
small genetic effective sizes. In contrast, in populations with sufficiently 

98 
CHAPTER 4 
large Ng, a differential rate of mutation to defective alleles can act as a selec-
tive deterrent to the expansion of gene architectural complexity. 
The degree to which a differential mutation rate might influence the like-
lihood of fixation of a newly arisen allele can be obtained by simply expand-
ing the theory for selection discussed above. Denoting the excess degener-
ative mutation rate of a newly arisen allele as ud, and assuming no intrinsic 
adaptive (or maladaptive) effect of such an allele, ud can simply be substi-
tuted for the deleterious selection coefficient (negative s) to determine the 
probability of fixation. From the left side of Figure 4.2, recalling that Ng = 
2Ne for a diploid, it is clear that if Ngud > 2, there is essentially no chance of 
fixation, but if 0 < Ngud < 0.5, such an allele will be capable of drifting to fix-
ation in a nearly neutral fashion. Letting ud = nu as noted above, the crite-
rion for near-neutrality becomes 2Ngu < l in. 
This relationship is a highly useful one for two reasons. First, the prod-
uct Ngu has a simple intuitive interpretation, as it is equivalent to the ratio 
of the power of mutation (u) to the power of random genetic drift (l/Nj5)' 
If this ratio is too low, the negative force of degenerative mutation will be 
so overwhelmed by the noise in the evolutionary process that selection 
against a mutationally harmful genomic addition will be ineffective. Sec-
ond, because both 2N gU and n are estimable parameters, the first as 1ts and 
the second from the key molecular features associated with a modified gene 
structure, explicit predictions can be made regarding the population genetic 
conditions that are conducive to the accumulation of slightly deleterious 
modifications in gene and genomic features. This also means that hypothe-
ses can be tested with empirical data. 
For example, the number of nucleotides critical for proper spliceosome 
recognition of an intron is about 25 (see Chapter 9), which implies a thresh-
old 2Ngu for intron colonization of about 0.04. Recalling the average esti-
mates of lrs and their likely downward biases (see Figure 4.7), it is clear that 
the population genetic environment of prokaryotes may only rarely be con-
ducive to intron colonization, whereas the extremely low levels of lrs for 
multicellular eukaryotes imply conditions that are incapable of preventing 
intron proliferation. With their wide range of lrs' the various lineages of uni-
cellular eukaryotes are expected to straddle these two extremes. As pre-
viewed in Chapters 2 and 3, these predictions are quite consistent with the 
phylogenetic distribution of introns. 
This fundamental approach can also be extended to other aspects of 
genomic complexity. For example, tandernly linked groups of duplicate 
genes, with each member specializing in restricted sets of functions of the 
ancestral gene (see Chapter 8), are discouraged from proceeding to fixation 
in sufficiently large populations, because such duplications greatly expand 
the amount of coding DNA that must avoid mutations. The modularization 
of regulatory elements can also be inhibited in populations with sufficiently 
large 2Ns..u (see Chapter 10), as can the expansion of mobile element fami-
lies (see Chapter 7). 

WHY POPULATION SIZE MATTERS 
99 
That the qualitative predictions of population genetic theory combined 
with quantitative estimates of 2Ngu jointly point to the effectiveness of large 
population size as a barrier to the evolution of complex gene and genomic 
architectural features raises significant challenges to purely adaptive expla-
nations for the evolution of the eukaryotic genome. Indeed, as will be 
repeatedly pointed out in the following chapters, it is difficult to reject the 
hypothesis that the emergence of many aspects of eukaryotic gene struc-
ture and genomic complexity was largely a consequence of nonadaptive 
mechanisms operating in a direction contrary to that expected under nat-
ural selection. This is not to say that the repatterning of the eukaryotic 
genome had no adaptive consequences. Quite the contrary; as will also be 
emphasized in subsequent chapters, there are good reasons to believe that 
once the peculiar features of eukaryotic genes were broadly established, 
entirely novel pathways were opened up for adaptive evolution by descent 
with modification. 
As an empirical preview to these matters, the negative association 
between genome size and 1[s across a broad array of phylogenetic groups 
is noted in Figure 4.8. Caution should be exercised in overinterpreting the 
quantitative scaling of the relationship in this figure because errors in the 
.. . .. 
 
 
 Vertebrates 
 Plants 
 Invertebrates 
 
 Unicellular /oligocellular eukaryotes 
 Prokaryotes 
   
     
... \ .. . 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
II  
  
 
 
 
,I ..... 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  .f  
.. . , :. . .... 
.. 
 
 
 
 
Silent-site diversity (Jrs) 
Figure 4.8 The relationship between genome size and Jrs for members of various 
taxonomic groups. (From Lynch 2006.) 

100 
CHAPTER 4 
estimates of 7[s will cause the slope to be less pronounced (by spreading 
the points out along the x axis), whereas the expected downward bias in 7[s 
resulting from selection is likely to have the opposite effect (by pushing 
the points with highest 7[s more to the left). Nonetheless, no amount of rea-
sonable transformation of the x axis in Figure 4.8 would alter the conclusion 
that there is a broad negative association between genome size and 2Ngu. 
Because most aspects of genomic evolution develop on time scales of mil-
lions of years, clear associations of this nature are unlikely to be observed 
at the level of species within genera, but a remarkably similar pattern to that 
in Figure 4.8 has been revealed within the ray-finned fishes (Yi and Streel-
man 2005). A major challenge for evolutionary genomics-and the goal of 
the remaining chapters-is to explain why such patterns exist. 

Three Keys to 
Chromosomal 
Integrity 
Having achieved a broad overview of the potential population genetic 
processes driving genomic evolution, our remaining goal is to more fully 
explore the origins and maintenance of specific aspects of genomic archi-
tecture from a mechanistic perspective. Because the adaptive morphologies, 
physiologies, and behaviors on which all organisms depend require the 
proper functioning of thousands of gene products, it is easy to lose sight of 
the fact that, regardless of a gene's phenotypic consequences, transmission 
to the next generation critically depends on the structural features of the 
chromosome on which it resides. Successful chromosomes must be capable 
of maintaining structural stability, replicating in entirety, and properly assort-
ing into daughter cells. Moreover, these processes must be coordinated 
among all members of a chromosome set to ensure the inheritance of com-
plete genomic complements by daughter cells. Three noncoding features of 
chromosomes-origins of replication, centromeres, and telomeres-are 
essential for these functions. 
This chapter is focused on the gross anatomical aspects of these vital chro-
mosomal components and the special mechanisms by which they evolve. 
The coverage here is not simply a side excursion from the main course of 
the book. Because the processes of chromosome maintenance and replica-
tion also determine the types of mutations that arise, they are intimately 
related to patterns of nucleotide composition (see Chapter 6). In addition, 
chromosomal segments that are physically involved in delivery to gametes 
are subject to selection for features that maximize their likelihood of inher-
itance at the expense of homologous chromosomes. The resultant biased 
transmission can create a drive-like process, reducing the effective popula-
tion size of a chromosome and compromising the efficiency of selection oper-

102 
CHAPTER 5 
ating on linked genes, in the same manner as an adaptive selective sweep 
(see Chapter 4). 
Before proceeding, it should be noted that eukaryotic chromosomes are 
not simply limp and naked molecules of DNA, but exist as chromatin com-
plexes with a number of chromosome-specific proteins, most notably his-
tones (Van Holde 1989). During the nonreplicating phase of the cell cycle, 
chromatin consists of core subunits of spools of DNA wound around 
octamers of histone proteins (nucleosomes), which are in turn aggregated 
into a nested hierarchy of architectural compactions to form visible chro-
mosomes. Given our focus on genomic architecture, the following discus-
sion considers primarily only DNA-level aspects of chromosomal architec-
ture, although the influential role of DNA-binding proteins will become 
apparent in a number of contexts. 
Origins of Replication 
The faithful inheritance of genes across generations requires accurate repli-
cation of the complete chromosomes on which they reside. Jacob et al. (1963) 
thought that this process must be achieved by the recognition of a specific 
DNA element (the replicator) by a replication protein (the initiator), and the 
limited details that have subsequently emerged on chromosome replication 
provide general support for this model (DePamphilis 1996). First, replica-
tion is usually initiated at well-defined origin of replication sites (ORIs), 
which the cell detects by use of an origin recognition protein complex. Sec-
ond, replication is bidirectional and semiconservative, proceeding outward 
in both directions from each ORI, with each parental DNA strand specify-
ing its complement. Third, except in organelles, replication is semi-discon-
tinuous, with continuous synthesis proceeding along "leading" strands, and 
discontinuous production of Okazaki fragments and their subsequent 
annealing occurring on "lagging" strands (Figure 5.1). This latter feature is 
an unavoidable consequence of the bidirectional synthesis of both strands 
in a 5' to 3' direction, which causes newly synthesized lagging strands to 
grow in the opposite direction of parental strand exposure. Remarkably, 
these three ancestral features of replication are shared by all prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes, despite the fact that the replication proteins (DNA poly-
merases, primases, and helicases) in archaea and eukaryotes appear to be 
nonhomologous with those in eubacteria (see Chapter 1). 
Most prokaryotes have single ORIs located close to the locus of the ini-
tiator protein gene (Matsunaga et al. 2001; Kelman and Kelman 2004), with 
replication proceeding bidirectionally around the circular chromosome until 
a terminator sequence is reached at the opposite pole. A region near the ORl 
then attracts the proteins necessary for guiding the daughter chromosomes 
to opposite ends of the dividing cell (Sherratt 2003), functioning much as 
the centromeres of eukaryotic chromosomes do (see below). Under nor-
mal growth conditions, unidirectional rates of replication fork progression 
are about 21,35, and 50 kb/min, respectively, in the eubacteria Caulobacter 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
103 
r~'\ 
'x~~ 
~ 
Bidirectional opening of replication fork ~ 
t 
'" 
'" 
'" 
'" 
'" 
'" 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
t 
'" 
'" 
'" 
<IE 
<IE 
<IE 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
'" 
'" 
'" 
'" 
'" 
'" 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
 
<IE 
'" 
'" 
'" 
<IE 
'" 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
Figure 5.1 Top: Opening of an origin of replication with simultaneous, bidirectional 
synthesis of the continuous leading (long arrows) and discontinuous lagging (short ar-
rows) strands. Middle: The discontinuous Okazaki fragments are eventually ligated to-
gether in the two daughter chromosomes. Bottom: The four chromosomes resulting 
from the next round of replication, with the newly synthesized strands represented as 
blue lines. The lagging strands in each cell division become substrates for leading 
strand synthesis in the following division, and vice versa. 
crescentus, Mycoplasma smegmatis, and Escherichia coli (Hiriyanna and 
Rarnakrishnan 1986; Stillman 1996), whereas the rate for the slow-growing 
Mycoplasma tuberculosis is just 3 kb/min (Hiriyanna and Ramakrishnan 
1986). The rates for archaeal species in the genera Sulfolobus (Lundgren et 
al. 2004) and Pyrococcus (Myllykallio et al. 2000) are about 5 and 20 kb / min, 
respectively, although Sulfolobus species have three ORls, bringing the total 
rate up to about 15 kb / min. Thus, with most prokaryotes having genomes 
in the range of 1.0-8.0 Mb, the time to replicate an entire genome under good 
growth conditions is on the order of 10 minutes to 4 hours. 
Chromosome sizes in multicellular eukaryotes tend to be larger than 
those in prokaryotes, averaging 10-250 Mb for invertebrates, 40-200 Mb for 
vertebrates, and 30-2000 Mb for land plants (see Chapter 2). In contrast, 
eukaryotic fork progression rates are about an order of magnitude slower 
than in prokaryotes, usually in the range of 0.2-3.0 kb/min (Table 5.1). With 

104 
CHAPTER 5 
TABLE 5.1 Properties of replicons in various eukaryotes 
RATE (KB/MIN) 
LENGTH (KB) 
REFERENCES 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
2.9 
30 
Raghuraman et al. 2001 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
36 
Segura do et al. 2003 
Physarum polycephalum 
1.2 
35 
Pierron and Benard 1996 
Drosophila melanogaster 
0.6 
25 
Ananiev et al. 1977; 
Human 
Mouse 
Angiosperms 
MacAlpine et aJ. 2004 
1.7 
144 
Jackson and Pombo 1998 
1.8 
46 
Brown et al. 1987; 
Takebayashi et aJ. 2001 
0.2 
56 
Van't Hof and Bjerknes 
1981; Francis et al. 1985 
just a single ORI, replication of a 10 Mb chromosome at a fork rate of 1.5 
kb/min would require more than 2 days, and a 100 Mb chromosome would 
require more than 3 weeks. Eukaryotes compensate for this problem by pop-
ulating their chromosomes with multiple ORIs, but this poses an additional 
challenge. For efficient genomic replication, a full set of ORIs must be rec-
ognizable on each chromosome, but with hundreds of ORIs subject to inde-
pendent mutations, how can the origin recognition complex cope with what 
is likely to be substantial sequence variation? 
ORI specification 
The simplest known eukaryotic ORIs are those of the budding yeast S. cere-
visiae, each of which is only about 200 bp in length and contains at least one 
copy of an 11 bp binding site sequence for the origin recognition complex 
(Newlon and Theis 2002; Nieduszynski et al. 2006). The ORIs of S. cerevisiae 
are autonomously replicating sequences (ARSs), in the sense that they will 
support replication when placed in artificial constructs. Altogether, there 
are about 300 such elements per haploid yeast genome, with an average 
interval between them (replicon length) of about 30 kb. Although the aver-
age time to replicate a replicon in this species is about 5 minutes, the time 
to completely replicate the genome is conSiderably longer, about 55 min-
utes, because not all ORIs are activated simultaneously. ORIs near cen-
tromeres replicate earlier than others, and only a subset of ORIs appears to 
be employed during any cell division (Raghuraman et al. 2001). 
No other well-studied species has ORIs approaching the simplicity of 
those in the genus Saccharomyces. The next simplest known situation is in 
the fission yeast S. pombe, in which ORIs are about 0.5-1.0 kb in length, some-
times containing an 11 bp ARS-like sequence along with at least two 30-55 
bp A/T-rich regions and other ill-defined stimulatory sequences (Dubey 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
105 
et al. 1996). Remarkably, about 50% of random intergenic sequences from S. 
pombe with lengths and A/T contents similar to verified ORIs exhibit poten-
tial origin activity (Dai et al. 2005). 
The ORIs of animals are even more loosely defined than those in S. pombe, 
sharing only the attribute of A/T richness. Again, many random sequences 
of animal DNA can act as ARSs, although it is unclear how many of these 
are actually used in the cell (DePamphilis 1996). Drosophila and mammalian 
ORIs have lengths of 1-10 kb, individually contain multiple discrete initia-
tion sites, and generally reside within intergenic regions (Ina et al. 2001; Alt-
man and Fanning 2004). The numbers of ORIs per animal genome are in the 
thousands, and as in yeasts, only subsets of the potential pool of such regions 
appear to be deployed in individual cell divisions (Anglana et al. 2003), 
although many are used very reliably (Jackson and Pombo 1998). In some 
animal tissues, replication and cell division are uncoupled, leading to the 
production of endopolyploid cells, and cases exist in which restricted 
genomic intervals are over-replicated by repeatedly licensing the same ORIs 
within the cell. Such activities provide a mechanism for increasing the tran-
scriptional substrate for a number of highly active genes, including riboso-
mal RNA genes in amphibian oocytes and chorion (eggshell) protein genes 
in the follicle cells of Drosophila ovaries (Claycomb et al. 2004). 
The lack of well-defined core sequences for animal ORIs and the approx-
imately random distribution of replicons have led to the suggestion that epi-
genetic markers (heritable genomic modifications involving factors other 
than the specific DNA sequence, such as DNA methylation and histone 
acetylation) facilitate ORI identification (Hyrien et al. 2003; Aggarwal and 
Calvi 2004). Such effects remain elusive, although there is a positive asso-
ciation between replication and transcription (MacAlpine et al. 2004; 
Kohzaki and Murakami 2005). Some transcriptional control regions have 
the potential to operate as ORIs when moved to ectopic locations (Danis et 
al. 2004), and some transcription factors may directly recruit the origin recog-
nition complex. 
Evolutionary consequences 
The process of replication influences genomic evolution in several ways. 
First, the distribution of semi-discrete ORIs imposes constraints on the 
sequences within intergenic DNA (where ORIs almost universally reside). 
In the absence of comparative data on specific ORIs across species, it is not 
possible to estimate the magnitude of such constraints, but they need not 
be trivial. In vertebrates, for example, the total amount of DNA associated 
with ORIs probably exceeds the amount allocated to coding exons, although 
the requirements at any particular nucleotide site might be quite diffuse. 
In addition, the development of Okazaki fragments appears to depend on 
specific priming sites. In E. coli, Okazaki fragments average 1.5 kb in length, 
and the priming sites generally contain a CAG triplet, possibly accompa-
nied by contextual requirements in surrounding sequence (Zechner et al. 

106 
CHAPTER 5 
1992; Bhattacharyya and Griep 2000). Okazaki fragments in the archaebac-
terium Pyrococcus abyssi are shorter, averaging 100 bp (Matsunaga et al. 
2003). Unfortunately, such details are lacking for eukaryotic species. 
The second way in which replication can influence genomic architecture 
concerns the interference between jointly replicating and transcribing 
regions of the chromosome (French 1992). Because transcription always pro-
ceeds down an antisense strand in the 3' to 5' direction, DNA polymerases 
(replication) and RNA polymerases (transcription) will incur codirectional 
versus head-on collisions depending on whether they are proceeding along 
leading or lagging strands. Nevertheless, because rates of transcription are 
substantially slower than rates of replication [about 20 times slower in E. 
coli, according to Bremer and Dennis (1996), and about 100 times slower in 
eukaryotes, based on the data in Table 5.1 and in Reines et al. (1996) and 
Jackson et al. (2000)], collision rates are nearly independent of the strand 
being transcribed. All such events can interrupt gene expression by dis-
lodging RNA polymerases, but head-on collisions have the additional effect 
of reducing the rate of replication fork progression (Mirkin and Mirkin 2005). 
Although the negative consequences of collisions between the transcription 
and replication machinery can be reduced by localizing genes on leading 
strands, the quantitative advantage of such gene positioning may be quite 
small, as experimental inversions of genes in prokaryotes are not gener-
ally known to cause measurable changes in fitness (Price, AIm et al. 2005). 
Nevertheless, there is a tendency for essential genes to be located on lead-
ing strands in prokaryotic genomes (Rocha and Danchin 2003; Price, AIm 
et al. 2005). The matter is entirely unresolved in eukaryotes, for which infor-
mation on the locations of ORIs is sparse. 
Finally, the semi-discontinuous nature of replication can impose differ-
ent mutational spectra on genes residing on leading versus lagging strands. 
The mechanistic details will be explored in Chapter 6, but for now, the salient 
point is that strand-specific mutational biases generally lead to excesses of 
Gover C and of T over A on leading strands. As a consequence, genes expe-
rience different types of mutation pressures depending on the strands on 
which they reside; for example, Gs and Ts are more stable in genes on lead-
ing strands. The consequences of such mutational asymmetries become 
especially relevant if a gene is moved from one strand to another, as this 
usually transiently increases the mutation rate of the gene. For example, a 
gene residing on a leading strand for a sufficiently long time is expected to 
have a G+ T-rich coding sequence, but relocation of the gene to the lagging 
strand would yield an excess of more highly mutable Cs and As on the lead-
ing strand, leading to an elevation in the genic mutation rate until the local 
equilibrium state of nucleotide usage has been reestablished. 
Such a process could have significant implications for the ability of genes 
to successfully move to opposite strands in various lineages. As a simple 
example, consider a situation in which the numbers of Gs and Cs in a lead-
ing-strand gene are nc and nc' with leading-strand Cs being the predomi-
nant sites of mutations (see Chapter 6), which arise at a rate of u per C. If 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
107 
G G G GCG GG C C GG G G GC CG C GG G C - Leading 
CC C C GC CC G G C C C C CG GC GC C C G - Lagging 
G G G GC G GG C C G G G G GC C G C GG GC - Lagging 
CCCCGCCCGGCCCCCGGCGCCCG - Leading 
Figure 5.2 The mutational consequences of switching the DNA strands on which a 
gene resides. For simplicity, only complementary G:C base pairs are shown, and it is as-
sumed that the vast majority of mutations are C~G changes initiated at leading-strand 
Cs (denoted in orange). If the gene switches strands (e.g., by an inversion), the large 
number of Cs previously on the lagging strand are now vulnerable to mutation, lead-
ing to a transient increase in the gene-wide mutation rate (until a new equilibrium 
nucleotide composition evolves, with high G content again on the leading strand). 
such a gene were to relocate to a lagging strand, the genic mutation rate 
would initially increase by an amount (nG - nc)u, because the gene's high 
number of Gs would place the complementary Cs in a more mutable (lead-
ing-strand) environment (Figure 5.2). If this directional mutation pressure 
exceeded the power of random genetic drift (see Chapter 4) and the fitness 
consequences of such mutations were sufficiently negative, fixation of the 
strand-shifted gene copy would be unlikely. This leads to the prediction that 
strand switching by genes should be less common in prokaryotes (with large 
effective population sizes) than in eukaryotes (assuming that the physical 
initiation of such events is not greatly reduced in the latter). An analysis of 
this matter remains to be done. 
Centromeres 
One of the most poorly understood aspects of eukaryotic genomic evolu-
tion involves the centromere, a semi-discrete region on each chromosome 
that is essential to chromosome transmission to daughter cells. After chro-
mosome duplication, the replicated sister chromatids remain attached at the 
centromere until the initiation of cell division. At this point, each sister cen-
tromere serves as an assembly site for a proteinaceous kinetochore, which 
captures the spindle microtubules along which the sister chromatids will be 
dragged to opposite poles of the dividing cell. In most animals and land 
plants, centromeres are observable as constrictions in each metaphase chro-
mosome. Although such structures are not visible in the tiny chromosomes 
of most unicellular species, the replication-associated functions of cen-
tromeres and the core set of proteins that carry them out are highly con-
served. Thus, the centromere appears to be an evolutionary legacy of the 
stem eukaryote (Tyler-Smith and Floridia 2000). (In a few exceptional 
species, including C. elegans, discrete centromeres appear to have been lost, 

108 
CHAPTER 5 
and the chromosomes are holocentric, with microtubules attaching at many 
sites.) 
How the cell division machinery recognizes the centromere is largely a 
mystery. The discovery that S. cerevisiae centromeres consist of a specific 125 
bp signature (Ng and Carbon 1987) initially encouraged the view that the 
functional cores of centromeres might be quite conserved, but the simplic-
ity of the S. cerevisiae centromere turns out to be exceptional, even for a fun-
gus. For example, the centromeres of the fission yeast S. pam be are 35-110 
kb in length, containing a central core that is only about 50% identical across 
nonhomologous chromosomes (Chikashige et al. 1989). The centromeres of 
Candida albicans are intermediate in size to those of budding and fission 
yeasts, occupying 4-16 kb regions, and centro meres from different chro-
mosomes appear to harbor unique sequences (Sanyal et al. 2004). Still larger 
are the 200-400 kb centromeres of Neurospora crassa, which appear to be 
graveyards of several mobile element families despite the general absence 
of active mobile elements in this species (Cambareri et al. 1998; Borkovich 
et al. 2004). The few centromeres that have been tentatively characterized 
in other unicellular species follow this general theme of sequence complexity. 
For example, a putative 2 kb centromere in Plasmodium falciparum has 97% 
A/T content and contains a number of repetitive DNAs (Bowman et al. 
1999); and the one centromere characterized in Trypanosoma cruzi is about 
16 kb in length, highly enriched with G+C, and contains several degener-
ate retrotransposons (Obado et al. 2005). 
Even more poorly defined are the centromeres of animals and land plants. 
Functional studies indicate that D. melanogaster centromeres are about 420 
kb in length, containing numerous incapacitated mobile elements and about 
8% AATAT and TTCTC tandem repeats, but harboring no other obvious 
centromere-specific sequences (Murphy and Karpen 1995; Sun et al. 2003). 
Human centromeric regions, which range in length from 0.5 to 5.0 Mb, are 
also densely occupied by remnants of mobile elements and repetitive DNAs, 
including thousands of copies of a 171 bp repeat (Yang et al. 2000; Sullivan 
2001; Rudd et al. 2006), as well as abundant gene-containing duplicative 
transpositions, many younger than a few million years (Eichler et al. 1999; 
She et al. 2004). The short satellite repeats tend to have a nested age struc-
ture, with a substantial expansion of the youngest elements in the interior 
of the centromere and descendants of older elements near the edges 
(Schueler et al. 2001, 2005). Similar observations have been made with cen-
tromeres from the frog Xenopus (Edwards and Murray 2005). Land plant 
centromeres generally fall into the range of 0.5-3.0 Mb in length, and again 
contain numerous arrays of repetitive DNAs (with 150-180 bp element 
lengths) and mobile element insertions, many of which appear to be cen-
tromere-specific (Kaszas and Birchler 1998; Copenhaver et al. 1999; Gindullis 
et al. 2001; Jin et al. 2004; Nagaki et al. 2004; Ma and Bennetzen 2006). 
Although the data are still rather limited phylogenetically, these obser-
vations strongly suggest that centromere lengths increased with the transi-
tion from unicellularity to multicellularity, largely as a consequence of the 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
109 
expansion of repetitive DNA families and the accumulation of mobile ele-
ments. The large size and complexity of centromeres make it very difficult 
to localize functionally relevant regions, and despite considerable effort, no 
specific sequence requirement for centromere activity has been identified in 
any species other than S. cerevisiae. In addition, the boundary between cen-
tromeric and noncentromeric regions is by no means abrupt, and in multi-
cellular species, generally extends over a long, ill-defined gradient referred 
to as the pericentromeric region. One commonality does seem to exist: 
although the sequences of centromeric satellite repeats in different multi-
cellular species are widely divergent, they are almost universally 150-180 
bp long, putting them in the range of segment lengths that wrap around his-
tones to form the units of chromosomal compaction (nucleosomes) (Henikoff 
et al. 2001). Remarkably, however, the occasional emergence of new cen-
tromeres in regions free of satellite DNAs (below) indicates that these 
sequences are not essential to centromere definition. 
The centromeric-drive hypothesis 
The preceding observations illustrate one of the central paradoxes in chro-
mosome biology-the tendency of centromeric sequences to diverge rap-
idly among species despite their fundamental role in the survival of every 
chromosome. DNA sequences that are under strong selective constraints 
usually exhibit very slow rates of molecular evolution, but divergence in 
putative centromeric core elements well in excess of the neutral expectation 
has been documented in Oryza (rice), Arabidopsis, and Drosophila (Malik and 
Henikoff 2001; Kawabe and Nasuda 2005; Lee et al. 2005; Ma and Bennet-
zen 2006). A potential explanation for such rapid evolution was provided 
by Henikoff et al. (2001), who argued that selection should favor centromeric 
features that enhance their own chances of their being loaded into success-
ful gametes (Figure 5.3). The key underpinning of this hypothesis is the 
peculiar nature of female meiosis in animals and land plants: only one of 
the four meiotic products becomes an oocyte nucleus, setting up an oppor-
tunity for competition between alternative centromeres striving for deliv-
ery into the oocyte. Whether a particular centromere will win such a con-
test depends on its position in the female tetrad (the array of four meiotic 
products), its strength of binding to the spindle fibers, and so forth (Pardo-
Manuel de Villena and Sapienza 2001). 
Such a competitive arena might cause centromeric sequences to eventu-
ally evolve to a state that maximally exploits the meiotic machinery, bring-
ing further evolutionary change to a standstill. However, Henikoff et al. 
(2001) suggested that driving centromeres impose significant selection pres-
sure for the restoration of centromeric parity, setting up a sort of coevolu-
tionary loop that makes such stasis unlikely. The assumption here is that 
although disparities in centromeric strength should have negligible effects 
on female fitness (as each egg will still acquire a full haploid set of chro-
mosomes), male gamete production (which normally uses all four meiotic 

110 
CHAPTER 5 
Figure 5.3 The centromeric-drive hypothesis. Left: Two pairs of sister chromatids, all 
with functionally identical centromeres (colored balls), are lined up at metaphase. Each 
chromatid has an equal probability of being delivered to the oocyte. Center: One cen-
tromere (red) has acquired an alteration that attracts a larger number of spindle fibers, 
enhancing the chance of delivery to the oocyte. Right: A compensatory mutation in a 
centromeric binding protein restores a balanced number of spindle fibers. (From 
Henikoff et al. 2001.) 
products) may be compromised by centromeric competition. The cen-
tromeric-drive hypothesis postulates that such problems impose selection 
for changes in centromeric (or heterochromatin-binding) proteins that restore 
parity in microtubule attachment, resulting in cycles of fixations of driving 
centromeres and restoring modifiers. Likening this series of events to an 
intra genomic arms race, Henikoff et al. (2001) further suggested that the 
process might increase rates of speciation by creating incompatibilities 
between the centromeric proteins of one species and the centromeric 
sequences of another. In the case of Drosophila, the group in which the genet-
ics of speciation has been studied most closely, reproductive incompatibil-
ity does not appear to be associated with the major centromeric protein 
(Sainz et al. 2003). However, a factor that restores viability in interspecies 
hybrids has been mapped to the centromeric region of the X chromosome 
in D. melanogaster (Sawamura and Yamamoto 1993). 
Attempts to demonstrate the operation of directional selection on the cen-
tromeric binding proteins, which would be expected under a drive hypoth-
esis, have yielded mixed results. One target of interest is the centromeric 
histone protein (usually referred to as CenH3). Unlike the DNA-binding 
regions of histone H3, which interacts with the full lengths of all chromo-
somes and is one of the most highly conserved eukaryotic proteins, those 
of CenH3 evolve at rates in excess of the neutral expectation in both Ara-
bidopsis and Drosophila (Malik and Henikoff 2001; Cooper and Henikoff 
2004). In contrast, in mammals and grasses, CenH3 is under stabilizing selec-
tion, although another centromeric protein (CENP-C) does appear to be 
under positive selection (Talbert et al. 2004). Centromeric drive is not 
expected to occur in species in which all four tetrad products of meiosis 
yield gametes (e.g., fungi), and at least in yeasts, the centromeric proteins 
do appear to be under purifying selection (Talbert et al. 2004). The obvious 
systems to search for the process are animals with haplodiploid mating sys-

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
111 
tems, as no counter-selection is expected in haploid males, which produce 
sperm by mitosis. 
Despite the seductive simplicity of the centromeric-drive hypothesis, the 
population genetic conditions required for its operation may be quite restric-
tive. The key requirement for such a coevolutionary drive process is the 
maintenance of functionally significant polymorphisms in centromeric 
regions for a sufficiently long time to enable a compensatory response on 
the part of the centromeric proteins. In the case of an aggressive centromere 
that rapidly achieves high frequency, the likelihood of the selective pro-
motion of modifier mutations is small because homozygotes for driving cen-
tromeres are not subject to differential spindle-binding strength. On the other 
hand, if the deleterious effects of a driving centromere on male fitness are 
sufficiently greater than the power of the drive process, the driving cen-
tromere will be eliminated from the population too rapidly to allow the 
arrival of compensatory mutations. Small population size will facilitate sto-
chastic increases in the frequencies of mildly deleterious centromeres, but 
will also inhibit the population-level rate of mutational origin of modifiers 
and the ability of natural selection to promote them. Although a quasi-equi-
librium frequency of the driving centromere might arise under some con-
ditions, with the selective advantage through females being balanced by the 
disadvantage through males (Feldman and Otto 1991), there would then be 
no selective advantage of modifiers for the transmission of one versus the 
other centromeric type (although, in principle, a modifier that simply 
ensures "fairness" might emerge). Such equilibria appear to exist with nat-
urally occurring "knobbed" chromosomes in maize, one of the first known 
examples of preferential chromosome segregation (Buckler et al. 1999; Birch-
ler et al. 2003). Finally, a fundamental constraint on the centromeric drive 
process is imposed by the fact that centromeric proteins must recognize the 
full set of centromeric sequences across all chromosomes. A successful mod-
ifier protein would have to restore parity at the problematic chromosome 
without generating new difficulties elsewhere. Until these issues have been 
addressed formally in a population genetic framework, the mechanisms 
responsible for centromere evolution will remain uncertain. A substantial 
body of theory on the fixation of compensatory mutations could be adapted 
to this end (Kimura 1985; Hartl and Taubes 1996; Michalakis and Slatkin 
1996; Phillips 1996; Stephan 1996; Higgs 1998; Carter and Wagner 2002). 
The presence of small, apparently expendable B chromosomes in a wide 
variety of multicellular species may have additional bearing on the issue of 
centromeric drive (Camacho et al. 2000,2005), as may the parasitic plasmids 
of yeast (Hajra et al. 2006). These diminutive chromosomes appear to be 
derived from the centromeric regions of ordinary chromosomes and largely 
owe their success to masquerading as such. Like centromeres, B chromo-
somes are virtually always saturated with mobile elements and other forms 
of repetitive DNA and are largely devoid of coding sequences (Camacho 
2005; Page et al. 2001). They need not segregate as bivalents, and the rate 
of transmission by presence/ absence heterozygotes often exceeds 50%, as 

112 
CHAPTER 5 
expected for a drive process. B chromosome abundance is positively corre-
lated with genome size (Palestis et al. 2004; Levin et al. 2005), with only a 
few examples known outside of animals and land plants (all of which are 
fungi). This pattern may reflect the fact that the mildly deleterious effects 
that are frequently associated with B chromosomes (Burt and Trivers 2006) 
tend to be overwhelmed by the forces of random genetic drift in the typi-
cally small populations of multicellular species-the same mechanism that 
probably drives the expansion of noncoding DNA on the primary chromo-
somes. And this, in turn, reemphasizes the point that consideration of pop-
ulation size issues may help solve the many remaining mysteries of cen-
tromeric evolution. 
Centromere positioning 
Pardo-Manuel de Villena and Sapienza (2001) have argued that some sort 
of drive process also underlies patterns of centromere positioning in vari-
ous vertebrates. Within most such species, there is a strong tendency for the 
full set of chromosomes to have centromeres in the same relative locations, 
being either mostly meta centric (centromeres centrally located) or mostly 
acrocentric (centromeres near chromosome tips). Experiments in the mouse 
demonstrate that a single meta centric chromosome tends to lose to two oth-
erwise homologous acrocentrics during meiosis, whereas the opposite 
occurs in humans and chickens. That is, the oocyte appears to attract cen-
tromeres in the mouse, but to repel them in humans and chickens. The pre-
dominant forms of chromosome structure in these different lineages, pri-
marily acrocentric in the mouse and primarily meta centric in humans and 
chickens, are consistent with such behavior having played a central role in 
the evolution of centromere locations in these lineages. 
Centromere repositioning (the appearance of a novel centromere at an 
ectopic location concurrent with the loss of the original centromere) can be 
quite rapid, with phylogenetic analyses implying such changes on time 
scales of a few million years or less within primates (Ventura et al. 2001, 
2004; Eder et al. 2003), rodents (Armengol et aJ. 2003), and horses (Yang et 
al. 2004; Carbone et al. 2006). However, the mechanisms by which a neo-
centromere-bearing chromosome spreads through a population remain 
unclear. Until such a chromosome has risen to high frequency, it will face a 
significant problem with recombination, as an odd number of inter-
centromeric crossovers will yield one daughter chromosome with two cen-
tromeres and another with none (Figure 5.4), almost certainly leading to 
nonfunctional gametes and reduced fertility. Under this scenario, a minor-
ity chromosome will always be at a selective disadvantage because it will 
essentially always be present in heterozygous carriers. Thus, successful cen-
tromere repositioning requires a mechanism whereby the novel chromo-
some can rise to a high enough frequency to become the most advantageous 
state (because the original chromosome will now mostly be found in chro-
mosomal heterozygotes). 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
113 
Figure 5.4 The consequences of a crossover (thin con-
necting lines) in an individual heterozygous for centromere 
positioning. One daughter chromosome is dicentric, 
whereas the other is acentric. 
In principle, the recombinationalload associated with centromere repo-
sitioning might be avoided entirely if the centromere moved gradually 
enough along the chromosome to minimize the chances of crossovers within 
the intercentromeric region. The early colonization burden could also be 
overcome during a population bottleneck of significant enough magnitude 
and intensity that the power of random genetic drift approached or exceeded 
the selective disadvantage of chromosomal heterozygotes (Lande 1979; 
Walsh 1982), and such transitions would be facilitated further if neocen-
tromeres were endowed with a driving capacity. Nonetheless, why certain 
genomes are biased toward one type of karyotypic profile over the other is 
a mystery. 
Centromere definition 
Perhaps the central unsolved question regarding centromeres is how they 
are defined at the molecular level. The emergence of neocentromeres with-
out any obvious rearrangements at the DNA level (e.g., Amor et al. 2004; 
Heun et al. 2006) implies a de novo origin and the involvement of regional 
epigenetic modifications of the chromatin, rather than a physical relocation 
of ancestral centromeric DNA. But how might a heritable and informative 
set of epigenetic markings be acquired? 
As noted above, most centromeric regions contain a high density of lin-
eage-specific tandem repeats and mobile element insertions. Numerous 
processes can lead to rapid interspecies divergence of tandem arrays of 
noncoding DNA while maintaining within-array homogeneity (Figure 5.5), 
and many mobile elements appear to be specialized for residence in cen-
tromeric regions, where low gene densities ensure minimal fitness effects 
of new insertions (Wong and Choo 2004). Thus, a key question is whether 
the typical contents of centromeric regions are simple reflections of chro-
mosomal environments with exceptional vulnerability to excess DNA accu-
mulation or whether, once established, repetitive DNAs and mobile ele-
ments become reliable enough defining features to be exploited for 
centromere identification. 

114 
CHAPTER 5 
-
Figure 5.5 Homogenization of a tandem array of repetitive DNAs. A random sample 
of five chromosomes is illustrated for each of three points in time. Top: Initially, all ar-
rays are of equal length, but one has acquired a variant repeat type (green). Middle: 
During replication, various DNA-level mechanisms (gene conversion, unequal crossing 
over, and replication slippage) can lead to the stochastic gain/loss of various repeat 
types, as well as expansion/contraction of array lengths. In some cases (e.g., biased 
gene conversion), one of the repeat types may expand at the expense of another. 
Bottom: Eventually, one of the repeat types will be lost by random processes, but the 
cycle will continue as new (red) variants arise. This process is often called concerted 
evolution. 
Two sets of observations implicate the involvement of mobile elements 
in centromere definition. First, the extensive sequence similarity between 
CENP-B, one of the major centromeric binding proteins, and the transposase 
of rigger elements (members of the mariner transposon family; see Chapter 
7) suggests the possible evolutionary recruitment of centromeric proteins 
from mobile elements. Because mobile element-encoded transposases bind 
to their own terminal sequences (see Chapters 3 and 7), the plausibility of 
this argument is bolstered by the strong homology between the terminal 
inverted repeat sequences of rigger and the consensus DNA recognition 
sequence of the CENP-B protein (Kipling and Warburton 1997; Volpe et al. 
2002). Second, there is a remarkable similarity between the mechanisms by 
which centromeres acquire their epigenetic markings and by which mobile 
elements become silenced in eukaryotic genomes (see Chapter 7). Although 
the general rarity of protein-coding genes fosters the view that centromeric 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
regions are largely transcriptionally silent, a low level of bidirectional tran-
scription occurs from centromeric sequences in S. pombe, including those 
associated with mobile elements (Volpe et al. 2002; Hall et al. 2003). The dou-
ble-stranded RNAs resulting from the annealing of the resultant comple-
mentary transcripts are subject to cleavage into small interfering RNAs (siR-
NAs) by the RNA interference (RNAi) pathway (Reinhart and Bartel 2002) 
(see Chapter 3). These siRNAs then appear to recruit enzymes that methy-
late centromeric histones specifically in the regions of original transcription, 
thereby providing an epigenetic signature for centromere location (Sullivan 
and Karpen 2004; Pidoux and Allshire 2005). Analogous processes appear 
to occur in plants (e.g., May et al. 2005; Martienssen 2003). 
Despite these enticing leads, many questions regarding the epigenetic 
specification of the centromere remain unanswered, not the least of which 
concerns the mechanism by which the epigenetic markings of centromeres 
are stably inherited across cell divisions. One idea is that the tension between 
sister centromeres imposes a topological change that facilitates the loading 
of centromeric proteins and their markings (Mellone and Allshire 2003; 
Henikoff and Dalal 2005). This hypothesis also provides a potentially sim-
ple explanation for chromosome repositioning, as an accidental cellular mis-
placement of the kinetochore assembly would immediately result in a new 
stable centromeric location. If such accidents were quite local, they might 
allow for gradual centromeric migrations without substantial negative 
recombinational effects. 
Although many details have been glossed over here, the key point is that 
the specific contents of a centromeric region may often be of secondary 
importance with respect to centromeric definition. Instead, provided that 
an adequate supply of transcription promoters and repetitive sequences is 
present, as would be the case in a region enriched in mobile elements, the 
maintenance of centromere location may be largely a self-reinforcing process. 
If this is the case, then the specific sequences associated with the repetitive 
tandem arrays commonly found in centromeres may be largely inconse-
quential, although, as noted above, the near constancy in size of the repeat 
units (at about 180 bp) implies a significant physical constraint. 
The possibility that mobile elements playa key role in centromere defi-
nition also provides a potential solution to some of the conceptual challenges 
confronting the centromeric-drive hypothesis. First, if mobile elements are 
the governing force, then centromeric sequences do not necessarily evolve 
so as to take advantage of spindle attachment mechanisms. Rather, by the 
stochastic expansion and contraction of mobile element families and adja-
cent tandem repeats, the centromere could simply passively acquire 
sequence changes that then secondarily drive the evolution of the cen-
tromeric proteins. If this hypothesis is correct, then species with limited 
mobile element activity (generally, those with very large effective popula-
tion sizes; see Chapter 7) should harbor centromeres with unusually stable 
contents. Second, mobile element colonization provides a powerful mech-
anism for rapidly homogenizing the centromeric regions of the full set of a 
115 ,

116 
CHAPTER 5 
species' chromosomes, thereby minimizing cytogenetic problems that might 
arise with chromosome-specific centromeres. 
Telomeres 
Whereas most prokaryotic genomes consist of single circular molecules, 
all known eukaryotic nuclear chromosomes are linear. This type of chro-
mosomal architecture imposes two substantial challenges. First, chromo-
some ends are intrinsically vulnerable to gradual loss during replication. 
Once a replicon reaches the end of a chromosome, there is no more substrate 
for initiating an Okazaki fragment (see Figure 5.1), so the final nucleotides 
on lagging strands cannot be replaced without a special mechanism for end 
sequence replication. Second, as noted in Chapters 2 and 4, eukaryotic chro-
mosomes commonly experience double-strand breaks, which are often 
repaired by the process of nonhomologous end joining (Lieber et al. 2003; 
Daley et al. 2005). The accidental fusion of true chromosome ends by this 
repair pathway would lead to immediate genomic instability, as some chro-
mosomes would have multiple centromeres and others none. Thus, a mech-
anism is required to distinguish telomeres from chromosome breaks. Muller 
(1938) demonstrated the existence of such protective properties by showing 
that chromosomes without telomeres are never recovered after double-
strand breaks are imposed in Drosophila. 
Eukaryotic telomeres generally consist of repetitive DNA sequences, with 
one strand of the duplex extending tens to hundreds of base pairs beyond 
the other. In many species (including vertebrates, trypanosomes, and cili-
ates, but apparently not yeasts), this single strand invades the upstream dou-
ble-strand repeats to form a loop (Murti and Prescott 1999; de Lange 2004). 
Such structures, along with the key proteins that bind them, playa central 
role in end sequence identity and the maintenance of telomere integrity, and 
their absence generally leads to rapid telomere loss andlor chromosome 
fusion (Baumann and Cech 2001; Loayza and de Lange 2003; Pardo and 
Marcand 2005; Shakirov et al. 2005). 
The telomeric arrays of unicellular species tend to be fairly short (less 
than a few hundred bp), whereas those of animals and plants are gener-
ally 5-150 kb long (Louis and Vershinin 2005). Such arrays often consist of 
a wide variety of repeat types, although some commonalities have emerged. 
Telomeric repeat units are invariably very G+ T rich and often small in size. 
For example, GGGTTA is generally used in vertebrates and some filamen-
tous fungi (Pryde et al. 1997); GGGGTT or GGGGTTTT in ciliates (Murray 
1990); GGGTTCA in Plasmodium (Carlton et al. 2002); GGTTA(A) in some 
arthropods (Pryde et al. 1997; Sahara et al. 1999); GGCTTA in C. elegans 
(Wicky et al. 1996); and GGGTTTT(TT)A in Chlamydomonas (Hails et al. 1995). 
This widespread reliance on G+ T-rich telomeric repeats invites comparisons 
to the situation noted above for leading versus lagging strands of DNA. 
Because exposure of DNA in the single-stranded state imposes strong muta-
tion pressure in the G/T direction, the commonalities in the typical telom-

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
117 
eric repeats noted above may be as much a product of shared mutational 
forces as shared inheritance. A+C-rich telomeres are expected to be highly 
unstable. 
Despite the fairly high degree of conservation of telomeric repeat 
sequences across a diversity of distantly related lineages, small repeat units 
are by no means universal. For example, although most plants utilize either 
GGGTTTA or GGGITA telomeric repeats, a number of monocot lineages 
rely on larger, ill-defined sequences (S. P. Adams et al. 2001; Fajkus et al. 
2005). The telomeres of the fungus Ashbya gossypii consist of 24 bp G+ T-rich 
repeats (Dietrich et al. 2004), and numerous variants are found in other fungi 
(Teixeira and Gilson 2005). The telomeres of the fly midge Chironomus con-
sist of 150-350 bp repeats, the exact sequence of which differs significantly 
among species (Colm and Edstrom 1992), and those of the slime mold Dic-
tyosteliul11 are even more dramatically divergent, consisting of rONA-like 
repeats (Eichinger et al. 2005). 
In most species, end sequence maintenance is accomplished by the telom-
erase enzyme, which is part protein and part RNA. The RNA component 
contains a sequence complementary to the telomeric repeat, which enables 
it to bind to single-stranded ends and repetitively prime for the addition 
of the telomeric repeat sequences by a slippage mechanism (Figure 5.6). 
Observations on human somatic cells, most of which do not express this 
enzyme, powerfully demonstrate the critical contribution of telomerase to 
end sequence maintenance. Such cell lineages experience progressive telom-
ere loss, up to 200 bp per cell division, eventually succumbing to cellular 
senescence. Mammalian telomere elongation ordinarily occurs only during 
early embryogenesis (Schaetzlein et aJ. 2004). 
Given that chromosome ends in vertebrate cancer cells are maintained 
by the activation of an alternative telomere maintenance pathway (Teng and 
Zakian 1999; Lundblad 2000) and that linear bacterial and viral chromo-
somes also maintain their integrity without telomerase (Kobryn and Cha-
conas 2001), it is clear that the earliest eukaryotic chromosomes need not 
have been telomerase-dependent. On the other hand, the wide phylogenetic 
distribution of this enzyme suggests an early takeover, quite likely in the 
stem eukaryote itself. The telomerase protein appears to be related to the 
reverse transcriptase of non-LTR retrotransposons (Eickbush 1997), sug-
gesting the possibility that the ancestral telomerase was a domesticated 
mobile element. But tIle enzymatic features of telomerase activity raise 
another intriguing issue.lf reverse transcriptase is essential for chromosome 
maintenance, then residing within every telomerase-containing eukaryote 
is a source of the key protein for retrotransposon proliferation. Can this kind 
of takeover operate in reverse; that is, can the duplication and divergence 
of telomerase genes lead to the origin of new retrotransposon families? 
A remarkable case for a retrotransposon-telomerase connection comes 
from the genus Drosophiln, which appears to be devoid of telomerase, rely-
ing instead on arrays of two telomere-homing non-LTR retrotransposon fam-
ilies, He TA and TART (Sheen and Levis 1994; Pardue and DeBaryshe 2003; 

118 
CHAPTER 5 
------------ TTAGGGTTAGGGTTA 
I ~--- AATCCCAAT 
t 
GGGTTA 
HHH 
___ __ ___ ____ TTAGGGTTAGGGTTA 
AATCCCAAT 
____________ TTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA 
AATCCCAAT 
GGGTTA 
HHH 
____________ TTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA 
-
AATCCCAAT 
Figure 5.6 Maintenance of a telomere, consisting of GGGTIA repeats, by repeated 
primer extensions. Top: After conventional replication, the chromosome (black) has a 
Single-strand overhang, to which a telomerase containing a complementary RNA tem-
plate (orange) is recruited. Middle: The top strand is extended by the addition of bases 
complementary to the RNA template. Bottom: The template dislodges and slides to the 
right, and the process is repeated. The number of extension cycles is regulated by cel-
lular processes. (From Chan and Blackburn 2004.) 
Abad et al. 2004; Pardue et al. 2005). Both types of elements cooperate in 
telomere maintenance in a way that is quite similar to the telomerase path-
way-the transcripts of each element are diverted to chromosome tips, 
where they serve as primers for new insertions. Only TART is autonomous, 
but although HeTA does not encode reverse transcriptase, it does appear to 
be primarily responsible for the homing process. Phylogenetic evidence sug-
gests an origin of this liaison prior to the divergence of members of the 
Drosophila genus (Pardue and DeBaryshe 2003), and Pardue et al. (2005) 
make a plausible case that the entire system is derived from telomerase 
(which is present in many other arthropod genera). 
Any attempt to understand telomere evolution must confront the same 
kinds of issues discussed above with respect to centromeres. Because end 
maintenance is critical to chromosome survival, chromosomes with telom-
eres better able to sequester telomerase should experience greater longevi-
ties. This idea raises the specter of a potential telomeric drive situation, with 
a tight co evolutionary loop between telomeric repeat structure and telom-
erase sequence. However, this issue is further complicated by the presence 
of the RNA component in telomerase. With each telomere being grown from 

THREE KEYS TO CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRITY 
119 
the same RNA template, telomere homogeneity would seem to be ensured, 
thereby inhibiting a drive process unless the RNA template itself changed 
(which, in principle, could cause a rapid transformation of all telomeres, but 
probably would cause major chromosome maintenance problems until 
established). 
Consistent with this view, most of the rare radical alterations in telom-
eric constitutions that have occurred across phylogenetic lineages appear to 
have been followed by long periods of stability. Quite contrary to the situ-
ation noted above for centromeres, all species within a genus, or even a fam-
ily, tend to have very similar telomeric repeat units. Only a few examples 
of within-species variation among telomeric sequences have been found; 
for example, on the linear mitochondrial chromosomes of Tetrahymena 
(Morin and Cech 1988) and on the auto somes of Chironomus (c. C. Lopez 
et al. 1996). One mechanism that might initiate a genome-wide shift in telom-
eric structure with few intermediate negative repercussions is duplication 
of the telomerase molecule itself, as this might allow one paralog (and/ or 
its RNA moiety) to gradually acquire features leading to the displacement 
of the ancestral telomeric sequence. As in the case of cenhomeric drive, this 
is clearly an area of evolutionary genomics that warrants further popula-
tion genetic analysis and detailed comparative study. 

The Nucleotide 
Composition 
Landscape 
If the nucleotide composition of DNA were totally driven by mutation 
and the rates of all twelve base-substitution mutations (e.g., A~C, A~G, 
.. . , T ~G) were identical, the genome-wide frequencies of all four nucleo-
tides would equal 0.25 on both strands. This is virtually never the case 
(Sueoka 1962). Because of the Watson-Crick nature of double-stranded DNA 
(G binding with C, and A with T), when both strands are counted, the 
genome-wide numbers of Gs and Cs must be equal, and the same is true for 
As and Ts. However, this is the only universal form of parity in nucleotide 
usage. For example, the fractional A+ T content of prokaryotic genornes 
ranges from about 0.25 to about 0.85 (Figure 6.1); species withA+ T content 
greater than 0.70 tend to be intracellular pathogens or endosymbionts, 
whereas those with the lowest values are much more functionally diverse. 
The A + T contents of the genomes of unicellular eukaryotes are also wide-
ranging (0.40-0.80), but with no obvious relationship to lifestyle. The 
genomes of animals and land plants are almost invariably A+ T rich, 
although not greatly so, falling in the narrow range of about 0.50-0.70. In 
addition to these dramatic levels of variation in overall nucleotide compo-
sition among species, within-strand asymmetry with respect to comple-
mentary bases is common (i.e., A:t T and/ or G:t C), and some chromosomes 
exhibit substantial regional heterogeneity in nucleotide composition. 
In principle, such disparities in nucleotide usage could be consequences 
of biases driven by natural selection. However, before invoking adaptive 
explanations for the patterning of nucleotide composition, it is appropri-
ate to consider the physical processes associated with mutation and recom-
bination alone. We will first examine the directional effects of mutation, 
which commonly (if not universally) impose pressure toward A + T content. 
Opposing this baseline mutational pattern, gene conversion activity as so-

122 
CHAPTER 6 
'" 
IlJ 
El 
100 
80 
5 60 
b/) 
... 
] 
40 
~ 
Z 
20 
Vertebra tes 
Invertebrates 
Land plants 
Unicellular eukaryotes 
o L----L_---"---I_ 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
A+T content 
Figure 6.1 Distribution of genome-wide A+ T content for prokaryotes with com-
pletely sequenced genomes (histogram) and ranges for eukaryotes (colored lines). The 
prokaryotic mean and SD are 0.54 and 0.13 (sample size = 293). Note that because of 
the Watson- Crick base complementarity of As and Ts, the A+ T content is identical for 
both strands. 
ciated with recombination is generally biased in the direction of G+C con-
tent. However, unlike mutation, which operates independently of the geno-
typic background, gene conversion occurs only in heterozygous individu-
als and so is most effective in large populations harboring high levels of 
nucleotide variation (see Chapter 4). After considering the relative strengths 
of these two physical processes, which can be substantial, we will examine 
the potential role of selection, which becomes especially relevant in the con-
text of protein-coding genes. Because the net effects of physical forces oper-
ating on nucleotide composition may be either parallel to or opposite to the 
directional forces of selection, an understanding of the determinants of 
nucleotide composition is fundamental to the full spectrum of issues in 
genomic evolution. 
The Molecular Spectrum 
of Mutational Effects 
Natural cellular processes can induce a wide spectrum of base modifica-
tions (premutations) that, if unrepaired at the time of replication, ultimately 
result in inherited mutations. Although twelve types of base-substitution 
mutations are possible, observations on E. coli, yeast, and human cell cul-
tures suggest that a small subset of the possible changes dominate the dis-
tribution of mutational types. 

Cytosine 
NH2 
I 
--
THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
123 
o 
II 
C 
HN/ 
"'CH 
I 
II 
~C , / CH 
o 
N 
H 
Uracil 
Figure 6.2 Top: Deamination of cytosine 
produces uracil, which becomes thymine after 
postreplicative repair. Bottom: Deamination of 
5-methylcytosine leads directly to thymine. 
C 
--:/ "'C-CH 
~ 
II 
3 
o 
II 
C 
--
HN/ 
"'C-
CH 
I 
II 
3 
~ C , / CH 
oY' 
N 
H 
5-methylcytosine 
~ C , / CH 
oY' 
N 
H 
Thymine 
One of the most common sources of mutation is spontaneous deamina-
tion of cytosine or 5-methylcytosine, which promotes C:G~ T:A transitions 
(Figure 6.2), where the colon denotes a bond between DNA strands. In a 
number of species (mammals and land plants in particular), the cytosines 
in CG dinucleotides (a C followed by a G on the same strand) are frequently 
methylated and dominate the total mutational landscape, having muta-
tion rates 2-10 times greater than other sites (Ehrlich and Wang 1981; Kraw-
czak et al. 1998; Siepel and Haussler 2004; Hwang and Green 2004; Huang 
et al. 2005; Arndt et al. 2005; Mikkelsen et al. 2005; Morton et al. 2006). A CG 
on one strand will be paired with a GC on the other, so depending on the 
strand on which C is methylated, a CG doublet will be converted to TG or 
CA. Although such changes are commonly initiated on single-stranded 
DNA exposed during replication or transcription, leading to strand asym-
metry in G and C content (see below), they can also arise symmetrically from 
both strands as DNA "breathes" during normal cellular processes. More-
over, the CG mutation rate is higher in A + T-rich regions (Fryxell and Zuck-
erkandl2000; Fryxell and Moon 2005; Morton et al. 2006). This effect pre-
sumably arises because G and C are linked by three hydrogen bonds, 
whereas A and T are linked by two, rendering A+ T-rich regions less stable 
and more likely to transiently enter a single-stranded state. 
A second common source of premutations, the oxidative conversion of 
guanine to 8-oxo-guanine (GO), encourages mutations in two ways (Groll-
man and Moriya 1993; Miller 1996; Wang et al. 1998). First, when a resident 
GO base is present at the time of replication, an A can be incorporated into 
the replicating complementary strand (Figure 6.3). Although an A:GO mis-
match can still be repaired by first replacing the A with a C and then restor-
ing a C:G state by base excision repair, GO can also be replaced by T, lead-

124 
CHAPTER 6 
Guanine 
J 
riNH2 ---- O}-(N':::::'CH 
( 
~N-----HN~ _ )-~ 
N--.I 
)=N 
dR 
I 
~ 
dR 
O-----H2N 
Cytosine -
Guanine 
" 
8-oxo-guanine 
J 
H 
NH, 
N-i 
<{ 
NH'------O~N 
N~N----------HN 
N 
~ 
y ~ 
IN 
 
dR 
Adenine -
8-oxo-guanine 
Figure 6.3 Oxidation of guanine to 8-oxo-guanine. Like guanine, 8-oxo-guanine 
can bond with cytosine, but it bonds much more frequently with adenine (as shown at 
the bottom right). The red circle demarcates the chemical modifications of guanine, 
and the dotted lines denote hydrogen bonds. dR denotes a deoxyribose in the 
sugar-phosphate backbone of the DNA molecule. 
ing to an inherited C:G~A:T transversion. Second, GOs can be directly incor-
porated into replicating strands of DNA when a GO base from the precur-
sor nucleotide pool is inserted across from an A or a C on the template strand, 
encouraging A:T ~C:G transversions. The relative rates of these two types 
of GO-induced transversions are unknown, but because the first mechanism 
occurs in both replicating and nonreplicating DNA, it may predominate. 
Although the rate of origin of GO bases in the germ line is unknown, the 
ratio of GOs to Gs in the DNA of mammalian somatic tissues is about 10-7 to 
10-5, depending on the age of the individual (Helbock et al. 1998; Hamilton 
et al. 2001), so the opportunity for GO-induced mutations may be quite high. 
Although the preceding observations suggest two potent biochemical 
mechanisms that could bias the prevailing mutation pressure in the direc-
tion of A + T richness, the full spectrum of mutations potentially depends on 
numerous additional types of DNA error propagation. An unbiased per-
spective on the mutational spectrum of effects requires direct observations 
of heritable changes at the DNA level prior to the operation of natural selec-
tion, but owing to the extreme rarity of mutations, such analyses are nearly 
nonexistent. However, several attempts have been made to indirectly derive 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
125 
the mutational spectrum from laboratory studies of reporter constructs or 
from phylogenetic analyses of sequence changes in pseudogenes (assumed 
to be neutral). Despite their mixed nature and potential for bias, these stud-
ies have yielded a fairly consistent set of results. For example, across 
prokaryotes, yeast, and several animals, G/C-7A/T mutations (where the 
slash denotes "or") outnumber those in the opposite direction by factors 
of 1.6-2.8, with G:C-7A:T transitions almost always being the most com-
mon substitution type (Table 6.1). Concordant observations have been 
obtained from phylogenetic comparisons innumerous species (McVean and 
TABLE 6.1 Distribution of base-substitution mutations estimated 
from direct observations of reporter constructs (rc) 
or phylogenetic analyses of pseudogenes [pal 
SPECIES: 
Transitions: 
A:T~G:C 
G:C~A:T 
Transversions: 
A:T~C:G 
A:T~T:A 
G:C~C:G 
G:C~T:A 
A+Tbias: 
MP 
(pa) 
0.14 
0.42 
0.07 
0.05 
0.16 
0.16 
Numbers 
2.76 
Rates 
3.81 
A+ T genome content: 
Observed 0.58 
Expected 
0.79 
EC 
(rc) 
0.12 
0.44 
0.14 
0.13 
0.06 
0.11 
2.11 
2.12 
0.50 
0.68 
SC 
(rc) 
0.13 
0.24 
0.05 
0.10 
0.22 
0.26 
2.77 
4.54 
0.62 
0.82 
CG 
(rc) 
0.13 
0.31 
0.19 
0.05 
0.12 
0.20 
1.59 
2.21 
0.58 
0.69 
HS 
(rc) 
0.13 
0.38 
0.12 
0.14 
0.14 
0.09 
1.88 
2.70 
0.59 
0.73 
HS 
(pa) 
0.17 
0.37 
0.09 
0.14 
0.10 
0.13 
1.92 
2.77 
0.59 
0.73 
DM 
(pa) 
0.18 
0.30 
0.10 
0.09 
0.13 
0.20 
1.78 
2.57 
0.59 
0.72 
Sources: Mycobacterium ieprae (Mp): Mitchell and Graur (2005); Escherichia coli (Ec): Schaaper 
and Dunn (1991), Sargentini and Smith (1994), Yamamura et al. (2000,2002), Wolff et aL 
(2004); Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc): Kunz et aL (1998), Ohnishi et al. (2004); Cricetus griseus 
(hamster, Cg): Nalbantoglu et aL (1987), de Jong et al. (1988), Zhang et al. (1992), Xu et aL 
(1995), Kimura et aL (1998); Homo sapiens (Hs, rc): Podlutsky et al. (1998); Homo sapiens (Hs, 
pal: Petrov and Hartl (1999); Drosophila meianogaster (Om): Petrov and Hartl (1999). 
Note: AT and G:C denote Watson-Crick base pairs across strands. Observed frequencies of 
each type of mutation, which sum to one for each species, are functions of both the number 
of sites with a particular parental type and the mutation rate conditional on that type. The 
A+T number bias is the ratio of observed G/C-7A/T to A/T -7G/C mutations; e.g., for 
Mp, (0.42 + 0.16)/(0.14 + 0.07) = 2.76. The A+ T mutation rate bias is the ratio of observed 
G/C-7A/T to A/T -7G/C mutations, each weighted by the abundance of source nucleo-
tides (given in the second from the last row), which gives an estimate of the relative muta-
tion rates in both directions (m in the text); e.g., for Mp, [(0.42+0.16)/0.42]/[(0.14+0.07)/0.58] 
= 3.81. The expected A+ T content is computed using the expression in Box 6.1. 

126 
CHAPTER 6 
Vieira 2001; Green et al. 2003; Hudson et al. 2003; Arndt et al. 2005; Singh 
et al. 2005; Morton et al. 2006). Single-site analyses do not fully capture the 
mutational substitution spectrum, as the changes at individual sites can 
depend on the immediately surrounding nucleotides (Siepel and Haussler 
2004; Hwang and Green 2004; Arndt et al. 2005), but with the available data, 
it is hard to escape the conclusion that the prevailing mutation pressure is 
generally in the direction of A+ T. Indeed, no species has yet been identified 
in which mutation pressure favors G+C richness. 
While suggesting that the spectrum of substitution mutations may be 
roughly similar across diverse life forms, the results in Table 6.1 are quite 
peculiar in another respect. For a genome that has reached an equilibrium 
nucleotide composition driven by mutation alone, the numbers of 
G/ C-7A/T and A/T-7G/C mutations should be exactly equal. Thus, the 
excess mutations in the direction of A/T imply that each of the genomes in 
Table 6.1 has a substantially lower A+ T composition than expected under 
a process entirely driven by mutations. The equilibrium A+ T composition 
is a function of the relative rates of the two classes of mutations (Box 6.1). 
For example, in yeast, the ratio of mutation rates involving G/C-7A/T and 
A/ T -7G/ C changes is 4.54 (see Table 6.1), which, when applied to Equation 
6.1 in Box 6.1 yields an expected equilibrium A + T content of 4.54/ (4.54 t 
1.00) = 0.82, whereas the actual genomic content is 0.62. Given the diversity 
Box 6.1 Equilibrium Nucleotide Composition 
under a Mutation-Driven Process 
Here we consider the expected A+ T composition of a genome under the assumption that 
the only relevant processes are the relative mutation rates from A or T to G or C, and vice 
versa. Because we are considering the entire nucleotide content of the genome on both 
strands, and because each A is balanced by a T on the opposite strand (and similarly for 
the other bases), it is sufficient to lump As with Ts and Gs with Cs. For this same reason, 
AH T and GHC mutations are irrelevant to overall At T composition. We further assume 
that the mutation rate per site is independent of the status of neighboring sites. 
Suppose the mutation rate from AfT to G/C is u, whereas that from G/C to AfT is v. 
Letting p be the current frequency of A+ T, the rate of change in p caused by mutation is 
equal to (1 - p)v - pu. At equilibrium, the number of G/C--1AfT mutations, (1 - p)v, must 
equal the number of AfT --1G/C mutations, pu, so the equilibrium A+ T composition is ob-
tained by solving (1 - p)v - pu = 0, 
_ 
v 
m 
p------
(u+v) 
(l+m) 
(6.1) 
where m = v/u is the mutational bias toward A+ T. Because we have assumed neutral sites, 
p can be interpreted here as the probability that a particular site is of type A or T or as the 
expected At T content of the entire genome. In the absence of mutational bias (m = 1), 
the equilibrium A+ T content is 0.5. As shown in Table 6.1, m generally appears to be in 
the range of 2.1-4.5. 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
127 
of systems analyzed, this consistent pattern suggests the existence of some 
general force operating in the opposite direction; that is, favoring newly 
arisen G / Cs more than A/ Is. A leading candidate for such a force is the sub-
ject of the next section. 
Biased Gene Conversion 
Aside from their involvement in codons, it is difficult to imagine a univer-
sal selective advantage for G/ C nucleotides, unless heteroduplex stability 
is involved. However, there is a potentially powerful nonadaptive mecha-
nism that might promote such changes: biased gene conversion. Although 
it is common to think of recombination as a process of reciprocal exchange 
(crossing-over), the point of recombination almost always experiences a 
patch of nonreciprocal exchange (Figure 6.4). Recombination events are ini-
tiated when a broken strand of DNA is repaired by using the homologous 
region of an intact chromosome as a template for strand resynthesis. If the 
sequences of the homologous chromosomes differ in this region, gene con-
version will result as mismatched (noncomplementary) nucleotides between 
invading and recipient strands are restored to Watson-Crick pairs by the 
e 
e 
! 
e 
----- + -----
--------------- e---------------
! 
e 
- ---- ----- + -----------
e 
------- ~ -------------
Figure 6.4 The double-strand break repair 
model of recombination. Parallel sets of lines of 
the same color denote the two complementary 
strands of DNA. Top: The broken red chromo-
some has been resected by an exonuclease. The 
black dots denote a nucleotide position on the 
black chromosome that had a different state on 
the red chromosome. Middle: Using sequence ho-
mology as guide, the red chromosome invades 
the black chromosome, forming a heteroduplex 
and utilizing the latter as a template for strand 
resynthesis (dashed lines). Bottom: The inter-
twined chromatids are cut and rejoined, resulting 
in the restoration of two complete chromosomes. 
Note that the red chromosome has acquired the 
black sequence from the homologous chromo-
some (the gene conversion tract). In addition, the 
restored chromosomes may contain small regions 
of heteroduplex DNA (complementary strands of 
black and red), which may contain base mis-
matches resulting from additional nucleotide het-
erozygosity between the parental chromosomes; 
in that case, mismatch repair may lead to further 
gene conversion. Depending on how the strand 
junctions are cut, the nonreciprocal conversion 
mayor may not be accompanied by reciprocal 
exchange (crossing-over), although only a non-
crossover event is shown here. (Modified from 
Szostak et al. 1983.) 

128 
CHAPTER 6 
mismatch repair pathway. This double-strand break repair model describes 
just one of several physical mechanisms of recombination (Haber 2000), but 
all result in gene conversion regardless of whether recombination is accom-
panied by crossing-over. 
If the points of chromosome breakage were entirely independent of local 
nucleotide composition and the repair of mismatches in heteroduplex DNA 
were entirely random, gene conversion would be unbiased. That is, although 
individual conversion events would cause nonreciprocal exchange among 
homologous chromosomes, there would be no tendency for a particular 
sequence to drive itself through the population. However, a substantial 
amount of evidence from fungi and animals indicates a general conversion 
bias toward G/C. The results come from both direct observation (Brown 
and Jiricny 1988; Bill et al. 1998; Birdsell 2002) and assessments of allele 
frequency distributions showing that presumptively neutral A/T ....::,G/C 
mutations are capable of rising to higher frequencies than G/C....::,A/T muta-
tions (Webster et al. 2003; Webster and Smith 2004; Galtier et al. 2006). A 
reflection of this behavior is seen in yeasts, in which there is a strong posi-
tive correlation between the recombination rate within a chromosomal 
region and the G+C content at silent sites (Birdsell 2002). Such correlations 
have also been seen in nematodes and Drosophila (Marais et al. 2001; Marais 
and Piganeau 2002; Singh et al. 2005), humans (Fullerton et al. 2001; Kong 
et al. 2002), and mice (Huang et al. 2005). 
A number of observations support the idea that recombinational activity 
is driving G+C composition, and not the other way around. First, in humans, 
the recombination rate of a region is much more highly correlated with the 
types of mutations being produced than with the current composition of the 
region (Meunier and Duret 2004). Second, large, recombinationally quies-
cent genomic regions, such as Y chromosomes and the fourth chromosome 
of D. melanogaster, tend to be very A+ T rich (Perry and Ashworth 1999; 
Marais 2003). Third, large repetitive DNAs that engage in frequent gene con-
versions, such as those encoding rRNAs and tRNAs, tend to have l.ffiUSU-
ally high G+C contents (Galtier et al. 2001), as do small chromosomes (Web-
ster et al. 2006), which tend to experience more recombination per nucleotide 
site because of the near constancy of the number of crossover events per 
chromosome (see Chapter 4). 
Can biased gene conversion be a powerful enough force to alter the equi-
librium nucleotide composition of a genome relative to that expected with 
biased mutation alone? To answer this question, two fundamental issues 
must be considered: the power of the physical pressure of gene conversion 
and the sufficiency of the population genetic context for the operation of the 
biasing process. There is little question that conversion tracts arise at a high 
rate relative to that of mutation. The recombination rate per base pair asso-
ciated with crossing-over is often on the order of the mutation rate (see 
Chapter 4), and there are several reasons to expect the rate of conversion 
to be substantially higher. First, although all recombination events are 
accompanied by gene conversion (only those involving nonidentical 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
129 
sequences having consequences), just a fraction of recombination events 
result in crossing-over: about 25% in S. cerevisiae (Malkova et al. 2004), 9% 
in Arabidopsis (Copenhaver et al. 2002; Haubold et al. 2002), 15% in Drosophila 
(Hilliker et al. 1991), and 12% in humans (Frisse et al. 2001). Second, mei-
otic gene conversion tract lengths appear to follow a geometric distribution 
of the form p(n) = l/J
I1
, where n is the length of the tract in nucleotides and l/J 
is the per-base probability of extending a conversion tract (Ahn et al. 1988; 
Hilliker et al. 1994). Under this distribution, the probability of a particular 
tract length declines with n, but because l/J is generally very close to 1.0, the 
average tract length,l/J/(l-l/J), is generally quite high: about 400 bp in eubac-
teria (Santoyo et al. 2005),500 bp in S. cerevisiae (Ahn and Livingston 1986), 
and 350 bp in D1'Osophila (Hilliker et al. 1994). Third, gene conversion can 
occur during mitotic as well as meiotic divisions (Ahn et al. 1988; Mezard 
et al. 1992; Sugawara and Haber 1992; Gloor 2002; Omilian et al. 2006), and 
the average tract lengths of mitotic conversions can be 10 times larger than 
those arising during meiosis Gudd and Petes 1988). The combination of these 
three factors suggests that conversion rates per nucleotide site must com-
monly be at least a thousand times greater than mutation rates, which is 
consistent with direct estimates of conversion rates of about 10-5/ site/ gen-
eration in multicellular species and as high as 10-2 in yeasts (Marais 2003). 
The key to understanding the ability of biased gene conversion to drive 
genomic nucleotide composition away from the expectation under mutation 
alone is the realization that although gene conversion is an internal physical 
process like mutation, it is also a selection-like process, whose operation is 
entirely dependent on the presence of heterozygotes. The power of biased 
gene conversion can be summarized in the following way. Letting K be the 
conversion rate and f3 be the frequency of G/C transmission from a het-
erozygote (containing a G or C at a position on one chromosome and an A 
or T at the same position on the homologous chromosome), the change in 
G/C frequency (1 - p) through a single heterozygote is K(f3 - 0.5), where 
(f3 - 0.5) is the deviation of the segregation ratio from the random expecta-
tion of 0.5. The change at the population level, through the entire pool ofhet-
erozygotes (assumed to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium), is K(f3 - 0.5) 
[2p(1- p)]. Thus, if newly arisen mutations with conversion advantages are 
to have an influence on the nucleotide composition of a population, they 
must remain segregating in the population for a sufficiently long time to 
experience conversion events within heterozygous individuals. If the pop-
ulation size is too small, so that most newly arisen mutations are lost or fixed 
faster than the time scale of conversion (-1/ K generations), the process will 
be ineffective. 
These verbal arguments can be made more explicit by taking advantage 
of the observation that biased gene conversion has an influence on the 
dynamics of new mutations that is indistinguishable from that of natural 
selection (Nagylaki 1983; Walsh 1983), which allows the formal use of the 
theory developed in Chapter 4 for mutations with effects on fitness. In this 
case, the selection coefficient is s = K(2f3 - I), which is simply twice the 

130 
CHAPTER 6 
expression derived in the preceding paragraph. Recalling the theory intro-
duced in Chapter 4, mutant alleles with conversion advantages or disad-
vantages will behave in an essentially neutral fashion if 12N gSl < < I, where 
Ng is the effective number of genes at the locus in the population. Thus, 
regardless of the absolute intensity of biased gene conversion, nucleotide 
composition will approach the expectations under mutational pressure alone 
if 11((2,8-1)1 I/(2Ng). 
Unfortunately, direct empirical estimates of 1((2,8 -1) are scarce except in 
fungi, which have unusually high recombinational activity (see Chapter 4). 
In S. cerevisiae, for which the data are most reliable, 1((2,8 -1) has an average 
value of 0.004 during meiotic cell divisions (Lamb 1998). If I( scales with 
genome size in the same manner as the crossing-over rate (see Figure 4.6), 
then assuming that the average value of (2,8 - 1) is roughly comparable 
Box 6.2 Equilibrium Nucleotide Composition under 
the Joint Pressures of Mutation and 
Gene Conversion 
As in Box 6.1, we consider the expected A+ T composition of a genome in the absence of 
natural selection, but here we allow for both differential mutation rates and biased gene 
conversion. Again, we denote the mutation rates from A/T to G/C as u and from G/C to 
A/T as v, and their ratio as m = v/u (the mutational bias toward A+ n. As discussed in the 
text, biased gene conversion operates like selection by causing heterozygotes to segregate 
alleles at ratios deviating from 1 :1, so now both the rates of origin of different mutations 
and their subsequent probabilities of fixation may differ. We assume here that As and Ts 
convert to Gs and Cs by recombination in an equivalent manner, and vice versa. 
From Chapter 4, the probabilities of fixation of newly arisen mutations with conversion 
advantages and disadvantages are, respectively, 
+ 5/ (2N) 
P j = 1 
-s 
-e 
_ 
5/ (2N) 
Pj=- 1 
s 
-e 
where 5 = 2Ngs, with Ng being the effective number of genes at a locus, N being the 
absolute population size of reproductive adults, and 5 being the selection coefficient 
[equivalent to 1(2f3 - 1), where the conversion rate is K and the conversion bias is 
(2f3 - 1), as described in the text). Here we assume that G/C bases have a conversion 
advantage over A/T bases, which is consistent with most observations, although the fol-
lowing derivations are generalizable by simply shifting the sign on S. 
To obtain the equilibrium A+ T composition, p, we must find the frequency at which 
A/T -7G/C fixations are exactly balanced by G/C-7A/T fixations. At this point, the number 
of A/T -7G/C mutations arising per generation is 2Npu, as there are 2Np A/T alleles in the 
diploid population, each mutating to G/C at rate u, and each of these has a probability of 
fixation of Pf' Similarly, 2N(1 - p)v G/C-7A/T mutations arise per generation, each with a 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
131 
across species, the average 1((2{3 -1) for multicellular eukaryotes is expected 
to be in the range of 10-7-10-5. This rough calculation is consistent with I( 
being about 10-5 in multicellular species (as noted above) and with the con-
version bias toward C-G or G-C bonds for some mismatches (C-A, T-G, and 
G-T) being as high as {3 = 0.7 in some cases (Bill et a1. 1998). 
The expected equilibrium A + T content, taking into consideration the joint 
pressures of mutation, random genetic drift, and gene conversion, is derived 
in Box 6.2. Even with 2N~ as small as 1.0, biased gene conversion can sub-
stantially reduce the eqUIlibrium A+ T composition relative to the situation 
expected with mutation alone (Figure 6.5). However, with Ng on the order 
of 104-106 for multicellular eukaryotes (see Chapter 4) and s probably in the 
range of 10-7_10-5, this high a level of 2Nl may only rarely be exceeded in 
such species. This may explain why the A+ T content of nearly all animal 
1.0 
~ 0.8 
e 
~ 8 0.6 
E-< 
+ 
~ 
. ~ 0.4 
j 
0'" 
~ 0.2 
0.0 i::==::::::;:::::;::::.."-'-'...J....L.1._---..J...--'--L...:!.J.-'--'-~ 
0.1 
1 
10 
Relative mutation rate towards A/ T (m) 
Figure 6.5 The equilibrium A+T composi-
tions of genomes under the joint forces of 
differential mutation pressure (m), biased 
gene conversion (s), and random genetic 
drift (1/ Ng), given for three values of 2Ngs 
applied to Equation 6.2. The upper curve 
denotes the situation in which gene conver-
sion is unbiased, such that the equilibrium 
genome content is determined solely by 
mutation pressure, as described in Box 6.1 . 
The vertical green bar denotes the range of 
observed estimates of m from Table 6.1, and 
the horizontal blue bar denotes the range of 
A+ T composition in observed animal and 
land plant species from Figure 6.1. The four 
points are taken from the data on m and p 
for eukaryotes in Table 6.1, all animals ex-
cept for the farthest point to the right for 
the yeast 5. cerevisiae. 
fixation probability of p;' The equilibrium A+ T composition is then obtained by solving 
2Npu Pf = 2N(1 - p)v. P;' Using the useful relationship 
+ 
PI 
s 
-=e 
PI 
the equilibrium A+ T composition is found to be 
_ 
mes 
P= 
mes +1 
which reduces to p = m/(m+ 1) when conversion is unbiased or ineffective (S  1). 
(6.2) 

132 
CHAPTER 6 
and land plant genomes is within the range of expectations for 0.0 < 2Ngs 
< 1.0, assuming the mutational biases outlined in Table 6.1 (Figure 6.5). The 
expectations for unicellular eukaryotes are less clear, because although such 
species may have substantially higher values of s = /((2{3 - 1) than multi-
cellular species during meiotic divisions, unicellular species also often have 
prominent haploid and/ or clonal phases of reproduction during which s 
is likely to be very low. Even the lowest observed A+ T composition in uni-
cellular eukaryotes, about 0.40, is compatible with 2Nt only slightly greater 
than 1.0 (see Figure 6.5). 
These theoretical results, combined with the existing empirical observa-
tions on mutation and gene conversion biases, suggest that subtle variation 
in these features and in the power of random genetic drift can account for 
a substantial fraction of the variation in genome-wide nucleotide composi-
tions among species, as well as the general tendency for A+ T content to be 
lower than that expected on the basis of mutation pressure alone. Birdsell 
(2002) further argues that the joint operation of mutation and biased con-
version might explain the tendency for coding exons to be higher in G+C 
content than intervening introns and surrounding intergenic regions (Kli-
man and Hey 1994; Green et al. 2003; Zhang and Gerstein 2003; Comeron 
2004; Arndt et al. 2005; Mitchison 2005). Because coding regions are gener-
ally under selective constraint to maintain protein function, they usually 
have relatively low levels of nucleotide heterozygosity, which facilitates 
homology-dependent recombination (see Chapter 4), and this in turn is 
expected to drive the G+C content upward as heteroduplex mismatches are 
converted in favor of G/Cs. Moreover, by encouraging the buildup of G+C 
content in coding regions, recombination may also secondarily modify the 
mutational spectrum because, as noted above, C:G-7 T:A transition muta-
tions induced by cytosine dearnination are less likely to occur in more phys-
ically stable, high-G+C regions (Fryxell and Zuckerkandl2000). Thus, two 
of the predominant effects of mutation and recombination on nucleotide 
composition may be mutually reinforcing. 
Finally, although it is tempting to conclude that the prevailing bias of 
gene conversion toward G/C has evolved by natural selection as a means 
for avoiding an inevitable buildup of A/T content by mutational bias (e.g., 
Fryxell and Zuckerkandl2000), Nagylaki and Petes (1982) and Walsh (1983) 
articulated a simple reason why opposing patterns of mutation and con-
version bias should emerge naturally without any direct involvement of 
selection. When conversion bias is effective, selectively neutral sites in a par-
ticular genomic region are expected to become enriched with nucleotides 
with a conversion advantage. Mutations arising from such nucleotides will 
then tend to be sensitive to conversion back to the original state; that is, to 
be at a conversion disadvantage. This simple logic also has important impli-
cations for our understanding of molecular evolution. As discussed in Chap-
ter 4, it is often argued that a universal prediction of the neutral theory is 
that the long-term rate of nucleotide substitution at a neutral site is equal to 
the mutation rate. Biased gene conversion is the one nonadaptive mecha-

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
133 
nism that can lead to a violation of this principle, and the widespread occur-
rence of this phenomenon may provide a simple explanation for why long-
term rates of evolution at silent sites tend to be lower than laboratory esti-
mates of the mutation rate (see Chapter 4). 
Evolutionary Consequences of Replication 
Because mutations are frequently instigated when DNA is in a single-
stranded state, there is substantial opportunity for the development of 
nucleotide composition heterogeneity in association with the semi-discon-
tinuous nature of replication. As seen in the previous chapter (see Figure 
5.1), to the left of an origin of replication (ORl), top-strand DNA is replicated 
discontinuously, whereas bottom-strand DNA is replicated continuously. 
The opposite occurs to the right of an ORl. As a consequence, parental 
strands on which Okazaki fragments are built spend significant time in the 
mutagenic single-stranded state, whereas the opposite strands are nearly 
constantly in a more protected double-stranded state. The different mech-
anisms of processivity of the two strands may also promote variation in 
repair processes. For example, Okazaki fragments may serve as entry points 
for mismatch repair enzymes, which require DNA nicks to proceed (Rad-
man 1998). 
If the types of mutations incurred during lagging strand and leading 
strand synthesis differ, an asymmetry in base composition is expected (Lobry 
1995; Sueoka 1995), with the top strand to the left of an ORl tending to evolve 
toward the same equilibrium nucleotide frequencies as the bottom strand 
to the right, and vice versa. The signature of such mutational variation is 
readily seen in prokaryotic genomes with a single ORl. When viewed at the 
level of the entire genome, most prokaryotes exhibit intrastrand parity, with 
the abundance of A equaling that of T, and of C equaling that of G (Lobry 
1996). However, this symmetry breaks down when chromosomes are 
viewed on a more local scale. Most prokaryotes have enrichments of Gover 
C and T over A on leading strands (Lobry and Sueoka 2002), the main excep-
tion being species utilizing an alternative DNA polymerase that reverses the 
polarity of A/T bias (Worning et al. 2006). With just a single ORl on a cir-
cular chromosome, this kind of asymmetry results in the typical subdivi-
sion of prokaryotic genomes into two regions, with each strand exhibiting 
G+ T richness on one side of the chromosome and C + A richness on the other. 
This pattern is generally so pronounced that it provides a reliable indica-
tor of ORl location (Grigoriev 1998; Tillier and Collins 2000) (Figure 6.6). 
Two of the leading candidates for the mutational events contributing to 
such asymmetry have been noted above (see Figures 6.2 and 6.3). Deami-
nation of cytosine to uracil (or 5-methylcytosine to thymine) occurs more 
than a hundred times faster in single- than double-stranded DNA (Beletskii 
and Bhagwat 1996; Frank and Lobry 1999; Lutsenko and Bhagwat 1999), 
and mismatches involving 8-oxo-guanine are also repaired less efficiently 
on single-stranded DNA (Pavlov et al. 2003). Also encouraged on single-

134 
CHAPTER 6 
~ 0.000 
Q) 
~ 
<Jl 
U 
-...... 
{) 
-0.002 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
Relative position in the genome 
Figure 6.6 G/C skew for the genome of the prokaryote Mycoplasma pneumoniae, 
measured as (G - C)/(G + C), where (G - C) and (G + C) denote the difference and 
sum of G and C nucleotides in windows of about 10 kb. The horizontal black jagged 
line plots the noncumulative measures, which when summed from left to right yield 
the much more obvious cumulative pattern given in red. The initiation of an increase 
in the cumulative skew to the right of the ORI (Origin) demarcates an abrupt change in 
(G - C) content. Linear trends in the cumulative skew reflect nearly constant G/C levels 
to the right and left of the ORI, with local discontinuities and sampling error causing 
the jagged edges. More complex analyses (Frank and Lobry 2000) that simultaneously 
utilize the frequencies of all four nucleotides yield smoother profiles. (Modified from 
Grigoriev 1998.) 
stranded DNA is the deamination of adenine to produce hypoxanthine, 
which base-pairs with C rather than T, resulting in an A-1G transition on 
the affected strand (Lindahl 1993; Ames et al. 1995). The joint action of all 
three mechanisms causes (G - C) and (T - A) differences to increase on 
exposed strands. 
Mutational asymmetries associated with single-strand vulnerability are 
also apparent in the mitochondrial genomes of eukaryotes. Although mito-
chondria generally have circular chromosomes, the mechanism of genome 
replication differs from that of prokaryotes in that two ORIs are utilized (fig-
ure 6.7). Replication is initiated at ORIH, building a new G+ T-rich heavy 
strand using the light strand as a template and displacing the parental heavy 
strand in the process. The latter then remains single-stranded until ORIL is 
reached about two-thirds of the way around the molecule, at which point 
light-strand replication is initiated in the opposite direction. In contrast to 
the situation in prokaryotes (and nuclear genomes), no Okazaki fragments 
are made during this process, so the parental heavy strand remains single-
stranded for up to 2 hours, with an essentially linear decline in exposure 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
135 
ORIH 
\ 
4-o 
OIDH 
O\H / 
--10:: 
""-- ....... 
' ___ T:: 
\ 
/ 
ORIL 
ORIL 
Figure 6.7 Replication of a mitochondrial genome. The inner and outer solid circles 
denote the light and heavy strands on the parental genome; the dashed lines denote 
newly synthesized strands. Replication is initiated at ORIH (upper right) and proceeds to 
build a new heavy strand. Once ORIL is exposed, synthesis begins in the opposite direc-
tion, using the original heavy strand as a template (lower right). Note that the parental 
heavy-strand DNA closest to ORIH remains single-stranded for the longest time. 
(Modified from Brown et al. 2005.) 
time between the positions closest to ORIH and those closest to ORIL. This 
decline is reflected in a substantial increase in the abundance of G and T at 
silent sites on the heavy strand from ORIL to ORIH, driven by elevated rates 
of C--7T and A--7G transitions on the heavy strand (Reyes et al. 1998; Faith 
and Pollock 2003). 
Do replication-associated mutational biases extend to the nuclear 
genomes of eukaryotes? On the one hand, the shorter Okazaki fragments 
and replicon lengths in eukaryotes relative to prokaryotes will tend to reduce 
the time of exposure of single-stranded DNA, and the possibility that not 
all eukaryotic ORIs are uniformly used in all cell divisions (see Chapter 5) 
will blur any expected pattern. On the other hand, these conditions may 
be mitigated by the greatly reduced rates of strand extension in eukaryotes. 
Analysis of the problem is further complicated by the fact that the locations 
of ORIs are generally unknown in most eukaryotes. Nevertheless, regions 
surrounding known ORIs in the human genome reveal the same kinds of 
patterns seen in prokaryotes, with very sharp bends in cumulative skew 
profiles occurring at ORI locations and a significant bias toward G and T 

136 
CHAPTER 6 
appearing on leading strands (Touchon et al. 2005). Parallel analyses in mice 
and dogs yield almost identical profiles, suggesting that the locations of 
mammalian ORIs are stable on time scales of 50-100 million years. Appli-
cation of the cumulative skew approach has also had some success with 
yeasts (Gierlik et al. 2000). 
Coding regions are also subject to single-strandedness during transcrip-
tion, and Francino and Ochman (1997) have argued that this may introduce 
mutational asymmetries in two ways. First, during transcription, the tran-
scribed strand is kept protected by the RNA polymerase and the growing 
mRNA chain, while the coding strand is exposed. Second, transcription-
coupled repair corrects bulky lesions in the transcribed strand, but not in 
the coding strand (Hanawalt 1994). There is little question that transcrip-
tion causes an overall elevation in the mutation rate (Datta and Jinks-Robert-
son 1995; Green et al. 2003; Yoshiyama and Maki 2003), but are transcrip-
tion-associated asymmetries in the spectrum of mutational effects significant 
enough to overwhelm those associated with replication? The tendency for 
genes that have been transposed from one strand to the other to adopt the 
local nucleotide usage pattern (Lafay et al. 1999; Tillier and Collins 2000; 
Szczepanik et al. 2001) strongly suggests that transcription-associated biases 
are secondary to those associated with replication. In addition, in the ani-
mal mitochondrion, almost all transcription is off the heavy strand (the cod-
ing sequences reside on the light strand), and yet (as noted above) the heavy 
strand is enriched with G and T, contrary to the pattern expected under 
the transcription-bias hypothesis. 
Isochores 
Whereas spatial heterogeneity in nucleotide usage along chromosomes can 
be found in every species, it has long been thought that the magnitude of 
such variation is unusually pronounced in tetrapods. Extensive regions of 
approximate homogeneity, known as isochores, were first discovered by 
density centrifugation of fractionated bovine DNA (Filipski et al. 1973; 
reviewed in Bernardi 2000), which revealed alternating G+C- and A+ T-rich 
tracts. Although isochores do not exist in the strict sense of having sharp 
boundaries, there is no question that the level of heterogeneity in nucleotide 
composition far exceeds that expected by chance. For example, the G+C con-
tent of 100 kb regions in the human genome ranges from 35% to 65% (Lan-
der et al. 2001), whereas the expected range associated with sampling error 
is well under 1 %. Such regional variation affects both coding and noncod-
ing DNA, although coding regions tend to be more G+C rich than introns 
and intergenic DNA (Bernardi 2000). Comparative analyses suggest a rela-
tively A+ T-rich vertebrate ancestor, with GjC isochores arising about 350 
MYA in the ancestor leading to mammals, birds, and other reptiles (Bernardi 
et al. 1997; Duret et al. 2002). 
The mechanisms that might contribute to such patterns include selection, 
mutation, and biased gene conversion, but why such processes would vary 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
137 
on spatial scales of 100 kb in these particular lineages remains uncertain 
(Eyre-Walker and Hurst 2001). Given the presence of isochores in both birds 
and mammals, Bernardi et al. (1985; Bernardi 1993, 2000) have argued that 
G+C-rich isochores increase the thermostability of DNA in homeotherms. 
However, this hypothesis fails to explain why G+C richness should be con-
fined to some regions as opposed to being genome-wide, and it is also chal-
lenged by circumstantial evidence suggesting the presence of isochores in 
snakes and crocodilians, both of which are ectotherms (Hughes et al. 1999; 
Hamada et al. 2003). Vinogradov (2005) suggested that G+C content influ-
ences the potential for nucleosome formation and hence the accessibility 
of chromosomal regions to gene expression. But again, this hypothesis does 
not explain why such a phenomenon should be restricted to a subset of ver-
tebrates. If selection is responsible for the origin and maintenance of iso-
chores, it must be capable of promoting single-base substitutions on the basis 
of their effects over megabase-sized regions. Moreover, any such advantages 
would have to exceed the potential influence on gene function, because even 
the amino acid composition of proteins is influenced by the isochore con-
text of the genes that encode them (D'Onofrio et al. 1991). In light of these 
difficulties and the fact that isochores are present in precisely the lineages 
in which selection is expected to be least efficient (vertebrates with low Ng), 
nonadaptive mechanisms for the origin and maintenance of isochores must 
be taken seriously. 
If isochores are not sculpted by selection, then some kind of regional bias 
in mutational and/ or recombinational activity must be involved. At least 
three candidate mechanisms can be envisioned, although none have 
achieved indisputable support. One idea relies on the observation that base 
misincorporation errors are influenced by the composition of the nucleotide 
pool, which can vary during the cell cycle (Wolfe et al. 1989). Because vari-
ation also exists in the timing of replication of different chromosomal 
regions, such conditions could lead to base compositional heterogeneity 
along chromosomes. If this is to be a viable hypothesis, two key issues must 
be resolved: first, whether significant temporal variation in nucleotide pools 
occurs in germ line cells, and second, why such variation should be pecu-
liar to (or most effective in) mammals and birds. 
A second nonadaptive hypothesis for the origin of isochores is that sto-
chastic variation in nucleotide composition along a chromosome nucleates 
localized changes in susceptibility to mutations, thereby leading to self-sus-
taining patterns of heterogeneity. For example, as noted above, regions with 
elevated levels of A+ T spend more time in single-stranded form, encour-
aging the mutational production of Ts associated with cytosine deamina-
tion, which reinforces the local A+ T content. 
Third, isochores could be a consequence of regional variation in biased 
gene conversion (Holmquist 1992; Galtier et al. 2001). However, if isochores 
are to be confidently attributed to gene conversion, it will have to be resolved 
why such activity is more intense in some regions than in others and how 
it can be spatially restricted for long enough periods to create an isochore. 

138 
CHAPTER 6 
In principle, this might happen if recombinational activity is encouraged by 
G+C content, as this would impose a self-reinforcing process like that envi-
sioned above for the elevated rate of mutations toward As and Ts in A+ T-
rich regions. In yeasts, for example, recombination hot spots tend to be G+C 
rich (Borts and Kirkpatrick 2006), and circumstantial evidence suggests a 
similar situation in mammals (Petes 2001), with the motif CCTCCCCT 
(AGGGGAGG on the opposite strand) being a likely hot spot (Myers et al. 
2005). Runs of Gs frequently lead to structural modifications of DNA involv-
ing quartets of Gs within or between strands (G4 DNA), which might serve 
as nuclei for initiating recombination events (Maizels 2006). 
Attempts to determine the factors responsible for isochores generally 
assume that the same forces that gave rise to them are operable today; that 
is, that isochore compositions more or less reflect an equilibrium situation. 
Superficially, this assumption appears reasonable, because different line-
ages of mammals have roughly comparable isochore structures (Bernardi 
2000). Moreover, phylogenetic analyses suggest that both the types of muta-
tions that arise and their probabilities of fixation differ between G+C- and 
A+ T-rich regions (Duret et al. 2002; Arndt et al. 2003, 2005; Belle et al. 2004; 
Comeron 2006; Lipatov et al. 2006). Remarkably, however, the latter studies 
demonstrate that regional differences in nucleotide substitution patterns are 
insufficient for the maintenance of isochores. Instead, G+C-rich isochores 
appear to be slowly disappearing from mammalian lineages due to an excess 
of G/C---1A/T substitutions over the reverse. Even though newly arisen 
G/Cs have higher probabilities of fixation than A/Ts, consistent with the 
expectations of biased gene conversion, this fixation bias is being over-
whelmed by mutation pressure in the direction of A/T. Thus, tl1e compa-
rable isochore features among different mammals appear to be a simple con-
sequence of parallel evolution and common ancestry. As noted above, the 
directional force of biased gene conversion can be overwhelmed by random 
genetic drift in populations of sufficiently small size, so these observations 
are consistent with mammalian lineages having a small Ng. However, the 
question as to how isochores originated remains unresolved, and equally 
puzzling is the observation that substitutional biases in the chicken line-
age appear to be enforcing isochore maintenance (Webster et al. 2006). 
Finally, it is worth considering whether the attention focused on verte-
brate isochores is entirely justified. All genomes exhibit some level of het-
erogeneity in nucleotide composition, and when scaled appropriately, the 
pattern does not necessarily deviate greatly from that seen in mammals. In 
yeasts, for example, the G+C content of 5 kb windows ranges from 35% to 
45% (Figure 6.8A). Although the human chromosome in Figure 6.8B is about 
470 times the length of that in yeasts, the recombination rate per physical 
distance in yeasts is about 270 times greater than that in humans (see Chap-
ter 4). Thus, if regional variation in nucleotide composition is driven by 
recombination processes, the finer scaling and reduced magnitude in yeasts 
could be a simple consequence of more frequent recombination and higher 
efficiency of selection. 

(A) 
50 
u 
+ 40 
l) 
~ 
(B) 
60 
u 50 
+ 
l) 
~ 
40 
50 
20 
THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
139 
100 
150 
200 
Chromosomal position (kb) 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Chromosomal position (Mb) 
250 
120 
Figure 6.8 Regional patterns 
of nucleotide composition. (A) 
Yeast chromosome 6; 5 kb sliding 
averages, shifted by 1 kb; hori-
zontal scale in kb. (Modified from 
Petes 2001 .) (B) Human chromo-
some 11; a redrawn version of a 
100 kb window plot; horizontal 
scale in Mb. (Modified from 
Costantini et al. 2006.) 
The Nonadaptive Basis of Genome -Wide 
Nucleotide Composition Variation 
Although selection plays a role in constraining small-scale intergenic 
sequences in the vicinity of genes (e.g., transcription factor binding sites; see 
Chapters 3 and 10), the preceding observations provide little, if any, support 
for the hypothesis that variation in nucleotide composition in putatively non-
functional genomic regions is a product of natural selection. Rather, the data 
suggest that most species are subject to an intrinsic mutational bias toward 
A+ T richness, which is counteracted by the tendency of gene conversion to 
favor C+C composition. Because biased gene conversion is promoted by 
recombination, its effects are expected to be most pronounced in small 
eukaryotic genomes (where the rate of crossing-over per physical distance 
is high; see Chapter 4), especially in those that regularly engage in meiosis. 
Moreover, because biased gene conversion operates in a selection-like man-

140 
CHAPTER 6 
ner, all other things being equal, G+C richness is expected to be greatest in 
species with high Ng. In principle, a formal test of this hypothesis would be 
possible if accurate estimates of both long-term N g and the per-generation 
recombination rate were available for a wide range of species, but informa-
tion on the latter is especially sparse for natural populations. 
Given their haploid nature, prokaryotes may be effectively immune to 
gene conversion activity, but given their large effective population sizes, 
they should be maximally sensitive to the modification of nucleotide com-
position in non coding regions by direct forces of selection. However, an 
examination of the two selective mechanisms thought to influence 
nucleotide usage does not inspire confidence in adaptive explanations for 
prokaryotic G+C composition. First, as noted above, the stability of DNA 
increases with G+C content because of the three versus two hydrogen bonds 
involved in G:C versus AT bonds. Thus, if DNA stability is a significant tar-
get of selection, species inhabiting warm environments, where DNA is more 
susceptible to melting, would be expected to have relatively G+C-rich 
genomes. However, there is no correlation between optimal growth tem-
peratures and G+C contents of prokaryotic genomes (Galtier and Lobry 
1997; Hurst and Merchant 2001; Marashi and Ghalanbor 2004), although the 
G+C richness of the stems of structural RNAs does increase with optimal 
growth temperature (Galtier and Lobry 1997). 
Second, the metabolic costs of production of the four nucleotides are not 
equal: among pyrimidines, C is more costly than T, and among purines, G 
is more costly than A. Thus, under the metabolic hypothesis for genomic 
streamlining (see Chapter 2), prokaryotic genomes should be biased in the 
direction of A+ T richness (Rocha and Danchin 2002). However, as noted in 
Figure 6.1, prokaryotic genomes exhibit a broad range of nucleotide com-
positions, with many having higher G+C contents than any eukaryote. The 
fact that endosymbiotic eubacteria, which are entirely dependent on their 
hosts for survival, have A + T-rich genomes has been cited as support for the 
metabolic hypothesis (Rocha and Danchin 2002), but this pattern may also 
be a simple consequence of an altered mutational spectrum, as such species 
have lost numerous DNA repair pathway genes (Moran 2002). Indeed, phy-
logenetic analysis of one such genus, Buchnera, suggests very strong muta-
tional bias in the direction of A + T and provides no evidence of a selection-
driven process (Wernegreen and Funk 2004). Even among free-living 
prokaryotes, there is a significant tendency for G+C-rich genomes to encode 
proteins with elevated usage of amino acids with G+C-rich codons (Lobry 
1997; Gu et al. 1998; D'Onofrio et al. 1999; Wilquet et al. 1999), an observa-
tion that suggests a mutationally driven process. 
This disparate set of observations suggests that even the large effective 
population sizes of prokaryotes are inadequate to enable selection to signif-
icantly influence genome-wide nucleotide composition. If the strength of 
selection per noncoding nucleotide site is overwhelmed by the power of 
directional mutation, even the complete absence of random genetic drift 
would not change this situation. In any case, the data suggest that phyloge-

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
141 
netic diversity in G+C composition is largely a consequence of variation in 
the physical forces of mutation and/ or recombination. Although the specific 
mechanisms responsible for such variation are not yet understood, the under-
lying changes in such forces may be largely random from a phylogenetic per-
spective. Indeed, Haywood-Farmer and Otto (2003) find that a simple Brown-
ian motion model with a constant diffusion rate readily explains essentially 
the entire dispersion of nucleotide compositions across all eubacteria, the 
only exceptions being the obligate intracellular species, Rickettsia and Buch-
nera, which, as noted above, probably have peculiar mutational properties. 
Summing up to this point, we have reached the rather surprising con-
clusion that the relative frequencies of the basic building blocks from which 
most species construct their genomes may be largely driven by internal 
physical processes of mutation and gene conversion, with external forces of 
natural selection playing, at most, a minor role at the genome level. This 
claim appears to be quantitatively consistent with what we know about the 
nucleotide composition biases associated with both mutation and gene con-
version. Nevertheless, as there are many ways to construct a genome with 
the same pool of nucleotides, it is important to keep in mind that the lack 
of a significant role of selection in defining genome-wide nucleotide contents 
need not imply a complete absence of selective influence on the precise 
sequences residing in particular genomic locations. The next section explores 
this matter by examining one of the most intensely studied but poorly 
understood aspects of genome architecture: the usage of alternative 
nucleotides at the silent sites of protein-coding genes. 
Codon Usage Bias 
As noted in Chapter 4, population geneticists frequently rely on the assump-
tion of neutrality of silent sites to derive inferences about population struc-
ture, mutation, and recombination, as well as to infer levels of selection oper-
ating on replacement sites. The logic underlying this assumption draws from 
the fact that silent-site substitutions have no effect at the protein sequence 
level. This is an oversimplification, however, as there are numerous other 
ways by which selection can influence nucleotide usage at silent sites: 
1. Alternative codons for a particular amino acid might be more efficient at 
recruiting appropriately charged transfer RNAs (tRNAs), thereby increas-
ing the rate and/ or accuracy of translation. 
2. Codons consisting of mononucleotide runs (e.g., AAA) may be muta-
tionally or selectively eliminated as a consequence of their vulnerability 
to replication and/ or transcription slippage (and the resultant produc-
tion of frameshifts) (Bennetzen and Hall 1982; Ackermann and Chao 
2006). 
3. Eukaryotic genes often harbor exon-splicing enhancer and silencer 
sequences for guiding the spliceosome to proper locations for intron 
removal (see Chapter 9). 

142 
CHAPTER 6 
4. Specific exonic sequences may yield secondary structures that contribute 
to mRNA stability. 
5. As noted above, biased gene conversion can cause nucleotide frequen-
cies to deviate from expectations based on mutation and drift alone. 
Codon usage bias is universal. All but two amino acids (methionine and 
tryptophan) are encoded by two to six co dons in nearly all nuclear eukary-
otic and prokaryotic genomes, but in almost no case are the alternative 
co dons for a particular amino acid used in identical frequencies. The cen-
tral question is whether such biases simply reflect inequities in the physical 
pressures of mutation and/ or gene conversion or whether some additional 
form of selection needs to be invoked. To address this issue, numerous inves-
tigators either have assumed that the most commonly used codon is the one 
preferred by natural selection or have defined optimal codons to be those 
that best match the anticodon sequences of the most abundant cognate 
tRNAs. Indices of overall evenness of codon usage are often relied upon, 
with deviations from parity being interpreted as the signature of selection. 
The diversity of approaches, along with the circular reasoning underlying 
some of them, has led to much confusion in the literature on codon usage 
bias. 
To see the potential perils of measures of codon bias that do not explic-
itly take into account the underlying population genetic processes, consider 
the expected usage of alternative codons in the face of the joint pressures of 
selection, mutation, and random genetic drift. (We will add in the additional 
complexity of gene conversion shortly.) To simplify the discussion, imagine 
an amino acid encoded by two alternative third-position nucleotides, and 
denote the alternative allelic states as B and b, with B denoting the opti-
mal codon state, B mutating to b at rate u, and b mutating to B at rate v. The 
same mathematical machinery developed in Box 6.2 can then be used to 
obtain the equilibrium usage of optimal codon B over the entire genome (jJ): 
2Ngs 
-
e 
p = 2N S 
e 
g + (u / v) 
(6.3) 
where e2N-t is the selection bias toward B and (u/v) is the mutational bias 
toward b (Li 1987; Shields 1990; Bulmer 1991). 
Although this derivation is restricted to the two-codon situation and 
ignores mutations that impose amino acid replacements (under the assump-
tion that selection at the protein level rapidly eliminates such mutations 
from the population), it nicely encapsulates the problems in interpreting the 
mechanisms underlying biased codon usage. First, the theory demonstrates 
that if selection is sufficiently weak and biased mutation sufficiently strong, 
the most common codon need not be the optimal codon (lower right region 
of Figure 6.9). Second, unless selection on silent sites is quite strong (2Ngs 
> 1) and mutation is strongly biased in the direction of the optimal codon 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
143 
1.0 F:::::~=----
~ 
~ 0.8 
 
"d o 
u 
ra ] 
0.. 0.6 
o 
"" o 
>, 
u 
~ 
Cli 
;::I f 0.4 
S 
;::I 
.t:: 
i 
0" 0.2 
~ 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
Relative mutation rate toward nonoptirnal codon (u/v) 
Figure 6.9 The expected genomic frequency of the optimal codon in the case of a 
twofold redundant silent site under the assumption of mutation-selection-drift equilib-
rium, derived using Equation 6.3. The bottom (red) curve gives the result under neu-
trality (5 = 0). 
(upper left region of Figure 6.9), suboptimal codons are expected to be pres-
ent at appreciable frequencies. Third, if there is a conflict between the direc-
tions of mutation and selection bias (right half of Figure 6.9), genes under 
different intensities of selection for codon usage are expected to exhibit 
biases toward different codons (jj > 0.5 for large s, and p < 0.5 for small s). 
This point highlights the precarious nature of the frequent argument that 
the elevated frequency of "nonoptimal" codons in certain genes is a direct 
response to natural selection on the regulation of gene expression (e.g., Gros-
jean and Fiers 1982; Lavner and Kotlar 2005). Finally, to be fully inclusive, 
s should be viewed as the net directional pressure on a particular nucleotide 
resulting from the joint forces of natural selection and biased gene conver-
sion. In other words, if se and sn denote the selection coefficients associated 
with gene conversion and natural selection, respectively, then S = se + sn' In 
principle, these forces could be in opposite directions (e.g., conversion bias 
is in the direction of the nonoptimal codon, but se is negative), rendering S 
closer to zero than expected based on natural selection alone. 

144 
CHAPTER 6 
Prokaryotes 
In principle, the preceding theory can be used to infer the magnitude of 
selection operating on codon usage. Rearranging Equation 6.3, 2Ngs can be 
estimated as 
lnP(u/v) 
(1- p) 
by substituting the genome-wide estimate of the frequency of usage of the 
optimal codon for p. Such treatment assumes fairly homogeneous evolu-
tionary forces operating on all sites, but a more central issue is the need for 
an estimate of u/v. If the nucleotide usage from truly neutral regions (s = 0) 
of DNA (Pn) were known, u/v could be estimated from Equation 6.1 as 
(1- Pn)/Pn' but the problem, of course, is that we are attempting to determine 
whether such sites actually exist. Sharp et al. (2005) attempted to circumvent 
this difficulty by assuming that genome-wide codon usage in prokaryotes 
essentially reflects mutational bias (providing an estimate of Pn)' with just 
the small subset of highly expressed genes being subject to selection on silent 
sites. They then used the estimate of u/v derived by the genome-wide esti-
mate of Pn to infer 2Ngs by applying the preceding expression. For four two-
codon amino acids, tEe optimal codon could be identified by physical argu-
ments alone; for example, of the two codons for phenylalanine (TIT and 
rrC), the latter has the greatest affinity for the single phenylalanine tRNA 
with anticodon GAA. Application of this methodology to forty highly 
expressed genes in eighty prokaryotes yielded estimates of 2N I that were 
uniformly ~ 2.5, similar to earlier results obtained by other methods (e.g., 
Hartl et al. 1994). Because of the haploid nature of prokaryotic genomes, these 
results are presumably free of the effects of biased gene conversion. The idea 
that translation-associated selection drives codon usage in prokaryotes is fur-
ther supported by the strong correlation between species-specific estimates 
of 2N ~ obtained by Sharp et al. and numbers of tRNA and ribosomal RNA 
gene copies per genome, two presumptive indicators of the rate of transla-
tion (Figure 6.10). A similar conclusion was reached by dos Reis et al. (2004) 
using substantially different methods. 
The estimates of 2N ~ in Figure 6.10 will be downwardly biased if codon 
usage by genes with moderate to low expression is actually molded by nat-
ural selection, rather than providing a clean estimate of u/v. These estimates 
are also derived under the assumption that the mutational spectrum is essen-
tially the same for genes with high and low expression, an assumption that 
might be questioned given the aforementioned evidence for the influence 
of transcription on the mutation process. If transcription-associated muta-
tions are biased toward nonoptimal co dons, 2N ~ will be underestimated, 
perhaps even enough to yield negative estimates (as seen in Figure 6.10); 
but if they are biased toward optimal codons, 2N gS will be overestimated 
(because the elevated usage of optimal codons is due to mutation rather 
than selection). Given the uncertainties in the magnitude of these potential 
biases, and recalling from Chapter 4 that the average estimate of the prokary-

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
145 
3.0 
3.0 
 
 
I 
2.0 
I 
 
 
Ul 
Ul 
'Z,bIJ 1.0 
 
~bIJ 
 
N 
 
 
I 
  
0 
-'- "-  T~------------
0 
I 
\ 
 
 
  
 
-1.0 
-1.0 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 120 140 
rRNAcopies 
tRNAgenes 
Figure 6.1 0 Estimates of 2Ngs from genomic data for 40 highly expressed genes 
in 80 species of prokaryotes, and their relationship to the number of genomic copies of 
rRNA and tRNA genes. The analyses are restricted to four amino acids that utilize two 
codons, but just one anticodon at the tRNA level (whose affinity to the alternative 
codons is understood at the molecular level). Negative estimates are obtained when 
the frequency of usage of the codon assumed to be optimal is less than that predicted 
from mutational bias alone. (Modified from Sharp et al. 2005.) 
otic 2Ngu:::: 0.10 is likely to be downwardly biased, these results tentatively 
suggest that the strength of selection associated with codon bias in prokary-
otes is of the same order of magnitude as the per-nucleotide mutation rate 
(i.e., s :::: U, because 2Ngs :::: 2Ngu). Recalling the estimates of U for prokary-
otes (see Chapter 4), this further implies s on the order of 10-1_10-9 in such 
species. 
With 2Ngs = 0.1 and 1.0 (and even as large as 3.0), interspecific differences 
in codon usage are still expected to closely reflect mutational bias differ-
ences among species (see Figure 6.9); that is, the effect of selection is statis-
tically significant, but not so large as to eliminate silent-site variation. Thus, 
if it is correct that most loci in prokaryotes are negligibly influenced by trans-
lation-associated selection, it is not surprising that a strong correlation exists 
between nucleotide usage at silent sites in protein-coding genes and in non-
coding regions of such species (Chen et al. 2004). 
Two additional sets of observations support the idea that translation-asso-
ciated selection is effective enough to influence patterns of nucleotide usage 
at least at some loci in prokaryotes. First, consistent with the implicit assump-
tion in the Sharp et al. analysis, many studies have noted that the degree of 
bias toward usage of presumptively optimal codons increases in highly 
expressed genes (e.g., Ikemura 1981, 1985; Gouy and Gautier 1982; Gros-
jean and Fiers 1982; Karlin et al. 1998). A reduction in the rate of interspecific 
sequence divergence at silent sites with increasing levels of gene expression 
in prokaryotes is also consistent with the operation of selection for the main-

146 
CHAPTER 6 
tenance of particular codons (Sharp and Li 1987). Second, correlations often 
exist between the abundances of alternative tRNAs and the frequency of 
usage of their most favored codons (the anticodons of the tRNAs for sev-
eral amino acids vary in nucleotide composition in the third position, and 
such variants have unequal affinities for alternative codons) (Ikemura 1981, 
1985; Kanaya et al. 1999). In addition, prokaryotes with shorter generation 
times have more but less diverse tRNAs, with the most common tRNA type 
closely matching the codon most frequently used for its arrtino acid (Rocha 
2004). A fundamental unresolved issue with respect to tRNA usage rela-
tionships concerns the question of causality. Does the tRNA repertoire of a 
species serve as a relatively constant selection pressure on codon usage, or 
do mutational biases drive nucleotide composition to the extent that selec-
tion primarily operates at the level of tRNAs, modifying their relative abun-
dances by gene duplication and/ or anticodon-sequence mutations? Bulmer 
(1987) makes a compelling case that the simultaneous operation of both forces 
leads to coevolution between codon usage and tRNA abundance. 
Finally, it should be noted that some evidence suggests that the 
nucleotide composition at silent sites of some prokaryotic genes is molded 
by selective forces unassociated with tRNA recruitment. For example, the 
bias toward translationally optimal codons is weaker toward the ends of 
prokaryotic genes than in the centers (Bulmer 1988; Eyre-Walker 1996; Qin 
et al. 2004). Although such a pattern could result from an overall relaxation 
of selection on silent sites in such regions, this does not appear to be the 
case, as interspecific divergence rates (which should be inversely related 
to the intensity of purifying selection) are actually reduced at such sites, 
at least in the contrast between E. coli and Salmonella (Eyre-Walker and Bul-
mer 1993). In principle, constraints on silent sites at the ends of genes rrtight 
result from the selective promotion of codons via their effects on the recruit-
ment of the transcriptional machinery and/ or the stability of the result-
ant mRNAs. In addition, the sequences of some closely packed genes may 
be constrained by the placement of ribosome-binding sites (Shine-Dalgamo 
sequences; see Chapter 10) within the end sequences of their immediately 
upstream gene neighbors. 
Eukaryotes 
Given that the effective population sizes of eukaryotes are typically one to 
five orders of magnitude smaller than those of prokaryotes (see Chapter 4), 
the preceding results suggest that codon usage-associated values of 2N r! in 
eukaryotes are likely to be substantially less than one and perhaps so small 
as to be entirely inconsequential. Thus, it is surprising that many of the pat-
terns of codon usage bias seen in prokaryotes have also been observed in 
eukaryotes. Increased levels of codon bias in highly expressed genes have 
been observed in Giardia (Lafay and Sharp 1999), Saccharomyces (Bennet-
zen and Hall 1982; Akashi 2003), Arabidopsis (Duret and Mouchiroud 1999; 
Wright et al. 2004), Drosophila (Duret and Mouchiroud 1999; Hey and Kli-

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
147 
man 2002; Marais and Piganeau 2002), and Caenorhabditis (Castillo-Davis 
and Hartl 2002; Marais and Piganeau 2002), and a weak pattern even exists 
in mammals (Urrutia and Hurst 2003; Comeron 2004; Lavner and Kotlar 
2005). In most of these species, the most frequently used codon for a given 
amino acid corresponds with the most abundant tRNA in the genome (Ben-
netzen and Hall 1982; Moriyama and Powell 1997; Duret 2000; Kanaya et al. 
2001; Wright et al. 2004; Comeron 2004), although the correlation is not 
always strong. In addition, the rate of silent-site divergence is lower in genes 
with greater codon bias in Caenorhabditis (Castillo-Davis and Hartl 2002), 
Chlamydomonas (Popescu et al. 2006), and Drosophila (Powell and Moriyama 
1997), although the effect has not been seen in Arabidopsis (Wright et al. 2004) 
or mammals (Duret and Mouchiroud 2000; Urrutia and Hurst 2001; 
Mikkelsen et al. 2005). 
Taken at face value, this collective set of results appears to support the 
idea that translation-associated selection is effective in at least some eukary-
otic genes. But this raises a significant paradox, in that such selection would 
require s operating on silent sites in eukaryotic genes to be orders of mag-
nitude greater than that in prokaryotes, whereas there is no direct evidence 
that this is the case. One potential resolution to this puzzle is that codon 
usage bias in eukaryotes is driven by nonadaptive mechanisms that are 
largely inoperable in prokaryotes. For example, as noted above, the power 
of biased gene conversion is great enough to drive nucleotide composition 
in the direction of G+C content in recombining genomes of some outcross-
ing eukaryotes. If this force is effective, then genes in regions of high recom-
bination are expected to exhibit elevated G+C content at silent sites, and 
such a pattern is indeed seen in Saccharomyces (Birdsell 2002), Caenorhabdi-
tis (Marais et al. 2001), Drosophila (Akashi 1995; Akashi et al. 1998; Comeron 
et al. 1999; Kliman and Hey 2003; Singh et al. 2005), and humans (Galtier 
et al. 2001; Comeron 2004). In all of these species, for nearly all amino acids, 
the optimal codon (corresponding to the most abundant tRNA type) ends 
in G or C, encouraging the view that increased usage of such codons in 
regions of high recombination is a consequence of an increased efficiency 
of selection (Hey and Kliman 2002). However, the G+C contents of introns 
and intergenic DNA are also correlated with recombination rates (Marais et 
al. 2001; Marais and Piganeau 2002), and in nematodes, optimal codons end-
ing in A or T decline in frequency with increasing recombination rates 
(Marais et al. 2001). 
This broad collection of observations suggests that biased gene conver-
sion, rather than translation-associated selection, may be the primary deter-
mmant of the G+C content at silent sites in eukaryotes. If this is the case, the 
predominance of tRNAs with affinities for G/C-ending co dons might be 
promoted by secondary selection imposed by genome-wide G+C content 
at silent sites driven by physical forces. However, such tRNAs might also 
simply accumulate spontaneously, as tRNA genes will be just as suscepti-
ble to the conversion process as protein-coding loci (if not more so, as a con-
sequence of their elevated copy numbers). Biased gene conversion may also 

148 
CHAPTER 6 
be responsible for the reduced rate of silent-site substitutions at G+C-rich 
loci, which will predominantly produce mutations in the AlI direction 
whose fixation is opposed by the conversion process. 
Many other eukaryotic patterns of codon usage bias that superficially 
appear to be adaptive are plausible outcomes of biased gene conversion. 
For example, rapidly evolving Drosophila proteins tend to be produced by 
loci with low frequencies of optimal codons (Betancourt and Pres graves 
2002; Marais et al. 2004), leading these authors to suggest that selective 
interference resulting from strong directional selection on replacement 
sites overwhelms the much weaker translation-associated selection on 
linked silent sites. A second explanation for this pattern is that genes that 
are under strong purifying selection at the amino acid level are also under 
strong selection for translational accuracy, yielding an elevated abundance 
of "optimal" G/C-ending co dons (Akashi 1994; Bierne and Eyre-Walker 
2006). However, an alternative exists to both of these arguments: if rap-
idly evolving proteins experience periodic selective sweeps, the oppor-
tunities for biased gene conversion in heterozygous individuals will be 
reduced, resulting in an elevated abundance of "nonoptimal" AlI-end-
ing codons. A parallel explanation can potentially explain the reduced rates 
of evolution at both replacement and silent sites in highly expressed genes 
of eukaryotes (Subramanian and Kumar 2004; Drummond et al. 2005; 
Lemos et al. 2005): if such genes only rarely experience selective sweeps, 
as a consequence of a predominant pattern of purifying selection, the sus-
ceptibility of newly arisen mutations to biased gene conversion will be 
enhanced, thereby encouraging elevated levels of relatively stable G/C-
ending codons. 
Using methods related to those outlined above for prokaryotes, but inter-
preting nucleotide composition in introns as a reflection of the mutational 
pattern expected under neutrality, Kondrashov et al. (2006) estimated 2N~ 
to be about 1.0 in the great ape lineage, and estimates for Drosophila species 
generally fall in the range of 3-18 (Akashi 1995; Akashi and Schaeffer 1997; 
Maside et al. 2004). These estimates are of the same order of magnitude if 
not higher than those obtained for prokaryotes (see Figure 6.10), which, 
given the elevated levels of Ng in prokaryotes, implies that s associated with 
codon bias in eukaryotes is oraers of magnitude higher than in prokaryotes. 
This pattern can be explained by recalling that s is a composite index of bias 
imposed by both gene conversion (sc) and translation-associated selection 
(sn); that is, s = Sc + sn. Assuming that the magnitude of translation-associ-
ated selection per nucleotide site is roughly comparable between prokary-
otes and eukaryotes, then to compensate for the disparity in Ng and yield 
comparable 2Ngs in both groups, Sc associated with eukaryotic biased gene 
conversion must be several orders of magnitude greater than sn associated 
with translation-associated selection. This is a plausible situation, given that 
sn is about 10-9 in prokaryotes and that Sc is about 10-3 in yeasts and in the 
range of 10-7-10-5 in multicellular species (as discussed above). 

THE NUCLEOTIDE COMPOSITION LANDSCAPE 
149 
One other explanation has been offered for the comparable levels of 2N-t 
associated with silent sites observed in prokaryotes and eukaryotes: if codons 
exhibit synergistic epistasis, such that consecutive suboptimal codons accu-
mulating in a genome impose increasingly deleterious effects on fitness, the 
load from such mutations would freely accumulate in a genome until s asso-
ciated with additional suboptimal codons satisfied the condition for efficient 
selection (2Ngsn > 1) (Li 1987). The major limitation of this argument is 
its implications for the accumulation of a much greater absolute fitness load 
in multicellular eukaryotes than in prokaryotes, which raise significant ques-
tions about the maintenance of species viability (Kondrashov 1995). This type 
of cost is not imposed by biased gene conversion, which need not have any 
direct effect on fitness. 
Unsolved problems 
In summary, although diverse sources of circumstantial evidence support 
the view that silent sites are subject to selection for translation efficiency and 
accuracy, the magnitude of such selection is so weak that even prokaryotic 
populations with extremely large effective population sizes exhibit only 
moderate deviations of nucleotide usage from the expectations based on 
mutation pressure alone. Eukaryotes, with smaller effective population sizes 
than prokaryotes, appear to provide an inadequate population genetic envi-
ronment for the operation of translation-associated selection, but they still 
present physical opportunities for the biasing effects of gene conversion that 
may be largely absent from prokaryotes. 
In closing, one additional caveat must be given with respect to the inter-
pretation of codon bias. Although a deviation of genome-wide codon usage 
from the neutral expectation provides compelling evidence for the opera-
tion of selection on silent sites, the reverse is not necessarily true; that is, the 
absence of codon bias need not imply the absence of selection. For example, 
selection operating on silent sites for reasons other than translation efficiency 
(e.g., mRNA architecture or exon identification signals) could promote cer-
tain codons in some gene locations and their alternatives in others, yielding 
an overall pattern with little deviation from the mutation/ gene-conversion 
expectation on a genome-wide level. Support for this concern derives from 
computational and empirical work showing that randomization of the syn-
onymous co dons within mammalian and drosophilid genes, while keeping 
both the protein sequence and the overall codon usage constant, reduces the 
structural stability of mRNAs (Seffens and Digby 1999; Carlini et al. 2001; 
Duan and Antezana 2003; Carlini 2005; Chamary and Hurst 2005). 
An additional trend bearing on this matter is a gradient of decreasing 
usage of putatively "optimal" G/ C-ending codons from the edges to the 
interiors of exons in a diversity of species (Comeron et al. 1999; Comeron 
and Kreitman 2002; Comeron and Guthrie 2005). These authors suggest that 
this pattern is a consequence of selective interference (with simultaneous 

150 
CHAPTER 6 
selection operating on linked sites reducing the overall efficiency of selec-
tion; see Chapter 4). For translation-associated selection, such interference 
is expected to be highest in exon interiors, where all neighboring sites are 
coding sequence. However, given the absence of compelling evidence for 
high 2Ngsr; in eukaryotic genes, alternative explanations need to be con-
sidered. Willie and Majewski (2004) and Qin et al. (2004) point out another 
puzzling aspect of the gradient of codon usage bearing on this issue: it is 
not just the frequency of optimal codons, but the overall diversity of codons, 
that declines in exon interiors. Such a pattern appears to be inconsistent with 
a reduction in the efficiency of translation-associated selection in exon inte-
riors, where "suboptimal" codons should be able to drift to higher fre-
quencies, but it can be explained by supposing that codon usage in such 
regions is driven largely by biased mutation/conversion processes. More 
even codon usage toward the edges of exons CfJ closer to 0.5) would be 
expected if the selectively advantageous codons were discouraged by muta-
tion/ conversion processes (see Figure 6.9). 
Such conflicts may arise from the constraints imposed by the splicing 
process. To provide guidance for the spliceosome during precursor mRNA 
processing (see Chapter 9), the edges of exons generally harbor short 
sequence motifs that operate as exon-splicing enhancers, whereas intron-
splicing enhancers are avoided in these same regions. For example, the exon-
splicing enhancer motif GAA is more abundant, and the intron-splicing 
enhancer GGG less abundant, near intron-exon boundaries (Willie and 
Majewski 2004). The signature of purifying selection, in the form of reduced 
levels of interspecific divergence and intraspecific polymorphism, is read-
ily seen in such motifs (Carlini and Genut 2006; Parmley et al. 2006). In a sim-
ilar vein, the dinucleotides GT and AG, which form the end sequences of 
most introns, are avoided at the edges of Drosophila and Caenorhabditis exons 
(Eskesen et al. 2004). Although these observations do not fully eliminate 
translation-associated selection as a contributor to spatial patterns of codon 
usage bias within exons, they do raise significant questions about both the 
necessity and sufficiency of such an explanation. Perhaps the best evidence 
for the effects of selective interference on exonic gradients of codon usage 
bias derives from a study focused entirely on intron-free genes in Drosophila, 
which showed an increase in silent-site divergence rates in gene interiors 
(Comeron and Guthrie 2005), but even here, caution is required in inter-
preting this pattern as a consequence of translation-associated selection. 

Mobile Genetic 
Elements 
Virtually all organisms are at least periodically confronted with intra-
cellular parasites. When the infective agent is a bacterium or a virus, the 
debilitating effects of such interactions can often be minimized by behav-
ioral avoidance and/ or immunological responses, but this is not an option 
in the case of a mobile genetic element (retrotransposon or transposon) resid-
ing in the host genome. Such a niche not only guarantees an element's trans-
mission from host parent to offspring, but also provides access to new col-
onization sites in other chromosomal locations, and in sexual species, in 
other individuals. 
Mobile elements have been spectacularly successful at exploiting cellu-
lar life. Indeed, they are so ubiquitous, so diverse, and have such a profound 
effect on eukaryotic chromosomal architecture that one can reasonably argue 
that an overview of genomic evolution ought to start with them, before mov-
ing on to the host genes themselves. That is the approach taken here. We 
will first consider the key molecular attributes of the main classes of mobile 
elements, focusing on matters relevant to their mobilization within host 
genomes, and then move on to explore population biological issues, con-
centrating on the key determinants of mobile element proliferation and per-
sistence within host genomes. Most mobile elements have predominantly 
negative effects on their hosts, but at the close of the chapter, we will see 
that the table has been turned many times, with the host procuring a major 
benefit from a prior genomic parasite. This need not imply that mobile ele-
ments are retained for their advantageous effects. Almost certainly they are 
not, but as a major source of genomic mutation, mobile elements are bound 
to occasionally spawn beneficial changes, as is the case with virtually any 
environmental mutagen. 

152 
CHAPTER 7 
As briefly outlined in Chapter 3, two broad classes of mobile elements 
are found in eukaryotes, both of which rely on mobility factors encoded 
within the elements themselves. Retrotransposons (sometimes referred to 
as class I elements) proliferate by a copy-and-paste mechanism, using an 
RNA intermediate for dispersal. After the mobility factors for such elements 
are transcribed and then translated in the cytoplasm, they generally remain 
associated with their parental (or related) mRNA molecules, using them as 
templates for reverse transcription to a DNA product that can be inserted 
elsewhere in the genome. In contrast, transposons (sometimes referred to 
as class II elements) proliferate by a cut-and-paste mechanism that directly 
mobilizes DNA-based elements. After the mobility factors encoded by a 
transposon have been transcribed and translated, they return to the nucleus 
(without the mRNA), where they have an opportunity to interact with a ran-
dom element and insert a copy of it elsewhere. Because the life cycles of all 
mobile elements involve the export of an element-associated mRNA to the 
cytoplasm followed by the migration of the translated mobility factors back 
to the nucleus, the barrier presented by the nuclear envelope may have been 
a challenge to the early success of eukaryotic mobile elements. However, 
given the enormous numbers of mobile elements in the genomes of today's 
multicellular eukaryotes, it is clear that the nuclear membrane is no longer 
a major impediment. 
Most mobile elements insert themselves randomly into host genomes, 
without regard to the relevance of the landing site to the host's well-being, 
so their potential to generate deleterious mutations is high. Their negative 
effects can range from frameshifts and truncations caused by insertions into 
coding DNA to changes in gene expression resulting from insertions into 
regulatory regions to large-scale chromosomal rearrangements. Not sur-
prisingly, such activities have earned mobile elements the label of "selfish 
DNAs" (Doolittle and Sapienza 1980; Orgel and Crick 1980). Although the 
earliest speculations about the selfish nature of mobile elements were based 
on compelling verbal arguments, the development of formal population 
genetic models played an essential role in validating this conclusion 
(Charlesworth 1985). Selection at the level of a mobile element family will 
then tend to favor lineages with greater proliferative abilities. In contrast, 
selection against hosts with high mobile element loads should reduce the 
extent of mobile element proliferation while also encouraging the evolution 
of host-encoded resistance factors. The degree to which an element family 
can expand within a species will then depend on the relative strengths of 
these opposing forces, which might be modified through time by a coevo-
lutionary arms race between both players. 
The range of apparent susceptibilities of different host lineages to mobile 
element expansion is profound. For example, well over half of the human 
and maize nuclear genomes consist of mobile elements and their remnants, 
whereas several unicellular eukaryotes appear to lack mobile elements 
entirely. Given that the ancestors of the major classes of mobile elements 
were probably present near the very base of the eukaryotic tree, and that 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
153 
at least some transposons are capable of horizontal transfer, a central goal 
of evolutionary genomics is to clarify the mechanisms responsible for this 
uneven phylogenetic distribution. 
Our overview of the natural history of mobile elements will start with 
the retrotransposons, which, as noted in Chapter 3, are generally subdivided 
into two groups with substantially different mobility mechanisms. Like most 
retroviruses, LTR retrotransposons are flanked by long terminal repeats 
(LTRs), which playa key role in element proliferation, whereas non-LTR 
retrotransposons lack this attribute. It may seem a bit odd to name a group 
for something that it lacks, and an attempt has been made to rectify this 
situation (Eickbush and Malik 2002), but this nomenclature will serve our 
purposes. The vast majority of retrotransposons fall neatly into these two 
major categories, but a few other eukaryotic classes have been suggested 
(Cappello et al. 1985; Goodwin and Poulter 2001; Duncan et al. 2002), and 
additional groups reside within prokaryotes (Curcio and Derbyshire 2003; 
Lampson et al. 2005). Although we will focus on the LTR and non-LTR 
groups, these exceptions serve as a reminder that other retrotransposon 
classes probably await discovery. Following a generic description of the two 
major retrotransposon groups, similar coverage will be given to transposons. 
A detailed account of the biology of a single element in Drosophila 
melanogaster will provide more in-depth understanding of each major type. 
Non-LTR Retrotransposons 
A key contributor to the proliferative success of retrotransposons is the 
replicative nature of their insertion mechanism. Each birth of a new element 
leaves the parental copy intact, and once in place, a retrotransposon essen-
tially never leaves its insertion site unless it happens to be contained within 
a deletion event at the level of the host genome. Although some non-LTR 
insertions arise by integration into preexisting breaks in the host DNA (Mor-
rish et al. 2002), most are initiated by the elements' own endonuclease activ-
ity (Luan et al. 1993; Weiner 2002; Eickbush and Malik 2002). The process, 
known as target-primed reverse transcription (Figure 7.1), begins with tran-
scription of an autonomous element. By directing transcription initiation to 
an upstream region, the internal promoters in such elements (red box in fig-
ure) ensure their own inclusion in the resultant mRNAs. After translation 
in the cytoplasm, the element-encoded endonuclease and reverse transcrip-
tase become intimately associated with their parent mRNA, and with luck, 
the aggregate then reenters the nucleus. If at this point the endonuclease is 
able to produce a single-strand nick in the nuclear DNA, the close associa-
tion of the reverse transcriptase with the 3' tail of the element's transcript can 
initiate DNA synthesis at the nick, using the mRNA as a template. Several 
molecular aspects of the final integration steps are poorly understood, but 
most non-LTR element insertions are flanked by variable-length target-site 
duplications, implying that staggered cuts are made in the recipient chro-
mosome. Synthesis of the second DNA strand of the inserting element 

154 
CHAPTER 7 
NAB RT 
EN 
~ I 
-=AAAA*=~== 
/
''''OOPtiO" 
~ AAAA I 
Translation and 
nuclear import 
~Ar 
DNA nicking at " -
target site 
l\.~ -
~~Pti'" 
====t~:::: 
::::~~ = 
Figure 7.1 Insertion of a non-LTR element into a new target site. Thick lines denote 
DNA flanking the element, black for the original element and light blue for the new 
insertion. The original autonomous element encodes three protein domains, which 
are not necessarily in the order shown or independently transcribed: NAB (nucleic 
acid-binding protein), RT (reverse transcriptase), and EN (endonuclease). Also included 
are an internal transcription promoter (red) and a 3' poly(A) tail. The transcript is shown 
as a wavy line, and the proteins derived from the transcript as color-coded ovals. 
Following the creation of a single-strand nick in the recipient DNA, reverse transcription 
produces single-stranded DNA starting at the poly(A) end of the transcript. It is thought 
that host-encoded DNA repair enzymes are involved in second-strand synthesis. 
Potential errors at the 5' and 3' ends of the new inserts are shown as dotted lines, and 
target-site duplications as triangles. 
requires removal of the mRNA primer template by an RNase H, usually 
derived from the host celt except in the I family of elements (Malik 2005). 
The sloppy nature of non-LTR element replication causes new insertions 
to deviate from their parental elements in numerous ways. First, because 
the polyadenylation signal built into some retrotransposons is weak, tran-
scription occasionally proceeds into the 3' flanking DNA. Such cotran-
scription can result in the hitchhiking of parental flanking DNA to new inser-
tion sites, potentially leading to the insertion of regulatory elements, 
individual exons, or even fully functional genes. Second, because the mRNA 
template is not directly annealed to the priming site, slippage errors are 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
155 
sometimes made at the initiation of insertion, resulting in the further accu-
mulation of As in the poly(A) region of such elements. Third, 5' -truncated 
insertions can arise when integration occurs prior to processing of the entire 
transcript. Fourth, new insertions can be accompanied by other rearrange-
ments, including deletions or inversions of genomic DNA at the insertion 
site. Finally, due to the absence of a proofreading mechanism, reverse tran-
scription is a relatively noisy process, with a rate of base misincorporation 
on the order of 10-5 per nucleotide site per replication (Mansky and Temin 
1995; Boutabout et al. 2001). 
The net effect of these aberrations is that many retrotranspositional events 
result in the insertion of nonautonomous (dead-on-arrival) elements inca-
pable of producing functional proteins. However, not all such incapacitated 
elements are immobile. Although retrotransposon-encoded proteins bind 
preferentially to the mRNA from which they arise, they do not do so exclu-
sively. This means that defective elements can still be mobilized as long as 
they are transcribed and other autonomous (protein-producing) elements 
remain in the genome (Wei et al. 2001). Such nonautonomous elements effec-
tively operate as secondary genomic parasites by hijacking the mobility 
apparatus of their autonomous relatives. One of the most dramatic exam-
ples of defective element proliferation is the case of the Ll-dependent Alu 
element in the human genome (see Chapter 3). 
As a consequence of their reliance on an endonuclease, all non-LTR ele-
ments appear to have at least some insertion-site specificity, although most 
insertion-site sequence requirements are so minimal that potential sites are 
widely distributed throughout the host genome. For example, primate 
LINE elements are preferentially inserted at IT I AAAA sites, which should 
appear roughly once every 46 = 4096 genomic positions, assuming a ran-
dom distribution of nucleotides. In dipterans, Waldo elements are prefer-
entially inserted into ACAY repeats (where Y denotes an arbitrary pyrim-
idine), and Mino elements are preferentially inserted into AC repeats 
(Kojima and Fujiwara 2003), both of which are quite common. Many other 
examples could be cited. On the other hand, a few non-LTR lineages appear 
to have very specific target-site requirements. Most such lineages rely on 
highly repetitive and conserved sequences, which presumably offer a reli-
able and somewhat expendable resource. For example, members of the 
R2 clade are inserted specifically into ribosomal RNA gene spacers in 
arthropods (Eickbush 2002), planarians (Burke et al. 2003), and vertebrates 
(Kojima and Fujiwara 2004). The Genie element is inserted near the tel om-
eres of Giardia (Arkhipova and Morrison 2001; Burke et al. 2002). The NeSL-
1 element is inserted into spliced leader sequences in nematodes, and the 
CZAR and SLAC elements behave similarly in trypanosomes (Aksoy et 
al. 1990; Villanueva et al. 1991) (repetitive spliced leader genes encode the 
leading ex on that is trans-spliced to the transcripts in these species; see 
Chapter 9). 
The non-LTR elements comprise an enormous phylogenetic group. 
Through a comparative analysis of reverse transcriptase sequences shared 

156 
CHAPTER 7 
by all elements, Malik et al. (1999) initially suggested the existence of eleven 
distinct clades. Although subsequent discoveries of new lineages (Malik and 
Eickbush 2000; Arkhipova and Morrison 2001; Burke et al. 2002) have raised 
questions about the general validity of this early classification scheme, a 
case can still be made for the presence of five major groupings based on 
reverse transcriptase sequence divergence and gene content and arrange-
ment (Figure 7.2). Even so, each of these five groups contains such deeply 
diverging lineages that only a small fraction of the sequence variation among 
non-LTR elements separates the major lineages. --
R2 - Arthropods 
NeSL - Nematodes 
CZAR, CRE - Trypanosomes 
Genie - Diplomonads 
~ 
L1-Mammals 
Swimmer - Fishes 
ORE, Tdd3 - Slime molds 
Zarro - Fungi 
Cln4, Tall - Plants 
-
BOOF-Cow 
RTE - Nematodes 
SR2 - Trematodes 
Hv1, Colonist - Plants 
--- -
I, R1, R2 - Diptera 
Tad1- Fungi 
Ingi, L1Tc - Trypanosomes 
---
Line2 - Mammals 
CRI - Birds, turtles 
Maul, Rex1 - Fishes 
Jockey - Insects 
Sam - Nematodes 
Figure 7.2 Simplified version of the phylogeny of non-LTR elements. The five major 
clades can be further subdivided into many deep lineages, some representatives of 
which are given on the right. All autonomous elements carry a coding domain for re-
verse transcriptase (yellow rectangle). Distinct open reading frames are separated by 
narrow lines (second, fourth, and fifth clades). The R2 (top) clade employs an endonu-
clease that appears to be entirely unrelated to that used by all other clades (green rec-
tangle vs. ovals), although a clade containing both types of endonuclease has been 
found in the green alga Chlamydomonas (Kojima and Fujiwara 2005). Distinct nucleic 
acid-binding protein genes are illustrated in blue and with an open box. Members of 
the RTf-containing clade uniquely lack a nucleic acid-binding protein (absence of 
blue), whereas members of the I-containing clade uniquely carry a gene for ribonucle-
ase H (red), presumably used in the degradation of mRNA subsequent to reverse tran-
scription. The mechanisms by which the polycistronic open reading frames give rise to 
multiple proteins are poorly understood. (Modified from Eickbush and Malik 2002.) 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
157 
One of the greatest enigmas concerning mobile elements concerns their 
ultimate phylogenetic roots. Although numerous prokaryotes contain small 
to moderate numbers of mobile elements, no non-LTR-like prokaryotic ele-
ments have been found. A plausible case can be made for a relationship 
between non-LTR retrotransposons and prokaryotic group II introns (Xiong 
and Eickbush 1990; Eickbush and Malik 2002; Belfort et al. 2002; see Chap-
ter 9), as both employ an endonuclease and a reverse transcriptase to insert 
new copies via target-primed reverse transcription. However, unlike group 
II introns, non-LTR retrotransposons are incapable of splicing themselves out 
of precursor mRNAs, raising the question as to whether non-LTR elements 
are descendants of group II introns that have lost the ability to self-splice, 
or vice versa, or whether both are derived from an unknown common ances-
tor with rather different abilities. Non-LTR inserts within noncoding DNA 
are under no selection pressure to retain a capacity for RNA splicing, and 
this, combined with their apparent absence from prokaryotes and that of 
group II introns from nuclear genomes, suggests that non-LTR elements may 
be simplified group II introns, but the matter remains unresolved. 
Might non-LTR elements be relatively recent arrivals that somehow infec-
tiously spread across various eukaryotic lineages? In contrast to the situa-
tion in many transposon families (see below), there is little evidence of phy-
logenetically distant horizontal transfer in any non-LTR lineage, although 
a few such events have been suggested (Zupunski et al. 2001), and some 
introductions by inadvertent interspecific matings are likely. The rarity of 
such movement may be a consequence of cytoplasmic copies of non-LTR 
retrotransposons being in the form of RNA, which is much less stable than 
DNA. To complete a successful journey across a species barrier, a non-LTR 
element's unprotected mRNA molecule would need to be transported intact, 
most likely along with functional copies of the proteins necessary for inte-
gration into the alternative host's genome. In any event, although a num-
ber of issues remain unresolved, the deep phylogenies indicated in Figure 
7.2 are consistent with the hypothesis that the major non-LTR lineages diver-
sified early, perhaps even prior to the establishment of the major eukaryotic 
groups. 
The IR system of hybrid dysgenesis 
The first mobile element to be identified in D. melanogaster, the I factor, was 
discovered when Picard and L'Heritier (1971) found that crosses between 
some flies produced a high incidence of genetic abnormalities (a phenom-
enon known as hybrid dysgenesis, although in this case the participants 
were members of the same species). All isolated strains of D. melanogaster 
can be characterized as I (inducer) or R (reactive) (Bucheton et al. 2002; 
Chambeyron and Bucheton 2005). Most D. melanogaster individuals contain 
20 to 30 defective I elements per haploid genome, but only I-strain mem-
bers carry active elements. These active elements are largely silent in crosses 
between I strains, but when I males mate with R females, the elements begin 

158 
CHAPTER 7 
to mobilize at very high rates (a 100-fold or so increase) in the germ lines 
of the hybrid daughters (mobilization has never been seen in males), caus-
ing a high incidence of infertility from chromosomal defects. The daughters 
of the reciprocal cross exhibit a much lower degree of I element activation 
and have nearly normal fertility. I does not appear to be active in somatic 
tissues, and activation in the female germ line appears to be due to the pres-
ence of an ovary-specific enhancer within the 5' UTR of the element. As in 
the case of LINEs and Alus, nonautonomous elements can spread by exploit-
ing the mobilization apparatus of active elements (Robin et al. 2002). 
Remarkably, all individuals in current natural populations of D. 
melanogaster are I-strain members, while isolates sequestered in the labora-
tory prior to 1930 are R-strain members. The presence of remnants of inac-
tivated elements in even the oldest isolates of D. melanogaster implies sig-
nificant prior I activity followed by element family extinction. Thus, shortly 
after 1930, either a previously defective element was somehow reactivated 
within the species or an active element was introduced by horizontal trans-
fer, rapidly spreading throughout the entire geographic range of D. 
melanogaster. Under this hypothesis, the old R lab strains have retained their 
status by being shielded from gene flow from the rest of the species. 
Although there is little direct evidence for distant horizontal transfers of 
non-LIR elements in D. melanogaster, rare hybridization events with the 
closely related D. simulans, which carries active elements, are possible 
(Sezutsu et al. 1995; Bucheton et al. 2002). 
The rapid proliferation of a mobile element throughout an entire species 
poses the obvious question as to what, if anything, prevents runaway 
expansion of copy number within the host genome. In the case of I, retro-
transposition appears to be tightly regulated, because shortly after the ini-
tiation of a dysgenic cross, the number of active elements stabilizes at 10 to 
15 per haploid genome. Although the mechanisms by which this is accom-
plished remain unclear, they go beyond simple natural selection against 
hosts with high copy numbers. For example, insertion of fragments of either 
the 5' UIR or the coding region of an active I element into a fly genome 
greatly reduces the retrotransposition rate in a copy-number-dependent 
manner. The underlying mechanism appears to involve some sort of homol-
ogy-dependent suppression mechanism associated with mRNA interme-
diates (Chaboissier et al. 1998; Jensen et al. 1999a,b; Malinsky et al. 2000). 
Females that have lost the DNAs associated with introduced trans genes 
(by segregation), but not their mRNAs, continue to exhibit the suppression 
effect for at least a generation, pointing to the maternal inheritance of this 
RNAi-like phenomenon. 
The most remarkable feature of I element cosuppression is its ability to 
operate via nonhomologous sequences Qensen et al. 2002). If a reporter con-
struct with a small portion of I is introduced into the fly genome, and then 
another construct with a nonoverlapping fragment of I is added, active tran-
scription of the latter results in the transcriptional silencing of the former. The 
leading hypothesis to explain such behavior invokes the presence of "relay" 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
159 
sequences containing regions of homology to both introduced constructs, and 
the obvious candidates are the defective elements residing in the genome. 
Despite the many remaining mysteries regarding the mechanics of cosup-
pression, these results strongly suggest that "self-regulation" of I element 
number is an indirect effect of general host cell processes. The enhanced I 
activity in I/ R hybrids is then presumably explained by the 50% reduction in 
the number of interfering copies in the cytoplasm of hybrid offspring. 
LTR Retrotransposons 
Like those of non-LTR elements, transcripts of autonomous LTR elements 
serve as both the information-bearing message necessary for translation into 
the mobility apparatus and the template for reverse transcription. However, 
the mobility mechanisms of LTR elements are much more similar to those 
of eukaryotic retroviruses than to those of non-LTR elements. As in retro-
viruses, the information critical for the transcription of an LTR element is 
contained within the terminal direct repeats (the LTRs), and of the three 
genes encoded by retroviruses (gag, pol, and env), two are also present in 
LTR elements. The gag gene encodes the capsid protein, which helps 
sequester the key element components during reverse transcription, whereas 
pol encodes the three functional domains necessary for mobilization: pro-
tease (PR), reverse transcriptase (RT), and integrase (IN). The RT protein is 
further subdivided into two domains: a DNA polymerase that can. use DNA 
or RNA as a template, and an RNase H used in the elimination of RNA dur-
ing the replication reaction. Finally, as in retroviruses, most LTR elements 
use a host transfer RNA (tRNA) to initially prime reverse transcription dur-
ing replication, with different element families relying on different tRNAs. 
The primary distinction between infectious retroviruses and LTR elements 
is the presence of an env gene in the former, the product of which facili-
tates entry into host cells and hence horizontal transfer. 
Following transcription, some LTR element transcripts are translated in 
the cytoplasm, where the protease activity of the primary translation prod-
uct subdivides pol into its individual protein components. However, most 
transcripts are destined to be packaged into capsids (generally two per cap-
sid), where RT and IN assemble into viruslike particles along with the host 
tRNA necessary for priming reverse transcription. In contrast to the situa-
tion in non-LTR elements, reverse transcription is carried out within these 
cytoplasmic vesicles, after which daughter cDNA molecules enter the 
nucleus in the form of preintegration complexes containing the pol prod-
ucts. Insertion into the host chromosome is carried out when IN makes stag-
gered cuts in the host DNA, resulting in short direct repeats flanking the 
integrated element. 
The production of an LTR element's cDNA is a remarkably intricate 
process. Given that transcription is initiated within the 5' LTR and termi-
nated within the 3' LTR, full-length copies of LTR elements are never pres-
ent at the mRNAlevel (Figure 7.3). How, then, can a complete daughter ele-

160 
CHAPTER 7 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
1 
1 
1 R 1 
PBS 
PPT 
R 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
: 
: 
1 
-1+-+
1 --1~.~ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Figure 7.3 The steps by which a copy of an 
LTR element is produced by reverse transcrip-
tion. Wavy lines denote RNA; solid lines are 
DNA; black terminal regions are the LTRs; and 
the stem-loop structure is the tRNA primer. R is 
the terminally redundant portion of the LTR 
contained within both ends of the mRNA; PBS 
is the tRNA binding site; and PPT is a poly-
purine tract, resistant to RNase activity. (1) A 
host tRNA with sequence complementary to 
the PBS primes reverse transcription of the 
lower strand, which proceeds to the end of R. 
(2) A strand switch occurs, with the previously 
synthesized DNA reannealing to the 3' end of 
the mRNA. (3) Reverse transcription proceeds 
again to the 5' end of the mRNA. (4) All but 
the PPT is digested by RNase activity, and the 
remaining fragment then serves as a primer for 
the production of a complementary portion of 
the top strand of DNA. (5) Finally, the two par-
tial strands of DNA serve to prime second-
strand synthesis in both directions, thereby re-
constituting a complete element at the DNA 
level. A few intermediate steps are omitted. 
(Modified from Voytas and Boeke 2002.) 
1 
1 
1 
1 
~: 
1 
1 
: 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
VV\ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 .: 
I. 
. 
ment be reconstituted at the DNA level? The key resides in the fact that the 
portion of the LTR missing at the 5' end of the transcript is present at the 3' 
end, and vice versa, ensuring that each transcript contains all of the infor-
mation necessary for the production of a full-length cDNA copy. After the 
initial priming of reverse transcription via a host tRNA, cDNA synthesis pro-
ceeds in the 5' direction to make a partial copy of the 5' LTR segment. Using 
the homology of LTR sequences at both ends of the transcript as a guide, a 
series of strand switches of primers followed by cDNA extension then leads 
to the reconstitution of a full-length element (see Figure 7.3). A few variants 
on this theme are known to exist (Levin 1995; Duncan et al. 2002). 
This mechanism of cDNA production ensures that the complete right and 
left LTR sequences of newly produced elements are 100% identical, even if 
they had diverged in the parental molecule. Because LTRs are often hun-
dreds of bases long, this unique feature of newborn LTR elements provides 
an exceptional opportunity for deciphering the evolutionary demography 
of a family of LTR elements within a host genome. With no mechanism to 
maintain their homogeneity after insertion (with the possible exception of 
gene conversion), the LTRs of individual elements are expected to diverge 
neutrally (i.e., at the mutation rate), allowing one to infer the age of an inser-
tion from the magnitude of divergence between its two LTRs. Applying this 
logic to random samples of LTR elements within a genome, several stud-
ies have shed light on the average life spans of LTR element insertions. 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
161 
The age distributions of such elements are often highly L-shaped, closely 
approximating an exponential distribution. Such distributions are expected 
under a steady-state birth-death model, and the half-life of an element can 
be estimated from the slope of the distribution on a log-arithmetic plot. For 
example, the age distribution of hopi family members in the rice genome 
implies that 50% of insertions are lost by the time their LTRs have diverged 
by just 1 % at the nucleotide sequence level (Figure 7.4A). Similar results 
have been obtained for a broad range of other LTR families in rice (Ma et a1. 
2004), maize (San Miguel et a1. 1998), wheat (San Miguel et a1. 2002), peas 
(A) 
 
10 
2 ::: 
C)) 
E 
~ 
C)) 
..... 
0 
.... 
C)) 
1 
.0  
Z 
0.1 
0.00 
(B) 
10 
2 ::: 
C)) 
E 
~ 
C)) 
..... 
0 ... 
C)) 
1 
.0  
Z 
0.1 
0.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oryza sativa 
0.01 
0.02 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
0.01 
0.02 
Divergence between LTRs 
0.03 
0.03 
Figure 7.4 (A) Age distributions (in units 
of sequence divergence) of the hopi family of 
LTR elements in the rice genome (B) and of 
the Tyl and Ty2 families in yeast. The nega-
tive slopes of the regressions yield half-life 
estimates of 0.01 0 and 0.014 (in terms of se-
quence divergence), respectively. (A, modi-
fied from Vitte and Panaud 2003; B, modi-
fied from Promislow et al. 1999.) 

162 
CHAPTER 7 
(Jing et al. 2005), and Arabidopsis (Devos et al. 2002; Pereira 2004). Because 
the average level of divergence of alleles at silent sites in land plants is gen-
erally on the order of 1 % or less (see Chapter 4), this implies that a large frac-
tion of LTR element insertions in plants are younger than segregating alle-
les, with most never reaching fixation at the population level. 
These kinds of observations are not unique to plants. For example, in 
units of sequence divergence, the Ty elements of the yeast S. cerevisiae have 
an estimated half-life of 1.4% (Figure 7.4B). In addition, virtually all elements 
in 17 distinct LTR families in D. melanogaster are less than 1 % divergent in 
their terminal regions, with 70% having identical intra-element LTRs (Bowen 
and McDonald 2001). Essentially the same observation has been made in C. 
elegans (Bowen and McDonald 1999). In striking contrast, LTR elements seem 
to survive much longer in the human genome, as revealed by average intra-
element LTR divergences of 13.4% (Tristem 2000). 
The distinct mobility mechanisms of non-LTR and LTR retrotransposons 
impose fundamental differences in their demographic properties. First, 
whereas non-LTR elements are often truncated (and hence dead on arrival) 
at the time of integration, new LTR insertions are generally of full length. 
Second, whereas a non-LTR element can be lost from the host genome only 
if it happens to be contained in a deletion event, LTR elements are subject 
to an internal mechanism of inactivation: intra-element recombination 
between the 5' and 3' LTRs results in a loss of intervening sequence, yield-
ing a defective element in the form of a solo LTR. Third, LTR elements may 
gradually lose their ability to complete a replication cycle as their LTR 
sequences become too divergent to support primer strand switching. Thus, 
all other things being equal, LTR elements are expected to be more successful 
in producing autonomous progeny at the time of insertion than non-LTR 
elements, but less successful in maintaining them. Finally, because viruslike 
particles generally package more than one mRNA, the opportunity exists 
for template switching in the replication of heterologous mRNAs. Such 
events can generate entirely new families of elements (Temin 1991; Jordan 
and McDonald 1998; Kelly and Levin 2005). 
Despite these differences, there are also similarities in the life history fea-
tures of LTR and non-LTR elements. First, like non-LTR elements, LTR retro-
transposons appear to depend almost entirely on vertical inheritance for 
survival. Few convincing cases of horizontal transmission have been uncov-
ered, and these appear to involve rare hybridization events between con-
generic species, as in the case of a copia element shared between D. 
melanogaster and D. willis toni (Jordan et al. 1999). Second, like non-LTR ele-
ments, autonomous LTR retrotransposons are subject to exploitation by 
nonautonomous derivatives (Jiang et al. 2002; Havecker et al. 2004). Third, 
a number of LTR elements have strong insertion-site preferences, often in 
regions containing arrays of genes. For example, of the five families of such 
elements in S. cerevisiae, four integrate primarily within the 750 bp region 
upstream of tRNA genes, while the fifth is targeted to telomeres (Voytas 
1996; Zou et al. 1996). The Tf1 element of S. pombe exhibits a strong prefer-

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
163 
ence for insertion in the promoter region of protein-coding genes (Kelly and 
Levin 2005). 
Finally, it is worth noting that mobile elements that rely on the use of 
processed mRNA intermediates are not expected to contain introns, and this 
expectation is frequently exploited to formally demonstrate that an element 
qualifies as a retrotransposon: if a spliceosomal intron is introduced into an 
otherwise active retrotransposon, a new genomic insertion derived from 
such a construct is expected to lack the intron as a consequence of its removal 
during the intermediate stage of mRNA processing (Boeke et al. 1985; Kin-
sey 1993). This result has been seen with nearly all modified retrotrans-
posons, although a few rare types of LTR elements do contain spliceosomal 
introns (Arkhipova et al. 2003; Goodwin and Poulter 2004; Evgen'ev and 
Arkhipova 2005). In these exceptional cases, only a subset of element tran-
scripts may be spliced and translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, with 
unspliced forms being retained for packaging and replication. 
Comparative analysis of reverse transcriptase sequences suggests that 
LTR elements can be subdivided into four major clades (Xiong and Eick-
bush 1990; Eickbush and Malik 2002). However, as in the case of non-LTR 
elements, most of the total diversity of such elements is found among deeply 
diverging lineages within each clade. Two of the four major clades, the 
Tyl / copia and Ty3 / gypsy groups, named after elements described initially 
in S. cerevisiae and D. melanogaster, respectively, are very similar in most 
respects except for the relative position of the IN domain within the pol gene. 
Although the broad phylogenetic distribution of each group, combined with 
both groups' apparent absence from prokaryotes, suggests a presence in the 
stem eukaryote prior to the emergence of the major eukaryotic lineages, the 
origin of LTR retrotransposons is no less enigmatic than that of non-LTR ele-
ments. Malik and Eickbush (2001) have hypothesized that LTR elements 
arose via the fusion of a non-LTR element and a DNA-based transposon, 
with the former providing reverse transcriptase and the latter providing the 
integrase necessary for insertion into double-stranded DNA. In still a third 
step of eukaryotic retroelement evolution, retroviruses may arise when LTR 
retrotransposons acquire env genes from unrelated viruses, providing them 
with a capacity for extracellular transfer (Temin 1980; Malik et al. 2000; 
Frame et al. 2001; Pearson and Rohrmann 2006). 
The gypsy element 
Gypsy is one of about 30 LTR element families found in D. melanogaster. It 
is not particularly abundant, with just ten or so copies carried per individ-
ual (Rizzon et al. 2002), but the element is unusual in that it encodes an env 
gene, which may endow gypsy with infectious viruslike properties. Gypsy 
elements are found in many species of Drosophila, and although many of 
their env genes have acquired frame shift mutations, a comparison of sub-
stitutions at silent and replacement sites indicates that functional env genes 
are under strong purifying selection (Mejlumian et al. 2002; Pelisson et al. 

164 
CHAPTER 7 
2002), consistent with the idea that gypsy is a derived form of a retrovirus 
that has taken up residence in the Drosophila germ line (Terzian et al. 2001). 
Phylogenetic analyses of the elements in various Drosophila hosts support 
this view by pointing to the occurrence of horizontal transfer (Terzian et 
al. 2000; Heredia et al. 2004). 
From the standpoint of mobilization, gypsy is clearly an unusual element. 
When lines of D. melanogaster with inactive elements are fed homogenized 
larvae containing viruslike particles from active elements, rates of incor-
poration can be as high as one per gamete (Kim et al. 1994; Pelisson et al. 
2002). A role for env in transmission is implicated by the observation that 
such activity is inhibited by pretreating the homogenate with antibodies 
against the Env protein, but the mechanism by which Env is actually 
deployed in the movement of gypsy is less clear. Although heritable retro-
transpositional events are generally thought to require germ line tran-
scription of an element, gypsy is apparently expressed in female somatic 
cells and then somehow transferred to the oocytes, where integration into 
the germ line subsequently takes place (Chalvet et al. 1999). This is one of 
the only known examples of genetic transmission from the soma to the 
germ line. 
There is significant genetic variation in the ability of D. melanogaster to 
resist the spread of gypsy. In particular, the flamenco gene, the products of 
which remain to be characterized, operates via a maternal effect. Mutant 
homozygous females at this locus provide a permissive environment for 
gypsy mobility in male and female progeny (Prud'homrne et al. 1995), lead-
ing to a higher abundance of elements within individuals of such stocks 
(Lyubomirskaya et al. 2001). As in the case of the non-LTR I element of D. 
melanogaster, some form of RNA-mediated cosuppression appears to play 
a role in the posttranscriptional silencing of gypsy, as small RNAs homolo-
gous to gypsy (the hallmark of RNA interference, and potentially the prod-
ucts of the flamenco gene) are found in fly ovaries (Sarot et al. 2004). 
Transposons 
In contrast to retrotransposons, for which new insertions are derived from 
RNA intermediates, transposon movement relies exclusively on the exci-
sion of elements at the genomic (DNA) level. Transposition requires that an 
active element be transcribed to produce the transposase enzyme, but nei-
ther the element's mRNA nor a cDNA derived from it is involved in sub-
sequent mobilization. Rather, after entering the nucleus, transposase mol-
ecules interact with random genomic copies of the element by binding to 
key recognition sequences contained within the 100-500 bp terminal 
inverted repeats (TIRs) flanking such elements. Once positioned at such 
sites, the transposase creates double-strand breaks and attempts to insert 
the liberated element elsewhere in the genome. 
Despite the excision step, most transposon movement leads to an increase 
in copy number. Usually, the double-strand break inflicted at the source site 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
165 
is repaired by homologous recombination with the filled site on a sister chro-
matid (Engels et al. 1990; Gloor et al. 1991), restoring the original copy (Fig-
ure 7.SA). Duplicative transposition can also occur during germ cell divi-
sion when a copy transposes from a replicated portion of a chromosome to 
a region that has not yet been replicated (Chen et al. 1992), ensuring that 
both descendent chromosomes inherit the new copy after replication (Fig-
ure 7.SB). As in the case of most retrotransposons, the relative simplicity of 
the insertion-site sequences of transposons generally ensures a wide, more 
or less random distribution of such locations over the host genome, although 
the physical mechanism of insertion may result in the localization of new-
born elements near their parental sources. One exception is the Pokey ele-
ment of the microcrustacean Daphnia, which is addressed to a specific site 
within the 185 ribosomal RNA repeat (Penton et al. 2002), similar to the sit-
uation for the Rl and R2 retrotransposons of arthropods. 
Because gap repair is error prone, newborn transposons can sometimes 
be dead on arrival, and resident elements will inevitably succumb to inac-
tivating mutations, so virtually all transposons are expected to eventually 
become nonautonomous. Moreover, because transposase is imported back 
into the nucleus with no memory of its genomic source, an autonomous ele-
ment can mobilize any genomic copy of itself, provided the key recognition 
(A) 
",.. -- ..... 
/ 
"-
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
.. 
t 
  
.... 
~ ~"-
I 
\ 
 
t 
' 
--; -Y... 
 ... 
i 
/ 
~ 
T 
-Y... 
.... 
(B) 
/ 
/ 
I 
6 ... 
L, 
I 
\ 9 
~ 
 
T 
 ... 
"-, 
\ 
t 
y 
y 
Figure 7.5 Duplicative transposition of a DNA-based transposon. In each case, the 
excised element is replaced by the intact copy by double-strand break repair using the 
sister chromatid. Centromeres of sister chromatids are denoted by solid circles; trans-
posons are denoted by triangles; and a double-strand gap is denoted by a break in the 
chromatid. (A) The donor element moves to a replicated site on the same or a different 
chromosome, such that only a single daughter chromosome inherits a new element. 
(B) The donor element arises in a replicated region of the chromosome and moves to 
an unreplicated region, such that both daughter chromosomes inherit the new copy. 
Here, the solid bubble in the upper chromosome represents the region of replicated 
DNA, which will eventually expand to yield complete sister chromatids. 

166 
CHAPTER 7 
sites reside within the TIRs. Thus, as in the case of retrotransposons, inca-
pacitated elements (in this case, lacking a functional transposase gene) can 
expand at the genomic level by exploiting the transposition machinery of 
active elements. Not surprisingly, of the many thousands of transposons 
that have been identified in various species, only a few have been formally 
demonstrated to be autonomous. A striking example of the proliferative 
ability of defective elements is provided by a superfamily of miniature 
inverted-repeat transposable elements (MITEs) that is widespread through-
out animals and land plants, with up to tens of thousands of copies per 
genome in some cases (Bureau and Wessler 1994; X. Zhang et al. 2004). Com-
pletely devoid of protein-coding capacity, these large families of elements 
maintain themselves by taking advantage of autonomous members of the 
mariner family (Feschotte et al. 2003; Jiang et al. 2003). 
A number of examples of horizontal transfers of transposons have been 
documented, perhaps the best case being that of the mariner elements in 
insects, other animals, and plants (Robertson 1993, 1997; Robertson and 
Zumpano 1997; Feschotte et al. 2002; Lampe et al. 2003). Although the exact 
mechanisms are unknown, transfers across species boundaries may be facil-
itated by the self-contained nature of transposon systems, which require no 
host factors for mobilization. As a consequence of this feature, transposons 
are capable of cleavage and integration when introduced to the genomes of 
even distantly related species (Rubin et al. 1999; Q. Zhang et al. 2000; 
Mamoun et al. 2000). Although transposons are widely distributed through-
out the eukaryotic domain, this capacity for horizontal transfer greatly com-
promises the use of phylogenetic data to infer the times of origin of trans-
poson families. Nevertheless, eubacteria harbor numerous lineages of 
insertion sequences (ISs) (Chandler and Mahillon 2002) that appear to be 
related to distinct lineages of eukaryotic transposons (Eisen et al. 1994; 
Kapitonov and Jurka 1999; Feschotte 2004) and to use essentially the same 
insertion mechanisms. Thus, there is again good reason to believe that DNA-
based transposons have a very early origin. 
The P element 
One of the most intensely studied transposons is the P element of Drosophila 
melanogaster, originally discovered through its involvement in a hybrid dys-
genesis syndrome similar to that involving the I retrotransposon. High rates 
of mutation, chromosomal breakage, male recombination (normally absent 
in D. melanogaster), and sterility (Kidwell 1983, 1994) are uniquely observed 
in the offspring of crosses between P-carrying males and P-free females, 
but not vice versa. Within the germ line, P element activity is regulated 
by a maternally transmitted condition known as P cytotype (Engels 1979), 
which appears to be specifically associated with P elements present in a 
telomere of the X chromosome (Niemi et al. 2004). Females lacking such 
elements transmit the M-cytotype condition, which is permissive to ele-
ment activity. 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
167 
Although P elements are now globally distributed in D. melanogaster, this 
appears to be a very recent condition. Laboratory strains of D. melanogaster 
isolated more than 50 years ago are entirely free of P. Moreover, no P ele-
ments have been found in any member of the melanogaster subgroup of 
Drosophila except D. melanogaster itself, which appears to have obtained it 
from D. willis toni (Daniels et al. 1990; Pinsker et al. 2001). Such a rapid and 
complete invasion is remarkably reminiscent of the I element system in the 
same species (noted above). 
Like many mobile elements, P is active only in the germ line. In this case, 
tissue specificity is conferred by host-specific alternative splicing (Labrador 
and Corces 1997; Rio 2002). Unlike retrotransposons, transposons often har-
bor introns, and of the four carried by P, the third is retained in transcripts 
in somatic cells, resulting in a premature termination codon and the pro-
duction of a nonfunctional transposase (Laski et al. 1986; Simmons et al. 
2002). Such truncated transposases suppress transposition by competitively 
binding to the TIRs of inserted elements, restricting their access to functional 
transposase (Rio 2002). In some lines, a defective P element (KP) has a sim-
ilar effect (Lee et al. 1998). This repressor mechanism is so powerful that it 
even somatically silences P elements in dysgenic crosses. 
Rates of Insertion and Fitness Effects 
Prior to considering the population biology of mobile elements, some basic 
information on the mobility rates and fitness effects of element insertions is 
essential, as both factors ultimately dictate whether a mobile element fam-
ily can achieve long-term persistence in its host species. Because mobile ele-
ments are constantly subject to inactivating mutations, long-term persist-
ence of an element family is absolutely dependent on the mobilization of 
existing autonomous copies, which by definition ensures the retention of 
functional replicative machinery in fresh insertions. In addition, the effects 
of new insertions on host fitness must not be too negative if they are to avoid 
selection at the host level long enough to produce still another generation 
of viable progeny elements. 
Unfortunately, few attempts have been made to estimate the rate of ele-
ment insertion, and almost all of these derive from mutation accumulation 
experiments in the fruit fly D. melanogaster. Such experiments involve the 
transmission of initially identical chromosomes through replicate full-sib 
mated lines for dozens of generations. With such small population sizes, 
random genetic drift overwhelms the ability of selection to oppose the accu-
mulation of all but very highly deleterious insertions, and in accordance 
with the neutral theory (see Chapter 4), the increase in element numbers 
will be close to the rate of insertion. With D. melanogaster, new insertions can 
be identified by hybridizing element-specific DNA to polytene chromo-
somes and visualizing new positions under the microscope. Summarizing 
over a large number of element families, such studies lead to average inser-
tion rate estimates of 1.2 x 10-4 per element per generation (Table 7.1). One 

168 
CHAPTER 7 
TABLE 7.1 Rates of mobile element insertion and loss (per element per 
generation) in Drosophila melanogaster 
NUMBER OF FAMILIES 
INSERTION 
EXCISION 
REFERENCE 
11 
9 
17 
1.2 X 10-4 
1.0 X 10-4 
1.8 X 10-4 
4.0 X 10--<i 
3.9 X 10--<i 
1.8 X 10--<i 
Maside et al. 2000 
Maside et al. 2001 
Nuzhdin and Mackay 1995 
Note: Rates are averaged over a large number of families, most of which are retrotransposons, from changes 
accumulated over 60-200 generations in parallel sets of initially identical, inbred lines. 
limitation of these estimates is their inability to discriminate between 
autonomous and nonautonomous elements. Because not all potential 
parental elements are autonomous and not all insertions are complete, the 
rate of autonomous element insertion per autonomous element (which is 
the key to an element family's success) could be higher or lower than the 
estimates in Table 7.1. In contrast, the rate of element excision averages 
nearly two orders of magnitude less than the rate of insertion, just 3.2 x 10--<i 
per element per generation. 
Other smaller studies with D. melanogaster have yielded qualitatively sim-
ilar results (Eggleston et al. 1988; Harada et al. 1990; Perez-Gonzalez and 
Eickbush 2002), and the only studies for a non-fly species, involving the Tyl 
LTR element in yeast, suggest insertion rates on the order of 10-6-10-4, 
depending on the growth temperature, and excision rates about a hundred 
times lower (Curcio and Garfinkel 1991; Garfinkel et al. 2005). None of these 
estimates includes observations from highly active phases of hybrid dys-
genesis, which can yield insertion rates approaching 0.01 per element per 
generation (Kidwell 1983; Busseau et al. 1994; Petrov et al. 1995). Extrapo-
lating to the full set of mobile elements across the entire Drosophila genome, 
the total number of new insertions per gamete per generation is estimated 
to be 0.1-0.2 (Nuzhdin and Mackay 1995; Maside et al. 2000, 2001), so for 
this species there is little question that mobile element activity is a major 
force pushing the genome toward larger size. 
Estimates of the average effects of mobile element insertions, again 
entirely confined to D. melanogaster, uniformly confirm the idea that inser-
tions are typically deleterious to host fitness. On average, both homozygous 
and heterozygous insertions individually reduce fitness by 0.5%-1.5% 
(Eanes et al. 1988; Houle and Nuzhdin 2004; Pasyukova et al. 2004), although 
a study in one set of lines yielded average fitness effects as high as 13% 
(Mackay et al. 1992; Lyman et al. 1996), and approximately 10% of insertions 
have lethal effects (Engels 1989; Maside et al. 2000). In yeast, Tyl insertions, 
which target intergenic regions upstream of tRNA and rRNA genes, have 
small but significant negative fitness effects, averaging 0.6% per insertion 
(Blanc and Adams 2004). In the prokaryote E. coli, TnlO insertions cause an 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
169 
average 1 %-3% reduction in fitness, depending on the environment (Cooper 
et al. 2005). Although most deleterious effects are likely to be direct conse-
quences of insertions, it has been suggested that the relatively high het-
erozygous effects on viable progeny production may be indirect conse-
quences of an elevated rate of ectopic recombination that results when 
insertions present on single chromosomes cause misalignment with 
homologs during meiosis (Pasyukova et al. 2004). 
Regulation of Mobile Element Activity 
Given the ubiquity of mobile elements and the general negative effects of 
new insertions, host species are expected to be under strong selection to 
restrict mobile element activity. In contrast, selection at the level of the 
mobile element family (effectively a parasite population) will encourage 
elevated insertion rates so long as these are not offset by excessive reduc-
tions in host fitness. Thus, a coevolutionary loop between various aspects 
of mobile element adaptation and host counteradaptation may be common, 
although the long-term stability of such situations remains unclear. 
One aspect of mobile element evolution that will generally be mutu-
ally advantageous to both element and host is a restriction of element activ-
ity to the germ line, as damage inflicted on somatic cells will reduce the 
reliability of host carriers. This predicted pattern has been widely observed. 
For example, in D. melanogaster, the rDNA-inhabiting non-LTR elements 
Rl and R2 appear to move nearly exclusively in the male germ line (Perez-
Gonzalez et al. 2003), whereas transposons such as I and P are largely silent 
except in the female germ line (Engels 1979; Bucheton et al. 2002; Rio 2002). 
The activity of the ZAM LTR element of D. melanogaster is also restricted to 
ovaries (LeBlanc et al. 2000), and the Doc non-LTR element exhibits its high-
est levels of transcription in ovaries and testes (Zhao and Bownes 1998). 
Similarly, Tagl, a transposon in Arabidopsis, moves almost exclusively in 
developing ovules and pollen (Galli et al. 2003). Yeast Ty3 is about 50 times 
more active in meiotically than in mitotically dividing cells (Ribeiro-dos-
Santos et al. 1997), and Tyl and Ty5 are also more highly expressed dur-
ing mating (Voytas and Boeke 2002; Sandmeyer et al. 2002). Although yeast 
is a single-celled organism, such a restriction in element activity will help 
ensure the survival of clonal lineages prior to mating. Finally, LINE mobil-
ity in humans appears to be largely restricted to male and female germ lines 
and suppressed in somatic tissues (Moran and Gilbert 2002). One known 
exception to this pattern is the Tel non-LTR element in C. e/egans, which is 
essentially silent in the germ line but highly mobile in mitotically dividing 
cells (Eide and Anderson 1985; Plasterk and van Luenen 2002). 
Several additional observations indicate the existence of evolved con-
straints on mobile element activity. For example, the normally quiescent C. 
elegans Tel has been shown to mobilize when placed in human cells 
(Schouten et al. 1998), Tc3 rapidly mobilizes in zebrafish (Raz et al. 1998), 

170 
CHAPTER 7 
and many other trans-species mobilizations have been induced in the lab-
oratory with various members of the Tel / mariner family, even in bacteria 
(PIa sterk et al. 1999; Rubin et al. 1999). Mobile elements are also frequently 
activated by various kinds of stress to the host (Junakovic et al. 1986; Rat-
ner et al. 1992; Engels 1989; Finnegan et al. 1989; Petrov et al. 1995; O'Neill, 
O'Neill et al. 1998; Labrador et al. 1999; Grandbastien et al. 1997,2005; 
Grandbastien 1998; Capy et al. 2000), which may be a simple consequence 
of the compromised efficiency of host regulatory mechanisms in extreme 
environments. 
The opportunity for self-regulation 
Because the transmission of a mobile element from one generation to the 
next depends critically on host viability and reproductive potential, selec-
tion may oppose overly aggressive copies, and as just noted, substantial evi-
dence does indeed support the idea that the physical activities of many 
mobile elements are strongly constrained. But is the regulation of mobile 
element activity an evolved feature of the element itself, of host-encoded 
immunity functions, or both? And if element-associated features are 
involved, is this a consequence of natural selection? 
There is little question as to the involvement of the physical features of 
the elements themselves. Insertions of mobile elements may inadvertently 
alter local chromatin structure in ways that inhibit further element colo-
nization (Ye et al. 2005), and in some cases the mere retention of inactivated 
element copies within a host genome provides a built-in mechanism for con-
straining the proliferation of autonomous copies. For example, as noted 
above, transcribed but otherwise defective elements can divert the mobil-
ity machinery from active copies, providing a buffer against the runaway 
proliferation of autonomous copies. However, such constrained behavior is 
probably nothing more than an indirect consequence of the basic life cycle 
of a mobile element. Because all mobile element copies must eventually suc-
cumb to mutational inactivation, the accumulation of nonautonomous ele-
ments is inevitable. 
Consider the case of the highly abundant non-LTR L1 elements of 
humans, which have extremely low levels of expression resulting from an 
inhibition of transcript elongation (Han et al. 2004). By simply engineering 
a series of silent-site substitutions within the L1 open reading frame, Han 
and Boeke (2004) were able to increase the transposition rate 200-fold. Ther~ 
is no evidence that this constrained activity of endogenous L1 elements is 
a consequence of direct selection (at the level of either the element or the 
host). Indeed, to date, there are no convincing examples of any autonomous 
eukaryotic mobile element having acquired a selectively promoted mech-
anism for regulating its own activity or that of other elements. Charlesworth 
and Langley (1986) present some compelling explanations for why this is 
so (Box 7.1). 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
171 
Box 7.1 The Population Genetic Conditions for the 
Evolution of Mobile Element Self-Regulation 
The selective advantage of a mutant element capable of self-regulation (Le., of restricting 
the insertion rate of family members) is a function of the improvement in host fitness re-
sulting from reduced element activity (which influences the self-regulating element's likeli-
hood of being vertically transmitted to the next generation) and of the degree to which 
such an element is linked to the chromosomal region(s) in which it suppresses element 
activity (which determines the degree to which the advantage is transmitted to the next 
generation along with the element itself). Imagine an element that prevents the insertion 
of other elements in its immediate vicinity, assumed to be a fraction p of the entire 
genome. Such localized transposition immunity implies essentially complete linkage of the 
regulating element and the advantage that it produces. 
The average reduction in the total insertion rate will be approximately npJ.1, where J.1 is 
the insertion rate per element and n is the number of autonomous elements per genome 
(assumed to be randomly distributed, so that np is the expected number in the zone of 
regulation). For a genome in which an element family is in approximate equilibrium due 
to a balance between element insertion and selection at the host level, the average effect 
of an insertion on host fitness is approximately J.1 (see below), so the selective advantage 
associated with local transposition immunity is 5"" npJ.12. Thus, with np unlikely to be 
much greater than 1, and ~12 being on the order of 10-8 (see Table 7.1), npJ.12 is expected 
to be no greater than 10-6, and possibly much lower. 
Another potential mechanism of self-regulation, called transposition repression by 
Charlesworth and Langley (1986), considers the hypothetical situation in which an ele-
ment has a genome-wide ability to reduce the insertion rates of all other family members 
by some fraction f. In this case, given a total insertion rate of a family of n~l, the maximum 
selective advantage of repression, approximately fnJ.1, would be experienced if all inser-
tions had dominant lethal or sterilizing effects. However, because the data cited in the 
previous section imply heterozygous fitness effects of about 1 %, the selective advantage 
of a mutant element conferring genome-wide transposition repression should be more on 
the order of 5"" 0.01 fnJ.1. Although some subtle issues regarding recombination rates have 
been glossed over here, the main point is that the selective advantage of transposition re-
pression will generally be very small, again most likely less than 10-6. 
These qualitative results point to the extremely stringent conditions necessary for the 
adaptive evolution of self-regulatory mechanisms in mobile element systems. If selection is 
to promote a mutation conferring self-regulatory ability, the advantage of self-regulation 
(from the element's perspective) must exceed the power of random genetic drift at the el-
ement's insertion site, which must be essentially the same as that in the host species, ap-
proximately 1 lNg, where Ng is approximately twice the effective population size of a dip-
loid, outcrossing host species. Thus, if s < 10-6, and perhaps substantially so, the host Ng 
must be considerably larger than 106 for self-regulation to evolve by positive selection. 
Given the data reported in Chapter 4, such conditions are not likely to be met in most mul-
ticellular eukaryotes, or even in many unicellular species. On the other hand, some prokary-
otic species are likely to have a sufficiently large Ng to provide an adequate environment for 
the selective promotion of self-regulation. Thus, it is of interest that several prokaryotic mo-
bile elements have evolved mechanisms for inhibiting transposition, often in a density-de-
pendent fashion (Zerbib et al. 1990; Kleckner 1990; Craig 2002; Reznikoff 2002). 

172 
CHAPTER 7 
Host-encoded mechanisms for mobile 
element containment 
Although the power of selection in eukaryotes may be generally insufficient 
for the emergence of element-encoded mechanisms of self-restraint, the ben-
efits of reducing element activity can be much more substantial from the 
standpoint of the host. As noted above, from an element's perspective, the 
selective advantage of self-regulation will be roughly proportional to the 
number of active family members per host genome (n), but if a host-encoded 
mechanism for constraining element activity had broad utility, the advan-
tage would be approximately proportional to the total number of 
autonomous elements across all element families. Thus, given the multi-
plicity of element families within hosts and their general negative effects on 
host fitness, it comes as no surprise that host mechanisms for regulating ele-
ment activity have evolved. The more surprising observation is that few, if 
any, eukaryotic species have developed effective enough defensive mech-
anisms to eliminate mobile element activity entirely. Host-encoded mecha-
nisms for reducing mobile element activity involve numerous aspects of cell 
biology, including transcription and RNA processing, chromatin dynamics, 
protein modification, and nuclear import from the cytoplasm (Lippman et 
al. 2003; Aye et al. 2004), but most of these mechanisms can be subdivided 
into four categories. 
First, as discussed above in the context of the I and gypsy elements of D. 
melanogaster, homology-dependent suppression provides a powerful mech-
anism for silencing mobile elements. The involvement of an mRNA inter-
mediate in both cases strongly implies the use of the posttranscriptional gene-
silencing mechanism known as RNA interference (RNAi; see Chapter 3). 
However, it is not entirely clear how the double-stranded RNA-directed 
degradation associated with RNAi can control the activities of the single-
stranded transcripts of mobile elements. One possibility is that as the num-
ber of copies of a mobile element increases within a host genome, there is an 
increasing likelihood that one or more copies will be erroneously transcribed 
from a noncoding strand, which would then lead to the spontaneous anneal-
ing of complementary copies to produce double-stranded RNA. The non-LTR 
F element of D. melanogaster is known to exhibit such behavior (Contursi et 
al. 1993). With transposons, an additional mechanism is possible: elements 
that are erroneously transcribed beyond the terminal inverted repeats will 
contain complementary end sequences at the mRNA level, which can then 
snap together by Watson-Crick base pairing (Sijen and Plasterk 2003). 
Despite these uncertainties, several observations support the idea that 
RNAi plays a central role in constraining mobile element activity. For exam-
ple, isolates of the nematode C. elegans that have lost the RNAi silencing 
pathway invariably have elevated rates of transposition (Ketting et al. 1999; 
Tabara et al. 1999). The RNAi pathway in this species also serves as an effec-
tive system for opposing the proliferation of double-stranded RNA viruses 
(Lu et al. 2005; Wilkins et al. 2005). Observations on the non-LTR INCI ele-
ment in Trypanosoma brucei have yielded evidence of the production of small 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
173 
interfering molecules (Djiking et al. 2001), the hallmark of RNAi, suggest-
ing that this pathway is at work in at least some unicellular species. (Post-
transcriptional silencing also reduces the rate of Tyl retrotransposition in 
the yeast S. cerevisiae, although the absence of an RNAi pathway in this 
species implies the use of an alternative mechanism; Garfinkel et al. 2003.) 
A second major mechanism of host control involves transcriptional silenc-
ing via the methylation of cytosines within genomic copies of mobile ele-
ments. In mammals, for example, a host-encoded DNA methyltransferase 
specifically active in spermatogonia and spermatocytes is responsible for 
the silencing of both LTR and non-LTR retrotransposons (Bourc'his and 
Bestor 2004), and related phenomena have been observed in the plant Ara-
bidopsis (Miura et al. 2001) and the ascomycete Ascobolus (Faugeron et al. 
1990; Rhounim et al. 1992; Goyon et al. 1996). Several key questions about 
this mode of transcriptional silencing remain only partially resolved. Is DNA 
methylation of mobile elements a direct cause or an indirect consequence 
of transcriptional silencing? How is DNA methylation specifically addressed 
to mobile elements, and how are methylated regions stably maintained 
across host generations? 
Remarkably, at least in mammals and plants, the sites of DNA methy-
lation appear to be guided by the short interfering RNAs produced by 
RNAi (Zilberman et al. 2003; Kawasaki and Taira 2004; Martienssen et al. 
2004). This observation implies that transcriptional silencing is a by-prod-
uct of posttranscriptional inactivation; that is, that the two major host 
defense mechanisms against mobile element activity are part of the same 
system. Such a dual mechanism could playa powerful role in reinforcing 
the silencing of mobile elements, as any demethylated elements that were 
transcribed would have the potential to yield some double-stranded RNAs, 
which would in turn elicit RNAi, returning the elements to a methylated 
state. 
A third, highly unusual mechanism of mobile element control exists in 
the fungus Neurospora crassa, where the proliferation of all mobile elements 
is greatly curtailed, if not entirely prevented, by repeat-induced point muta-
tion (RIP; Selker 1990). Although RIP occurs only during the sexual phase, 
it affects nearly all duplicated DNAs (not just mobile element insertions), 
and the alterations are permanent: both copies are generally riddled with 
mutations, and an unlinked duplicate has only about a 50% chance of going 
undetected. Not surprisingly, only a single active mobile element, the non-
LTR Tad retrotransposon, has been found in a single Neurospora strain (Cam-
bareri et al. 1994). However, most strains exhibit signs of prior Tad inacti-
vation by RIP, and geographically adjacent clones can have different 
inactivated inserts (Kinsey et al. 1994; Cambareri et al. 1998; C. Anderson 
et al. 2001), so retrotransposition must be ongoing, albeit at a very low rate. 
Although it is remarkable that a mechanism of mobile element containment 
with this level of efficiency has been found in just a single species, RIP comes 
at a significant long-term cost: it essentially eliminates the possibility of any 
gene spawning a viable duplicate copy. 

174 
CHAPTER 7 
Finally, mammals appear to have an intrinsic intracellular immune 
defense against many retroviruses. Members of the multigene family of cyti-
dine deaminases encourage the deamination of cytosines to uracils (see 
Chapter 6) during reverse transcription, thereby yielding mutagenized 
daughter viral genomes that are either destroyed by uracil DNA glycosy-
lases (host proteins that eliminate such bases from DNA) or give rise to 
defective progeny upon replication (Bieniasz 2004). This defense system also 
appears to diminish the activity of mammalian retrotransposons by reduc-
ing cDNA production (Esnault et al. 2006; Muckenfuss et al. 2006). 
The Population Biology of Mobile Elements 
Now that we have outlined the natural history of mobile elements, we turn 
to their ability to persist and expand at the expense of their hosts. The one 
simple requirement for the long-term persistence of a mobile element fam-
ily is identical to the viability criterion for any population: the average 
autonomous element must give rise to at least one autonomous daughter 
element before acquiring inactivating mutations or being eliminated by 
genomic deletion, ectopic recombination, or natural selection. A lower rate 
of daughter element production would imply a net replacement rate of less 
than one, a decline in the number of elements per host genome, and even-
tual element extinction. In contrast, because a fraction of element insertions 
will have deleterious consequences for host fitness, a highly aggressive ele-
ment with excess daughter element production could eventually drive its 
host to extinction. Thus, the key to long-term mobile element success is an 
ability to stabilize at a copy number high enough to avoid stochastic loss 
but low enough to minimize the risk of host extinction. We will now outline 
some simple theory addressing these issues. Important technical reviews 
are provided by Charlesworth (1985) and Brookfield (1986). 
Conditions for establishment 
The influence of new insertions on host fitness is critical to an element's abil-
ity to colonize a host genome, as highly deleterious insertions will be elim-
inated by selection before they have a chance to replicate to additional, less 
deleterious sites. A key to mobile element proliferation is the class of inser-
tions with the greatest propensity to increase: those with sufficiently mild 
deleterious effects on host fitness that they behave in a nearly neutral fash-
ion (Box 7.2). Such insertions satisfy the condition 2Ng5 < I, where Ng is 
the effective number of genes per locus in the host popUlation (equivalent 
to the effective size of a haploid population and approximately twice that 
for a diploid population; see Chapter 4) and 5 is the fractional reduction in 
host fitness caused by a single insertion (assumed to have effect 25 in 
homozygotes) . 
The net replacement rate of a particular element (i.e., the number of new 
autonomous element insertions produced per element lifetime, R) is equal 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
175 
to the rate of insertion per generation (u) times the number of generations 
the element is expected to survive. The latter quantity is simply equal to the 
reciprocal of the per-generation rate of element removal. If the parental copy 
is immune to selection, either because its effects are neutral or because drift 
overwhelms selection, its expected life span is Ilv generations, where v is 
the rate of removal by nonselective physical forces (e.g., genomic deletion, 
ectopic recombination, or degenerative mutations), but if the strength of 
selection is substantially greater than v and the population size is sufficiently 
large, the average life span is 115 (the reciprocal of the rate of removal by 
selection). In these two extreme cases, R = J..l I v and J..l 15, respectively. Given 
the rate estimates for f.I, v, and 5 provided above, J..llv is generally expected 
to be substantially greater than 1.0, implying a sufficient net replacement 
rate for establishment in the absence of efficient selection, but J..l 15 is expected 
to be substantially smaller than 1.0. Insertions are expected to have a con-
tinuous distribution of fitness effects, so many insertions will lie between 
these extremes. However, the case is made in Box 7.2 that the criterion for 
element establishment is approximately J..lp(N~)lv, where p(Ng) is the frac-
tion of insertions that are effectively neutral glVen the host Ng. 
This simple, qualitative relationship makes a fairly robust prediction about 
mobile element proliferation as a function of host population size. Regard-
less of the distribution of negative fitness effects of mutations, the function 
p(Ng) must decrease with increasing Ng (Figure 7.6), but J..l and v are defined 
by intracellular activities that should be independent of population size. At 
very small population sizes, p(Ng) ::: 1 because drift overwhelms selection, 
1.0 
)!l 0.8 
.9 
~ 
<Il .5 
~ 0.6 
.n 
<'l x 
u:::: 
.... o 
~ 0.4 
o 
'.0 
~ 
.n E 
!/l 
is 0.2 
Ng = 
-1 
-
200 
-
2000 
-
20,000 
0.0 L1---"-__ 
-'-___ ---'---==--__ 
.l....-___ 
-'--
0.005 
0.010 
0.015 
0.020 
Selection coefficient (s) 
Figure 7.6 Hypothetical distribu-
tions of host fitness effects (5) of fix-
able mutations at various effective 
sizes for the host population (Ng). It 
is assumed that the input distribu-
tion of insertion effects is exponen-
tial with an average reduction in 
host fitness per insertion of 0.01 
(black line). Distributions for larger 
Ng are obtained by multiplying the 
input distribution by the probabili-
ties of fixation of deleterious muta-
tions with effects 5 (see Chapter 4). 
The area under each curve relative 
to the input distribution is equiva-
lent to the total fraction of inserts 
that are fixable at the host level, 
p(Ng), which equals 1.000, 0.3167, 
0.0375, and 0.0082 for the four in-
creasing values of Ng As Ng increas-
es, selection removes all but the 
most mildly deleterious mutations. 

176 
CHAPTER 7 
Box 7.2 The Minimum Population Genetic Conditions 
for Establishment of a Mobile Element 
If an autonomous mobile element is to have any hope of becoming established in a host 
population, it must give rise to at least one successful daughter element before it suc-
cumbs to inactivating physical mechanisms or is eliminated by natural selection. In a finite 
population, there is always a chance that an element will leave no descendants in the fol-
lowing generation as a consequence of drift alone, so the most meaningful analysis is to 
consider the reproductive capacity of an element on the basis of physical factors and se-
lection alone. 
For the simplest scenario in which the element has no deleterious effects and the host 
population is stable in size, every element is expected to contribute an average of one 
daughter copy by vertical descent to the next generation, but with a rate of element inac-
tivation of v per generation, only a fraction (1 - v) of these copies are functional. Thus, the 
average life span of a particular vertical line of descent is 1 + (1 - v) + (1 - v)z + (1 - v)3 + 
... = 1 Iv generations. With each autonomous copy giving rise to novel insertions at rate ~I, 
the upper bound on the net replacement rate over the life span of a neutral element inser-
tion is 
R=)1 v 
(7.1) 
The situation is more complicated for insertions that cause a reduction in host fitness 
because the efficiency of selection against new insertions will be a function of the effective 
population size of the host (see Chapter 4). The most stringent condition for element per-
sistence arises if the host population is effectively infinite, so that selection at the host level 
prevents the fixation of all new insertions. In this case, each active element is expected to 
leave (1 - 5 - v) copies by vertical descent in the following generation (Li and Nei 1972; 
Garcia-Dorado et al. 2003), where 5 is the reduction in host fitness caused by a single in-
sertion, so the average longevity in host generations is 1/(s + v). Following the preceding 
logic 
R=L 
s+v 
(7.2A) 
Thus, the condition for persistence, R ~ 1, or equivalently, VI - 5 - v) > 0, has a straightfor-
ward interpretation: the rate of insertion of new elements must exceed the rate of loss of 
old elements by selection and physical inactivation. Moreover, because the data presented 
and element invasiveness is ensured provided )1 > v, although individual 
attempts at invasion may be thwarted by stochastic sampling loss while the 
element is initially at low frequency. However, for any element family, a 
threshold host l'!g must exist above which invasiveness is not possible. The 
precise value of N at which this threshold occurs satisfies p(N g) '" v /IL, which 
depends on the form of the distribution of s. For example, in Figure 7.6, 
where an exponential distribution of fitness effects of insertions with aver-
age s = 0.01 is assumed, p(Ng) '" 0.01 when Ng = 20,000, so for this Ng, a pos-
itive net replacement rate for the element requires v /)1 < 0.01. Because the 
rates given in Table 7.1 imply v /)1 '" 0.01, for such a distribution of insertion 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
177 
above indicate an average value of 5 :::: 10-2 and v:::: 10-6, the criterion for element family 
persistence in an infinite population is very close to 
R = P 
(7.2B) 
s 
For finite populations, we resort to a more approximate argument, taking advantage of 
the preceding results and partitioning insertions into two fractions: those that are effec-
tively neutral (and hence capable of going to fixation), p(Ng), and those that are eliminat-
ed by selection, [1 - p(Ng)], which implies 
{
P(Ng) 
I-P(Ng)} 
R==p -- + 
v 
s * 
(7.3A) 
where 1/5* denotes the average value of 1/5 over all selectively perceived insertions. $0 
long as 5* is substantially greater than both p and v, as the data suggest, this expression 
reduces further to 
v 
(7.3B) 
In other words, the persistence of a mobile element family requires that the rate of inser-
tion of fixable elements exceed the rate of physical loss. 
In principle, with a large enough pool of insertions with deleterious effects substantial 
enough to prevent their fixation but mild enough to allow them to generate a successful 
daughter element before being eliminated by selection, persistence might be possible 
without any fixation (Charlesworth and Barton 2004). However, the conditions required 
for such a situation appear to be quite stringent. If selection is to prevent an insertion from 
going to fixation,s must be larger than 1/(2Ng), but if such an insertion is to have an ap-
preciable chance of spawning an autonomous daughter element,s must be less than (p -
v). Thus, transient deleterious insertions must satisfy the approximate condition 1 /(2N~) < 
5 < (p - v) if they are to ensure their initial establishment. Given the empirical results cited 
in the previous section, the upper limit to this range of 5 is approximately 10-4, whereas 
the lower limit is 10-5 if 2Ng = 105 and 10-8 if 2N = 108. Thus, unless a large fraction of 
insertions have very tiny but effective selective effects, the subset of fixable insertions 
largely governs the invasiveness of an element family. 
effects, any expansion of Ng beyond 20,000 would increase the efficiency of 
selection at the host level beyond the point that allows element persistence. 
One complication not considered here is that as mobile element families 
expand within genomes, p(Ng) may increase even in the absence of a change 
in the host effective population size. For example, as more insertions accu-
mulate within a host genome, the fraction of new insertions with functional 
effects on host fitness may decline simply because elements can begin to 
insert themselves into one another. 
Empirical insight into these issues can be acquired by considering the 
results from fully sequenced genomes, which show a strong relationship 

178 
CHAPTER 7 
between total genome size and the number of mobile elements (Kidwell 2002; 
Vieira et al. 2002; Lynch and Conery 2003b). The data suggest the presence 
of a threshold genome size below which mobile elements are unable to main-
tain themselves, an intermediate range in which only a fraction of species 
harbor them, and an upper threshold (-100 Mb) above which all species are 
infected with all three classes of elements (Figure 7.7). This threshold behav-
ior with respect to genome size is qualitatively consistent with the theoreti-
Non-LTR retrotransposons 
107 
DNA transposons 
107 
105 
103 
101 
I 
 
I 
I 
I 
10-1 
I 
I  
 
I 
  
 
I 
 
10-3 
I 
 
I 
I 
I 
10-5 
1 
10 
100 
.. 
 
 .. 
.: 
 
 
1000 
LTR retrotransposons 
107 
Total 
107 
105 
103 
 
 
 
 
  
 
" . 
101 
 
Total number 
I  
.. 
:~ 
10-1 
I 
... 
 
 
I 
~ 
Fraction of genome 
10-3 
I 
I 
10-5 
1 
10 
100 
1000 
Genome size (Mb) 
Figure 7.7 Expansion of the three major classes of mobile elements with genome 
size in species whose genomes have been fully sequenced. The scale on the y axis ap-
plies to both the numerical (red) and fractional (blue) contributions of the major class-
es. The regressions do not include species for which elements are entirely absent, al-
though these are plotted as having y-axis values of 10-s. (Updated from Lynch and 
Conery 2003b.) 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
179 
cal expectations outlined above in that total genome size is inversely corre-
lated with long-term effective population size (see Chapter 4). 
Virtually all of the species that lie near or below the threshold for mobile 
element persistence are unicellular. The tiny microsporidian Encephalitozoon 
cuniculi, the kinetoplastid Leishmania major, the yeast Ashbya gossypii, the 
unicellular red alga Cyanidioschyzon merolae, and the apicomplexans Cryp-
tosporidium parvum, Plasmodium jalciparum, and Toxoplasma gondii appear to 
lack mobile elements entirely. Many yeasts, including Saccharomyces cere-
visiae and Schizosaccha1'Omyces pombe, harbor only a few hundred LTR retro-
transposons, but no non-LTR retrotransposons and no transposons. Such 
conditions are not a consequence of immunity to mobile elements, as plant 
transposons are fully capable of mobilization when placed in a yeast genome 
(Weil and Kunze 2000), and even eukaryotic species with no known mobile 
elements are clearly susceptible to them (e.g., Beverley et al. 2002; Balu et 
al. 2005). Finally, insertion elements are extremely rare in prokaryotes 10 
elements per genome in almost all free-living species), with family mem-
bers exhibiting shallow genealogical relationships, as expected for parasitic 
elements opposed by efficient selection at the host level (Wagner 2006). 
Conditions for element number stabilization 
Having evaluated the conditions for the establishment of mobile elements, 
we will now return to the central question from the host's point of view: 
what, if anything, prevents the runaway colonization of mobile elements? 
A key issue here is whether mobile element activity is regulated in a den-
sity-dependent manner. Negative density dependence, with insertion rates 
declining with increasing element number, would tend to stabilize the copy 
number per genome, whereas positive density dependence could lead to 
eventual host (and mobile element) extinction. 
Models for copy number stabilization, formally developed by Charles-
worth and Charlesworth (1983), Kaplan and Brookfield (1983), and Lang-
ley et al. (1983), have considered two alternative extremes: (1) elements 
whose dynamics are governed purely by the physical forces of insertion and 
excision (no selection), with some molecular mechanism regulating the inser-
tion rate; and (2) elements controlled via negative selection on host carriers, 
with no genomic mechanism for regulation of element activities. The con-
ditions for stability under the first model are straightforward: with an 
increasing number of elements per host (n), the insertion rate must decline, 
or the deletion rate must increase, or both (Figure 7.8B). If these functions 
are denoted as J..1(n) and v(n), respectively, then the equilibrium number of 
elements per host genome, ii, is the value of n that satisfies p(n) = v(n). Most 
evaluations of the relationship between element mobility rate and copy 
number (including those in the preceding examples) suggest a negative cor-
relation, but the alternative is not out of the question. For example, inser-
tion rates of the copia and Doc retrotransposons scale positively with copy 
number in D. melanogaster (Pasyukova et al. 1998). 

180 
CHAPTER 7 
(A) Neutral stability 
(B) Stable equilibrium 
(C) Runaway colonization 
------
------------------
Number of elements per genome (n) 
Figure 7.8 Conditions for stability of the average number of element copies per 
genome. Solid lines denote rates of insertion per element; dashed lines denote net 
rates of elimination by natural selection or physical processes (such as ectopic recombi-
nation). (A) The unlikely situation in which rates of insertion and elimination are identi-
cal for all values of n; in this case, all values of n denote neutrally stable equilibria. (B) A 
stable equilibrium exists at the point where the rates of insertion and elimination are 
identical. Below this point, element numbers increase, and above this point, element 
numbers decrease. (C) For every value of n, the rate of insertion exceeds the rate of 
elimination, so no equilibrium is attained. 
Under the selection model, the logic developed in the previous section 
leads to the conclusion that ii is the value of n that satisfies p(Ng,n)J.1 = v, such 
that the rate of colonization of effectively neutral elements is balanced by 
the rate of loss by physical factors. (Here we allow for the possibility that 
the fraction of neutral insertions is a function of both population size and 
element number per genome.) If 5 were independent of copy number, an 
equilibrium number of elements would exist only in the extremely improb-
able situation in which p(N g)J.1 was exactly equal to v (Figure 7.8A), and even 
this equilibrium would be neutrally stable to perturbations. This is because 
for any new n, the rate of effective colonization, p(Ng)J.1n, would still be 
exactly equal to the rate of removal, vn, leading to a new transient equilib-
rium. Thus, under the pure selection model, copy number stabilization 
requires an increase in the average effect of an insertion with increasing ele-
ment number, a phenomenon known as synergistic epistasis. Intermediate 
models in which both 5 and J.1 - v are density-dependent are possible, and 
multiple equilibrium points cannot be ruled out. 
Before continuing with an empirical overview of the factors influencing 
the dynamics of mobile element numbers, it is essential to point out that ele-
ments capable of establishment need not always achieve an equilibrium 
state at which the rates of input and output balance. Indeed, they may only 
rarely do so. If a new element enters a naIve host genome that has no innate 
mechanisms for damping the element's activity, rapid proliferation through-
out the entire host species may ensue. However, subsequent modifications 
of host and I or element might then prohibit further element proliferation, 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
181 
leading to a situation in which reentry or activation of a more aggressive 
element copy would be necessary to return the element family to a state of 
long-term viability. All of the detailed examples of mobile elements in D. 
melanogaster discussed above are consistent with the common occurrence of 
such boom-and-bust cycles, as are population surveys of nucleotide varia-
tion among elements. 
Recall from Chapter 4 that the level of variation among silent sites for ran-
domly sampled alleles in a population is expected to be 2Ngu under 
drift-mutation equilibrium, where u denotes the substitutional mutation rate 
per nucleotide. For a mobile element with an average n autonomous copies 
per haploid host genome, the expected equilibrium silent-site divergence 
among all elements (across all insertions sites) simply scales up to about 
2nNgu (Slatkin 1985; Brookfield 1986; Ohta 1986), as the effective number of 
element family members in the population is roughly n-fold greater than that 
for a single-locus gene. Thus, for a mobile element family that has achieved 
long-term equilibrium, the amount of silent-site variation among random 
copies (sampled over all insertion sites) is expected to be roughly n times that 
for randomly sampled host gene alleles. Quite contrary to this prediction, 
the average level of silent-site diversity for a variety of retrotransposons and 
transposons within D. melanogaster is roughly 100 times smaller than that for 
host genes, and a similar level of reduction is seen for the level of interspecific 
divergence among homologous elements (Sanchez-Gracia et al. 2005). Such 
results strongly suggest that mobile elements are periodically introduced into 
D. melanogaster via rare interspecific transfers (perhaps via inappropriate mat-
ings that do not lead to conventional gene exchange), with most families 
experiencing relatively rapid initial expansion and gradual contraction before 
ever reaching an insertion-loss equilibrium. Similar observations have been 
made in other Drosophila species (Silva and Kidwell 2004), leading to the sug-
gestion that the long-term survival of many mobile element families is 
absolutely dependent on rare horizontal transfers to permissive environ-
ments in novel hosts (Robertson 1997; Hartl et al. 1997). Horizontal transfer 
need not be very frequent to allow persistence by such island-hopping; on 
average, an established element family need only make a single successful 
jump to a new host prior to local extinction. 
Insights from population surveys 
We will now consider empirical attempts to narrow down the list of alter-
native mechanisms for mobile element containment, again with the caveat 
that the vast majority of relevant data is restricted to Drosophila, leaving us 
with considerable uncertainty as to the generality of the results. Let us first 
dispense with the insertion--xcision balance hypothesis, which predicts that 
the physical forces of element elimination or inactivation are sufficient to 
yield an equilibrium copy number without any assistance from natural selec-
tion. Such a situation could arise if the efficiency of host defense mecha-
nisms such as RNAi and methylation increased with element number to the 

182 
CHAPTER 7 
point at which p(n) = v(n), or if an accumulation of nonautonomous ele-
ments led to a substantial reduction in the insertion capabilities of 
autonomous elements. However, the data from Table 7.1 clearly indicate 
that element numbers in D. melanogaster are not typically controlled by 
molecular regulatory mechanisms alone, as the rate of insertion is approx-
imately 100 times higher than that of excision. If average mobile element 
family sizes in D. melanogaster are at equilibrium, these two rates should 
be identical under the insertion-excision balance model. Thus, alternative 
mechanisms for copy number stabilization must be sought, the most obvi-
ous of which is natural selection at the host level. 
Although the average effects of mobile element insertions on host fitness 
are clearly negative, there has been some debate about the mechanisms 
underlying such effects. The most obvious consequence of an insertion is the 
direct disruption of the function of a neighboring or encompassing gene, but 
it is also possible that physiological effects of mobile elements compromise 
normal host cell functions (e.g., the attraction of host RNA polymerase to the 
promoters of retrotransposons might reduce transcription rates of normal 
host genes) (Nuzhdin 1999). However, if the latter effect were significant, 
incapacitated elements lacking 5' promoters should be retained in a host pop-
ulation longer than autonomous elements. Because this is not the case (Yang 
and Nuzhdin 2003), it appears that the negative effects of mobile element 
insertions are primarily direct manifestations of structural aspects of gene 
disruption rather than indirect responses to element metabolism. 
Chromosomal surveys of insertion-site occupancies in natural popula-
tions strongly support the hypothesis that these negative effects are of suf-
ficient magnitude to be strongly resisted by natural selection. For example, 
if insertions were neutral with respect to host fitness, then specific insertions 
with high population-level frequencies should be just as common as those 
with low frequencies, except in the case of recent invasions (Charlesworth 
and Charlesworth 1983). However, surveys of D. melanogaster populations 
consistently show that most insertions are present in no more than a small 
percentage of sampled individuals (Charlesworth 1985; Perez-Gonzruez and 
Eickbush 2001, 2002), with only a small minority reaching high frequency or 
fixation (Hey 1989; Montchamp-Moreau et al. 1993; Petrov et al. 2003; Fran-
chini et al. 2004). Similar observations have been made with natural isolates 
from E. coli (Sawyer et al. 1987), the yeast Saccharomyces paradoxus (Finger-
man et al. 2003), peas Ging et al. 2005), and Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 7.9). 
On the other hand, support for the idea that the direct deleterious effects 
of element insertions increase with the copy number per host genome in a 
way that might lead to element number stabilization is equivocal at best. 
Mutation accumulation experiments in which small inbred lines acquire 
mutations in an effectively neutral fashion have sometimes shown an accel-
erating rate of fitness loss through time, consistent with synergistic epista-
sis among consecutive mutations, but more often than not such studies have 
revealed no such pattern (Keightley and Eyre-Walker 1999; Lynch et al. 1999; 
Peters and Keightley 2000; Fry 2004; Maisnier-Patin et al. 2005). The inter-

 
'.c 
&:l 
25 
20 
15 
10 
5 
MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
183 
Arabidopsis lyrata 
.S 
1 3 
5 
7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 
&:l 25 
~ 
Z 20 
15 
10 
5 
Arabidopsis thaliana 
1 
3 
5 
7 
9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 
Number of individuals 
Figure 7.9 The distribution of frequencies for insertions of the Ac-like transposon 
in 29 randomly sampled individuals of outcrossing (A. Iyrata) and self-fertilizing 
(A. thaliana) species of Arabidopsis. For example, 23 insertions at specific sites were 
found in only single individuals and 12 were present in two individuals of A. Iyrata. 
(Modified from Wright et al. 2001.) 
pretation of many of these studies is clouded by the fact that the assayed 
mutations come from all sources, not just mobile element activity, but spe-
cific studies of mobile element insertions have yielded no evidence for aver-
age synergistic effects of new insertions (Clark and Wang 1997; Elena and 
Lenski 1997; Cooper et al. 2005). 
There is, however, an indirect physical mechanism by which element 
removal could effectively operate like synergistic epistasis. Ectopic recom-
bination between similar mobile element sequences dispersed throughout 
a host genome can cause an elevated rate of production of aneuploid 
gametes and reduced fertility in element-laden individuals (Langley et al. 
1988; Devos et al. 2002). Because nonhomologous recombination depends 
on pairs of elements, its frequency is expected to be a quadratic function of 

184 
CHAPTER 7 
copy number, naturally creating a rapid increase in the magnitude of neg-
ative effects with an increase in element number. The establishment of con-
vincing support for the ectopic recombination hypothesis has been difficult, 
however. For example, although the elevated abundance of mobile elements 
in some regions of low recombination in D. melanogaster is consistent with 
this model (Langley et al. 1988; Charlesworth and Langley 1989; Bartolome 
et al. 2002; Karninker et al. 2002; Rizzon et al. 2002; Dimitri et al. 2003; Casals 
et al. 2005), because the efficiency of natural selection is also reduced in low-
recombination regions (see Chapter 4), the same pattern is expected in the 
absence of epistasis. 
Given these conflicting observations, is there any justification for think-
ing that mobile elements ever achieve equilibrium densities? As noted 
above, element number stability requires that the power of selection be great 
enough that the net colonization rate of effectively neutral insertions can be 
balanced by the physical removal rate, such that p(Ng,n)p(n) = v(n). Two 
observations suggest that this is not the case. First, with the insertion rate 
for established elements in Drosophila being roughly 100 times greater than 
the excision rate (see Table 7.1), p(Ng,n) must be roughly 0.01 if such ele-
ments are being kept in check by selection. The Drosophila evidence reviewed 
above suggests that the average insertion reduces host fitness by about 1 % 
and that the distribution of selection coefficients is approximately negative 
exponential, in which case p(Ng,n) =:: 0.01 requires that Ng =:: 20,000 (see Fig-
ure 7.6). As considerable evidence suggests that average Ng =:: 106 in 
Drosophila (see Chapter 4), actual p(Ng;n) must be considerably smaller than 
0.01, which implies that the current ettective colonization rate of mobile ele-
ments in Drosophila is substantially smaller than the rate of their physical 
elimination, i.e., that element abundances are in excess of equilibrium expec-
tations. Second, the distributions of insertion-site occupancies within pop-
ulations take on diagnostic forms depending on the relative rates of inser-
tion and excision and on the power of selection, but under the assumption 
of equilibrium, the observed low levels of occupancy of most insertion sites 
in Drosophila imply 2Ngs > 10 (Charlesworth and Langley 1989; Biemont 
1992; Biemont et al. 1994). This estimate is inconsistent with data derived 
from laboratory assays of the fitness effects of new insertions, as it suggests 
an average s on the order of 2.0 x 10--4 after factoring out the estimated Ng 
for this species (Charlesworth et al. 1992). Thus, insertion-site occupancies 
also suggest that mobile elements in Drosophila are generally more cornmon 
than expected on the basis of laboratory estimates of insertion rates and 
effects. 
Taken together, the data for Drosophila are explained most easily if, rather 
than attaining equilibrium, mobile elements are simply products of boom-
and-bust cycles. As noted above, when elements initially enter a naIve host 
environment, insertion rates are often at least two orders of magnitude 
greater than those of well-established elements. Such a condition can be suf-
ficient to initially overcome the rate of element loss via selection, rapidly 
seeding the population with numerous low-frequency elements, but even-

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
185 
tually giving rise to an unsustainable situation when p(n) declines to the 
point at which p(Ns.,n)J..I(n) < v(n). Theory suggests that such cycles are par-
ticularly likely when non autonomous elements compete with their 
autonomous relatives (Kaplan et al. 1985). 
Some final insight into the mechanisms opposing mobile element pro-
liferation derives from observations on highly self-fertilizing species, which 
present a dramatically different environment for mobile element prolifera-
tion than outcrossing species. Because the entire genome of a selfer is essen-
tially homozygous and inherited in an effectively clonal fashion, all genomic 
regions are expected to experience high and roughly equivalent amounts of 
selective interference due to linkage. In addition, homozygosity at insertion 
sites should minimize the incidence of ectopic exchange resulting from mis-
alignment of chromosomes during meiosis (Montgomery et al. 1991). Thus, 
the genome-wide population of insertions in self-fertilizing species is 
expected to expand as a consequence of the reduced efficiency of selection, 
and the abundance of mobile elements is expected to be uncorrelated with 
the recombination rate along chromosomes, unless the density of function-
ally vulnerable DNA is associated with local levels of recombination. Con-
sistent with this hypothesis, in two self-fertilizing species, the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans and the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, there is no associa-
tion between retrotransposon abundance and the local recombination rate, 
although transposons are somewhat more abundant in regions of high 
recombination, which are also relatively gene-poor (Duret et al. 2000; Wright 
et al. 2003a). In addition, the frequency distribution of mobile element inser-
tions in A. thaliana is nearly symmetrical, whereas that in the outcrossing 
Arabidopsis lyrata is highly biased toward low-frequency insertions (Figure 
7.9). Although not ruling out a possible role for ectopic recombination in 
outcrossing species, these results provide additional compelling support for 
the hypothesis that gene disruption effects playa major role in the dynam-
ics of mobile element numbers. 
Mobile elements and species extinction 
It is striking that not a single case has yet been uncovered that is reasonably 
consistent with the regulation of element numbers at a stable equilibrium. 
In principle, host lineages might still achieve relatively stable total numbers 
of elements (summed over all element families) while experiencing con-
siderable turnover in the identities of the most active families over evolu-
tionary time. However, given the evidence that individual element families 
are capable of dramatic expansions on time scales of decades in the appro-
priate population genetic environment, that such elements have average 
negative effects on host fitness, and that transient population bottlenecks 
driven by external ecological forces can occasionally reduce the efficiency 
of selection against deleterious element insertions, can we rule out the pos-
sibility that mobile element activity significantly influences the long-term 
survival of some host lineages? Our general ignorance of the factors driv-

186 
CHAPTER 7 
ing the background extinction rates of phylogenetic lineages suggests that 
it is premature to do so. 
In very large populations with efficient selection, the fitness load associ-
ated with mobile elements need not be great. For example, assuming that 
the mutational mechanisms of element removal are weak relative to the 
forces of insertion and selection, then for an effectively infinite population, 
the equilibrium frequency of insertions (q) for each of m potential insertion 
sites is simply the ratio of the rate of site-specific insertion, pfi/m, to the rate 
of element removal by natural selection, s; that is, q = pfi/ (ms). Under a 
multiplicative fitness model, with each insertion reducing host fitness by 
a fraction (1 - s), the equilibrium fitness is (1 - s?qm, where 2qm is the 
expected number of insertions per diploid individual (Charlesworth and 
Charlesworth 1983), which, after substituting for q, reduces to roughly e-2Pii, 
or simply (1 - 2pfi) if 2,ufi is small. In other words, in an effectively infinite 
population, the load associated with mobile elements is approximately 
equal to the total diploid insertion rate, 2,ufi per generation. Under such con-
ditions, the selective effect of an individual insertion (s) has no influence on 
the equilibrium host fitness because the insertion frequency is an inverse 
function of s, which cancels out when the number of elements is multiplied 
by their individual effects. The same point was made long ago by Haldane 
(1937) in a more general consideration of the mutation load. Thus, for large 
populations, with p on the order of 10-4, the reduction in host fitness would 
be no greater than 1% for an element family of moderate size (50 copies 
per host genome). 
This result relies on the assumption that the population size is so large 
that natural selection can prevent essentially any insertion from becoming 
fixed, an implausible condition for large multicellular species, as most clearly 
illustrated by the millions of LINE element fixations that have occurred in 
the human genome (see Chapter 3). Fixations of mildly deleterious inser-
tions are problematic for a host species because, in the absence of compen-
satory mutations, they cause a cumulative decline in average fitness, even-
tually leading to the point at which the population can no longer sustain its 
current density (because the net replacement rate of individuals is less than 
one). By magnifying the power of genetic drift, and hence reducing the abil-
ity of natural selection to eliminate new insertions, the decline in popula-
tion size will accelerate the fixation of future deleterious mutations, driving 
the population to a still smaller size and eventually resulting in extinction 
via a mutational meltdown (Lynch et al. 1993, 1995a,b). The extent to which 
such a condition will ever be reached depends on a number of factors, 
including those discussed above in the context of element number regula-
tion: the degree to which an increase in element number results in molecu-
lar changes that reduce the level of element activity (e.g., via the erosion of 
element activity by the accumulation of nonautonomous elements) and the 
likelihood of genomic excision processes removing elements subsequent to 
their fixation. 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
187 
A matter of special relevance to the mutational meltdown model is the 
distribution of fitness effects of insertions. Deleterious mutations for which 
S '" liNg are most harmful to populations, as they constitute the class of ele-
ments with the greatest negative effects that are still highly vulnerable to 
fixation by random genetic drift (Gabriel et al. 1994; Lande 1994). Gener-
ously assuming that all insertions have effects of this magnitude and are 
fixed at the neutral rate, then with n autonomous elements per genome, the 
expected long-term fitness loss associated with each generation of insertions 
would be nplNg. If np were no greater than 1.0, then even a vertebrate or 
vascular plant with a small Ng of 104 (see Chapter 4) would have a cumu-
lative rate of fitness loss of less than 10-4 per generation, so any extinction 
event driven by mobile element accumulation would have a fairly long prel-
ude. Nevertheless, because the background extinction rate revealed by the 
fossil record is on the order of 10-7 to 10"-6 per year, with higher rates apply-
ing to organisms with larger sizes (Stanley 1979), this crude calculation sug-
gests that internal genomic processes driven by selfish elements can be quan-
titatively sufficient to play an influential role in species longevities. Such a 
view may seem implausible to those used to interpreting every aspect of the 
fossil record in terms of putative ecological forces, but there is no objective 
basis for the latter position. In both land plants and vertebrates, species with 
larger genomes (owing to larger numbers of mobile elements) do have 
higher risks of extinction (Vinogradov 2003, 2004), although it remains nec-
essary to tease out cause versus effect. 
All other things being equal, asexual lineages are expected to be espe-
cially vulnerable to extinction resulting from mobile element proliferation 
(Lynch et al. 1993; Gabriel et al. 1994). As noted above, the absence of out-
crossing effectively converts an entire genome into a single linkage unit, 
thereby maximizing the amount of selective interference among linked sites 
and minimizing the ability of natural selection to eradicate mildly delete-
rious insertions. In addition, the absence of meiosis may largely render 
ectopic recombination inoperable, although some mitotic recombinational 
activity may remain. There is little question that asexual lineages of eukary-
otes are relatively short-lived. Nearly every major group of animals harbors 
one or more parthenogenetic lineages, indicating a general absence of cyto-
genetic barriers to a transition to asexuality, yet nearly all parthenogenetic 
species appear to be less than a million years old Qudson and Normark 1996; 
Butlin 2002). Might these relatively short life spans be a consequence of dele-
terious mutation accumulation? The matter is not entirely settled, as numer-
ous hypotheses have been suggested for the short life spans of asexual lin-
eages (Kondrashov 1993), but the one study that has searched for mutational 
degeneration at the molecular level revealed a concentration of such changes 
in obligately asexual lineages of the microcrustacean Daphnia in compari-
son to its sexual relatives (Paland and Lynch 2006). Although this work 
focused on the sequences of host protein-coding genes, evidence that the 
general principles extend to mobile element accumulation derives from 

188 
CHAPTER 7 
observations on Candida albicans, a highly clonal species of yeast, whose 
genome is quite enriched with mobile elements relative to the genomes in 
related species (Kim et al. 1998; Goodwin and Poulter 2000). 
With so few data on the behavior of mobile elements in organisms with 
alternative reproductive modes, it is premature to conclude that asexual 
species will always be exceptionally vulnerable to mobile element accu-
mulation. Some have even argued the opposite; that is, that the stochastic 
loss of autonomous elements from closed lineages should eventually lead 
to an alternative stable state of complete genomic sanitization (Arkhipova 
and Meselson 2000), and by extension, that sexual reproduction may have 
originated as a by-product of a selfish element that modified its host genome 
to overcome such problems (Hickey 1982). Theoretical studies indicate that 
the complete purging of mobile elements is indeed possible in asexual pop-
ulations, but unless effective population sizes are in excess of the reciprocal 
of the excision rate (Ng > 106 from Table 7.1), mobile elements are more likely 
to drive asexual host species to extinction (Dolgin and Charlesworth 2006). 
Nevertheless, even the latter work ignores a key biological observation noted 
above: the confinement of the activities of many mobile elements to meiot-
ically dividing cells. Thus, the key to understanding the consequences of 
host asexuality for mobile element proliferation comes down to a basic cell 
biological issue and a basic population genetic issue: the extent to which ele-
ment activity is reduced by a transition to nonmeiotic reproduction, and the 
extent to which the stochastic accumulation of active elements within host 
lineages offsets the stochastic inactivation of elements within lineages. 
One asexual species group that may be illuminating in this regard is the 
bdelloid rotifers, a family of morphologically diverse species probably 
exceeding SO million years in age (a major outlier to the usual pattern of 
short asexual life spans). Is the unusual longevity of this group a conse-
quence of an exceptional degree of immunity to mobile elements or of a 
lucky founder event involving an element-free ancestor? Although it was 
initially suggested that bdelloids are uniquely devoid of retrotransposons 
relative to other invertebrates (Arkhipova and Meselson 2000), subsequent 
work revealed a unique class of bdelloid retrotransposons (Arkhipova et 
al. 2003), and some DNA-based transposons that are abundant in bdelloids 
appear to be absent from some sexually reproducing rotifers (Arkhipova 
and Meselson 2000, 2005). Thus, it is not entirely clear whether bdelloid 
genomes are strikingly depleted in overall mobile element composition. In 
any event, it should also be recognized that members of this group are ubiq-
uitously distributed and remarkably abundant (a glass of tap water left in 
the open air will usually acquire bdelloids within a week). In principle, 
such species may have large enough effective population sizes to com-
pensate for the reduction in the efficiency of selection resulting from the 
absence of meiotic recombination. These matters will take on additional 
significance when we consider nonrecombining genomic regions within 
sexually reproducing species: organelles (see Chapter 11) and sex chro-
mosomes (see Chapter 12). 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
189 
Positive Effects of Mobile Element Insertions 
Summarizing to this point, three independent sets of observations point to 
the net deleterious nature of mobile elements: direct observations on the 
average effects of insertions; population surveys of insertion frequencies 
and element age distributions; and the paucity of such elements in hosts 
with large effective population sizes. Nonetheless, a number of investiga-
tors prefer to emphasize the beneficial side of such elements (e.g., Kidwell 
and Lisch 2000, 2002; Wessler 2006), a view derived in part from ideas pro-
moted by the discoverer of mobile elements, who suggested that element 
activation during times of stress enables host genomes to modify themselves 
in potentially favorable ways (McClintock 1984). Perhaps the simplest and 
most compelling argument opposing this view derives from the fact that 
transposition and retrotransposition factors are virtually always encoded 
by the elements themselves, not by the host genomes. Because numerous 
nonautonomous elements are known to be activated in trans, it is clear that 
host-encoded mobilization proteins could be relied on to regulate overall 
element activity if selection favored such a situation. 
As we will see below, it is certainly true that numerous mobile element 
insertions have spawned beneficial host mutations. Given the extraordinary 
diversity of mutational types produced by such elements and their large 
contribution to the total mutation pool in multicellular species, it would 
be astonishing if this were not the case. However, the fact that mobile ~1e
ments can generate mutations with positive effects need not imply that such 
elements are maintained to enhance the long-term adaptive potential of host 
lineages. Like chromosomal breakage resulting from X-ray irradiation and 
nucleotide damage resulting from free radicals, mobile element activity is 
largely a pathology resulting from the limitations of cell biology. 
Adaptive evolution opportunistically takes advantage of the mutations 
that happen to present themselves during a period of selection, and it 
remains unclear whether there are many types of functional evolutionary 
changes that can be accomplished only with mobile elements. For example, 
although mobile element insertions can influence the expression of adjacent 
host genes in numerous ways, gene regulation can also be accomplished by 
alternative routes, such as modification of transcription factor binding sites 
by small-scale nucleotide substitution, insertions, and deletions (see Chap-
ter 10). Nevertheless, a unique feature of mobile elements that encourages 
their indirect promotion is their tight linkage to the mutations they precip-
itate, which induces hitchhiking with any chance beneficial host mutations 
they create (Chao et al. 1983; Zeyl et al. 1996). In principle, such events can 
be sufficient to maintain an element family within a host genome, so long 
as the approximate requirement noted in the previous section is fulfilled: 
that a fixable autonomous insertion occurs within the life span of an aver-
age element. A few compelling examples of such hitchhiking events exist. 
For example, the expansion to near fixation of mutant alleles conferring 
insecticide resistance has been documented on several occasions in 

190 
CHAPTER 7 
Drosophila (Dabom et al. 2002; Schlenke and Begun 2004; Aminetzach et al. 
2005), and in each case, the mutation has been a knockout induced by a 
mobile element insertion. 
As first emphasized by McClintock (1956, 1984), mobile element inser-
tions have an enormous potential to modify the activity of genes in their 
near vicinity in more subtle ways. Because mobile elements are equipped 
with their own promoters and regulatory elements, their insertion into host 
gene regulatory regions may result in modifications of transcription rates 
(Conte et al. 2002; Jordan et al. 2003; Han et al. 2004; Lesage and Todeschini 
2005; Marino-Ramirez et al. 2005). Similar effects can result from insertions 
of 3' retrotransposon sequences containing transcription termination 
sequences, polyadenylation signals, and I or micro RNA targets (Roy-Engel 
et al. 2005; Smalheiser and Torvik 2006), and some insertions may impose 
physical effects that insulate genes from prior local regulatory sites. Mobile 
element insertions can also have more indirect effects, as when an adjacent 
host gene in opposite orientation to a retrotransposon is silenced by RNAj 
effects generated by read-through antisense transcripts initiated from the 
element insertion site (Kashkush et al. 2003; Puig et al. 2004). 
Mobile element insertions may also have structural effects on the prod-
ucts of adjacent host genes. For example, insertions into host gene UTRs can 
alter points of transcription initiation andl or termination, and insertions 
into introns can modify the locations of splice sites (see Chapter 9). In addi-
tion, as noted above, the frequent extension of non-LTR element transcripts 
into the territory of downstream genes provides a mechanism for dupli-
cating host gene sequences. Complete duplication events result in increased 
levels of gene dosage, whereas partial duplications can lead to the produc-
tion of chimeric genes with novel functions. Although the mechanism of 
acquisition is unknown, plant MULE elements are known to scavenge frag-
ments of host coding DNA when they insert themselves, providing an addi-
tional route to generating novel gene functions when these fragments move 
to appropriate locations Giang et al. 2004). 
As discussed in Chapter 5, mobile elements are involved in host chro-
mosome stability in a number of eukaryotes. In a few species (most notably 
Drosophila), specific families of non-LTR elements are central to telomere 
maintenance, and the telomerase enzyme deployed by most other species 
appears to contain a reverse transcriptase domain from an ancient retro-
transposon. In addition, the transcriptional activities of centromeric mobile 
elements appear to playa key role in defining the centromere via indirect 
epigenetic effects. Mobile elements also sometimes provide mechanisms for 
patching double-strand breaks of chromosomes (Moore and Haber 1996; 
Teng et al. 1996). 
A few intriguing possibilities have been suggested for direct benefits 
derived from element-encoded proteins. An overview of several likely exam-
ples of co-option of viral proteins by mammalian genomes is presented by 
Britten (2004), but perhaps the most impressive instances of eukaryotic 
exploitation of retroviruses involve the env gene, which normally is 

MOBILE GENETIC ELEMENTS 
191 
deployed in viral fusion to host cell membranes. For example, syncytin, a 
protein specifically expressed in the mammalian placenta and thought to 
be involved in its formation through cell fusions, is closely related to the 
Env protein of mammalian retroviruses and appears to have arisen inde-
pendently in primates and rodents (Mi et a1. 2000; Dupressoir et a1. 2005). 
Remarkably, env has also been independently domesticated in the Drosophila 
and mosquito lineages, possibly as a mechanism for shielding cells from 
retroviral infection (Malik and Henikoff 2005). These and many more types 
of observations demonstrate that although selection generally acts to elim-
inate mobile elements, vertical inheritance also provides an opportunity for 
the host to turn the tables by exploiting mutant elements that are fortuitously 
advantageous. 

Genomic Expansion 
by Gene Duplication 
Dating back to the pre-molecular era (Muller 1940; Haldane 1933; 0000 
1970; reviewed in Taylor and Raes 2004), substantial attention has been given 
to the idea that gene duplication is the major mechanism for the origin of 
new gene functions, and it is now firmly established that the refashioning 
of duplicate genes is a major contributor to the origin of adaptive evolu-
tionary novelties (numerous examples are cataloged in Ganfornina and 
Sanchez 1999; Patthy 1999b; True and Carroll 2002; Hurley et al. 2005; Irish 
and Utt 2005; Nei and Rooney 2005). However, these attention-grabbing 
examples need not be representative of the fates of average gene duplicates, 
as there is a logical distinction between the processes responsible for the ini-
tial establishment of duplicate genes and their secondary modification by 
mutation and natural selection. Virtually all new genes must arise from acci-
dental duplications of preexisting genes or parts thereof, which implies an 
initial state of a single copy in a single member of the population. Thus, 
understanding the processes that facilitate the expansion versus contraction 
of gene number requires an appreciation of the molecular processes that 
give rise to duplication events and of the population genetic forces that influ-
ence the dynamics of newly arisen genes. 
If beneficial mutations resulting in new gene functions were the primary 
means for preserving duplicate genes, then because such mutations are rare, 
species with enormous population sizes would be expected to carry the 
largest numbers of genes. That this is not the case immediateiy suggests that 
other defining forces must be at work. A key point to be made below is that 
random genetic drift and degenerative mutations commonly playa cen-
tral role in the growth of gene number in populations that are sufficiently 
small in size. Although the preservation of duplicate genes by degenerative 
mutations may seem counterintuitive, we will see that this process is a nat-
J

194 
CHAPTER 8 
ural outcome of the structure of eukaryotic genes. Once this principle is 
understood, the conclusion that phylogenetic changes in gene number may 
be substantially influenced by nonadaptive processes becomes inescapable, 
although as noted above, this need not imply that gene duplication is a 
minor player in the origin of new gene functions. 
Prior to addressing the population genetic mechanisms by which dupli-
cate genes evolve, the context of the problem will first be established by con-
sidering the rates at which such genes arise and the time periods over which 
they typically survive. Although substantial evidence suggests that many 
key evolutionary lineages of multicellular eukaryotes have experienced one 
or more complete genome doublings (polyploidization) at some time in the 
distant past (Wolfe 2001), it will be seen that gene duplication by smaller-
scale processes is an ongoing feature of all organisms. The genome is a 
dynamic playing field on which new genes are continually arising via dupli-
cation events, with most being eliminated fairly quickly by drift and/ or nat-
ural selection, some simply replacing their parental copies, and a few expe-
riencing functional changes that ensure their long-term preservation along 
with their ancestral family members. Even in the absence of any net growth 
in genome size, this continual turnover of genes has further evolutionary 
implications, as it passively promotes the origin of microchromosomal 
rearrangements. In this sense, the gene duplication process provides fuel 
for both of the major engines of evolution: adaptive phenotypic change 
within lineages and the creation of new lineages by speciation. 
The Evolutionary Demography 
of Duplicate Genes 
The power of gene duplication as an evolutionary force depends on the rate 
at which duplicate genes arise. Although there is currently no simple way 
to estimate this rate directly in laboratory experiments, information from 
complete genome sequences provides an indirect approach (Lynch and Con-
ery 2000, 2003a). Through comparative sequence analysis, the total pool of 
duplicate genes within a genome can be identified, and under the assump-
tion that silent sites accumulate nucleotide changes at a relatively constant 
rate, the relative age of each duplicate pair can be estimated from the silent-
site divergence between pair members. The resultant age distribution of 
duplicate pairs can then be used to estimate the average rates of origin and 
elimination of duplicate genes, using the same principles that demographers 
use to estimate birth and death rates of individuals in natural populations. 
If it can be assumed that birth and death rates of duplicate genes have 
remained roughly constant over the time scale of observation, a particularly 
powerful analysis becomes possible. Under a steady-state birth/ death 
process, the expected frequency of duplicates declines exponentially with 
age, with the time-zero intercept of the age distribution providing infor-

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
195 
mation on the birth rate and the slope providing information on the death 
rate. To see this, recall the simple model introduced in Chapter 3, 
nl = nt_1 + B(I + nt_I) - Dnt_1 
where nl denotes the number of genomic copies of a gene at generation t (in 
excess of the baseline single-copy requirement for viability), B denotes the 
rate of gene birth (applied to the baseline and extra copies), and D denotes 
the rate of gene death (applied only to the excess copies, and otherwise 
assumed to be independent of copy number). Both Band D are stochastic 
variables, but averaging over a large pool of genes (the entire genome), some 
specific patterns can be predicted. At equilibrium (nt = nt_I)' the expected 
number of excess copies per gene is ntot = B/(D - B), which is just a function 
of the ratio BID. If D B (justified by data presented below), ntot '" BID, 
which is much less than I, so the total birth rate per gene family, B(I + ntot)' 
is close to B each generation. Furthermore, because a constant fraction D is 
lost each generation, the steady-state age distribution is close to 
ni = B(I- D)i 
as graphed in Figure 8.1 (Lynch and Conery 2003a). Under this model, a log-
linear plot of ni versus i is expected to yield a straight line with the expected 
form 
0.025 
0.020 
!i:- 0.015 
~ 
u 
~ 
Q) 
;:l 
CT' 
~ 
~ 0.010 
0.005 
o 
log(ni) = log B + i . 10g(I- D) 
High B and high D 
10 
20 
Age,i 
30 
Figure 8.1 Expected age distributions of duplicate-
gene pairs under a steady-state birth/death process. In 
both cases, the ratio of birth to death (8/0) is equal to 
0.125, but 8 = 0.025 for the upper curve and 8 = 0.01 for 
the shallower curve. The plotted function is nj = 8(1 - DY, 
so logarithmic transformation of the y axis yields a straight 
line with a y intercept equal to log 8 and a slope equal to 
10g(1 - D). 
40 
50 

196 
CHAPTER 8 
Figure 8.2 
Thus, by fitting a linear regression to the logarithmic transformation of the 
age distribution, estimates of the birth and death rates of duplicate genes 
can be acquired by setting the intercept and slope equal to log B and log(l 
- D), respectively. The age distribution (n;) for such an analysis can be 
acquired by querying an entire genome for the number of gene pairs of each 
age i (binning in units of silent-site divergence) and dividing by the total 
number of genes (not including the duplicates themselves). 
We have already encountered a duplicate-gene age distribution for the 
human genome (see Figure 3.1) that closely approximates the exponential 
form suggested by the preceding model, and another such distribution for 
the Caenorhabditis elegans genome appears in Figure 8.2A. Many additional 
eukaryotic genomes exhibit this pattern, at least as a first approximation 
Age distributions of duplicate 
(A) Cael10rhabditis eiegans 
0.25 
0.20 
G 0.15 
c 
Q) 
& 
Q) 
~ 0.10 
0.05 
(B) Arabidopsis thaliana 
0.25 
0.20 
G 0.15 
c 
Q) 
;:l 
cr' 
Q) 
~ 0.10 
2 
3 
4 
5 
genes in the nematode Caenorhabditis e/egans 
(A) and the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (B). The 
0.05 
approximate sample sizes are 1100 and 3200, 
respectively. The large internal peak in the 
Arabidopsis age distribution is a reflection of an 
2 
3 
4 
5 
ancient polyploidization event. (From Lynch 
and Conery 2003a.) 
Substitutions/silent site 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
197 
(Lynch and Conery 2000, 2003a; Achaz et al. 2001; Blanc and Wolfe 2004). 
However, nonequilibrium situations, such as a ''baby boom" resulting from 
a past polyploidization event, are sometimes inferred from an intermediate 
peak in the age distribution (Gu et al. 2002a; McLysaght et al. 2002; Jaillon 
et al. 2004; Vandepoele et al. 2004; Maere et al. 2005; Figure 8.2B). In princi-
ple, bulged distributions can also result from periods of reduced duplicate-
gene loss. 
Application of the steady-state solution to the genomes of diverse eukary-
otic species yields birth rate estimates for duplicate genes that are generally 
in the range of 0.001 to 0.01 per gene on the time scale of 1 % divergence 
(Table 8.1). There is no general phylogenetic pattern to these values, as both 
unicellular species and animals have average values of about 0.004, and the 
one land plant for which data are available, Arabidopsis thaliana, has an esti-
mate of 0.003. It should be emphasized that these estimated rates of gene 
duplication apply to single genes in single individuals. They are not popu-
lation-level rates of origin of new duplicates (which are equivalent to 2NB, 
where N is the number of individuals in a diploid population), nor are they 
equivalent to fixation rates of new duplicates (which would be diminished 
by processes of duplicate-gene loss). 
TABLE 8.1 Estimated rates of origin (B) and loss (0) 
of duplicate genes for eukaryotes 
SPECIES 
B 
D 
BID 
Unicellular species 
Plasmodium falciparum 
0.0003 
0.167 
0.0018 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
0.0025 
0.324 
0.0077 
Schizosaccharomyces pombe 
0.0016 
0.386 
0.0042 
Encephalitozoon cuniculi 
0.0117 
0.487 
0.0240 
Animals 
Homo sapiens 
0.0049 
0.081 
0.0605 
Mus musculus 
0.0030 
0.134 
0.0224 
Fugu rubripes 
0.0043 
0.189 
0.0228 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
0.0028 
0.136 
0.0206 
Drosophila melanogaster 
0.0011 
0.229 
0.0048 
Anopheles gambiae 
0.0062 
0.190 
0.0326 
Plants 
Arabidopsis thaliana 
0.0032 
0.033 
0.0970 
Source: Lynch and Conery 2003a. 
Note: Both Band D are defined on a time scale of 1 % divergence for silent sites. As noted in 
the text, the ratio B / D provides an estimate of the average number of excess copies per 
gene resulting from the stochastic birth/ death process. 

198 
CHAPTER 8 
It is difficult to apply the age distribution approach to prokaryotic species 
because of their greatly reduced number of genes. However, a downwardly 
biased average estimate of B for 73 species of prokaryotes, which simply 
counts the number of duplicates with silent-site divergence of less than 1 % 
and does not account for early gene loss, is about 0.002 (Lynch and Conery 
2003a), well within the range of eukaryotic species. As many other indirect 
observations support the idea that rates of gene duplication (some involv-
ing horizontal transfer) are high in prokaryotes (Anderson and Roth 1977; 
Brenner et a1. 1995; Lawrence and Ochman 1998; Bergthorsson and Ochman 
1999; Lerat et a1. 2005), the relatively small number of genes within prokary-
otic genomes is a consequence of a relatively high rate of attrition of gene 
duplicates. 
As a first approximation, these observations suggest that the rate of dupli-
cation of entire genes is only slightly less than the rate at which nucleotide 
substitutions occur at silent sites. Given this scaling and the fact that the 
amount of silent-site substitution per generation increases with generation 
time (see Chapter 4), it follows that the per-generation rate of gene dupli-
cation increases from unicellular to multicellular species. Recalling the esti-
mates for silent-site divergence given in Figure 4.5,1 % silent-site divergence 
is roughly equivalent to 6 x 106, 8 X 105, and 2 x 105 generations in unicel-
lular eukaryotes, invertebrates, and vertebrates, respectively, which in turn 
imply birth rate estimates of 0.06%, 0.5%, and 2% per gene per 106 genera-
tions for these three groups. Using an average rate of silent-site substitution 
for vascular plants derived from six independent studies (Gaut et a1. 1996; 
Li 1997; Lynch 1997; Koch et a1. 2000), 8.1 per site per billion years, and 
assuming two generations per year, the birth rate of gene duplicates in Ara-
bidopsis is about 0.8% per gene per 106 generations. 
There are a number of significant caveats with respect to these estimates. 
For example, most of them assume an equilibrium age distribution of dupli-
cate genes and an approximately constant rate of silent-site divergence. 
Because duplicate genes generally have identical sequences at the time of 
origin and are also often in close spatial proximity, they are expected to be 
subject to stochastic homogenization by gene conversion. In principle, gene 
conversion between duplicate pairs could also be mediated by recombina-
tion with reverse-transcribed mRNAs, in which case highly expressed genes 
would be especially prone to rejuvenation (Pyne et a1. 2005). Such events 
would result in a nonlinear relationship between the age of a pair and the 
rate of silent-site divergence until the level of divergence exceeded the point 
beyond which homology-dependent conversion is possible, potentially lead-
ing to overestimates of B. 
Despite these concerns, the results reported above appear to be quite 
robust. Using rather different approaches, Cotton and Page (2005) obtained 
a human duplication rate estimate identical to that given above when a 
20-year generation time was assumed. Furthermore, studies of segmental 
duplications in the human population, which reveal hundreds of pres-

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
199 
ence/ absence polymorphisms of duplication spans of up to several hun-
dred kilobases in length (Iafrate et al. 2004; Sebat et al. 2004; Tuzun et al. 
2005; Khaja et al. 2006; Redon et al. 2006), imply minimum duplication rates 
of about 2% per gene per million years (van Ommen 2005). In addition, 
Maere et al. (2005) arrived at a birth rate estimate for Arabidopsis identical 
to that given above for land plants. An exceedingly tiny estimate 
(-O.OOl%/gene/MY) reported for Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Gao and Innan 
2004) is clearly an error, as the authors actually considered the rate of gene 
preservation (which is diminished by mechanisms of gene loss) rather than 
birth. Finally, because specific genes in Drosophila have been found to dupli-
cate at rates as high as 1.0 to 100 per gene per 106 generations (Gelbart and 
Chovnick 1979; Shapira and Finnerty 1986), the indirect estimates suggested 
above are not biologically unrealistic and may be quite conservative. 
Substantial differences in the loss rates of duplicate genes also exist 
between unicellular and multicellular species. On the time scale of 1 % silent-
site divergence, D averages 0.34 (SE = 0.07) for unicellular species, 0.18 (0.03) 
for invertebrates, 0.13 (0.03) for vertebrates, and 0.033 for Arabidopsis, but 
because 1% silent-site divergence requires many more generations in uni-
cellular than in multicellular species, the per-generation loss rates are actu-
ally higher in multicellular species. On a time scale of 106 generations, esti-
mated loss rates are -0.04 for unicellular eukaryotes, 0.10 for invertebrates, 
and 0.28 for vertebrates and Arabidopsis, implying half-lives for duplicate 
genes in these three groups of 16.7, 7.0, and 2.5 millions of generations, 
respectively. 
These results suggest that with respect to gene content, the eukaryotic 
genome is highly dynamic. As a consequence of a stochastic balance between 
gene birth and death rates, total genome size may remain approximately 
constant for long periods, but throughout such periods there is likely to be 
continual turnover with respect to the specific genes that are present in 
redundant copies. Given that the probability of a gene duplicating by the 
time a silent site experiences 0.01 substitutions is roughly 0.004, the rate of 
duplication per gene is about 40% of the rate of mutation per nucleotide site, 
raising the possibility that changes in gene content may often rival changes 
in gene sequence as a mechanism of phenotypic evolution. Indeed, on a time 
scale of roughly 250 million years, nearly every gene in a typical eukaryotic 
genome can be expected to duplicate at least once. On the other hand, as is 
the case for most amino acid replacement substitutions within genes, most 
duplicate genes appear to be evolutionarily short-lived, with typical half-
lives of just a few million years. 
Origins of segmental duplications 
The molecular mechanisms by which duplicate genes arise are diverse, rang-
ing from complete genome duplication (discussed in the following section) 
to more restricted duplications of smaller chromosomal regions. The latter, 

200 
CHAPTER 8 
Unequal 
crossing-over 
Retrotransposition 
~-.,.----
Fragment capture --7''/ 
by double-strand 
\. ___ __ 
break 
'"""i 
~ ~ 
Ectopic exchange 
'--. ____ ~ 
-
___ HII---
I 
I 
 
I 
I 
Figure 8.3 Four mechanisms for the origin of gene-sized duplications. Unequal 
crossing-over: A crossover occurs between two regions of sequence similarity (red) at 
nonhomologous sites, yielding one chromosome with a duplication and another with a 
deletion. Retrotransposition: A gene that has been transcribed along with an upstream 
retrotransposon (yellow) is inserted into a new site after reverse transcription of the 
mRNA intermediate (dashed line). Capture by double-strand break: An exogenous 
fragment containing a gene sequence (possibly originating by reverse transcription) is 
inserted into a chromosomal break point. Ectopic exchange: A double-strand break ini-
tiates a recombination event by invading a nonhomologous site, at which a gene copy 
is generated by strand extension prior to reannealing of the broken chromosome. 
broadly defined as segmental duplications, arise by multiple pathways (Fig-
ure 8.3): 
 Many newly arisen gene duplicates are tandemly associated with their 
parental copy, having arisen from local chromosomal events such as repli-
cation slippage or nonhomologous unequal crossing-over. Such local 
duplications can then be subsequently dispersed by various mechanisms 
of chromosomal rearrangement. 
 Sloppy transcription of non-LTR retrotransposons occasionally leads to 
the replication of downstream genes and their reinsertion elsewhere in 
the genome, as emphasized in Chapter 3. The products of such events will 
often be nonfunctional (e.g., when the duplication span fails to incorpo-
rate key regulatory or coding domains), but the possibility also exists for 
the acquisition of entirely new expression patterns (e.g., when an inser-
tion fortuitously incorporates regulatory sequences at the new site). 
 Duplicates can originate via the capture of DNA inserts during the repair 
of double-strand breaks. Fragments of mitochondrial DNA and retro-
transposon-derived cDNAs appear to be particularly common substrates 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
201 
for this process (Ricchetti et al. 1999; Yu and Gabriel 1999; Lin and Wald-
man 2001a,b). 
 Protruding ends of double-strand breaks may invade ectopic sites with 
short regions of homology, transiently using the invaded chromosome as 
a template for strand extension and then reattaching the two free ends 
(Gorbunova and Levy 1997). As in the case of LTR-derived duplications, 
whether insertions generated during double-strand break repair will con-
tain one or more functional genes or simply be 1/ dead on arrival" is entirely 
a matter of chance. 
Structural analyses of the youngest cohorts of duplicate genes (<10% 
sequence divergence at silent sites) in the C. elegans genome provide some 
insight into these issues (Ka~u and Lynch 2003, 2006; Thomas 2006). In this 
species, the distribution of duplication-span lengths is highly L-shaped, with 
a mean of just 1.4 kb and only 30% of duplication events exceeding 2.5 kb 
in length (Figure 8.4). Thus, because the average length of a C. elegans gene 
from start codon to termination codon is about 1.9 kb, only 50% of newborn 
duplicates appear to be complete. Approximately 20% of newborn C. ele-
gans genes are partial, in the sense that one member of the pair (presumably 
the parental copy) contains unique exonic DNA, and 30% are chimeric, with 
each member of the pair containing unique exons. The degree to which par-
tial or chimeric duplicates are operable remains to be determined, but 
0.25 
0.20 
>. 0.15 
u 
i=: 
Cli 
~ 
J: 0.10 
0.05 
0.000 
2 
4 
Figure 8.4 Size distribution of duplication 
spans in the nematode Caenorhabditis e/egans. 
Note that because fragments containing less 
than a single gene are excluded from this analy-
sis, the true distribution for all duplication spans 
must be much more L-shaped than the observed 
pattern. (From Katju and Lynch 2003.) 
6 
8 
10 
Duplication span (kb) 

202 
CHAPTER 8 
because the relative frequencies of such genes do not radically change in 
older cohorts, and because the expression of such genes is just as frequent 
as that of complete duplicates, some functional role seems likely. 
Almost all (-90%) newborn duplicates in C. elegans are tandemly arranged. 
However, although tandem duplications are generally thought to arise via 
unequal crossing-over, which should lead to tail-to-head orientations of adja-
cent members, about 70% of newly arisen C. elegans duplicates are inverted 
and on opposite strands in tail-to-tail or head-to-head orientations. Tandem 
inversions can arise during replication if the DNA polymerase transiently 
switches strands, moving in the opposite direction on the complementary 
strand for a while, before switching back to the original strand (Bi and Liu 
1996; Lin et al. 2001). Such inverted duplicates may be more stable than direct 
tandem repeats, which may be easily lost through the very same mechanisms 
that lead to their creation. L-shaped length distributions and inverted dupli-
cations are commonly observed in other species (Fischer et al. 2001; Bensas-
son et al. 2003; Thomas et al. 2004; Zhang et al. 2005). 
Whole genome duplication 
Although the previous analyses have focused on segmental duplications 
involving one to a few genes, entire genomes are sometimes duplicated via 
polyploidization events. Over the course of evolutionary history, whole-
genome duplication events have been fairly common in plants, and although 
they are much rarer in animals (Ramsey and Schemske 1998; Otto and Whit-
ton 2000), they nevertheless appear to occupy key positions in the animal 
phylogeny (Figure 8.5). Remarkably, as discussed below, the lineages of most 
of the model systems adopted by molecular, cell, and developmental biolo-
gists may have experienced at least one polyploidization event in the distant 
past. 
The mechanisms of polyploidization are varied. Autopolyploids origi-
nate endogenously, with all alleles at a locus deriving from the same species, 
whereas allopolyploids arise via hybridization events. Both mechanisms 
often involve the participation of unreduced gametes, either at the outset in 
the case of autopolyploidy or subsequent to hybridization in the case of 
allopolyploidy. The initial stages of such events are made difficult by the 
fact that the incipient polyploid individual will generally be embedded 
within a population of diploids, and hence confronted with a high likeli-
hood of yielding progeny with intermediate ploidy levels, which can inhibit 
the production of viable gametes. For example, the mating of a tetraploid 
with a diploid will produce triploid offspring that experience major prob-
lems during meiosis. Self-fertilization provides a simple mechanism for 
bypassing such problems in land plants, but most animals are obligate out-
crossers. 
Documenting an ancient polyploidization event can be difficult for sev-
eral reasons. A clear signature of polyploidy is the presence of long colinear 
duplication spans of genes or, ideally, entire chromosomes. However, as 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
203 
Limbs \ 
Paired 
appendages, jaws '\ 
Tetrapods 
.--~....;.-----
Neural crest,\ 
big brain 
Ray-finned fishes 
..... ____ 
C_e .. 
p_ha_lo_c_h_or_d_at_es __ c;:::: ..... ~ 
Urochordates 
Hemichordates 
Echinoderms 
Number 
of species 
20,000 
30,000 
100 
23 
3000 
85 
7000 
Figure 8.5 The chordate phylogeny. Lineage-specific morphological innovations are 
shown to the left, and numbers of species in each lineage are shown to the right. Blue 
bars denote periods of hypothesized genome duplication. The exact positions of the 
two duplications preceding the evolution of jawed vertebrates are uncertain, as is their 
polyploid origin; the duplication at the right denotes a polyploidization event deep in 
the ray-finned fish lineage, which has been followed by secondary polyploidization 
events in various fish lineages (not shown). 
described above, many duplicate genes are eventually lost, leaving large 
gaps in what would otherwise be continuous stretches of genes. Secondary 
rearrangements of chromosomal segments (e.g., inversions and transloca-
tions) can further obscure the signature of polyploidization, as can back-
ground segmental duplications that increase the number of copies of genes 
beyond the expectation based on polyploidy alone. Bioinformaticians have 
attempted to grapple with these problems by factoring out apparently young 
gene duplicates and simultaneously analyzing several species, but acquir-

204 
CHAPTER B 
ing strong evidence for ancient polyploidization events is still a formida-
ble task. Here, we briefly highlight four putative eukaryotic genome dupli-
cation events, all involving lineages that are central to experimental biology. 
Although polyploidy is often regarded as a much more common fea-
ture of multicellular than unicellular species, the first detailed genomic 
analysis of a polyploidization event derived from the discovery of a large 
number of duplicate chromosomal fragments in the yeast S. cerevisiae (Wolfe 
and Shields 1997). Only about 8% of the originally duplicated genes survive 
today, and there has been substantial secondary movement of chromoso-
mal segments (Figure 8.6). Nevertheless, the fact that nearly all gene pairs 
within surviving fragments have the same orientation with respect to cen-
tromeres supports the idea that these segments originally arose via whole-
genome duplication, a conclusion that is also consistent with phylogenetic 
analysis (Langkjaer et al. 2003). More recent work has revealed an even more 
striking case of polyploidization in the unicellular ciliate (Paramecium tetrau-
relia), where an apparent three rounds of whole-genome duplication has 
yielded -40,000 genes (Aury et al. 2006). 
The Arabidopsis genome project was initiated on the assumption that this 
species would have a simple genome relative to that of other plants, but it 
soon became apparent that the chromosomal contents of this species reflect 
a complex history of duplication events. The bulge in the age distribution 
of Arabidopsis gene duplicates appearing at an average level of silent-site 
divergence of 0.8 (see Figure 8.2) suggests an ancient phase of genome ampli-
0( 
XVI 
V---t~~-+.-j~~
! 
!.
!!!!! ~!!!~
! ~~~~--~tjr-----
x ~ 
~ IX ~
1l 
~ IV 
--( vu 
--( vn 
 
Figure B.6 Examples of remnant chromosomal segments derived from an ancient 
whole-genome duplication in the yeast S. cerevisiae. Roman numerals denote chromo-
some numbers. Colored blocks of genes denote groups of genes (indicated by tick 
marks) for which duplicated spans exist on another chromosome (given by the Roman 
numeral underlying the block). Arrows denote the relative orientations of the full set of 
genes within a block. The solid circles demarcate centromeres. The mixture of blocks of 
different ancestries on individual chromosomes presumably results from chromosomal 
rearrangement subsequent to polyploidization. (From Wolfe and Shields 1997.) 
II 
~ VJJ 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
205 
fication. Because a very large fraction of duplicate genes of this age will have 
been lost, and because the silent sites of the remaining pairs are saturated 
with mutations, it is difficult to infer the mechanisms underlying such 
ancient bouts of gene amplification from age distributions alone. However, 
additional work that takes chromosomal positions into account suggests 
that the Arabidopsis genome is a product of at least two, and probably three, 
polyploidization events (Simillion et al. 2002; Bowers et al. 2003): the first 
prior to the monocot-dicot split; the second between 160 and 230 MYA (after 
the divergence of monocots and dicots); and the third between 20 and 85 
MYA. An earlier suggestion of a fourth round of polyploidization (Vision et 
al. 2000) has not been upheld. Additional observations on other angiosperm 
groups suggest the occurrence of numerous independent polyploidization 
events in descendent sublineages (Wendel 2000; Paterson et al. 2004). Large-
scale partial genome duplications have also occurred in plants. In rice, for 
example, a single-chromosome duplication appears to have occurred around 
54 MYA, the approximate time of origin of the major grass lineages (Vande-
poele et al. 2003). 
Although polyploidization events are generally rare in animals, the ray-
finned fish lineage appears to be exceptional. The discovery that the 
zebrafish has seven Hox clusters, compared with four in tetrapods, led to 
the hypothesis that it is an ancient polyploid (Amores et al. 1998). More in-
depth analyses of Hox and other genes in medaka and pufferfish suggest 
that the polyploidization event took place prior to the radiation of the ray-
finned fish lineage (Taylor et al. 2001a, 2003; Christoffels et al. 2004; Jaillon 
et al. 2004; Crow et al. 2006). Under this interpretation, the presence of seven 
Hox clusters in the zebrafish, rather than the predicted eight, implies the 
loss of one cluster following polyploidization. As in land plants, this basal 
polyploidization event was followed by numerous secondary genome dupli-
cations, including those at the bases of the lineages of salmonids Gohnson 
et al. 1987), suckers (Ferris and Whitt 1979), sturgeon (Ludwig et al. 2001), 
and carp (David et al. 2003). 
Taking one step further back in the vertebrate phylogeny, the presence of 
four Hox clusters throughout the tetrapod lineage, as well as multiple copies 
of a number of other genes in tetrapods relative to invertebrates, suggests 
the occurrence of substantial gene duplication prior to the divergence of ray-
finned fishes and tetrapods. Based on rather limited data and indirect infer-
ence, 0000 (1970) first launched the idea that two adjacent rounds of poly-
ploidization preceded the emergence of the major lineages of jawed 
vertebrates. Subsequently christened the "2R" hypothesis (for "two rounds" 
of polyploidization), Ohno's conjecture implies that the ancestral jawed ver-
tebrate was an octoploid. This idea has been extraordinarily difficult to test, 
largely because of the enormous time since the putative duplication events 
took place (450-550 MYA). Over such a long period, enough chromosomal 
rearrangements, gene removals, and secondary segmental duplications have 
taken place to all but obliterate most ancestral linkage groups, and the silent 
sites of protein-coding genes are so saturated with mutations that accurate 
a

 
206 
CHAPTER 8 
dating of divergence times between candidate ancestral duplicates is essen-
tially impossible. 
Hughes and Friedman (2003) have questioned the validity of the 2R 
hypothesis on several grounds. First, based on the assumption that one 
duplication yields two copies of each gene and a second then yields four, 
they suggest that the 2R hypothesis implies a 4:1 ratio of gene family sizes 
between vertebrates and invertebrates. In contrast, the peak ratio of human 
gene family sizes to those of Drosophila (or Caenorhabditis) is close to 1:1, 
although ratios as large as 4:1 are found in many cases. Even in a compar-
ison of vertebrates with the invertebrate cephalochordate Branchiostoma, a 
ratio of 2:1 is more common than 3:1, which in turn is more common than 
4:1 (Furlong and Holland 2002). One weakness of using such observations 
to reject the 2R hypothesis, however, is that the 4:1 ratio prediction ignores 
the ubiquitous turnover of duplicated genes. Even if the half-life of verte-
brate duplicate genes were as long as 100 million years (see below), almost 
all duplicates arising from an event about 500 MYA would have been 
silenced, and many smaller-scale secondary duplications would also have 
occurred. Thus, ratios of tetrapod:invertebrate gene family sizes are not 
particularly informative with respect to the 2R hypothesis, nor do they pro-
vide grounds for ruling out alternative hypotheses, such as ongoing seg-
mental duplication. 
Second, Hughes and Friedman (2003), as well as Martin (1999), argue that 
the 2R hypothesis predicts an (AB)(CD) topology for the genealogical trees 
of four-member families of vertebrate genes, with the AB and CD pairs of 
genes representing paralogs from the most recent genome duplication event 
and the (AB) versus (CD) clades representing the first duplication event (Fig-
ure 8.7). Although well over half of the estimated gene genealogies deviate 
from the (AB)(CD) expectation, there are again substantial reasons to ques-
tion the informativeness of such an analysis. First, a large fraction of phy-
logenies with deep and contiguous internal nodes can be expected to devi-
ate from the predicted pattern due to errors in phylogenetic construction 
alone. Second, with secondary duplications, rearrangements, and gene 
silencings overlaid on the original polyploidization events, a wide array of 
tree topologies is expected (recall, for example, Figure 1.5). Finally, if the 
original duplication events resulted from autopolyploidy, deviations from 
the (AB)(CD) pattern can arise naturally from allelic sorting prior to con-
version of the octoploid state to functional diploidy (Furlong and Holland 
2002). Thus, the failure to consistently recover an (AB)(CD) topology for ver-
tebrate genes with four family members has little power for testing the 2R 
hypothesis. 
Despite these uncertainties about the validity of the 2R hypothesis, there 
is little question that considerable gene duplication of some sort occurred 
deep in the chordate lineage. For example, after factoring out the large num-
ber of fairly recent duplications in the human genome, Panopoulou et al. 
(2003) dated a peak of ancient vertebrate duplicate genes at about 500 MYA. 
Similarly, by performing phylogenetic analyses on putative paralogous link-

-
GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
207 
Vertebrate genome 
duplication events 
I t 
Recent 
A} 
B 
para logs 
Recent 
C} 
D 
para logs 
Invertebrate 
outgroup 
Ancient 
paralogs 
Figure 8.7 Idealized tree of relatedness of the members of a vertebrate gene family 
under the 2R hypothesis. The gray area denotes a set of genes within a single verte-
brate genome resulting from two prior genome duplication events. A single copy of 
the gene (black dot) exists in the ancestral vertebrate as well as in the invertebrate out-
group. In the first round of polyploidization, this gene is duplicated to form the paralo-
gous copies denoted by the green and blue dots. A second round of polyploidization 
then gives rise to four copies (A and B in the green lineage, and C and D in the blue 
lineage). As discussed in the text, this (AB)(CD) expectation requires that both copies 
survive the initial polyploidization event, and it also ignores the numerous ways in 
which secondary duplications and gene losses can lead to the same tree structure re-
gardless of whether the 2R hypothesis is correct. 
age groups using Drosophila and Caenorhabditis as outgroups, McLysaght 
et al. (2002) found a peak in the age distribution of duplicate genes prior to 
the emergence of vertebrates but subsequent to the protostome-deuteros-
tome split. Additional analyses suggest that this peak postdates the split 
between cephalochordates and vertebrates (Figure 8.5) but predates the ori-
gin of jawed vertebrates (Abi-Rached et al. 2002; Escriva et al. 2002; Furlong 
and Holland 2002; Gu et al. 2002a; Robinson-Rechavi et al. 2004). Such tim-
ing is consistent with 0000' s conjecture that a massive phase of gene dupli-
cation provided the genetic substrate deployed in the subsequent emergence 
of the unique morphological innovations of jawed vertebrates (see Figure 
8.5). Whether such extensive duplication activity involved one, two, or even 
three polyploidization events or was simply a period of substantial seg-
mental duplication remains uncertain, but the most thorough study to date, 
a joint analysis of gene locations and family-member phylogenies, supports 
the 2R hypothesis (Dehal and Boore 2005). The unresolved matter of whether 
amplification of gene number had a causal role in phenotypic diversifica-
tion is another issue entirely. 
Finally, it is notable that genes arising via polyploidization generally 
exhibit enhanced longevity relative to those arising by segmental duplica-
tions. For example, based on the results cited above for yeast, the half-life 

208 
CHAPTER 8 
of a duplicate gene arising by a localized duplication event is about 17 x 106 
generations, whereas that for a duplicate arising via the ancient poly-
ploidization event is about 27 x 106 years (and presumably many more gen-
erations) (Table 8.2). Similarly, vertebrate genes arising by segmental dupli-
cation have half-lives of about 2 x 106 years, whereas those arising by 
polyploidization in ray-finned fishes have average half-lives of about 45 x 
106 years. Finally, the half-lives of genes arising by polyploidization in plants 
appear to be approximately tenfold greater than those ariSing by small-scale 
events. 
One possible explanation for the greater longevity of duplicates arising 
via polyploidization involves dosage requirements. When a complete 
genome is duplicated, each gene's expression is expected to remain in the 
same stoichiometric relationship with all of its interacting partners, a bal-
ance that may be favored by selection. In contrast, when a single gene is 
duplicated, it is immediately out of balance with its partners, potentially 
leading to functional difficulties. This hypothesis is consistent with two 
observations in yeast: first, that duplicate genes whose products participate 
in protein complexes are relatively underrepresented among duplications 
with segmental origins; and second, that members of interacting pairs of 
genes tend to be co-duplicated (Papp et al. 2003a). The enhanced longevity 
of duplicate genes derived from polyploidization may also be facilitated by 
the complete conservation of surrounding regulatory sites and the ances-
tral pattern of gene expression at the time of duplication. 
Table 8.2 Proportions of genes surviving a polyploidization event 
DATE OF 
PHYLOGENETIC 
FRACTION 
EVENT 
HALF-LIFE 
GROUP 
SURVIVING 
(MYA) 
(MY) 
REFERENCE 
Animals 
Catastornids 
0.50 
50 
50 
Ferris and Whitt 1979 
Cyprinus carpio (carp) 
0.60 
12 
16 
David et al. 2003 
Loaches 
0.25 
28 
14 
Ferris and Whitt 1977 
Salmonids 
0.50 
100 
100 
Allendorf et al. 1975 
Xenopus laevis (frog) 
0.77 
30 
80 
Hughes and Hughes 1993 
Land plants 
Arabidopsis thaliana 
0.33 
50 
31 
Ermolaeva et al. 2003 
Oryza sativa (rice) 
0.21 
70 
31 
Paterson et al. 2004 
Zea mays 
0.72 
11 
23 
Gaut and Doebley 1997 
Yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
0.08 
100 
27 
Wolfe and Shields 1997 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
209 
Mechanisms for the Preservation 
of Duplicate Genes 
To be successful in the long term, a duplicate gene must first drift toward 
fixation, and then, once it has risen to a high frequency, the selective forces 
for its maintenance must be sufficiently large to prevent its subsequent loss 
by degenerative mutation. The preceding results indicate that the vast major-
ity of gene duplicates arising by segmental duplication experience an early 
exit from the population, most probably failing to ever reach fixation. How-
ever, a minority of duplicates can be retained for long periods. The precise 
mechanisms by which duplicate genes are preserved, three of which are dis-
cussed below, have a fundamental bearing on genome evolution. For exam-
ple, the reciprocal preservation of both members of a pair of duplicates leads 
to an expansion in genome size, while the preservation of a new unlinked 
duplicate combined with the loss of the ancestral copy has no effect on gene 
number, but does induce an alteration of the genetic map. 
Neofunctionalization 
One of the more notable mechanisms for the preservation of a pair of gene 
duplicates is the process of neofunctionalization, whereby one copy acquires 
a beneficial mutation that results in a new function. Models of neofunction-
alization via gene duplication generally assume that new beneficial functions 
are acquired at the expense of essential ancestral functions, the unspoken 
reasoning being that selectively advantageous mutations with no negative 
pleiotropic effects on wild-type fitness should have had no barriers to fixa-
tion prior to duplication. Under this reasoning, the temporary phase of redun-
dancy provided by gene duplication is thought to release one copy from prior 
selective constraints, thereby enabling it to take on a previously forbidden 
adaptive feature (e.g., Ohno 1970). Although it is frequently assumed that 
the newly arisen copy will be the recipient of a new function, natural selec-
tion makes no decision as to which copy to tinker with. Instead, the early tra-
jectories of the members of a duplicate pair are defined largely by their allelic 
ancestry or by early chance mutational events that occur in one copy or the 
other. The simplest version of this model, which assumes the duplication to 
be initially fixed in the population, extends back at least to Haldane (1933) 
and was explored quantitatively by Walsh (1995). In most of the following 
discussion, however, we will consider the more realistic case in which a dupli-
cate arises as a single copy in a single member of the population, as the early 
phase of establishment can be critical. 
Although most theoretical treatments of neofunctionalization have 
focused on mutations arising after the duplication event, Spofford (1969) 
made the key observation that the process need not await the arrival of new 
mutations. Her reasoning was based on the simple fact that the spectrum of 
mutations arising after a duplication event must be the same as that of muta-
tions arising prior to duplication. Under this view, prior to duplication, a 

210 
CHAPTER 8 
mutant allele endowed with a beneficial function at the expense of an essen-
tial ancestral feature may be maintained at low frequency by balancing selec-
tion, provided that heterozygotes have a selective advantage (5) relative to 
wild-type homozygotes. Such ancestral polymorphisms can facilitate the 
route to neofunctionalization in two ways (Figure 8.8). First, if the duplicate 
locus is founded by a neofunctionalized allele, its fixation can be promoted 
by positive selection while the original locus retains the ancestral function. 
Second, if the duplicate locus is founded by a "wild-type" allele, which drifts 
by chance to a high enough frequency, the selective regime at the ancestral 
locus will be altered from balancing selection to positive selection for the 
previously low-frequency neofunctional allele. In either case, the final out-
come is functionally equivalent to the fixation of heterozygosity, with one 
locus becoming essentially monomorphic for the wild-type allele and the 
other for the neofunctionalized allele. 
A striking example of this process involves the evolution of insecticide 
resistance in the mosquito Culex pipien5 (Lenormand et al. 1998). The acetyl-
---
---
-- --
- --
----- --
---
---
- ---~ 
5 
1 -5 
j 
Dupli".o" 
-
DO 
D
O 
0 
o 
DO 0 
---
----
-- -
Fixation 
---
----- --
---
------- ---
----
-- -
Neofunctionalization of 
new locus 
Neofunctionalization of 
ancestral locus 
Figure 8. 8 Neofunctionalization following duplication of an ancestral locus carrying 
an adaptive polymorphism. The individual boxes denote alleles in the gene pool. Prior 
to duplication, the green (neofunctional) allele is unable to go to fixation because, de-
spite its advantage in heterozygotes, it is lethal in the homozygous state due to the ab-
sence of an essential wild-type function. The duplication event begins with either the 
wild-type (red) allele or the neofunctional (green) allele, with the relative frequencies of 
the starting states (denoted by arrows with different thicknesses and the algebraic ex-
pressions along the arrows) equal to the allele frequencies at the ancestral locus. 
Horizontal lines separate genes at the two loci; "absentee" alleles at the time of the du-
plication are denoted by hollow boxes. Although the path on the left is less likely at the 
duplication stage, once initiated, it is more likely to go to fixation because of the initial 
elevated advantage of the green allele at the new locus. 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
211 
cholinesterase enzyme in this species normally plays an essential role in the 
central nervous system, but a mutant allele at the locus also confers resist-
ance to organophosphate insecticides. Because the mutant allele reduces fit-
ness in the absence of insecticides (Berticat et al. 2002), it is maintained at a 
very low frequency in insecticide-free environments. However, when mos-
quitoes were challenged with organophosphates, a linked combination of a 
wild-type and a resistant-type allele rose rapidly to a high frequency, pre-
sumably because the first member of the pair provided the essential ances-
tral gene functions while the second ameliorated the toxicity of the envi-
ronment. The linked pair of duplicates may have been present in the absence 
of insecticides, but kept at a very low frequency by the negative effects of 
increased dosage. Similarly, trichromatic vision in some primates appears 
to have become established by the parallel fixation of preexisting opsin alle-
les following the duplication of an ancestral locus (Jacobs et al. 1996; Dulai 
et al. 1999). 
The conditions necessary for the maintenance of neofunctional alleles at 
an ancestral locus by balancing selection have been worked out (Lynch et 
al. 2001). The key requirement is that the power of random genetic drift be 
sufficiently weak relative to the strength of balancing selection (approxi-
mately liNg < s2/8, where Ng is the effective number of genes per locus-
equivalent to the effective population size for a haploid and approximately 
twice that for an outcrossing diploid; see Chapter 4). Provided this condi-
tion is met, the neofunctional allele will be present at the ancestral locus with 
approximate expected frequency 5 (e.g., an allele that is lethal in the homozy-
gous state but increases fitness by 1 % in the heterozygous state would have 
an expected frequency of 1 %, provided that Ng > 80,000). Thus, a mild het-
erozygote advantage combined with a moderately large effective popula-
tion size is sufficient to poise a population for progression toward neo-
functionalization following a duplication event, eliminating the waiting time 
for new mutations. 
The probability of preservation of a pair of duplicate genes by neofunc-
tionalization depends on several additional factors (Lynch et al. 2001; Walsh 
2003). In large populations, the probability of neofunctionalization increases 
with S2, provided the duplicate loci are unlinked. This scaling can be under-
stood most easily by noting that the new locus will be founded by a wild-
type allele with probability (1- 5) and by a neofunctionalized allele with 
probability s (see Figure 8.8). In the former case, the founder allele will have 
a selective advantage defined by the frequency of neofunctional homozy-
gotes at the ancestral locus (52), because" absentee" homozygotes at the new 
locus are lethal on this genetic background. In the hi.tter case, the marginal 
selective advantage of the founder allele over the absentee allele is simply 
the selective advantage 5. The probability of neofunctionalization by each 
of these paths is equal to the product of the probability of the starting con-
dition and the fixation probability (which, in a large population, is approx-
imately equal to twice the selective advantage; see Chapter 4). Assuming 
small s so that (1- s) '" I, each path has a probability of approximately 2s2. 
J 

212 
CHAPTER 8 
This overall neofunctionalization probability is actually an upper bound, as 
it assumes the duplicate loci to be unlinked. This point can most easily be 
understood by considering a pair of tandemly linked duplicates in which 
both members have the same initial allelic state. In the extreme case of com-
plete linkage, a tandem pair of neofunctionalized alleles cannot proceed to 
fixation, as this would lead to the complete loss of the essential ancestral 
function. 
In this latter case, as well as in the more general case in which N g < 8/ S2 
and the neofunctional allele cannot be maintained at the ancestral locus by 
selection, permanent neofunctionalization by gene duplication requires a 
starting point at which both loci harbor only wild-type alleles. Such a con-
dition imposes a particularly precarious phase of initial establishment, mak-
ing it unlikely that the probability of neofunctionalization will exceed 
1/ (2N), the initial frequency of the active allele at the new locus, unless there 
is an intrinsic selective premium on the duplication itself (e.g., a dosage 
advantage). If the duplication is initially neutral, it will drift to fixation with 
probability 1/ (2N), and its subsequent fate will be determined by the rela-
tive rates of fixation of inactivating versus preservational mutations. Given 
an assumed initial state of neutrality, the rate of inactivation is simply equal 
to the degenerative mutation rate, whereas the rate of preservation by neo-
functionalizing mutations is equal to the rate of origin of such mutations 
times the probability of fixation (necessarily less than 1). Thus, because we 
generally expect most mutations to be deleterious, the probability of neo-
functionalization in the absence of neofunctional alleles in the base popu-
lation is likely to be just a small fraction of 1/ (2N) (Walsh 1995). 
On the other hand, even in the absence of preexisting neofunctional alle-
les, if there is an immediate selective advantage for a duplication, as would 
be the case if a larger amount of the gene product were beneficial (Zhang 
2003; Francino 2005; Kondrashov and Kondrashov 2006), then the proba-
bility of the first (preservational) step toward neofunctionalization can be 
greater than 1/(2N). As noted in Chapter 4, positive selection will be effec-
tive only if the intrinsic advantage of a duplicate (sd) is sufficiently greater 
than the power of random genetic drift (i.e., 2Ngsd > 1). Moreover, after a 
duplicate has been preserved by this process, neofunctionalization will fol-
low only if the origin of a new function at one locus provides a benefit (s) 
that significantly exceeds the initial advantage associated with gene dosage 
[i.e., 2Nis - sd) > 1]. All of these observations reinforce the general princi-
ple that the neofunctionalization of a duplicate gene is a large-population 
phenomenon. 
Finally, under all of the theory discussed above, neofunctionalization 
evolves through the progressive modification of an active allele. 0000 (1970) 
suggested an alternative scenario by which a silenced gene duplicate (i.e., 
a transient pseudogene) might provide the substrate for the origin of a novel 
function (see also Marshall et al. 1994). By accumulating a series of molec-
ular changes in a neutral fashion, an inactivated locus might eventually yield 
a beneficial product that would be impossible to acquire via natural selec-

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
213 
tion alone. Imagine, for example, a silent allele at a duplicated locus sepa-
rated from a beneficial state by intermediate mutational steps associated 
with low fitness (if expressed). If, after the fortuitous acquisition of muta-
tions with jointly beneficial effects, such an allele were to be reactivated 
somehow, it would be strongly favored by natural selection, possibly dis-
placing the ancestral locus (in the absence of negative pleiotropy) or coex-
isting permanently with it (in the presence of a trade-off). In principle, this 
mechanism for vaulting an adaptive valley might be facilitated by gene con-
version between the silenced and expressed loci (Hansen et al. 2000). To 
date, however, there is no evidence that these sorts of Lazarus effects play 
an important role in evolution. 
The masking effect of duplicate genes 
Because all loci harbor suboptimal alleles due to the recurrent introduction 
of deleterious mutations, it is sometimes thought that duplicate genes have 
an intrinsic selective advantage associated with their ability to mask the 
effects of deleterious mutations at the ancestral locus. But is the magnitude 
of such an indirect advantage great enough to promote the permanent 
preservation of duplicate genes? Fisher (1935) realized that even in an effec-
tively infinite population (in which the efficiency of selection is maximized), 
two genes with identical functions will not be mutually maintained by this 
process unless their mutation rates to defective alleles are identical. If this 
is not the case, the gene with the higher mutation rate will eventually be 
silenced by the differential accumulation of genetic load. In principle, per-
manent retention of duplicate genes might be achieved by a delicate bal-
ance between differential selective advantages and differential mutation 
rates of a pair of duplicate loci (e.g., with one gene operating more effi-
ciently and the other having a lower mutation rate to null alleles) (Nowak 
et al. 1997), but the conditions required under this model are unrealistically 
stringent. 
In finite populations, not even identical mutation rates are sufficient for 
the permanent retention of duplicate genes via the masking effect (Clark 
1994; Lynch et al. 2001; O'Hely 2006). Consider, for example, a segregating 
recessive lethal allele, which in a large population has an equilibrium 
homozygote frequency at a single-copy locus equal to the null mutation rate, 
J-Ie (Crow and Kimura 1970). Under the masking model, Pc is equal to the 
initial selective advantage of an otherwise redundant functional duplicate 
at a new locus, as the duplicate modifies fitness only in individuals that have 
no functional gene at the ancestral locus. However, because ,Lie is also the 
rate of silencing of genes at the duplicate locus, these two factors cancel 
exactly, rendering the duplicate effectively neutral and vulnerable to even-
tualloss by random genetic drift. If null alleles have fitness effects in het-
erozygotes, a duplicate gene can potentially mask the effects of subopti-
mal genotypes in a larger fraction of the population, but even in this case, 
the net advantage of the masking effect is on the order of the mutation rate. 
7

214 
CHAPTER 8 
A deleterious allele causing a reduction of fitness in heterozygotes of hs has 
an expected frequency q = pi (Its) under selection-mutation balance, so with 
a fraction 2(1- q)q '" 2q of the population heterozygous at the original locus, 
the selective advantage of a newly arisen duplicate is just 2q . hs = 2pc (Otto 
and Yong 2002; Proulx and Phillips 2005). After subtracting out the rate of 
loss of the duplicate gene by mutation, and recalling the definition of effec-
tive neutrality (see Chapter 4), we see that the condition for the maintenance 
of a duplicate gene via the masking effect is 2N~,LI c > 1. In other words, the 
effective gene number per locus must exceed 1; (2JIJ 
Although the preceding arguments raise significant questions about the 
sufficiency of the power of the masking effect to maintain duplicate genes, 
they do not rule out the possibility that duplicates maintained by other 
processes still have a buffering potential. However, although genetic redun-
dancy almost certainly masks some deleterious mutational effects, quanti-
tative information on the matter is scant. In the yeast S. cerevisiae and the 
nematode C. elegans, the fitness consequences of knockouts of single mem-
bers of pairs of duplicate genes are smaller than those of knockouts of sin-
gle-copy genes, and the effects of knockouts increase with the magnitude 
of sequence divergence between paralogs (Gu et al. 2003; Conant and Wag-
ner 2004). Taken at face value, such observations suggest a diminishing inci-
dence of overlapping functions as a duplicate pair ages. However, studies 
of extant duplicates suffer from ascertainment bias. In yeast, for example, 
those genes that have the smallest knockout effects when present in a sin-
gle copy are the most likely to exist as duplicates (He and Zhang 2005a; Pra-
chumwat and Li 2006), so the small effects of deletions of single members 
of such pairs are not entirely due to a buffering effect, but at least in part a 
simple consequence of their nonessentiality. 
Finally, it should be noted that the masking effects described above are 
concerned with compensation for mutationally silenced alleles, whereas 
duplicate genes might also provide a buffer against transient cellular 
mishaps causing localized absence of gene expression by normally active 
genes (Tautz 1992; Nowak et al. 1997). The potential sources of such devel-
opmental errors include somatic mutations and errors in transcription and 
translation. Following the logic outlined above, for this masking mechanism 
to maintain a duplicate gene by natural selection, the fitness consequences 
of developmental errors at a locus would have to exceed the rate of origin 
of null mutations at the duplicate locus, and this net difference, in turn, 
would have to exceed the power of random genetic drift. 
In summary, despite their seductive nature, the various masking mod-
els for the preservation of duplicate genes require rather special sets of 
mutational conditions and very large effective population sizes to enable 
the very weak selective advantages of redundancy to corne to prominence. 
Perhaps the most serious challenge to the idea that masking plays a promi-
nent role in duplicate-gene retention is the general paucity of duplicate 
genes in prokaryotes despite their haploid nature and exceptionally high 
Ng. 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
215 
Subfunctionalization 
Given the difficulties with the various masking hypotheses, neofunctional-
ization has often been assumed to be the only mechanism that can perma-
nently preserve duplicate genes. Under this view, however, the vast major-
ity of new gene duplicates are expected to be lost within a relatively short 
time because of the rarity of neofunctionalizing relative to nonfunctionaliz-
ing mutations. In the absence of positive selection, a fraction [1-1/ (2N)] of 
newly arisen gene duplicates will be lost by random genetic drift in an aver-
age of just 21n(Ng) generations (Kimura and Ohta 1969), a flash on the evo-
lutionary time scale. Moreover, the small remaining fraction, 1/ (2N), that 
manages to drift to fixation is also expected to fall victim to silencing muta-
tions relatively quickly. If N';lc 1, the average time to silencing of a fixed 
duplicate is approximately equal to the mean waiting time for the appear-
ance of a null mutation at one of the loci, 1/(2,uc) generations. On the other 
hand, when N g,uc > > 1, null mutations are cornmon, and the time to silenc-
ing depends largely on the time required for one of them to drift to fixation 
at one of the loci, about 2Ng generations (see Chapter 4), with the slight ini-
tial masking advantage of the new allele (described above) prolonging its 
survival up to 5Ng generations (Watterson 1983; Lynch and Force 2000b). 
Although these predictions of a relatively rapid demise of the vast major-
ity of duplicate genes are in rough accord with the evolutionary demo-
graphic analyses reported above for segmental duplications, they are incon-
sistent with the large levels of duplicate-gene retention in ancient polyploids 
(see Table 8.2). Moreover, the lack of evidence that polyploid lineages have 
evolved unusually large numbers of new gene functions suggests the in-
volvement of preservational mechanisms other than neofunctionallzation. 
As noted above, positive selection associated with dosage requirements may 
playa role in polyploid lineages, but a more general mechanism for dupli-
cate-gene preservation, relevant even to segmental duplications, derives 
from a broader view of gene structure than assumed under the classic model. 
Many eukaryotic genes, particularly those in multicellular species, have 
complex, modular regulatory regions, alternative splicing mechanisms, 
and/ or functional domain structures. Such genes are naturally endowed 
with independently mutable sub functions, in the sense that mutations that 
cause the loss of function in one particular tissue or developmental period 
do not necessarily affect other tissue- or timing-specific aspects of their 
expression. The widespread existence of such structural complexities leads 
to the prediction that duplicate-gene preservation will sometimes result from 
the partitioning of ancestral gene functions through complementary loss-
of-function mutations in paralogous copies (Figure 8.9). Under the DOC 
(Duplication-Degeneration-Complementation) model of Force et al. (1999), 
subfunctionalization is driven entirely by degenerative mutations, which 
we know to be much more cornmon than beneficial mutations (Lynch et 
al. 1999). Special cases of this model have also been discussed by Hughes 
(1994) and Stoltzfus (1999), and Taylor and Raes (2004) cite earlier relevant 
references. 

216 
CHAPTER 8 
Duplication 
 
 
Degeneration 
 
Complementation / 
t 
~ 
_ ____ 
--DD-1'-----l~ 
 
Subfunctionalization 
Neofunctionalization 
Nonfunctionalization 
Figure 8.9 The DDC model for the alternative fates of duplicate genes. The ances-
tral gene is depicted as having two independently mutable regulatory regions (one 
blue and one green), each driving expression in a particular tissue or developmental 
period. Solid boxes denote fully functional regulatory and coding regions, whereas 
open boxes denote loss of function, and the red box denotes the gain of a new benefi-
cial function. Each pair of genes reflects the fixed haploid state of the population. 
Following the duplication event, the first degenerative mutation eliminates a subfunc-
tion of one of the copies. The second mutational event then dictates the final fate of 
the pair-subfunctionalization, with the second copy acquiring a complementary loss-
of-subfunction mutation; neofunctionalization, with the second copy acquiring a 
novel, beneficial expression pattern at the expense of an ancestral subfunction; or non-
functionalization, with the first copy losing all functional ability. (From Force et al. 
1999.) 
Duplicate-gene preservation by subfunctionalization is a two-step 
process. First, one of the genes becomes fixed for a mutation that eliminates 
an essential sub function, permanently preserving the second copy. Loss of 
an alternative sub function by the second copy then reciprocally preserves 
the first copy. If the effective population size is sufficiently small that seg-
regating null mutations are typically rare (NgI-'c 1), the fate of a newly 
arisen duplicate gene under the DDC model depends almost entirely on the 
relative rates of origin of mutations that abrogate single subfunctions (j..'r) 
versus those that cause complete nonfunctionalization (j..'c)' and the proba-
bility of subfunctionalization can be approximated with combinatorial logic. 
Consider, for example, a gene with two independently mutable subfunc-
tions, with the rate of mutation to new beneficial functions being of negli-
gible importance. The probability that a newborn duplicate will drift to fix-
ation is its initial frequency, 1/(2N), and having arrived at that point, the 
probability that the first fixed mutation will eliminate a subfunction from 
one of the genes is simply the fraction of mutations that are of the sub-
functionalizing type, 2~1/ (2Pr + {IJ After fixation of a subfunctionalized 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
217 
allele at one locus, the intact locus is no longer free to lose its now unique 
sub function, so it accepts mutations at rate Pr, whereas the partially debili-
tated locus is free to become completely silenced (at rate Pr + !-IJ Thus, the 
fraction of permissible mutations that eliminate the complementary sub-
function at the intact locus in the second step is pJ (2,ur + pJ The probabil-
ity of subfunctionalization (Psub) is equal to the product of these three prob-
abilities, a2/ (4N), where a = 2pJ (2!-lr + Pc) is the fraction of degenerative 
mutations that eliminate single subfunctions. Under this two-sub function 
model, P sub approaches a maximum of 1/(4N) as a approaches 1 (all muta-
tions are of the subfunctionalizing type) because there is a 50% probability 
that the first two mutations will be incurred by the same copy (leading to 
nonfunctionalization) and a 50% probability that the two copies will incur 
complementary mutations. 
A number of factors can increase the probability of subfunctionalization 
above 1/ (4N), but none of them is likely to move the upper bound beyond 
1/ (2N), the probability of initial fixation of an entirely neutral duplication. 
For example, increasing the number of independently mutable subfunctions 
increases P sub by increasing the number of paths by which complementary 
loss-of-function mutations can be acquired by the two copies (Lynch and 
Force 2000b). Mutations with partial effects on gene expression will also 
increase the probability of duplicate-gene preservation, even providing a 
retention mechanism for duplicates whose expression patterns cannot be 
subdivided spatially or temporally in development (Lynch and Force 2000b; 
Duarte et al. 2006). Such preservation, known as quantitative subfunction-
alization, occurs whenever the total capacity of both loci is degraded to the 
extent that their joint presence is needed to fulfill the requirements of the 
single-copy ancestral gene (as in the case of duplicate enzyme genes that 
acquire activity-reducing mutations). Consider, for example, a gene with a 
single function, and let n be the number of mutations with partial effects 
necessary to completely eliminate its function. If Pp is the total rate of ori-
gin of such mutations and p = p/ (pp + !-Ic) is the fraction of the total pool 
of mutations with partial effects, then the upper limit to P sub under this 
model, p2/ (2N), is approached as the average effects of partially debilitat-
ing mutations decline to zero (Le., as n approaches infinity). This limit 
approaches a maximum value of 1/ (2N) as mutations with partial effects 
become more predominant (Le., as p approaches 1). Finally, as noted above, 
newly arisen duplicates need not always be complete, and if critical regu-
latory elements are missing from the flanking regions at the time of the 
duplication event, the first step toward subfunctionalization may be ful-
filled at the outset (Averof et al. 1996). For a gene with two subfunctions, the 
loss of one sub function at the time of duplication would increase the prob-
ability of subfunctionalization from a2/ (4N) to a/(4N). 
The subfunctionalization model makes unique predictions about the scal-
ing of the probability of duplicate-gene preservation with population size 
(Box 8.1). Assuming that there is no initial selective consequence of sub-
functionalization, duplicate genes should be preserved more often by this 

218 
CHAPTER 8 
mechanism in small populations and somewhat more commonly when they 
are tandemly linked. These predictions contrast with those of the neofunc-
tionalization model, which predicts that duplicate genes should be preserved 
more often in large populations and more commonly when they are 
unlinked. These divergent expectations have a potentially important bear-
ing on our understanding of the mechanisms leading to genome expansion. 
If neofunctionalization is the predominant mechanism of duplicate-gene 
preservation, then larger populations, which harbor more targets for rare 
beneficial mutations, should experience a greater expansion of gene number 
(provided the duplication rate itself is comparable, and factoring out quan-
tum changes due to polyploidization). Noting that the mouse lineage has 
Box 8.1 Effective Population Size, Linkage, and 
the Probability of Subfunctionalization 
The expressions derived in the text for the probability of subfunctionalization assume a 
sufficiently small effective population size that (1) each step in the process proceeds to 
completion before the next key mutational event occurs and (2) differences in the muta-
tional vulnerabilities of alternative alleles have negligible selective consequences. These 
conditions, which are generally met if the effective population size is small enough that 
Ncjlc  1 (where J-Ic is the rate of nonfunctionalizing mutation per generation), result in a 
situation in which the rate of subfunctionalization at a locus is essentially independent of 
both the population size and the degree of linkage between duplicates. Assuming 
diploidy, the population-level rate of duplication is 2NB, where N is the population size 
and B is the physical rate of gene duplication and, conditional on duplication, the proba-
bility of subfunctionalization is a2/(4N), where a is the fraction of degenerative mutations 
that eliminate single subfunctions. The rate of subfunctionalization is the product of these 
two components, Ba2/2 (Lynch and Force 2000b). 
In larger populations, both population size and degree of linkage play important roles 
in determining the probability of subfunctionalization (Lynch et al. 2001). Specifically, for 
NgJ.1c > 1 and unlinked duplicates, Psub approaches zero at large Ng because during the 
first phase of the process (the -2Ng generations required for a newly arisen duplicate 
to drift to initial fixation), essentially all descendants of the initial duplicate will acquire 
silencing mutations. 
The situation is slightly more complicated for linked duplicates. The probability of sub-
functionalization again declines to zero at large Ng, but at a somewhat higher threshold 
value of Ng than for unlinked duplicates. A linked pair of duplicates initially has a weak se-
lective advantage (approximately equal to J.1c) over a single-copy gene, resulting from the 
fact that complete inactivation of a "two-copy" allele requires the Silencing of both mem-
bers of the pair. This advantage gives a linked pair of duplicates a slight boost in the initial 
fixation process relative to the neutral expectation of 1 j(2N). However, once such a pair 
becomes subfunctionalized, the tables are turned: because such a linked pair requires two 
coding regions to carry out the ancestral subfunctions, it is a larger mutational target than 
a fully functional single-copy allele, and therefore has a permanent selective disadvantage 
(again equal to J.1J These types of insights would not have been possible without a formal 
population genetic analysis. 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
219 
experienced roughly 60% more gains and 45% fewer losses of duplicate genes 
established prior to the rodent-primate divergence than has the great ape 
lineage (assumed to have a smaller long-term effective population size), Shiu 
et al. (2006) have argued that positive selection plays a more important role 
in duplicate-gene preservation than does degenerative mutation. However, 
because the generation length of rodents is substantially shorter than that 
of primates, on a per-generation basis (the relevant scale for genomic evo-
lution), there are actually substantially more gains and losses of duplicates 
in the human lineage (approximately 6 and 19 times more, respectively, if the 
average generation time leading to humans is assumed to be ten times that 
for rodents). Thus, these comparative analyses of mammalian duplicates 
actually support a central role for subfunctionalizing and nonfunctionaliz-
ing mutations, as do numerous other observations to be discussed below. 
By postulating a preservational process driven entirely by degenerative 
mutations, the subfunctionalization model provides a null hypothesis for 
the interpretation of patterns of survival of duplicate genes. Subfunction-
alization, however, may be the beginning, not the end, of new evolutionary 
pathways. Consider, for example, a single-copy locus that is a victim of a 
"jack of all trades, master of none" syndrome, such that an adaptive conflict 
exists between its subfunctions. If such a gene is duplicated, complemen-
tary loss-of-subfunction mutations are expected to alter the selective land-
scape experienced by the two members of the duplicate pair, enabling each 
copy to become more refined to its specific subset of tasks (Piatigorsky and 
Wistow 1991; Hughes 1994) and perhaps opening up previously unavail-
able pathways to neofunctionalization. By this means, two of the most com-
mon forms of genomic upheaval, gene duplication and degenerative muta-
tion, may provide a unique mechanism for the creation of novel evolutionary 
opportunities through the elimination of pleiotropic constraints. 
The Fates of Duplicated Protein Sequences 
The alternative models for the maintenance of duplicate genes motivate sev-
eral questions. First, do duplicate genes experience an early phase of relaxed 
purifying selection? Second, do functional novelties in duplicate genes arise 
out of preexisting polymorphisms (the balancing-selection model), as refine-
ments of preexisting sub functions in multifunctional single-copy genes (the 
adaptive-conflict model), or as de novo modifications following duplica-
tion? Third, are the mutational events that drive the critical phase of early 
preservation typically beneficial (neofunctionalization model) or degener-
ative (subfunctionalization model), and how frequently do such mutations 
influence regulatory versus coding sequences? Fourth, are the rates of molec-
ular evolution in the two copies equal or asymmetrical (the latter being the 
expectation if just one copy embarks on an exploratory evolutionary path-
way)? Answering these questions has been a major challenge. 
The presentation in the previous section indicates that the relative inci-
dence of nonfunctionalizing, subfunctionalizing, and neofunctionalizing 

220 
CHAPTER 8 
mutations should be a fundamental determinant of the fates of duplicate 
genes, but direct information on this matter is lacking. Thus, most attempts 
to understand the evolution of duplicate genes have resorted to a more indi-
rect approach: comparative analysis of paralogous sequences in extant 
species. The cumulative nature of gene evolution substantially restricts the 
information that can be gleaned from such studies. In order to distinguish 
between the mutational events that lead to duplicate-gene establishment 
versus subsequent divergence, one would like to follow the historical record 
of substitutional changes incurred by both members of the pair from the 
time of origin to the time of preservation or elimination, but comparative 
analysis reveals only the end products of evolution. In addition, due to our 
poor understanding of the functional significance of noncoding regions of 
genes, almost all research in this area has been restricted to coding region 
evolution. 
As noted in previous chapters, contrasts in the number of amino acid 
replacement substitutions per replacement site (R) and the number of silent 
substitutions per silent site (5) can provide crude information on the aver-
age form of selection operating on a pair of genes: an R/ 5 ratio smaller than 
one implies that selection on replacement sites is predominantly of a puri-
fying form, while a ratio greater than one implies directional selection for a 
change in function in one or both sequences. This criterion for distinguish-
ing between directional and purifying selection is actually somewhat ambigu-
ous in that an R/5 ratio smaller than one averaged over the full length of a 
coding sequence does not preclude the possibility of strong adaptive diver-
gence in one region of the protein on a more general background of purify-
ing selection. In addition, an R/ 5 close to one, which is consistent with neu-
trality, could also arise if one member of a pair were under purifying selection 
and the other under positive selection. On the other hand, a gene-wide esti-
mate of R/ 5 greater than one provides essentially unambiguous evidence of 
directional selection in one or both pair members. A deeper problem is that 
the estimates of R and 5 for any pair of extant duplicates are cumulative out-
comes of the joint evolutionary pressures operating on both loci since the ini-
tial duplication event. In a simple two-gene analysis, a brief early phase of 
relaxed selection (R/5 "" 1.0) could easily be obscured by a subsequent pro-
longed phase of purifying or positive selection. 
Patterns of molecular evolution 
Some information on the temporal dynamics of selection on gene duplicates 
can be gleaned from observations on the joint distribution of R and 5 for the 
entire assemblage of gene pairs within a species, from the youngest new-
born cohort to the less abundant ancient pairs. Although such an approach 
is unable to reveal the historical order of the mutational events associated 
with any particular gene pair, it may help reveal the average temporal pat-
tern of selection experienced by all cohorts of duplicates. If, for example, the 
intensity of purifying selection operating on duplicate genes typically 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
221 
increases with the age of a pair, this pattern should be reflected in a reduc-
tion in R/S in cohorts of increasing age, whereas the opposite is expected 
if selection is progressively relaxed. 
One way to achieve insight into this matter is to assume a particular pat-
tern in the way in which the instantaneous ratio of replacement to silent 
mutation rates (dR/ dS) changes through time to yield a cumulative rela-
tionship between observed R values in gene pairs with different values of 
S (Box 8.2; Figure 8.10). From the observed behavior of cumulative Rand S 
over the entire set of duplicates within a particular genome, it is then pos-
sible to indirectly infer the historical changes in average cohort-specific val-
ues of dR/ dS that best explain the cumulative data. Fits of such a model to 
observations on complete genomic sets of gene duplicates from eukary-
otes reveal fairly consistent patterns (Lynch and Conery 2000, 2003a), most 
notably a clear tendency for dR/ dS to decrease with increasing S (Figure 
8.11). The asymptotic values of dR / dS at low S for animals, yeasts, and land 
plants range from 0.36 to tOO, with an overall average of 0.77 (implying that 
only about 23% of replacement substitutions are removed from relatively 
young duplicates by selection). In contrast, estimates of dR/ dS at high S fall 
in the narrow range of 0.02-0.09, with an overall average of 0.05. Thus, 
whereas a substantial fraction of young duplicate pairs experience a phase 
of highly relaxed selection, by the time a duplicate pair has diverged about 
10% at silent sites, reestablishment of a purifying selection regime has gen-
erally increased the stringency of selection against amino acid changes more 
than tenfold, to the point at which only about 5% of replacement mutations 
are able to proceed to fixation. Only a small fraction of intermediate-aged 
duplicates exhibit rates of replacement-site substitution in excess of the neu-
tral expectation, no more than expected by chance in a large sample of mul-
tiple comparisons. 
The conclusion that newly arisen gene duplicates generally experience 
an initial phase of relaxed selection is supported by a number of other stud-
ies. For example, the average cumulative R/ S values for paralogs within a 
variety of prokaryotic and eukaryotic species are higher than those for sin-
gle-copy genes separated by speciation events, but still virtually always less 
than 1.0 (Li 1985; Van de Peer et al. 2001; Kondrashov et al. 2002; Nembaware 
et al. 2002; Seoighe et al. 2003). Despite the consistency of these observa-
tions, numerous issues remain unresolved. In particular, elevated levels of 
dR/ dS in young duplicates could be a consequence of relaxed selection 
against degenerative mutations at some sites, positive directional selection 
at others, or both. In addition, there may be an intrinsic bias to whole-
genome analyses that lump all functional categories of genes together if 
there is significant variation in the duplicability of different gene categories. 
Heterogeneous patterns of gene duplicability do appear to be common. For 
example, protein-coding genes that evolve slowly and are expressed broadly 
when present in a single copy are preserved as duplicates more frequently 
than rapidly evolving or narrowly expressed protein-coding genes (Yang et 
al. 2003; Davis and Petrov 2004; Jordan et al. 2004; Brunet et al. 2006; Chap-

222 
CHAPTER 8 
Box 8.2 Indirect Inference of Historical Patterns 
of Molecular Evolution in Duplicate Protein-
Coding Genes 
To account for the possibility that the ratio of instantaneous rates of replacement and 
silent substitutions (dR/d5) changes through time, a mathematical function such as that 
outlined in Figure 8.1 OA can be employed. This particular function allows for two different 
phases of divergence as well as a gradual transition between them. Assuming positive m, 
dR/d5 starts with an expected value of 1/(0 - b) at 5 = 0 (newly arisen duplicates) and de-
clines to 1/0 as 5 approaches infinity (ancient duplicates). (It is assumed here that both a 
and b are positive; a negative value of b would cause dR/d5 to increase with 5, but such 
behavior has not been seen with empirical data.) Other mathematical functions with more 
complex behavior can be constructed, but the specific model in Figure 8.1 OA is especially 
useful because it can be integrated to yield a simple algebraic expression for the historical 
development of the cumulative 
ratio of substitutions per replace-
ment site and per silent site, as 
shown in Figure 8.1 OB. It is this 
cumulative R/5 ratio that is ob-
served in empirical studies, as op-
posed to the instantaneous ratio, 
which can vary from cohort to co-
hort. 
On a log-log plot of R versus 5, 
points with equal R/5 ratios fall on 
Figure 8.10 The change in the 
R/5 ratio with increasing evolu-
tionary time (measured in units of 
5). (A) The instantaneous ratio of 
replacement to silent substitu-
tions (Le., the ratio for mutations 
arising within the current cohort), 
defined by the inset equation 
with 0= 20, b = 19, and m = 10. 
In this particular example, the 
ratio of replacement to silent sub-
stitutions initiates at 1.0 for newly 
arisen duplicates (5 = 0.0) and 
gradually declines to a stable ratio 
of 0.05 as 5 ~ 
00 (B) The cumula-
tive behavior of R vs. 5, obtained 
by integrating the equation in the 
top panel (see Equation 8 in 
Lynch and Conery 2003a). Here, 
the dashed lines represent points 
of equal R/5. 
(A) 
1.0 
dR/dS = l/(a - be-mS) 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 L-'-I..L.u..u.L--'--'-..J..W..U~::::::::;:;::;;r:==;:;: 
0.001 
0.01 
0.1 
1 
(B) 
.~ 
1 
CIl 
~ 
~ 
'" -a 
0.1 
2:: 
...... 
 
'.0 
.2 
'.g 
0.01 
.g 
CIl 
0.001 
/. 
/. 
"/ 
/ 
"/ 
"/ 
/ 
Substitutions/silent site 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
dR/dS = 1.00 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
/ 
dR/dS = 0.10 
/ 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
0.01 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
"/ 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
0.1 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
/ 
"/ 
/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Substitutions/silent site 
/ 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
1 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
"/ 
/ 

2 
'Vi 
~ 
::; 
~ 
u 
'" 
GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
223 
a diagonal line, with the height of the line being defined by the magnitude of R/S. Thus, 
with the preceding model, a linear relationship appears between log S and log R when S 
is sufficiently small that dR/dS", 1 /(0 - b). The response of log R to log S (the solid curve) 
then becomes shallower as a transition is made to a constant and lower ratio (dR/dS '" 
1 /0). During a period in which genes are evolving in a neutral fashion, the response will 
converge with the diagonal describing dR/ dS = 1.0 (the main diagonal in Figure 8.1 OS). 
Homo sapiens 
0.1 
0.01 
.. / 
, / 
/ 
/ 
,/ 
,I.e 
0.. 0.001 
1 
~ 
.......  
'.0 
.2 
Caenorhabditis e1egans 
'.0 
<Jl 
- 
1 
Cfl 
0.1 
0.01 
,/ 
/ 
/ 
0.001 
  
. .,. 
\ ... 
, / 
,/ . 
/ 
,/ 
/ 
/ . 
  
 
0.01 
0.1 
 
Substitutions/ silent site 
/ 
  
 
1 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
,/ 
/ 
Figure 8.11 R versus 5 plots for 
duplicate gene pairs in two animal 
species. Red points denote pairs for 
which R is not significantly different 
from 5 (i.e., for which neutral evo-
lution cannot be rejected). The di-
agonal dashed line denotes the 
neutral expectation, R = 5, whereas 
the solid curve (mostly hidden be-
hind the data points) is the fitted 
function described in the text. 
(From Lynch and Conery 2003a.) 

224 
CHAPTER 8 
man et al. 2006). The enhanced frequency of successful duplications of par-
ticular gene classes might be a consequence of their elevated susceptibility 
to subfunctionalization, a pattern that is consistent with large multi domain 
proteins having higher probabilities of preservation following poly-
ploidization (Chapman et al. 2006). The elevated preservation of short genes 
with strong tissue-specific expression patterns following segmental dupli-
cation events (Urrutia and Hurst 2003) may be a simple consequence of an 
enhanced likelihood of being fully contained within a duplication span. 
Regardless of the underlying mechanism, the innate tendency of genes that 
are more prone to successful duplication to also have lower amino acid sub-
stitution rates implies that the decline in R/ S in older duplicates seen in Fig-
ure 8.11 may be not only a consequence of an increase in the stringency of 
purifying selection on individual gene pairs over time, but also a reflection 
of the elevated extinction rate of duplicate pairs with high R. 
Although the high values of R/ S frequently observed in young cohorts 
of duplicate genes imply that mutations that never become fixed in single-
copy genes are often able to accumulate in a nearly neutral fashion early 
after gene duplication, such observations do not address the common notion 
that just one member of a duplicate pair experiences an altered evolution-
ary trajectory after duplication. Resolution of this issue requires that both 
members of a paralogous pair be compared with an appropriate single-copy 
gene within an outgroup species; if both members of the pair are evolving 
under the same levels of constraint, they should be equally divergent from 
the outgroup sequence. In the first study of this kind, using mammalian out-
group sequences, Hughes and Hughes (1993) found no evidence for unequal 
rates of duplicate-gene evolution in the tetraploid frog Xenopus laevis, and 
similar results have been obtained with other taxa (Kondrashov et al. 2002; 
L. Zhang et al. 2002). Most of these analyses focused on relatively old dupli-
cates, however, raising the possibility that an early phase of asymmetry was 
obscured by subsequent substitutional changes. Indeed, analysis of rela-
tively young (S < 0.3) duplicate pairs from the human genome reveals a very 
high incidence (-60%) of asymmetrically evolving pairs (P. Zhang et al. 
2003), and results from several other animals and yeasts also point to sig-
nificant asymmetry in sequence divergence (Van de Peer et al. 2001; Conant 
and Wagner 2003; Chain and Evans 2006). The tendency for the more rap-
idly evolving members of human gene pairs to accumulate changes evenly 
across the molecule while the more slowly evolving copies exhibit spatially 
uneven substitution patterns is consistent with a relaxation of selection on 
the more rapidly evolving pair members (P. Zhang et al. 2003), as is the 
observation that the more slowly evolving members of yeast duplicate pairs 
tend to be more embedded in protein interaction networks and more criti-
cal to fitness (Kim and Yi 2006). 
The elevated level of dR/ dS, as well as the rate asymmetry, in young 
duplicate genes may simply be a consequence of chance events setting one 
copy on a trajectory of dR/ dS = 1.0 until it is completely nonfunctionalized. 
However, the eventual return of surviving pairs of duplicate genes to a tra-

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
225 
jectory of low dR/ dS is also consistent with the hypothesis that the early 
phase of relaxed selection frequently reflects the initial preservation of dupli-
cates by subfunctionalizing degenerative mutations, as is the observed 
narrowing of gene-specific expression domains following duplication 
(described below). Single-copy vertebrate genes with more restricted tissue-
specific patterns of expression are known to evolve more rapidly at the 
amino acid level, putatively because of a reduction in selective constraints 
(Hastings 1996; Duret and Mouchiroud 2000), so it is plausible that the early 
phase of high dR/ dS in duplicate genes is a reflection of a narrowing of par-
alog expression patterns. In a broader evaluation of the possibility of sub-
functionalization at the level of protein structure, Dermitzakis and Clark 
(2001) introduced a computational test for spatial variation in substitution 
patterns in the coding regions of paralogs and found that about half of 
mouse and human duplicate genes exhibit significant spatial variation 
among paralogous copies, some of which appears to be associated with func-
tional domains. 
Although these patterns are suggestive, statistical considerations raise 
significant caveats with respect to interpretations derived from observations 
on asymmetrical paralog divergence. As noted above, the fates of most 
duplicate genes are likely to be determined by the first few mutations 
incurred by one or both pair members. However, there is essentially no sta-
tistical power to detect significant asymmetry among paralogs until the aver-
age member has incurred a few dozen mutations (Lynch and Ka~u 2004). 
Moreover, from the standpoint of the masking model of duplicate-gene 
preservation, the question of interest is whether the two members of a pair 
have evolved in a more symmetrical pattern than expected by chance, not 
whether the evolutionary pattern is unbalanced. Testing for symmetry is 
even more difficult than testing for asymmetry. Even with an average of 100 
to 300 substitutions per gene, it is virtually impossible to detect an excep-
tionally symmetrical rate of evolution across a pair of duplicates: a chance 
difference of just zero or one mutations per gene still has a cumulative prob-
ability of more than 5% under a model of equal underlying rates (Lynch and 
Ka~u 2004). 
The Case for Subfunctionalization 
Prior to the formal development of the DDC model, circumstantial evidence 
for duplicate-gene preservation via subfunctionalization of regulatory 
regions had been revealed through studies of polyploid fishes, which repeat-
edly demonstrated tissue specificity of expression of duplicated enzyme loci 
(Ferris and Whitt 1977, 1979). These observations have recently been sup-
plemented by a substantial number of investigations in the zebrafish, a 
member of an ancient polyploid lineage that still retains roughly 25% of its 
original gene pairs in a functional state (Amores et al. 1998; Postlethwait et 
al. 2000). A key to such analyses has been the availability of orthologous sin-
gle-copy genes in tetrapods. Comparison of zebrafish gene expression pat-

226 
CHAPTER 8 
terns with those in the homologous tissues of tetrapod outgroup species 
(usually mouse or chicken) provides insight into the mechanisms by which 
zebrafish paralogs may have been preserved. In virtually every well-char-
acterized case, subfunctionalization has been implicated. 
Consider, for example, the two zebrafish genes for microphthalmia-asso-
ciated transcription factor, mitfa and mitfb. Expression of the first gene is 
restricted to neural crest, and that of the second is restricted to the epiph-
ysis and olfactory bulb (Lister et al. 2001; Altschmied et al. 2002). The prod-
ucts of these two zebrafish paralogs appear to be homologous to the two 
alternatively spliced forms of the product of the single-copy locus found 
in tetrapods, with subfunctionalization resulting from deletions in both reg-
ulatory and coding regions (such that each copy has adopted a single splic-
ing variant). As another example, consider the two zebrafish cytochrome 
P450 aromatase genes (Chiang, Yan et al. 2001). One of these is expressed in 
the ovary and the other in the brain, whereas the orthologous single-copy 
gene in tetrapods is expressed in both tissues. Similarly, the zebrafish has 
two soxll genes, one of which is expressed in the anterior and the other in 
the posterior somites, whereas the single soxll product in the mouse is 
expressed in all somites (de Martino et al. 2000). Many other zebrafish genes 
appear to have become subfunctionalized following gene duplication 
(Westin and Lardelli 1997; Nornes et al. 1998; Force et al. 1999; Chiang, Pai 
et al. 2001; Quint et al. 2000; Bruce et al. 2001; McClintock et al. 2002; de 
Souza et al. 2005; Liu et al. 2005). Nevertheless, it should be noted here that 
the DDC model originally postulated subfunctionalization as a process of 
duplicate-gene preservation by degenerative mutation, whereas it is for-
mally possible that patterns of partitioned gene sub functions between extant 
duplicate genes may have arisen secondarily, with the initial phase of preser-
vation having been driven by other mechanisms. 
Observed patterns of subfunctionalization are by no means a peculiarity 
of polyploid fishes, and just a few additional examples are cited here. First, 
genome-wide analyses of the mRNAs of duplicate genes provide strong 
support for the idea that the partitioning of ancestral alternatively spliced 
variants, as seen in the case of the zebrafish mitf genes, is a common fate of 
duplicate genes throughout the animal kingdom (Kopelman et al. 2005; Su 
et al. 2006). Second, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has two ~-catenin 
genes, one of which plays a role in cell signaling and the other in cell adhe-
sion, whereas a single gene fulfills both functions in most other animals 
(Crimson et al. 2000; Korswagen et al. 2000). The functional differences 
between the paralogous C. elegans genes appear to be due to alterations in 
the coding region. Third, in the barnacle Sacculina carcini, two engrailed dupli-
cates are expressed late in development. The expression of one member of 
this pair is restricted to the nervous system and that of the other to the epi-
dermis, whereas a single gene is responsible for both expression patterns in 
other arthropods (Gibert et al. 2000). Fourth, all vertebrates harbor two mem-
bers of the Snail developmental gene family, Snail and Slug, the summed 
expression of which is conserved among all species (Locascio et al. 2002). 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
227 
Remarkably, however, the three major expression domains of the paralogs 
appear to have shifted from one copy to the other in various vertebrate lin-
eages, presumably because of ongoing regulatory region exchange between 
the duplicates. Fifth, experiments in the mouse have shown that the com-
bination of a coding region from a single member of a paralogous Hox gene 
pair with the regulatory elements of both pair members is sufficient for nor-
mal development (Tvrdik and Capecchi 2006). Although such manipula-
tions may be viewed as effectively reversing the subfunctionalization process 
and recreating the ancestral single-copy locus, precise interpretations are 
rendered difficult by the large numbers of accumulated mutations in the 
paralogous copies. Finally, in maize (Zea mays), two copies of the pl myb-
like transcriptional activator partition expression patterns in male and 
female reproductive structures and leaves, whereas the single-copy ortholog 
in closely related teosinte is responsible for all of these expression patterns 
(P. Zhang et al. 2000). Numerous cases of suspected subfunctionalization in 
maize are associated with the reciprocal loss of conserved noncoding regions 
(presumably regulatory elements) (Langham et al. 2004). 
These observations, and many more, show that there are numerous poten-
tial paths to subfunctionalization, including the reciprocal silencing of tis-
sue-specific promoters, the adoption of alternative splicing forms, and mod-
ification of the coding regions of multifunctional proteins. In addition, 
although theoretical considerations have focused on the role of degenerative 
mutations in initiating the subfunctionalization pathway, other poorly under-
stood processes may facilitate the process (Rodin and Riggs 2003). For exam-
ple, in numerous animals, including nematodes and mammals, the X chro-
mosome is inactivated in the male germ line. This means that any autosomal 
gene with male germ line expression will immediately lose that subfunction 
if duplicated to the X. The autosomal copy is then free to lose expression in 
somatic tissues, but forced to retain male germ line expression. Several auto-
somal/X pairs of C. elegans gene duplicates exhibit this pattern (Maciejowski 
et al. 2005). In addition, following allopolyploidization (the joining of 
genomes from two different species), plants often experience rapid rates of 
genomic rearrangement and/ or abrupt epigenetic changes in methylation 
patterns, which can spontaneously induce restrictions in the tissue-specific 
expression patterns of paralogs (Adams et al. 2003; Osborn et al. 2003). Com-
plementary reciprocal epigenetic silencing can lead to essentially instanta-
neous subfunctionalization, with the epigenetic ally silenced sub functions 
eventually being replaced by neutrally accumulating background degener-
ative mutations, providing one mechanism by which subfunctionalization 
might proceed to completion even in very large populations. 
Although unicellular species have no opportunities for tissue-specific 
specialization of gene expression, gene function partitioning may occur at 
the subcellular level (e.g., via the modification of transit signals for local-
ization of proteins to specific organelles; Silva-Filho 2003; Schmidt et al. 
2003). As discussed above, however, even if such physical opportunities 
exist, the probability of subfunctionalization is greatly reduced in popula-

228 
CHAPTER 8 
tions of unicellular species with sufficiently large genetic effective sizes. 
Nonetheless, substantial evidence suggests that duplicate genes in the yeast 
s. cerevisiae are often victims of subfunctionalization. For example, empiri-
cal studies in which S. cerevisiae paralogs were swapped with the single-
copy gene from the outgroup species S. kluyveri have provided compelling 
evidence for subfunctionalization at the level of coding DNA (van Hoof 
2005). A gradual loss of ancestral subfunctions by paralogous copies of S. 
cerevisiae genes is suggested by observed reductions in the similarity of 
expression patterns (measured across different environments), the number 
of shared regulatory motifs, the number of shared interacting protein part-
ners, and the number of shared functional domains with increasing age of 
paralogs (Gu et al. 2002b; Papp et al. 2003b; He and Zhang 2005b; van Hoof 
2005). In contrast, the total numbers of regulatory motifs and of interacting 
protein partners for each member of a pair appear to remain roughly con-
stant or even increase over time, suggesting an approximate balance 
between gains and losses of such elements (Papp et al. 2003b; He and Zhang 
2005b), a pattern also found in mammalian duplicate gene pairs by 
Hurniniecki and Wolfe (2004). The recruitment of novel regulatory elements 
is not surprising, as small patches of DNA are even more likely to be dupli-
cated than entire genes. However, answers to the many questions raised by 
these observations will require additional work, like that of van Hoof (2005), 
with outgroup Saccharomyces species containing single-copy orthologs of 
the S. cerevisiae paralogs. 
Speciation via the Divergent Resolution 
of Duplicate Genes 
Most studies of duplicate genes have focused on their potential role in the 
origin of evolutionary novelties through the establishment of new gene func-
tions. However, given the high rate at which duplicate genes arise, move to 
unlinked positions, and become randomly silenced or subfunctionalized, 
gene duplication may be an equally important contributor to the other major 
engine of evolution: the origin of new species (Lynch and Force 2000a; Shpak 
2005). Consider an unlinked pair of duplicate autosomal genes in a diploid 
ancestral species, which then experience divergent silencing or subfunc-
tionalization in two descendent lineages, effectively resulting in a map 
change (Figure 8.12). Because the FI hybrids of such lineages will be "pres-
ence/ absence" heterozygotes at the two independently segregating loci, 1/4 
of the FI gametes will contain null (absentee) alleles at both loci. Thus, if the 
gene is critical to gamete function, this single divergently resolved dupli-
cation will result in an expected 25% reduction in fertility. For a zygotically 
acting gene, 1/16 of the F2 offspring from the interspecific cross will lack 
functional alleles at both loci, and another 1/4 will carry only a single func-
tional allele. Thus, if the gene is haploinsufficient, 5/16 of the F2 zygotes of 
such a cross will be inviable (and/ or sterile). With n divergently resolved 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
229 
Ancestral species 
---c=:=J-
---c=:=J-
+ 
Acquisition of duplicate gene 
---c=:=J-
---c=:=J- -{"".'==jl-
Geographic isolation and 
divergent gene silencing 
~ 
---c=:=J- ~~}-
~ 
--c:::::::J-
---c=:=J- -C:><::J-
~ 
Hybridi~tion / 
~-c:==}-
---c=:=J- -C8::J-
Nonfunctional / \  
Nonfunctional 
gametes 
progeny 
~ 
~~~J-
~-r-=-..... 
Figure 8.12 Divergent silencing of an an-
cestral duplicate gene in two geographically 
isolated lineages. One gene copy is denoted 
by a white box, the other by a green box, 
and an X denotes an inactivated gene. Gene 
pairs represent alleles at diploid loci. Progeny 
other than those indicated might have com-
promised fitness (e.g., individuals with just a 
single active gene). 
duplicates, the expected fitness of hybrid progeny is W = (1- 8t, with 8 
denoting the reduction in hybrid fitness per map change. For example, with 
8 = 5/16, W = 0.024 in the F2 generation when n = 10, and W = 5 X 10-17 when 
11 = 100. Observed rates of gene duplication indicate that this type of process 
is sufficiently powerful to yield nearly complete genomic incompatibility 
within a few million years of cessation of gene flow (Lynch and Force 2000a; 
Lynch 2002a; Shpak 2005), which is the approximate time scale over which 
postzygotic isolation generally occurs in animals (Parker et al. 1985; Coyne 
and Orr 1997; Sasa et al. 1998; Presgraves 2002; Price and Bouvier 2002). 
Indirect evidence leaves little room for doubt that microchromosomal 
rearrangements resulting from gene duplication can be significant contrib-
utors to the establishment of postzygotic isolating barriers among species. 
Consider, for example, the mustards Arabidopsis thaliana and Brassica oler-
aceae, which are thought to have diverged from a common ancestor 10-20 
MYA (Yang et al.1999; Bancroft 2001). Although the two species contain many 
sets of orthologous chromosomal segments with long-range colinearity in 
gene content, alternative losses of orthologous gene copies in the two species 
are common (O'Neill and Bancroft 2000; Quiros et al. 2001). Complicating 
matters is the fact that B. oleraceae is a triploid derivative of the older line-
age containing A. thaliana, which itself experienced two or three ancient 
polyploidization events, as described above. However, even this complex-
ity is informative. For example, in an analysis of two triplicated paralogous 

230 
CHAPTER 8 
chromosomal regions in B. oleraceae, O'Neill and Bancroft (2000) found that 
about two-thirds of the paralogous groups had at least one member silenced 
on at least one paralog. These results, as well as others (e.g., Ku et al. 2000; 
Bennetzen and Ramakrishna 2002), suggest that the primary mechanism of 
chromosomal repatterning in plants may be duplication of large chromo-
somal regions followed by random loss of component genes. Estimated rates 
of microchromosomal rearrangement in plants range from 0.3 to 6.0 per lin-
eage per million years (Lagercrantz 1998; Burke et al. 2003), and most of 
these estimates are downwardly biased by imperfect resolution in the asso-
ciated mapping projects. Thus, considering that many rearranged fragments 
may contain multiple genes, the number of map changes per million years 
may commonly exceed ten in land plants. 
Such high rates of micro chromosomal rearrangement are by no means 
unique to plants. For example, comparing the genomic sequence of the nem-
atode Caenorhabditis elegans with that of its congener C. briggsae, Coghlan 
and Wolfe (2002) estimated that 4,030 rearrangements had occurred over a 
period of 80 million years, implying 25 rearrangements per lineage per mil-
lion years. Reciprocal exchanges between two genomic locations,local inver-
sions, and transpositions from one location to another contribute to the total 
pool of rearrangements at a ratio of 1:1:2, and the vast majority of the seg-
ments involved span five or fewer genes. Rates of microchromosomal 
rearrangements in vertebrates appear to be at least as high as those in nema-
todes, with roughly 1.5 large-scale (> 100 kb) rearrangements occurring per 
lineage per million years, usually as a consequence of duplicative transpo-
sition, and smaller-scale rearrangements arising at rates of at least 20 per 
lineage per million years (McLysaght et al. 2000; Locke et al. 2003; Pevzner 
and Tesler 2003). In contrast, the rates of micro chromosomal rearrangement 
in both Drosophila (fruit flies) and Anopheles (mosquitoes) appear to be sub-
stantially lower, in both cases about 7 per lineage per million years, with the 
vast majority of rearrangements being within, rather than between, chro-
mosomes (Gonzalez et al. 2002; Ranz et al. 2001, 2003; Sharakhov et al. 2002). 
Finally, genomic comparisons of the yeasts S. cerevisiae and Candida albi-
cans imply a rate of micro chromosomal rearrangement of about 2.3 per lin-
eage per million years (Seoighe et al. 2000). 
Although micro chromosomal rearrangements need not always originate 
via gene duplication events, a large fraction of such events almost certainly 
do, for the simple reason that the movement of a gene to a new unlinked 
location is much more easily accomplished if the transition is made gradu-
ally while the original locus is still intact. The magnitude of gene duplica-
tion activity discussed above appears to be fully compatible with this 
interpretation. Under a steady-state birth/ death process, a population is 
expected to gain 2NB new duplications per locus per generation, each with 
a probability of fixation equal to 1/ (2N) under the assumption of initial neu-
trality. Assuming that the fate of most duplicates is nonfunctionalization, 
and recalling that each fixed duplication has a 50% probability of being 
resolved in favor of the new locus, the steady-state rate of origin of map 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
231 
changes is simply (GB/2) per lineage per generation, where G is the total 
number of genes per genome. Using the estimates of B reported in Table 8.1 
and the estimates of G from Table 3.2, the approximate expected number 
of map changes per million years is 2.5 for unicellular species, 15 for inver-
tebrates, and 125 for vertebrates and plants. Not all such changes will nec-
essarily induce hybrid incompatibilities, as some divergently resolved pairs 
of loci will be tandemly located and/ or members of multigene families. Nev-
ertheless, these collective results reinforce the idea that up to dozens of map 
changes per million years may passively accumulate in isolated lineages via 
small duplication events. 
Duplication of autosomal genes is just one route by which map changes 
can be induced passively by divergent degenerative mutation, and to 
emphasize this point, we now consider three additional mechanisms. First, 
consider the situation in which an ancestral gene with a male-specific func-
tion is initially present on both sex chromosomes, with the copy on the X 
becoming silenced in one descendent lineage and the copy on the Y becom-
ing silenced in a sister lineage. A cross between females of the first popula-
tion (assumed to be XX) and males (XY) of the second would result in male 
progeny completely lacking in gene function, while the reciprocal cross 
would have active copies on both the X and the Y. Thus, duplication events 
involving genes on sex chromosomes have potential relevance to under-
standing the mechanisms underlying Haldane's rule, which states that inter-
specific genomic incompatibilities are most severe in heterogametic FI prog-
eny (Orr 1997). A number of interesting reassignments of map locations of 
male-specific genes have been uncovered in mammals. For example, almost 
all extant mammals have autosomal CDYL and CDYL2 genes, which carry 
out key housekeeping and testes-specific functions. However, in the line-
age leading to humans, a copy of CDYL was duplicated to the Y chromo-
some, where it retained a function in spermatogenesis but lost the house-
keeping function, while the autosomal loci experienced the opposite fate: 
loss of function in spermatogenesis but retention of the housekeeping role 
(Dorus et al. 2003). 
Second, a remarkable set of examples of map changes induced by gene 
duplication in plants involves the movement of genes between organelle 
and nuclear genomes. Transfers of functional mitochondrial genes to the 
nuclear genome (accompanied by their subsequent loss from the mito-
chondrion) have occurred on many independent occasions within lineages 
of flowering plants, with the overall rate in some cases rivaling the rate of 
nucleotide substitution at silent sites (K. L. Adams et al. 2000, 2001, 2002). 
The details worked out for the mitochondrial respiratory protein gene cox2 
are particularly revealing. This gene was apparently duplicated to the 
nuclear genome of the ancestor of the Papilionoideae (a subfamily of 
legumes), transiently persisting as active copies in both genomes, with one 
or the other copy becoming randomly inactivated (in approximately equal 
frequencies, and by a variety of mechanisms) in almost all descendent lin-
eages (Adams et al. 1999). Many closely related plant genera also exhibit 

232 
CHAPTER 8 
complex patterns of nuclear transfer of mitochondrial ribosomal protein 
genes (Adams et al. 2002). Moreover, these kinds of intergenomic gene trans-
fers are not restricted to plant mitochondria, as a study of the chloroplast 
infA gene also reveals large numbers of transfers to the nuclear genome 
(Millen et al. 2001). 
Third, although the previous arguments focus entirely on the divergent 
resolution of duplicate genes driven by degenerative mutation, map changes 
can also be induced by neofunctionalization, provided the copies acquiring 
new functions do so at the expense of the old function (Figure 8.13). Such 
changes, which arise whenever the ancestral locus takes on the new func-
tion while the descendent locus retains the original function, are expected 
to arise in 25% to 50% of cases of duplicate-gene neofunctionalization, 
depending on the population size (Lynch et al. 2001). Because the proba-
bility of preservation of duplicate genes by neofunctionalization increases 
with population size, unlike the many genetic theories of speciation that 
rely on population bottlenecks, this version of the gene duplication model 
is also effective in very large populations. 
Genetic theories of speciation have traditionally focused on two com-
peting sets of hypotheses, each of which has numerous adherents and 
detractors (reviewed in Orr 1996; Rieseberg 2001; Coyne and Orr 2004). The 
Dobzhansky-Muller model postulates the accumulation of lineage-specific 
gene sequence changes that are mutually incompatible when brought 
together in a hybrid genome, whereas the chromosomal model invokes the 
accumulation of rearrangements that result in mis-segregation in hybrid 
backgrounds. Both models are based on rather stringent assumptions. For 
example, the Dobzhansky-Muller model invokes the evolution of coadapted 
complexes of epistatically interacting factors, none of which have yet been 
identified at the molecular level, whereas chromosomal models generally 
focus on major rearrangements, the fixation of which can be greatly inhib-
ited by the reduction in fitness in chromosomal heterozygotes. 
A notable feature of the gene duplication model of speciation described 
above is that it is consistent with both the Dobzhansky-Muller model and 
the chromosomal model while requiring fewer assumptions than either of 
them. The gene duplication model is effectively a chromosomal model of 
speciation, but because the rearrangements are microchromosomal, and 
hence unlikely to cause significant problems during meiosis, they accumu-
late passively without any alteration in within-species fitness. The gene 
duplication model also masquerades as a Dobzhansky-Muller model in that 
the map changes induced by divergent resolution result in pseudo-epista-
tic interactions without any changes at the gene level. Genomic incompat-
ibilities arising from reassignments of genes to new locations appear super-
ficially as epistatic interactions because the loss-of-function phenotype is 
determined by the number of active alleles at the two homologous loci in 
hybrid progeny. Thus, low-resolution analyses of species incompatibilities 
that fail to identify the specific underlying loci can lead to misinterpreta-
tions regarding the underlying genetic mechanism of postzygotic isolation. 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
233 
Ancestral species 
Acquisition of duplicate gene 
Neofunctionalization I 
of the original locus 
Absentee allele 
at the new locus 
--c:=:=J---_I-
--c==:J---_I-
~ 
Hybridiz,tion / 
--c==:J- -----
Nonfunctional / \  
Nonfunctional 
gametes 
progeny 
--c==:J- ___ I-
--c:=:=J---_I-
--c==:J---_I-
Figure 8.13 The origin of postzygotic incompatibility by neofunctionalization of 
an ancestral locus. A gene with the essential ancestral function is denoted by black, a 
neofunctionalized gene by red, and an empty locus by white. Neofunctionalization is 
assumed to have occurred at the expense of the original gene function. The species 
on the right either did not experience a duplication at the new locus or lost it prior 
to fixation. 
The induction of map changes by neofunctionalization also blurs the dis-
tinction between species-isolating mechanisms based on adaptive genetic 
change and chromosomal rearrangements. For example, in a hybrid cross, 
a neofunctionalized ancestral locus would superficially appear to interact 
negatively with genetic factors residing in the single-copy species (see Fig-
ure 8.13). However, the incompatibility would not be a function of adaptive 
changes at the neofunctionalized locus, but simply an indirect consequence 
of the relocation of the ancestral gene function. 
The vast majority of research on the genetic mechanisms of species-iso-
lating barriers has focused on Drosophila, and most of this work, inspired by 
the classic Dobzhansky-Muller model, has concentrated on a search for 
"speciation" genes carrying the signature of local adaptation (Coyne and 
Orr 2004; Wu and Ting 2004). The genetic analysiS of speciation is an extraor-
dinarily difficult enterprise, as it is generally nearly impossible to determine 
whether a particular incompatibility factor played a formative role in species 
isolation or simply arose secondarily after interspecific gene flow had ceased. 

234 
CHAPTER 8 
Of even greater uncertainty, however, is whether a singular focus on adap-
tive mechanisms leads to a biased perspective on the origins of interspecific 
reproductive incompatibility. Given the generally high rate of microchro-
mosomal rearrangement induced by gene duplication, an evaluation of the 
gene duplication model ought to be a priority of any study that seeks an 
unbiased perspective on the mechanisms of speciation, if for no other rea-
son than to provide a null model against which hypotheses involving adap-
tation can be tested. 
One remarkable observation that appears to be quite compatible with the 
gene duplication model of speciation involves the yeast S. cerevisiae and its 
close relatives, which exhibit numerous differences in gene order resulting 
from chromosomal rearrangements. Although the haploid offspring of 
crosses between such species are almost always sterile, after engineering the 
chromosomes to restore large-scale colinearity, Delneri et al. (2003) were able 
to increase fertility to 20%-30%. Some minor differences in gene order almost 
certainly went undetected in these constructs, so it is quite possible that 
restoration to complete colinearity would have had an even greater effect. 
Well-documented examples of the involvement of duplicate genes in the 
reproductive isolation of Drosophila species also exist. In two cases, a strong 
phase of positive selection operating on single paralogs has been implicated 
(ring et al. 2004; Greenberg et al. 2006), but in some D. melanogaster-D. sim-
ulans hybrids, sterility appears to be a simple consequence of the movement 
of an essential gene to a new chromosomal location via an intermediate 
phase of gene duplication (and without a change in function), in full accor-
dance with the model presented in Figure 8.12 (Masly et al. 2006). Other 
lines of evidence support the idea that isolating barriers are associated with 
small chromosomal rearrangements, although alternative mechanistic expla-
nations (such as the capture of adaptive alleles by nonrecombining chro-
mosomal inversions) have been suggested for such patterns (Noor et al. 
2001; Rieseberg 2001; Navarro and Barton 2003). 
Under the gene duplication model, certain groups of organisms are 
expected to be more prone to speciation than others, the most notable being 
lineages that experience a doubling in genome size. One potential exam-
ple of such a key event was noted in Chapter 1: the colonization of ances-
tral eukaryotic genomes by endosymbiotic organelles. Considering the very 
large number of organelle-to-nucleus transfers that apparently occurred 
soon after the establishment of the mitochondrial progenitor (Martin et al. 
1998), divergent resolution of duplicated organelle genes may have pro-
voked the passive development of isolating barriers among a number of the 
basal eukaryotic lineages. 
Polyploidization provides another enormous opportunity for the rapid 
proliferation of isolated lineages via the divergent resolution of duplicate 
genes. Following the first map changes induced by reciprocal silencing in 
sister polyploid taxa, the thousands of duplicate pairs still remaining in a 
functional state are free to become divergently resolved in subsequently iso-
lated lineages, potentially yielding a large number of nested speciation 

GENOMIC EXPANSION BY GENE DUPLICATION 
235 
events. The origin of species via polyploidy-associated map changes may 
be especially common in plants, almost all of which are descendents of one 
or more polyploidization events (Werth and Windham 1991). In addition, 
particularly striking support for the gene duplication model of species iso-
lation is revealed by the genomic structures of lineages derived from the 
yeast polyploidization event noted above (Scannell et al. 2006). Pairwise 
comparisons of the three completely sequenced yeast genomes (5. castellii, 
5. cerevisiae, and Candida glabrata) identify 100 to 200 divergently resolved 
paralogous gene pairs (approximately 5% of the single-copy genes in dif-
ferent species are not orthologs), and phylogenetic analysis places much of 
the genomic repatterning during the period of species emergence. Finally, 
although the details remain to be worked out, one of the most striking exam-
ples of cryptic speciation, the reproductive isolation of 14 morphologically 
indistinguishable members of the Paramecium aurelia complex, also appears 
to have developed shortly after an ancestral polyploidization event (Aury 
et al. 2006). 
Key genome doubling events may have facilitated the diversification of 
many major animal lineages as well. First, given the apparent twofold-to-
threefold increase in gene content in basal animals relative to fungi, genome 
amplification may have been involved in the origin of the major animal 
phyla. Second, as described above, it also appears that a substantial amount 
of gene duplication occurred prior to the radiation of the major vertebrate 
lineages. Finally, it may be no coincidence that the most species-rich lineage 
of vertebrates, the ray-finned fishes (-30,000 species; see Figure 8.5), is a 
descendent of an ancient polyploidization event. At least some evidence 
points to divergent resolution in isolated lineages in this group (Cresko et al. 
2003), and secondary polyploidization events within specific lineages are 
associated with enhanced rates of speciation (Ferris et al. 1979; Taylor et al. 
2001b; Hoegg et aL 2004; Mank and Avise 2006; Volff 2005). In contrast, all of 
the fish lineages that branched off prior to the basal polyploidization event 
(e.g., bichirs, bowfin, gars, paddlefish, and sturgeons) contain just a handful 
of species. These kinds of observations suggest that adaptive radiations are 
associated with polyploidization events not only because gene duplication 
opens up novel evolutionary pathways for the origins of new gene functions, 
but also because polyploidization generates a population genetic environ-
ment that is highly conducive to the passive origin of reproductive barriers. 

Genes in Pieces 
The discovery that eukaryotic genes can contain intervening non coding 
sequences (Berget et al. 1977; Chow et al. 1977; Evans et al. 1977; Goldberg 
et al. 1977) still stands as one of the most perplexing observation ever made 
in molecular genetics. Remarkably, these intragenic spacers, now known as 
introns (Gilbert 1978), are initially transcribed only to be eliminated dur-
ing mRNA maturation. This processing is carried out by the splice os orne, 
a molecular machine rivaling the ribosome in complexity. Although com-
pletely absent from prokaryotes, spliceosomal introns appear to be present 
in all major eukaryotic lineages, as well as in some eukaryotic transposons 
(Stiller et al. 1998; Fast and Doolittle 1999; Archibald et al. 2002; Nixon et 
al. 2002; Simpson, Macquarrie, and Roger 2002). Thus, spliceosomal inh'ons 
were almost certainly present in the stem eukaryote, and as we will see, 
there may have been two different spliceosomes at this time, each process-
ing a different class of introns. 
Explaining the origin of mtrons continues to be a major challenge for evo-
lutionary genomics. Introns impose numerous burdens on their eukary-
otic hosts, including additional investment in DNA and RNA; enhanced 
production of inappropriate transcripts by splicing errors; the need to selec-
tively degrade excised introns; and an excess mutation rate to defective alle-
les associated with sites involved in splice-site recognition. A stark reminder 
of the nontrivial nature of these costs is the observation that at least a third 
of human genetic disorders are attributable to mutations that cause defec-
tive splice-site recognition (Culbertson 1999; Frischmeyer and Dietz 1999; 
Philips and Cooper 2000; Lopez-Bigas et al. 2005). 
A puzzle of equal proportions is the phylogenetically uneven distribution 
of introns. Most multicellular species average five or more introns per pro-
tein-coding gene, while most unicellular eukaryotes average less than one. 

Such disparities must ultimately be a consequence of differences in the molec-
ular rates of intron origin and removal and I or the ability of natural selection 
to promote or prevent fixation of such modifications. Because the stem 
eukaryote appears to have been moderately intron rich, it is unlikely that the 
initial colonization of introns was promoted by their involvement in the adap-
tive evolution of the complex features of multicellular organisms. Rather, like 
other forms of nonessential DNA, introns may have more successfully col-
onized and been maintained in multicellular species simply because of the 
permissive nature of the population genetic environment (a lower effective 
population size allowing a larger fraction of mildly deleterious insertions 
to proceed to fixation). Nevertheless, despite their short-term intrinsic costs, 
once inh'ons were established, they provided a potential substrate for the ori-
gin of novel mechanisms of gene regulation and transcript processing, open-
ing up previously inaccessible paths of adaptive evolution. 
Any rigorous theory about the intra genomic and phylogenetic distribu-
tions of introns must be consistent with known cellular mechanisms of 
intron birth, death, and processing. Thus, this chapter starts with an 
overview of the complex molecular machinery responsible for splicing. After 
considering the suspected molecular mechanisms of intron gain and loss 
and the costs of maintaining introns, the population genetic issues that bear 
on intron proliferation will be reviewed and put to the test by conSidering 
the incidence of introns in various phylogenetic lineages. Most of the dis-
cussion will focus on the spliceosomal introns of protein-coding genes, 
which constitute the vast majority of introns in nuclear genes, and these will 
hereafter be simply referred to as introns. 
The Spliceosome[s) 
Introns are processed out of mRNAs by the spliceosome (Figure 9.1), a large 
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex whose mechanisms have been studied 
most intensely in humans and two yeasts (5. cerevisiae and 5. p0111be) 
(reviewed in Burge et al. 1999; Hastings and Krainer 2001; Brow 2002; Kulll! 
and Kaufer 2003). Eukaryotes invest very heavily in the spliceosome: about 
1 % of known human and yeast genes encode products deployed in splic-
ing. Five small nuclear RNAs (the U1, U2, U4, U5, and U6 snRNAs) consti-
tute the heart of the spliceosome in all eukaryotes (Collins and Penny 2005), 
and each of these is assembled into a snRNP (small nuclear RNP). Seven 
core proteins are shared by four of the snRNPs, U6 being exceptional in hav-
ing its own set. Each snRNP incorporates an additional unique set of about 
ten proteins, and numerous non-snRNP proteins also contribute to the 
spliceosome. Although some have suggested that spliceosomes are pre-
formed organelles (Stevens et al. 2002), recent data suggest that snRNPs 
assemble into spliceosomes in a stepwise fashion at each intron (Gomemann 
et al. 2005; Lacadie and Rosbash 2005). Moreover, the spliceosome appears 
to serve as a hub for additional mRNA development activities, including 
capping and preparation for nuclear export (Hirose and Manley 2000; Bent-

GENES IN PIECES 
239 
I 
' 
-,
-/ 
I I 
.. I 
I GT----A-YYY-AG
I~ ~========~ 
~ 
Figure 9.1 An approximate schematic of the anatomy of a spliceosomal intron and 
the steps in its removal from a precursor transcript. Top: The precursor mRNA (only 
part of which is shown) contains an intron, which usually starts with a GT and ends 
with an AG, always contains an internal branch point (A), and often has a downstream 
polypyrimidine (YYY) tract. The surrounding exons (open boxes) contain short motifs 
that serve as exon splicing enhancers and silencers (green and red bars). In the first 
step of splicing, the component snRNPs of the spliceosome (large colored ovals) begin 
to bind to appropriate locations on the pre-mRNA. Middle: The 5' end of the intron is 
released and brought into contact with the branch point, forming a lariat. Bottom: The 
intron is completely released, and the two exons are spliced together. An exon junction 
complex (small orange ovals) is deposited just upstream of the splice site prior to ex-
port of the mRNA from the nucleus. 
ley 2002; Maniatis and Reed 2002; Orphanides and Reinberg 2002; Proud-
foot et al. 2002; Rappsilber et al. 2002; Zhou et al. 2002). 
Despite its central significance to the biology of eukaryotes, the spliceo-
some is not an invariant structure. For example, several observations sug-
gest that S. cerevisiae, a species that is extremely depauperate with respect 
to introns, has experienced an evolutionary simplification of its mRNA pro-
cessing machinery. Altogether, about 200 unique proteins contribute to the 
human spliceosome (Zhou et al. 2002), but only 80 form the S. cerevisiae 
spliceosome (Brow 2002). The fission yeast S. pombe contains a number of 
spliceosomal components that are missing in S. cerevisiae, and of the com-
ponents shared by all three species, those from S. pombe tend to be more sim-
ilar to human than to S. cerevisiae orthologs (Abovich and Rosbash 1997; 

240 
CHAPTER 9 
Aravind et al. 2000; Kaufer and Potashkin 2000; Kuhn and Kaufer 2003). In 
addition, although mammals and S. pombe utilize exon splicing enhancers 
(ESEs, specific guide sequences encoded within exons) and SR (serine-argi-
nine) proteins to orient the spliceosome to intron-exon junctions, neither 
have been found in S. cerevisiae (Nissim-Rafinia and Kerem 2002). A dra-
matic reduction in the complexity of the spliceosome has also been seen in 
the apicomplexan Cryptosporidiu111, which has a severalfold reduction in 
intron number compared with its relative Plasmodium (Templeton et al. 2004). 
An unexpected layer of complexity in the evolution of the spliceosome 
was introduced with the discovery that many eukaryotes harbor not just 
one, but two, such molecular machines (Hall and Padgett 1994; Burge et 
al. 1998; Patel and Steitz 2003). The major spliceosome deals with the clas-
sic set of introns that usually start with GT and end with AG (see Figure 9.1), 
while the minor spliceosome processes another set. Although it was first 
thought that AT / AC ends were a defining feature of this second class of 
introns, earning them the initial name of ATAC introns, many have been 
found to have standard GT / AG ends, and they are now known as U12-
dependent introns. In contrast, introns processed by the major spliceosome 
are referred to as U2-dependent, with U2 and U12 denoting homologous 
snRNAs used in the two spliceosomes. Of the five snRNAs employed in 
splicing, only US is used jointly by the two spliceosomes, although most 
(but not all) of the spliceosomal proteins appear to be shared (Hastings and 
Krainer 2001; Luo et al. 1999; Will et al. 1999,2001,2004; Schneider et al. 
2002). Despite the overlapping components, there are fundamental differ-
ences between U2- and Ul2-dependent intron splicing, with the latter hav-
ing a much more rigid set of splicing requirements (Burge et al. 1998; Patel 
and Steitz 2003). For example, the internal branch-point sequences and 5' 
splice sites are much more highly conserved in Ul2-dependent introns, 
whereas the 3' polypyrimidine tract typically found in U2-dependent introns 
is generally lacking (Burge et al. 1998). In addition, whereas the Ul and U2 
snRNPs of the major spliceosome interact separately with 5' splice sites and 
branch points, Ull (the Ul analog in the minor spliceosome) and U12 coop-
eratively bind both regions simultaneously (Frilander and Steitz 1999). 
Ul2-dependent introns are present in amoebozoans, oomycetes, plants, 
Drosophila, vertebrates, and at least one fungus (Levine and Durbin 2001; 
Otake et al. 2002; Zhu and Brendel 2003; Schneider et al. 2004; Lorkovic et 
al. 2005). However, no evidence of a minor spliceosome has been found in 
nematodes or in any of a number of lineages of fungi and protists (Burge 
et al. 1998, 1999). Because the clades containing Ul2-dependent introns are 
distributed throughout the eukaryotic tree (see Chapter I), and because most 
such introns utilize similar splice-site and branch-point sequences, the minor 
spliceosome appears to be ancient, perhaps even dating to the stem eukary-
ote, with many lineages subsequently losing all such introns. 
How might the major and minor spliceosomes have arisen? One scenario, 
known as the fission-fusion model, assumes that the descendants of a sin-
gle ancestral spliceosome diverged in two phylogenetically independent 

GEN ES IN PIECES 
241 
lineages that relll1ited by a subsequent hybridization event (Burge et al. 1998, 
1999). There are, however, two significant difficulties with this hypothesis. 
First, during the period of isolation, the overall level of genomic divergence 
would have to be sufficiently small to allow reproductive compatibility 
between hybridizing lineages. Second, the magnitude of functional diver-
gence between orthologous snRNAs would have to be substantial enough 
to allow their independent operation when reunited. Given the need for a 
spliceosome to service all of the introns within a host genome, it is difficult 
to see how this could occur unless the number of introns per genome were 
quite small. The ability of yeast to splice mammalian introns, despite the 
billion or so years separating these lineages, testifies to the evolutionary sta-
bility of the spliceosomal machinery (Trachtulec and Forejt 1999; Kunze et 
al. 2000). 
An alternative model that avoids these limitations invokes an endoge-
nous origin of two spliceosomes within a single species (Lynch and Richard-
son 2002). This might have been achieved by sequential seeding of the 
nucleus of the ancestral eukaryote with the descendants of two organelle-
derived group II introns, the hypothesized original source of spliceosomal 
introns (see below). Such a scenario is conceptually appealing because the 
coevolution of the internal components of group IT introns would provide 
a natural barrier to cross-talk between different elements (Toar et al. 2001). 
Under this hypothesis, the similar secondary structures of the snRNAs of 
the major and minor spliceosomes would have arisen by convergence, per-
haps with the generalized pool of splicing proteins serving as a guiding force 
(Burge et al. 1999). If these ideas are correct, then other rare types of spliceo-
somes may await discovery. An intriguing possibility is presented by Euglena 
gracilis, which, in addition to having conventional U2-dependent introns, 
harbors a lll1ique type of intron with long complementary ends that can be 
folded into a secondary structure (Tessier et al. 1995; Canaday et al. 2001). 
How do we account for the apparent loss of the minor spliceosome from 
some lineages? In every species observed, U12-dependent introns are a tiny 
minority 0.5%) of the total pool of spliceosomal introns. The highest count 
is 404 for the human genome (Levine and Durbin 2001), which contains over 
150,000 U2-dependent introns. The rarity of U12-dependent introns is prob-
ably a consequence of several phenomena. First, the greater degree of con-
servation of branch-point and 5' splice sites in U12 intron-containing alle-
les implies that they are more vulnerable to inactivating mutations than are 
U2 intron-containing alleles (Lynch 2002b). Second, some mutational 
changes convert U12-dependent introns into the more simply defined U2-
dependent intrOI1S, whereas the reverse seems to occur rarely, if ever, prob-
ably because of the much more conserved recognition sequences of U12-
dependent introns (Burge et al. 1998). Third, U12-dependent introns are 
spliced more slowly (Patel et al. 2002) and less accurately (Levine and 
Durbin 2001) than are U2-dependent introns. All three of these features are 
expected to result in shorter mean persistence times of U12-dependent 
introns over evolutionary time relative to their U2-dependent counterparts. 

242 
CHAPTER 9 
Should a genome then experience complete stochastic loss of U12-depend-
ent introns, the functionless snRNAs of the minor spliceosome would even-
tually succumb to the passive accumulation of degenerative mutations, 
essentially immunizing the lineage against future recolonization by this class 
of introns. Under this stochastic-loss hypothesis, U12-dependent introns are 
confined to lineages that harbor large total numbers of introns (multicellu-
lar animals and plants) simply because the chance of complete loss is 
reduced when copy numbers are high. 
The Introns Early-Introns Late Debate 
Soon after the discovery of introns, an intense debate erupted over their time 
of origin and their role in protein evolution. One camp argued that introns 
played a critical role in the earliest stages of protein evolution by promot-
ing recombinational shuffling of modular domains or "mini-genes" into 
combinations with new functions (Gilbert 1987). Various versions of this 
introns-early hypothesis exist, the most extreme being that introns were 
present in the first prokaryotic cells and were then lost from all descendant 
lineages except eukaryotes (Darnell 1978; Doolittle 1978). Under the con-
hoasting introns-late view, spliceosomal introns were never present in 
prokaryotes, played no significant role in the formation of novel proteins, 
and were simply adventitious embellishments of genes with well-estab-
lished functions (Orgel and Crick 1980; Cavalier-Smith 1985; Palmer and 
Logsdon 1991). 
Given the complete absence of spliceosomal introns from prokaryotes, 
the introns-early school has relied on indirect lines of evidence to support 
its case. For example, one prediction of the introns-early hypothesis is that 
the majority of introns should reside between adjacent codons (phase 0 
introns) rather than splitting codons (phase 1 and 2 introns), as the former 
arrangement preserves tIle reading frame after the shuffling of exons (Fig-
ure 9.2). A similar argument leads to the prediction that adjacent introns 
should tend to be in the same phase. Both kinds of phase bias do exist (Long 
et al. 1995), and the tendency for introns to lie between versus within pro-
tein architectural modules has also been cited as evidence for the involve-
ment of introns in the early assembly of proteins (Roy et al. 1999). 
These interpretations are compromised by the fact that qualitatively sim-
ilar patterns of phase bias are expected under the introns-late hypothesis if 
introns tend to be inserted into particular dinucleotides and/ or if postcol-
onization success depends on the intron phase. For example, as noted below, 
introns tend to be flanked on both sides by G nucleotides, and as a conse-
quence, intron phase bias closely reflects the distribution of GG dinu-
cleotides within and between codons (e.g., phase 1 introns commonly 
inhabit glycine codons, which always start with GG), and the sequences 
flanking introns tend to put them in amino acid contexts that fall between 
functional domains (Ruvinsky et al. 2005; Whamond and Thornton 2006). 
In addition, in the face of an error-prone spliceosome, as well as in the case 

GENES IN PIECES 
243 
o 
o 
Maintenance of frame 
t 
- - - -+- Frameshift 
Figure 9.2 The consequences of exon swapping for protein sequence conservation. 
The color-coded codon boxes to the left denote the proper reading frames in ancestral 
sequences. The sets of triplets to the lower right consisting of mixed colors denote 
frameshifted codons. Intron phases are denoted by integers. Top: An exon flanked by 
two phase 0 introns is inserted into a phase 0 intron in another gene, resulting in the 
addition of three codons, but otherwise maintaining the reading frame. Bottom: 
Because the inserted exon is flanked by introns that split codons, the recipient gene ex-
periences a frameshift downstream of the point of insertion. 
of adaptive alternative splicing (see below), introns are expected to be more 
innocuous (less likely to encourage mRNAs with frameshifts and/ or hybrid 
codons) if they are in phase 0 and in the same adjacent phases (Lynch 2002b; 
Figure 9.3). The similarity in the magnitude of phase biases in recent and 
ancient introns (Rogozin et al. 2003; Sverdlov et al. 2003; Coghlan and Wolfe 
2004; Qiu et al. 2004; Nguyen et al. 2006) provides compelling evidence that 
these concerns are not misplaced. 
In summary, although the fact that the number of introns in a few uni-
cellular eukaryotes has dwindled to just a handful leaves open the remote 
possibility of complete spliceosomal intron loss from the main ancestral lines 
leading to all prokaryotes, the absence of any direct evidence for the early 
existence of introns in prokaryotes does not inspire confidence in the introns-
early view. The population genetic principles to be discussed below provide 
a more formal challenge to an introns-early world, and even the strongest 
o 
o 
2 
Figure 9.3 Skipping of an exon has different consequences depending on the phas-
es of the surrounding introns. Top: The reading frame is maintained because the sur-
rounding introns are in the same phase. Bottom: A frameshift results when the phases 
of the surrounding introns differ. 

244 
CHAPTER 9 
introns-early adherents now acknowledge that a large fraction of introns 
arose long after the origin of eukaryotes (de Souza et al. 1998; Roy et a1. 1999; 
Fedorov, Cao et a1. 2001). This conclusion does not rule out a creative role 
for exon shuffling in protein evolution in more recent times, however (Patthy 
1999a). For example, about 10% of animal genes contain tandemly dupli-
cated exons (Letunic et al. 2002), whose mutually exclusive splicing can 
achieve functional diversity once the exonic sequences have diverged suf-
ficiently (Kondrashov and Koonin 2001). 
A Group II Origin? 
One of the most enduring mysteries about introns is the origin of the spliceo-
some, the only credible hypothesis to date invoking descent from a group 
II intron (Sharp 1985; Cech 1986; Jacquier 1990; Cavalier-Smith 1991; Lam-
bowitz and Zimmerly 2004; Robart and Zimmerly 2005). Group II introns 
are often referred to as "self-splicing," which if taken literally, implies com-
plete endowment with all the necessary machinery for their removal from 
host mRNAs. However, although most group II introns have a secondary 
RNA structure that facilitates splicing, and although many encode multi-
functional proteins that assist in the splicing process, splicing is almost 
always facilitated by host-encoded factors. Group II introns have been fourld 
in the chromosomes and plasmids of numerous eubacteria (Dai and Zim-
merly 2002) and archaea (Dai and Zimmerly 2003; Rest and Minde1l2003; 
Toro 2003). However, they are never very abundant in these contexts, and 
technically speaking, many of these prokaryotic elements are not introns 
at all, in that they lie between rather than within genes (Zimmerly et al. 2001; 
Dai and Zimmerly 2002). No group II intron has been found in a eukaryotic 
nuclear gene, but they are present in some protein-coding genes within the 
organelles of plants, fungi, and numerous protists (Bonen and Vogel 2001; 
see Chapter 11). 
The ability to mobilize distinguishes group II introns from spliceosomal 
introns (Lambowitz et a1. 1999; Hiller et al. 2000; Lambowitz and Zimmerly 
2004). Group II intron integrations usually occur at a very specific insertion-
site sequence (a process referred to as retrohoming), but insertions into non-
specific sites (retrotranspositions) occasionally occur (Cousineau et al. 2000; 
Dickson et a1. 2001). There are at least three mobilization pathways (Figure 
9.4). First, as with non-LTR retrotransposons (see Chapters 3 and 7), tar-
get-primed reverse transcription can occur at the site of insertion (Zimmerly 
et a1. 1995; Yang et a1. 1996). In this case, after the intron is removed from 
its host mRNA and subjected to translation, the insertion protein encoded 
within the intron binds directly back to the transcript, providing the machin-
ery for reintegrating at a suitable genomic insertion site and cleaving the 
second strand to complete double-strand synthesis. Second, group II introns 
without endonuclease activity can sometimes insert themselves without sec-
ond-strand cleavage by waiting for a DNA replica tion event to fill in the gap 
on the opposite strand (Zhong and Lambowitz 2003). Third, the intron RNA 

Reverse splicing 
into genomic DNA 
Target primed 
reverse transcription 
Transcription and splicing 
... 
Second-strand 
replication 
~--
+ 
GENES IN PIECES 
245 
-------------~ 
Reverse splicing into 
unrelated transcript 
Reverse transcription, and 
homologous recombination 
x 
Figure 9.4 The three known pathways for the mobilization of a group II intron to a 
new site. DNA is denoted by solid lines and RNA by dotted lines. After transcription of 
the host gene, the intron is released as a lariat. In the two pathways on the left, the ele-
ment is initially integrated as RNA, whereas in the pathway on the right, reverse tran-
scription converts the element into DNA prior to its integration into a new genomic lo-
cation via homologous recombination. 
may be reverse-spliced into an unrelated transcript, which, if then reverse-
transcribed, can introduce the intron into an ectopic site by homologous 
recombination (Cousineau et al. 2000). 
This multiplicity of mobilization pathways, combined with phylogenetic 
evidence for the horizontal transfer of group IT introns among eubacterial 
species and between microbes and eukaryotic organelles (Zimmerly et al. 
2001), lends credence to the hypothesis that the nuclear genes of the stem 
eukaryote were initially populated by group II introns. It is plausible that 
the primordial mitochondrion was the source of such introns (Sheveleva 
and Hallick 2004), although other sources (including prior residence in the 
nuclear genome) cannot be ruled out. A list of striking structural and func-
tional similarities between the excision mechanisms of group II introns and 
those of spliceosome-dependent introns is also consistent with the idea that 
the five spliceosomal snRNAs are direct descendants of the major subunits 
of the catalytic core of a group IT intron (Michel and Ferat 1995; Hetzer et al. 

246 
CHAPTER 9 
1997; Burge et al. 1999; Sontheimer et al. 1999; Yean et al. 2000; Shukla and 
Padgett 2002; Val ad khan and Manley 2002), although the limited number 
of efficient biochemical mechanisms for splicing implies a nonnegligible 
probability of evolutionary convergence of two independent splicing path-
ways (Stahley and Strobel 2005). 
Any transition from a self-splicing group II intron to a large population 
of eukaryotic spliceosome-dependent introns would necessarily involve a 
number of significant steps: (1) a cohesive self-splicing system would have 
to give rise to an elaborate fragmented spliceosomal system; (2) the frag-
mented components would have to retain their functionality while coop-
eratively operating in trans; (3) a set of splicing proteins would have to be 
recruited to form the full spliceosomal complex; and (4) the derived popu-
lation of spliceosome-dependent introns would have to eventually displace 
the ancestral population of self-splicing introns. A variety of observations 
demonstrate the feasibility of each of these steps. For example, contrary to 
the usual situation in prokaryotes, plant organelles often harbor spatially 
isolated group IT intron fragments (split introns), which cooperate to splice 
together host gene exons located in distant genomic regions (Malek and 
Knoop 1998; Dai and Zimmerly 2002; Robart and Zimmerly 2005). Although 
each fragment contains just a portion of the intronic sequence essential to 
splicing, when the products of separate transcripts are brought together in 
trans, a fully functional secondary RNA structure for splicing is assembled. 
Also contrary to the usual situation in prokaryotes, most organellar group 
II introns have lost their protein genes, relying instead on nuclear-encoded 
host proteins (Perron et al. 1999; Vogel et al. 1999; Bonen and Vogel 2001; 
Jenkins and Barkan 2001; Rivier et al. 2001; Mohr and Lambowitz 2003; 
Ostheimer et al. 2003). Thus, group II introns not only can fragment into 
mutually dependent RNA molecules (like the snRNAs of the spliceosome), 
but also can recruit various host proteins to facilitate the splicing process. 
The involvement of these proteins in the removal of group II introns from 
pre-mRNAs constitutes a sort of loosely defined spliceosome (Perron et al. 
2004), albeit one that is quite different from that in the nucleus. 
Given the tendency for group II introns to both fragment and mobilize, 
the spliceosome may have evolved largely by a series of neutral processes 
involving duplication and degeneration (Cavalier-Smith 1991; Stoltzfus 
1999). Under this scenario, once a set of group II-derived, trans-acting frag-
ments had become fully cooperative, related group II introns recognizable 
by this incipient spliceosome would have experienced relaxed selection and 
eventual loss of self-splicing abilities. Such a scenario is a special case of the 
subfunctionalization process (see Chapter 8), an evolutionary pathway that 
is unlikely to proceed in large populations. The key issue here is whether a 
newly arisen trans-acting fragment is likely to maintain functionality dur-
ing the average 2Ng generations (where Ng is the effective number of genes 
per locus in the population) that it takes to drift to fixation. Letting u be 
the mutation rate per nucleotide site per generation and n be the number of 
nucleotide sites critical to fragment function, and following the logic laid 

GENES IN PIECES 
247 
out in Chapter 4, if 2Ngnu  1, virtually all potential descendants of the 
founding fragment would be inactivated by mutations by the time fixation 
had occurred. Given that 2Ngu is generally greater than 0.1 in free-living 
prokaryotes (see Chapter 4), a fragment containing more than ten or so key 
nucleotides would have a difficult time becoming established by neutral 
processes in this type of population genetic background. Consistent with 
this view, all of the group II intron fragments known in eubacteria appear 
to be incapable of trans cooperation and may simply be incapacitated rem-
nants of previously cohesive elements. On the other hand, because muta-
tional inactivation is an insignificant barrier to subfunctionalization when 
2Ng11U  1, the substantial reduction in 2Ngu that probably occurred dur-
ing the origin of eukaryotes (see Chapters 1-4) would have been conducive 
to the emergence of the spliceosome by fragmentation. 
Despite the attractiveness of the group II-seeding hypothesis for the ori-
gin of spliceosomal introns, several significant questions remain to be 
answered. First, how did mobile group II elements themselves originate? 
Did reverse transcriptase become associated with a self-splicing intron, 
endowing it with mobility? Or are group II introns non-LTR retrotrans-
posons with acquired self-splicing ability? Whereas the joint use of target-
primed reverse transcription by both classes of elements is an argument in 
favor of the latter, the absence of non-LTR elements from prokaryotes is not. 
Second, if the spliceosome arose via the subfunctionalization of a group II 
intron within the nuclear genome, then wby have no nuclear group II introns 
yet been found? (A portion of one plant nuclear intron has been fow1d to be 
homologous to a mitochondrial group II intron, but this may simply be a 
secondary transfer of an organelle fragment into a preexisting spliceosomal 
intron; Kudla et al. 2002.) Third, following subfunctionalization of the ances-
tral group II intron, how did the individual RNA fragments liberate them-
selves from their original host genes to become autonomous contributors to 
a more generalized splicing reaction? Given the antiquity of the events that 
gave rise to the spliceosome, definitive answers to these questions may be 
beyond reach, and we now return to more tractable matters. 
Mechanisms of Origin and Loss 
Althougb early comparative studies suggested that stochastic intron origin 
and loss are ongoing in all species (Hankeln et al. 1997; Frugoli et al. 1998; 
Logsdon et al. 1998; O'Neill, Brennan et al. 1998; Robertson 2000; Boudet et 
al. 2001; Watanabe and Ohama 2001; Feiber et al. 2002; Krzywinski and Besan-
sky 2002; Wada et al. 2002), the physical processes leading to intron birth and 
death have remained enigmatic. One proposed mechanism of intron loss is 
reverse transcription of a processed mRNA (its introns already having been 
spliced out) followed by gene conversion of the parental gene (Fink 1986; 
Palmer and Logsdon 1991) (Figure 9.5). This mechanism does not account 
for the fact that most genes that lose one intron retain others (Krzywinski 
and Besansky 2002; Wada et al. 2002), unless only fractions of reverse tran-

248 
CHAPTER 9 
Figure 9.5 Two mechanisms of 
intron loss: reverse transcription fol-
lowed by gene conversion (left), 
and genomic deletion (right). DNA 
is denoted by solid lines and RNA 
by dotted lines. Intronic DNA is 
shown in blue. Because the break 
points are arbitrary, genomic dele-
tion may leave behind a small patch 
of intronic DNA (as shown) and/or 
eliminate flanking exonic DNA. 
Transcription and splicing 
.. 
Reverse transcription of mRNA 
Homologous recombination 
Genomic deletion 
.. 
x .. ----
scripts are involved in such conversions. In principle, intron loss via reverse 
transcripts should exhibit a 3' bias because reverse transcriptase moves in a 
3'----75' direction, sometimes failing to go to completion, but the entire process 
is expected to be rare in animals, as it must be restricted to genes whose h'an-
scripts are present in the germ line. Although some animals and a few fungi 
do exhibit a paucity of introns at the 3' end, the general pattern is weak to 
nonexistent (Lynch and Kewalramani 2003; S. Cho et al. 2004; Nielsen et al. 
2004; Niu et al. 2005; Roy and Gilbert 2005b; Jeffares et al. 2006). 
An alternative mechanism of intron loss is simple genomic deletion. Such 
a modification need not always involve precise intronic removal, but if it 
yields a gain or loss of 311 coding nucleotides (where 11 is an arbitrary inte-
ger), the downstream reading frame will remain intact, resulting in codon 
addition or loss to the host gene. Provided tl,at no in-frame termination 
co dons are generated, and that the modified protein remains fully func-
tional, such mutant alleles may sometimes spread through a population 
(Golding et al. 1994; Llopart et al. 2002). 
The mechanisms of intron gain have been equally elusive. One suggested 
route involves the tandem duplication of an internal fragment of coding 
DNA containing an AGGT teh'amer (Rogers 1990), a process that neatly cre-
ates an intervening sequence with conventional 5' GT and 3' AG splice sites 
as well as the G IG context noted above; ... AG I gt ... ag I GT ... , where the 
segment with lowercase letters denotes the new intron. Barriers to the de 
novo production of introns by this route include the need for fortuitous 
inclusions of a functional branch-point sequence, exon splicing enhancers, 
and so forth (see Figure 9.l), but circumstantial evidence for this mode of 
origin derives from sequence within novel introns in several fish genes that 
aligns well with surrounding exonic sequence (Venkatesh et al. 1999). 

GENES IN PIECES 
249 
Transposable elements are a second potential source of introns (Purug-
ganan and Wessler 1992; Kidwell and Lisch 2000). Retrotransposons cannot 
deliver introns, as introns are spliced out of the primary transcripts of such 
elements prior to mobilization, and there is no evidence that mobile element 
insertions typically carry the complete repertoire of recognition signals that 
would enabJe the spliceosome to treat them as de novo introns. However, 
mobile element insertions can sometimes alter the spatial configuration of 
cryptic splice sites within host genes so as to activate a new pattern of splic-
ing that fortuitously excludes the element from the mature mRNA (Pret et 
al. 1991; Giroux et al. 1994; Luehrsen et al. 1994; Nouaud et al. 1999; H. Lin 
et al. 2006). Such insertions usually induce some change in the coding 
sequence of the mature mRNA, and there is no guarantee that a functional 
product will remain, but cases are known in which transposons inserted 
into plant genes are spliced out precisely from mRNAs (Wessler 1989; Lal 
and Hmmah 1999). 
One of the most striking examples of an association between mobile ele-
ments and introns involves the Tel and Te4 transposons of C. elegans, which 
are typically removed from host mRNAs prior to translation (Li and Shaw 
1993; Rushforth and Anderson 1996). Altllough such pre-mRNA excisions 
are imprecise and stochastically leave behind small insertions, deletions, or 
substitutions, it appears that frameshifted transcripts are eliminated from 
cells by mRNA surveillance (described below), leaving only a subpopula-
tion of mature mRNAs with continuous open reading frames. Even more 
remarkably, excision of Tel elements fr0111 the genome can lead to de novo 
modifications of preexisting introns. As with most transposons, genomic 
excision of Tel is imprecise, often leaving behind a TGTA insert in the host 
DNA (Carr and Anderson 1994), but in spite of the expected frameshift, 
many revertant alleles have no obvious phenotypic effects. This results from 
the Tel remnant operating as a new 5' splice site, T I gta, which is similar to 
the canonicalS' splice site of C. elegans and alters the downstream reading 
frame in only a fraction of cases. These observations clearly suggest how 
mobile element insertion/ excision cycles might give rise to expansions or 
contractions of intron-exon junctions (Carr and Anderson 1994), a phe-
nomenon often referred to as intron sbding (Stoltzfus et al. 1997). 
A third potential mechanism of intron birth, duplication of a released 
intron from an mRNA and its reintegration at an ectopic site (Sharp 1985; 
Lynch and Richardson 2002), requires three fortuitous steps. First, while 
remaining transiently combined with a recently excised intron, at least part 
of the spliceosome would have to reattach to a previously unoccupied but 
potentially useful splice site in a foreign mRNA. Second, the armed spliceo-
some would have to catalyze a reverse-spbcing reaction to insert the intron. 
Third, the modified mRNA would need to be reverse-transcribed into a 
DNA capable of moving the intron into its new genomic site by homolo-
gous recombination with the host gene. Despite the intricacies involved, this 
model has a number of appealing features: (1) the inserted sequence would 
be immediately endowed with internal intron signature sequences; (2) 

250 
CHAPTER 9 
spliceosomal recruitment to the recipient mRNA by conventional processes 
provides a mechanism for preferential insertion into coding regions con-
taining appropriate splice-site recognition sequences; and (3) insertion of 
the new inhon need not occur at the expense of coding DNA. The proposed 
scenario is also mechanistically plausible. Immediately following splicir'g, 
the U2, US, and U6 snRNPs (the spliceosomal components most likely to be 
catalytic) remain transiently attached to intron lariats (Burge et al. 1999), and 
the -10-30-minute half-life of spliced introns (Clement et al. 2001) is suffi-
cient to allow some reverse splicing. In principle, intron duplication might 
even proceed without an RNA intermediate for the recipient gene and with-
out any involvement of the spliceosomal components. In almost all eukary-
otes, retrotransposons produce reverse transcriptases and endonucleases 
for self-mobilization, and as noted in Chapter 7, this mobility apparatus 
occasionally switches from its parental transcript to alternative RNA tem-
plates, leading to novel insertions via target-primed reverse transcription. 
There are no obvious reasons why excised introns would be immune to this 
process. 
Support for the reverse-splicing hypothesis derives from several obser-
vations. First, duplication of an intron into an ectopic site in its own host 
gene seems particularly likely given the close proximity of excised intron 
and host mRNA during normal splicing processes. A comparative analysis 
across Drosophila genomes has revealed three examples of intron duplica-
tion within the xanthine dehydrogenase locus (Tanio et al. 1998), and five 
pairs of homologous introns 1,ave been found in the same host gene in 
Caenol'habditis (Coghlan and Wolfe 2004). Second, because intron gain by 
reverse splicing requires the donor and / or recipient gene to be transcrip-
tionally active in the germ line of animals, it is noteworthy that intron gain 
is disproportionately common in Caenorhabditis germ line-expressed genes 
(Coghlan and Wolfe 2004). Third, the reverse-splicing hypothesis is consis-
tent with the presence of spliceosomal introns in some of the tiny U1, U2, 
US, and U6 snRNA genes of yeasts (Tani and Ohshima 1991; Takahashi et 
al. 1993, 1996). Spliceosomal introns are extremely uncommon in non cod-
ing genes, but as the snRNAs are part of the catalytic core of the spliceo-
some, they reside in an optimal intracellular environment for acquiring 
introns by reverse splicing. 
Do introns preferentially insert themselves into coding DNA with par-
ticular sequence motifs? In animals and land plants, introns are often sur-
rounded by AG I .. 1 (A/G), where 1 ... 1 denotes the intron, although the 
bias is not great (Long et al. 1998). Dibb and Newman (1989) suggested that 
such patterns result from the preferential insertion of introns into fortuitous 
"proto-splice" sites in host genes, but it is difficult to rule out alternative 
hypotheses, including de novo production of such sites and random inser-
tion followed by differential postcolonization success. For example, as noted 
above, the internal duplication of an exonic region containing an AGGT will 
yield an AG 1 gt ... ag 1 GT sequence, and flanking nucleotides involved in 
spliceosomal guidance can be promoted by natural selection (Zhuang and 

GENES IN PIECES 
251 
Weiner 1989; Carmel et al. 2004). Nevertheless, the proto-splice site hypoth-
esis draws support from an observed weak decline in the information con-
tent of flanking exonic regions with intron age in multicellular species (Kent 
and Zahler 2000; Sverdlov et al. 2003; Coghlan and Wolfe 2004), and from 
the observation that cryptic unoccupied splice sites in the exons of one 
species sometimes harbor introns in related species (Sadusky et al. 2004). 
One of the most striking examples of an insertion-site association is the 
unusually high incidence of phase 1 introns within the signal peptide cleav-
age sites commonly found at the glycine-rich N-terminal ends of mam-
malian cell-surface proteins, which, as noted above, serve as potential 
G 1 ... 1 G insertion sites (Tordai and Patthy 2004). The observation that 
nuclear and mitochondrial ribosomal protein genes (which are believed to 
have separate stem eukaryotic and prokaryotic ancestries; see Chapter 1) 
contain numerous inh'ons at identical nucleotide sites is also consistent with 
the hypothesis that intron colonization is promoted by local sequence con-
texts (Yoshihama et al. 2006). 
The Intrinsic Cost of Introns 
lntrons impose a flmdamental cost on their host genes at two levels. First, 
because introns are copied into precursor mRNAs, they decrease the effi-
ciency and fidelity of transcript production. Cells produce dozens to hun-
dreds of mRNAs per gene per cell cycle, so the investment in nucleotides at 
the RNA level can be considerable. Tran cripts elongate at rat s of -20-40 
bp per second in eukaryotic cells (Reines et al. 1996; Jackson et al. 2000), so 
an average human gene, with -1.3 kb of total coding DNA interspersed 
among eight introns with average lengths of 4.8 kb, requires -22 minutes 
for complete transcription (not including the Wl.translated end sequences), 
about thirty times the time required for an intron-free allele. Errors in splic-
ing (discussed below) are also expected to yield Ul1productive transcripts, 
imposing a further wastage of nucleotides. 
A second price paid by intron-containing alleles is an excess rate of muta-
tion to nonfunctional alleles associated with nucleotide substitutions at sites 
required for proper spliceosomal recognition (Moore 2000; Lynch 2002b). 
The removal of each intron from a pre-mRNA depends on a diffuse pre-
translational code (see Figure 9.1). For example, spliceosomal introns uni-
versally have specific short terminal sequence requirements for proper exci-
sion, almost always GT at the 5' end and AG at the 3' end in the case of 
U2-dependent introns, with longer tracts of conservation in the case of U12-
dependent introns. Many animal, plant, and fungal introns also have 
polypyrimidine tracts of about ten nucleotides just upstream of the canon-
ical AG, and in some species, such as Caenorhabditis elegans, this sequence is 
highly conserved (Blumenthal and Steward 1997; Simpson, Thow et al. 2002; 
Kupfer et al. 2004; Abril et al. 2005). In addition, an interior branch point 
A, located an appropriate distance from the downstream AG, is an essen-
tial feature of all spliceosomal introns. Although the sequence surround-

252 
CHAPTER 9 
ing the branch point is generally quite variable, S. cerevisiae and many other 
yeasts exhibit essentially invariant seven-nucleotide branch points (TAC-
TAAC) as well as invariant 5 bp sequences at 5' splice sites (Burge et al. 1999; 
Bon et al. 2003). Remarkably, intense selection for splicing in mammalian 
cell cultures yields this same branch-point sequence (Lund et al. 2000), a 
finding that is consistent with the idea that the lack of conservation in mul-
ticellular species is a consequence of inefficient selection (to be discussed 
more fully below). 
A number of other requirements for intron recognition and splicing are 
less specific. For example, land plant introns have elevated A/T contents rel-
ative to adjacent exons (Lorkovic et al. 2000), as do the introns of many other 
lineages (see Chapter 6), and in some cases tile mere insertion of an A/T-rich 
region into a plant gene can result in the de novo production of an intron, 
with the spliceosome relying on the nearest cryptic splice signals for intron 
delimitation (Luehrsen and Walbot 1994). Vertebrate introns are commonJy 
enriched with specific trinucleotides that serve as intron splicing enhancers 
(ISEs; Majewski and Ott 2002; Yeo et al. 2004), and the splicing efficiency of 
some mammalian introns is influenced further by inh'onic secondary struc-
ture in pre-mRNAs (Buratti and Baralle 2004). Either too low or too high a 
degree of sequence complementarity between the 5' end of an intron and tile 
Ul snRNA can inhibit splicing (Carmel et al. 2004), and circumstantial evi-
dence also suggests that intron lengths can be under stabilizing selection 
(Schaeffer 2002; Parsch 2003; Ometto et al. 2005). Many more subtle aspects 
of splice-site recognition associated with intronic sequences probably remain 
to be discovered. For example, the introns of more than 95% of human genes 
contain latent (unused) 5' splice sites that are more similar to the consensus 
splicing sequence than the ones that are actually used (Miriami et al. 2002). 
In most of these cases, use of the altemative downstream splice sites would 
introduce in-frame premature termination codons into tIle mature transcript. 
Remarkably, when such nonsense triplets are removed, the spliceosome 
switches to the more compliant site (B. Li et al. 2002), suggesting that such 
triplets are involved in splicing inhibition. 
Despite its central importance, the information contained witllin introns 
is often insufficient for proper localization of the splice os orne, particularly 
in the case of very large introns containing numerous spurious recognition 
sites (Mount et al. 1992; Burge et al. 1999; Long and Deutsch 1999). Supple-
mental information is often contaiJled within the surrounding exons in the 
form of ex on splicing enhancers (ESEs) and silencers (ESSs). Typically four 
to ten nucleotides in length (Liu et al. 1998; Schaal and Maniatis 1999; 
Blencowe 2000), ESEs facilitate splicing by recruiting a variety of SR pro-
teins, each of which contains one or more sequence-specific RNA recogni-
tion motifs and an arginine/serine-rich domain that helps secure the splic-
ing apparatus (Graveley 2000). ESSs attract a separate set of proteins that 
inhibit local splicing, and the antagonism between these two types of activ-
ities, along with input from ISEs and ISSs, serves to coordinate the exact 
location of a splice site (Zhu et al. 2001; Z. Wang et al. 2004). The ancient use 

GENES IN PIECES 
253 
of ESSs is suggested by the demonstration that ESSs derived from verte-
brate genes enhance the splicing of pre-mRNAs in the fission yeast S. pombe 
(c. J. Webb et al. 2005). 
The critical importance of ESEs and ESSs is revealed by numerous obser-
vations on human genes. First, many human genetic disorders are caused 
by splicing errors resulting from point mutations in exons (Cooper and Mat-
tox 1997; Nissim-Rafinia and Kerem 2002), with over 25% of nucleotide sub-
stitutions in silent sites resulting in a splicing defect (Pagani et al. 2005). Sec-
ond, 2%-4% of exonic sequence matches the signatures of known ESSs, with 
about five such clumps per ex on (Fairbrother et al. 2002). The significantly 
different frequencies of various nucleotide oligomers in intron-containing 
versus intron-free genes (Fedorov, Saxonov et al. 2001) is a likely reflection 
of selection for such sequences, as are the general tendency for silent-site 
sequences in exon termini to evolve unusually slowly (Majewski and Ott 
2002; Halligan et al. 2004) and the reduced levels of sequence polymorphism 
in ESE motifs relative to other neighboring regions of the genome (Carlini 
and Genut 2006). This diverse set of observations leaves little doubt that the 
need for accurate splicing mechanisms has pronounced side effects on the 
coding sequence of exons, possibly even compromising the functional effi-
ciency of the proteins encoded by some host genes (Marais et al. 2005). 
The key point here is that mutations that alter the sequences of any 
nucleotide sites critical to intron processing can completely abrogate an 
intron's capacity to be spliced. Such intron-debilitating mutations will result 
in intron expansion or contraction, and the modified mRNA will yjeld a new 
protein with either a loss or a gain of aJ:Itino acids, usually with an accom-
panying change in reading frame and loss of gene function. Summing over 
the conserved positions at the 5' and 3' splice sites, internal branch point, 
3' polypyrimidine tract, and exon splicing enhancers and silencers, the effec-
tive number of bases reserved for splicing appears to be on the order of 25 
per intron, and perhaps somewhat higher for larger introns. Thus, letting 
the mutation rate per base per generation be LI, each additional intron 
increases a gene's mutation rate to defective alleles by an amount in the 
neighborhood of 25u, where u "" 10-9 in unicellular species and approaches 
10-7 in large multicellular species (see Chapter 4). 
Introns and Population Size 
As noted in Chapter 3, whereas most multicellular species harbor an aver-
age of five to seven introns per protein-coding gene, many unicellular 
eukaryotes have only a handful in the entire genome. In principle, such dis-
parities could reflect major differences in molecular mechanisms for intron 
gain or loss among eukaryotic lineages, but as yet there is no evidence that 
diversity in intron abundance is a consequence of variation in cell biologi-
cal features. Thus, we must look to population-level processes that modify 
the success rate of newly derived intron-containing or intron-free alleles. 
One possibility is that the reduction in the efficiency of natural selection in 

254 
CHAPTER 9 
species with smaller effective population sizes magnifies the probability of 
colonization and retention of innately deleterious introns (Lynch 2002b). 
For newly arisen introns having no functional significance for the prod-
ucts of their host genes, the primary force opposing their ability to spread 
throughout a population is their excess mutation rate to defective alleles (s), 
and because this force is expected to be quite weak, selection will be inef-
fective in preventing intron colonization in populations experiencing sub-
stantiallevels of random genetic drift. Letting Ng be the effective number of 
Box 9 .1 The Population Genetic Barrier to Intron 
Proliferation 
As discussed in Chapter 4, differences among alleles in their rate of mutation to defective 
products have essentially the same effect on their fixation probabilities as weak selection. In 
the present context, this observation allows the use of standard diffusion theory to evaluate 
the probability that a newly arisen intron-containing allele will go to fixation. Letting S be 
the excess deleterious mutation rate for an intron-containing allele and Ng be the effective 
number of genes at the locus in the population (approximately twice the effective size of a 
diploid outcrossing population), the probability of fixation of a newly arisen intron relative 
to the neutral expectation 
(which is equivalent to the 
initial frequency of the mu-
tation) is 2 Ngs/(e2NgS - 1). 
The converse situation, the 
probability that a newly aris-
en intron-free allele will be-
come fixed in an intron-con-
taining background, can be 
evaluated by substituting -s 
for s in this expression. The 
outcome depends entirely 
on the ratio of the power of 
differential mutation to the 
power of random genetic 
drift, 2Ngs. For 2Ngs < 1, the 
probabilities of fixation and 
loss are very close to the 
neutral expectation, but 
above 2Ngs = 1, there is a 
precipitous decline in the 
fixation probability and an 
equally dramatic increase in 
the loss probability (Figure 
9.6). Thus, 2Ngs > 1 demar-
cates an approximate barri-
er to intron colonization and 
retention. 
1000 
Loss 
100 
10 
1 
0.1 
0.01 
Fixation 
Figure 9 .6 Probabilities of fixation of a newly arisen intron 
(lower curve) and of a newly arisen intron-free allele (upper 
curve) relative to the neutral expectation. Solid lines denote the-
oretical expectations, whereas points are derived from computer 
simulations. The dashed line is the neutral expectation. (From 
Lynch 2002b.) 

GENES IN PIECES 
255 
genes at a locus in a population, the condition 2Ngs > 1 defines the approx-
imate population genetic barrier to intron colonization (Box 9.1; Figure 9.6). 
For situations in which 2Ngs I, the power of random genetic drift, l iNg, 
ovelwhelms the power of selection, enabling introns to proliferate in an effec-
tively neutral manner, but when 2Ngs  I, intron establishment is essen-
tially prohibited. Because the preceding observations on splice-site recogni-
tion requirements indicate that S "" 25u, where u is the mutation rate per base 
per generation, the barrier to intron colonization translates to 2Ngu > 0.04. 
This benchmark is of practical utility because, as discussed in Chapter 4, ob-
served levels of nucleotide diversity at silent sites in protein-coding genes 
(Jrs) provide empirical estimates of 2Ngu. 
The limited data available are consistent with this hypothesized popu-
lation genetic barrier to intron establishment. For almost all species with Jrs 
< 0.01, most of which are multicellular, the mean number of introns per gene 
is nearly independent of Jrs' Above this point, there is a drop-off in the inci-
dence of introns, with the approximate threshold falling in the range of 0.02 
< Jrs < 0.06 (Figure 9.7). Because of the short-term nature and potential bias 
of Jrs estimates, and because of the stochastic nature of intron gain and loss, 
this relationship cmmot be expected to be perfect, but it is compatible with 
the predicted Jrs = 0.04 thresllold. The most extreme cases of intron num-
ber reduction are the unicellular kinetoplastids Leishmania major and Try-
panosomn brucei, neither of which has been found to contain spliceosomal 
inh"ons, and the diplomonad Giardia lamblia, with only three introns detected 
genome-wide (Russell et a1. 2005). However, not all unicellular species have 
]04 
co 
o 
0 
Length (bp) 
103 
o 
0 
102 
0 
o 
o 
o 
101 
  
 
 
 
10 
 
 
I 
10-1 
  
10-2 
 
 
Number I gene 
 
10-4 '-::-_-'---"---'-~....L...I....J...L:----'---<_"""-'-L..J....L-'-:-_-'--.J 
10-3 
10-2 
10-1 
Silent-site variation (Jrs) 
Figure 9.7 The relationship of 
the average number of introns per 
gene (solid points) and average in-
tron length (bp, open points) to 
estimates of 2Ngu derived from 
levels of nucleotide variation at 
silent sites in protein-coding genes 
in eukaryotic species (see Chapter 
4). All species-specific estimates of 
intron properties are based on sur-
veys of the entire genome (black, 
vertebrates; red, invertebrates; 
green, land plants; purple, unicel-
lular and oligocellular species). 
The shaded gray region denotes a 
rough transition between intron-
rich and intron-poor taxa. (Data 
from Lynch 2006a and a few addi-
tional recent references.) 

256 
CHAPTER 9 
reduced numbers of introns. For example, Plasmodium falciparum (the malar-
ial parasite), which has a much lower level of 1[s than any other well-char-
acterized unicellular eukaryote, has -1.5 introns per gene. 
Because the barrier to intron colonization is a function of the product of 
Ng and 5, the preceding theory also predicts that introns with more strin-
gent recognition requirements (larger 5) will be less frequent. Quite striking 
in this regard is the substantial reduction in intron numbers in S. cerevisiae 
(which has only 250 in the entire genome) and other hemiascomycetes (Bon 
et al. 2003), which have a much higher degree of intronic sequence conser-
vation than other well-studied eukaryotes. Fission yeast (5. pombe), for which 
intronic sequences are much less conserved, has roughly 20 times as many 
introns as S. cerevisiae (Wood et al. 2002). A high degree of conservation of 
splice-site sequences is also seen in the red alga Cyanidioschyzon memlae, 
whose entire genome contains only 27 introns (Matsuzaki et al. 2004), as 
well as within (and between) the deeply branching lineages containing Gia-
rdia and Trichomonas (Russell et al. 2005; Vartacova et al. 2005), both of which 
are highly depauperate with respect to introns. Similar reasoning helps 
explain the extreme rarity of U12- relative to U2-dependent introns, as the 
former have highly conserved 5' splice sites (ATATCCTI) and branch-point 
sequences (TCCTIAAC), in contrast to the relaxed sequence requirements 
for U2-dependent introns described above. 
Rates of Intron Gain and Loss 
The average number of introns per protein-coding gene is ultimately a func-
tion of the relative rates of intron gain and loss by physical processes and 
of the ability of natural selection to eradicate or promote alleles with and 
without introns. Provided the effective population size and the physical 
rates of intron insertion and removal remain stable for a sufficiently long 
time, the average number of introns within a lineage is expected to approach 
a quasi-equilibrium level, although the precise locations of introns will still 
vary as a result of stochastic turnover. Sufficient data for estimating intron 
turnover rates exist for just a few species, but the results are quite consis-
tent. For example, in a comparison of the genomes of the nematodes C. ele-
gans and C. briggsae, 263 of -2700 introns were found to be unique to a sin-
gle species (Kent and Zahler 2000). Using 95 million years as the estimated 
divergence time between these two species (Stein et al. 2003), the rate of 
turnover per intron is inferred to be 0.51 per billion years per lineage. This 
estimate is a bit misleading, in that it is conditional on one member of a pair 
of species containing an intron at a site, but it can be standardized to account 
for the number of potential sites of occupancy by dividing by the average 
number of coding nucleotides per occupied site (assuming that introns are 
free to insert themselves at any position in a coding region). Application of 
this procedure to Caenorhabditis and several other pairs of multicellular 
species yields estimates in the narrow range of 0.001-0.003 turnovers per 
coding nucleotide per billion years (Table 9.1). 

GENES IN PIECES 
257 
TABLE 9.1 Estimates of intron occupancy per coding nucleotide [P) 
and rates of intron turnover [.1), birth [B), and death (0) 
for various pairs of multicellular species 
CODING 
DIVER-
SITES/ 
INTRONS/ 
GENCE 
SPECIES 
GENE (BP) 
GENE 
TIME (MY) 
P 
.1 
B 
D 
Caenorhabditis 
1250 
5.0 
95 
0.0040 
0.0020 
0.0010 
0.25 
Drosophila 
1660 
4.7 
50 
0.0028 
0.0022 
0.0011 
0.39 
Mammals 
1300 
7.6 
75 
0.0058 
0.0008 
0.0004 
0.07 
Land plants 
1800 
6.2 
150 
0.0034 
0.0033 
0.0016 
0.47 
Cryptococcus 
1620 
5.3 
18 
0.0033 
0.0004 
0.0002 
0.06 
Plasmodium 
1790 
1.2 
100 
0.0007 
0.00004 
0.00002 
0.03 
Theileria 
1506 
2.2 
82 
0.0015 
0.00003 
0.00002 
0.01 
Note: All rates are per coding nucleotide per billion years. Average total numbers of coding nucleotides per gene 
are taken from Table 3.2. Data and times to common ancestors are taken from Kent and Zahler (2000) and Stein 
et at. (2003) for C. elegans and C. briggsne; Moriyama et al. (1998) and Russo et al. (1995) for D. melnl10gnster and 
D. virilis; Waterston et al. (2002) for M. I1lUSCUIIlS and H. sapiens; Ku et al. (2000) for Arnbidopsis and Lycopersicol/; 
Stajich and Dietrich (2006) for Cryptococcus neojor7llnns var. grubii and var. neojof/I/ans; Casti llo-Davis et al. (2004) 
and Roy and Hartl (2006), averaging, for Plaslllodiwl/ jnlciparul1l and P. yoe/ii; and Pain et al. (2005) and Roy and 
PerulY (2006) for Theileria n717lulaia and T. parvn. Intron numbers per gene are from Lynch (2006a). 
Under the assumption of equilibrium numbers of introns per gene, joint 
information on intron turnover and intron occupancy can be used to esti-
mate rates of intron birth and death (Box 9.2). Letting the number of introns 
per base pair of coding DNA be P, the molecular rates of intron gain per 
unoccupied site and loss per occupied site be B and D respectively, and S = 
2Ngs, the equilibrium level of intron occupancy is P '" BI (DeS), provided the 
level of intron occupancy is less than 0.01, which is virtually always the case. 
For cases in which selection is ineffective (S  1), the level of intron occu-
pancy reduces further to a simple function of physical processes, P '" BID. 
The equilibrium rate of intron turnover within a lineage is J '" (2SB) I (es -
1), which is very close to Ll '" 2B provided that S < 0.3. Thus, as a first-order 
approximation, ignoring the terms involving selection, J/2 provides a 
downwardly biased estimate ofthe intron birth rate B, and Ll I (2P) provides 
an upwardly biased estimate of the intron loss rate D. Because S '" 257[s' and 
7[s is generally in the range of 0.001-0.1 in eukaryotes (see Chapter 4), the 
bias of such estimates will be pronounced only for species at the high end 
of the 7[s range (typically unicellular species), and even then, the estimates 
are unlikely to be off by much more than a factor of three. 
Within the pairs of species in Table 9.1, the average numbers of introns 
per gene are highly similar, providing some justification for the use of these 
equilibrium expressions (although it is formally possible that two lineages 
could exhibit similar intron numbers because they are experiencing parallel 
patterns of expansion I contraction). For example, both species of Caenorhab-

258 
CHAPTER 9 
Box 9.2 Intron Occupancy and Turnover 
Here we examine the joint consequences of the molecular processes of intron gain and 
loss and the ability of natural selection to inhibit gains and promote losses. Specifically, we 
consider the situation in which these processes have remained constant for a long enough 
time for the level of intron occupancy to have reached an equilibrium between the net 
forces of gain and loss. Letting P denote the equilibrium occupancy, defined as the frac-
tion of coding nucleotides that are immediately followed by an intron, the equilibrium 
point is the value of P at which the number of gains per unit time is equal to the number 
of losses, 
P2ND pj = (1-P)2NB PI 
where D is the rate of intron loss per occupied site per gene, B is the rate of intron birth 
per unoccupied site per gene, and N is the size of the population (here assumed to be 
diploid, which has no influence on the following results). To understand this expression, 
note that for each occupied site, 2ND mutations to an intron-free state are experienced at 
the population level per generation, each of which goes to fixation with probability p/; a 
similar explanation defines the rate of intron gains on the right side of the preceding 
equation. 
From Chapter 4, the probabilities of fixation of beneficial (intron loss) and detrimental 
(intron gain) mutations are, respectively, 
+ 5/ (2N) 
Pf = 1 
-5 
-e 
_ 
5/ (2N) 
Pf=- 1 
5 
-e 
where S = 2Ngs, with Ng being the effective number of genes at a locus and 5 being 
the selection coefficient (here equivalent to the excess mutation rate to defective alleles 
ditis have ~5.0 introns per gene (Stein et al. 2003), and mice and humans have 
7.4 and 7.7, respectively (Lynch and Conery 2003b). Applying the preced-
ing formulae, the birth rates of introns in most lineages fall in the range of 
0.0002-0.0016 per coding nucleotide site per billion years, whereas most esti-
mated rates of intron loss are in the range of 0.06-0.57 per intron per billion 
years (see Table 9.1). (TI1e estimates of Band D for the apicomplexans Plas-
modium and Theileria fall substantially below these ranges, suggesting an 
overall reduction in the physical dynamics of introns in this lineage; Roy and 
PelU1Y 2006.) Rates of the same order of magnitude have been inferred using 
other phylogenetic approaches that do not rely on an equilibrium assump-
tion (S. Cho et al. 2004; Nielsen et al. 2004; Roy and Gilbert 2005c; Knowles 
and McLysaght 2006). Unless parallel gains of introns have caused a sub-
stantial misinterpretation of levels of intron sharing, these results indicate 
that introns within most lineages have been remarkably stable for the past 
100 million years or so of evolutionary history, with average half-lives (1/0) 
on the order of several billion years, exceeding the age of eukaryotes. 

GENES IN PIECES 
259 
caused by an individual intron). The use of these expressions assumes that the selective 
disadvantage of an intron gain is essentially equivalent to the selective advantage of an 
intron loss, which will not necessarily be the case for introns that have taken on key 
functions. Using the useful relationship P/lPf- = eS, the equilibrium occupancy is found 
to be 
which reduces to 
p= B/(Des) 
B/(Des)+l 
p = 
(B I D) 
(BID)+l 
when selection is ineffective (S  1). 
The rate of intron turnover is the joint rate at which occupied sites lose introns and un-
occupied sites gain them, 
LI = [p. 2ND pj ]+ [(l -P)  2NB pi ] 
This description is reasonable even under nonequilibrium conditions, but further simplifi-
cation is possible at equilibrium, as substitution for P leads to 
LI= 
25/(es -1) 
(II B)+(11 Des) 
which, when selection is ineffective, reduces to the harmonic mean of Band 0, 
2 
LI=-----
(II B)+(11 D) 
Some further details can be found in Lynch (2002). 
Although crude, the birth rate estimates above provide some insight into 
the frequencies with which random insertions and deletions of DNA might 
give rise to new introns. From results discussed in Chapters 2 and 4, we 
know that the rate of insertion I deletion per nucleotide site (not including 
mobile element-induced events) is on the order of 10-10 to 10-8 per genera-
tion, whereas intron birth rates appear to be on the order of 10-16 to 10-11 per 
site per generation (after scaling the estimates in Table 9.1 by generation 
length), with the lower and higher ends of these ranges pertaining to uni-
cellular and multicellular species, respectively. This means that no more than 
0.0001 %-0.1 % of random insertion I deletion events need to give rise to new 
introns to account for the data. Thus, given that we have encountered sev-
eral mechanisms that can sometimes spontaneously generate new introns-
random internal duplications containing anAGGT tetramer, mobile element 
insertions, and AT-rich insertions-estimates of recent intron birth rates are 
not implausible in light of our knowledge of the molecular biology of today's 
organisms. Once the baseline recognition mechanisms of the spliceosome 

260 
CHAPTER 9 
were established, eukaryotes must have become vulnerable to the passive 
inclusion of random coding region insertions that previously would have 
yielded nonfunctional alleles. 
Open questions remain concerning the sources of the wide phylogenetic 
range of variation in intron numbers that exist among eukaryotic lineages. 
Did the ancestral eukaryote harbor large numbers of introns that were sub-
sequently lost from some unicellular lineages? Do the large numbers of 
introns in multicellular species reflect massive intron gain in the ancestors 
of land plants and animals? Or did both types of events playa role? In an 
early phylogenetic analysis of the triose phosphate isomerase gene, Logs-
don et al. (1995) found that 5 of 21 introns throughout the eukaryotic tree 
were shared by plants and animals. Given that these lineages appear to 
reside on opposite sides of the root of the eukaryotic tree (see Chapter 1), 
this observation suggested an abundance of introns in the stem eukaryote, 
substantial loss in most unicellular lineages, and extensive gain in the land 
plant and animal lineages. A similar conclusion arose from the observa-
tion that 8 of 56 known introns in actin genes are shared by species tra-
versing the eukaryotic root (Bhattacharya and Weber 1997). 
These matters were recently explored on a much larger scale with 
genome-wide phylogenetic analyses of introns in ancient genes conserved 
across deeply diverging lineages. For example, a parsimony analysis led 
Rogozin et al. (2003) to suggest that tIle basal bilaterian anilnal contained 
large numbers of introns, with significant losses occurring in the arthropod 
and nematode lineages and substantial gains occurring in vertebrates. 
Although an assumed absence of parallel intron losses may have yielded 
upwardly biased rates of intron gain and downwardly biased rates of intron 
loss in this study (Roy and Gilbert 2005a), independent support for an 
intron-rich ancestral animal derives from observations that most of the 
introns in sponges (basal anilnals) are also fOlmd in bilaterians (Muller et 
al. 2002) and that two-thirds of human introns are shared with annelids 
(Raible et al. 2005). 
Going further back in time, Rogozin et al. (2003) also concluded that the 
stem eukaryote was intron rich. This hypothesis is consistent with several 
additional lines of evidence (Lynch and Richardson 2002; Roy and Gilbert 
200Sa; Vartacova et al. 2005; Lynch 2006a; Slamovits and Keeling 2006), 
although an array of statistical methodologies and assumptions have led to 
considerable debate over the relative rates of intron gain and loss on vari-
ous branches of the eukaryotic tree (Qiu et al. 2004; Roy and Gilbert 2005c; 
Nguyen et al. 2005). To gain some insight into just how intron rich the stem 
eukaryote might have been, and into the difficulties associated with such 
an estimate, consider the observation that about 18% of the introns in ani-
mals occupy homologous insertion sites in land plants (Fedorov et al. 2002; 
Rogozin et al. 2003). If one is willing to ignore the possibility of parallel galllS 
of introns, then, given that these two lineages are on opposite sides of the 
root of the eukaryotic tree (see Chapter 1) and that both have an average of 
l
1
E
a
a
a
tl
S

GENES IN PIECES 
261 
approximately 5.0 introns per protein-coding gene, the 18% rate of inh'on 
sharing implies a minimum of one intron per protein-coding gene in the 
stem eukaryote. However, given the evidence in support of the proto-splice 
site hypothesis (described above) and the reliance of phylogenetic analyses 
on highly conserved genes (with stable insertion sites), it is by no means cer-
tain that parallel intron gains can be ruled out, especially on a time scale of 
a billion years. If parallel gains have occurred, the above estimate could be 
inflated substantially, but an even more intron-rich stem eukaryote cannot 
be ruled out either. Noting that animals and land plants diverged -1.6 bil-
lion years ago (see Chapter I), the rate of intron loss necessary to explain 
the current level of shared sites under the assumption of a steady-state aver-
age of five introns per gene is the solution to e-3.2D = 0.18, which yields 0 = 
0.54 per insertion per BY. Because this rate of loss is just slightly greater than 
the estimates in Table 9.1, extraordinary conditions do not have to be 
invoked to be compatible with a situation in which the stem eukaryote had 
as many introns as today's multicellular species. The substantial degree of 
uncertainty in these estimates highlights the need for an understanding of 
the molecular basis of intron gain and loss and the extent to which such 
events are likely to engender parallel changes. 
Although it has been argued that an intron-rich stem eukaryote is incon-
sistent with the idea that introns are intrinsically deleterious (Roy and 
Gilbert 2006), that is not correct. Rather, such an inferred condition is 
entirely compatible with the hypothesis that the stem eukaryote experi-
enced a long phase of relatively low Ng compared with many of today's 
unicellular eukaryotes (see Chapter 1). Such an episode would not only 
have facilitated the fixation of introns but, as noted above, could also have 
provided tIle conditions necessary for the emergence of the spliceosome 
itself. Moreover, the possibility that intron proliferation in the earliest stages 
of eukaryotic evolution was actively promoted by exceptional colonization 
mechanisms cannot be ruled out. Because the time between the origin of 
life and the origin of eukaryotes is -1 BY (see Chapter I), even in the com-
plete absence of intron loss, a typical 1.5 kb coding region would be unlikely 
to acquire more than a single intron by the time of the early diversifica-
tion of eukaryotes unless the early rate of intron insertion substantially 
exceeded the average estimate of B in Table 9.1 (-0.0006/ nucleotide 
site/BY). Thus, a scenario in which the stem eukaryote was intron rich 
appears to require a phase in which the physical processes of insertion were 
much more active than in modern species and/ or introns were favored 
by natural selection at the host level (yielding a rate of establishment in 
excess of the neutral expectation of B). Some possible selective mechanisms 
are discussed in the following section, but the fact that the stem eukary-
ote was almost certainly unicellular provides a compelling argument 
against the idea that the initial proliferation of introns was associated with 
the adaptive origin of features unique to multicellular species (e.g., tis-
sue-specific alternative splicing). 

262 
CHAPTER 9 
Adaptive Exploitation of Introns 
Although the initial establishment of spliceosomal introns may have been 
entirely a product of nonadaptive forces, once introns had spread through-
out the eukaryotic genome, the new norm of genes in pieces would have 
provided a novel physical structure for adaptive exploitation by descent 
with modification. In today's multicellular eukaryotes, almost all of the 
major events in the production of mature mRNAs are tightly coupled with 
exon definition and/ or intron splicing (Maniatis and Reed 2002). For exam-
ple, interactions between various splicing factors and elongation factor pro-
mote transcript elongation (Ares et al. 1999; Fong and Zhou 2001), alld splic-
ing indirectly facilitates mRNA export to the cytoplasm via a protein 
complex specifically deposited on spliced mRNAs (Luo and Reed 1999; Reed 
and Hurt 2002; Rose 2004). In addition, splicing signals associated with the 
final intron can be essential for efficient transcription termination (Dye and 
Proudfoot 1999; McCracken et al. 2002) and polyadenylation (Niwa et al. 
1990,1992). Given this diverse array of services associated with introns and 
their processing, as well as the residence of functional non coding sequences 
withill some introns (Sironi et al. 2005) and the involvement of mtrons in 
alternative splicing and mRNA surveillance (described below), it is possi-
ble that few of today's eukaryotes could survive without inhons. Even in 
the intron-depauperate yeast S. cerevisiae, experimental removal of introns 
from host genes results in reduced mRNA levels (Juneau et al. 2006). We 
now examine some of the ways ill which introns have been suggested to 
be mvolved in adaptive evolution. 
Modifiers of the recombination rate 
Genome-wide analyses indicate that mtron size and number ill crease in 
regions of low recombmation in D. melanognster (Carvalho and Clark 1999; 
Comeron and Kreitman 2000). Introns are also more abundant and longer 
in the G/ C-poor regions of vertebrate genomes, which are relatively reCOffi-
binationally quiescent (Duret et al. 1995). Although both trends are very 
weak, they have elicited both nonadaptive and adaptive explanations. Car-
valho and Clark (1999) suggest that the inverse relationship between illh'on 
size and recombination rate is a simple reflection of the reduced efficiency 
of selection against insertion mutations in regions of low recombination. 
In contrast, Comeron and Kreitntan (2000) argue that by magnifying the clis-
tance between some codons, intron expansion increases the intra genic 
recombination rate, thereby reducing the deleterious consequences of selec-
tive interference among tightly linked sites in coding exons. These two 
hypotheses could not be more different: the first invokes the expansion of 
introns as a symptom of the Hill-Robertson effect (see Chapter 4), and the 
second invokes it as a solution. 
Are the population genetic conditions necessary for the selective pro-
motion of intron expansion as a recombination frequency modifier likely to 

GENES IN PIECES 
263 
be met in many species? A simple argument suggests they are not. Because 
not all recombination events produce gametes with elevated fitness, and 
because the improvement in fitness associated with beneficial events is likely 
to be small, the selective advantage of a modifier of recombination is nec-
essarily less than the fractional increase in the recombination rate, and prob-
ably substantially so. Yet a 100 bp expansion in the physical distance 
between selected sites (which exceeds the gradient of average intron size 
across the entire Drosophila genome) is expected to increase the recombina-
tion frequency per meiotic event by just 10-7 to 10-5 (see Figure 4.6). Thus, 
witll effective population sizes in the range of 104 to 106 for animals (see 
Chapter 4) and the requirement for efficient selection being 2Ngs > 1, it 
appears wllikely that anything other than an enormous increase in intron 
length could be promoted by selection for increased recombination fre-
quency, and such alterations would probably have negative side effects asso-
ciated with reduced splicing efficiency. 
Carvalho and Clark's (1999) explanation for the association of intron 
abWldance and size with recombination frequency is fully compatible with 
the population genetic theory presented above. If reduced intron size has 
a weak selective advantage (due, for example, to increased rates of tran-
scription and/ or increased accmacy of pre-mRNA processing), the efficiency 
of selection for intron-shortening mutations (and against intron-enlarging 
mutations) is expected to be weaker in regions of low recombination. This 
same logic provides an explanation for the hWldrediold decline in average 
intron length with increasing Ngu across eukaryotes (see Figure 9.7). Nev-
ertheless, there are some remaining subtleties in intron size variation that 
remain to be explained, including a very weak positive association between 
intron size and recombination rate within the nematode C. elegans (Pra-
chumwat et al. 2004) and differences in the dynamics of intron size in auto-
somal versus X-linked genes in Drosophila (Presgraves 2006). The extent to 
which the de novo length distributions of insertions and deletions vary with 
the level of recombinational activity (see Chapter 4) will need to be incor-
porated into future studies if the contribution from selection is to be factored 
out in an wlbiased fashion. Even then, the very weak intron size gradients 
observed in previous intraspecific smveys indicate that the overall explana-
tory power of such work will be limited. 
Alternative splicing 
Introns provide multiple opportunities for enhancing protein diversity via 
the production of alternatively spliced forms of mRNAs, such as inclusion 
versus exclusion of an exon in the matme transcript (ex on skipping), com-
binatorial mixing of various exons (exon swapping), and modifications of 
5' and/ or 3' splice sites (Mayeda et al. 1999; Smith and Valcarcel2000; Grav-
eley 2001; Ladd and Cooper 2002; Roberts and Smith 2002; Xing and Lee 
2006) (Figure 9.8). At least 75% of human genes express alternatively spliced 
variants (Boue et al. 2003; Johnson et al. 2003), and high levels of alternative 

264 
CHAPTER 9 
Figure 9 .8 Some forms of alter-
native splicing. Colored bars de-
note exons, solid lines denote in-
trons, and dashed lines demarcate 
regions that are spliced out to 
produce the alternative mRNAs on 
the right. 
Exon skipping 
" 
I 
\ 
I, 
( 
, .... ' 
'--
Exon swapping 
Use of alternative splice site 
,," 
" 
splicing have also been observed in other multicellular species (Brett et al. 
2002; Okazaki et al. 2002; Stole et al. 2004), with some genes producing 
dozens to hundreds of distinct mRNAs. 
The mechanisms by which alternative splicing is accomplished are not 
entirely understood, but SR proteins, which bind exon splicing enhancers 
(as described above), are known to be involved. In humans, the SR family 
contains ten members with unique RNA-binding sequences (Graveley 2000), 
and other animals and land plants have multiple genes in this family as well 
(Lopato et al. 1996; Longman et al. 2000; Barbosa-Morais et al. 2006). Thus, 
variation in tissue-specific expression among SR family members provides 
a potential means for guiding the spliceosome toward alternative splice sites 
associated with different ESEs (Zahler et al. 1993), and further combinato-
rial possibilities are presented by ESSs, which are in turn bound by anotber 
variable family of proteins. 
From the standpoint of adaptation, alternative splicing provides a poten-
tially powerful mecbanism for resolving conflicts between alternative allelic 
states. If two separate alleles encode unique products that exhibit a favor-
able interaction, the fitness-enl1ancing effect is experienced only by het-
erozygotes, and suboptimal homozygotes are produced anew each gener-
ation by segregation. In contrast, if alternative splicing can produce two (or 
more) products from the same allele in sufficient quantity, fixation of such 
an allele will ensure the expression of both products in all individuals, poten-
tially in an advantageous tissue-specific manner. 
Nevertheless, the degree to which alternatively spliced mRNAs are prod-
ucts of adaptive evolution, as opposed to being simple artifacts of an imper-
fect splicing process, remains unclear (Levine and Durbin 2001; Sorek et 
al. 2004; Chern et al. 2006). Only a few clear examples of adaptive alterna-
tive splicing have been uncovered, most notably the sex determination cas-
cade in Drosophila (Tian and Maniatis 1993). Although numerous examples 
of alternative splicing in vertebrates superficially appear to be functionally 

GENES IN PIECES 
265 
critical (Stamm et a1. 2005), the evidence is mostly circumstantial in narure. 
For example, about 77% of the alternatively spliced exons conserved 
between humans and mice are flanked by intronic sequence more highly 
conserved than that of constitutively spliced introns, suggesting important 
functional constraints (Sorek and Ast 2003; Xing and Lee 2006). Among alter-
natively spliced human genes, 10%-30% exhibit tissue-specific expression 
(Xu et a1. 2002), and the alternatively spliced exons in these genes are very 
slightly biased toward lengths of 311, thereby preserving the reading frame 
(Xing and Lee 2005). 
Despite these suggestive observations, some evidence, mostly from 
humans, suggests that a great deal of alternative splicing may be nonadap-
tive. First, alternative splicing commonly produces mRNAs with frameshifts 
that yield premature termination codons (Stamm et aJ. 2005; Sorek et al. 2004; 
Xing and Lee 2004), making them targets for immediate elimination by the 
nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway (discussed in detail below). 
Although Mitrovich and Anderson (2000) and Lewis et a1. (2003) have 
argued that the production of such transcripts provides an effective cellu-
lar mechanism for regulating gene expression, there are many more direct 
routes to silencing a gene than turning it on (see Chapter 10), and the fact 
that most alternatively spliced variants are not regulated by NMD in a tis-
sue-specific manner further argues against this adaptive 11ypothesis (Pan et 
a1. 2006). Second, -75% of the alternatively spliced exons in humans are 
absent from mice, and these exons tend to be minor-form (numerically least 
abundant) variants with a substantial inflation in the incidence of frameshifts 
(Modrek and Lee 2003; Thanaraj et a1. 2003; Sorek et a1. 2004), consistent 
with the expectations for aberrant splicing products. Third, alternatively 
spliced exons exhibit higher rates of amino acid substitution (Chen et a1. 
2006) and higher levels of structural instability than constitutively spliced 
exons (Romero et a1. 2006). Although both patterns could be a consequence 
of recent adaptive recruitment of new exons, they are also consistent with 
a relax a tion of selection. Fourth, -5% of human alternatively spliced exons 
are derived from insertions of primate-specific Alu retrotransposons (see 
Chapter 3) harboring latent splice sites. Nearly a third of such exons are just 
a single nucleotide substitution away from being constitutively expressed 
as exons that cause genetic disorders (Sorek et a1. 2002; Lev-Maor et al. 2003; 
Kreahling and Graveley 2004). 
Messenger RNA surveillance 
One of the most significant services provided by introns is their indirect role 
in the cell's surveillance for transcripts harboring inappropriate premature 
termination codons (PTCs). PTC-containing mRNAs arise from the direct 
h'anscription of inherited mutant alleles as well as from errors in the tran-
scription or splicing of otherwise functional alleles. Eukaryotes protect them-
selves from the accumulation of potentially deleterious truncated proteins 
resulting from such transcripts via the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) 

266 
CHAPTER 9 
pathway, which elirrUnates a substantial fraction of PTC -contairUng mRNAs 
during their first round of translation (Hentze and Kulozik 1999; Gonzalez 
et al. 2001; Lykke-Andersen 2001; Mango 2001; Maquat and Carmichael 
2001; Wilusz et al. 2001; Maquat 2004, 2006). The need for mRNA surveil-
lance appears to be substantial. The transcriptional error rate is on the order 
of 10-5 per nucleotide (Ninio 1991; R. J. Shaw et al. 2002), so with 3/64 of 
random co dons denoting termination, base misincorporations are expected 
to yield 0.05%-0.5% PTC-containing transcripts for genes 103-104 coding 
nucleotides in length. Many additional inaccuracies undoubtedly arise from 
errors in transcription initiation and splicing (see Chapter 10). 
Numerous human genetic disorders associated with PTC-containing alle-
les are rendered recessive in the heterozygous state via the silencing effects 
of NMD (Frischmeyer and Dietz 1999), and the power of NMD is illustrated 
by experiments in which the pathway has been silenced. Such shldies show 
substantial increases in PTC-containing mRNAs, including those resulting 
from inappropriate alternative splicing and transcription from defective 
mobile elements and pseudogenes (Mendell et al. 2004; Mitrovich and 
Anderson 2005). Knockouts of the NMD pathway have small phenotypic 
effects in S. cerevisiae and s. pombe (Leeds et al. 1992; Dahlseid et al. 1998; 
Mendell et al. 2000), moderate fitness effects in C. elegans (Hodgkin et al. 
1989), and lethal effects in mjce (Medgha1chi et al. 2001). The enhanced sen-
sitivity of multicellular species to NMD inactivation may simply be a con-
sequence of greater rates of production of erroneous transcripts in complex 
genomes with more opportunities for splicing errors, although this con-
clusion is clouded by evidence that some of the proteins in the NMD path-
way have additional cellular functions (Maguat 2006). 
The major requirement for a successful NMD pathway is a mechanism 
for distinguishing PTCs from correct termination codons. In mammals, guid-
ance is usually provided by a multiprotein exon jrn-lction complex (the EJC) 
deposited 20-24 nucleotides upstream of exon-exon junctions at the time 
of splicing. During the first round of translation, these marked junctions allow 
the cell to infer the position of the true termination codon, which generally 
resides in the final exon (beyond the last EJC). If a termination codon is 
detected 50 or more nucleotides upstream of a marked exon-exon junction, 
the mRNA is targeted for selective degradation (Nagy and Maquat 1998). 
Although the central role of introns ill this process is confirmed by the obser-
vation that intron-free mammalian genes are generally NMD illsensitive 
(Maquat and Li 2001; Brocke et al. 2002), illtrons are not always required for 
NMD. For example, although the nuclear genome of s. cerevisiae contains 
only about 250 mtrons, this species is still broadly susceptible to NMD, with 
PTC recognition relying either on downstream sequence elements (DSEs) 
embedded within coding DNA (Ruiz-Echevarria et al. 1998) or on contex-
tual information residing ill the 3' UTR (Amrani and Jacobson 2006). 
It is unclear whether the mammalian EJC-based pathway or the S. cere-
visiae DSE/UTR-based pathway more closely represents the ancestral mode 
of PTC recognition. However, because empirical work demonstrates that 

GENES IN PIECES 
267 
NMD can operate on intron-free genes in S. pombe (Mendell et al. 2000) and 
on at least some intron-free genes in mammals (Cheng et al. 1994; Zhang 
et al. 1998; Rajavel and Neufeld 2001; BUhler et al. 2006), nematodes (Pulak 
and Anderson 1993), dipterans (Gatfield et al. 2003), and plants (van Hoof 
and Green 1996; Neu-Yilik et aJ. 2001; Kertesz et al. 2006), it appears that 
two NMD pathways exist within some eukaryotic lineages. Mammals have 
corne to rely predominantly on the EJC pathway, while S. cerevisiae and per-
haps S. pombe predominantly utilize an intron-independent pathway. In 
Drosophila, PTC-containing intronless gene constructs introduced from other 
species are subject to NMD (Gatfield et al. 2003), suggesting that the mech-
anism of PTC detection is not a function of the coding sequence, but of some 
sort of mark, perhaps the poly(A) tailor a protein deposited on the 3' UTR. 
Although NMD is not known to occur in any prokaryote, homologs for 
all of the core components of the NMD pathway and the EJC are broadly 
distributed across the entire eukaryotic phylogeny, suggesting that both 
were present in the stern eukaryote (Lynch et al. 2006b). However, the EJC 
appears to have been independently lost from several species, including 
the microsporidian Encephalitozoon, the red alga Cyanidioschyzon, the kine-
toplastid Trypanosoma, and the diplomonad Giardin. Remarkably, each loss 
of the EJC was accompanied by both a massive loss of introns and an appar-
ent loss of the NMD pathway. Such a phylogenetic co distribution of events 
raises the possibility that NMD and the EJC may have cooperated in rnRNA 
surveillance from a very early date. However, because introns (and there-
fore EJCs) are not a physical necessity for the operation of NMD in all genes 
or lineages, alternative explanations for the parallel loss of NMD and 
introns from specific lineages cannot be ruled out. For example, most of the 
species that have lost the NMD pathway have exceptionally compact 
genomes in all respects (see Chapter 3), being nearly devoid of mobile ele-
ments and having substantially diminished levels of intergenic DNA. By 
greatly reducing the production of erroneous transcripts, the absence of all 
of these features (including introns) is expected to relax the need for rnRNA 
surveillance. 
The establishment of an intron-based mechanism for NMD orientation 
may have dramatically altered the selective environment for further intron 
colonization (Lynch and Kewalramani 2003). At this point in eukruyotic evo-
lution, not all newly arisen introns would have been unconditionally neu-
tral or deleterious. Rather, appropriately located introns might have 
endowed their host genes with a selective advantage, potentially driving a 
positive feedback in genomic evolution by encouraging intron colonization 
at sites that maximize the efficiency of PTC detection. However, once suffi-
cient spatial coverage for efficient NMD was achieved, the inherent disad-
vantages of introns would begin to outweigh their NMD-associated advan-
tages, providing a natural barrier to runaway intron colonization. 
Under this model, the selective consequences of new introns should 
depend on their insertion sites and on the geometric constraints associated 
with the rnRNA surveillance process. For example, if the NMD machinery 

268 
CHAPTER 9 
Figure 9.9 The average num-
ber of introns per protein-coding 
gene is linearly related to the 
length of the coding DNA in mul-
ticellular species. The results are 
based on the full set of annotated 
genes from four genomes. (From 
Lynch and Kewalramani 2003.) 
4000 
Ct. 
~ 3000 
Z o 
bI:J 
~ 
~ 2000 
o 
1000 
o 
 A. t1wliana 
 
 H. sapiens 
 C. e/ega/1s 
 D. lIlelanogasler 
 
 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Number of introns 
were capable of scanning the entire length of a transcript (and no other selec-
tive factors influenced the spatial locations of introns), the optimal config-
uration would be a single intron at the 3' end of every coding region. How-
ever, if the NMD machinery were somewhat nearsighted, and thus not fully 
capable of scanning hundreds to thousands of bases, a more uniform scat-
tering of introns would be necessary for complete NMD coverage. Unfor-
tunately, empirical information on the spatial requirements of NMD is quite 
limited. In humans, NMD is elicited by PTCs as far as 550 bp upstream of 
an intron in the h'iose phosphate isomerase gene (Zhang et al. 1998), 700 bp 
upstream in the ~-globin gene (Neu-Yilik et al. 2001), and 1200 bp upstream 
in the HSP70 gene (Maquat and Li 2001). However, the relationship between 
NMD efficiency and the PTC-EJC distance is probably more gradual than 
a threshold function, and multiple introns may facilitate the process (Rajavel 
and Neufeld 2001). Some studies have suggested that more 5'-located introns 
elicit a higher level of NMD (van Hoof aJld Green 1996; Pulak and Ander-
son 1993), and the length of the surveillance tract may differ among species. 
For example, although no direct evidence has yet been forthcoming, it has 
been suggested that NMD requires two marked exon junctions in C. elegans 
(Mango 2001), and the first (rather than final) ex on junction may be critical 
in rice (Isshiki et al. 2001). In S. cerevisiae, sensitivity to NMD is completely 
eliminated if the PTC is more than 300 bp upstream of a DSE (Ruiz-Echevar-
ria et al. 1998). 
Provided there are spatial limitations on the NMD scanning mechanism, 
one simple prediction of this model is that the number of introns per gene 

GENES IN PIECES 
269 
should increase linearly with the length of the gene; that is, with the amount 
of territory that needs to be scanned. A second prediction is that introns 
should be over dispersed within their host genes; that is, exon sizes should 
be more uniform than under a model of random insertion. Although the 
quantitative relationships differ among species, genome-wide surveys in 
multicellular organisms support both predictions. Intron number is con-
sistently linearly related to gene size (Figure 9.9), and the average positions 
of consecutive introns tend to evenly partition the coding sequence (Fig-
ure 9.10; see also Sakurai et al. 2002; Mourier and Jeffares 2003). Although 
these patterns could arise from completely random colonization of introns, 
the low variance of ex on size is statistically incompatible with such a "bro-
ken-stick" model (Lynch and Kewalramani 2003). That is, exon sizes are 
more even than expected by chance (Figure 9.11), consistent with the hypoth-
esis of the operation of stabilizing selection on exon size. 
It remains to be determined whether these patterns have been actively 
promoted by the requirements of NMD and/ or by addi tional factors such 
as the existence of a minimal exon size for efficient splicing. Notably, D. 
melanogaster, the one species whose ex on size distribution is very close to 
the random expectation, also reportedly has an intron-independent NMD 
process (Behm-Ansmant and Izaurralde 2006), although this pattern is less 
obvious in Arabidopsis, which also appears to have intron-independent NMD 
in at least some genes (van Hoof and Green 2006). Additional support for 
the operation of stabilizing selection on intron number arld location derives 
from observations on the relative constancy of these features in the face of 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
1.0 
.. 
,. 
.. 
0.8 
.. 
.' 
  
Figure 9.10 The average rela-
~. 
c 
 
tive locations of introns in human 
0 
.' 
'r:: 
 
genes with 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 in-
til 0.6 
 
trons. The lengths of the coding 
0 
.' 
0.. 
  
regions of all genes are scaled to 
c 
0 
1.0. The dotted lines denote the 
.t: . 5 
.'  
expected positions of consecutive 
, 
~ 0.4 
.; 
introns in the absence of location-
<Ii 
.' 
::s 
" 
II 
.' 
al biases; for example, for genes 
" 
",' 
 
with two introns, on average, the 
0.2 
.. 
' 
first intron is expected to be - 33% 
.' .-.... ':' 
and the second - 67% down the 
" : ......... 
length of the gene, which is very 
,':.:.: ~ . 
",", . 
close to the actual data shown by 
,:~,:, 
the two solid points on the line la-
0.0 -
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
beled 2. (From Lynch and 
Intron 
Kewalramani 2003.) 

270 
CHAPTER 9 
Figure 9.11 The average ef-
/ 
 A. ti1nlinlla 
/ 
/ 
fective number of exons for 
/ 
10 
 H. sapiens 
/ 
genes in four multicellular 
/ 
 C. eJegans 
/ 
Uniform 
/ 
species. Results are given for col-
/ 
 D. meJanognster 
/ 
lections of genes with different 
/ 
/ 
/ 
numbers of introns. The effective 
8 
/ 
/ 
number of exons is a function of 
til 
/ 
C 
/ 
0 
/ 
the uniformity of exon sizes with-
x 
/ 
.... 
OJ 
/ 
.... 
in genes, and where all exons are 
'0 
/ 
.... .... 
/ 
"".// 
.... 
/ 
equal in size, has an expectation 
OJ 
6 
/ 
--
.... 
.D 
/ 
.... 
 
/ 
.... .... 
equal to the number of introns + 
/ 
.... 
/ 
.... .... 
Random 
1 (upper dashed line). The lower 
c 
/ 
--
.... 
/ 
.... 
OJ 
/ 
--
dashed line gives the expectation 
;> 
/ 
-- --
:0 4 
/ 
.... --
under the "broken-stick" model, 
u 
/ 
.... 
 
/ 
.... .... 
/ 
.... 
according to which introns are 
u:.l 
/ 
.... .... 
/ 
.... 
/ 
.... .... 
randomly distributed along the 
/ 
.... 
~ 
/ 
.... 
coding region. (From Lynch and 
/ 
.... 
2 
Kewalramani 2003.) 
o ~~------~------~----~------~----
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
umber of introns 
significant change in intron size. In both nematodes and mammals, average 
intron size declines dramatically in genes with increasing levels of expres-
sion, while intron number remains constant (Castillo-Davis et al. 2002). In 
Arabidopsis, genes that are expressed in pollen, and hence exposed to 
stronger selection in the haploid state, have introns that are smaller than, 
but equally abundant as, those in genes expressed solely in diploid tissue 
(Seoighe et al. 2005), and curiously, the number of introns per gene in this 
species increases with the level of gene expression (Ren et al. 2006). 
Interpretation of these observations needs to be tempered in light of our 
knowledge about rates of intron turnover. Even if an ancestral intron-based 
NMD mechanism was displaced by an intron-independent process in some 
lineages, the signature of past selection for intron location could remain 
for a very long time. If the average loss rate in Table 9.1 were to apply, about 
83% of intron positions would be retained over a billion-year period in the 
absence of selection for subsequent intron movement. 

Transcript 
Production 
As noted in Chapter 1, the origin of eukaryotes coincided with numer-
ous changes in the ways in which gene transcripts are processed into mature 
mRNAs and eventually translated into proteins. Eukaryotic gene expres-
sion is generally initiated by the recruitment of one or more transcription 
factors by multiple upstream regulatory elements, and these in turn help 
activate the transcription machinery in the vicinity of the correct h',mscrip-
tion initiation site (Ptashne and Gann 2002). These key events must be suf-
ficiently accurate to ensure that transcripts are initiated upstream of the 
translation initiation site, and elongation must proceed far enough to ensure 
the incorporation of the translation termination site. Both processes are gen-
erally guided by sequence information contained within noncoding regions 
of genes, the refinement of which imposes conflicting advantages and dis-
advantages. For example, as we have seen in the case of introns, any bene-
fits of elaborate transcriptional control sequences must be weighed against 
their elevated mutation rate to defective alleles resulting from the increased 
size of the mutational target. A long region between a gene's transcription 
and translation initiation sites provides potential opportunities for finely 
tuning gene expression at the level of mRNA localization, stabilization, 
and/ or translation, but increases the mutational rate of origin of premature 
translation initiation sites, landing sites for mobile element insertions, and 
so forth. 
Although we now know a great deal about protein sequence evolution 
(Li 1997) and a fair amount about the temporal and spatial regulation of 
gene expression (Carroll et al. 2001; Davidson 2001), the evolutionary mech-
anisms sculpting the regions of eukaryotic genes that are essential to the 
development of productive transcripts are poorly understood (Wray et al. 
2003). This chapter explores a number of central but seldom asked questions 

272 
CHAPTER 10 
about the origins of the features of the termmal noncoding regions of genes. 
As with many other genomic features, it is unclear whether the complex 
architecture of the upstream and downstream regions of eukaryotic genes 
arose because the immediate selective advantages outweighed the negative 
mutational consequences. An alternative view is that nonadaptive processes 
played a key initial role in restructuring eukaryotic gene organization, yield-
ing novel physical substrates for the subsequent evolutionary refinement of 
gene regulation mechanisms. The merit in exploring this view is embod-
ied in the following question: if the origin of eukaryotic gene structure 
awaited the appearance of rare beneficial mutations, then why do all well-
studied prokaryotes harbor much simpler forms of gene organization, 
despite their enormous population sizes (and large numbers of mutational 
targets)? In order to resolve these issues, we again need to consider the direc-
tion in which mutational processes are expected to drive the evolution of 
gene architectural features when the power of natural selection is over-
whelmed by genetic drift. 
Transcription and Translation Initiation 
The total amount of transcriptional and translational activity within a cell 
is enormous. For example, in actively growing yeast (5. cerevisiae), individ-
ual genes are generally represented by 0.1-100 mRNAs per cell (with an 
average of 2-3), and each mRNA is responsible for the production of 102 to 
106 proteins prior to decay and replacement (with an average of about 5000) 
(Ghaemmaghami et al. 2003). Approximately 70% of a yeast cell's mRNAs 
are engaged with one or more ribosomes at any time (Arava et a1. 2003), 
although the number of ribosomes per mRNA is only about 20% of the max-
imum packing density, suggesting that translation is limited by the initia-
tion process. 
To ensure that transcription is initiated upstream of the translation initi-
ation site (usually a methionine AUG), all organisms have core promoter 
sequences, usually immediately upstream of each transcription initiation 
site (or in some cases encompassing or following the latter). Generally con-
sisting of no more than a dozen nucleotides, the core promoter is the site 
where information conveyed by specific transcription factors bound at more 
distant regulatory sites is integrated to signal the loading of the transcrip-
tion pre-initiation complex (Smale and Kadonaga 2003). The position of the 
core promoter defines the point of transcription initiation, yielding a leader 
sequence between the sites of transcription and translation initiation. This 
sequence, the 5' UTR (w1translated region), is retained as a permanent fea-
ture of the mature mRNA after the removal of introns during pre-mRNA 
processing (Figure 10.1). 
Prokaryotes employ mechanisms that allow a very rapid transition from 
transcription to translation. In eubacteria, transcription initiation signals 
(hereafter, TISs) at core promoters are generally located close enough to the 
translation initiation codon to yield a 5' UTR no more than a dozen 

Prokaryotes 
Eukaryotes 
Transcription 
initiation 
Translation 
initiation 
S' UTR 
TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
273 
Translation 
termination 
3' UTR 
Transcription 
termination 
Poly(A) 
Figure 10.1 The comparative anatomy of gene and transcript structures in prokary-
otes and eukaryotes. Blue bars denote coding DNA; yellow bars denote transcribed but 
untranslated DNA. Thin lines denote untranscribed intergenic DNA and introns within 
transcribed regions. Colored ovals denote transcription factor binding sites, which col-
lectively convey information (curved arrow) to the core promoter (TATA being one of 
the possible eukaryotic motifs for the latter). AATAAA is a simplified depiction of the 
polyadenylation signal, and Poly(A) denotes the posttranscriptional addition of a 
poly(A) tail. Note that the lengths of various gene parts and numbers of transcription 
factor binding sites are not necessarily to scale, e.g., eukaryotic genes can harbor as 
many as several dozen introns, each of which can greatly exceed the length of its sur-
rounding exons, and transcription factor binding sites can be much more numerous 
and widely distributed than illustrated. 
nucleotides in length. Eubacterial genes are often aggregated into operons: 
cassettes of genes that are transcribed as continuous (polycistronic) mRNAs. 
Each gene in an operon is preceded by a Shine-Dalgarno sequence that 
binds the 16S small ribosomal RNA subunit, orienting it to the translation 
initiation codon (Shine and Dalgarno 1974). In the archae a, genes internal 
to operons often have Shine--Dalgarno sequences, whereas the leader genes 
often do not (Tolstrup et al. 2000; Slupska et al. 2001). In the archaeal species 
that has been investigated in the most detail, Pyrobaculum aerophilum, almost 
all mRNAs are leaderless; that is, the transcription and translation initiation 
sites are identical (Slupska et al. 2001), a feature also found in a few eubac-
teria (Weiner et al. 2000; Moll et al. 2002). Transcription of mitochondrial 
genomes is guided by simple -9 bp core promoters and usually produces 

274 
CHAPTER 10 
a small number of polycistronic transcripts that are cleaved into distinct 
leaderless rnRNAs prior to translation (Gillham 1994; Taanrnan 1999). 
Unlike the situation in prokaryotes, eukaryotic nuclear gene transcripts 
must be exported to the cytoplasm for translation, and this requirement 
necessitates several rnRNA processing steps. Nevertheless, as in prokaryotes, 
eukaryotic nuclear genes employ relatively simple core promoters for h'aT\-
scription initiation. One of the most phylogenetically widespread eukaryotic 
TISs is the TATA box, which generally resides 20-40 nucleotides upstream of 
transcription initiation sites. The TATA box is employed in a substantial frac-
tion of animal genes (about 42% in Drosophila and 32% in humans; Kutach 
and Kadonaga 2000; Suzuki, Tsunoda et al. 2001; Ohler et al. 2002) and in 
most yeast genes (Struhl1989; Choi et al. 2002). Putative TATA boxes are also 
associated with the genes of Paramecium (Yamauchi et al. 1992), Dictyostelium 
(Hori and Firte11994), and Entamoeba (Singh et al. 1997). This wide phylo-
genetic distribution of the TATA box, as well as its involvement in archaeal 
transcription (Thomm 1996; Soppa 1999a,b; Bell et al. 2001; Slupska et al. 
2001), suggests that the stern eukaryote utilized this sequence for transcrip-
tion orientation, although not necessarily exclusively so. 
Remarkably, only a few alternative core promoters have been found in 
eukaryotes, and only one of them has been found to be self-sufficient: the 
loosely defined initiator (1m) sequence, which contains an internal tran-
scription initiation site embedded within a semiconserved sequence of five 
to seven nucleotides. With a consensus sequence of Y-Y-A-N-(T / A)-Y-Y in 
animals (Lo and Smale 1996), where Y denotes a pyrimidine and N an arbi-
trary nucleotide, the complexity of Inr is even less than that of TATA. In 
Drosophila and humans, 65%-85% of all protein-coding genes are associated 
with Iru sequences (Suzuki, Taira et al. 2001; Suzuki, Tsunoda et al. 2001; 
Ohler et al. 2002). A self-sufficient Iru is not known in yeasts, although sig-
nificant information can be encoded at the site of transcription initiation 
(Hahn et al. 1985; Nagawa and Fink 1985). However, Iru is used by a num-
ber of protists, including Toxoplasma gondii (Nakaar et al. 1998), Trichomonas 
vaginalis (Liston and Johnson 1999), and Entamoeba histolytica (Singh et al. 
1997). This wide phylogenetic distribution of 1m elements, their rough 
sequence similarity in different eukaryotic lineages, and their utilization in 
archaea suggests that Iru, like TATA, was utilized by the stern eukaryote and 
then lost from some descendant lineages. 
A substantial fraction of well-studied eukaryotic genes (including nearly 
half of human genes) do not appear to harbor a TATA box, an Iru sequence, 
or either of two other somewhat less well-defined TISs (Mitchell and Tijian 
1989; Kadonaga 2002). However, such genes do generally harbor a sequence 
at the transcription initiation site that confers exceptional local physical flex-
ibility on the DNA, as the TATA box and 1m do (Fukue et al. 2005). This 
observation suggests that TISs may be largely defined by mechanical prop-
erties, although proteins that specifically bind to TATA and Iru do exist. 
Although the complexity of TISs does not appear to vary much across 
the major domains of life, eukaryotes are distinguished by a substantial 

TRAN SCRIPT PRODUCTION 
275 
expansion in the lengths of their 5' UTRs relative to those of prokaryotes. 
Among the major eukaryotic groups, average 5' UTR lengths are quite sim-
ilar, ranging from just under 100 bp to just over 200 bp (Table 10.1). This 
approximate independence of 5' UTR length and organismal complexity is 
in striking contrast to the order-of-magnitude interspecific differences in 
numbers and sizes of introns, numbers of mobile elements, and lengths of 
nontranscribed intergenic spacers (discussed in previous chapters). Equally 
striking is the relatively constant amount of dispersion about the mean for 
the full sets of 5' UTR lengths within species, with the average coefficients 
of variation for vertebrates, invertebrates, plants, and unicellular species 
being 1.13, 1.15, 1.22, and 1.34 respectively (see Table 10.1). 
TABLE 10.1 The average lengths of 5' UTRs [bp) in various eukaryotic 
lineages and their average coefficients of variation [ratio of 
standard deviation to mean) within species 
NUMBER OF GENERA 
MEAN 
cv 
Vertebrates 
Mammals 
21 
139 
1.33 
Birds 
4 
128 
1.21 
Frogs 
4 
103 
1.14 
Ray-finned fish 
20 
125 
1.20 
Agnathans 
3 
139 
0.79 
Invertebrates 
Invertebrate chordates 
3 
125 
1.27 
Echinoderma ta 
4 
206 
1.09 
Arthropoda 
24 
121 
1.25 
Mollusca 
6 
122 
0.95 
Armelida 
2 
76 
0.77 
Nematoda 
8 
67 
1.15 
Platyhelminthes 
3 
118 
1.75 
Porifera 
3 
85 
0.95 
Vascular plants 
51 
106 
1.22 
Unicellular species 
Fungi 
17 
149 
1.22 
Slime molds 
2 
107 
1.17 
Green algae 
4 
110 
1.22 
Apicomplexans 
4 
227 
1.20 
Kinetoplastids 
2 
163 
1.43 
Ciliates 
2 
126 
1.80 
SOl/rce: Lynch et al. 2005. 

276 
CHAPTER 10 
Figure 10.2 Frequency distribu-
tions of lengths of 5' UTRs, derived 
from the database of Pesole et al. 
(2002). (From Lynch et al. 2005.) 
0.15 
0.10 
0.05 
o 
200 
-
Homo sapiens 
-
Drosophila melanogaster 
-
Arabidopsis thaliana 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
Length (bp) 
Because the lengths of individualS' UTRs within species can range from 
tens to thousands of base pairs (Radford and Parish 1997; Pesole, Grillo et 
al. 2000; Pesole et al. 2001; Suzuki et al. 2000; Rogozin et al. 2001) (Figure 
10.2), the relative invariance of the phylogenetic means and CVs does not 
appear to be due to a structural constraint, such as the need for a riboso-
mal landing pad. Although archaea initiate transcription by mechanisms 
similar to those in eukaryotes (Bell and Jackson 2001), their 5' UTRs are very 
small, and 5' UTRs in the diplomonad Giardia, a unicellular eukaryote, often 
consist of just a single nucleotide (Iwabe and Miyata 2001). A substantial 
fraction of 5' UTRs in a variety of other unicellular eukaryotes have been 
found to be less than 25 bp in length, including those in the ciliate Euplotes 
crassus (Ghosh et al. 1994), the amoeba Entamoeba histolytica (Singh et al. 
1997), and the trichomonad Trichomonas vaginalis (Liston and Johnson 1999). 
Experimental evidence suggests that such diminutive leader sequences are 
sufficient to support translation in mammals and yeasts, although the effi-
ciency of translation can be reduced with UTRs shorter than about 30 bp 
(van den Heuvel et aJ. 1989; Maicas et al. 1990; Hughes and Andrews 1997). 
The Premature Translation Initiation Problem 
In contrast to the situation in prokaryotes, eukaryotic translation is usually 
preceded by the binding of the sma1l40S ribosomal subunit and multiple 
initiation factors, including the methionine initiator tRNA, to the 5' cap struc-
ture of the mRNA (Kyrpides and Woese 1998; Saito and Tomita 1999b). This 
complex then scans downstream until it encounters an AUG (methionine) 

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
277 
initiation codon, although the selection of a specific initiation site is some-
times influenced by a small surrounding set of nucleotides (Kozak 1987, 
1994; Pesole, Gissi et al. 2000; Niimura et al. 2003). At this point, the full ribo-
some assembles and begins translation. No eukaryote is known to employ 
a Shine-Dalgarno sequence for translation initiation site localization, 
although some eukaryotic mRNAs do harbor sequences with complemen-
tarity to rRNAs that may function in translation control (Tranque et al. 1998; 
Mauro and Edelman 2002). 
From the standpoint of allelic mutability, the scanning mechanism for 
translation initiation is potentially problematic because the acquisition of 
an AUG triplet in a 5' UTR (a premature start codon, or PSC) will result in 
premature translation initiation. Such alterations will often result in non-
functional alleles because two-thirds of random A UGs will be frame shifted 
with respect to the downstream coding sequence, an.d even when the triplet 
is in frame, the addition of N-terminal amino acids may lead to a defective 
protein. In a variety of species, 15%-55% of 5' UTRs contain upstream AUGs 
(Suzuki et al. 2000; Peri and Pandey 2001; Rogozin et al. 2001), so it is clear 
that not all PSCs result in gene malfunction. Nevertheless, several human 
genetic disorders are known to result from the mutational origin of PSCs 
(Kozak 2002), and the fact that all species have a reduced incidence of PSCs 
relative to random expectations (Rogozin et al. 2001) implies that a sub-
stantial fraction of such sequences are opposed by selection. However, the 
deficit of PSCs within the 5' UTRs of eukaryotes shows a strong gradient, 
with the bias being negligible beyond 500 bp upstream of the true transla-
tion initiation site (Figure 10.3). The observation that such deficits are much 
1.2 
1.0 
0.2 
a 
 
 
 
 Vertebrates 
 Drosophila 
 Plants 
 Unicellular species 
200 
400 
600 
800 
Distance upstream from translation start (bp) 
 
1000 
Figure 10.3 The incidence of 
observed AUG triplets, relative to 
the random expectation, at 20 
bp intervals in 5' UTR sequence 
increasingly upstream of the true 
translation initiation site. All data 
points are based on estimates 
from 50 or more genes using 
data from Peso Ie et al. (2002); 
standard errors are for the various 
genera within taxonomic groups. 
The solid line denotes the best fit 
to all of the data. (From Lynch et 
al. 2005.) 

278 
CHAPTER 10 
less pronounced within the introns in 5' UTRs, regardless of position, 
strongly supports the idea that this pattern is driven by a translation-asso-
ciated process (Lynch et at. 2005). Moreover, in prokaryotes, such deficits 
extend only 10-30 bp upstream of the true translation initiation point; that 
is, just up to the location of tI,e Shine-Dalgarno sequence (Saito and Tomita 
1999). 
The near phylogenetic constancy in species-specific distributions of 5' 
UTR lengths suggests the existence of a general (eukaryote-wide) mecha-
nism of 5' UTR evolution. One possibility is that SUcll evolution i~ entire!) 
driven by the stochastic mutational origin of alternative transcription initi-
ation signals (TISs) and premahlre start codons (PSCs). Flexibility in the pre-
cise locations of TISs is supported by the empirical demonstration that the 
loss of a fuJlctional TIS can be compensated by forhlitous alternative match-
ing sequences in the near vicinity (Hahn et al. 1985; Nagawa and Fink 1985). 
Such modifications are appa rent within the yeast genus Sncc!wrolllYCCS, in 
which some 10C}j, of TIS locations and/or motifs have changed among genes 
across species (Bazykin and Kondrashov 2006). Similarly, a comparison of 
mouse and lLUman transcript sequences reveab that the vast majority of 
transcription initiation sites have moved at least 10 bp, with 20% moving 
more than 100 bp (Frith et al. 20(6). 
The simplest conceptual model for 5' UTR evolution is one in which tIl(' 
transcription appara tus employs as a TIS the nearest appropriate sequence 
upstream of tI,e proper translation initiation site (Lynch et a1. 2005). Undel 
this model, functional alleles require the absence of harmful PSCs within 
the UTR, but A UGs are free to accumulate in a neuh"al fashion upstream of 
the currently utilized TIS. Numerous types of functional and nonfunctional 
alleles can arise by mutation under this model (Figtlrc 10.4). For example, 
all potential TTSs are subject to mutational loss at rate /111, where /1 is tht 
number of nucleotides in the TIS and u is the mutation rate per nucleotide 
If such a mutation involves the currently utilized TIS, the UTR will expand 
out to the nearest upstreClm alternative TIS, and a nonfunctional allele will 
result if the extended region contains a harmful PS . AltemativeJy, should 
a new TTS arise downstream of the previously employed TIS but ill a 10C(1-
tion that still allows the inclusion of the translation initiation site in the tran-
script, the 5' UTR will take on a sl,orter length. in parallel with these 
processes, PSCs are free to wink on and off neutrally upstream of the cur-
rent TTS, whereas the subset of harmful PSCs that fall within the current 
OTR will result in nonfunctional alleles. Such behavior results in the evo-
lution of a gradient of increasing density of AUGs 5' to a gene's general 
TIS location (approaching random frequencies at positions far upstream), 
thereby producing a barrier to the upstream movement of a TIS by muta-
tional processes. In the long run, the stochastic gain and loss of PSCs and 
TISs by these processes yields a steady-state distribution of viable 5' UTr. 
lengths that can be viewed as either the long-term history of UTR lengths 
of an individual gene or the expected snapshot genomic distribution ofUTR 
lengths for all genes under similar mutational pressures. 

Gain of upstream TIS 
Upstream movement of TIS 
Loss ofPSC 
Upstream movement of TIS 
to inappropriate location 
Gain of PSC within UTR 
Transcription initiation 
beyond translation start 
TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
279 
 e:: ~ :--
' -:J----L*---I __ 
_ 
  
e:: ~~~:-----o---LL_ ... _. 
Neutral mutations 
Nonfunctionalizing 
mutations 
 . ,-~:----e;: ~i------OJ-.LC;-e-__ 
 
.. . --'-~ ----, 
--, 
,-
--~-- ,....-------,--~ 
Figure 10.4 Schematic for some alternative allelic types associated with mutations 
in the 5' UTR. Solid arrows denote active transcription initiation sites, and the leftmost 
edge of the solid box defines the true translation initiation codon; the span between 
these two points is the 5' UTR. Small open boxes denote transcription initiation signals 
(TISs), here assumed to lie upstream of the transcription initiation site (dashed boxes 
indicate latent TISs, and solid boxes currently used TISs). Green circles denote harmless 
AUG triplets upstream of the UTR, whereas the red circle denotes a harmful PSC ap-
pearing within a UTR. 
Because of the somewhat ill-defined nature of TISs, their mutational vul-
nerability (nu) can only be approximated. Given the widespread use of the 
TATA and Inr elements, n is at least 4, and the presence of putative conserved 
accessory elements in a variety of lineages implies that it could be as large 
as 10 (Singh et al. 1997; Soppa 1999a,b; Gourse et aJ. 2000; Ohler et al. 2002). 
However, the predictions of the preceding null model are quite robust to 
this uncertainty. For n = 6 and higher, the steady-state distribution of 5' UTR 
length is nearly invariant, with an overall mean of 190 bp and a CV of 1.27 
(Figure 10.5), both of which are roughly compatible with the observed data 
(see Table 10.1). Moreover, as can be seen by comparing Figures 10.2 and 
10.5, the overall forms of the observed and expected 5' UTR length distri-
butions are very similar, except for the deficit of observed 5' UTR lengths 
shorter than 50 bp. 
At least two factors might contribute to this discrepancy. First, if tran-
scription is initiated at variable positions relative to the TIS, some transcripts 
could inadvertently begin downstream of tl1e translation initiation site when 
the TIS is close to the latter. Noisy transcription initiation sites, with ranges 
up to 10-100 bp, are known to occur in eubacteria (Nicolaides et al. 1995), 
mitochondria (Lizama et al. 1994; Carrodeguas and Vallejo 1997; KUhn et al. 
2005), and nuclear genes (Hahn et al. 1985; Nagawa and Fink 1985; Bergsma 

280 
CHAPTER 10 
Figure 10.5 Expected steady-
state frequency distributions for 5' 
UTR lengths under a model in 
which TISs and PSCs randomly ap-
pear and disappear by mutational 
processes, as described in the text. 
Results are given for TISs of various 
lengths (in bp, denoted by n). 
Frequencies are given for bin 
widths of 20 bp. The results were 
obtained by computer simulation 
with u = 10-7 per base pair per 
generation, using an empirical 
function for the probability that a 
PSC is potentially harmful (defined 
by the solid line in Figure 10.3). 
(From Lynch et al. 2005.) 
0.16 
0.12 
0.04 
o 
600 
Length of 5' UTR (bp) 
-- 11=4 
-- 11=5 
--11=6,7,8 
800 
1000 
et al. 1996; Yu et al. 1996; Kaji et aJ. 1998; Watanabe et al. 2002). In humans, 
for which the data are most extensive, many genes appear to have a con-
tinuum of transcription initiation sites (Kim et aJ. 2005), with an average 
range of 62 bp and an average standard deviation of 20 bp (Suzuki, Tsun-
oda et aJ. 2001), and similar observations have been made in the mouse 
(Carninci et al. 2006). 
A second complication not directly accounted for by the preceding model 
concerns the presence of (external) introns in the 5' UTR. By definition, a TIS 
lies upstream of all introns, but because introns are removed prior to trans-
lation, they are free to accumulate AUG triplets. In principle, as' UTR inh'on 
is free to be lost, as it contributes nothing to the mature mRNA (although 
it may contain elements regulating transcription). However, the inclusion 
of AUGs within such introns can inhibit their loss in at least two ways. First, 
the appearance of a new TIS within an external intron will result in the incor-
poration of the downstream intronic sequence into the 5' UTR of the mature 
mRNA, yielding a nonfunctional allele should the added region (previously 
intronic DNA) contain a harmful PSc. Second, any mutational elimination 
of either intronic splice site will result in the incorporation of the full intron 
into the 5' UTR, yielding an even higher likelihood of PSC introduction. In 
this sense, external introns, once established, are expected to be exception-
ally stable in location and resistant to size reductions. The elevated size of 
introns in 5' UTRs relative to those in coding regions is consistent with this 
hypothesis (Hong et al. 2006). The presence of external introns can inhibit 
the evolution of overly short 5' UTRs because a TIS must be located suffi-

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
281 
ciently far upstream of an intron to prevent transcription initiation within 
the intron (which would incorporate intronic sequence into the UTR). 
We now return to the question of why the distributions of 5' UTR lengths 
are so constant across diverse lineages of eukaryotes, focusing on the cost 
of long 5' UTRs associated with the occasional mutational appearance of 
PSCs. Due to the stochastic expansion and contraction of UTRs (and hence 
alterations in mutational target size), the rate of origin of PSCs for individ-
ual genes will vary through time, but in the long run, an allelic lineage can 
be characterized by an average mutation rate to null alleles associated with 
PSCs. This excess mutation rate, which is equivalent to the average selec-
tive advantage (5) of maintaining a minimal 5' UTR, turns out to be quite 
small (Lynch et al. 2005). Under the null model described above, 5 is a func-
tion of 11, which defines the size of the TIS mutational target and also deter-
mines the vulnerability to PSCs (the larger the interval between alterna-
tive TISs, the higher the likelihood of incorporation of a PSC upon TIS loss). 
However, both the dependence on n and the overall cost of randomly main-
tained 5' UTRs are weak, with 5 ::: U when 11 = 5, 3u when n = 6, and 4u when 
n = 8. 
Recalling the principle that weak differential mutation rates to null alle-
les effectively operate like selection with additive allelic effects on fitness, 
and the fact that selection is relatively ineffective if 2N-t  1 (see Chapter 
4), the preceding results suggest that 2Ngu must be on the order of 0.25 or 
greater if selection is to be capable of preventing the random expansion of 
5' UTRs. This limit is well above the upper bowld on estimates of 2Ngu for 
multicellular species and even -5 times greater than the mean for wUcel-
lular eukaryotes, but well within the range of possibility for prokaryotes 
(see Chapter 4). Thus, the effective population sizes of most eukaryotes are 
far too small for differential mutational vulnerability to significantly influ-
ence the evolution of 5' UTR Jengths, which in turn helps explain the approx-
imate pllylogenetic constancy of distributions of eukaryotic 5' UTR lengths. 
In contrast, the long-term effective population sizes of most prokaryotes, 
and perhaps a few unicellular eukaryotes, may be adequate to allow the 
selective retention of alleles with 5' UTRs of minimal length. As noted above, 
a few protist lineages may have average 5' UTR lengths too small to be 
accommodated by the null model (Ghosh et al. 1994; Singh et al. 1997; Lis-
ton and Johnson 1999; Yee et al. 2000; Adam 2001). 
These results support the idea that the reduction in Ng that accompanied 
the evolution of eukaryotes, particularly multicellular species, produced a 
population genetic environment conducive to the movement of TISs to ran-
dom positions, subject only to the constraint imposed by the stochastic muta-
tional production of PSCs. If this hypothesis is correct, then selection for 
gene-specific regulatory features need not be invoked to explain either the 
expansion of eukaryotic 5' UTRs relative to those of prokaryotes or the thou-
sandfold range of 5' UTR lengths among genes within species. Neverthe-
less, once permanently established, expanded 5' UTRs may have provided 
novel substrate for the evolution of mechanisms for posttranscriptional reg-

282 
CHAPTER 10 
ulation of eukaryotic gene expression, providing still another example of 
how a reduction in population size can passively promote the emergence 
of forms of gene ardutecture that ultimately facilitate the evolution of organ-
ismal complexity. 
Numerous structural features of 5' UTRs (including their lengths) in 
today's eukaryotes influence rates of protein synthesis by modifying the 
efficiency of translation (Hughes 2006). For example, upstream open read-
ing frames (uORFs) can slow the rate of h-an lation by causing the ribosome 
to terminate and reinitiate, and secondary structure and/or internal ribo-
some entry sites may have similar indirect roles. However, although a num-
ber of authors have suggested that uORFs serve an adaptive function (Mor-
ris and Geballe 2000; Meijer and Thomas 2002; Vilela and McCarthy 2003), 
confirmation of the extent to which any features of 5' UTRs are adaptive 
awaits empirical investigation. B cause uORFs are generally on the order 
of 20 codons in length (approximately what is expected by chance), and 
because transcripts fronl some uORF-containing genes are degraded by tIle 
nonsense-mediated decay pathway (Ruiz-Echevarria and Peltz 2000), it is 
premature to reject the hypothe i that a substantial fraction of uORFs are 
either neutral or mildly deleterious. Although some uORFs appear to be 
evolutionarily conserved across lineages (Churbanov et al. 2005; Galagan et 
al. 2005), many of them may exist simply because down tream termina-
tion codons have neutralized the effects of PSCs, a view supported by the 
fact that upstream A UGs that are not followed by termination codons are 
much rarer than those that are (lacono et al. 2005). 
Transcription Termination 
As important as the localization of proper h-an cription initiation sites is tIle 
need for an accurate mechanism to ensure that transcripts elongate beyond 
their translation termination sites. In eubactcria, a secondary structure 
involving one or more hairpins assembled beyond the translation termina-
tion codon in the developing mRNA combine with a downsh-eam U-rich 
sequence to provide a sufficient signal for terminating traJlScription (Unni-
raman et aL 2002). Some archaeaJ genes aJso employ such sh-uchlres (Clarens 
et al. 1995), but eukaryotic genes do not. Instead, prior to their export to the 
cytoplasm, eukaryotic mRNAs undergo two processing events at the 3' end: 
removal of part of the trailing noncoding end from tIle immature transcript 
and addition of a poly(A) tail to the remaining mRNA. To accomplish these 
tasks, eukaryotic genes must contain sequence information specifymg the 
proper pOints of both transcription tenmna tion and cleavage, as premature 
engagement in either process can yield a transcript devoid of a termina-
tion codon and/ or a poly(A) tail. In principle, the same signal could serve 
both functions. 
The mechanisms of eukaryotic transcription termination have been 
explored extensively only in mammals and yeasts, but in both cases a dis-
crete polyadenylation signaJ defines the point of cleavage and poly(A) addi-
f
=
a

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
283 
tion (Keller and Minvielle-Sebastia 1997; Graber et a1. 1999; Wahle and 
Ruegsegger 1999; Zhao et a1. 1999). Polyadenylation is essential to eukary-
otic mRNA maturation: only polyadenylated messages are exported to the 
cytoplasm, and a poly(A) binding protein is involved in ribosome recruit-
ment (Mendez and Richter 2001). In mammals, the poly(A) signal is almost 
always anAAUAAA sequence residing 10-30 nucleotides upsh"eam of the 
cleavage site. This signal is generally sandwiched between a U-rich stimu-
latory upstream sequence and a U- or GU-rich downstream element (DSE) 
about 30 bp 3' to the cleavage site. Cleavage occurs at an imprecise point 
between the poly(A) signal and the DSE (usually at an A in vertebrates). The 
h"anscription of many animal mRNAs is terminated prior to cleavage (Sad-
owski et a1. 2003), but others appear to experience cleavage first (Osheim et 
a1. 2002; Tollervey 2004). The exact position of transcription termination 
appears to be fairly random, often occurring at sites hundreds to thousands 
of base pairs downstream of the poly(A) signal (Proudfoot 1989; Dye and 
Proudfoot 2001; Carninci 2006). 
Numerous variations in 3' end processing exist. The upstream sequences 
and the poly(A) signals are more loosely defined in S. cerevisiae than in mam-
mals, and there is no obvious DSE. However, the end sequences of S. pombe 
primary transcripts do contain DSEs and are much more similar to those 
in mammals than to those in S. cerevisiae in other ways as well (Humphrey 
et al. 1994). Some variants of the poly(A) signal have also been fowld in var-
ious protist lineages. In the trichomonad Trichomonas vagil1alis, for example, 
UAAA serves as the signal for cleavage 10-30 nucleotides downstream 
(Espinosa et a1. 2002), with the initial three nucleotides (UAA) also serving 
as the translation termination codon. The diplomonad Giardia lamblia uses 
AGURAAY, where R denotes a purine and Y a pyrimidine, about 10 nucleo-
tides upstream of the cleavage site (Que et al. 1996). In prokaryotes, only a 
fraction of h"anscripts for a given gene become polyadenylated (often <50%), 
and poly(A) is not essential for growth (Sarkar 1997). Finally, downstream 
UTRs are entirely lacking in the h"anscripts of most mitochondrial genomes; 
instead, polycistroruc transcripts are cleaved into individual components, 
and poly(A) tails are added directly to a terminal U or UA to form termi-
nation codons (Gillham 1994; Sarkar et a1. 1997). 
Average lineage-specific lengths of 3' UTRs are about threefold longer 
than those of 5' UTRs, falling in the narrow range of 200-500 bp with CVs 
generally close to 1.0 (Table 10.2). As in the case of 5' UTRs, there is no obvi-
ous pattern in the data with respect to phylogeny or organismal complex-
ity, and species-specific distributions are typically unimodal with a long tail 
to the right (Figure 10.6). However, a simple null model, like that presented 
above for the 5' UTR, does not provide an immediate explanation for these 
patterns. For example, if the four nucleotides are present at equal frequen-
cies, the expected distance from the translation termination codon to the 
first random consensus poly(A) signal, AAUAAA, would be about 1/ (1/4)6 
= 4096 bp, and the distribution of 3' UTR lengths would be exponential (with 
a peak at 0). This rough calculation does not consider the additional con-

284 
CHAPTER 10 
Figure 10.6 Frequency distribu-
tions of lengths of 3' UTRs, derived 
from the database of Pesole et al. 
(2002). 
0.12 
0.10 
0.08 
0.04 
0.02 
o 
200 
-- Homo sapiens 
-- Drosophila melanogaster 
-- Arabidopsis thaliana 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
Length (bp) 
straint imposed by the upstream and downstream U-rich patches that help 
define the poly(A) site, but additional sequence complexity would only 
increase the mean of the random null distribution of lengths. 
How can the unexpectedly low means of 3' UTR length distributions and 
the relative paucity of the shortest classes be explained? Overly short 3' 
UTRs may be problematic because the maintenance of specific polyadeny-
lation and cleavage signals upstream of the translation termination codon 
would compromise tbe coding sequence, but the rarity of long 3' UTRs is 
less easily explained. Little is known about the mechanism by which the 
poly(A) signal is located during transcription, but it appears to occur prior 
to (or simultaneously witb) the removal of introns (Zhao et al. 1999; Mani-
atis and Reed 2002; Proudfoot et al. 2002). However, because only about 
1 %-10% of the genes of animals and land plants have 3' UTR introns (Pesole 
et al. 2001), intron removal does not account for the unexpectedly short mean 
lengths of 3' UTRs. The proximity of adjacent genes must impose some selec-
tion for the avoidance of interference between the termination of transcrip-
tion of one gene and initiation of transcription of another, but the space 
between the genes of multicellular species is generally much greater than 
the distributions in Figure 10.6. Genes with longer 3' UTRs are transcribed 
more slowly (Chiaromonte et al. 2003), but their translation efficiency and 
mRNA stability are enbanced, although tbe effect is small beyond a lengtb 
of about 27 bp (Tanguay and Gallie 1996a,b). The major problem imposed 
by overly long 3' UTRs may be the appearance of spurious regulatory motifs 
(e.g., micro RNA binding sites; see Chapter 3). 
or
m
ex
of
w
25
dn
stc
fra
ad
vic

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
TABLE 10.2 The average lengths of 3' UTRs [bp) in various eukaryotic 
lineages and their average coefficients of variation [ratio 
of standard deviation to mean) within species 
NUMBER OF GENERA 
MEAN 
Vertebrates 
Mammals 
20 
446 
Birds 
4 
435 
Frogs 
4 
479 
Ray-finned fish 
24 
424 
Agnathans 
2 
470 
Invertebrates 
Invertebrate chordates 
4 
502 
Echinoderms 
4 
850 
Arthropoda 
34 
333 
Mollusca 
9 
335 
Nematoda 
10 
191 
PIa ty helmin thes 
5 
214 
Porifera 
3 
151 
Vascular plants 
76 
232 
Unicellular species 
Fungi 
21 
207 
Slime molds 
2 
104 
Green algae 
3 
571 
Apicomplexans 
5 
327 
Kinetoplastids 
2 
459 
Ciliates 
3 
170 
Source: Derived from the databa e of Peso Ie et al. 2002. 
Contrary to the situation in 5' UTRs, in which PSCs are selected against, 
one would not expect a bias in the incidence of translation initiation or ter-
mination codons within 3' UTRs because sequences within them are 
expected to be translationally irrelevant. However, there is a 10%-30% excess 
of AUG triplets throughout the 3' UTR relative to the random expectation, 
whereas termination codon triplets tend to be underrepresented by up to 
25% in the first 100-200 bp (Figure 10.7). One simple mechanism that could 
drive the termination codon deficit in the terminal portion of genes is the 
stochastic gain and loss of termination codons: mutational gain of an in-
frame termination codon upstream of the prior termination codon will yield 
a downstream UTR region relatively devoid of termination codons in the 
vicinity of the new one, assuming that alleles with 3'-truncated coding 
285 
CV 
1.10 
1.03 
1.13 
1.02 
0.81 
0.83 
1.10 
1.08 
1.08 
1.06 
1.02 
0.59 
0.56 
0.75 
1.26 
0.64 
1.21 
1.07 
l.23 

286 
CHAPTER 10 
(A) 
C? 1.4 
;:J 
<t: 
~ 
f-; 
;:J 
~ 
"0 -t 1.2 
il) 
0... 
X 
il) 
"-
"0 
il) 
:> 
I..; 
il) 
<fJ 
<3 1.0 
0 
(B) 
<fJ 
0... 
0 
tl 1.0 
~ 
~ 
"0 
~ 
u 
il) 
! 
0... 
x 
! 
il) 
"-
"0 
il) 
~ 0.8 ~ 
 Vertebrates 
<fJ 
 
 
----------------------- ~ -. 
.D 
0 
 Drosophila 
 
 
 Plants 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
0 
200 
400 
600 
800 
1000 
Distance downstream from 
Distance downstream from 
translation stop (bp) 
translation stop (bp) 
Figure 10.7 The fractions of observed initiation codon (AUG) triplets (A) and termi-
nation codon triplets (B) relative to the random expectations (dashed lines) at 20 bp 
intervals downstream of the true translation initiation site. (Data derived from the data-
base of Pesole et al. 2002.) 
regions are not always eliminated by selection. But how can an overabUJl-
dance of initiation codon triplets in 3' UTRs be explained? Rather than being 
simple linear molecules, the ends of eukaryotic mRNAs are bound together 
by a number of proteins to effectively form a circularized message (Preiss 
and Hentze 1999; Sachs and Varani 2000; Mendez and Richter 2001; 
Mazumder et al. 2003; Moore 2005). Such a structure appears to facilitate 
the retum of the ribosomal subunits to the 5' end of the message after each 
round of translation (Tanguay and Callie 1996b). This process of recycling 
may also present the ribosomal subunits with the opportunity to interact 
with AUCs within the 3' UTR prior to returning to the proper initiation 
codon, which although initially unproductive, could serve to keep the h'ans-
lational machinery localized. However, although the translation of uORFs 
(described above) formally demonstrates that reinitiation of scanning does 
occur within rnRNAs, it remains to be seen whether such reengagement can 
also take place with downstream ORFs, as reinitiation and recycling are 
somewhat distinct processes (Rajkowitsch et al. 2004). 
Finally, we return to the issue of the extreme rarity of introns within 3' 
UTRs. Nagy and Maquat (1998) pointed out that the final introns within tran-
scripts of human genes are generally no more than 50 bp downstream of the 
translation termination codon, and suggested that this is a necessary conse-
quence of the reliance on a mRNA surveillance mechanism dependent on 
e) 
n( 
up 
na
WI 
all 
thl
fe, 
pa
COl
p.
thE 
in! 
ee 
pal
in :
reg
ofl
inf, 
tia l
mR
anc 
one 
T~
ThE
ofe
intE
hov 
The
ing,
(sn1 
1
ing: 
(the
to a 
typi
pori
card
is e 
som
(Fur
witt
snRJ

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
287 
exon junction complexes (EJCs). Recall from Chapter 9 that EJC-dependent 
nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) relies on protein markers deposited 
upstream of each exon-exon junction; under this model, if the true termi-
nation codon resided more than 50 bp upstream of an intron, the mRNA 
would be identified as defective and subjected to decay. Nevertheless, 
although this model may be mechanistically correct for mammals, it appears 
that most eukaryotes, even those without EJC-dependent NMD, have very 
few 3' VIR introns (Hong et al. 2006). A more general explanation for the 
paucity of 3' VIR introns may simply be their evolutionary instability: in 
contrast to the situation in 5' VIRs or coding regions, wllere the failure to 
splice out an intron sequence will generally lead to a nonfunctional allele, 
the mutation of a key splicing signal for a 3' UTR intron (and subsequent 
integration of the intronic sequence into the UTR) may have negligible con-
sequences for gene function, as the protein sequence remains unaltered. 
In summary, as in the case of 5' UTRs, the origin of eukaryotes was accom-
panied by an expansion in the size of 3' VIRs. Eukaryotes are also unique 
in relying on a discrete polyadenylation signal downstream of the coding 
region. However, a fully satisfying explanation for the evolutionary origin 
of the features of 3' VIRs remains to be developed. In today's eukaryotes, 
information encoded in 3' VIRs plays a role in nuclear export and in the ini-
tiation, regulation, and subcellular localization of translation of many 
mRNAs Gansen 2001; Macdonald 2001; Mendez and Richter 2001; Gebauer 
and Hentze 2004; Xie et al. 2005). But these novelties presumably arose sec-
ondarily, after the establishment of mRNA downstream sequence. 
The Deployment of trans Splicing 
The widespread process of removing introns and joining adjacent segments 
of exonic RNA, discussed in Chapter 9, is known as cis splicing (because the 
interacting cut sites are located on the same transcript). In some species, 
however, segments of different transcripts can be joined by trans splicing. 
The most common form of this process is spliced-leader (SL) trans splic-
ing, whereby a short leader sequence, derived from a small nuclear RNA 
(snRNA), is added to the 5' end of the transcript of a protein-coding gene. 
The mechanism of trans splicing is remarkably similar to that of cis splic-
ing: a small (15-45 nucleotide) leading sequence of the SL snRNA h<anscript 
(the spliced leader) is detached at a junction adjacent to a GU, analogous 
to a typical 5' exon-intron junction, whereas the pre-mRNA is severed at a 
typical AG 3' splice site (see Chapter 9). Thus, the discarded downstream 
portion of the SL snRNA functions as a 5' end of an intron, whereas the dis-
carded upstream portion of the pre-mRNA, often referred to as an outron, 
is equivalent to the 3' end of an intron (Figure 10.8). Almost all of the spliceo-
somal components used in cis splicing are also employed in trans splicing 
(Furuyama and Bruzik 2002), although two unique proteins are associated 
with the SL transcript in nematodes (Denker et al. 2002). In addition, the SL 
snRNA of all characterized species has a modified nucleotide cap on the SL, 

288 
CHAPTER 10 
Figure 10.8 Spliced-leader (SL) 
trans splicing. Colored boxes denote 
sequences destined for mature 
mRNAs; horizontal lines denote in-
tronic sequences. The spliced-leader 
sequence is transcribed from a dif-
ferent locus than the pre-mRNA, 
and its leading sequence (the spliced 
leader) is trans-spliced to the front 
end of the mRNA. Cis splicing de-
notes conventional splicing of an in-
ternal intron. 
SLsnRNA 
 
trans splicing 
Precursor rnRNA 
~ 
________ 
A~ ________ _ 
( 
Outran 
Intran 
Mature rnRNA 
a conserved binding site for accessory proteins used in splicing (see Chap-
ter 9), and a characteristic secondary structure. The similar mechanisms 
for SL trans splicing across distantly related lineages suggest that such pro-
cessing was deployed in the stem eukaryote for at least some genes and 
probably has a common evolutionary origin with cis splicing. 
Although SL trans splicing has not been observed in vertebrates or vas-
cular plants, it appears to be phylogenetically widespread. Among animals, 
it has been found in some genes in cnidarians (Stover and Steele 2001), 
nematodes (Evans et al. 1997; Blumenthal and Gleason 2003; Lee and Som-
mer 2003), flatworms (Davis et al. 1995; Brehm et al. 2000; Zayas et al. 2005), 
rotifers (Pouchkina-Stantcheva and Tunnacliffe 2005), and urochordates 
(Vandenberghe et aI. 2001; Ganot et al. 2004; Satou et al. 2006). It also occurs 
in euglenoids (Tessier et al. 1991; Frantz et al. 2000), and every mRNA is 
trans-spliced in trypanosomes (Campbell et al. 1984; Kooter et al. 1984; Mil-
hausen et al. 1984). Because trans splicing is usually detected only after the 
discovery of identical upstream sequences on mature mRNAs of unrelated 
genes, it is likely that the phenomenon will be found in many additional 
eukaryotes following the characterization of full-length cDNA libraries. 
Although not all eukaryotes engage in SL trans splicing, the ability to par-
ticipate in other forms of trans splicing may be widely retained. For exam-
ple, a few instances of trans splicing of internal exons from different tran-
scripts have been discovered in Drosophila and other dipterans (Dorn et al. 
2001; Horiuchi et al. 2003; Krauss and Dorn 2004), rodents (Takahara et al. 
2002), and humans (Finta and Zaphiropoulos 2002). Such trans splicing can 
occur between the products of different alleles at the same locus or between 
transcripts from entirely different chromosomal locations. Remarkably, SL 
snRNAs from C. elegans and trypanosomes can function in mammalian cells 
to trans-splice an appropriate outron to transcripts (Bruzik and Maniatis 
1992), suggesting the possibility that SL trans-splicing alleles could reemerge 
in various lineages if the SL snRNA genes were still present. 
A clue to the functional significance of trans splicing is provided by the 
unusual genomic features of the species that employ the process. Most 
r 
s
a
S
fl 
n 
V\ 
a
d 
fe 
d,
gl 
ce 
ul 
m 
di
al.
on
all
Re 
un
eal
im
sp]
rna
Stu
10]
niSi
in I
aSSI
bee
an j 
Jeas
but 
witl
T
text 
mg. 
seq1-
reml
tram
is sel
knov
10.3) 
5'U1

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
289 
notably, although few nuclear genomes have operons (cassettes of cotran-
scribed genes), all species known to have them (kinetoplastids, nematodes, 
and some urochordates) process the component genes by SL trans splicing. 
Such an intermediate step in transcript individualization may be essential 
for eukaryotic operons because, lmlike prokaryotic transcripts, eukaryotic 
mRNAs need to be processed prior to translation. TIle transcripts of genes 
within eukaryotic operons face an unusual problem at their 3' ends. As noted 
above, the trailing tails of single-gene transcripts are generally rapidly 
degraded following cleavage from the upstream functional transcript. Thus, 
for genes internal to operons, some mechanism must exist to prevent 
destruction of a transcript following its cleavage from that of the upstream 
gene. The process has been studied most closely in C. elegans, in which a 
conventional poly(A) signal elicits cleavage and polyadenylation of the 
upstream transcript prior to processing of the downsh'eam remnant, and an 
intervening U-rich intergenic region prevents downstream degradation and 
directs the attachment of the next spliced leader (Huang et a1. 2001; Liu et 
a1. 2003). Approximately 15% of C. elegans genes are contained within oper-
ons, with the first genes within operons utilizing one spliced-leader sequence 
and most internal genes utilizing another (Blumenthal and Steward 1997; 
Redmond and Knox 2001; Blumentllal et a1. 2002). 
Despite this association between operons and trans splicing, it remains 
unclear why these features evolved to such a significant extent in some lin-
eages and not in others (Nilsen 2001). SL trans splicing requires a cellular 
investment that would otherwise be tumecessary: prior to their use in trans 
splicing, the SL snRNAs are subject to extensive processing (e.g., 5' cap for-
mation, binding of proteins necessary for SpliClllg, and 3' end trimming; 
Sturm et a1. 1999; Zeiner et a1. 2003). Nevertheless, other than the provi-
sioning of the 5' cap, which can be acquired by more conventional mecha-
nisms for solo genes, the functions of the spliced leader have been elusive. 
In Leishmania, the SL sequence appears to contain determinants for efficient 
association with ribosomes (Zeiner et a1. 2003), but such sequences have not 
been identified in other organisms. TIle 3' end sequence of flatworm SLs is 
an AUG, which appears to be used as the translation initiation codon ill at 
least some transcripts (Davis et a1. 1995; Brehm et a1. 2002; Cheng et a1. 2006), 
but in other lineages the translation ffiitiation codon is generally contained 
within the prilnary transcript. 
The premature start codon (PSC) problem, discussed above in the con-
text of 5' UTR evolution, may provide a key to the mystery of SL trans splic-
ing. With this method of transcript processing, most of the pre-rnRNA 
sequence upstream of the translation ffiitiation codon is eliminated via the 
removal of the outron. For example, in C. elegans, the distance between the 
trans splice site and the translation ffiitiation codon averages only 10 bp and 
is seldom more than 30 bp (Blumenthal and Steward 1997). Moreover, ill all 
known cases, the SL sequence added to the 5' UTR is less than 50 bp (Table 
10.3). Thus, SL trans splicing results in mature mRNAs with unusually short 
5' UTRs, thereby minilnizing the likelihood of occurrence of a harmful PSc. 

290 
CHAPTER 10 
TABLE 10.3 Lengths (bp) of spliced-leader snRNAs for a variety of eukaryotes 
SNRNAa 
SL 
REFERENCE 
Euglenoids (six species) 
95-107 
25-27 
Frantz et al. 2000 
Trypanosomes 
99 
39 
Gibson et al. 2000 
(several species) 
Rotifers (two species) 
106 
23 
Pouchkina-Stantcheva 
and Tunnacliffe 2005 
Nematodes 
Caenorhabditis elegans 
Blumenthal and Steward 1997 
SLl 
95 
22 
SL2 
110 
22 
Haemonchus contortus 
113 
22 
Redmond and Knox 2001 
Flatworms 
Echinococcus multilocLllaris 
104 
36 
Brehm et al. 2000 
Taenia solium 
96 
33 
Brehm et al. 2002 
Schistosoma mansoni 
92 
33 
Rajkovic et al. 1990 
Hydra vulgaris 
Stover and Steele 2001 
SL-A 
80 
24 
SL-B 
106 
45 
Urochordates 
Ciona intestinalis 
46 
16 
Vandenberghe et al. 2001 
Oikopleura dioica 
92 
40 
Ganot et al. 2004 
"Refers to the entire length of the 5L snRNA prior to the spIking of the leader sequence (5L) to the primary 
transcript. 
Nevertheless, as discussed above, the extent to which this advantage trans-
lates into the evolution of SL trans-splicing alleles depends on the magni-
tude of the reduction in the mutation rate to PSCs relative to that for con-
ventional transcripts. Experimental work with C. elegans shows that there 
are no significant barriers to the conversion of one type of allele to the other: 
the only difference between trans-spliced and conventional alleles is the pres-
ence of an outron (Conrad et al. 1991, 1993, 1995). Thus, without a signifi-
cant enough selective advantage, a locus relying on SL trans is vulnerable 
to invasion by mutant non-trans-splicing alleles. Such conversions arise by 
two mutational pathways: (1) the outron may gain a 5' splice site, which 
converts it to an upstream exon followed by a 5' VTR intron; or (2) the out-
ron may lose its 3' splice site and be added to the leading end of the initial 
exon (Figure 10.9). Both paths would immediately yield null alleles if the 
recruited exon sequence contained a harmful PSC, and if a functional non-
trans-splicing allele did initially emerge, an elevated mutation rate to nulls 
v
t 
s 
VI 
ti 
S1 
h 
tv 
sl 
ec 
er 
III
al 
ec 
In 
fn 
to 
su 
ge 
oti 

OJ 
1 1 
1 
1 
D 
1 1 
-----L..I 1 __ 
-----' 
2 
j 
) 
) 
TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
291 
Figure 10.9 The paths by which trans-
spliced and conventional alleles can be inter-
converted. For the trans-spliced allele in the 
center, the horizontal line on the left denotes 
the outron and the box on the right the first 
exon, with the vertical green line denoting the 
translation initiation codon. (1) Gain of a 5' 
splice site in the outron. (2) Loss of the 3' 
splice site from the outran. The shaded boxes 
denote null alleles resulting from the exposure 
of a premature start codon (red bar) upon the 
addition of new exonic DNA. 
would result from the 5' UTR expansion-all the more so for alleles losing 
the 3' splice site. 
Although the formal details of this model remain to be worked out, these 
simple arguments suggest that if the efficiency of selection were sufficiently 
weak (due, for example, to small effective population size), recurrent muta-
tion to non-trans-splicing alleles could eventually result in the fixation of 
such derived alleles despite their weak mutational disadvantage. However, 
because the conversion of alleles from one functional type to another is a 
two-way street (i.e., through gain or loss of relevant splice sites, non-trans-
splicing alleles can be converted back to the trans-splicing type), a quasi-
equilibrium may be reached, with an approximately constant fraction of loci 
engaging in SL trans splicing. All lineages known to engage in SL trans splic-
ing except trypanosomes apply it to only a moderate fraction of genes, 
although it remains to be seen whether these lineages represent cases of 
equilibria or transient phases en route to loss or fixation of SL dependence. 
In any event, should a pOint be reached at which SL trans splicing is lost 
from all loci, the SL locus would be released from selection and vulnerable 
to loss by inactivating mutations. Given the complexity of the SL locus, 
such a condition would probably lead to permanent loss of this mode of 
gene processing, a state that has apparently been reached by most eukary-
otic lineages. 

292 
CHAPTER 10 
Evolution of Modular Gene Organization 
In the preceding sections, we have considered a number of basic features of 
eukaryotic transcripts without regard to the mechanisms that dictate spa-
tial and temporal patterns of gene expression. Yet the ability to regulate 
the transcription of various suites of genes in a tissue-specific, development-
specific, and/ or environment-specific manner is the hallmark of organisms 
with multiple cell types. To accomplish such tasks, the noncoding DNA of 
individual genes generally harbors numerous cis-acting elements that coop-
eratively interact with multiple trans-acting factors to finely tune levels of 
transcription. Collectively the transcription factor binding sites of a gene 
are generally referred to as an enhancer. As noted above, the core promoter 
receives information from the enhancer and serves as the binding site for 
RNA polymerase and the basal transcriptional machinery. 
As emphasized in Chapter 8, the regulatory elements of eukaryotic 
enhancers are often organized into modular units, so that individual muta-
tions influence only a subset of a gene's total phenotypic effects. The pres-
ence of such gene sub functions promotes the preservation of duplicate genes 
by degenerative mutations. But how do the modular subunits of gene 
expression on which subfunctionalization depends arise in the first place? 
Many evolutionary developmental biologists have argued that the emer-
gence of this particulate form of gene regulation in multicellular species was 
a fundamental prerequisite for the origin of developmental modules capa-
ble of independent evolutionary trajectories, and some have suggested that 
such organization has been promoted by natural selection as a means for 
enhancing the evolvability of lineages (Raff 1996; Wagner 1996; Wagner and 
Altenberg 1996; Gerhart and Kirschner 1997; Hartwell et al. 1999; Niehrs 
and Pollet 1999; Carroll et al. 2001; Davidson 2001; Lipson et al. 2002; Cohen-
Gihon et al. 2005). However, the causal link between genotypic and phe-
notypic modularity remains unclear, and prior to invoking natural selection 
as the driving force in the origin of modular gene structure, a formal theo-
retical framework incorporating known population genetic mechanisms 
needs to be considered. An essential first step is to evaluate the situation in 
which selection is a negligible force (ZuckerkandI2001; Force et al. 2005). 
As we will see below, a model based entirely on drift and mutation yields 
a simple potential explanation for the emergence of the modular nature of 
gene expression, providing a null model against which to contrast the pre-
dictions of verbal adaptive arguments. 
Before we explore the population genetic issues, a brief overview of 
eukaryotic transcriptional control is in order. Transcription factor genes are 
generally expressed at specific stages of development at a hierarchy of lev-
els of organization. Some transcription factors are organ-specific, some are 
specific to individual tissues within an organ, some are expressed in spe-
cific cell types within a tissue, and still others have narrow subcellular pat-
terns of localization. By virtue of their ability to bind DNA and/ or to act 
as cofactors in binding one another together in functionally significant ways, 
t 
\ 
! 
s
s 
1;
F
f, 
e 
iE 
g
 
el
p. 
ra 
et
e) 
w 
pc 
he
pi
re; 
th
N( 
fi];
biJ 
Be 

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
293 
00 
Figure 10.10 The anatomy of an idealized gene regulatory region. The long black 
bar at the right denotes the coding region, and the short black bar is the generic core 
promoter through which all transcriptional information passes to initiate transcription 
at the point of the arrow. The small colored bars denote transcription factor binding 
sites (TFBSs) that are specific to transcription factors of the same color (open ovals). As 
an example, each of the blue TFBSs is shown to be bound to a specific transcription 
factor, and the pair of factors then binds to a cofactor, producing a complex that trans-
mits information to the core promoter. The green, purple, yellow, and red TFBSs would 
activate transcription within cells expressing their appropriate transcription factors. 
However, this gene would be silent in a cell expressing only the pink transcription fac-
tors, as the complementary TFBSs are absent from the gene's regulatory region. 
the full suite of h'anscription factors and their combinatorial expression pro-
vide a heterogeneous informational environment within the organism. 
Eukaryotic genes exploit this information by incorporating arrays of tran-
scription factor binding sites (hereafter, TFBSs) to finely tune their expres-
sion at various levels of morphological, physiological, and behavioral organ-
ization. For example, each of the color-coded TFBSs in the gene shown in 
Figure 10.10 can be viewed as a substrate for tissue-specific transcription 
factors denoted by the same color; the gene will be turned on only in cells 
expressing an appropriate mix of transcription factors. Further fine-tuning 
is achieved through the use of transcription factors that act as repressors of 
gene expression and through modifications in the spatial distribution of 
cooperatively acting TFBSs. The data suggest that the match between 
enhancer elements and transcription factors serves simply to modify the 
probability that a gene will be expressed (i.e., as a binary onloff switch) 
rather than to modify the actual rate of transcription once engaged (Walters 
et al. 1995; Fiering et al. 2000). 
Although the entire regulatory domain of a gene may substantially 
exceed the length of the coding region, each of the binding sites associated 
with individual transcription factors is usually no more than a dozen base 
pairs in length (e.g., Wilkins 2002; Gasch et al. 2004). Individual genes can 
harbor dozens of such elements, some of which can be partially overlap-
ping (e.g., the yellow and red elements that overlap to produce the orange 
region in Figure 10.10), entirely embedded (e.g., the purple element within 
the green element), on opposite strands, andlor in inverse orientation. 
Nonoverlapping elements, single or otherwise (e.g., the blue elements), ful-
fill our definition of a subfunction, as each nucleotide in their constituent 
binding sites can be modified without affecting expression in other tissues. 
Because small regulatory elements can arise by de novo mutation or trans-

294 
CHAPTER 10 
positional insertion, there are many potential ways in which the numbers, 
locations, and types of TFBSs for a gene can become modified (Brosius 1999; 
von Dassow and Monro 1999; Edelman et al. 2000; Stone and Wray 2001; 
Rockman and Wray 2002; Jordan et al. 2003; Wray et al. 2003; Harbison et 
al. 2004; MacArthur and Brookfield 2004). By this means, entire suites of 
genes harboring functionally similar but evolutionarily independent regu-
latory elements can come to be turned on and off in a highly synchronous 
fashion. Likewise, modifications of the DNA-binding domains of individ-
ual transcription factors can result in cells, tissues, and/ or organs with novel 
features. 
The passive emergence of modularity 
Redundant copies of binding sites for particular transcription factors are 
often present in gene regulatory regions, and various permutations of TFBSs 
can often yield functionally equivalent patterns of gene expression (Bon-
neton et al. 1997; Hancock et al. 1999; Ludwig et al. 2000, 2005; P. J. Shaw et 
al. 2002; DermitzalGs and Clark 2002; Arnosti 2003; Dermitzakis et al. 2003b). 
It then follows that the stochastic turnover of transcriptional control ele-
ments by nearly neutral processes can playa significant role in the evolu-
tion of regulatory region architecture. This is particularly true in multicel-
lular species because, although some regulatory region structures will 
endow an allele with higher fitness than others, the range of effectively 
equivalent states will i.ncrease in populations with small effective sizes, i.n 
which the efficiency of selection is reduced. Provided these effectively neu-
tral solu tions are still sufficient for gene function, tl,e inh"usion of new TFBSs 
can proceed passively, in ways that may be prevented by selection in much 
larger populations. 
The central idea to be explored here is that the same lGnds of duplication 
and degeneration processes that lead to the subfunctionalization of dupH-
cate genes promote the emergence of the sub functions themselves. To sim-
plify the discussion, we will assume that subfwlctions are defined by tran-
scription factor binding sites (or integrated regions of such sites) that are 
separable from other such sites, both mutationally and fWLCtionally (Yuh 
et al. 1998; Force et al. 1999; Arnosti 2003). However, as emphasized in Chap-
ter 8, the same principles apply to sub functions defined by functional motifs 
in coding regions or by alternative splice-site junctions, transcription initi-
ation sites, polyadenylation signals, and so forth. 
Before proceeding, it is essential to recall that we are not attempting to 
explain the expression of a gene in a new temporal or spatial context. Rather, 
we are trying to understand how a gene that is initially under the control of 
ubiquitously expressed transcription factors comes to be regulated by tis-
sue-specific transcription factors while retaining the same overall expres-
sion pattern. The process envisioned here, subfLmction fission, involves con-
ventional processes of descent with modification: the progressive structural 
modification of a preexisting enhancer via consecutive processes of partial 
Fil
ml 
ml
co 
tia 
Tr, 
the 
EXI 
wh 
del
dar 
ger 
atE 
In t 
cor 
has 
mu 
thr< 
tial 

TRANSCR IPT PRODUCTION 
295 
duplication and partial loss of regulatory information (Force et al. 2005). The 
first phase involves the accretion of new semi-redundant TFBSs combined 
with the degeneration of one or more ancestral sites, which yields a semi-
independent enhancer (Figure 10.11, top). The second phase involves tan-
 
 
Accretion, degeneration, 
and partial replacement 
of TFBSs 
a 
 c:::::::JH."--
b 
 c:::::::JHI.t---
t 
c ____ ~ 
d --.... ..--
........ --
Duplication, degeneration, 
and complementation 
 
  
 
Transcription factor utilization 
Tissue 1 
I 
I 
I~ 
Tissue 2 
Figure 10 .11 A hypothetical scenario in which an allele with two independently 
mutable subfunctions can arise from an allele with a single generalized expression 
mechanism. Regulatory regions are depicted on the left, with each regulatory element 
color-coded according to the transcription factor that binds to it. On the right, the spa-
tial patterns of allele-specific utilization of transcription factors are color-coded. 
Transcription factors denoted by black and white are ubiquitously expressed, whereas 
those denoted by green and red are expressed in single, nonoverlapping tissues. 
Expression of the original allele requires three transcription factor binding sites (one 
white and two black). In the first phase of allelic evolution, the regulatory region un-
dergoes the sequential accretion of green and red elements, which together are redun-
dant with respect to the white element, which is then lost in a neutral fashion by de-
generative mutation. At this point, the descendant allele has a semi-independent mode 
of expression, as the two black elements are still essential to expression in both tissues. 
In the second phase, the entire enhancer region is tandemly duplicated, with each 
component then losing a complementary (red or green) element. The resultant allele 
has two independent subfunctions, denoted by the green and red open boxes, as a 
mutation in either region has effects that are confined to a single tissue. Note that 
throughout all of these stages of allelic evolution, there has been no change in the spa-
tial pattern of expression of the gene. 

296 
CHAPTER 1 0 
dem duplication of the semi-independent enhancer, followed by the for-
mation of two entirely independent regulatory sub functions by comple-
mentary degenerative mutations (Figure 10.11, bottom). Other than the fact 
that smaller regulatory elements are involved, the events during the second 
phase are conceptually identical to those underlying the subfunctionaliza-
tion of duplicate genes (see Chapter 8). 
We start by considering how informational accretion can transform an 
allele a with a single sub function (with its expression in all tissues driven 
by the same transcription factors) into an allele with two overlapping reg-
ulatory subfunctions (Figure 10.11, top left). Here we assume a gene with 
essential functions in two tissues, which each express a unique mix of tran-
scription factors (those expressed only in tissue 1 are shown in green, those 
expressed only in tissue 2 in red, and those expressed ubiquitously in black 
and in white). Under this model, the ancestral allele is subject to the sto-
chastic accretion of TFBSs for the tissue-specific (green and red) h"anscrip-
tion factors. However, because the green and red regulatory elements are 
together functionally redundant with respect to the white (but not the black) 
element, once allele c is established, the white element can be lost by degen-
erative mutation. At this point, the black elements, whkh represent other 
essential TFBSs (nonredundant with respect to the white, green, or red ele-
ments), must be retained and shared. The product at the end of the first 
phase is thus an allele d with partially overlapping subfunctions; mutations 
in either the green or red elements will alter expression in single tissues, 
while mutations in the black elements will alter expression in both tissues. 
Because the binding sites for all three types of transcription factors are 
subject to both mutational gain and loss, there is not necessarily a perma-
nent allelic state under this model, as the alternative classes of shared and 
semi-independently regulated alleles are free to mutate back and forth 
(hence, the two-way arrows at the top left of Figure 10.11). Nevertheless, it 
is informative to consider the circumstances under which the semi-inde-
pendently regulated allele d is likely to rise to high frequency, as its pres-
ence is essential to completing the transition to an allele with two entirely 
independent subfunctions. Some of the technical details are outlined in Box 
10.1, and further analysis is provided in Force et al. (2005). The key obser-
vation is that rates of mutational origin and loss of alternative TFBSs appear 
to be sufficiently small that the population genetic environments of most 
multicellular organisms enable alternative alleles like those at the upper left 
of Figure 10.11 to drift freely back and forth to transient states of fixation 
in an effectively neutral fashion. This observation implies that as soon as 
transcription factors with spatially and/ or temporally restricted patterns of 
expression evolved in eukaryotes, large numbers of broadly expressed genes 
would have become vulnerable to the accumulation of alleles with semi-
independent regulation even in the absence of any direct selection for such 
gene architecture. 
If, at the close of the accretion/ degeneration phase, no additional ubiq-
uitously expressed transcription factors were critical to a gene's expression 
r
t
]
2
a
g
o
a
a
n
a
e
ti
aJ
T
C
d
CE

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
297 
(e.g., if the black TFBSs in Figure 10.11 were absent), the descendant allele 
would have arrived at a state of modular architecture, with expression in 
the two tissues being independently regulated. However, the residual pres-
ence of one or more shared transcription factors would impose a require-
ment for a second phase of events for the emergence of two completely inde-
pendent enhancers. In the example shown in Figure 10.11 (lower left), 
duplication of the entire regulatory domain of allele d opens up such an 
opportunity: the duplicate regulatory regions lose complementary tissue-
specific TFBSs (red on the left and green on the right), yielding a modular 
pair of enhancers, each driving expression in a single tissue and each inde-
pendently mutable with respect to the other. Because the rate of tandem 
duplication is inversely related to the length of a duplication span (Ka~u 
and Lynch 2003) and the rate of tandem duplication of gene-sized (>1 kb) 
fragments is already quite high (on the order of 1 % per million years; see 
Chapter 8), the rate of spontaneous entry into this second phase (conditional 
on the presence of allele d) is likely to be at least as rapid as the completion 
of the first phase. 
However, not all novel alleles with modular architectures will be free to 
become established throughout a population. Alleles with modular archi-
tectures will almost always have elevated total numbers of TFBSs (e.g., rel-
ative to allele a, the final modular allele in Figure 10.11 has twice the num-
ber of TFBSs), and hence will be larger targets for mutational degeneration. 
Following the general principles outlined in previous chapters, if the excess 
mutation rate to null alleles associated with the expansion of regulatory 
region complexity is Pr, then the passive emergence of modular gene archi-
tecture will proceed in an effectively neutral fashion if 2N~,u r  1 (see Box 
10.1). However, in populations with large enough Ng to vlolate this condi-
tion, the probability of enhancer fission declines precipitously (Force et al. 
2005). 
These observations raise significant questions about both the necessity 
and the sufficiency of natural selection as a determining force in the emer-
gence of complex patterns of gene regulation. Not only can modular forms 
of gene structure emerge in the absence of any direct selection for such 
architectural features, but in sufficiently large populations, such changes 
are actually opposed by selection (unless they are immediately accompa-
nied by phenotypic advantages that substantially offset the mutational dis-
advantages). As we will see in the final chapter, this view of gene structure 
evolution has several implications for our understanding of the connec-
tions that may exist between the evolution of complexity at the genomic 
and organismallevels. 
The demise of operons 
Coregulation of the expression of genes mutually engaged in metabolic and 
developmental processes is critical to all organisms, particularly to multi-
cellular species that rely on the cascading effects of gene networks to pro-

298 
CHAPTER 10 
Box 10.1 Conversion to Independently Regulated Alleles 
by Effectively Neutral Processes 
A key first step in the evolution of a modular regulatory region is the emergence of semi-
independent enhancers from an ancestral allele that is activated by ubiquitously expressed 
transcription factors. Such a process initially requires the stochastic gain of tissue-specific 
regulatory elements, either by de novo mutation to an appropriate sequence or by the ac-
cretion of such elements via duplication from alternative genomic sites. The following dis-
cussion relies on the schematic in Figure 10.11, and for simplicity, it is assumed that the 
white, green, and red TFBSs are all gained and lost at the same rates, f.1b and {ld respec-
tively. These rates determine the rates of conversion from one allelic type to another, and 
a transition matrix approach provides a basis for estimating the average number of gener-
ations transpiring between an initial state fixed for allele a and a transient state of fixation 
for allele d (Force et al. 2005). 
Assuming that two adjacent alleles in an allelic series are selectively equivalent, the ex-
pected transition time from one allele to the fixation of a novel derivative is a function of 
the arrival time of the requisite mutation and its time to drift to fixation. Letting Ng be 
the effective number of genes per locus in a population, provided that 2N~lb 
1 and 
2Ngf.1d  1, the waiting times for mutations, 11.Llb and l /f.1d' are much greater than the 
time for a neutral mutation to drift to fixation, 2Ng. In this case, the transition time to the 
semi-independently regulated state is essentially independent of population size and en-
tirely determined by the relative values of f.1b and !ld (Figure 10.12). Although the most di-
rect route from allele a to allele d involves two gains (green and red) and one loss (white) 
of regulatory elements, such elements can be repeatedly gained and lost, so the average 
time to fixation of allele d exceeds the sum of the arrival times of the requisite changes; 
that is, it is greater than (21{lb) + (1 I{ld)' In general, the transition time from a to d de-
clines as the ratio of f.1b to f..1d increases, eventually reaching an asymptote at 1/{ld genera-
tions at high ,Llbl f.1d' as the final degenerative step involving the loss of the generalized 
(white) element becomes the limiting factor. 
The conditions 2Ng!lb  1 and 2Ngt-ld 
1 may be frequently met in eukaryotes. From 
Chapter 4, we know that the average values of 2Ngu, where U is the substitutional muta-
tion rate per nucleotide, are roughly 0.004,0.015, 0.026, and 0.057 for vertebrates, land 
plants, invertebrates, and eukaryotic microbes, respectively. Thus, given that transcription 
factor binding sites typically contain just ten or so nucleotides, we can expect 2Ngt-ld to be 
on the order of ten times 2Ngu, and hence much less than 1 for most multicellular species. 
(Accounting for small-scale insertions and deletions would not alter this qualitative conclu-
sion; see Chapter 3.) Obtaining an estimate of 2Ngt-lb is less straightforward because a TFBS 
may appear in many places in the vicinity of a gene. However, if we assume that an appro-
priate TFBS can arise anywhere within a span of L nucleotides, then for a site containing n 
specific nucleotides, the spontaneous rate of emergence of appropriate TFBSs from a ran-
dom DNA sequence with equal usage of all four nucleotides is t-lb "" L(uI3)(0.75n)(0.25)n-l 
(this equation takes into account the probability that a preexisting span of n nucleotides 
has the appropriate sequence at n - 1 sites and the rate at which new mutations at the re-
maining site give rise to the appropriate nucleotide for completing the TFBS). For a typical 
TFBS with n = 10, f.1b "" 0.01 U when L = 103, and f.1b "" u when L = 105, implying that for the 
de novo origin of TFBSs by stochastic nucleotide substitution, 2Ngt-lb will generally be on 
the order of 2Ngu or less. The insertion of preexisting TFBSs by duplication from ectopic lo-
cations will increase f.1b to an unknown, but probably nontrivial, degree. 
As Ng increases beyond the point at which 2Ngf.1b = 1 and 2Ngf.1d = 1, the time re-
quired to make the transition to the semi-independently regulated state approaches a 

~ 108 
~ 
o 
'.c e 
~ 
~ 
~ 107 
t:; o 
~ 
- -----~ - - ----
J! 
Pb = 10-6 
- - _~ - - - - - - II 
Pb = 10-4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
299 
1 
1 ,I 
_"II 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
, 
1 
1 
Effective population size (Ne) 
Figure 10.12 Time to transient fixation of a semi-independently regulated allele (d in Figure 
10.11), starting from a state of fixation for an allele under unitary control (0). Solid lines denote the 
expectations under complete neutrality (i.e., assuming all alleles to be selectively equivalent) derived 
in Force et al. (2005). The data points were obtained by computer simulation, which accounted for 
differential allele-specific rates of nonfunctionalization by mutation, as described in the text. In this 
example, the rates of birth and death of transcription factor binding sites are assumed to be equal. 
Note that the effective population size is equal to Ng, the effective number of genes per locus, for a 
haploid population, and approximately O.5Ng for an outcrossing diploid. 
linear scaling with Ng (see Figure 10.12). This pattern is not simply a consequence of the 
greater times needed for mutant alleles to drift to fixation, however, as a purely neutral 
theory (which assumes alleles a to d to be selectively equivalent, as shown by the solid 
lines Figure 10.12) underestimates the transition time by nearly an order of magnitude. 
Rather, the reduced ability of the semi-independently regulated allele d to become estab-
lished at large Ng is a result of d having an additional essential TFBS relative to allele a. 
This factor causes an increase in the mutation rate of allele d to nonfunctional (and hence 
nonfixable) alleles, imposing a weak selective disadvantage on the order of Pd' 
To evaluate the probability that a duplicated semi-independent enhancer (d) will subse-
quently acquire a completely modular structure (as in the lower part of Figure 10.11), re-
call the general theory outlined in Chapter 8. Such a fate requires the tandem duplication 
of the semi-independent enhancer, with each copy then incurring a complementary loss 
of a tissue-specific TFBS prior to one of the enhancers being entirely silenced. The proba-
bility of such an outcome (following enhancer duplication) depends on the relative rates 
of loss of tissue-specific (green or red) and shared (black) TFBSs, I-'d and Pc respectively. 
Provided the population size is sufficiently small that 2Ngpc  1, for the two-tissue case il-
lustrated in Figure 1 0.11 and starting from a single copy of a mutant allele with a dupli-
cated enhancer, the probability of fixation of enhancer fission is 2[21-'d/(21-'d + Pc)J2/Ng, 
which, if Pd = Pc' is 8/(9Ng), very close to the neutral expectation of 1/ Ng. 

300 
CHAPTER 10 
duce different cell types. Most species, espedally among eukaryotes, coor-
dinate gene expression by equipping interacting genes with similar sets of 
TFBSs to attract the same transcription factors. Prokaryotes, however, often 
have an additional layer of gene expression coordination made possible 
by the use of operons, polycistronic units of cotranscribed and oftentimes 
functionally related genes. By no means is every gene in every prokaryote 
deployed in this manner, but the contrast with the situation in eukaryotes 
is striking. TIle vast majority of eukaryotic genomes are completely devoid 
of operons. The most extreme exception is the trypanosomes, in which 
nearly all genes are initially transcribed into polydstronic units prior to trans 
splicing (Campbell et al. 2003). Exceptions among animals include the nem-
atode C. elegans, for which some 15% of the genome is arranged into at least 
1000 operons of two to eight genes (Blumenthal et al. 2002; Blumenthal and 
Gleason 2003), and the tunicate Ciona, whose genome contains at least 400 
two-gene operons (Satou et al. 2006). Some operons also exist in flatworms 
(Davis and Hodgson 1997) and in the nucleomorphs of chlorarachniophyte 
algae (Gilson and McFadden 1996; see Chapter 11), and individual cases of 
dicistronic units are known in Drosophila (Andrews et al. 1996) and in 
humans (Lee 1991). Nevertheless, given that most well-studied eukaryotes 
(including fungi, plants, and other animals) have revealed no evidence of 
operons, it is clear that they are the exception rather than the rule. 
Despite the rarity of operons, it is common for sets of colocalized genes 
in eukaryotes to be under the partial conh"ol of shared enhancer sequences. 
Microarray analyses of gene expression in yeasts (Cohen et al. 2000; Lee and 
Sonnhammer 2003), Arabidopsis (Williams and Bowles 2004), Caenorhabditis 
(Roy et al. 2002; Lercher, Blumenthal et al. 2003), Drosophiln (Boutanaev et 
al. 2002; Spellman and Rubin 2002), and mammals (Lercher et aJ. 2002; 
Semon and Duret 2006) all indicate the presence of correlated patterns of 
expression of small groups of (two to ten) adjacent genes. In yeasts, there 
is a weak tendency for adjacent genes to have similar functions (Cohen et 
al. 2000), but such associations appear to be absent in multicellular species. 
Human housekeeping genes are more clustered than expected by chance 
(Lercher et al. 2002), and mammalian globin and Hox gene clusters are under 
the partial control of shared regulatory elements, called locus control regions, 
while maintaining subsidiary gene-specific regulatory regions (Q. Li et al. 
2002; Spitz et al. 2003), but these are exceptions. Moreover, colocalization of 
functionally related genes outside of operons is seen in many prokaryotes 
(Overbeek et al. 1999; Lathe et al. 2000), so this type of spatial patterning is 
by no means a unique feature of eukaryotes. Thus, from the standpoint of 
gene expression coordination, the most radical change associated with the 
emergence of eukaryotes was the widespread loss of operons. 
Operons enable organisms to respond to environmental and/ or devel-
opmental challenges in an efficient manner, and there is no compelling rea-
son to think that they would be intrinsically disadvantageous in eukaryotes. 
Polycistronic transcripts could pose a potential structural problem for 
eukaryotes, given that the scanning mechanism of translation initiation 
a 
iz 
er 
si: 
dt
OJ
ti( 
er
dt
at 
to 
H 
of 
to 
mt 
eu
sel
lat
bn
pn
ter
thE
ge:
err
sin
sec
mc
n01
sp,
tal 
is r
OpE
stOt
gin
cor
ma,
to s
firs 

TRANSCRIPT PRODUCTION 
301 
requires ribosomal reentry at downstream genes. However, the processing 
of polycistronic transcripts into monocistronic units by trans splicing in some 
lineages (described above) clearly indicates that there are no insurmount-
able cytological barriers to operons in eukaryotes. Why, then, are most 
eukaryotic genomes devoid of operons? Does positive selection for single-
gene control need to be invoked to explain such a transition? 
The conversion of an operon containing genes under unitary control to 
a set of component genes under individual control is a form of modular-
ization at the genomic level. That is, all genes within an operon are influ-
enced equally by each mutation influencing transcription initiation, whereas 
single-gene transcripts are irtdependently mutable. Thus, following the logic 
developed in the preceding section, it can be argued that the loss of oper-
ons is an expected passive response to a reduction in the efficiency of selec-
tion for weakly advantageous operon architectures in populations experi-
encing reduced effective sizes. As noted above, because small local 
duplications are common and because simple enhancer elements can arise 
at an appreciable rate by single-base substitutions, all genes are vulnerable 
to the chance invasion of TFBSs capable of driving independent expression. 
However, by increasing the size of the mutational target, the accumulation 
of regulatory elements imposes a weak selective disadvantage, equivalent 
to roughly ten times the per-nucleotide mutation rate for each control ele-
ment (u). This implies that unless 2Ngu > 0.1, which is rarely the case in 
eukaryotes (see Chapter 4), selection will be incapable of keeping a mutant 
self-regulated allele from going to fixation. In conh'ast, prokaryotic popu-
lations, for which 2Ngu > 0.1 is common, will be relatively resistant to the 
breakup of operons by the mutational origin of single-gene control 
processes. Thus, as emphasized in many other contexts in previous chap-
ters, direct selection for genomic strearnlining need not be invoked to explain 
the elevated levels of operons in prokaryotes. A similar idea has been sug-
gested by Price, Huang et al. (2005), although these authors put more 
emphasis on positive selection for the coordinated expression of genes with 
similar, complex regulatory domains than on the negative mutational con-
sequences of maintaining such regulatory machinery for individual genes. 
Both of these hypotheses depart radically from the "selfish-operon" 
model of Lawrence and Roth (1996), which postulates that operons evolve 
not because of their immediate benefits to the host genome, but because a 
spatial aggregation of functionally integrated genes facilitates the horizon-
tal transfer of an operon to alternative host species. The selfish-operon model 
is motivated by two assumptions: (1) that the metabolic advantages of an 
operon structure are too weak to maintain such organization in the face of 
stochastic microcmomosomal rearrangements and (2) that the stochastic ori-
gin of gene-specific promoters will eventually overwhelm the benefits of 
coregulation. However, both assumptions conflict with the observations 
made above. The fact that functionalJy related genes can remain aggregated 
to some extent even outside of operons appears to be inconsistent with the 
first assumption, whereas the mutational cost of independent gene regula-

302 
CHAPTER 10 
tion is inconsistent with the second point. The fact that essential genes are 
frequently contained within prokaryotic operons is also inconsistent with 
the selfish-operon model, as such genes are expected to be incapable of 
undergoing the periodic phases of loss and transfer postulated by the model 
(Price, Huang et al. 2005). Although these arguments need not imply that 
the selfish-operon hypothesis is devoid of explanatory power for all oper-
ons in all prokaryotes, the model certainly cannot explain the presence of 
operons in eukaryotes, in which there is no significant horizontal transfer. 
A clear prediction of the theory presented here is that eukaryotic oper-
ons will most likely be found within species with exceptionally large effec-
tive population sizes. Thus, it is of interest that all eukaryotes known to con-
tain numerous operons exhibit the hallmarks of genomic architecture 
expected under a long-term regime of large Ng. For example, among uni-
cellular eukaryotes, trypanosomes are distinct in being nearly devoid of both 
introns and mobile elements, and the genome of the chlorarachniophytic 
algal nucleomorph contains the smallest known introns and is also lacking 
in mobile elements. Likewise, among animals, nematodes have the small-
est known introns, are relatively depauperate with respect to mobile ele-
ments, and probably have relatively high ancesh'al Ng (Cutter et al. 2006). 
These are, of course, anecdotal observations, and a more formal survey 
remains to be done. 
As 
the
tiOJ 
che
rna;
eag
ity :
otic
org 
pla1 
hist
J. 
are 
alth 
diffE 
asyr 
latte 
ing 
acql 
theiJ 
The 
bers 
but (
that 
o 
erali

Expansion and 
Contraction of 
Organelle Genomes 
As noted in Chapter 1, a defining event m the origm of eukaryotes was 
the internalization of a eubacterium, which prior to eukaryotic diversifica-
tion became genetically and phenotypically modified to form the mito-
chondrion, locked mto an obligate symbiosis with its host cell. A second 
major endosymbiotic event, the colonization of a descendant eukaryotic lm-
eage by the cyanobacterial precursor of the chloroplast, brought the capac-
ity for photosynthesis into the eukaryotic domam. Other early endosymbi-
otic relationships may have contributed to the establishment of the various 
organelles contamed within eukaryotic cells, but only mitochondria and 
plastids (also known as chloroplasts m photosynthetic tissues) retam the 
history of such events in internal genomes. 
As we will see in this chapter, organelle genomes have architectures that 
are radically different from those of eukaryotic nuclear genomes, and 
although they have some structural similarities to eubacterial genomes, the 
differences can be equally striking. Most notably, there has been a dramatic 
asymmetry m the evolution of host and endosymbiont genomes, with the 
latter becommg milliaturized with respect to gene content, in part by export-
ing genes to the nucleus. In addition, many organelle genomes have 
acquired changes m the genetic code, and in some cases, the sequences of 
their messenger RNAs are radically altered by posttranscriptional editing. 
The protein-codmg genes in some organelle lineages harbor significant num-
bers of self-splicmg introns, which are absent from nuclear coding genes, 
but organelle genomes are completely devoid of the spliceosomal mtrons 
that commonly inhabit nuclear genes. 
Organelle genomes pose special opportunities and challenges for the gen-
eral ideas proposed m previous chapters. Most of the patterns encountered 

304 
CHAPTER 11 
up to now have drawn from the full domain of cellular life, leaving little 
room for independent evaluation of the contention that nonadaptive forces 
playa central role in the diversification of genome architecture. Because they 
represent independent branches on the tree of life, mitochondrial and plas-
tid genomes provide such an option, although at first glance they also pres-
ent a conundrum. Most notably, in stark contrast to the parallel patterns of 
nuclear genome evolution observed in the two major multicellular lineages 
of eukaryotes (animals and land plants), the organelle genomes in these two 
groups have evolved in radically different ways. The mitochondrial 
genomes of animals are extraordinarily streamlined, whereas plant organelle 
genomes are exceptionally bloated with noncoding DNA. 
Given its reliance on the universal population genetic processes of muta-
tion and random genetic drift, the theory presented in the preceding chap-
ters should apply to both nuclear and organelle genomes. What, then, are 
the unique biological features of organelles that encourage evolutionary tra-
jectories different from those experienced by nuclear genomes within the 
same cells? Although it has been argued in prior chapters that numerous 
aspects of the phylogenetic diversification of nuclear genomes are attribut-
able to differences in the power of random genetic drift, it has also been 
repeatedly emphasized that the influence of the population genetic envi-
ronment on genomic evolution is determined by the product of the effec-
tive number of genes per locus (Ng) and the mutation rate per nucleotide 
site (u). With this in mind, the case will be made here that disparities in muta-
tion rates playa mucll more central role in organelle genome diversification 
than in the case of nuclear genomes. 
Before we explore these issues, an overview of the putative ancestral 
states and basic biology of organelle genomes is in order. The data suggest 
that because of the haploid and uniparental inheritance of most organelle 
genomes, their Ng is lower than that of nuclear genomes in the same species, 
but not dramatically so. However, some organelle lineages (in particular, 
those in animals) have experienced a substantial increase in the mutation 
rate, whereas others (land plant mitochondria and chloroplasts) are unusu-
ally mutationally quiescent. These mutation rate differences provide a poten-
tially unifying explanation for a wide range of previously disconnected 
observations on animal and land plant organelles, including differences in 
genome architechrre, modifications in the genetic code, and the existence of 
mRNA editing. The chapter will then consider the susceptibility of nonre-
combining organelle genomes to eventual extinction via deleterious muta-
tion accumulation, and finally conclude with an overview of the features of 
more recent endosymbioses involving eubacterial inhabitants of a variety 
of arthropod species. In principle, these latter endosymbionts provide oppor-
tunities for still further independent tests of general hypotheses in evolu-
tionary genomics. 
j 
v
a
f(
o
o 
Ie 
11
IT 
V\ 
w 
et
fu 
2C
TI
BE
to:
Vi 
ceo
(Fi 
m 
va 
me 
tiv 
pIE
cOt
Of]
did
lyil
cha
abs 
Ont
SOlI
(Gu
grm
et aJ
ing 

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
305 
Establishment and Stabilization 
of Organelles 
Although the ultimate roots of the eukaryotic nuclear genome remain some-
what lmcertain, one thing is clear: the common ancestor of most (and prob-
ably all) eukaryotes contained a mitochondrion-like organelle. The evidence 
for this assertion is straightforward and compelling: nearly all extant eukary-
otes harbor mitochondria, and the few that do not nevertheless exhibit signs 
of their prior existence. Based on cytological evidence, mitochondria were 
long suspected of being bacterial in origin (Mereschkowsky 1905; Margulis 
1981), and modern molecular phylogenetic evidence strongly supports their 
monophyletic origin, most likely from a member of the a-proteobacteria. 
Whereas some evidence supports an affinity with the Rickettsiales subgroup, 
which contains numerous intracellular parasites (Andersson et al. 1998; Gray 
et al. 1999; Gabald6n and Huynen 2003), a purple photosynthetic nonsul-
fur bacterial origin cannot be ruled out (Esser et al. 2004; Cavalier-Smith 
2006b). 
The early stages of mitochondrial evolution 
Because the origin of the mitochondrion is a singular, ancient event, the fac-
tors underlying its initial establishment are largely a matter of conjecture. 
Virtually all such speculation has started with the assumption that the first 
cells to harbor mitochondria experienced significant benefits from doing so 
(Figure 11.1). However, given the numerous aspects of genomic complexity 
in eukaryotic cells that can arise by effectively neuh'al processes (e.g., preser-
vation of duplicate genes, proliferation of introns or mobile elements, and 
modularization of regulatory regions), it is by no means certain that adap-
tive forces drove the initial establishment of the mitochondrion. For exam-
ple, a simple capture of a key host gene by the primordial mitochondrion 
could have led to the permanent enslavement of the host species with little 
or no overall change in host fitness. In addition, even if adaptive processes 
did playa role in the initial stages of endosymbiosis, the clues to the under-
lying events may not reside in the known benefits of modern-day mito-
chondria, which may have arisen secondarily. 
Some functions of modern-day mitochondria were probably entirely 
absent from the primordial endosymbiont (Gabald6n and Huynen 2004). 
One potential example is the role played by mitochondrion-derived ribo-
somes in the translation of nuclear-derived mRNAs in mammalian sperm 
(Gur and Breitbart 2006). The mitochondrion also plays a central role in pro-
grammed cell death during animal development (Kroemer et al. 1998; Joza 
et al. 2001), although here, the possibility exists that the capacity for induc-
ing cell death is derived from an ancestral mitochondrion that killed cells 

306 
CHAPTER 11 
Energy acquisition 
Hydrogen acquisition 
C0 
~ 
Oxygen scavenging 
Photosynthate acquisition 
Figure 11.1 A simplified overview of four adaptive hypotheses for the initial estab-
lishment of the mitochondrion. The host cell is depicted as a white oval, and the small 
internal oval represents the primordial mitochondrion (gold denotes an oxygen-utiliz-
ing organelle, blue an anaerobic hydrogenosome, and purple an anaerobic purple 
photosynthetic bacterium). Arrows indicate the exchanges of materials between host 
cell and endosymbiont that are most relevant to the various hypotheses (with OC de-
noting organic carbon). The relative numbers of oxygen symbols indicate external en-
vironmentallevels of oxygen (zero in the bottom two panels). 
that did not contain it (Kobayashi 1998). Such an endosymbiont may sound 
far-fetched, but killer bacteria with exactly these properties exist in Para-
mecium (Preer et al. 1971), and another ciliate, Tetrahymena thermophi/a, 
deploys aggregates of mitochondria in the degeneration of old "macronu-
clei" (ciliates have dual nuclei, with all transcription occurring from the 
"somatic" macronucleus) (Kobayashi and Endoh 2005). The mere existence 
of such systems is relevant to any discourse on the origins of organelles, as 
it demonstrates the potential for some endosymbionts to promote their own 
existence without providing any metabolic advantages to their host cells. 
These substantial caveats should be kept in mind as we consider four pro-
posed adaptive hypotheses for the origin of the mitochondrion (see Figure 
11.1). 
Many believe that the key contributor to the establishment of the mito-
chondrion was its provisioning of the host with energy. It is certainly true 
that the mitochondrion plays a vital role in energy production in nearly all 
of 
co: 
an 
m(
COl 
en, 
po 
Ga 
cor
aro 
thr 
me
obi 
stal 
h05
the 
in,
der
gell
Mli
akE 
ami 
hyd
acet
i n 
met
erot
l 
ble (
drio
com
199,
ChOI
moll
Tjad
som,
led 5
the r
are f
(AId
2002,
phyl
evol,
ChOll

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
307 
of today's aerobic eukaryotes: within the cytoplasm, glycolysis converts glu-
cose to pyruvate, which, upon entering the mitochondrion, is subjected to 
an oxygen-consuming process (aerobic respiration) that produces some 36 
molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose. However, there is one obvious 
concern with this energy acquisition hypothesis: although the primordial 
endosymbiont must have been capable of ATP production, it need not have 
possessed a mechanism to transport ATP to its host (Amiri et al. 2003; 
Gabald6n and Huynen 2004), let alone an incentive to do so. 
A second hypothesis for the emergence of the mitochondrion views the 
consumption of oxygen in a rather different way. Rising oxygen levels 
around the time of origin of eukaryotes (-2 BYA) may have posed a toxic 
threat to anaerobic species, thereby providing a selective advantage for 
mechanisms for removing intracellular oxygen. Under this scenario, an aer-
obic mitochondrion that scavenged oxygen from its host cell maintained the 
status quo for host cell metabolism (Kurland and Andersson 2000), and the 
host provided a sanctuary for its detoxifying inhabitant, but the reliance of 
the host on the mitochondrion for ATP production arose secondarily. 
A third hypothesis postulates that the primordial mjtochondrion emerged 
in a fully anaerobic environment in a methanogenic host that initially 
derived nothing more than a waste product from its endosymbiont: llydro-
gen produced from the fermentation of organic substrates (Martin and 
Muller 1998). Aside from the small demands placed on the endosymbiont, 
a key motivation for this hypothesis is the observation that the few existing 
amitochondriate eukaryotes generally harbor an alternative organelle, the 
hydrogenosome, which anaerobically processes glucose to yield CO2, 
acetate, hydrogen, and a small amount of ATP. From this starting point, it 
is not too difficult to imagine the eventual conversion of an autotrophic 
methanogen, previously reliant on environmental hydrogen, to a het-
erotrophic lifestyle requiring host-derived substrates for energy and carbon. 
Under this scenario, the ancestral endosymbiont might have been capa-
ble of both aerobic and anaerobic metabolism, in which case the mitochon-
drion and the hydrogenosome may represent alternative evolutionary out-
comes in which one or the other pathway has been relinquished (Palmer 
1997; Embley et al. 2003; Sutak et al. 2004). Unfortunately, unlike mito-
chondria, most hydrogenosomes do not contain a genome, rendering a 
molecular phylogenetic analysis difficult (Dyall et al. 2004; Hrdy et al. 2004; 
Tjaden et al. 2004). The analysis of proteins imported into the hydrogeno-
somes of trichomonads, most likely a very basal group (see Chapter I), has 
led some to suggest that hydrogenosomes have an origin independent of 
the mitochondrion, but this is a demanding alternative, as hydrogenosomes 
are found in several distantly related lineages, including anaerobic ciliates 
(Akhmanova et al. 1998) and microsporidian fungi (van del' Giezen et al. 
2002; Williams et al. 2002). The issue is further clouded by the fact that the 
phylogenetically basal diplomonads (e.g., Giardia), once thought to have 
evolved prior to the origin of the mitochondrion, appear to harbor mito-
chondrion-derived genes in their nuclear genome (Roger et al. 1998) and 

308 
CHAPTER 11 
also contain a highly reduced, genome-free, mitocJlondrion-like organelle 
(the mitosome) (Tovar et al. 2003). Phylogenetic analysis of the one hydro-
genosome known to contain a genome, from an anaerobic ciliate inhabiting 
the hindguts of cockroaches, is entirely consistent with the hypothesis that 
mitochondria and hydrogenosomes have diverged from a common ances-
tor (Boxma et al. 2005). 
Finally, although all of the above hypotheses assume that the primordial 
mitochondrion was a heterotroph dependent on host-derived organic sub-
strates, Cavalier-Smith (2006b) suggests an autotrophic origin in the form 
of a purple nonsulfur bacterium. Under this hypothesis, the primordial 
endosymbiont relied on host-produced CO2 as a carbon source while pro-
viding the host with some of the products of photosynthesis. Because the 
extant members of the purple nonsulfur bacteria are capable of photosyn-
thesis only under anaerobic conditions, this hypothesis (like the preceding 
two) presume a significant period of anoxia in the historical development 
of the stem eukaryote. If this assumption is correct, the eventual loss of pho-
tosyntlletic capacity by the protomitochondrion may have occurred by sim-
ple relaxation of selection following the transition of the host to an aerobic 
environment. 
Intergenomic transfer 
Regardless of which, if any, of the preceding scenarios is correct, a key step 
in stabilizing the h'ansition from an autonomous endo ymbiont to a host-
dependent mitochondrion must have been the transfer of at least a few genes 
central to endosymbiont metabolism and / or replication to the host's nuclear 
genome. Such transfers almost certainly involved an initial phase of gene 
duplication, with the gene being retained in both genomes until the nuclear 
copy had established full functionality, rendering the organelle copy expend-
able. Although the time scale over which such movement occurred has not 
been determined, the relatively small numb r of gene contained within all 
mitochondria suggests a fairly early and massive amount of gene hoansfer. 
In yeasts, in which these issues ha ve been studied most closely, approxi-
mately 850 nuclear-encoded proteins are imported to the mitochondrion 
(Karlberg et al. 2000; Sickmann et al. 2003), and the numbers for inverte-
brates and vertebrates are approximately 2000 and 4000, respectively (Richly 
et al. 2003). Some of these genes were almost certainly derived from the pri-
mordial mitochondrion, although others were mo t likely present in the ini-
tial host genome, subsequently acquiring a new organelle-associated func-
tion (as described below). 
Of the substantial barriers to the transfer of an essential organelle gene 
to the nuclear genome, the physical transport of organelle DNA is perhaps 
the easiest challenge to meet and is ongoing even in today's eukaryotes. 
Nearly all nuclear genomes harbor numerous insertions with high similar-
ity to contemporary mitochondrial DNA (Thorsness and Fox 1990, 1993; J. 
v. Lopez et al. 1996; Stupar et al. 2001; Adams and Palmer 2003; Bensasson 
et 
liJ 
pI 
m 
m 
pr 
fu 
fo:
tilt 
m; 
re~ 
ha 
pre 
mi 
sec 
en< 
lik, 
late 
Soy 
be 
mit
et a
dUJ 
illV
nur
seq-
tlni 
inti
hoar
mer
rnis 
whi
prot
Cav
ofm
F
chor
hon
frorr
anu
erth!
chon
appE
have
rmar

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
309 
et al. 2003; Richly and Leister 2004; Leister 2005). Of course, to have much 
likelihood of spawning a productive transfer, any such insertions must com-
pletely encompass the organelle gene. A more considerable challenge is the 
necessity of either inserting into a transcriptionally active position in the 
nuclear genome or secondarily acquiring transcription factor binding sites 
prior to being pseudogenized by degenerative mutations. Finally, complete 
functional transfer to the nucleus requires the acquisition of a mechanism 
for orienting the nuclear-encoded protein back to the mitochondrion; either 
the transcript itself or the resultant protein must carry some sort of infor-
mation for use in subcellular localization. This challenge has usually been 
resolved at the protein level, with most nuclear-encoded organelle proteins 
having a precursor stage with an N-terminal sequence that helps guide the 
protein to the organelle membrane. After being bound to receptors at the 
mitochondrial surface and threaded through membrane pores, these pre-
sequences are eliminated proteolytically. However, the mRNAs of nuclear-
encoded mitochondrial proteins having eubacterial affinities (and therefore 
likely to have a mitochondrial origin) also tend to be differentially trans-
lated by ribosomes bound to mitochondrial surfaces (as opposed to ribo-
somes in the cytosol) (Marc et al. 2002). 
Although the complete series of events outlined above may appear to 
be highly improbable, each step is supported by observations on recent 
mitochondrion-to-nucleus transfers in plants (Kadowaki et al. 1996; Adams 
et al. 2000; Kubo et al. 2000; Sandoval et al. 2004). Moreover, h"cmsfers made 
during the early establishment of the mitochondrion need not have 
involved the de novo origin of novel features. For example, a substantial 
number of bacterial proteins appear to have fairly simple N-terminal 
sequences that preadapt them to organelle import (Herrmann 2003; Lucat-
tini et al. 2004; Ralph et al. 2004). Once such sequences were established 
in the nuclear genome via the first successful organelle-to-nucleus gene 
transfers, various duplication mechanisms may have led to their recruit-
ment by additional mitochondrial proteins (Adams and Palmer 2003; Tim-
mis et al. 2004). In addition, many of the nuclear-encoded proteins from 
which the entry sites to mitocllondria are built appear to be derived from 
proteins used in transport across eubacterial membranes (Gabriel et al. 2001; 
Cavalier-Smith 2006b), and may have been involved in the earliest stages 
of mitochondrial assimilation. 
Finally, it should be noted that the coalition between host and mito-
chondrial genomes was not simply a one-way street involving the reloca-
tion of organelle genes to the nucleus. Although organelles can import DNA 
from exogenous sources (Knoop 2004), there are no known cases in which 
a nuclear gene has been successfully incorporated into an organelle. Nev-
ertheless, about 15% of the nuclear-encoded proteins deployed to the mito-
chondrion (including components of the protein import machinery itself) 
appear to be derived from the eukaryotic host genome, and some of these 
have no recognizable homologs in prokaryotes (Andersson et al. 2003; Her-
rmann 2003; Gabald6n and Huynen 2004; Dolezal et al. 2006). This obser-

310 
CHAPTER 11 
vation suggests that the origin of the mitochondrion induced an environ-
mental shift that promoted the neofunctionalization of host-encoded pro-
teins. A number of genes of the primordial mitochondrion that were h'ans-
ferred to the nucleus now have functions that are carried out entirely in 
the cytoplasm, so they too have experienced neofunctionalization (Gabald6n 
and Huynen 2003). 
The origins of plastids 
The establishment of the mitochondrion is not the only endosymbiotic event 
that left a broad mark on eukaryotes, Colonization of the common ancestor 
of green plants, red algae, and glaucophytic algae by a cyanobacterium gave 
rise to the plastid (called the chloroplast in photosynthetic tissues) (Tomi-
tani et al. 1999; Moreira et aJ. 2000), whose establishment appears to have 
involved events similar to those experienced by the mitochondrion. For 
example, approximately 20% of land plant nuclear genes appear to be 
derived from the primordial plastid genome, of which 1000-4000 produce 
proteins that are targeted to the plastid. Even larger numbers are addressed 
to other subcellular locations (Martin et al. 2002), having become neofunc-
tionalized following duplication to the nucleus and loss from the organelle. 
Unlike mitochondria, which appear to have been vertically inherited 
throughout the eukaryotic domain, plastids have been horizontally trans-
ferred across several distantly related lineages (Cavalier-Smith 2002a, 2003; 
Bllattacharya et al. 2004) (Figure 11.2). For example, the chlorarachniophytes, 
a group of amoeboid algae, appear to have obtained their photosynthetic 
capability by engulfing a green alga (Van de Peer et aJ. 1996). Although this 
secondary endosymbiont initially also contained a mitochondrion and a 
nucleus, only the latter was retained, and it now forms a highly reduced 
derivative called a nucleomorph, sandwiched between the inner and outer 
membranes of the plastid. Another secondary endosymbiotic event involv-
ing a green alga appears to have given rise to the euglenozoans (which 
include the euglenoids and the kinetoplastids). In this case, however, only 
the plastid was retained, and even that was lost from the nonphotosynthetic 
kinetoplastids, which nevertheless still contain some plantlike genes in the 
nuclear genome (Hannaert et al. 2003). 
The engulfment of a red alga gave rise to still another secondary 
endosymbiotic event, in this case yielding the putative common ancestor of 
the diverse group of species sometimes referred to as the chromalveolates 
(Cavalier-Smith 1999; Keeling et al. 2004; Harper et al. 2005; Li et al. 2006). 
One sublineage of tbis group, the cryptomonads, retains both a plastid and 
a nucleomorph from this event (Douglas et aJ. 2001), much like the chlo-
rarachniophytes described above. However, all other sublineages (includ-
ing the diatoms and kelps) have lost the nucleomorph, and still other line-
ages of uncertain affinities (including the apicomplexans, ciliates, and 
oomycetes) bave lost the plastid as well (Morden and Sherwood 2002). 
Remarkably, the nonphotosynthetic apicomplexans (including Plasmodium) 
Cc 
Di 
Di 
Figl
Solie
row~
and 
chlol 
with 
UpPE
tiona
only 
reprE 
app(
anot
Cai E
imat
this I
cont,
ofth
plica
onda
etal. 
thep
lined
Or
need~
cally 

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
311 
Coccolithophores 
Dinoflagellates 
Diatoms 
Secondary host 
Euglenoids 
o ~ 
8 
CY'nob,,', nom _ ~ 
Stem eukaryote 0 
a-Proteobacterium _ ~ 
Ancestral host 0 
Chlorarachniophytes 
Cryptomonads 
Green plants 
Red algae 
Glaucophytes 
Nonphotosynthetic 
species 
Figure 11 .2 Hypothetical paths to the acquisition of photosynthesis by eukaryotes. 
Solid circles and ovals denote nuclear and organelle genomes, respectively. Broad ar-
rows are color-coded to denote monophyletic events. The mitochondrion (gray arrow) 
and the primary chloroplast (dark green arrow) each have a single origin. Secondary 
chloroplasts have evolved at least three times (light green, blue, and brown arrows), 
with the nucleomorph having been lost independently from the two lineages at the 
upper left. The internal ovals surrounding secondarily derived chloroplasts denote addi-
tional membranes acquired from the donor species. Note that this schematic provides 
only an overview of the physical paths to organelle genome acquisition; it does not 
represent the phylogenetiC relationships of the depicted lineages. 
appear to contain a modified plastid (the apicoplast) derived from still 
another secondary event, the engulfment of a green alga (Funes et al. 2002; 
Cai et al. 2003). Although the function of the apicoplast is unknown, approx-
imately 8% of the nuclear-encoded proteins in Plasmodium are imported to 
this organelle (Zuegge et al. 2001). Finally, most dinoflagellates appear to 
contain tertiary endosymbionts: their photosynthetic ability is a consequence 
of the engulfment of a member of the brown algal lineage, which (to com-
plicate matters further) may have displaced a previously sequestered sec-
ondary plastid from the dinoflagellate host cell (Ishida and Green 2002; Yoon 
et al. 2002; Hackett et al. 2004). All of these observations have helped resolve 
the phylogenetic relationships of many of the major eukaryotic lineages out-
lined in Chapter 1. 
One final issue with respect to the stabilization of organelle genomes 
needs to be addressed here. Given that most organelle genes can be physi-
cally transferred to the nucleus, at least over long evolutionary time spans, 

312 
CHAPTER 11 
and given that the reverse seems not to occur, why do almost all lineages 
retain at least small organelle genomes? In a nwnber of lineages, of animals 
in particular, the mutation rate is significantly lower in the nucleus than in 
the mitochondrion (as we will see below), a factor that might seem to encour-
age residence in the nucleus (Allen and Raven 1996; Blanchard and Lynch 
2000). However, even if there is a long-term advantage to relocating an 
organelle gene to the nucleus, it appears urilikely that the short-term bene-
fit is large enough to selectively advance such a change on the time scale 
of a typical fixation event (described below). 
One hypothesis for the retention of organelle genomes is that their few 
remaining genes tend to produce hydrophobic proteins, many of which need 
to be integrated into the organelle membrane and are difficult to import (Von 
Heijne 1986; Adams and Palmer 2003). It has also been suggested that genes 
involved in electron transport need to be directly regulated by the local 
redox balance to avoid overproduction of toxic and mutagenic free oxygen 
radicals (Allen 2003). Although neither of these possibilities can be entirely 
ruled out, there are clearly additional factors at play. In particular, as we will 
see below, most organelle genomes have experienced at least one change in 
the genetic code, often involving termination codons. Once such a shift has 
been implemented, it may be essentially impossible to transfer an organelle 
gene to the nucleus without yielding mish'anslated products. Although land 
plant organelles are exceptional in retaining the genetic code used by the 
nucleus, they also have remarkably low mutation rates, so from this stand-
point, transfer to the nucleus would actually be disadvantageous. 
Genome Content and Organization 
Most organelles are thought to harbor single circular genomes like those 
of prokaryotes. However, this conclusion has usually been based on 
sequence analysis rather than direct observation, and many organelle 
genomes may exist as linear head-to-tail conca tamers produced by rolling-
circle replication (Williamson 2002; Bendich 2004). Linear mitochondrial 
genomes have been formally documented in some fungi (Fukuhara et al. 
1993; Forget et al. 2002; Rycovska et al. 2004), other unicellular species 
(Burger et al. 2000; Conway et al. 2000; Fan and Lee 2002; Nosek and 
Tomaska 2003), and a small fraction of animals (Pont-Kingdon et al. 2000; 
Shao et al. 2006), and cannot be ruled out for plants (Oldenburg and Ben-
dich 2004). There are also scattered deviations from the theme of a single 
organelle chromosome. One of the strangest genomes known is that of the 
kinetoplastid mitochondrion, to be discussed in more detail below, which 
consists of thousands of circular molecules containing cryptic messages that 
require posttranscriptional editing. The mitochondrial genome of A1110e-
bidiu111 parasiticu111 consists of hundreds of short linear fragments, each con-
taining just one or two genes (Burger, Forget et al. 2003). Dinoflagellates 
(Zhang, Cavalier-Smith et al. 1999,2002; Howe et al. 2003) and mesozoans 
(a group of simple 20-30-cell parasites) (Watanabe et al. 1999) also have sin-
gle-
tior 
tUrE 
avo 
this 
[ 
mg 
11.3: 
largl 
in g( 
<J) 
Q) 
<J} 
'" 
.0 
0 
SZ 
1 (
1C 
IC 
10 
10-
10-:
10 -:
10-1 
10-2 
10-3 
] 
Figure 
genome
genome

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
313 
gle-gene chromosomes in the form of minicircles. Although these aberra-
tions suggest numerous avenues for future research on chromosome struc-
ture, including the mechanisms by which fragmented organelle genomes 
avoid stochastic chromosomal loss during cell division, the remainder of 
this chapter will focus on genome content. 
Despite the extreme reduction in organelle genome sizes, the general scal-
ing of genome content with overall genome size in mitochondria (Figure 
11.3) is similar to that in nuclear genomes (see Figure 2.1). Expansions of the 
largest mitochondrial genomes are only weakly associated with increases 
in gene number, with a near-threshold increase in investment in intronic 
Figure 11 .3 Scaling of genome content with genome size in mitochondrial 
genomes. The diagonal lines define points of equal proportional contribution to total 
genome size. (Updated from Lynch et al. 2006b.) 

314 
CHAPTER 11 
and intergenic DNA occurring at the low end of the genome size spectrum. 
In addition, there is considerable continuity of scaling within and between 
major groups of organisms, as in nuclear genomes. 
In contrast, there are significant differences in the positions of various 
phylogenetic groups along the size gradient in mitochondrial versus nuclear 
genomes. As noted in preceding chapters, the independent excursions of 
animals and land plants into multicellularity were accompanied by very 
similar expansions in noncoding nuclear DNA. In contrast, the mitochon-
drial genomes of these two lineages followed radically different evolution-
ary h'ajectories; relative to the mitochondrial genomes of unicellular species, 
those in animals are miniaturized, while those in land plants are bloated. 
This contrasting pattern strongly supports the contention that major dif-
ferences in genome architecture are driven by factors other than the evolu-
tion of organismal complexity. 
The smallest mitochondrial genomes are found in animals. Generally in 
the range of 14-20 kb in size and nearly all sharing the same 13 protein-cod-
ing genes, 22 transfer RNA genes, and 2 ribosomal genes, these diminutive 
genomes are highly derived, having lost many of the genes that are broadly 
dish'ibuted across the various unicellular lineages (Gray et al. 1998). Land 
plant mitochondrial genomes reside at the opposite end of the scale, falling 
in the range of 180-1600 kb (Ward et al. 1981) and containing between 29 
and 59 protein-coding genes, usually along with full sets of transfer and 
ribosomal RNAs. Most animal mitochondria consist of 90%-95% coding 
DNA, even exhibiting overlaps between the initiation and termination 
co dons of some adjacent genes, whereas the vast majority (>90%) of land 
plant mitochondrial DNA is noncoding. 
No mitochondria contain spliceosomal introns, and mobile elements are 
almost always absent, one possible exception being a small double-hairpin 
element distributed among the intergenic regions of the mitochondrial 
genome of Allomyces (a fungus) (Paquin et al. 1997). However, mitochon-
drial group I and II introns are found throughout the eukaryotic domain, 
albeit with a very uneven distribution (see Figure 11.3). Unicellular species 
are often completely devoid of such introns and rarely have more than ten 
(the main exception being an expansion in the number of group I introns in 
some fungal lineages). No green algae are known to have more than ten 
introns per mitochondrial genome, but almost all land plants have twenty 
to thirty, suggesting a wLiquely large expansion in intron number in this lin-
eage. In contrast, animal mitochondria lack introns, with just a few excep-
tions: the genomes of two cnidarians, a coral (Acropera; van Oppen et al. 
2002) and a sea anemone (Metridium; Pont-Kingdon et al. 1998), contain one 
and two introns, respectively, whereas that of the placozoan Trichoplax 
adhaerens contains four (Dellaporta et al. 2006). As we will see below, these 
exceptions are potentially revealing with respect to the mechanisms pro-
moting the maintenance of organelle introns. 
Because of the diversity of ancestries associated with plastids and the 
limited number of whole-genome sequences, the interpretation of data on 
( 
( 
( ,
~
~
Fi 
di,
All
pI"
an
de
lar
lor
pL
alt
nu
tid
int

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
315 
---- 100% 
102 
----
----
Ii G 
--- -
----
---
iec1. 
 
 
.-- 10% 
101 
0 
.-J ---
----
 
0 
-----
-
-----
--.... -.- 100% 
102 
----.... " -.~ 
------.0 
-000-
---- 10% 
101 
-----
f/J 
----
til 
ill 
-----
OJ 
f/J 
---
til 
--
'" 
'" 
.0 
---- 1% 
.n 
0 
0 
;2 10 
-----
~ 
----
----
--
----
::_-------------------- 1% 
10-1 
Coding DNA 
10-2 L-_'---'-__'_---'-__'_-'--'--
,------' 
30 
100 
200 
Genome size (kilobases) 
___ - _--------.--- -
100% 
---
---
o _---.lJI,,-.~ 10% 
_-J--
-------
o 
0 _-- 1% 
--------------
------
 
QO 
lntronic DNA 
10-2 L....(~)-C)__--'---'---'---'---'--4 ..... ---e--
30 
100 
200 
Genome size (kiloba es) 
10-1 
Intergenic DNA 
10-2 L---'_-'----'---'----'--'---', ____ 
-' 
30 
100 
200 
Genome size (kilobases) 
 Land plants 
o Green algae 
 Other primary endosymbionts 
 Secondary endosymbionts 
 Euglena gracilis 
 Nonphotosynthetic land plant 
o Nonphotosynthetic unicellular 
Figure 11.4 Scaling of genome content with genome size in plastid genomes. The 
diagonal lines define points of equal proportional contribution to total genome size. 
Algae with "other primary endosymbionts" include the red algae and a glaucocysto-
phyte, whereas those with secondary endosymbionts include a diatom, a haptophyte, 
and a cryptophyte. The plastid of Euglena gracilis, another secondary endosymbiont, is 
depicted separately. Derived plastids from non photosynthetic organisms are from one 
land plant (Epifagus), two unicellular parasitic algae (Helicosporidium sp. and Euglena 
langa), and four apicomplexans. (Updated from Lynch et al. 2006b.) 
plastid genomes is less straightforward than in the case of mitochondria, 
although three patterns are notable (Figure 11.4). First, as in the case of 
nuclear and mitochondrial genomes, expansion in size in the largest plas-
tid genomes is largely a consequence of the proliferation of intergenic and 
intronic DNA. Of the lineages derived from the primary endosymbiotic 

316 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE 11.1 Average content of plastid (cp) versus mitochondrial (mt) 
genomes 
GENOME 
NUMBER OF GENES 
INTRONS/ 
FRACTION NONCODlNG 
SIZE (BP) 
PROTEIN 
tRNA 
GENE 
INTRON 
INTERGENIC 
N 
Land plants 
cp 
150,290 
87 
33 
0.16 
0.12 
0.30 
35 
mt 
311,760 
39 
22 
0.57 
0.18 
0.58 
9 
Green algae 
cp 
167,210 
92 
31 
0.07 
0.05 
0.38 
8 
mt 
41,550 
22 
17 
0.17 
0.11 
0.25 
12 
Red algae 
cp 
169,950 
206 
32 
0.00 
0.00 
0.12 
4 
mt 
31,600 
29 
24 
0.00 
0.05 
0.06 
3 
Source: Data are derived from annotated genomes deposited at the 
ationaJ Center for Biotechnology 
Information. 
Note: Jntrons/ gene refers to protein-coding loci, whereas the fraction of intronic DNA includes that within 
tRNA and rRNA genes. The number of genomes entering each analysis is denoted by N. 
event, chlorophytes (green algae and land plants) have retained nearly 60% 
fewer protein-coding genes than their red algal relatives while harboring 
substantially more intergenic and intronic DNA (Table 11.1). Second, the 
plastid genomes of algae that have experienced secondary endosymbiotic 
events have lost numerous genes, with a dramatic proliferation of introns 
occurring in the euglenoid lineage. Finally, the expansion of noncoding DNA 
in land plant plastids is much less substantial than in mitochondria; 
although the latter contain less than half the number of genes in the former, 
the average genome size is twofold higher (see Table 11.1). 
The Population Genetic Environment 
Previous chapters have promoted the view tllat much of the diversity in 
gene and genomic architecture is a consequence of the relative power of two 
nonadaptive forces, mutation and random genetic drift. Before we attempt 
to extend this reasoning to organelle genomes, some fundamental popula-
tion genetic issues must be revisited. As noted in Chapter 4, interactions 
between mutation, recombination, and numbers of reproductive individu-
als define the effective number of gene copies at a locus in a population (Ng). 
In the nuclear genome, all three of these factors work in the same direction 
to cause a reduction in Ng in multicellular species relative to that in unicel-
lular taxa. However, given the muque aspects of inheritance and mutational 
susceptibility in organelles, these patterns need not hold in mitochondrial 
and plastid genomes. 
r
C 
IE 
e 
ti 
g 
v 
er 
cc 
in 
el:
ti\ 
m:
le,
th, 
alt
ge:
(KJ 
geJ 
er}
ba~
TAl
M
PIa
SOUTe

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
317 
Mutation 
Several factors may promote unusual patterns of mutation in the mito-
chondrion. First, as sites of aerobic respiration, mitochondria generate high 
levels of free oxygen radicals, producing an internal environment with an 
exceptional potential for causing DNA damage, including the deamina-
tion of cytosine to uracil and the oxidative modification of guanine to 8-oxo-
guanine, which respectively cause C:G~T:A transitions and C:G~A:T trans-
versions (see Chapter 6). Such mutation pressure is consistent with the 
nearly universal A/T bias that exists in mitochondrial genomes (Table 11.2). 
Second, in contrast to nuclear DNA, mitochondrial DNA is frequently repli-
cated within nondividing cells, increasing the opportunities for replication 
errors per cell cycle. Third, mitochondria generally contain multiple genomic 
copies, enhancing the likelihood that newly arisen mutations will be 
involved in gene conversions. By promoting some types of mutations and 
eliminating others, biased gene conversion within an organelle can effec-
tively alter the mutation profile, as mutations that are incapable of becom-
ing fixed within an organelle are unable to become fixed at the population 
level (Birky and Walsh 1992). Unfortunately, almost nothing is known about 
the magnitude or direction of gene conversion forces in mitochondria, 
although the single study of the matter that has been done, on the plastid 
genome of tobacco, indicates a strong conversion bias toward A/T 
(Khakhlova and Bock 2006), the opposite of what is generally seen in nuclear 
genomes (see Chapter 6). 
The mutation rate is a function of the accuracy of the replication machin-
ery and the ability of repair enzymes to correct pre-replication damage. The 
base misincorporation rate of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase (pol y), 
TABLE 11.2 Mean AfT content of mitochondrial and plastid 
genomes as a fraction of the entire genome 
MEA 
SD 
N 
Mitochondrial genomes 
Vertebrates 
0.59 
0.04 
33 
Invertebrates 
0.67 
0.07 
36 
Land plants 
0.58 
0.04 
9 
Green algae 
0.66 
0.06 
12 
Fungi 
0.74 
0.07 
36 
Unicellular species 
0.72 
0.06 
26 
Plastid genomes 
Land plants 
0.64 
0.04 
27 
Green algae 
0.67 
0.05 
9 
Source: Data from records a t the 
ational Center for Biotechnology Information. 

8 
CHAPTER 11 
which is universally encoded in the nucleus, is several times lower than that 
of polymerases deployed in nuclear genome replication (Kunkel and 
Alexander 1986; Johnson and Johnson 2001). However, in contrast to nuclear 
genomes, almost no mitochondrial genome encodes DNA repair proteins, 
such functions having either been transferred to the nucleus or lost entirely 
in the early establishment of tlie primordial endosymbiont. Almost every-
thing we know about mitochondrial DNA repair derives from studies of 
budding yeast and human cells, and even that knowledge is limited (BohT 
et a1. 2002; Kang and Hamasaki 2002; Mason and Ligbtowlers 2003). Of the 
three major patbways for eliminating DNA damage-base excision repair, 
mismatch repall~ and nucleotide exdsion repair-tlie last appears to be com-
pletely absent from the mitocliondrion of both species. In contrast, botli 
groups deploy a base excision repair process that may be even more effi-
dent than that in the nuclear genome (Bohr et a1. 2002). Vertebrates appear 
to have more proteins allocated to mitochondrial base excision repair tlian 
yeasts (Foury et al. 2004), but this need not imply a higher degree of main-
tenance fidelity. Indeed, mitochondrial base excision repair appears to be 
mutagenic, in that damaged bases are often replaced by incorrect nucleotides 
(Phadnis et a1. 2006). In yeast mitochondria, such errors can be eliminated 
by nuclear-encoded mismatch repair enzyme. Such proteins are not known 
to enter buman mitochondria, liowever, and although some mechanism for 
mismatch repair is present lli vertebrates, the absence of strand bias inlpHes 
that correct and incorrect bases are equally likely to be altered (Mason et 
a1. 2003). Unfortunately, these limited observations on mitochondrial DNA 
repair provide no quantitative information on mitochondrial mutation rates, 
which ultimately depend on both tlic amowit of damage per cell cycle and 
the efficiency of repair. 
The only attempt to directly estimate the germ lin mutation rate of mito-
chondrial DNA involves a survey of long-term mutation accumulation lines 
of the nematode C. elegnl1s (Denver et a1. 2000). Because these lines were 
maintained by single-progeny descent from self-fertilizing individuals, nat-
ural selection was effectively eliminated, so thc rate of mutation accumu-
lation is expected to be very close to the mutation rate (in accordance witli 
the neutral tlieory; see Chapter 4). At the level of nucleotide substitutions, 
this study revealed a mutation rate of 9.7 x lO-R per site per generation, 
which corresponds to 8.9 x 10-6 per site per year, a rate about ten times 
greater than the directly observed nuclear rate for this species (Denver et a1. 
2004). (Strictly speaking, this esrunate and all others discussed here sliould 
be viewed as net mutation rates after accounting for any biases associated 
witb within-organelle gene conversion.) The ratio of mitochondrial transi-
tions to transversions III this study was 4:1, consistent witb observations on 
somatic mutations in human mitochondria (Khrapko et a1. 1997) and with 
the commonly observed excess of transitions over transversions at silent 
sites in lllterspecies comparisons (Horai and Hayasaka 1990; Xia et al. 1996). 
All other attempts to estimate the mitochondrial mutation rate are based 
on the enumeration of substitutions at silent sites in pairs of species witli 
g~ 
fr 
fe 
ra 
cc 
gE 
fo 
co 
O.~ 
ch 
cal 
ge~ 
seE 
for 
rec 
ofl
sis 
(Ca 
tW(
ChI 
pro
be 1
mit
nuc
spo
of s
exp
1
ges
mit<
(exc
cho
conl
of tJ
ial t(
0.57 
rate 
resp
coral
facto
mitol
aclOE
what
rate i
era oj

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
319 
geologically based divergence time estimates, relying on the assumption 
that such sites are neutral (see Chapter 4). These studies reveal dramatic dif-
ferences among major phylogenetic groups (Table 11.3). In mammals, the 
rate of silent-site substitution averages 34 x 10-9 per site per year and is fairly 
constant across species, so that the per-generation rate scales inversely with 
generation length. Qualitatively similar rates per absolute time have been 
found for other animals, with the exception of sharks and corals. In stark 
contrast, the absolute rate of silent-site substitution in plants averages just 
0.36 x 10-9 per site per year, suggesting a hundredfold difference in mito-
chondrial mutation rates between animals and plants. 
Uncertainties remain about the quantitative reliability of phylogeneti-
cally based mitochondrial mutation rate estimates, with some evidence sug-
gesting they are substantially downwardly biased (as in the nuclear genome; 
see Chapter 4). For example, on an absolute time scale, the direct estimate 
for C. elegans noted above is about 150 times greater than the largest indi-
rect rate obtained for any species (see Table 11.3), and the average estimate 
of the human mitochondrial mutation rate obtained from pedigree analy-
sis exceeds that obtained from phylogenetic analysis by a factor of about 23 
(Cavelier et al. 2000; Howell et al. 2003; Santos et al. 2005). There are at least 
two potential explanations for such discrepancies. First, as discussed in 
Chapter 6, selection associated with translation or other aspects of mRNA 
processing (codon bias) could cause the rate of divergence of silent sites to 
be less than the actual mutation rate. Second, the vast majority of human 
mitochondrial mutations appear to be concentrated at a few single-
nucleotide hot spots (Khrapko et al. 1997; Zheng et al. 2006). Mutational hot 
spots can profoundly bias phylogenetic estimates of mutation rates, as pairs 
of species with low levels of average divergence may nevertheless have 
experienced multiple substitutions at a small number of hot spots. 
These quantitative uncertainties aside, the data in Table 11.3 strongly sug-
gest the presence of major phylogenetic differences in the mutagenicity of 
mitochondrial versus nuclear envirorunents. In vertebrates and invertebrates 
(excluding corals), the average substitution rates at silent sites in the mito-
chondrion are 19 and 8 times those in the nuclear genome, respectively. In 
contrast, the land plant mitochondrial substitution rate is generally just 5% 
of that of the nuclear genome. Because the estimated ratio of mitochondr-
ial to nuclear mutation rates averages 1.6 for unicellular species and is just 
0.57 for corals (a basal lineage of animals), a high mitochondrial mutation 
rate appears to be largely a feature of bilaterian animals. The mechanisms 
responsible for the mutational quiescence of mitochondria in plants and 
corals are unclear, but differences in mismatch repair capabilities may be a 
factor. The only animal known to encode a mismatch repair enzyme in its 
mitochondrion is a coral (Pont-Kingdon et al. 1998), and land plants harbor 
a closely related variant of this enzyme (Abdelnoor et al. 2006). Nevertheless, 
whatever mechanism is responsible for the extraordinarily low mutation 
rate in plant mitochondria, it is not an entirely invariant feature. Two gen-
era of plants (Plantago and Pelargonium) contain species with mitochondrial 

320 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE 11.3 Rates of nucleotide substitution mutation per nucleotide site in 
,
mitochondria, derived from phylogenetic comparisons using silent 
sites in protein-coding genes (in units of 10-9 /site] 
RATE PER YEAR 
RATE PER GENERATION 
MT/NUa 
Mammals 
Whales 
28.80 
648.00 
13.09 
Great apes 
26.13 
522.66 
20.91 
Lemurs 
35.98 
97.15 
29.30 
Big cats 
67.68 
473.76 
17.92 
Horses 
36.50 
109.50 
26.96 
Seals 
20.30 
62.93 
17.65 
5( 
Rodent 
21.81 
10.90 
12.74 
Sf 
Birds 
aF 
Herons 
19.20 
192.00 
10.91 
Woodpeckers 
24.71 
74.12 
14.04 
Chicken/ quail 
8.10 
8.10 
4.59 
si 
Reptiles and amphibians 
rE 
Turtles 
8.20 
357.52 
32.79 
m
Frogs 
20.37 
20.37 
16.60 
m
Newts 
17.72 
115.20 
b'
Fishes 
si'
Centrarchidae 
17.17 
re
Characiformes 
47.33 
su
Sharks 
0.70 
11.90 
4.38 
pl
Bilaterian invertebrates 
cr
Drosophila 
34.00 
3.40 
2.34 
W
Mosquitoes 
1.43 
Crickets 
18.03 
Tr
Aphids 
18.00 
In
Butterflies 
2.95 
ot:
Tiger beetles 
16.60 
ite
Snails 
57.00 
0.82 
or1
Sea urchins 
81.00 
7.54 
aC
Nematodes 
of
10.26 
sic
Corals 
0.50 
0.57 
ryi
Land plants 
raJ
Grasses 
0.34 
0.34 
0.05 
of 
Palms 
0.15 
1.50 
0.06 
en
Brassicaceae 
0.60 
0.90 
0.04 
tiv
fro

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
321 
TABLE 11.3 (Continued) 
Fungi and unicellular species 
Aspergillus 
CnJptococcus 
Haemoproteus 
Paramecium 
Plasmodium 
Trypanosoma 
Yeasts 
RATE PER YEAR 
RATE PER GENERATION 
1.84 
0.73 
0.47 
1.40 
0.42 
4.04 
2.14 
Source: Updated from Lynch et al. (2006b), with additional references for snails (Hellberg and Vacguier 1999), 
sea urchins (McCartney et al. 2000; Zigler et al. 2005), and coral (Hellberg 2006). 
'Ratio of rates in mitochondrial (mt) versus nuclear (nu) genomes. 
silent-site substitution rates as much as 4000 times greater than those 
reported above (Palmer et al. 2000; Y. Cho et al. 2004), and a switch from 
maternal to paternal inheritance in gyrm10sperms can increase organelle 
mutation rates by severalfold (Whittle and Johnston 2002). 
Where does the plastid fit in with respect to mutation rates? Compara-
tive studies of grasses (rice and maize) and palms imply ratios of silent-
site substitution rates in the plastid versus nuclear genomes of 0.22 and 0.08, 
respectively (Gaut et al. 1996). Recalling the relative rates of mitochondrial 
silent-site substitution in Table 11.3, these observations suggest that the land 
plant plastid mutation rate is two to four times that of the land plant mito-
chondrion. A similar conclusion can be derived from the earlier work of 
Wolfe et al. (1987). 
Transmission and recombination 
In contrast to nuclear genomes, all organelle genomes are replicated amei-
otically, and in the vast majority of animals and land plants, they are inher-
ited uniparentally, usually through the mother. Although the numbers of 
organelles per oocyte can range up to 104 or so, the number of genome copies 
actually inherited by progeny appears to be substantially smaller. The issue 
of organelle transmission dynamics has been addressed on several occa-
sions through the serendipitous discovery of heteroplasmic females (car-
rying two distinct mitochondrial types), generated either by mutation or by 
rare cases of paternal leakage. Letting p and (1 - p) denote the frequencies 
of two haplotypes in a mother, the variance in their frequencies among prog-
eny follows from simple binomial sampling, p(l- p)/no' where 110 (the effec-
tive number of organelle genomes within an individual) can be ascertained 
from the degree of dispersion of the haplotype frequencies among progeny. 

322 
CHAPTER 11 
('This formula is identical in form to that for genetic drift of two autosomal 
alleles within a population; see Chapter 4.) Using this approach, or a close 
variant of it, the effective number of mitochondrial genomes per female 
transmission is estimated to be ten in mice and humans Genuth et al. 1996; 
Marchington et al. 1997) and two in cows (Ashley et al. 1989). Thus, in these 
mammals, heteroplasmic lineages become homoplasmic in just a few gen-
erations, although the mechanisms responsible for the underlying trans-
mission bottlenecks are unclear (candidates include direct organelle destruc-
tion, differential replication, and random partitioning of the cytoplasm; for 
a review, see Burt and Trivers 2006). Heteroplasmy in the slime mold 
Physamn7 also tends to be resolved within just a couple of generations 
(Meland et al. 1991), and in S. cerevisiae, heteroplasmy is generally lost within 
20 generations, suggesting an effective number of organelle genomes per 
individual of about five (Birky et al. 1978). In contrast, in Drosophila and 
crickets, the effective number of organelle genomes per female appears to 
be significantly larger, on the order of two to three hundred (Solignac et al. 
1983; Rand and Harrison 1986). 
Such rapid loss of heteroplasmy bears on the issue of organelle effective 
population sizes in two significant ways. First, the multiplicity of genomes 
within individuals is expected to have only a minor effect on the long-term 
effective number at the population level (Ng), which will be primarily dic-
tated by the effective number of transmitting parents (Birky et al. 1983). This 
is because the depth of the entire genealogy of organelles within a popula-
tion will be almost entirely determined by tIle time separating organelle lin-
eages among (as opposed to within) hosts. Second, even though organelle 
genomes are capable of recombination (Thyagarajan et al. 1996), the oppor-
tunities for generating novel recombinant genotypes are quite restricted. 
Because recombination between molecules varying at zero or one sites yields 
identical offspring molecules, genetically effective recombination requires 
the participation of pairs of molecules with at least two polymorphic 
nucleotide sites. With within-individual divergence times sllorter than a few 
hundred generations, such levels of variation will only rarely develop by 
mutation. 
Thus, genetically effective recombination between organelles generally 
requires biparental transmission to bring divergent genomes into contact. 
The degree to which such situations arise has been debated considerably 
(Eyre-Walker and Awadalla 2001; McVean 2001). Given the thousandfold or 
greater difference in the numbers of mitochondria usually carried in eggs 
and in sperm, and the fact that sperm mitochondria are generally targeted 
for destruction (Satoh and Kuroiwa 1991), biparental encounters of animal 
mitochondria are clearly much less frequent than in the case of nuclear 
genes. Observations of recombinant events in the somatic cells of rare het-
eroplasmic humans provide direct evidence that recombination can occur 
in animals (Kraytsberg et al. 2004; Zsurka et al. 2005), but to have evolu-
tionary consequences, recombination must occur in the germ line, and it is 
here that the picture becomes murkier. 
Ie 
Iii 
m 
te 
re 
2C 
Gc 
so 
Be 
ch 
the 
so:
We 
is e
SO) 
cOl 
an: 
is ( 
Sill 
J. E
org 
cor
of~
Ne
an
wh
Ho
of E
gib.
rece
Del
mO
orgi
gen
Eftt
It is
tive
spec
par
one 
two

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
323 
Because of the extremely low likelihood of directly observing recombi-
nation events in an organelle, attempts have been made to address the prob-
lem indirectly by looking for the hallmark of recombination, a decline in 
linkage disequilibrium with increasing physical distance between poly-
morphic nucleotide sites in samples from natural populations (see Chap-
ter 4). Some observations of this sort seem consistent with the occurrence of 
recombination in animal mitochondria (Awadalla et al. 1999; Piganeau et al. 
2004), but a number of potential artifacts can cloud such interpretations 
(Jorde and Barnshad 2000; Kivisild and Villems 2000; Kumar et al. 2000; Par-
sons and Irwin 2000; Elson et al. 2001; Wiuf 2001; Innan and Nordborg 2002). 
Berlin and Ellegren (2001) tested the hypothesis of clonal inheritance of mito-
chondrial DNA in a bird by comparing the population-level genealogy of 
the mitochondrion with that of a molecular marker on the W sex chromo-
some, which is strictly maternally inherited without recombination. There 
was complete concordance between the two sets of markers, a finding that 
is consistent with the hypothesis that both mitochondrion and W chromo-
some are coinherited entirely through females. Thus, to date, there is no 
compelling evidence for the occurrence of significant recombination within 
animal mitochondria. 
In contrast to the situation in animals, mitochondrial inheritance in fungi 
is often biparental, and recombination does occur (Wilkie and Thomas 1973; 
Silliker et al. 1996; MacAlpine et al. 1998; Saville et al. 1998; Ling et al. 2000; 
J. B. Anderson et al. 2001). The situation is less clear in plants, in which 
organelle inheritance is usually uniparental. Plant mitochondrial genomes 
commonly contain dispersed repetitive DNAs that promote the production 
of subgenomic-sized circles by recombination (Palmer and Shields 1984; 
Newton 1988; Gillham 1994), and plant nuclear genomes appear to encode 
a mitochondrion-targeted RecA protein for homologous recombina tion, 
which has been lost from the fungal and animal lineages (Z. Lin et al. 2006). 
However, although such inh'agenomic exchange can lead to the production 
of genomic rearrangements, its effect on sequence evolution may be negli-
gible. Circumstantial evidence suggests the occurrence of some effective 
recombination in the mitochondria of the annual plant Silene (Stadler and 
Delph 2002), which harbors an unusually high level of nucleotide poly-
morphism, but the extremely low levels of within-species variation in the 
organelle DNA of most plants (described below) imply negligible levels of 
genetically effective recombination. 
Effective population size 
It is commonly argued that genes contained within organelles have effec-
tive population sizes about one-fourth those of nuclear genes in diploid 
species, the rationale being that each sexual reproductive event involves the 
participation of four nuclear gene copies (two from each parent), but just 
one organelle gene copy (generally from the mother). This argument ignores 
two key issues, however. First, as emphasized in Chapter 4, Ng can be more 

324 
CHAPTER 11 
strongly influenced by selective interference associated with linkage than 
by the number of transmitting units. The "one-fourth" rule implicitly 
assumes an identical level of selective interference in nuclear and organelle 
genes, but this assumption is almost certainly violated, perhaps even in dif-
ferent directions, in various phylogenetic lineages. Given the restricted 
recombination in organelle genomes, it is tempting to conclude that selec-
tive interference due to linkage is more substantial for organelle than for 
nuclear genes. However, even if recombination rates are greatly reduced 
in organelle genomes, nuclear chromosomes contain many more genes, and 
it is also unclear whether the distributions of the fitness effects of mutations 
that drive selective interference are equivalent among the two types of 
genomes. In plant organelle genomes, the mutation rate is so much lower 
than in the nuclear genome that selective interference may be a negligible 
force, but animal mitochondria may present the opposite condition. Second, 
the "one-fourth" rule implicitly assumes equal levels of variance in repro-
ductive success among males and among females. However, in many 
species, animals in particular, a much smaller fraction of males participate 
in mating than females. The demographic events in the nontransmitting sex 
are irrelevant to the evolution of an organelle genome, but because the effec-
tive population size of a biparentally inherited gene is most sh'ongly influ-
enced by the number of breeders in the rarer sex, a male bottleneck could 
actually result in a lower effective number of nuclear genes than maternally 
inherited organelle genes (Birky et al. 1983). 
Given this array of uncertainties, empirical observation is the only means 
of clarifying the relative effective numbers of organelle and nuclear genes. 
The problem will be addressed here in an indirect way, using T)eutral poly-
morphism and divergence data . Recall from Chapter 4 that the expected 
number of nucleotide substitutions between silent sites in randomly sam-
pled nuclear genes within a species (lfsn) is 2Ngnun at mutation-drift equi-
librium, where N gn is the effective number of nuclear genes at the locus and 
un is the mutation rate per nuclear nucleotide per generation. Similarly, the 
expected silent-site diversity in a mitochondrial gene (lfsm) can be denoted 
as 2N urn' If an estimate of the ratio of mitochondrial to nuclear divergence 
rates fur silent sites (dm / dn) among closely related taxa is available, then, 
under the assumption of neuh'ality, it can be used as an estimate of urn/un 
(see Table 11.3), thereby allowing the ratio of effective sizes (Ngm/Ngn) to be 
approximated by (lfsm/ lfsn)/ (dm / dn). 
The data for these computations are not extensive, and as ratios based 
on limited data, the estimates for individual species are not wuformly reli-
able, but the group means are consistent enough to be informative (Table 
11.4). The most significant observation is that although deviations from the 
"one-fourth" rule exist, they are generally fairly small. For mammals, the 
average Ngm/Ngn is 1.29 (SE = 0.43), which is significantly greater than the 
null expectation of 0.25, consistent with the fact that variance in male repro-
ductive success often exceeds that for females in mammalian species (Clut-
ton-Brock 1988). The average estimates of Ngrn/Ngn for other vertebrates, 
T 
I 
F
A
N
SOIlr

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
325 
TABLE 11.4 Estimates of the effective number of genes per 
locus for mitochondrial versus nuclear genes 
Mammals 
Erinaceus 
0.17 
Gorilla 
2.20 
Homo 
0.26 
Loxodonta 
1.94 
Microunga 
3.52 
Mus 
0.57 
Ovis 
0.09 
Pan 
1.54 
Birds 
Aethia 
0.02 
Reptiles/amphibians 
Eleutherodactylus 
2.55 
Emys 
1.81 
Fishes 
Prochilodus 
0.05 
Arthropods 
Aedes 
0.17 
Anopheles 
0.21 
Drosophila 
0.05 
Gryllus 
0.17 
Lu tzomyia 
0.12 
Nematodes 
Caenorhabditis 
1.29 
Haemonchus 
0.16 
Unicellular species 
Candida 
0.32 
Cryptococcus 
0.76 
Saccharomyces 
0.26 
Paramecium 
0.27 
Plasmodium 
1.16 
Tnjpanosoma 
0.10 
SOllrce: Lynch et al. 2006b. 

326 
CHAPTER 11 
invertebrates, and unicellular species, 1.11 (0.64),0.31 (0.16), and 0.48 (0.16), 
respectively, are uniformly greater than 0.25, although no individual devia-
tion is significant. Polymorphism data are scant for land plant mitochondria, 
so only crude estimates of N gm INn are possible for them. For the four plant 
species for which data are availabYe, three of the estimates of lfsm are 0.0000, 
and one is 0.0017 (Lynch et al. 2006a). Thus, recalling from Chapter 4 that 
average lfsn for land plants is 0.015 (0.003), and from Table 11.3 that average 
dml dn for land plants is 0.05, it appears likely that average N J Ngn for land 
plants is also in the vicinity of 0.5-1.0. Average silent-site ~eterozygosity 
for land plant chloroplasts is 0.0031 (0.0009) (Lynch et al. 2006a), and recall-
ing from above that average d/ dn ::: 0.015 for land plants (where c denotes 
the chloroplast), Ng/Ngn also appears to be in the vicinity of 1.0. 
Mutation Pressure and the Diversification 
of Organelle Genomes 
Despite the crude nature of the preceding calculations, they consistently point 
to the conclusion that effective numbers of genes per locus are generally of 
the same order of magnitude for organelle and nuclear genomes within 
species. Thus, the well-documented tendency for nuclear N g to decline with 
increasing organism size (see Chapter 4) should generally extend to 
organelles, and given the similarity of nuclear N g in animals and land plants, 
this further implies that the divergent patterns of organelle genome evolu-
tion in these two lineages are not products of differences in the power of ran-
dom genetic drift. This leaves mutation as a likely determinant. 
As noted above, under the assumption of neutrality, the average number 
of substitutions per silent site separating randomly sampled alleles within 
a species (lfs) provides an estimate of twice the ratio of the power of muta-
tion to the power of random genetic drift (2Ngu). In the nuclear genome, 
this measure tends to be substantially smaller in vertebrates than in inver-
tebrates as a consequence of the reduced N in the former (see Chapter 4), 
whereas both groups have comparable leve1s of silent-site variation in the 
mitochondrion (Table 11.5). Although Bazin et al. (2006) have suggested that 
this absence of pattern in lfsm among animal mitochondria is a consequence 
of a relatively constant effective population size for organelle genomes across 
species, the data in Tables 11.3 and 11.4 suggest otherwise: invertebrates 
have larger effective population sizes but lower per-generation mutation 
rates (u) than vertebrates, with these two opposing effects roughly cancel-
ing. In contrast, as alluded to in the previous section, lfs in plant organelle 
genomes is at least an order of magnitude lower than in those of bilaterian 
animals (see Table 11.5) as a consequence of depressed mutation rates in 
land plant organelles. In light of these fundamental differences in the rela-
tive power of mutation and random genetic drift, we now consider a poten-
tially unifying explanation for a diverse set of differences between animal 
and land plant organelle genomes. 
I
I
r
s
a
n
t
v
t

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
327 
TABLE 11.5 Average estimates of silent-site nucleotide 
diversity for organelle genomes (7[5) in various 
taxonomic groups 
MEAN 
SE 
N 
Mammals 
0.0406 
0.0087 
12 
Birds 
0.0169 
0.0053 
4 
Salamanders 
0.0481 
0.0148 
3 
Fishes 
0.0362 
0.0150 
6 
Echinoderms 
0.0117 
0.0036 
2 
Arthropods 
0.0276 
0.0056 
17 
Mollusks 
0.0135 
0.0068 
6 
Nematodes 
0.0677 
0.0084 
8 
PIa tyhelmin thes 
0.0399 
0.0063 
5 
Fungi 
0.0120 
0.0046 
3 
Land plant mt 
0.0004 
0.0004 
4 
Land plant cp 
0.0031 
0.0009 
17 
SOllrce: Lynch et al. 2006a. 
Note: Results are given for groups for which estimates are available for two or more species. 
SE = standard error; N = number of species upon which mean estimate is based. 
The proliferation of noncoding DNA 
As noted in prior chapters, intronic and intergenic DNA increase the sus-
ceptibility of a gene to degenerative changes by increasing the size of the 
mutational target. The magnitude of this hazard depends on the number of 
nucleotide sites associated with an embellishment critical to gene function 
(n) and the per-nucleotide mutation rate (u), whkh together define the over-
all mutational disadvantage, s = nu. If 2Nr!  I, or equivalently, 2Ngu  
lin, the power of drift (liNg) is sufficiently large that an allele with an 
elevated deleterious mutation rate will behave in an effectively neutral fash-
ion and hence be free to go to fixation. In contrast, sufficiently large 2Ngu 
serves as an effective barrier to the establishment of extragenic DNA. 
To extend this principle to organelle genomes, we first revisit the prob-
lem of introns. In the case of the nuclear genome, n z 25 for introns serviced 
by the spliceosome, leading to an approximate threshold for intron colo-
nization of 2Ngu < 0.04 (see Chapter 9). Because organelle introns are more 
self-contained (i.e., they do not rely on an external spliceosome for removal) 
and assume specific secondary structures with many stems and loops, they 
must harbor a larger number of nucleotides critical to proper splicing 
than do typical spliceosomal introns. Thus, because n > 25, the threshold 
value of 2Ngu for organelle intron colonization must be considerably lower 
than 0.04. Several observations are compatible with this hypothesis. 

328 
CHAPTER 11 
First, the data in Table 11.5 indicate that average mitochondria12Ngu for 
land plants and bilaterian animals bracket the likely threshold value for 
organelle intron colonization, and whereas the mitochondrial genomes of 
bilaterian animals are completely devoid of introns, land plants contain 
between 0.3 and 0.8 group II introns per mitochondrial protein-coding gene 
(Lynch et al. 2006a). Although the mitochondrial mutation rate in green algae 
(the group most closely related to land plants) is unknown, the elevation 
of Nrs in unicellular species suggests a higher 2Ngu, and hence a less per-
miSSIve environment for intron colonization, in such species. Thus, the 
observation that the average mitochondrial protein-coding gene in green 
algae contains fewer than 0.2 introns, and that most other unicellular eukary-
otes contain none at ail, suggests substantial intron colonization of land plant 
mitochondria subsequent to the reduction in 2Ngu. Remarkably, although 
the mitochondria of both the liverwort Marchantia and angiosperms contain 
25 group II introns, only one of these is in a conserved position (Knoop 2004). 
Such a condition is consistent with these two land plant lineages having 
reached an approximate equilibrium intron number determined by a sto-
chastic birth-death process (see Chapter 9), although the possibility that 
both lineages are still experiencing parallel phases of intron gain cannot be 
ruled out. 
Second, as noted above, the mutation rate in land plant plastids is a few 
times higher than in the mitochondrion. This observation implies that the 
plastid provides a somewhat less conducive environment for intron colo-
nization than the plant mitochondrion, and consistent with this expectation, 
the intron density in the protein-coding genes of land plant plastids is less 
than a third that in the mitochondrion (see Table 11.1). The average number 
of introns in the protein-coding genes of green algal plastids is even lower, 
with several such species harboring no plastid inh'ons at all. Most algae that 
have obtained their plastids by secondary endosymbiosis are also devoid 
of plastid introns, with one exception: the plastid of Euglena gracilis contains 
a remarkably high average of 2.2 introns per protein-coding gene (Hallick et 
al. 1993). Because euglenoids are thought to be obligately asexual, it is pos-
sible that the effective population sizes of such species are exceptionally low. 
Third, although introns are universally absent from the mitochondria of 
bilaterian animals, the mitochondria of anemones, corals, and placozoans 
generally contain one to four group II introns. This pattern is consistent with 
the greatly reduced mutation rate observed in the mitochondrial genomes 
of anemones and corals relative to other animals (see Table 11.3), yielding 
a condition very much like that observed in plant organelles: the near-
absence of mitochondrial nucleotide polymorphisms in global collections 
of such species (Shearer et al. 2002; Hellberg 2006). Although nothing is 
known about 2N gU in placozoans, phylogenetic analysis suggests that they 
too may have low mitochondrial mutation rates (Dellaporta et al. 2006). 
Finally, as noted in Figure 11.3, the scaling of the amount of intergenic 
DNA in organelle genomes parallels that for intronic DNA, with most bila-
terian animal mitochondria containing 12% or less intergenic DNA and the 
~ 
l 
( 
11 
b
ti 
e 
tl 
tl 
a 
Sl
aJ 
d 
IT
is 
ra
ra
(rl
n< 
Cl
ch
th
ot
ag
ev
esi
1m
al. 
Cal
sib
oH
wi
20(
for
to 1
wit
ger
ane
tiOI
tho

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
329 
largest plant mitochondrial genomes containing 80% or more. Land plant 
plastid genomes contain substantially lower amounts of intergenic DNA 
than do land plant mitochondria (see Table 11.1), and an exception among 
animal mitochondria is that of the placozoan Trichoplax, which contains some 
42% intergenic DNA (Dellaporta et al. 2006). The mitochondria of almost all 
unicellular eukaryotes contain less than 10% intergenic DNA, although those 
of green algae and fungi contain averages of 25%-30% (less than half the 
level for land plants). Thus, as in the case of introns, it appears that prior 
to the emergence of multicellularity, most organelles contained small frac-
tions of intergenic DNA (something on the order of 10%), with land plants 
experiencing a dramatic expansion in this component. One final exception 
that helps make this case is the wine yeast Hanseniaspora uvanl1n, which has 
the smallest known fungal mitochondrial genome 19 kb, compared with 
a fungi-wide average of 43 kb), with only 5% intergenic DNA, as well as a 
substantial elevation in the mutation rate as inferred from phylogenetic 
analysis (Pramateftaki et al. 2006). 
This diverse set of observations is consistent with the hypothesis that the 
dramatic divergence of organelle genome architectures by bilaterian ani-
mals and multicellular land plants from a more intermediate ancestral state 
is a simple indirect consequence of the lmndredfold difference in mutation 
rates between these two lineages. As a consequence of their low mutation 
rates, plant organelle genomes provide population genetic environments 
(reflected in 2Ngu) that are slightly more conducive to the accumulation of 
noncoding DNA than the nuclear genomes of multicellular species (see 
Chapter 4). In contrast, with their extremely high mutation rates, the mito-
chondria of bilaterian animals provide a population genetic environment 
that is comparable to that of the nuclear genomes of unicellular eukary-
otes (and in some cases approaches that of prokaryotes), which encour-
ages the elimination of mutationally disadvantageous noncoding DNA. 
One alternative to the mutational-hazard hypothesis for the divergent 
evolution of organelle genome structure is the "race to replication" hypoth-
esis, which postulates that a selective premium on high replication rates 
imposes strong selection for reduced genome sizes (Rand 2001; Selosse et 
al. 2001). Such a scenario is plausible in the sense that organelle genomes 
can multiply repeatedly within single cell cycles, setting up a competitive 
situation within cells, and it is well established that rapidly replicating but 
otherwise defective mitochondrial genomes can displace functional copies 
within the cells of yeasts and other species (Selosse et al. 2001; Taylor et al. 
2002; Bernardi 2005). However, as in the case of replication rate arguments 
for the evolution of small microbial genome sizes (see Chapter 2), the "race 
to replication" hypothesis for organelle genome size evolution is confronted 
with several challenges. First, the wide range of variation in levels of extra-
genic DNA across the organelle genomes of animals, unicellular eukaryotes, 
and land plants (see Figure 11.3) remains to be explained. Why would selec-
tion for high replication rates be greater in animal mitochondria than in 
those of unicellular species, and why are land plants apparently immune to 

330 
CHAPTER 11 
such effects? Second, regardless of whether a streamlined organelle genome 
can spread throughout a single organelle or even an entire host individual, 
establishment of such variants at the species level requires that the bearers 
of a reduced organelle genome have a selective advantage (or be neutral). 
Renegade organelle genomes with significant deletions from functional 
genes are expected to be purged at the population level, and with the nuclear 
genome being replicated just once per cell cycle, it is difficult to see how the 
generation time of an individual would be limited by the replication rate of 
its organelles. Third, if intra-organelle gene conversion occurs at a high 
enough rate, any replication advantage of a mutant genome might be over-
whelmed by chance intracellular processes (Walsh 1992). Finally, unlike the 
"race to replication" hypothesis, the mutational-hazard hypothesis for 
organelle genome evolution has explanatory power that extends well 
beyond matters of noncoding DNA evolution, as will be seen in the fol-
lowing two sections. 
Modifications of the genetic code 
It has long been known that the "universal genetic code" is not actually 
invariant. Alterations of the code in nuclear genomes are rare, but a dozen 
or so protist lineages (mostly ciliates) and a few infectious bacterial species 
exhibit reassignments of single codons to different amino acids (Knight, 
Freeland, and Landweber 2001; Knight, Landweber, and Yarus 2001). The 
situation is dramatically different in the mitochondrion. Most mitochondr-
iallineages of unicellular eukaryotes have experienced one or two code 
changes, but more striking are the mitochondrial genomes of bilaterian ani-
mals, all of which have three to five changes in the code. At least twelve 
unique changes have occurred throughout the entire bilaterian phylogeny 
(and possibly many more; AbascaJ et al. 2006). In contrast, no reassignments 
are known in the organelle genomes of land plants, nor have any been found 
in the mitochondrial genomes of cnidarians. To understand the potential 
basis for this dichotomy in the incidence of organelle genetic code changes, 
some appreciation of the extreme conditions required for code modifica-
ti0l1s is necessary. 
Messenger RNAs are decoded by a series of transfer RNAs (tRNAs), each 
of which reads one or more unique triplets via an anticodon and delivers a 
specific amino acid. Thus, a minimum requirement for a genetic code mod-
ification is that a tRNA be altered in such a way that it adds a novel amino 
acid to the growing polypeptide chain every time the old codon is encoun-
tered by the ribosome. This can happen if the anticodon of a tRNA is altered 
to recognize a novel codon, or if a tRNA modification results in charging by 
a different amino acid. Such tRNA mutants arise naturally, but the barriers 
to the permanent incorporation of a code change into a genome are enor-
mous. In nuclear genomes containing thousands of genes, any reassignment 
of a codon is likely to alter the functions of hundreds of proteins, resulting 
in the rigid enforcement of the conventional nuclear genetic code. 
I 
s
f, 
Co 
11
si 
1~ 
tF 
tR 
11
co 
the 
tiv 
(1) ,
(2)1
11
(3) A
Iy
(4) A 
Iy:
(5) AJ
Iys
FigurE
ture. (1
nized t
codons
loss of J
that it r
ognize 
selectiol
and AAl
read as i
chondri.

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
331 
This selective barrier is substantially relaxed in organelle genomes with 
no more than a few dozen protein-coding genes (just 13 in animals), in which 
the stochastic turnover of nucleotides at silent sites results in a small but 
appreciable chance that a codon will be entirely absent from a genome at 
any time. Indeed, about 70% of sequenced mitochondrial genomes com-
pletely lack one or more codons, and it is common for single codons to con-
stitute less than 5% of the members of twofold or fourfold redundant sets 
for specific amino acids (Swire et al. 2005). As pointed out in the "codon-
captme" model, the h'ansient absence of a codon provides a simple first step 
in the alteration of a genetic code, as any unutilized codon is free to be reas-
signed once it reappears by mutation (Osawa et al. 1992; Jukes and Osawa 
1993), but several additional conditions must be met (Figure 11.5). First, a 
tRNA must be available for recruitment, and in organelle genomes, just one 
tRNA often decodes all of the codon variants for a particular amino acid. 
Thus, tRNA reassignment will generally require the modification of the anti-
codon of a tRNA so as to expand its decoding capacity. Second, the tRNA 
that previously decoded the now missing codon must be lost by degenera-
tive mutation or modified so as to no longer recognize the missing codon. 
Codons 
Transfer RN As 
(1) AAG -AAA ----AAG ----AAG ----AAG ----AAG 
Lys-AA(A/G) 
Asn-AA(U/C) 
lys 
Iys 
Iys 
lys 
lys 
Iys 
(2) AAG ---AAG ----AAG ---AAG ----AAG ----AAG 
Lys-AA(A/ G) 
Asn-AA(U /C) 
Iys 
Iys 
Iys 
Iys 
Iys 
Iys 
(3) AAG----AAG----AAG----AAG ----AAG----AAG 
Lys-AAG 
A n-AA(U/C) 
Iys 
Iys 
lys 
lys 
Iys 
Iys 
(4) AAG----AAG----AAG ----AAG---AAG ----AAG 
Lys-AAG 
Asn-AA(A/ U Ie) 
lys 
Iys 
lys 
lys 
Iys 
lys 
(5) AAG ----AAG----AAG----AAG----AAG ----AAA 
Lys-AAG 
Asn-AA(A/ U I e) 
Iys 
Iys 
Iys 
Iys 
lys 
asn 
Figure 11.5 A hypothetical example of a change in the genetic code by codon cap-
ture. (1) Initially, lysine is encoded by both AAA and MG, both of which are recog-
nized by the same tRNA. In contrast, the asparagine tRNA recognizes MC and MU 
codons. (2) The rare AM codon is lost by mutation and random genetic drift. (3) The 
loss of AM provides an environment that allows tRNA-Lys to acquire a change such 
that it now recognizes only MG. (4) tRNA-Asn, which was previously selected to rec-
ognize C or U but to avoid A and G in the third position, is now partially released from 
selection, and it neutrally acquires an alteration that allows recognition of AM, MC, 
and MU, but not MG. (5) An AM codon that arises by subsequent mutation is now 
read as Asn. This particular change in the genetic code actually occurred in the mito-
chondrial genome of echinoderms. 

332 
CHAPTER 11 
If this is to occur, the genome must not revert to use of the superfluous codon 
at sites where the original amino acid is functionally significant before a 
potential tRNA recruit acquires its new function by fortuitous mutation, as 
this would enforce the maintenance of the original tRNA for that codon. 
Third, once the new tRNA has become established by chance, the missing 
codon must reappear in the genome in such a way that the loading of a new 
amino acid will be beneficial (or at least not harmful) to individual fitness, 
so as to stabilize the newly evolved tRNA. 
Although this informal description of the codon-capture model glosses 
over numerous details, the key point is that codon reassignments by semi-
neutral processes require the fortuitous occurrence of several mutational 
events in the same linked genome. The small sizes and high degree of link-
age of organelle genomes predispose them to modifications of the genetic 
code, and the exceptionally high mutation rates in the mitochondrial 
genomes of bilaterian animals may greatly elevate the probability of such 
changes simply by reducing the waiting time for the joint occurrence of mul-
tiple mutations. Under this view, the hundredfold reduction in the muta-
tion rate of plant mitochondrial genomes (combined perhaps with their 
roughly threefold greater number of protein-coding genes) is the primary 
impediment to the origin of code changes, possibly only delaying their ulti-
mate occurrence rather than preventing them entirely. In addition, the few 
microbial eukaryotes that have experienced a mitochondrial genetic code 
change may have achieved that state by the combined effects of an elevated 
mutation rate (relative to land plants) and an increase in the number of 
mutational targets (individuals per species). Finally, given their intrinsic rar-
ity Gust one per gene), it is not surprising that termination codons are excep-
tionally vulnerable to codon reassignments, constituting 10 of the 25 known 
cases of mitochondrial genetic code changes. In most cases, UGA is reas-
signed to tryptophan, which is ordinarily encoded only by UGG. Such mod-
ifications are readily explained by the codon-capture model, as tRNA-Trp 
must simply be modified to recognize UG(A/G). 
Some questions have been raised about the universality of the effectively 
neutral codon-capture model, the main concern being that genetic code 
changes may not always have started with absent codons (Knight, Freeland, 
and Landweber 2001; Knight, Landweber, and Yarus 2001; Swire et al. 2005). 
An alternative adaptive hypothesis, the "ambiguous-codon" model of 
Schultz and Yarus (1994), postulates that the reassigned codons are actually 
present during the initiation of genetic code transitions, with selection some-
how favoring a transformation of all such sites to an alternative amino acid 
(perhaps one less energetically expensive). Such an endpoint could be 
achieved if the tRNA for the disfavored codon were modified to recruit the 
preferred amino acid, or if the tRNA for the preferred amino acid were mod-
ified to recognize the disfavored codon. The obvious challenge to tills 
hypothesis is its requirement for a setting in which the simultaneous replace-
ment of one amino acid by another in multiple proteins is beneficial (or at 
least not harmful) with respect to fitness. 
1
t 
t 
F
1:
F
it
a 
2 
q
t( 
SE
R
rr
tc
ill
in
ar
th 
ti( 
TI 
en
in
of
20 
su
Tll
F
I 
I 
I<
P
P

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
333 
Messenger RNA editing 
A long history of research in molecular biology leads us to expect that cod-
ing information at the DNA level will provide a reliable prediction of pro-
tein sequences, and with just a few exceptions, this has generally been found 
to be true for nuclear genes (Gerber and Keller 2001; Keegan et al. 2001; 
Reenan 2001). However, some organelles use posttranscriptional editing to 
modify mRNA, tRNA, and/ or rRNA sequences. The most spectacular dis-
play of posttranscriptional editing occurs in the mitochondrial genes of kine-
toplastids (e.g., Trypanosoma), where insertion and deletion of Us (uracils) 
affects about 90% of all codons (Simpson et al. 2000; Horton and Landweber 
2002). With editing at such a massive scale, the underlying genomic se-
quences are literally nonsensical. The complex tasks of insertion/ deletion 
editing in such species are accomplished via the unique structure of the kine-
toplastid mitochondrial genome: a vast network of intertwined circular mol-
ecules, including several 20-40 kb maxicircles carrying the cryptic gene 
sequences as well as thousands of 0.5-3.0 kb minicircles, which carry guide 
RNA (gRNA) templates for the addition/removal of Us in the inunature 
maxicircle-derived mRNAs (Koslowsky et al. 1992). 
No other mitochondrial lineage engages in editing as extensively as kine-
toplastids, although some slime molds insert nucleotides (usually C) approx-
imately once every 25 nucleotides in mRNAs and once every 40 nucleotides 
in rRNAs and tRNAs (Horton and Landweber 2000; Cheng et al. 2001; Byrne 
and Gott 2004). In dinoflagellate mitochondria, editing modifies 2%-4% of 
the total sequence, mostly via three different types of nucleotide substitu-
tions at amino acid replacement sites (Lin et al. 2002; Zhang and Lin 2005). 
This sporadic distribution of editing, along with the diverse mechanisms 
employed (Table 11.6), strongly suggests that such processes have evolved 
independently in different lineages. 
Animals and land plants differ dramatically with respect to the incidence 
of editing in organelles. A few animals, such as centipedes (Lavrov et al. 
2000), snails (Yokobori and Pi:ii:ibo 1995), squids (Tomita et al. 1996), and mar-
supials (Tanke and Paabo 1993), use editing to repair base mismatches in the 
TABLE 11,6 A summary of some aspects of editing of organelle mRNAs 
PHYLOGENETIC GROUP 
Physarum (slime mold) mt 
Dinoflagellate mt 
Kinetoplastid mt 
Plantmt 
Plant cp 
MODIFICATIONS 
Primarily C insertions; but 
some A and U insertions, 
C~U substitutions, and a 
few dinucleotide insertions 
Primarily A~G, U~C, C~U 
U insertion and deletion 
C~U,U~C 
C~U,U~C 
REFERENCE 
Byrne and Gott 2004 
Lin et al. 2002 
Landweber and Gilbert 1993 
Gillham 1994 
Tsudzuki et al. 2001 

334 
CHAPTER 11 
stems of single mitochondrial tRNAs, a process that has also been observed 
in a rhizopod amoeba (Lonergan and Gray 1993) and some basal fungi 
(Paquin et al. 1997; Laforest et al. 2004). However, whereas mRNA editing 
appears to be entirely absent from animal mitochondria, it is used exten-
sively in land plant organelles. In Arabidopsis mitochondria, for example, 
441 editing sites are present in coding regions along with smaller numbers 
in introns and intergenic DNA, nearly all of them changing C to U (Giege 
and Brennicke 1999). Similar levels of C-7U mRNA editing are found in the 
mitochondria of other land plants, including some liverworts (Malek et al. 
1996; Freyer 1997). Although editing is much less extensive in land plant 
plastids, it is still prominent, with about 25-30 editing sites per genome in 
angiosperms (Tsudzuki et al. 2001) and up to several hundred sites in ferns 
and hornworts (Kugita et al. 2003; P. G. Wolf et al. 2004). Plastid mRNA edit-
ing shares many mechanistic features with editing in mitochondria (Tillich 
et al. 2006). These observations, combined with the absence of mRNAedit-
ing from the organelles of green algae, suggest a dramatic expansion of 
organelle editing with the origin of multicellular plants (Hiesel et al. 1994). 
The vast majority of mRNA editing in land plant organelles occurs at 
amino acid replacement (rather than silent) sites, with the changes often 
ensuring the preservation of amino acids that are highly conserved across 
distantly related species (Maier et al. 1996; Tsudzuki et al. 2001). Although 
this type of observation motivates the idea that editing provides a genomic 
buffer against the accumulation of deleterious mutations (Cavalier-Smith 
1997; Horton and Landweber 2002; Smith 2006), several observations raise 
significant doubts about this adaptive interpretation. First, if the buffering 
hypothesis were correct, we would expect editing to be most common in 
genomes with high mutation rates, exactly the opposite of what is observed. 
Second, the buffering hypothesis ignores the complexities of the editing 
process, which necessarily relies on the sequence stability of both the recog-
nition sites in the organelle transcripts and the editing apparatus itself. 
Although the exact mechanism of mRNA editing is unknown in plants, cis 
recognition sites for trans-acting editing factors appear to constitute a min-
in1al span of about 23 bp (Choury et al. 2004; Miyamoto et al. 2004), and con-
trary to the situation in kinetoplastids, the trans-acting factors appear to be 
editing-site-specific proteins encoded in the nucleus (Kotera et al. 2005; 
Shikanai 2006). It is difficult to imagine a net advantage for editing if the 
processing of each site depends on the integrity of a large number of cis and 
trans factors. TImd, editing in plant organelles is quite noisy, resulting in the 
production of a heterogeneous pool of transcripts, some of which are incom-
pletely edited and others containing erroneous editorial changes (Phreaner 
et al. 1996; Inada et al. 2004). In many cases, completely edited transcripts 
are the exception rather than the rule (Schuster et al. 1990), which again 
hardly seems advantageous to the individual. 
Perhaps the most significant challenge to the hypothesis that mRNA edit-
ing is maintained by selection derives from the following observation. Recall 
that the vast majority of mRNA editing in plant organelles involves con-
s 
E 
S 
C 
S 
T 
Ii 
si 
aJ 
pI
ec 
2C 
bE 
di 
111) 
in< 
diE
of 
tio 
nit
be 
apl
tim
mu
accc
of e
in t
mib
higl
ther
mg 
111Ul1
(Pab
A
tralr
tiom
fus C
the 0
tral n
here 
enou
lishrr

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
335 
versions of C to U. Because C--7T mutations at these sites eliminate the need 
for editing, such mutations are expected to accumulate at the neutral rate 
under the buffering hypothesis, as an allele with an encoded T should be 
selectively equivalent to one that simply acquires a C--7U replacement by 
editing. However, although editing sites do turn over frequently between 
species (only 45% of the editing sites in plastids and 58% of those in the mito-
chondrion are shared between monocots and dicots; Tsudzuki et al. 2001; 
Shields and Wolfe 1997), the conversion of C--7U editing sites to unedited 
Ts appears to be a non-neutral process. Under the neutral hypothesis, the 
rates of nucleotide substitution at editing sites should equal those at silent 
sites. However, the former rate is four times larger than the latter (Shields 
and Wolfe 1997), and this discrepancy is likely to be an underestimate, as 
plant organelle editing sites tend to be in UNA contexts (where N is the 
edited site), which have lower than average mutation rates (Tillich et al. 
2006). Thus, the loss of editing sites from land plant organelles appears to 
be promoted by positive selection, which implies that editing is selectively 
disadvantageous. 
Aside from the problem of inaccuracies in editing, alleles that rely on edit-
ing for the development of productive mRNAs have a fundamental cost: an 
increased vulnerability to inactivating mutations. Following the same logic 
discussed above for introns, the minimal intrinsic mutational disadvantage 
of an organelle editing site will be approximately equal to the total muta-
tion rate summed over the nucleotide sites reserved for editing-site recog-
nition. Based on the size of such sites, this excess mutation rate appears to 
be approximately 20u (not including the cost of maintaining the editing 
apparatus). Because this disadvantage is expected to be approximately 100 
times greater in animal than in land plant mitochondria due to the inflated 
mutation rate in the former, the absence of mRNA editing in animals is in 
accordance with the hypothesis that the mutation-associated disadvantage 
of editing is simply too great to allow its establishment (or maintenance) 
in that lineage. The reduced level of editing in land plant plastids versus 
mitochondda is also consistent with this hypothesis, as the former have 
higher mutation rates than the latter. Finally, if this hypothesis is correct, 
then one would expect to see a dramatic reduction in the incidence of edit-
ing in the mitochondrial genomes of plants such as Plantago and Pelargo-
nium, which have experienced hundredfold increases in the mutation rate 
(Palmer et al. 2000), and this is indeed the case (Parkinson et al. 2005). 
Although the preceding arguments lead to a reasonably satisfying neu-
tral hypothesis for the phylogenetic distribution of editing, substantial ques-
tions remain as to how such processes initially became established. Stoltz-
fus (1999) and Horton and Landweber (2002) have suggested a scenario for 
the origin of guide RNAs in kinetoplastid mitochondria by effectively neu-
tral mechanisms, although that is a rather specialized system. Our attention 
here will focus on the editing system in land plants, which is challenging 
enough. To account for such a system, a mechanism must exist for the estab-
lishment of multiple nuclear-encoded editing factors, each specialized for 

336 
CHAPTER 11 
the alteration of a small number of organelle sites (perhaps even single sites), 
and this in tum presumably requires the existence of factors with editing 
potential prior to the origin of mRNA sites requiring editing. TIle long-term 
survival of an editing factor would be ensured so long as an essential edit-
ing site cUd not revert to the preferred nucleotide. Getting to this point, how-
ever, would be difficult with a nuclear-encoded factor, which would have 
to remain in tight linkage disequilibrium with the serviced organelle site 
while both are en route to fixation. Uniparental inheritance of organelles 
facilitates such associations, as half the gametes of the transmitting parent 
will contain the appropriate nuclear-cytoplasmic combination, but the prob-
ability of dissociation is still considerable. 
Not all aspects of such a scenario are far-fetched. For example, the one 
nuclear factor that has been identified for a particular editing site in the plas-
tid of Arabidopsis is a member of a large protein family involved in a wide 
range of organelle mRNA maturation activities (Shikanai 2006). Such pro-
teins may be predisposed to recruitment to editing processes. The size of 
this family in Arabidopsis (about 450 genes), which greatly exceeds that in 
other well-characterized eukaryotes (including animals), closely approxi-
mates the number of mitochondrial editing sites in Arabidopsis, raising the 
possibility that the entire family diversified and proliferated in a stepwise 
fashion with the establishment of editing sites in land plants. Nevertheless, 
the mechanisms by which editing factors acquire their apparent site speci-
ficity remain mysterious. A really creative selfish editor might inflict the 
organelle genomic change necessary to ensure its own survival, and 
although no such element is known to exist, it is intriguing that some pro-
teins involved in the editing of vertebrate nuclear mRNAs are capable of 
inducing site-specific mutations (Smith 2006). 
In summary, although the origin of mRNA editing is one of more enig-
matic aspects of genome evolution, there is no evidence that such processes 
have originated to buffer mutational damage. Nor is there any evidence that 
the occupation of dry land by plants led to an altered mutagenic environ-
ment that promoted the need for such buffering (Smith 2006). In addition, 
the hypothesis that editing promotes the generation of adaptive variation 
at the RNA level (Tillich et al. 2006) is entirely without support. In short, it 
is difficult to reject the hypothesis that mRNA editing in organelles arose by 
nearly neutral processes in mutationally permissive environments. 
Muller's Ratchet and the Mitochondrion 
Because of their reduced ability to shed mutations by recombination, 
organelle genomes are expected to be uniquely susceptible to degradation 
by a process known as Muller's ratchet (Muller 1964; Felsenstein 1974). In 
the absence of segregation and recombination, parents cannot produce off-
spring with a reduced number of deleterious mutations, except in the rare 
case of back or compensatory mutations. TI1Us, in an asexual population, if 
by chance the fittest class of individuals (those with the smallest deleteri-
c
r
c
e 
rl 
1
Ie 
cJ 
P 
a! 
d,
dl
la 
G 
IiI 
as
Lj
ba
pa
vi,
Cl-
sh
of 
do
(LE
thE
by 
(Ta 
Ze~
I
on 
nur
OftE
is c<
mu'
liar 
tion
cell 
mig
mut
198~
able
men
talit,
hyp<

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
337 
ous mutation load) produces no surviving offspring, or only offspring that 
have acquired at least one new deleterious mutation, a nearly irreversible 
decline in fitness is experienced. There is an appreciable chance of such an 
event each generation because recurrent mutation pressure generally 
reduces the fittest class to a small fraction of the total population (Haigh 
1978). Moreover, each time the currently fittest class is lost from the popu-
lation, the previously second-best class becomes subject to the same sto-
chastic process, eventually suffering an identical fate. Once this process has 
proceeded to the point at which the mutation load is so high that the aver-
age individual cannot replace itself, the population size must begin to 
decline. This decline further enhances the magnitude of random genetic 
drift, promoting increasingly higher rates of deleterious mutation accumu-
lation and ultimately culminating in population extinction (Lynch and 
Gabriel 1990; Lynch et al. 1993, 1995a,b). Such mutational meltdowns are 
likely to be a primary cause of the typically short life spans of obligately 
asexual lineages (Lynch and Gabriel 1990; Lynch et aJ. 1993; Paland and 
Lynch 2006), except in cases in which population sizes are so enormous that 
back and /or compensatory mutations provide a remedy. 
Sexual reproduction facilitates the avoidance of such a fate by enabling 
parents to produce progeny with reduced numbers of deleterious mutations 
via segregation and recombination (Maynard Smith 1978; Pamilo et al. 1987; 
Charlesworth et al. 1993; Lynch et al. 1995a,b). Indeed, this mechanism of 
shedding mutations appears to be so powerful that the nuclear genomes 
of large outcrossing populations are nearly invulnerable to mutational melt-
downs on time scales shorter than hundreds of thousands of generations 
(Lande 1994; Lynch et al. 1995a,b; Schultz and Lynch 1997). Nevertheless, 
the possibility still exists that the viability of sexual species is compromised 
by the gradual mutational decay of their nonrecombining organelle genomes 
(Takahata and Slatkin 1983; Hastings 1992; Gabriel et al. 1993; Reboud and 
Zey11994; Loewe 2006). 
Resolution of this issue will ultimately depend on empirical observations 
on the rates and effects of organelle mutations. The fact that the effective 
number of genes residing at mitochondrial loci is generally no greater, and 
often considerably smaller, than the number at nuclear loci (see Table 11.4) 
is consistent with the idea that the efficiency of selection against deleterious 
mutations is reduced in organelle genomes. However, several features pecu-
liar to organelles might reduce the rate of deleterious mutation accumula-
tion. For example, replication of the mitochondrion independently of the 
cell cycle induces a within-generation drift process in the germ line, which 
might enhance the efficiency of selection by increasing the variance in 
mutant organelle content among maternal progeny (Takahata and Slatkin 
1983; Bergstrom and Pritchard 1998). In mammals, there is also consider-
able loss of the female germ cell population via apoptosis during develop-
ment, leading Krakauer and Mira (1999) to suggest that selective cell mor-
tality acts as a sieve against deleterious mutation-containing organelles, a 
hypothesis that has some empirical support (Perez et al. 2000). 

338 
CHAPTER 11 
Despite these concerns, several indirect lines of evidence point to the 
exceptional vulnerability of organelle genomes to deleterious mutation accu-
mulation. For example, numerous of human genetic disorders resulting from 
mitochondrial mutations are associated with deleterious alleles with pop-
ulation frequencies as high as 5% (Brown and Wallace 1994; Wallace 1994; 
Simon and Jolms 1999; Ruiz-Pesini et al. 2000; Kivisild et al. 2006). In addi-
tion, population surveys of nucleotide sequence variation in organelles con-
sistently reveal that ratios of nonsynonymous (amino acid replacement) to 
synonymous (silent-site) polymorphisms segregating within populations 
exceed those for divergence between closely related species. The most rea-
sonable interpretation of this pattern is that some mildly deleterious replace-
ment mutations are able to expand to frequencies high enough to be 
observed in population surveys, but not so high as to go to fixation. For 
the great apes, the within-species ratio of polymorphism at replacement sites 
to polymorphism at silent sites is 10 times greater than that for fixed dif-
ferences among species (Nachman et al. 1996; Templeton 1996; Hasegawa 
et al. 1998; Wise et al. 1998). There is similar (13-fold) inflation in mice (Nach-
man et al. 1994), and although the disparity is smaller, it is nevertheless sig-
nificant in Drosophila (l.5-fold; Ballard and Kreitman 1994; Rand et al. 1994), 
birds (1.9-fold; Fry 1999), and the annual plant Silene (2.5-fold; Stadler and 
Delpb 2002). These patterns are in complete opposition to tbose seen in 
nuclear genomes, in which there is generally an excess of replacement sub-
stitution at the level of divergence, a presumed reflection of fixation of adap-
tive mutations (see Cbapter 4). Because mildly deleterious mutations almost 
certainly have a wide range of selective effects (Lyncll and Walsh 1998), if 
such mutations are more capable of rising to moderate frequencies III 
organelle than in nuclear genomes, tlle fixation probabilities of subclasses 
with the mildest deleterious effects must be elevated as well. 
A more direct approach to obtaining insight into the matter of deleteri-
ous mutation accumulation would be to examine the evolutionary fates of 
genes with identical functions in the mitochondrial and nuclear genomes 
of the same species. UnfortuJlately, this is not possible with protein-coding 
genes, as there are no nuclear /mitochondrial pairs with homologous func-
tions. However, transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes 
provide an ideal venue for such analysis, as most organelle genomes con-
tain full sets of both, which like their nuclear counterparts, play central roles 
in mRNA translation. The extreme conservation of the primary, secondary, 
and tertiary structuJ"e of prokaryotic and eukaryotic nuclear tRNAs (Kimura 
1983; S6ll and RajBhandary 1995) and rRNAs (Smith 2001) implies that nat-
ural selection is exceptionally successful at maintaining the optimal molec-
ular architecture of these genes. For example, in all prokaryotes and all 
eukaryotic nuclear genomes, tRNAs have a standard cloverleaf secondary 
structure, with their roughly seventy bases mostly contained in three loops 
and four stem structures. Thirteen of these bases (not lllCluding the three 
nucleotides in the anticodon sites) are essentially invariant across the tRNAs 
for all amino acids in all prokaryotes and all nuclear genomes, and the aver-
ag
ne
th
ge
pr
CiE
or
an
tR
nu
mi
tio
me
3.1
tor
sin
wi
ch(
car
an
for 
tin-
fur
40~
of ,
(Ly 
ofJ 
ph; 
res!
the 
Stei
ane 
oft: 
cier 
has 
(Ku 
mit 
phe 
Phe 
199 
has 
( 
sim 
sele 

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
339 
age rate of nucleotide substitution across the molecule is just 1 %-3% of the 
neutral expectation (Lynch 1997, 1998; Lynch and Blanchard 1998). Because 
this degree of constancy must have been present in the primordial organelle 
genomes, any deviations of organelle-encoded tRNAs from the canonical 
prokaryotic/nuclear architecture are likely to reflect a reduction in the effi-
ciency of selection imposed by the population genetic environment of 
organelles. The evidence for such a shift is compelling. 
First, contrary to the situation in the nuclear genome, there are no invari-
ant sites in organelle tRNAs, and every region of the animal mitochondrial 
tRNA molecule evolves at a higher rate than the homologous region in the 
nuclear tRNA. These differences are not simply consequences of elevated 
mitochondrial mutation rates, because the ratio of the observed substitu-
tion rate to the neutral expectation (the width of selective sieve, which esti-
mates the fraction of mutations that avoid elimination by selection; see Box 
3.1) is elevated in mitochondrial tRNAs of all phylogenetic groups by fac-
tors of 1.3-13.1 relative to the same ratio in nuclear tRNAs (Table 11.7). A 
similar picture emerges from rRNA analyses, whicl'l yield increases in the 
width of the selective sieve ranging from 2.2 to 10.0. Second, animal mito-
chondrial tRNAs exhibit a wide array of structural deviations from the 
canonical form of prokaryotic/nuclear tRNAs, including losses of entire 
arms in some cases (Wolstenholme 1992). The width of the selective sieve 
for insertion/ deletion mutations in the loops of mitochondrial tRNAs is five 
times that for nuclear tRNAs (see Table 11.7). Third, for anirnals, plants, and 
fungi, the average binding strength of mitocbondrial tRNA stems is 
40%-90% that of nuclear tRNA stems, largely due to tbe higber incidence 
of A:T versus G:C bonds (two vs. three bydrogen bonds) in the former 
(Lynch 1997, 1998). Such modifications lead to conditions in whicb the stems 
of mammalian mitochondrial tRNAs initiate melting well below normal 
physiological temperatures (Ueda et al. 1985; Kumazawa et al. 1989). 
Although compensatory mutations in tRNA molecules, sucb as tbe 
restoration of Watson-Crick base pairs, may eventually mitigate some of 
the negative effects of single-base changes (Steinberg and Cedergren 1994; 
Steinberg et al. 1994; Watanabe et al. 1994; Wolstenholme et al. 1994; Kern 
and Kondrashov 2004), experimental evidence suggests that the net effects 
of the structural modifications noted above compromise the functional effi-
ciency of protein syntbesis. For example, bovine mitochondrial tRNA-Phe 
has been shown to bave an unusually low rate of amino acid loading 
(Kumazawa et al. 1989), and an in vitro translation system containing bovine 
mitochondrial ribosomes and elongation factors revealed that the rate of 
phenylalanine loading increases approximately tenfold when E. coli tRNA-
Phe is substituted for the bovine mitochondrial tRNA (Kumazawa et al. 
1991). The bovine mitochondrial tRNA for serine, which lacks an entire arm, 
has also been shown to be functionally compromised (Hanada et al. 2001). 
Could tl'le increased width of the selective sieve for orgarlelle genes be a 
simple consequence of the relaxation of selection in organelles (i.e., smaller 
selection coefficients), as suggested by Brown et al. (1982) and Kumazawa 

340 
CHAPTER 11 
TABLE 11.7 Estimates of the width of the selective sieve 
(measured as the ratio of the rate of evolution 
of RNA genes to the rate of synonymous sub-
stitut ion in protein-coding genes in the same 
genome] for organelle (or] vs. nuclear (nu] genes 
WIDTH OF SIEVE (cv)a 
sN b 
g 
or 
nu 
or 
nu 
tRNA substitutions 
Mammalm( 
0.18 
0.07 
1.40 
2.05 
Invertebrate mt 
0.38 
0.10 
0.85 
1.80 
Yeastmt 
0.50 
0.20 
0.63 
l.33 
Plantmt 
1.18 
0.09 
0.00 
1.87 
Plant cp 
0.12 
0.09 
1.68 
1.87 
rRNA substitutions 
Mammalmt 
0.14 
0.02 
1.58 
2.82 
Invertebrate mt 
0.44 
0.20 
0.73 
1.33 
Yeast mt 
0.80 
0.08 
0.22 
1.95 
Plant mt 
0.14 
0.02 
1.58 
2.82 
Plant cp 
0.07 
0.02 
2.05 
2.82 
tRNA insertion/deletions 
Mammal mt 
0.26 
0.05 
1.14 
2.26 
"The results for substitutions are from Lynch (1997) and Lynch and Blanchard (1998), 
whereas those for insertion / deletions, which apply to tRNA loops, are from Lynch 1996. 
The results for tRNAs are averages over all 20 amino acid groups, while those for rRNAs 
are averages over the small and large subunits. 
bJ'he quantity sNg is equal to the product of the deleterious selection coefficient and the 
effective number of genes per locus. 
"Mitochondrial and chloroplast genes are denoted by mt and cpo 
and Nishida (1993), rather than an outcome of a reduction in the efficiency 
of selection (smaller N )? Insight into this matter can be acquired by recall-
ing from Box 3.1 that if most mutations are either neutral or deleterious, the 
width of the selective sieve can be expressed as cv= 2sNg/ (e2sNg - 1), where 
S is the average selection coefficient opposing new mutations and Ng is the 
effective number of genes at a locus in the population. Solving this equa-
tion for organelle (0) and nuclear (n) genes using the data for cv in Table 11.7 
provides estimates of soN 0 and SnNgn' and taking the ratio of these estimates 
and applying the Ngo/~n ratios given above (see Table 11.4) then yields 
estimates of the ratio of average selective intensities in the two cellular envi-
ronments, so/sn' For mammals, the average value of Ngo/N is about 1.3, 
so from Table 11.7 the estimated ratio of selective intensities is 0.40/2.05)/1.3 
= 
a\
111
So
0.
dr
as
bii
ge
str
111 
thl
ti~
ch
me
est
ere
Dr
wI-
ree
ch<
sitE 
am
nu
tial
bet
res 
car 
the 
rOt;
on 
tiOl 
(wI 
qui 
mu 
tior 
coe 
the:
gen 
Chi 
por 
dec 
is 0 
tior 
Ass 

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
341 
= 0.5 for tRNAs and (1.58 / 2.82) / 1.3 = 0.4 for rRNAs. For invertebrates, the 
average value of N gol N gn is about 0.3, which implies ratios of selective 
intensities of 1.6 for tRNAs and 1.8 for rRNAs. Similar calculations suggest 
solsn of 1.1 and 0.3 for yeast tRNAs and rRNAs, respectively, and 0.9 and 
0.7 for land plant plastid tRNAs and rRNAs, respectively. If selectively 
driven codon bias is more significant in nuclear than in mitochondrial genes, 
as seems likely to be the case, these estimates of solsn will be downwardly 
biased by inflated estimates of the width of the selective sieve for nuclear 
genes. Thus, although crude, these calculations suggest that the absolute 
strength of selection opposing mutations in organelle genes is similar to that 
in nuclear genes, if not slightly higher, implying that the greater width of 
the selective sieve in organelle genomes is indeed a consequence of a reduc-
tion in the efficiency of selection. There is one potential outlier to this con-
clusion: for land plant mitochondrial tRNAs, the estimate of ill is approxi-
mately equal to the neutral expectation of 1.0 (see Table 11.7). However, this 
estimate may be upwardly biased by the inadvertent inclusion of some lat-
erally transferred genes from the plastid Qoyce and Gray 1989; Marechal-
Drouard et al. 1990; Nakazono and Hirai 1993). 
These results provide the basis for a rough assessment of the degree to 
which the long-term fitness of eukaryotes might be imperiled by their non-
recombining organelle genomes. Consider the situation in animal mito-
chondria, in which the mutation rate is quite high, averaging 3 x 10-8 per 
site per year (see Table 11.3), with -12,000 bases encoding tRNAs, rRNAs, 
amino acid replacement sites, and origins of replication. If it is assumed that 
nuclear tRNA and rRNA mutations escaping the selective sieve are essen-
tially neutral with respect to fitness, then the difference in the sieve widths 
between organelle and nuclear genes, which averages 0.20 in animals, rep-
resents the fraction of newly arisen mutations that are both deleterious and 
capable of fixation in organelles. Multiplying these three factors together, 
the average genome-wide rate of deleterious mutation in mitochondria is 
roughly 10-4 per year. The average effect of a new mitochondrial mutation 
on fitness is roughly 0.01 in animals, which is much too large to allow fixa-
tion unless effective population sizes are on the order of 100 or smaller 
(which is not the case), but because the distribution of mutational effects is 
quite L-shaped (Lynch and Walsh 1998), plenty of very mildly deleterious 
mutations are available for fixation. As discussed in Chapter 7, the muta-
tions that do the greatest long-term damage to a population have selection 
coefficients on the order of the reciprocal of the effective population size, as 
these have the largest fitness effects that are subject to substantial random 
genetic drift (Lynch and Gabriel 1990; Lande 1994). Using the results from 
Chapter 4 and Table 11.4, a typical animal species has an organelle effective 
population size (Ng) of approximately 105, so the maximum rate of fitness 
decline associated with mitochondrial mutations in a natmal population 
is on the order of 10-4 x 10-5 = 10-9 per year (ignoring the fixations of muta-
tions of larger effects that might occur during population bottlenecks). 
Assuming multiplicative fitness effects of mutations, this level of mutation 

342 
CHAPTER 11 
accumulation would yield just a 50% decline in fitness since the origin of 
animals about 700 million years ago (see Chapter I), during which time com-
pensatory andl or back mutations could reduce the rate of fitness loss to 
an even lower level. 
Thus, the observed levels of mutation accumulation in organelle genomes 
do not necessarily impose a substantial threat to species survival on time 
scales less than 108 million years or so. However, because the preceding esti-
mates are derived from surviving lineages, and because ecological processes 
may cause N g to be substantially less than 105 in some lineages for extended 
periods, it is premature to dismiss the possibility of a role for buildups of 
mitochondrial mutation loads in the differential proliferation of some 
eukaryotic lineages. One potentially important complication that has been 
omitted from the previous analysis concerns a unique evolutionary conse-
quence of uniparental inheritance: a maternally inherited genome can be 
selected only on the basis of its influence on female fitness. This means that 
sexually antagonistic organelle mutations, with positive effects on females 
but negative effects on male performance, can be driven to fixation despite 
their potential threat to long-term population viability (Gemmell et al. 2004). 
Insights from More Recent Endosymbioses 
Although mitochondria and plastids represent the most widespread cases 
of microbial endosymbiosis, many more phylogenetically restricted endo-
symbionts are known. The eubacterial inhabitants of various insect line-
ages have received the most attention. Because most sud, species are strictly 
vertically inherited like mitochondria, their N is again expected to be com-
parable to that of the host species, although t~e polymorphism and diver-
gence data necessary for testing this hypothesis are limited. For the one 
system for which data are available, the y-proteobacterium Buchnera aphidi-
cola residing within the aphid Uroleucon ambrosiae, the endosymbiont's Ng 
is estimated to be about 1.9 times that of the host mitochondrion (Lyndi. 
2006b), which itself is quite low (Funk et al. 2002), and its 2Ngu is 25 times 
smaller than the average for free-living and lor pathogenic prokaryotes 
(Lynch 2006b). Thus, although surveys of other species will be necessary to 
evaluate the generality of this conclusion, it is reasonable to expect the 
genomes of arthropod endosymbionts to exhibit the symptoms of a reduc-
tion in the efficiency of natural selection associated with reduced N . 
This expectation appears to be upheld (Moran and Plague 2054). For 
example, four sequenced B. aphidicola genomes, each from a different aphid 
lineage, have an extraordinarily high AIT content (-74%), consistent with 
a strongly mutation-driven process, and comparative analyses suggest ele-
vated long-term rates of molecular evolution and the accumulation of mildly 
deleterious mutations in protein-coding and ribosomal RNA genes (Moran 
1996; Lambert and Moran 1998; Shigenobu et al. 2000; Tamas et al. 2002; Her-
beck et al. 2003; Bastolla et al. 2004; van Ham et al. 2003). Containing just 
362-630 protein-coding genes, Buchnera genomes are among the smallest 
j 
s
s
E
f 
e
V
b 
n 
d
o 
a1 
CE 
al 
rE 
D
D
re 
gE 
D 
nE 
dr 
m 
as 
vii 
m 
tic
be
201 
wl
be 
for 
tio 
wi
de'
w} 
rna 
the
ofl
del
rec 

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
343 
known in prokaryotes (Latorre et al. 2005; Perez-Brocal et al. 2006), and many 
hundreds of genes (including many involved in DNA replication and repair) 
were probably lost early in the establishment of the lineage (Klasson and 
Andersson 2006), putatively in part because of the reduced efficiency of 
selection for gene maintenance in a stable host cell environment. A similar 
series of events is recorded in other eubacterial endosymbionts, such as 
Blochmannia (an inhabitant of ants), Wigglesworthia (an inhabitant of tsetse 
flies), and Carsonella (an inhabitant of sap-feeding psyllid insects) (Akman 
et al. 2002; Gil et al. 2003; Canback et al. 2004; Degnan et al. 2005; Fry and 
Wernegreen 2005; Nakabachi et al. 2006). 
Given the likely reduction in 2N U, the genomes of these microbes might 
be expected to evolve elevated levers of noncoding DNA, as the nuclear and 
mitochondrial genomes of eukaryotes have done, but they are often nearly 
devoid of mobile elements and contain approximately the same proportion 
of noncoding DNA as other prokaryotes (Moran and Plague 2004). Taken 
at face value, such observations might be viewed as a major challenge to the 
central premise of the mutational-hazard hypothesis: tbat low 2Ngu encour-
ages the accumulation of nonfunctional DNA. However, the genomic 
response to reduced 2Ngu depends not only on the mutational cost of excess 
DNA, but also on the relative rates of insertion and deletion of extragenic 
DNA. If deletion mutations were to arise more frequently than insertions, 
relaxed selection would lead to a reduction, rather than an increase, in 
genome size. Thus, contrary to the claims of some authors (Gregory and 
DeSalle 2005), the rarity of genomic obesity in arthropod endosymbionts 
need not be incompatible with the hypothesis that genome evolution is 
driven by basic population genetic processes. 
There are at least two reasons why the spectrum of mutations in some 
microbial endosymbionts may evolve in the direction of a deletion bias. First, 
as noted in Chapter 7, species with a strictly clonal mode of inheritance pro-
vide an wlstable habitat for mobile elements (a major source of insertions 
in most genomes): overly aggressive mobile elements may cause the extinc-
tion of asexual hosts, whereas overly quiescent elements will eventually 
become completely inactivated by mutations (Arkhipova and Meselson 
2000; Dolgin and Charlesworth 2006). Such a filtering process may explain 
why prokaryotes in putatively early stages of host associations (described 
below) and Wolbachia, a broadly distributed endosymbiont with a capacity 
for horizontal transfer and recombination, contain large numbers of inser-
tion elements (Jiggins 2002; Moran and Plague 2004; Baldo et al. 2006), 
whereas more ancient endosymbionts with strict vertical transmission are 
devoid of them. Second, although it has not been determined directly 
whether deletion mutations associated with replication and/ or chromosome 
maintenance outnumber insertions in Buchnera and allies, this is likely to be 
the case. Most ancient arthropod endosymbionts share the unique attribute 
of having lost conventional mismatch repair pathways, and it is known that 
defective mismatch repair greatly magnifies the deletion rate by promoting 
recombination between nonorthologous sequences (Nilsson et al. 2005). 

344 
CHAPTER 11 
Observed accumulations of deletions in pseudogenes in Rickettsia are con-
sistent with such behavior (Andersson and Andersson 1999), although it is 
not possible to exclude a role for selection in this process. 
Three specific examples clearly demonstrate that genome size reduction 
is by no means universal in arthropod endosymbionts. First, Sodalis glossini-
dius, an endosymbiont of tsetse flies, has only 51 % coding DNA (Toh et al. 
2005), by far the lowest value for any well-characterized prokaryote except 
for the intracellular parasite Mycoplasma leprae (48%). Perhaps it is no coin-
cidence that unlike most other arthropod endosymbionts, S. glossinidius has 
retained its DNA repair genes. Second, the genomes of three of the four 
extracellular symbionts associated with the marine oligochaete Olavius algar-
vensis (which lacks a mouth, gut, and anus) contain 300-400 mobile elements 
(Woyke et al. 2006), an extraordinarily high number for a prokaryote. Third, 
thousands of parasitoid wasp species use endosymbiotic viruses (from the 
Polydnaviridae family) to facilitate progeny development within parasitized 
lepidopteran larvae. Although most viruses are pathogens with substantial 
capacity for horizontal transmission and presumably high Ns' as reflected 
in their extremely streamlined genomes (Lynch 2006b), the chromosomes 
of polydnaviruses are integrated directly into the host nuclear genome, sub-
jecting them to the same drift and mutation processes as the wasps within 
which they reside. The genomes of polydnaviruses are enormous (-200-600 
kb), with 71 %-83% noncoding DNA, including numerous mobile elements, 
and 10%-20% of the protein-coding genes harbor spliceosomal introns (all 
highly unusual features for DNA viruses) (Espagne et al. 2004; B. A. Webb 
et al. 2005). Thus, when placed in a permissive population genetic envi-
ronment, even viruses can succumb to the syndrome of genomic changes 
seen in eukaryotes with low 2Ngu. 
One other unique form of endosymbiosis merits consideration here. As 
noted above, a number of eukaryotes have acquired the capacity for pho-
tosynthesis via secondary endosymbiosis; that is, by engulfing members 
of the primary plastid-carrying lineage. The ancestors of the cryptomonad 
and chlorarachniophytic algae were the recipients of red and green algal 
endosymbionts, respectively, and in both cases, the nucleus of the endosym-
biont still survives as a nucleomorph. One complete nucleomorph genome 
has been analyzed for each lineage (the respective host cells being Guillar-
dia theta and Bigelowiella natans). The two nucleomorphs exhibit strikingly 
similar patterns of evolution, including massive genomic streamlining, with 
one notable exception. The B. natans nucleomorph genome is just 0.37 Mb 
in length and contains only 331 protein-coding genes (Gilson et al. 2006), 
whereas that of G. theta is 0.55 Mb in length and contains 464 protein-cod-
ing genes (Douglas et al. 2001). In both cases, the intergenic spacers are 
extraordinarily tiny (often as small as 1 bp, with some genes overlapping 
by up to 100 bp), and many genes are cotranscribed, even when on oppo-
site strands (Williams et al. 2005). Both genomes are entirely devoid of 
mobile elements, but the incidence of introns differs substantially. Spliceo-
somal introns are common in the B. natans nucleomorph, averaging 2.6 per 
g 
o 
VI 
Sl 
( ~ 
ill
OJ 
aJ 
et 
e, 
c(
si 
UJ

EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION OF ORGANELLE GENOMES 
345 
gene, although they have the smallest known average size of any eukary-
otic introns (19 bp). In contrast, the G. theta nucleomorph is depauperate 
with respect to spliceosomal introns, containing only 17 within the entire 
set of protein-coding genes, although they are more substantial in length 
(42-52 bp). However, the tRNA genes of the G. theta nucleomorph harbor 
an unusually large number of introns (nearly half of them contain at least 
one, and these are in locations not previously observed in any eukaryote), 
although many of these introns are extremely tiny (as small as 3 bp) (Kawach 
et al. 2005). This difference in the incidence of introns between the two lin-
eages might be a simple consequence of different ancestral conditions in the 
colonizing endosymbiont, as a substantial range of variation in intron den-
sity exists among unicellular eukaryotes (see Chapter 9). However, a deeper 
understanding of nucleomorph evolution will require information on 
aspects of the population genetic environment associated with such 
genomes, including effective population sizes and the rates of nucleotide 
substitutions, insertions, and deletions. 

Sex Chromosomes 
The overview of organelle genomic evolution in the previous chapter 
provided a supplement to our previous focus on autosomal genes, demon-
strating further how a variety of DNA-level features can depend on the 
population genetic properties of the chromosomes on which they reside. 
Our final overview of genomic evolution addresses this matter in still 
another way by considering the features of sex chromosomes. Although 
sex chromosomes reside side by side with their autosomal counterparts 
in the nuclear environment, they have unique recombinational and muta-
tional features, which can, in principle, alter their vulnerability to non-
adaptive forces of evolution. Moreover, because sex chromosomes gener-
ally evolve from autosomes, most alterations in the architectural features 
of their genes can confidently be interpreted as derived traits, as opposed 
to being potential artifacts of ancient ancesh-y. As we will see below, such 
alterations arise remarkably rapidly, providing a powerful indictment of 
mutation, recombination, and random genetic drift as major sculptors of 
genomic evolution. 
One nomenclatural issue needs to be addressed at the outset. In most 
species with morphologically distinguishable sex chromosomes, the male 
is the heterogametic (XY) sex, whereas females are homogametic (XX). How-
ever, in a few groups, most notably birds and lepidopterans, the situation 
is reversed, with females being heterogametic; such systems are often 
referred to as ZW / ZZ. To simplify the presentation, this chapter will for the 
most part focus on XY / XX systems, although it will be seen that many of 
the peculiar features of the Y in XY / XX systems extend to the W in ZW / ZZ 
systems. It should also be noted that the definition of a sex chromosome is 
not always so clear-cut. In principle, this special notation may simply apply 

348 
CHAPTER 1 2 
to any pair of chromosomes on which the sex determination locus resides, 
regardless of the size of the differentiated region, although we will gen-
erally be focusing on the special cases in which the two chromosomes have 
become morphologically distinguishable from each other and non-recom-
bining. 
The evolutionary biology of sex chromosomes encompasses a diversity 
of subjects. Some of the central questions concern the matters of why sex 
chromosomes originate in the first place and why they are largely confined 
to multicellular animals and land plants (Ohno 1967; Bul11983). Because the 
Y chromosome resides only in males, it provides a unique target for the 
refinement of the functions of genes with male-specific features, so sex clu-o-
mosomes are also of special relevance to the field of sexual selection and the 
evolution of sexual dimorphism. Sex chromosomes also raise the challenge 
of understanding how gene expression is regulated so as to equalize the 
total activity of X-linked genes with generalized functions in males and in 
females, which contain one and two X chromosomes, respectively. Finally, 
nonrecombining sex chromosomes are especially vulnerable to the invasion 
of selfish elements promoting sex chromosome segregation distortion in the 
heterogametic sex; that is, the differential transmission of the X versus the 
Y into successful male gametes (Jaenike 2001; Burt and Trivers 2006). 
Although each of these issues could easily constitute an entire book or book 
chapter (as the preceding references testify), the focus here will be on the 
evolutionary consequences of residence on a sex chromosome for the basic 
archHectural features of a gene, and details on the above matters will be cov-
ered only to the extent necessary to accomplish this end. 
There are several basic asynunetries with respect to the population genet-
ics of X and Y chromosome evolution. First, with the exception of a small 
pseudoautosomal region, recombination is entirely suppressed across the 
Y chromosome, whereas the X is able to fully recombine in the homogametic 
sex. On this basis, the Y is expected to be much more vulnerable to selective 
sweeps and selective interference between simultaneously segregating 
mutations. Second, in a population with an even sex ratio, there are three 
times as many X as Y chromosomes, so on the basis of numbers alone, the 
Y is expected to be more vulnerable to random genetic drift. Third, at least 
in animals, the mutation rate appears to be substantially elevated in the male 
relative to the female germ line, so that the Y chromosome is a much more 
mutagenic environment than the X, which spends only a third of its time in 
males. Fourth, because of the haploid nature of both sex chromosomes in 
the heterogametic sex, recessive mutations are expected to be exceptionally 
sensitive to selective forces. Fifth, as noted above, the asymmetry in the sex-
ual background of the X and the Y imposes different patterns of selection 
for female-specific and male-specific gene functions. 
In the following pages, it will be seen that the joint operation of these fac-
tors generally leads to a greatly elevated vulnerability of the Y clu-omosome 
to mutational degradation as well as to a repatterning of the gene contents 
of both sex chromosomes. Although na tural selection plays a central role in 
t1 
n 
II
li 
cl 
T
o
e) 
hE 
bE 
ar
re 
ex 
he
al. 
a c
tio 
ari
thE 
ha
lat
na 
sec
19(
20(
SUI
del
era
ari~
sta)
sex
sur
pro
199
rnu
(eli
fern
w01
coel
rnee
be E
tun
eha

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
349 
the latter aspect of sex chromosome differentiation, it will become clear that 
nonadaptive forces have a substantial influence on many aspects of sex chro-
mosome evolution, including the expansion of extra genic DNA, the estab-
lishment of certain multigene families, and possibly even the origin of sex 
chromosomes themselves. 
The Origins of Sex Chromosomes 
One of the defining features of fully developed sex chromosomes is the 
extreme suppression of recombination on the chromosome confined to the 
heterogametic sex. Although the mechanisms by which such a sta te first 
becomes established are not entirely clear (Charlesworth 1996b; Charlesworth 
and Charlesworth 2000), comparative genome mapping indicates that non-
recombining sex chromosomes have emerged on multiple occasions. For 
example, the mammalian XY / XX (male/ female) system appears to be non-
homologous to the avian ZW / ZZ (female/male) system (Nand a, Haaf et 
al. 2002), although a potential link has been revealed by observations from 
a complex chromosomal chain in the platypus (Grutzner et al. 2004). In addi-
tion, as will be noted below, nomecombining sex determination regions have 
arisen in numerous ray-finned fish lineages. In the fly Megaselia scalaris, 
the sex determination factor appears to be carried by a mobile element that 
has been transposed to different chromosomal locations in different popu-
lations (Traut and Wollert 1998). The specific loci involved in sex determi-
nation appear to differ dramatically among species, and the protein 
sequences of such loci evolve at exceptionally rapid rates (O'Neil and Belote 
1992; Whitfield et al. 1993; Ferris et al. 1997; Haag and Doty 2005; Hill et al. 
2006). 
The initial steps in the origin of sex chromosomes most likely involve 
suppression of recombination (perhaps entirely fortuitous) around a sex 
determination locus, as recombinants of such genes would probably gen-
erate reproductively inferior progeny (Nei 1969). But how does such a locus 
arise in the first place? One possibility involves an initial hermaphroditic 
stage, followed by the emergence of two mutations at a locus influencing 
sex organ differentiation: one incurred by an allele on the proto-X, which 
suppresses the production of male gametes, and another arising on the 
proto-Y, which causes female sterility (Ohno 1967; Bull 1983; Charlesworth 
1991). If the proto-Y-linked allele were dominant to the proto-X-linked 
mutation, two XY individuals would be incapable of a successful mating 
(eliminating the possibility of YY genotypes): XX individuals would be 
female, and XY individuals would be male. The transition to this end state 
would not be a simple matter, however (Figure 12.1). As the instantaneous 
co establishment of both mutations would be extremely unlikely, an inter-
mediate state involving hermaphrodites and pure males or females would 
be expected under this model, the likelihood of which would depend in 
turn on the selective advantage of separate sexes (Charlesworth and 
Charlesworth 1978). In the case of the medaka fish, the initiation of a sex 

350 
CHAPTER 1 2 
Gain of male-
suppressing 
mutation 
Gain of female-
suppressing 
mutation 
AoAo }~ 
AoAx 
Loss of ancestral 
hermaphroditism 
allele 
AoAo }~ 
AoAo ~ ----:.~ AoAx 
---~.~ AxAx ? -----l.~ 
AXAY}a 
AoAy 
Hermaphroditism 
Mixed mating systems 
Separate sexes 
Figure 12.1 A potential two-step pathway to the evolution of a chromosomal re-
gion specifying separate sexes from an ancestral condition of hermaphroditism. Here 
the proto-X mutation is assumed to be recessive and the proto-Y mutation to be domi-
nant. The final loss of the ancestral allele (Ao) could be facilitated by natural selection if 
hermaphroditism had a significant cost. In principle, the order of the two steps could 
be reversed, leading to the initial evolution of males, and the intermediate steps could 
be maintained as balanced polymorph isms for prolonged periods. 
determination region appears to have been precipitated by the duplication 
of a gene involved in the development of the undifferentiated gonad, which 
when transferred to a new chromosomal location, became specialized for 
expression in the testes (Kondo et al. 2004,2006). 
Complete differentiation of sex chromosomes requires an outward 
expansion of recombination suppression around the sex determination 
locus, although in species such as Drosophila, in which there is no male 
recombination, a Y chromosome can be nomecombining from the time of 
origin. Because recombination is homology-dependent (see Chapters 2, 4, 
and 6), a nomecombining region might simply grow passively once a crit-
icallevel of sequence differentiation is reached in the core region. Such a 
process might also be nucleated in regions of intrinsically low recombina-
tion (e.g., centromeric regions), and might in some cases be facilitated by 
the accumulation of chromosomal rearrangements. Whatever the mecha-
nism, studies of both the human X and the chicken Z have revealed a series 
of strata of different ages, thereby implicating a gradual emergence of the 
nearly fully nomecombining sex chromosomes (Lahn and Page 1999; Han-
dley et al. 2004; Ross et al. 2005). Such differentiation appears to be molded 
by the stochastic recruitment of duplicated autosomal fragments by the 
X, followed by their recombination onto and subsequent degeneration on 
the Y (Graves 1995). 
1
A 
fr 
je 
re
re
pl 
ef
de
er,
erl
tio] 
effE
wit
tipl 
be]
onJ
kep
pos
sele
exp
Oro,
of a'
the 
reco
thes
ness
bad
T
than
pIe r
level
(or a
Y-lin
cific 

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
351 
The Population Genetic Environment 
As emphasized in Chapters 4 and 11, because new mutations cannot be freed 
from their original genetic background, nome combining genomes are sub-
ject to a relaxation in the efficiency of natural selection. The net result is a 
reduction of the chromosomal effective population size (Ng), which jointly 
reduces the probability of fixation of beneficial mutations and increases the 
probability of fixation of deleterious mutations. However, although this 
effect alone might be sufficient to lead eventually to the mutational degra-
dation of a nomecombining Y (Charlesworth and Charlesworth 2000), sev-
eral other distinguishing features of Y chromosomes are expected to exac-
erbate the situation. 
First, the haploid and sex-limited nature of the Y will cause a further 
reduction in its effective population size in several ways. Each mating 
involves four copies of each autosome and three X chromosomes, but only 
a single Y. Moreover, because the Y spends all of its tinle in males, while the 
X spends two-thirds of its time in females, any difference in the effective 
numbers of males and females in a population will further influence the dis-
parity of Ng associated with the e two chromosomes. In animals, it is often 
the case that only a fraction of males are successful in fertilizing females, 
further suppressing the relative effective number ofY chromosomes. 
Second, Y-linked genes are only subject to selection for male-specific func-
tions, whereas those on the X and autosomes are selected for their joint 
effects in the two sexes. Not surprisingly, Y chromosomes tend to be emiched 
with genes with testes-specific functions, many of which are present in mul-
tiple copies (Skaletsky et al. 2003). Because a gene that moves onto the Y will 
be released from any prior selective constraints associated with its effects 
on female performance, residence on the Y can transform a locus previously 
kept static by opposing selective pressures in the two sexes into one under 
positive selection for male fwlCtion, potentially enhancing the freguency of 
selective sweeps on the Y. Rice (1998) was able to demonstrate this effect 
experimentally by taking advantage of the absence of recombina tion in male 
Drosophila. The use of chromosomal markers enabled him to treat a full set 
of autosomes and the h"ue Y like a single giant Y chromosome, h"ansrnitting 
the entire artificial linkage group only through male progeny (without 
recombination). Within just 41 generations, the autosomes associated with 
these synthetic Y chromosomes acguired changes that improved male fit-
ness at the expense of female fih1ess (as revealed when they were inserted 
back into female backgrounds). 
Third, Y chromosomes typically experience higher average mutation rates 
than chromosomes that cycle through females. To see this, we rely on a sim-
ple method of estimating the relative mutagenicity of males by comparing 
levels of interspecific divergence at silent sites in Y-linked versus X-linked 
(or autosomal) genes. For example, assuming neutrality, the divergence of 
Y-linked silent sites proceeds at a per-generation rate egual to the male-spe-
cific mutation rate, ud" whereas that for X-linked sites proceeds at rate (2uQ 

352 
CHAPTER 12 
TABLE 12.1 Relative mutation rates in males versus females based on silent-
site divergence estimates for genes on sex chromosomes 
OnJzias (medaka fish) 
8.2 
Zhang 2004 
Oncorhynchus (salmonids) 
6.0 
Ellegren and Fridolfsson 2003 
Horninids 
5.2 
Makova and Li 2002 
Felidae (cats) 
4.4 
Slattery and O'Brien 1998 
Perissodactyls (horses, rhinos) 
3.9 
Goetting-Minesky and Makova 2006 
Passeriform birds 
3.6 
Axelsson et al. 2004 
Sheep / goats 
3.4 
Lawson and Hewitt 2002 
Gallus (chickens, quail, turkeys) 
2.2 
Berlin et al. 2006 
Mus/Rattus 
Drosophila 
Silene (plant) 
1.8 
Chang et al. 1994 
1.3 
Bauer and Aquadro 1997 
0.6 
Laporte et al. 2005 
+ ucr)/3 because X chromosomes spend two-thirds of their time in XX 
females. Letting dx and dy denote observed levels of silent-site divergence 
between two species for X- and Y-linked genes, the ratio of male to female 
mutation rates (ucr/u9) can be estimated as 2(dy / dx)/[3 - (dy / dJ]. This ratio 
exceeds 1.0 in every animal species examined (Table 12.1), and virtually 
identical results are obtained with insertions/ deletions as with substitutions 
(Makova et al. 2004). Because many mutations arise during periods of DNA 
replication, tills pattern is expected in animals in which the number of germ 
line cell divisions in males generally exceeds that in females, increasing with 
male age (Miyata et al. 1987; Crow 1993; Chang et al. 1994), an idea first sug-
gested by Haldane (1935). This hypothesis can be tested by restricting the 
analysis to highly mutable CG dinucleotide sites in mammals, which are 
thought to mutate in a largely replication-independent manner (see Chap-
ter 6). In such analyses, the male bias is reduced by more than 50% 
(Mikkelsen et al. 2005; Taylor et aI. 2006), consistent with the hypothesis that 
the bulk of mutational events at the remaining sites are driven by replica-
tion-associated processes. 
Further insight into the degree to which the population genetic environ-
ment is altered for genes residing on sex chromosomes can be acquired by 
considering a now familiar metric: the amount of segregating variation 
within natural populations at silent sites in protein-coding genes, which pro-
vides an estimate of the product of twice the effective number of genes per 
locus and the per-generation mutation rate per nucleotide (2Ngu). In all cases 
for which data are available, levels of variation on the Yare substantially 
less than those on both the X and the autosomes, in some cases being unde-
tectable (Table 12.2). That this feature is associated with the lack of recom-
bination, and is not simply a peculiarity of male-specific chromosomes, can 
be seen from the results for chickens (Gallus gal/us). As noted above, the 
T
Dr 
[ 
[ 
D
PIa 
Si 
Si 
Bire 
Ga 
Fie 
Fic 
Source: 
in Lyn( 
Note: 11 
recomt 

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
353 
TABLE 12.2 Nucleotide diversity at silent sites for population samples of 
randomly sampled alleles for protein-coding genes, which provide 
estimates of 2Ngu 
NUCLEOTIDE 
DIVERSITY 
RATIOS 
Y 
X 
Y/A 
xlA 
y/x 
Mammals: 
Homo sapiens 
0.00013 
0.00040 
0.134 
0.438 
0.319 
Sachidanandam et a1. 
2001; Shen et a1. 2000; 
Stone et a1. 2002 
Pan troglodytes 
0.00067 
0.00131 
0.500 
0.978 
0.511 
Stone et a1. 2002 
Ovis aries 
0.00009 
0.024 
Meadows et a1. 2004 
Lynx lynx 
0.00000 
0.00016 
0.000 
Hellborg and Ellegren 
2004 
Canis lupus 
0.00004 
0.00038 
0.105 
Hellborg and Ellegren 
2004 
Rangifer tarandus 
0.00000 
0.00050 
0.000 
Hellborg and Ellegren 
2004 
Bos taurus 
0.00000 
0.00025 
0.000 
Hellborg and Ellegren 
2004 
Microtus agrestis 
0.00017 
0.00080 
0.212 
Hellborg and Ellegren 
2004 
Mus domesticus 
0.00078 
0.067 
Naclunan 1997 
Drosophila: 
D. melanogaster 
0.01900 
1.210 
Andolfatto 2001 
D. miranda 
0.00012 
0.00711 
0.007 
0.435 
0.016 
Bachtrog and 
Charlesworth 2002 
D. simulans 
0.02340 
0.850 
Andolfatto 2001 
Plants: 
S ilene d ioica 
0.00330 
0.02576 
0.203 
1.585 
0.128 
Laporte et a1. 2005 
Silene latifolia 
0.00000 
0.03744 
0.000 
1.617 
0.000 
Laporte et a1. 2005 
W 
Z 
W/A 
Z/A 
w/z 
Birds: 
Gallus gallus 
0.00007 
0.00200 
0.011 
0.308 
0.035 
Berlin and Ellegren 
2004 
Ficedula albicollis 
0.00150 
0.416 
Borge et al. 2005 
Ficedula hypoleuca 
0.00100 
0.370 
Borge et al. 2005 
Source: The autosomal (A) data are either taken directly from the cited reference or from the survey 
in Lynch 2006a. 
Note: In birds, females (ZW) are the heterogametic sex, with W being analogous to Y (i.e., W is the non-
recombining chromosome, found only in females). 

354 
CHAPTER 12 
TABLE 12.3 Ratios of effective population sizes [Ng) for genes 
on Y chromosomes, X chromosomes, and auto-
somes, derived from the information in Tables 
12.1 and 12.2 
Y/A 
xiA 
y/x 
Homo sapiens 
0.080 
0.567 
0.147 
Pan troglodytes 
0.298 
1.264 
0.236 
Ovis aries 
0.D15 
Microtus agrestis 
0.149 
Mus domesticus 
0.067 
D. melanogaster 
1.260 
D. miranda 
0.006 
0.455 
0.014 
D. simulans 
0.889 
Silene dioica 
0.271 
1.468 
0.186 
Silene latifolin 
0.000 
1.497 
0.000 
W/A 
Z/A 
w/z 
Gallus gallus 
0.018 
0.271 
0.064 
female is the heterogametic sex in birds, and at least for this one species, the 
nonrecombining female-specific (W) chromosome exhibits just 4% of the 
silent-site diversity on the recombining Z. 
Using the relative mutation rates given in Table 12.1 to yield ratios of 
chromosome-specific mutation rates (uy/ ux) and dividing these into the 
average diversity ratios (e.g., 2Ngyuy/2NgXux) in Table 12.2 yields the esti-
mated ratios of effective population sizes in Table 12.3. These results demon-
strate that the effective number of Y chromosomes is always less than 30% 
of that of autosomes and X chromosomes, and often substantially so. Thus, 
there is little question that the Y chromosome is exceptionally vulnerable to 
the accumulation of mildly deleterious mutations. 
Degeneration of the V Chromosome 
The evidence for Y chromosome degeneration is overwhelming. For exam-
ple, the human Y chromosome harbors only 78 protein-coding genes and 
encodes only 27 distinct proteins (Skaletsky et al. 2003), less than 1 % of the 
number on other chromosomes, but has an elevated abundance of mobile 
element insertions (Erlandsson et al. 2000). About 30% of the euchromatic 
region of the human Y consists of degenerated sequence with homology to 
recognizable sequences on the X, while about 10% consists of recently  3 
MYA) transposed X sequences that have acquired twice the density of mobile 
r 
1.
f
"
1':
n

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
355 
elements found on the X. Approximately 25% of the euchromatic Y in 
humans consists of eight palindromes ranging in length from 9 kb to 1.5 Mh. 
Each of these regions consists of duplicate spans of DNA in tail-to-tail ori-
entations on opposite strands, kept in a nearly identical state by inh'a-
palindrome gene conversion (Rozen et a1. 2003). Although they too con-
tain many pseudogenes, these palindromes harbor the bulk of the active 
genes on the Y, most of which have been recruited from autosomes and have 
testes-specific expression (Noordam and Repping 2006). Many of these Y-
linked genes exhibit levels of divergence at amino acid replacement sites 
that approach those at silent sites (Kuroki et a1. 2006), a condition consistent 
with a scenario of reduced efficiency of selection. The mutational inactiva-
tion of several human Y-linked genes on the chimpanzee Yprovides further 
support for this contention (Hughes et a1. 2005). 
This general syndrome of a largely decomposing Y chromosome has been 
observed in numerous other species. For example, Drosophila melanogaster 
is a member of a lineage containing an ancient X/Y pair. There is no recog-
nizable homology between the two, and the Y contains only a dozen or so 
genes, many of which harbor enormous introns (Kurek et al. 2000; Carvalho 
et a1. 2001). As in humans, most of the Y-linked genes in this species have 
been recruited from autosomes and have male-specific functions, consistent 
with a pattern of duplication and subfunctionalization (Carvalho 2002). In 
D. pseudoobscura, the genes from the original Y chromosome were translo-
cated back to an autosome, after which their introns and intergenic regions 
declined dramatically in size (Carvalho and Clark 2005). Given the complete 
lack of recombination on the Y, this particular observation provides com-
pelling evidence that extra genic DNA is a consequence of inefficient selec-
tion, not an adaptation to magnify the recombination rate (see Chapter 9). 
In contrast to the situation in D. pseudoobscura, the Y chromosome of D. 
miranda has fused to an autosome, enforcing a nonrecombining environ-
ment on the latter since about 1 MYA (Figure 12.2). The autosome-derived 
genes on this neo-Y show many signs of degeneration, including mobile ele-
ment insertions, elevated levels of amino acid replacement substitutions, 
and reduced expression, with about one-third having been completely 
silenced by frame shift and/ or nonsense mutations (and their X-linked 
homologs retaining function) (Steinemarm and Steinemarm 1997, 2005a,b; 
Bachtrog 2003,2005,2006). 
Increased rates of replacement substitutions (relative to silent substitu-
tions) as well as accumulations of mobile element insertions and other repet-
itive DNAs have also been noted on the Y chromosomes of mice (Tucker et 
a1. 2003), members of the cat (Felidae) family (Slattery and O'Brien 1998), 
the liverwort Marchantia (lshizaki et a1. 2002), and the plant Silene (Filatov 
2005; Nicolas et a1. 2005; Hobza et a1. 2006). Likewise, the nonrecombining 
female-specific W chromosome of the silkworm Bombyx I'rlori is enriched 
with mobile elements (Abe et a1. 2005). Moreover, although stickJeback and 
medaka fish do not yet have fully differentiated Ys, the localized sex deter-
mination regions are littered with mobile element insertions, repeat ele-

356 
CHAPTER 12 
Figure 12.2 The evolution of a neo-X and 
neo-Y pair of chromosomes, resulting from the 
fusion of the Y and an autosome. The X and 
the free autosome will cosegregate during 
meiosis in male Drosophila, in which there is no 
recombination, but will experience recombina-
tion and independent segregation in females. 
The autosome that becomes physically at-
tached to the Y experiences no recombination 
and is expected to accumulate degenerative 
mutations (cross-hatches). 
x Y 
-----,.~ Neo-X 
Autosomes 
I 
Neo-Y 
ments, and pseudogenes (Nanda, Kondo et a1. 2002; Peichel et a1. 2004; 
Kondo et a1. 2006). The same is true in papaya (Uu et al. 2004), and a sub-
stantial enrichment of mobile element insertions exists in the region of the 
mating-type locus in the fungus Microbotryum violaceum (Hood et a1. 2004). 
After the X and Y cease communication, degradation of the Y can be quite 
rapid, as Rice (1994) demonstrated with manipulated Y-chromosomal con-
sh-ucts in laboratory populations of D. melanogaster in just a few dozen gen-
erations. 
Once sufficient degradation of Y-linked genes with general fm1Ctions has 
occurred, modifier loci that down-regulate the Y and/ or promote higher X 
expression in males may be promoted by selection (Charlesworth 1996b). 
By relaxing selection on the Y even further, such dosage compensation is 
expected to exacerbate Y deterioration, eventually leading to the complete 
demise of all Y-linked genes other than those critical to male function. As 
noted above, a common featuTe of Y chromosomes is an amplification of the 
copy number of testes-specific genes, and it is tempting to interpret such 
change as a simple response to positive selection for increased male func-
tion of genes restricted to the male sex. At least one example of positive selec-
tion on the protein-coding sequences ofY-linked mammalian genes appears 
to support this idea (Gerrard and Filatov 2005), but this study also noted 
that the efficiency of selection against mildly deleterious mutations was com-
promised at such loci (relative to that on the X). As noted in Chapter 8, tight 
linkage elevates the probability of preservation of duplicate genes by 
processes driven by degenerative mutations, such as quantitative subfunc-
tionalization (Lynch et a1. 2001). This is because a pair of completely linked 
duplicates transiently endows a chromosome with a weak mutational 
advantage, as each member of the pair serves as a backup for the other. Thus, 
the tendency for Y-linked genes to be present in multiple copies may sim-
ply reflect the same nonadaptive conditions that drive all of the other fea-
tures of Y chromosome evolution, rather than being solely a consequence 
of positive selection for increased dosage of male-specific proteins. 

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
357 
Is the deterioration of the Y solely a consequence of its increased vul-
nerability to deleterious mutation accumulation? A rather different hypoth-
esis for Y degeneration (as well as for the evolution of dosage compensa-
tion) postulates a process driven not so much by degenerative mutations 
as by the more rapid incorporation of adaptive mutations into X-linked 
than into Y-linked genes (Orr and Kim 1998). Adaptive selective sweeps 
are not expected to result in a net loss of fitness for any chromosome, as the 
deleterious load swept along will always be smaller than the advantage 
of the selected mutation. However, as noted above, the likelihood of a ben-
eficial mutation being swept to fixation is reduced on a nonrecombining 
chromosome because of the elevated burden of interference from linked 
background mutations. Thus, a lower rate of accumulation of positively 
selected mutations might lead to a situation in which the fitness of Y-linked 
alleles lags far enough behind that of their X-linked counterparts to encour-
age the selective advancement of mechanisms that increase the expres-
sion of X-linked genes at the expense of those on the Y. If this adaptive 
hypothesis for the degeneration of the Y is correct, then degenerated sex 
chromosomes should evolve more readily in populations with large effec-
tive sizes (in which the fix a tion probabilities of beneficial muta tions are ele-
vated). This prediction is completely contrary to the observed pattern. 
Despite the widespread distribution of genetic sex determination, fully dif-
ferentiated sex chromosomes are unknown outside of the animal and land 
plant lineages. Several fungal species have moderately sized chromosomal 
regions associated with sex determination (in some cases, on the order of 
100 to 500 kb in length, with greatly suppressed recombination) (Fraser and 
Heitman 2003, 2004), and Chlamydomonas has such a region extending over 
1 Mb (Ferris et a1. 2002), but these exceptions are dwarfed by the numer-
ous times that full-fledged sex chromosomes have independently emerged 
in multicellular species. 
It is often argued that these somewhat expanded sex determination 
regions of fungi and algae, as well as the small nonrecombining sex deter-
mination regions in some fishes, represent "incipient sex chromosomes" in 
early stages of an evolutionary progression toward full-fledged sex clU'o-
mosomes. However, there is no obvious reason why sex chromosome evo-
lution should have been delayed in such species, nor is there any evidence 
to support the idea that organisms with separate sexes are destined to even-
tually acquire such chromosomal constitutions. An alternative view is that 
many eukaryotic lineages simply do not provide the appropriate popula-
tion genetic environment for the emergence of sex chromosomes, regard-
less of the available time span. The differential phylogenetic distribution 
of sex chromosomes may instead simply reflect the natural predisposition 
of populations with small effective sizes to the evolution of sex chromo-
somes by degenerative mutations. It could be countered that sex chromo-
somes are unlikely to evolve in unicellular species without pronounced 
sexual dimorphism, but a case can also be made for the opposite causal 

358 
CHAPTER 1 2 
connection; that is, that the origin of sex chromosomes facilitates the evo-
lution of sexual differentiation at the phenotypic level (Rice 1984). 
Retailoring the X Chromosome 
Although the X chromosome is nowhere near as inhospitable a place for 
gene residence as the Y, it still presents a distinct environment relative to 
auto somes, raising the question of whether its contents also experience 
unique evolutionary trajectories. First, because the X chromosome does not 
recombine in males, it will generally experience two-thirds the level of 
recombination on an average autosome, provided the level of recombina-
tion is otherwise equivalent in the two sexes. However, in species such as 
Drosophila, in which even the auto somes are nonrecombining in males, the 
average rate of recombination on the X (which spends two-thirds of its time 
in females) will be elevated to four-thirds that on autosomes. Second, for 
each mating pair, there are only three X chromosomes for every four auto-
somes. This difference contributes to an expected reduction in the effective 
population size for X-linked genes, although the effect may be offset if the 
effective number of females is sufficiently greater than that of males. Third, 
because of the greater amount of time they spend in females, X chromo-
somes will experience lower average mutation rates than autosomal genes, 
although this effect is not large: with the largest ratio of male to female muta-
tion rates given in Table 12.1, the ratio of mutation rates on the X versus 
autosomes is 0.74. Fourth, because the X is haploid in males, the exposure 
of recessive mutations to selection is magnified. 
Given the numerous uncertainties about the relative contributions of 
these factors to the population genetic environment of the X, we again resort 
to empirical data on silent-site variation (7[s) to indirectly infer the magnitude 
of 2Ngu for X-linked genes. With just one exception (Mus domesticus), the 
ratios of 7[s for X-linked versus autosomal genes are within the range of 
0.4 to 1.6 (see Table 12.2), and after factoring out differences in mutation 
rates, the ratios of effective numbers of genes (Ng) are in the range of 0.6 to 
1.5 (see Table 12.3). These results provisionally suggest that, contrary to 
the situation on the Y, neither the magnitude of random genetic drift nor the 
mutation rate on the X chromosome deviates greatly from that on auto-
somes. This overall similarity in Ng and u appears to be reflected by the 
absence of any major deviations between the architectural features of X crl.ro-
mosomes and autosomes. For example, the human X chromosome contains 
about 1000 genes, a number similar to that on a typical autosome, and its 
density of intergenic DNA, mobile elements, and pseudogenes is only 
slightly elevated relative to autosomes (Kohn et al. 2004; Ross et al. 2005; 
Drouin 2006). 
On the other hand, the gene contents of X chromosomes are often quali-
tatively different than those of autosomes. In D. melanogaster, for example, the 
X cltromosome is demasculinized, in the sense that only 5% of its genes have 
male-biased expression, which is about half the level for such genes on auto-
I
E
S
a
t

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
359 
somes (Parisi et al. 2003). In C. elegans, testes-specific and germ line-intrinsic 
genes are almost exclusively present on autosomes, in striking contrast to 
genes with oocyte-biased expression, which are randomly distributed 
throughout the genome (Reinke et al. 2000). In contrast, genes with male-
biased expression are randomly dish'ibuted across the X and autosomes in 
mosquitoes (Hahn and Lanzaro 2005), whereas in mammals the X contains 
an excess of genes associated with male sexual reproduction, brain function, 
and musculature (Saifi and Chandra 1999; Wang et al. 2001; Lercher, Urrutia 
et al. 2003; Vallender and Lahn 2004). In both D. melanogaster and mammals, 
gene duplications arising via the transposition of reverse transcripts of 
mRNAs appear to move more frequently from the X to autosomes than vice 
versa, and an exceptionally high fraction of these novel genes have testes-spe-
cific expression (Betran et al. 2002; Emerson et al. 2004). It remains unclear 
whether such differential distributions of male-specific genes are driven by 
physical factors causing a directional bias in movement and establishment, 
by in situ molecular evolutionary change promoted by selection, or both. 
One feature that may encourage the adaptive repatterning of the contents 
of the X chromosome relates to its haploid versus diploid state in males ver-
sus females. It has been argued that the hemizygosity (the presence of a sin-
gle copy) of the X chromosome in males sets up a selective asymmetry that 
not only facilitates the fixation of recessive beneficial mutations, but also 
specifically promotes the evolution of male-advantageous alleles with antag-
onistic effects on female fitness (Rice 1984; Charlesworth et al. 1987). All 
male-expressed X-linked mutations are exposed to immediate selection in 
males, but if such mutations are recessive, they will be sheltered from selec-
tion in females until they rise to adequate frequencies to be exposed in 
homozygotes (and even then, they will be conditionally neutral if they are 
silent in females). Under this reasoning, mutations that are specifically ben-
eficial to male fitness are expected to have a higher probability of fixation 
if they reside on the X than on an autosome. The degree to which the fixa-
tion probability will be magnified will depend on the degree to which such 
mutations influence female fitness. However, even if such recessive muta-
tions have strong negative pleiotropic effects in homozygous females, they 
should still be capable of rising to high frequencies and should potentially 
still be vulnerable to fixation, especially if females are capable of selecting 
mates based on X-linked traits (Albert and Otto 2005). Under this reason-
ing, because autosomal genes are no more sheltered in females than in males, 
an enrichment of male-specific X-linked genes is always expected unless 
other factors are involved. Thus, the observed paucity of male-specific X-
linked genes in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis implicates a significant involve-
ment of something other than the hemizygous effect. 
One complicating factor with X-linked genes in animals is their frequent 
exposure to dosage compensation: a modification of allele-specific expres-
sion that approximately equalizes the total locus-specific expression in males 
and females. Might dosage compensation in some way alter the expecta-
tions of the preceding theory to make it more concordant with observations 

360 
CHAPTER 12 
on male-specific gene location? Two types of observations suggest that it 
does not. First, invoking dosage compensation does not help explain the 
demasculinization of the X chromosome in Drosophila and Caenorhabditis, as 
dosage compensation in these species operates to equalize the summed 
expression of both X chromosomes in females with that of the single X in 
males (Lucchesi 1998; Nusinow and Panning 2005), satisfying the assump-
tion that recessive mutations will be sheltered in heterozygous females. 
Second, although the enrichment of male-specific genes on mammalian 
X chromosomes is superficially in accord with the logic outlined above, 
the way in which the expression of X-linked genes is regulated in mam-
mals is inconsistent with the assumptions of the theory. In most mammals, 
dosage compensation is accomplished by the inactivation of a random X 
chromosome in each female cell (Lucchesi 1998; Nusinow and Panning 
2005). Thus, there is no masking of recessive X-linked alleles at dosage-
compensated loci at the cellular level in females, making it unclear whether 
the temporary sheltering of sexually antagonistic features can provide an 
explanation for the association of male-specific genes with the mammalian 
X chromosome. About 15% of the genes on the mammalian X are partially 
to entirely insensitive to dosage compensation in females (Carrel and 
Willard 2005), although it remains to be seen whether these genes are pecu-
liar to male/ female function. Although male-specific X-linked genes of pla-
cental mammals exllibit lligher rates of protein sequence evolution than 
genes on autosomes (Torgerson and Singh 2003; Wang and Zhang 2004; Lu 
and Wu 2005), future work will be necessary to ascertain whether thls is a 
consequence of adaptive evolution or reduced efficiency of selection against 
mildly detrimental mutations. 
Marsupial mammals may provide an ideal substrate for clarifying these 
matters, as in these species it is always the paternal X that is inactivated in 
females (Graves 1995). In this case, paternally derived X chromosomes are 
neuh"al in daughters and absent in SOllS, whereas maternally derived X chro-
mosomes will be selected for their full set of functions in daughters as well 
as in sons. That is, in marsupials all active X-linked genes are fully expressed, 
regardless of the sex, completely eliminating the complications of any mask-
ing effects of dosage compensation. 
As a possible explanation for the paucity of male-specific X-linked genes 
in invertebrates, we revisit the assumption of recessivity. X-linked genes 
spend only a thlrd of their time in males, whereas autosomal genes are 
equally distributed between the sexes. Thus, if male-beneficial mutations 
are not recessive but rather at least partially dominant, or if individuals 
are hlghly inbred (as in the case of Caenorhabditis), selection for such muta-
tions might be more effective if they reside on autosomes. This idea may 
have merit in that, contrary to the situation in mammals, average rates of 
protein sequence evolution of genes on the X and on autosomes are not sig-
nificantly different in Drosophila (Bartolome et al. 2005; Thornton et al. 2006). 
Such equality is inconsistent with the idea that advantageous mutations are 
t 
b
e
n 
n 
cJ
d 
P 
aJ

SEX CHROMOSOMES 
361 
typically recessive, which would promote higher rates of adaptive diver-
gence for X-linked genes. 
Finally, although the preceding arguments focus on aspects of gene 
expression in somatic cells, the degree to which expression of the X chro-
mosome is modified in the male and female germ lines may be a more cen-
tral determinant of the location of sex-specific genes (Wu and Xu 2003). In 
C. elegans, for example, the X chromosome appears to be inactivated in the 
male germ line during mitosis and early meiosis (Reinke et al. 2000; Fong 
et al. 2002), a process that is distinct from dosage compensation in female 
cells. Thus, in this species, there is essentially a complete relaxation of selec-
tion on the fW1ctions of X-linked genes in male gonadal tissue, leaving only 
functions at the level of the soma as potential male targets for selection on 
the X. Similarly, in mammals, despite the overall enrichment of the X with 
male-specific genes, there is a paucity of X-linked genes involved in late 
stages of spermatogenesis, in accordance with X inactivation in the male 
germ line at the onset of meiosis (Khil et al. 2004). 
In summary, with data bearing on all of the above X chromosome issues 
being derived from only three species, all of which are animals, it is prema-
ture to promote a general interpretation of the existing data in this area. How-
ever, it can be stated fairly confidently that, tmlike the Y, the X generally does 
not provide a sufficiently distinct environment with respect to the forces of 
mutation, recombination, and/ or random genetic drift to drive substantial 
changes in the architecture of individual genes. Rather, with its differential 
distribution between the sexes, the X provides a compelling substrate for 
potentially deciphering the roles that the degree of dominance and sexual 
antagonism play in the molecular evolution of individual gene products. 

Genomfart 
As we move into the next phase of evolutionary biology, we can be con-
fident of two things: the basic theoretical machinery for understandmg the 
evolutionary process is well established, and we will soon be effectively 
unlimited by the availability of mformation at the DNA level. The main 
question now is how to use this information to productively advance the 
development of a more mature science of evolution. What follows is a depar-
ture from the somewhat impersonal style of the previous chapters, in which 
an attempt was made to integrate the key findings of molecular biology and 
population genetics into a cohesive evolutionary genom.ics framework. First, 
I will give a very brief overview of the historical development of evolu-
tionary theory, as this helps clarify the roots of some of the controversies 
that still exist today. Second, I will comment on the current state of affairs 
in evolutionary biology, particularly the perception of sofhless in the field 
that has been encouraged by the propagation of evolutionary ideas by those 
with few intentions of being confined by the consh-aints of prior knowledge. 
Third, as considerable territory has been covered in prior chapters, I will 
summarize the central findings, place them in the context of prior conflicts, 
and highlight the major challenges that lie ahead_ 
To the extent that the ideas in this book have merit, there are two funda-
mental ways to move the field of evolutionary genomics forward. First, 
the overview presented in the preceding chapters provides only the seeds 
for a comprehensive understanding of genom.ic evolution. Substantial addi-
tional research, with more statistical rigor than was used on the previous 
pages, will be necessary to determine the full scope of the notion that non-
adaptive forces playa central role in the tailoring of genomic architecture. 
In any such efforts it will be essential to remember that today's products of 
evolution are remnants from the past, and that the current evolutionary 

364 
CHAPTER 13 
forces operating on a genomic segment may have nothing to do with those 
involved in its origin. Second, if nonadaptive factors have influenced the 
evolution of functionally important components of the genome, we must 
ask whether such processes have had cascading effects on evolution at 
higher levels of organization; that is, at the cellular and whole-organism lev-
els. Because evolution proceeds with the resources that it has in hand (i.e., 
via descent with modification), and because phenotypes are functions of 
genes with particular structural and functional attributes, such a possibil-
ity cannot be dismissed lightly. 
Some readers may be curious about the title of this chapter. Several years 
ago, following an international conference on bioinformatics where many 
of us pondered the potential meaning of the newly emerging genomic data, 
we were treated to an evening dinner on a ferry navigating through the 
Stockholm archipelago. Sitting at a table with Eugene Koonin, I happened 
to glance through the window, where, rising out of the sea, was a sign pro-
claiming "Genomfart./I At the time, this proclamation seemed a rather fit-
ting description of the day's activities, but genomfart is Swedish for "place 
of passage," or "the way forward./I At the close of this chapter, I will sug-
gest some ways in which knowledge about the evolution of gene and 
genomic architecture and the further development of population genetic 
theory might contribute to our understanding of the fundamental issues 
that concern most evolutionary biologists: the mechanisms that encourage 
versus constrain phenotypic evolution. 
The Origins of Modern Evolutionary Theory 
Since the 1859 publication of Darwin's major treatise, On the Origin of Species 
by Means of Natural Selection, evolutionary biology has undergone a suc-
cession of transformations. For nearly 60 years, the field wallowed in uncer-
tainty regarding mechanisms, even after Mendel's observations on segre-
gation and independent inheritance had become widely known (Provine 
1971; Stoltzfus 2006b). Around the turn of the twentieth century, the 
Mendelian school was convinced that the particulate nature of inheritance 
satisfactorily eliminated most of the lingering doubts about the mechanics 
of the evolutionary process, whereas the biometrics school argued just as 
vehemently that evolutionarily significant variation was a function of ill-
defined factors with very small effects and that traits with observable 
Mendelian features were mere oddities, irrelevant to evolution. 
A series of empirical observations from plant breeding began to raise 
doubts about some of the extreme views of the biometricians (reviewed in 
Lynch and Walsh 1998), but it was Fisher's landmark 1918 paper (drawing 
in part on earlier work by Pearson and Yule; see Hill 1984 for a review) that 
demolished the barriers between these two schools of thought. Here, Fisher 
formally demonstrated that the focal traits of the biometricians-continu-
ously distributed phenotypes associated with complex traits-are entirely 
consistent with Mendel's laws. At the age of 28, he had simultaneously 
r 
( 
v
r 
2
o
i1 
tl
b 
h 
U 
Sl
er
ac 
ui 
ill
laJ
se 
ur
ci,
de
wi
or 
of 
siC
un
oft
fiel
is t
rna
to (
de,
lOCi
ger
ces
ity 
rap

GENOMFART 
365 
removed the major barriers to our understanding of the sources of natural 
variation, clarified the distinction between genetic and environmental effects, 
laid the foundation for the development of a formal theory connecting the 
fields of genetics and evolution, and established the modern science of sta-
tistics. Although this paper is one of the most important articles written in 
the life sciences in the twentieth century, it is by no means an easy read, and 
remarkably few biologists are even aware of its existence. 
This early era of confusion in evolutionary biology might never have 
occurred had we known the molecular basis of genetic variation, but that 
would take many more years. Miescher first described a peculiar compo-
nent of pus (nuclein, later to be called D A) in 1871 (for a review, see Dahm 
2005), which a long series of studies eventually revealed to be the source 
of hereditary variation. But it was not until 1953 that Watson and Crick clar-
ified the physical and chemical nature of DNA, and even then, we had only 
the vaguest notion of the nature of the genetic material and the mechanisms 
by which it is mutationally modified. Nevertheless, in the brief 35 years 
between Fisher's paper and the elucidation of the structure of DNA, our 
understanding of the population genetic basis of evolutionary change made 
substantial advances. Although this progress involved a good deal of math-
ematical expertise, most of the theory was made possible by several well-
accepted genetic observations: the Mendelian nature of inheritance, the ubiq-
uity of recombination in sexual species, and the mutability of the (still 
undefined) gene. 
Early practical successes came in the field of quantitative genetics, which 
largely deals with complex, multiJocus traits. For example, Wright's (1934a,b) 
seminal work on threshold characters made significant contributions to our 
understanding of major genetic disorders, many of which appear superfi-
cially to have a non-Mendelian basis. Wright elegantly showed that the sud-
den appearance and disappearance of major phenotypes is fully consistent 
with expectations for a dichotomous h"ait with an underlying biochemical 
or cellular determinant having a multilocus basis. Like Fisher's paper, most 
of Wright's contributions are invisible to the vast majority of biologists out-
side of evolutionary biology, even to those whose careers are devoted to 
understanding the disparity between major quantitative traits in related taxa. 
Virtually all of science is derivative: new ideas almost always grow out 
of old concepts, some prior interpretations are shown to be wrong, and the 
field moves on. What is remarkable about the field of population genetics 
is that nearly all of the mathematical foundations developed prior to the 
molecular era not only still stand today, but are making major contributions 
to our understanding of the molecular basis of evolutionary change, to the 
development of rational programs in plant and animal breeding, and to the 
localization and characterization of the genetic defects underlying human 
genetic disorders. Shortly after the genetic code was cracked, a rapid suc-
cession of technological breakthroughs led to major advances in our abil-
ity to reveal variation at the molecular level: protein sequencing in the 1950s, 
rapid population-level surveys of protein variants in the 1960s, ribosomal 

366 
CHAPTER 1 3 
RNA sequencing in the 1970s, gene sequencing at the D A level in the 1980s, 
and whole-genome sequencing in the 1990s. Each of these brief episodes 
brought the need for new methods of data analysis and interpretation, and 
in each case the fundamental framework for such study was drawn largely 
from preexisting population genetic machinery. Many embellishments have 
been added to the theory, and views have changed on the relative power 
of alternative evolutionary forces, but no keystone principle of population 
genetics has been overturned by an observation in molecular, cellular, or 
developmental biology. Thus, although we do not yet fully understand the 
connections between variation at the molecular and phenotypic levels, we 
can be confident that the basic theoretical machinery for understanding the 
evolutionary process is in place. 
Evolution as a Science in the 
Post-Darwinian World 
Despite the tremendous theoretical and physical resources now available, 
the field of evolutionary biology continues to be widely perceived as a soft 
science. Here I am referring not to the problems associated with those push-
ing the view that life was created by an intelligent designer, but to a more 
significant internal issue: a subset of academics who consider themselves 
strong advocates of evolution but who see no compelling reason to probe 
the substantial knowledge base of the field. Although this is a heavy charge, 
it is easy to document. For example, in his 2001 preSidential address to the 
Society for the Study of Evolution, Nick Barton presented a survey that 
demonstrated that about half of the recent literature devoted to evolution-
ary issues is far removed from mainstream evolutionary biology. 
With the possible exception of behavior, evolutionary biology is treated 
unlike any other science. Philosophers, sociologists, and ethicists expound 
on the central role of evolutionary theory in understanding our place in the 
world. Physicists excited about biocomplexity and computer scientists 
enamored with genetic algorithms promise a bold new understanding of 
evolution, and similar claims are made in the emerging field of evolution-
ary psychology (and its derivatives in political science, economics, and even 
the humanities). Numerous popularizers of evolution, some with careers 
focused on defending the teaching of evolution in public schools, are 
entirely satisfied that a blind adherence to the Darwinian concept of natu-
ral selection is a license for such activities. A commonality among all of 
these groups is the near-absence of an appreciation of the most fundamental 
principles of evolution. Unfortunately, this list extends deep within the life 
sciences. 
Consider the steady stream of recent books by authors striving to define 
a new field called evolutionary developmental biology (e.g., Arthur 1997; 
Gerhart and Kirschner 1997; Davidson 2001, 2006; Carroll et al. 2001; West-
Eberhard 2003; Carro1l2005a; Kirschner and Gerhart 2005). The plots of all 
~ 
I 
1
s
c
e
D
f 
e 
il
il

GENOMFART 
367 
these books are similar: first, it is claimed that observations from develop-
mental biology demonstrate major inadequacies in current evolutionary the-
ory, and then a new view of evolution that eliminates many of the central 
shortcomings of the field is promised. Developmental biologists are correct 
in pointing out that evolutionary theory has not yet specifically connected 
genotypes to phenotypes in a molecular / cell biological sense. However, 
extraordinary claims call for extraordinary evidence, and none of these trea-
tises provides any formal examples of the fundamental inability of evolu-
tionary theory to explain patterns of morphological diversity. Those who 
argue that microevolutionary theory has made no contributions to our 
understanding of the evolution of form may wish to consult the substantial 
body of quantitative genetic literature on multivariate evolution. Such work 
is by no means fully satisfactory, as it is couched in terms of statistics (vari-
ances and covariances) rather than the molecular features of individual 
genes, but a more precise evolutionary framework for linking genes and 
morphology will not be possible until a critical mass of generalities on the 
matter has emerged at the molecular, cellular, and developmental levels. 
For the vast majority of biologists, evolution is nothing more than natu-
ral selection. This view reduces the study of evolution to the simple docu-
mentation of differences between species, proclamation of a belief in Dar-
win, and concoction of a superficially reasonable tale of adaptive divergence 
(see Table 13.1 for a sampling of such ideas from the genomic biology liter-
ature). A common stance in cellular and developmental biology is that the 
elucidation of differences in molecular genetic pathways between two 
species (usually very distant species) completes the evolutionary story. No 
need to dig any deeper-because natural selection surely produced the end 
products, the population genetic details do not matter. ill. individual cases, 
this type of informal thinking may do little harm, but in the long run it 
undermines the very scientific basis of evolutionary biology. 
There are two ftmdamental issues here. First, the notion that interspecific 
differences at the molecular level reveal the mechanism of evolution ignores 
the fundamental distinction between the outcome ot evolution and the 
events that lead to such changes. For example, although most animal devel-
opmental biologists argue that it was shocking to discover that the devel-
opment of all animals is based on modifications of the same sets of ancient 
genes, many evolutionary biologists regard this view with some surprise. 
It is, of course, easy to criticize based on 20/20 hindsight, but we have 
known for decades that all eukaryotes share most of the same genes for tran-
scription, translation, replication, nutrient uptake, core metabolism, 
cytoskeletal structure, and so forth. Why would we expect anything differ-
ent for development? Although knowing that Hox genes playa central role 
in the development of all animals provides insight into the genetic scaffold 
from which body plans are built, it does not advance our knowledge of the 
evolutionary process much beyond knowing that all vertebrates share a her-
itage of calcified skeletons. It need not even tell us that such genes were 
involved in the initial stages of differentiation (Alonso and Wilkins 2005). 

368 
CHAPTER 1 3 
TABLE 13.1 A sampling of unsubstantiated claims from molecular, cellular, 
and developmental biology regarding adaptive evolution, with 
some specific examples from genomics 
Complexity: The notion that all additional layers of complexity at the genomic, molecular, sub-
cellular, cellular, and developmental levels are entirely the products of adaptive processes. 
Genome size is modulated so as to optimize cell size and cell division rates. 
Duplicated genes are always actively preserved by positive selection for new functions. 
Genes encode upstream open reading frames in their 5' untranslated regions to slow down 
the rate of transcription. 
The incorporation of nonoptimal co dons into genes serves as a mechanism for modulating 
the translation rate. 
Genes are alternatively spliced to yield aberrant messenger RNAs so as to reduce the level of 
gene expression via the nonsense-mediated decay pathway. 
Modularity: The notion that the evolution of independently operating regulatory elements and 
networks of interacting genes owe their origins to the direct effects of natural selection. 
Gene network modules serve as "plug-ins" that enable saltatory evolution. 
Operons represent selfish groups of genes whose coordinated expression facilitates hori-
zontal transfer. 
Robustness: The notion that genomes are constructed so as to minimize the damage resulting 
from mutation and/ or physiological perturbations. 
Duplicate genes serve as a buffer for inactivated paralogs. 
Biased gene conversion toward G+C composition has evolved to offset mutation pressure 
toward A+ T content. 
G+C-rich vertebrate isochores have evolved to stabilize double-stranded DNA. 
Editing of messenger RNAs serves as a mutational buffer. 
Evolvability: The notion that the genetic architecture and cellular / developmental machinery 
of a species evolves so as to magnify the ability to evolve. 
lntrons exist to enhance the production of new genes by ex on shuffling. 
Mobile elements are activated during times of stress to generate beneficial mutations. 
Microsatellites and mononucleotide runs are maintained to enhance levels of mutability. 
Prions and heat-shock proteins serve as cellular mechanisms for revealing potentially 
adaptive phenotypes during times of stress. 
Note: Most of these topics have been touched on in earlier chapters. Although an adaptive basis for some of 
these features may eventually be shown to exist, simple nonadaptive mechanisms can already explain the 
origins of many such patterns. 
A vast chasm of stepwise (and partially overlapping) changes may separate 
today's products of evolution, and wlderstanding those steps is what dis-
tinguishes evolutionary biology from comparative biology. 
Second, the uncritical acceptance of natural selection as an explanatory 
force for all aspects of biodiversity (without any direct evidence) is not much 
different than invoking an intelligent designer (without any direct evidence). 

GEN OM FART 
369 
True, we have actually seen natural selection in action in a number of well-
documented cases of phenotypic evolution (Endler 1986; Kingsolver et aJ. 
2001), but it is a leap to assume that selection accounts for all evolutionary 
change, particularly at the molecular and cellular levels. The blind worship 
of natural selection is not evolutionary biology. It is arguably not even sci-
ence. Natural selection is just one of several evolutionary mechanisms, and 
the failure to realize this is probably the most significant impediment to a 
fruitful integration of evolutionary theory with molecular, cellular, and 
developmental biology. 
It should be emphasized here that the sins of panselectionism are by no 
means restricted to developmental biology, but simply follow the tradition 
embraced by many areas of evolutionary biology itself, including paleon-
tology and evolutionary ecology (as cogently articulated by Gould and 
Lewontin 1979). The vast majority of evolutionary biologists studying mor-
phological, physiological, and / or behavioral traits almost always interpret 
their results in terms of adaptive mechanisms, and they are so convinced of 
the validity of this approach that virtually no attention is given to the null 
hypothesis of neutral evolution, despite the availability of methods to do so 
(Lande 1976; Lynch and Hill 1986; Lynch 1994). For example, in a substan-
tial series of books addressed to the general public, Dawkins (e.g., 1976, 1986, 
1996,2004) has deftly explained a bewildering array of observations in terms 
of hypothetical selection scenarios. Dawkins's effort to spread the gospel of 
the awesome power of natural selection has been quite successful, but it has 
come at the expense of reference to any other mechanisms, and because 
more people have probably read Dawkins than Darwin, his words have in 
some ways been profoundly misleading. To his credit, Gould, who is also 
widely read by the general public, frequently railed against adaptive sto-
rytelling, but it can be difficult to understand what alternative mechanisms 
of evolution Gould had in mind. 
What would Darwin think of this? Presumably, he would be amazed at 
how much progress has been made in understanding the genetic basis of 
evolution, as well as satisfied to see that natural selection has been rigor-
ously validated as a major evolutionary force. But Darwin brought a lot 
more to the table than natural selection. His greatest contribution was in the 
promotion of integrative thinking in biology-not the integrative biology 
sometimes incorporated in the labels of academic departments that exclude 
entire areas of molecular and cell biology, but a concerted effort to solve 
problems by bringing together observations from all relevan.t areas. Darwin 
did not view all of evolution as being a product of natural selection, and 
even had a crude idea of random genetic drift: "Variations neither useful 
nor injurious would not be affected by natural selection, and would be left 
either a fluctuating element, as perhaps we see in certain polymorphic 
species, or would ultimately become fixed, owing to the nature of the organ-
ism and the nature of the conditions" (1859). 
There is, of course, a substantial difference between the kind of popu-
lar evolutionary literature produced by Dawkins and Gould and the more 

370 
CHAPTER 1 3 
technical knowledge base that has grown from the past century of theo-
retical and empirical study of the mechanisms of evolution, but this dis-
tinction is often missed by nonevolutionary biologists. With interest in evo-
lution now emerging among scientists working at all levels of biological 
organization, it is time to stop the trivialization of the field of evolutionary 
biology. A strong belief in cells does not make one a cell biologist, and a 
strong belief in Darwin's principle of natural selection is not a sufficient 
condition for understanding evolution. The standards for research in evo-
lutionary biology should be set no lower than those in any other area of 
scientific inquiry. 
Nothing in Evolution Makes Sense Except 
in the Light of Population Genetics 
In a few decades, we have gone from a state of no molecular data at all to 
one in which hundreds of genomes are available to the general public, and 
in the very near future, every moderately well-funded laboratory will be 
capable of acquiring multiple whole-genome sequences overnight. It would 
be easy to sit back and assume that the goals of evolutionary biology will 
soon be met. However, in some sense we are at a new beginning. Although 
cataloguing the products of evolution is a tangible goal, understanding how 
these endpoints were reached is quite another matter. 
Evolution is a population genetic process governed by four fundamen-
tal forces, which jointly dictate the relative abilities of genotypic variants 
to expand throughout a species. Darwin articulated a clear but informal 
description of one of those forces, selection (including natural and sexual 
selection), whose central role in the evolution of complex phenotypic traits 
is universaIJy accepted, and for which an elaborate formal theory in terms 
of change in genotypic frequencies now exists (Crow and Kimura 1970; 
Burger 2000). The remaining three evolutionary forces, however, are non-
adaptive in the sense that they are not a function of the fitness properties 
of individuals: mutation (broadly including insertions, deletions, and dupli-
cations) is the fundamental source of variation on which natural selection 
acts; recombination (including crossing-over and gene conversion) assorts 
variation within and among chromosomes; and random genetic drift 
ensures that gene frequencies will deviate a bit from generation to genera-
tion independently of other forces. Given the century of theoretical and 
empirical work devoted to the study of evolution, the only logical conclu-
sion is that these four broad classes of mechanisms are, in fact, the only fun-
damental forces of evolution. Their relative intensity, directionality, and vari-
ation over time define the way in which evolution proceeds in a particular 
context. 
As emphasized in previous chapters, an understanding of molecular biol-
ogy combined with studies of molecular variation within species yields rea-
sonably reliable estimates of the relative strengths of the forces of evolution 

GENOMFART 
371 
operating at the genomic level, and such work leaves little doubt that all 
four major forces are of central significance. Not only is it impossible to 
understand the diversification of genomes purely in terms of natural selec-
tion, but many aspects of genomic evolution can only be understood by 
invoking a negligible level of adaptive involvement. This conclusion raises 
significant technical challenges because all three nonadaptive forces of evo-
lution-mutation, recombination, and random genetic drift-are stochastic 
in nature and can generally only be understood in probabilistic terms. It is 
well known that most biologists abhor all things mathematical, but the quan-
titative details really do matter in evolutionary biology. 
Some have attempted to marginalize the contributions of population 
genetics to our understanding of evolution by pointing to the "beanbag" 
genetics debate that occurred in the middle of the twentieth century (for a 
historical overview, see Felsenstein 1975). Such criticism is a product of a 
misunderstanding, however, as the tensions during this period were not 
about the population genetic nature of tbe evolutionary process, but about 
the need to incorporate interaction (epistatic) effects into the existing frame-
work, something that population geneticists have invested heavily in over 
the past few decades (e.g., Wolf et al. 2000; Carter et al. 2005). Neverthe-
Ie s, numerous biologists, particularly in the area of development, have 
expressed reservations about the entire population genetic enterprise. Con-
sider this quote from Carroll (2005a): "Since the Modern Synthesis, most 
expositions of the evolutionary process have focused on microevolutionary 
mechanisms. Millions of biology students have been taught the view (from 
population genetics) that 'evolution is change in gene frequencies.' Isn't that 
an inspiring theme? This view forces the explanation towards mathematics 
and abstract descriptions of genes, and away from butterflies and zebras . 
... The evolution of form is the main drama of life's story, both as found in 
the fossil record and in the diversity of living species. So, let's teach that 
story. Instead of 'change in gene frequencies,' let's try 'evolution of form is 
change in development."' Many similar statements could be quoted from 
other authors. 
Even ignoring the fact that the vast majority of species are unicellular, 
differentiated mainly by metabolic rather than developmental features, this 
type of statement paints an inaccurate portrait of the current field of evo-
lutionary biology. Evolution is much more than a storytelling exercise, and 
the goal of population genetics is not to be inspiring, but to be explanatory. 
From the standpoint of its phenotypic products, evolution is indeed more 
than a change in gene frequencies: organisms are far more than the sum of 
their parts, just as genes are more than the sum of their functional compo-
nents. But if we are concerned with the process of evolutionary change, then 
evolution is indeed a change in gene frequencies (or more accurately, a 
change in genotype frequencies). Population genetics provides an essen-
tial framework for understanding how such changes come about, aJ.1d more 
importantly, grounds us in reality by clarifying the pathways that are open 
or closed to evolutionary exploitation in various contexts. As Carroll (2005a) 

372 
CHAPTER 13 
states in a somewhat different context, "Simplification may indeed be nec-
essary for news articles, but it can distort the more complex and subtle real-
ities of evolutionary patterns and mechanisms." 
Population geneticists do not claim to have solved every problem in evo-
lution-far from it. But as far as we know, the basic theoretical machinery 
to do so is largely in place. Population geneticists do not aspire to exclu-
sive ownership of the field of evolutionary biology. Indeed, one of the cen-
tral points of the preceding chapters is that a full understanding of the evo-
lutionary process will be impossible without substantial input from 
molecular, cellular, and developmental biologists. However, such integra-
tion needs to be a two-way street. Evolutionary biologists have thought quite 
a lot about evolution, and individuals from outside the field who claim to 
have solved a major evolutionary enigma might want to consider why their 
ideas have not previously come to the forefront. Have such ideas been 
ignored, or have they faded into the background because their feasibility 
is known to be marginal? The population genetic basis of evolutionary 
change is now so well established that those who claim its inadequacy 
should certainly bear the burden of explanation. 
The Passive Emergence of Genomic 
Complexity by Nonadaptive Processes 
Throughout this book, we have adhered to the principle of uniformitarian-
ism, the well-accepted view that the natmal forces that operate today also 
did so in the past (at least back to the point at which cells, and therefore indi-
viduals, had evolved). Regardless of the structural and metabolic features 
of cells, the fom major forces of evolution apply to all organisms, including 
those that have gone extinct. No genome can replicate without error, and 
mutation creates genetic variation in fitness, which by definition ensmes 
the operation of selection, even in a constant environment. All organisms, 
even prokaryotes, also experience some recombination. Finally, all popula-
tions are finite in size and therefore subject to chance fluctuation in geno-
type frequencies, the magnitude of which depends on the absolute popu-
lation size, the breeding system, and the chromosomal features of the 
genome. 
Even among those who acknowledge the joint operation of the four major 
forces in all contexts, statements are commonly made that natmal selec-
tion is the only guiding force of evolution, with mutation creating variation 
but never controlling its ultimate direction (for a review, see Stoltzfus 2006b). 
This view, especially cherished by those studying continuously distributed 
(e.g., morphological, life history, and physiological) traits, derives from two 
types of arguments. First, artificial selection experiments with diverse organ-
isms are generally capable of generating changes in mean phenotypes well 
beyond anything seen in the base population in just a few dozen genera-
tions (Falconer and Mackay 1996). Such observations inspired the devel-
t
\ 
r 
b
f1
a
( E
is
g.

GENOMFART 
373 
opment of the infinitesimal model, which assumes that standing genetic 
variation reflects a balance between opposing forces of selection and muta-
tion distributed over an effectively infinite number of loci, each with minus-
cule effects (Kimura 1965; Lande 1975; Bulmer 1980). Under one extreme 
form of this model, directional selection changes the mean phenotype with-
out altering the genetic variance, so variation is always available. Second, 
much of the earliest work in theoretical population genetics downplayed 
the role of mutation in a different way. In particular, Fisher (1930) and Hal-
dane (1932) argued that mutation operating in a direction contrary to selec-
tion could never overcome the force of selection. 
Neither of these arguments for a marginal role of mutation in directional 
evolution represents a situation in which the theory was structurally incor-
rect. Rather, both are simply based on questionable a priori assumptions. 
The infinitesimal model assumes a symmetrical distribution of mutational 
effects independent of the prior state; the Fisher-Haldane argument assumes 
that mutation is always a weak force relative to selection; and both ignore 
the complications that arise in finite populations. In the context of genomic 
evolution, we now know that the idea that mutation is a nonctirectional force 
is substantially off the mark. Nucleotide composition is influenced consid-
erably by biases in mutation and gene conversion, and many other aspects 
of genomic architecture, including mobile element proliferation, arise via 
internal drivelike mechanisms. With some vestiges tracing back to Darwin 
(1859, 1866) and Morgan (1925), the notion that internal mutation pressures 
can be a directional force in evolution is not new (Dover 1982; Nei 1987, 2005; 
Cavalier-Smith 1997) and has recently been revisited in a more formal way 
by Yampolsky and Stoltzfus (2001) and Stoltzfus (2006a). But it is fair to say 
that most biologists view evolution as a process dominated by ecological 
forces external to the organism. 
Given the centrality of this issue, the conditions that must be fulfilled if 
mutation is to impose a directional bias on evolution are worth reiterating. 
Suppose there are two alternative alleles at a locus, with the mutation rate 
of a -7 A being m times that of A -7 a, but with type A having a selective 
advantage s over type a. Letting the effective number of genes per locus be 
Ng, the fixation probability of a mutation to type A is eS times that for a muta-
tion to type a, where S = 2Ngs (see Box 6.2). Thus, because the rate of tran-
sition from one allelic type to another is equal to the product of the muta-
tion rate and the fixation rate, the ratio of probabilities of being in state A 
versus state a is simply meso Because it jointly incorporates the effects of 
mutation, selection, and random genetic drift (even the local effects of recom-
bination are contained within Ng), this simple expression makes a power-
ful statement. 
If there is no mutational bias (111 = 1) and no selection (S = 0), both states 
are equally probable (Figure 13.1). However, if the force of selection is weak 
(es "" I), because either the absolute value of s or the effective population size 
is small (Ng  
11 / 5 I), the pattern of genomic evolution will be strongly 
governed by mutational bias (m). Only if S is much greater than one (the 

374 
CHAPTER 13 
1.0 r-----------:::====~=~~ 
tlJ 0.8 
aJ 
:::l 
'" 
<Il 
:::l o 
tlJ 
~ 0.6 
~ 
> 
"0 
'" 
'"'" o 
,e. 0.4 
:;l 
.n 
'" 
.n o 
'"' 
P... 0.2 
0.1 
2NgB = 
0.0 
0.1 
1.0 
3.0 
--
00 
10 
Relative mutation rate towards advantageous allele (/11) 
100 
Figure 13.1 The long-term probability that an allele residing at a biallelic locus will 
be of the selectively advantageous type, given a selective advantage 5, an effective 
number of gene copies at the locus in the population of Ng, and a mutation rate to the 
beneficial allele m times that in the reverse direction. The curved lines plot the function 
mesl(l + mes), as described in the text. The situation in which 5 = 2Ngs = 0.0 denotes 
neutrality, which leads to an expected frequency of the advantageous allele equal to 
ml(l + m). The situation in which 2Ngs = 00 denotes an effectively infinite population 
size, such that random genetic drift is a negligible force, and the expected allele fre-
quency is very close to 1.0. When 2Ngs 1.0 (effective neutrality), allelic states closely 
resemble the expectations under mutation pressure alone. 
worldview of Fisher and Haldane) will the population be in state A with a 
probability approaching 1.0. Moreover, these conclusions hold regardless 
of the absolute power of mutation relative to selection. Numerous results 
presented in previous chapters indicate that for all forms of mutation, 
whether advantageous or deleterious, the condition N g 11/ s I is fre-
quently met. That is, the conditions on this planet are such that effective 
population sizes are often too small to prevent internal mutation pressures 
from driving patterns of genomic evolution. 
Thus, at least at the genomic level, there can no longer be any doubt that 
directional aspects of evolution are governed by all four major forces. Fur-
thermore, the data from comparative genomics summarized in the preced-
ing chapters support the more specific contention that many of the basic 
embellishments of the eukaryotic genome originated by nonadaptive 
processes operating contrary to the expected direction of natural selection. 
r 
i 
e
](
o
II

GENOMFART 
375 
The central conclusions, some of which constitute a rather substantial depar-
ture from many of the traditional beliefs in evolutionary biology, and oth-
ers a reinterpretation of those beliefs, can be summarized as follows: 
 The same population genetic processes govern patterns of evolution in 
prokaryotes and eukaryotes, although differences in the relative power 
of various nonadaptive forces result in fundamentally different evolu-
tionary trajectories at the genomic level. 
 Internal mutation pressure plays a central role in genomic evolution, often 
completely overwhelming the ~ternal forces of natural selection and driv-
ing change in a directional man.ner. 
 Although genetic drift is a random process, population size, by dictating 
the efficiency of selection, modulates the evolution of genomic complex-
ity by nonadaptive mechanisms, inhibiting certain kinds of evolutionary 
change and encouraging others. 
 Because each additional layer of gene structural complexity increases the 
mutation rate to defective alleles, mutation operates as a weak selective 
force, serving as a barrier to the emergence of gene and genomic com-
plexity in populations of sufficiently large size. 
 By enhancing the permissiveness of the population genetic environment 
for the passive emergence of gene architectural complexity, the non-
adaptive force of random genetic drift sets the stage for future paths of 
adaptive evolution in novel ways that would not otherwise be possible. 
Although this broad set of claims may appear to be overly grandiose, 
inviting the same sort of criticism that I have launched in the preceding para-
graphs, mutation and random genetic drift are uruversal evolutionary forces 
(even more uruversal than natural selection), applying to all organisms and 
all chromosomal regions. Thus, provided that the power of one or both of 
these forces is often high relative to that of natural selection operating at the 
genomic level, as the data suggest, it should not be too surprising that a 
wide range of heretofore disconnected patterns in genomic evolution are 
potentially encompassed by a single theoretical framework. 
If the explanatory power of this theory is judged to be overly simplistic, 
it should be relatively easy to demonstrate that the aspects of genomic evo-
lution outlined in Table 13.2 cannot be the products of nonadaptive forces. 
Simply claiming that natural selection is all-powerful will not do, for under 
that worldview, natural selection can explain anything, and therefore 
explains nothing. If a more specific adaptive counterargument is to be for-
mally defensible, then simpler nonadaptive models must be shown to be 
inadequate, and to accomplish that, something must be known about the 
expected pattern of evolution ill the absence of selection. If nothing else, the 
ideas presented above serve as a null hypothesis about the expected pattern 
of genomic evolution in the absence of selection. 
In further pursuing these ideas, care must be taken to avoid descendirlg 
into a world of nonadaptive storytelling. For example, as we learn more 

376 
CHAPTER 13 
TABLE 13.2 Aspects of gene and genomic architecture that appear to be 
explainable only after accounting for nonadaptive evolutionary 
forces 
Transition from the RNA world to the DNA world 
Genomic streamlining in microbial species 
Nucleotide composition variation within and among genomes: A/T composition, strand 
asymmetry, isochores, synonymous codon usage 
Centromere expansion in multicellular lineages 
Differential proliferation of mobile elements in unicellular versus multicellular species 
Gene number: preservation of duplicate genes by degenerative mutations 
(subfunctionalization) 
Origin of the spliceosome by subfunctionalization and proliferation of introns in lineages of 
multicellular species 
Expansion of UTRs (untranslated regions) of the messenger RNAs of eukaryotes 
Origin of modular regulatory regions in eukaryotic genes 
Demise of operons in eukaryotes 
Variation in organelle genomic architecture: lean in animals, bloated in land plants 
Messenger RNA editing in plant organelle genomes 
Restriction of sex chromosomes to multicellular lineages 
about the physical processes of genomic mutability (e.g., the rates and dis-
tribution of nucleotide substitutions, gene duplications, transpositions, and 
other forms of insertion and deletion), it may be found that the null mod-
els presented above are inadequate in some respects. But that will not alter 
the basic challenge. If evolutionary genomics is to be more than a hand-wav-
ing exercise, it is not so important that the ideas herein withstand the test 
of time, so long as they can be formally shown to be false in a hypothesis-
testing framework. 
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that the views presented above bear on 
the long-standing debate in evolutionary biology regarding the predictability 
of evolutionary trajectories. Because of the vagaries of the external envi-
ronment and the stochastic nature of mutation, recombination, and genetic 
drift, it is generally believed that evolution can never be a predictive sci-
ence, any more than meteorology will ever be able to predict the weather 
weeks in advance. Nevertheless, despite our inability to forecast the precise 
changes that natural selection will elicit at the molecular or phenotypic lev-
els, it now seems clear that the nonadaptive forces of random genetic drift 
and mutation do leave strong and consistent signatures at the genomic level 
in independent phylogenetic lineages, regardless of the exact nature of exter-
nal ecological factors. One of the most dramatic examples of such parallel 
evolutionary patterns concerns the nuclear genomes of animals and land 
plants. Although many lineage-specific peculiarities exist at the genomic 
( 
t 

F
a
ft 
tl
rr
C
ce
ot
da
of 
SOl
eu]
ad1
ity;

GENOMFART 
377 
level (e.g., scrambled genes and dual nuclei in ciliates, massive mitochon-
drial mRNA editing in trypanosomes), changes in the mutation rate (u) 
and/ or the effective population size (N g) (or more precisely, the product 
Ngu, the ratio of the power of mutation to that of drift) generally leave pre-
dictable footprints at the level of gene and genomic architecture when 
viewed in the context of known molecular biological constraints. 
This being said, it must be emphasized that genomic evolution operates 
on very long time scales (on the order of the reciprocal of the mutation rate). 
In contrast, estimates of Ngu derived from silent-site polymorphism data 
(lfs; see Chapter 4) have short-term applicability (reflecting events over just 
the past 2N ~ generations) and can suffer from considerable statistical inac-
curacies and biases, al1 of which reduces their utility as indicators of the con-
ditions under which particular genomic architectures have evolved. This 
problem represents a fundamental limitation on our ability to precisely 
define the population genetic conditions that have driven the evolution of 
genomic complexity versus simplicity. Because no method exists for the esti-
mation of longer-term average Ngu, to minimize the impact of stochastic 
species-specific events, most of the preceding analyses have relied on line-
age-wide average estimates of lfs to approximate the long-term population 
genetic environment for major lineages. 
Do the Roots of Organismal Complexity Also 
Reside in Nonadaptive Processes? 
Some of the deepest mysteries in evolutionary biology concern the mecha-
nisms that gave rise to the transitions between unicellular and multicellular 
species. Multicellularity is widely viewed as a unique attribute of eukary-
otes, somehow made possible by the origin of a more complex cellular archi-
tecture and, without question, with the assistance of natural selection. How-
ever, it is difficult to defend this assertion in any formal way. One central 
problem is that only two lineages of complex multicellular organisms exist: 
animals and vascular plants. True, both are eukaryotic, and one might add 
fungi to the list, although the number of fungal cell types is not large and 
there is some question as to whether multicellularity was ancestral to the 
major phylogenetic group containing animals, fungi, and slime molds (see 
Chapter 1). In any event, the probability that two or three origins of multi-
cellularity simply arose by chance within eukaryotes as opposed to prokary-
otes is somewhere on the order of 1/ 8 to 1/ 4, well below the general stan-
dards of statistical validity. Of course, many other eukaryotes are capable 
of producing a few different cell types, but the same is true of prokaryotes, 
some species of which produce radically different cell morphologies. 
Nevertheless, King (2004) states that "this historical predisposition of 
eukaryotes to the unicellular lifestyle begs the question of what selective 
advantages might have been conferred by the transition to multicellular-
ity;" and Jacob (1977) argues that "it is natural selection that gives direction 

378 
CHAPTER 13 
to changes, orients chance, and slowly, progressively produces more com-
plex structures, new organs, and new species." The vast majority of biolo-
gists almost certainly agree with such statements. Where, then, is the direct 
supportive evidence for the assumption that complexity is entirely rooted 
in adaptive processes? No existing observations support such a claim, and 
given the massive global dominance of unicellular species over multicellu-
lar eukaryotes, in terms of both species richness and numbers of individu-
als, if there is an advantage of organismal complexity, one can only marvel 
at the inability of natural selection to promote it. As noted in Chapter 4, mul-
ticellular species experience reduced population sizes and reduced recom-
bination rates, both of which diminish the efficiency of selection, thereby 
encouraging the accumulation of hazardous extragenic DNA. It may be no 
coincidence that multicellular species also have substantially higher extinc-
tion rates than unicellular species (Raup 1978; Stanley 1985). 
Although some aspects of the roots of the cellular interactions that con-
stitute development must reside in the resolution of adaptive conflicts 
between the advantages of cell-cell cooperation and the individual benefits 
of going it alone (e.g., Maynard Smith and Szathmary 1995; Michod 1999; 
Michod and Roze 2001), it need not follow that natural selection is a suffi-
cient force for the exit from the unicellular world. The concept of a "great 
chain of being," with all lineages gradually evolving toward some advanced 
grade, has long been abandoned, and earlier chapters have provided numer-
ous examples of simplification at the genomic level, the case of the yeast S. 
cerevisiae being particularly well documented. Many developmental genes 
previously thought to have originated in the vertebrate lineage, owing to 
their absence in arthropods and nematodes, are now known to be present 
in basal lineages of animals lacking mesoderm (the cnidarians) and hence 
must have been lost from triploblastic lineages (Technau et al. 2005). Numer-
ous examples of morphological simplifica tion exist in animals, such as limb 
loss in various tetrapods, coelom loss in nematodes (assuming the validity 
of the Ecdysozoa grouping; see Chapter I), and mouth and anus loss in 
hydrothermal vent worms. A plausible, albeit controversial, argument has 
even been made that prokaryotic cell architecture is a simplified deriva-
tive of that of eukaryotes (Kurland et al. 2006). One could argue that mul-
ticellularity arises after a species evolves new proteins that enable cells to 
stick together (Kirschner and Gerhart 2005), but large numbers of prokary-
otes are capable of that, and one could just as easily argue that multicellu-
larity arises when a unicellular species loses a reliable mechanism of cell 
separation. 
Is there any justification for thinking that nonadaptive processes could 
have played a role in the evolution of something as intricate as cell archi-
tectural or developmental features? Although there is no need to abandon 
the idea that many of the external morphological or behavioral manifesta-
tions of cellular complexity in today's organisms are adaptive, under-
standing the roots of the hallmarks of multicellularity (e.g., multiple cell 
types, complex patterns of gene expression, and mechanisms of cell sig-

GENOMFART 
379 
naling) requires knowledge of the processes that facilitate the prior estab-
lishment of the genomic material that makes their evolution possible. The 
challenge here is that although numerous embellishments of eukaryotic 
genes are exploited in functionally adaptive ways in today's multicellular 
species, most such modifications are mutationally disadvantageous, and 
there is no evidence that they were of immediate adaptive value to the first 
unicellular species to harbor them. There are two broad mechanisms by 
which nonadaptive evolution at the genomic level might precipitate a cas-
cade of events at higher levels of organization, and in both cases, the salient 
point is that certain types of cellular / developmental architechues are more 
likely to emerge evolutionarily in some population genetic environments 
than in others, independent of external selection pressures. 
First, intrinsically deleterious genome-level changes, such as those result-
ing from intron and mobile element proliferation, may impose selection 
pressure for intracellular defense mechanisms. Remarkably little thought 
has been given to the evolution of cellular architecture except in the context 
of hypothetical external selective factors (e.g., Cavalier-Smith 2006a). How-
ever, it has been argued that the origin of spliceosomal introns, by impos-
ing a need to process mRNAs prior to their exposure to ribosomes, provided 
the evolutionary pressure leading to the origin of the nuclear membrane 
(Martin and Koonin 2006; Lopez-Garcia and Moreira 2006), and Koonin 
(2006) has gone further in suggesting that the nonsense-mediated decay 
(NMD; see Chapter 9) and ubiquitin signaling pathways evolved as down-
stream mechanisms for minimizing the accumulation of aberrant transcripts 
and proteins resulting from splicing errors. In principle, this line of think-
ing could be taken in a number of additional directions. For example, the 
assembly of the spliceosomal subunits occurs in the Cajal body, a subnu-
clear organelle (Stanlk and Neugebauer 2006), and aberrant transcripts 
flagged by the NMD pathway are degraded in cytoplasmic P bodies (Sheth 
and Parker 2006). Nevertheless, resolving matters of causality is not so 
straight-forward here. All three hypothetical lines of defense against intron-
associated problems appear to be distributed throughout the entire eukary-
otic domain and hence were almost certainly present in the stem eukaryote. 
Thus, the possibility exists that the colonization of nuclear genes by introns 
followed the origin of permissive cellular feahues, rather than the other way 
around, although in either case, the idea that internal constraints played a 
role in cellular evolution would be secure. 
Second, because cellular and developmental features reflect the trans-
formation of gene-level information into gene expression, the potential direc-
tions of phenotypic evolution must ultimately be defined by the physical 
materials existing at the genomic level, the nahue of which appears to be 
strongly influenced by aspects of the population genetic environment. 
Reductions in effective population sizes are expected to lead to passive 
increases in intron number and size, expansions in UTR lengths, losses of 
operons, the modularization of regulatory regions, and the preservation of 
duplicate genes by subfunctionalization, among other things (see Table 13.2). 

380 
CHAPTER 13 
Thus, as will be discussed more fully in the following section, to the extent 
that an increase in genomic and gene architectural complexity is a precon-
dition for the emergence of greater complexity at the organismallevel, a 
long-term synergism may exist between the mechanisms of nonadaptive 
evolution at the DNA level and adaptive evolution at the phenotypic level. 
If this view is correct, then the relatively simple phenotypes of the Earth's 
smallest organisms are neither an inevitable outcome of the cell biological 
features of such species nor a reflection of selection for metabolic efficiency, 
but an indirect consequence of enormous effective population sizes, which, 
by reducing the power of random genetic drift, impose a barrier on the pas-
sive emergence of genomic complexity. 
Unfortunately, the emerging field of evolutionary developmental biol-
ogy is based almost entirely on a paradigm of natural selection, and the near-
absence of the concept of nonadaptive processes from the lexicon of those 
concerned with cellular and developmental evolution does not follow from 
any formal demonstration of the negligible contribution of such mecha-
nisms, but simply reflects the failure to consider them. TI'lere is no funda-
mental reason why cellular and developmental features should be uniquely 
immune to nonadaptive evolutionary forces. One could even argue that the 
stringency of natural selection is reduced in complex organisms with behav-
ioral and/ or growth form flexibilities that allow individuals to match their 
phenotypic capabilities to the local environment. 
An Entree to Understanding the Origins of 
Genomic Determinants of Organismal 
Complexity 
TILe tone of dissent in the preceding paragraphs should not be misinter-
preted as disrespect for the more reductionistic areas of biology, all of which 
are essential for resolving the functional underpinnings of the products of 
evolution. However, cataloging patterns of biodiversity is not equivalent to 
ascertaining the evolutionary mechanisms by which such patterns emerged. 
To date, cellular and developmental studies have contributed minimally 
to our understanding of such processes, and indeed, since their inception, 
have been strangely distant from mainstream evolutionary thinking (for a 
historical overview, see Wilkins 2002). With the advent of new methods for 
measuring gene expression and protein interactions, the opportunities for 
advancement of knowledge in the areas of cellular and developmental evo-
lution are enormous, but real progress will require the integration of well-
established principles from evolutionary genetics. 
Almost all molecular, cellular, and developmental biologists escbew 
intraspecific variation, focusing instead on typological characterizations of 
a few model species, for obvious practical reasons. However, because vir-
tually every complex trait in every species exhibits significant genetic vari-
ation (Lynch and Walsh 1998), it is likely that many textbook examples of 
a
r
F
JC
ti
tc
di
e)

GENOMFART 
381 
genetic/ developmental pathways derived from single clones or inbred lines 
are unrepresentative of patterns in nature, and some may be positively mis-
leading. Will the field of comparative development learn to utilize variation 
and incorporate population-level thinking to enhance interpretation? Or 
will the field remain shrouded in a kind of fifteenth-century mysticism, 
packaged in a gallery of beautiful embryo paintings? Although there is still 
a very long way to go, it is encouraging that a scaffold connecting evolu-
tionary genetics, genomics, and developmental biology is beginning to 
emerge. Interested readers are encouraged to start with Johnson and Porter 
(2000,2001), Stem (2000), Delattre and Felix (2001), True and Haag (2001), 
Rockman and Wray (2002), Wray et al. (2003), Force et al. (2005), and Haag 
and Molla (2005). 
Today's field of comparative development is heavily invested in the idea 
that modularity and repatterning of regulatory element utilization are the 
central determinants of the evolution of organismal complexity (Carroll 
2005b; Davidson 2006), a view inspired in part by King and Wilson's (1975) 
suggestion that much of phenotypic evolution is driven by regulatory rather 
than structural mutations. This is not a universally accepted view, even 
among developmental biologists (e.g., Alonso and Wilkins 2005), and the 
dismissal of gene duplication as a major force in the origin of evolutionary 
novelties (Behe and Snoke 2004; Carroll 2005b) ignores a vast amount of 
data that suggest otherwise (see Chapter 8). Nonetheless, because devel-
opment always involves cross-talk between multiple gene products, a log-
ical starting point is to consider the mechanisms of origin of tIle gene struc-
tural features that allow such transactions to take place. 
Despite the seductive nature of the idea that the apparently well-designed 
regulatory modules with functional significance in today's organisms could 
have arisen only via natural selection, it remains to be determined how the 
alterations necessary for the construction of genetic pathways come about. 
There is no evidence that gene regulatory modules associated with complex 
(multigene) functions arise as de novo integrated units, altllough some 
developmental biologists seem to believe otherwise (e.g., Davidson and 
Erwin 2006). Rather, like all aspects of evolution, changes in genetic path-
ways must be products of descent with modification, with mutant alleles 
arising at individual loci independently of processes occurring at other inter-
acting loci. The following is a brief sketch of how stepwise mutations, oper-
ating in population genetic environments common to multicellular species, 
might encourage the emergence of the kinds of gene structures and genetic 
pathway organizations that are thought to be essential for the building of 
complex organisms, without any direct involvement of selection. 
First, as noted in Chapter 10, in populations of sufficiently small size, the 
joint processes of regulatory region duplication and subsequent degenera-
tive mutation can lead to the passive emergence of modular gene regula-
tory structures (with unique transcription factors governing expression in 
different spatial/temporal contexts) from an initial state in which the entire 
expression breadth of the gene is under unified control (i.e., regulated via 

382 
CHAPTER 1 3 
the same transcription factors in all tissues or stages of development). Dur-
ing such a transition, a new gene architecture emerges beneath a constant 
spatial and/ or temporal pattern of gene expression, with no direct selection 
for modularity per se. However, because of the mutational cost of allelic 
complexity, the completion of such repatteming is less likely to occur in sit-
uations in which the excess degenerative mutation rate of a modified allele 
exceeds the power of drift. Thus, contrary to popular belief, natural selec-
tion not only may be an insufficient mechanism for the origin of genetic 
modularity, but may actually promote the opposite result: alleles under uni-
fied transcriptional control as well as operons (spatially contiguous genes 
under unified control). Under this view, the reductions in effective popu-
lation size that probably accompanied the origin of eukaryotes and the sub-
sequent emergence of the animal and land plant lineages may have played 
pivotal roles in the emergence of modular gene architecture. Moreover, such 
neutral transitions may help explain numerous cases of "developmental sys-
tem drift," whereby seemingly similar morphological structures in closely 
related species have come to be achieved by substantially different devel-
opmental/ regulatory mechanisms (Sommer 1997; Ludwig et al. 2000; John-
son and Porter 2001; True and Haag 2001; Ruvinsky and Ruvkun 2003; Tsong 
et al. 2006). 
Second, the transition to a modular gene regulatory structure following 
population size reduction may not always await the de novo origin of new 
regulatory elements following a population bottleneck. Rather, due to the 
recurrent mutational production of alternative transcription factor bind-
ing sites, large populations can be expected to harbor low frequencies of 
semi-modular alleles with redundant modes of gene activation (see Figure 
10.11), which, owing to the masking effects of redundancy, have reduced 
rates of mutation to defective alleles. Thus, while the fixation of modular-
ized alleles may be inhibited in large populations, their immediate precur-
sors may be maintained at moderately high frequencies in such settings 
(Wagner 1999, 2001). This implies that a population that has experienced a 
prolonged phase of large effective size can actually be poised to make a tran-
sition to a state of modularity following a population size reduction. This 
same point was made in Chapter 8 with respect to the neofunctionalization 
of duplicate genes: alleles with novel beneficial mutations that simultane-
ously eliminate key ancestral functions cannot go to fixation prior to dupli-
cation, but in populations of sufficiently large size, they will be maintained 
at low frequencies, which greatly increases the probability of neofunction-
alization following a duplication event. Wright's shifting balance theory, 
developed in the pre-molecular era, provides an interesting historical prece-
dent for the idea that fluctuations in population size and structure may 
greatly alter the paths open to evolution (reviewed in Provine 1986). 
Third, the emergence of independently mutable sub functions in a mod-
ularized allele may have second-order effects that contribute to adaptive 
evolution in significant ways. For example, if the ancestral allele under uni-
fied control was subject to pleiotropic constraints associated with shared 

GENOMFART 
383 
regulatory regions, modularization may open up previously inaccessible 
evolutionary pathways by eliminating a "jack of all trades, master of none" 
syndrome. Such genomic repatteming may be even further facilitated fol-
lowing the duplication of the entire gene, as complementary degenerative 
mutations can then result in the partitioning of cellular tasks among paral-
ogous copies, which can in turn lead to further refinements in the ability to 
carry out individual subfunctions (Force et al. 1999). Indeed, it is relevant 
that both processes-the emergence of gene sub functions and their subse-
quent partitioning among paralogous genes---occur most readily in the same 
small to medium-sized populations. Operating together, these processes 
provide a powerful but passive mechanism for the gradual remodeling of 
entire genetic pathways (Figure 13.2). 
Finally, a striking aspect of developmental pathways that has yet to be 
explained in adaptive terms concerns their oftentimes baroque structure 
(Wilkins 2002, 2005). It is common for linear pathways to consist of a series 
of genes whose products are essential to the activation/ deactivation of the 
next downstream member, with only the expression of the final component 
in the series having an immediate phenotypic effect. For example, the prod-
uct of gene D may be necessary to turn on gene C, whose product is neces-
sary to turn on gene B, which product finally turns on gene A. Pathways 
involving only inhibitory steps also exist, and these lead to an alternating 
series of high and low expression, depending on the state of the first gene 
in the pathway. For example, gene D may produce a product that inhibits 
the expression of gene C, whose silence allows gene B to be turned on, whose 
product inhibits the expression of gene A. It is unclear that such complex-
ity has any advantages over the simple constitutive expression or self-reg-
ulation of the final member of the pathway. 
In principle, pathway augmentation may be driven entirely by the non-
adaptive processes of duplication, degeneration, and random genetic drift. 
Consider the series of events in Figure 13.3. Initially, a single gene A car-
ries out some function in a constitutive fashion, but in a series of steps, it 
becomes completely reliant on an upstream activation factor B. A scenario 
like this could unfold in the following way. First, gene A becomes sensitive 
to activation by gene B, either because gene A has acquired a cis modifica-
tion that causes activation by B, or because some transcription factor B 
acquires a mutation that causes it to serve as a trans activator of A. At this 
point, gene A has redundant activation pathways and is therefore vulnera-
ble to loss of one of them. Should a degenerative mutation cause gene A to 
lose the ability to self-regulate, gene B will have been established as an essen-
tial activator of gene A. This process can be repeated anew as gene B acquires 
sensitivity to a further upstream transcription factor and loses the ability to 
be constitutively expressed. 
As in the case of sub function fission and duplicate-gene sub functional-
ization, the probability of establishment of these types of changes will 
depend on the effective population size. A redundantly regulated allele has 
a weak mutational advantage equal to the rate of loss of a regulatory site 

384 
CHAPTER 1 3 
0 
0 
~ /  
Sub function fission 
t 
) 
0 
0 
t/ ~ /t 
 
Subfunctionalization 
t 
0 
0 
0 
/ 
~ It 
0 
0 
Figure 13.2 Reorganization of a gene regulatory network by subfunction fission and 
duplicate-gene subfunctionalization. Initially, three transcription factors (TFs; ovals) drive 
the expression of four genes (squares) such that there are two independent networks 
(resulting in the final red/blue/green products on the left and the maroon product on 
the right). The gradient of shading within ovals and boxes denotes the regional expres-
sion of genes (e.g., left = anterior, right = posterior, and solid = ubiquitous). Initially, the 
green gene experiences subfunction fission in such a way that its expression is no longer 
driven by a ubiquitous TF (olive), but instead by two more localized TFs (black and or-
ange), which together cover all relevant tissues. The functional aspects of the olive TF 
are then engaged only in anterior expression (yielding a potential release from 
pleiotropic constraints), as no posterior genes are any longer dependent on its expres-
sion. Now exploiting two tissue-specific TFs, the green gene may also experience a re-
duction in pleiotropic constraints. In addition, the new modular regulatory architecture 
of the green gene sets the stage for subfunctionalization following gene duplication, 
with the black and orange TFs each coming to drive the expression of a different para-
log. The anterior and posterior gene networks are now entirely independent. 
(U1): one such mutation will result in the nonfunctionalization of either a 
self-regulated or an upstream-dependent allele, but will leave the function 
of a redundantly regulated allele unaltered. If the effective size of a popu-
lation is sufficiently small that l iNg u1f such an advantage will be imper-
vious to selection, and the population will evolve to an allelic state that sim-

GENOMFART 
385 
Mutational 
Conversion 
vulnerability 
rate 
Self-sufficient: 
0 
til 
J 
" g 1
u
' 
Redundantly 0 --0 
regulated: 
0 
J 
J 
Ull ug 
Upstream 
0 --0 
dependent: 
III 
J 
yJ 
Figure 13.3 An example of the growth of a genetic pathway by augmentation with 
an upstream transcription factor and loss of self-regulatory ability. Mutational rates of 
gain and loss of regulatory abilities are denoted by ug and u1, here for simplicity as-
sumed to be the same for self-activation and upstream activation. The redundantly 
regulated gene remains active in the face of single-loss mutations. 
ply dependson the relative rates of gain and loss of regulatory sites (ug and 
u, in Figure 13.3), eventually leading to the establishment of an obligatory 
pathway. In contrast, if l i Ng  u" the accumulation of upstream-depend-
ent alleles will be inhibited by their weak mutational burden, and in recom-
bining species, by their inactivation when they appear in genetic back-
grounds that fail to support A-B cross-talk. Thus, whereas small population 
sizes may promote the passive elongation of genetic pathways, large pop-
ulation sizes have the opposite effect. 
Although the preceding arguments demonstrate that small population 
size provides a permissive environment for the emergence of complex gene-
level transactions without any direct selection for complexity, this does not 
mean that such alterations cannot occur in very large populations. How-
ever, if such changes are to occur in a large Ns_context, they must have sub-
stantial immediate selective advantages to ottset the mutational burden of 
gene structural complexity. Imagine a new mutational alteration of gene 
structure that confers a change in development (or any other organismal 
feature) with a selective advantage in terms of survival and offspring pro-
duction equal to sa The net advantage is then sa - ud' where ud is the muta-
tional burden of the modified allele (i.e., the excess mutation rate to defec-
tive alleles, owing to the larger mutational target). Following the arguments 
presented above, a reasonable probability of fixation by natural selection 
requires that 2Ng(sa - ud) > I, such that the net selective advantage (sa - ud) 
exceeds the power of random genetic drift, 1 IN. If 2N (sa - Ud) < -I, owing 
to a sufficiently large mutational disadvantag;, fixati~n will be thwarted 
regardless of the allele's selective advantage. 

386 
CHAPTER 1 3 
Evolvability 
The emergence of systems biology and the various -omics fields (genomics, 
proteomics, metabolomics, transciptomics, etc.) and their focus on "dis-
covery-based science" (e.g., Ideker et al. 2001) has led to the promotion of 
four of the major buzzwords in biology today: complexity, modularity, 
robustness, and evolvability (see Table 13.1). Many view such attributes to 
be emergent properties of organisms that cannot be explained by the sum 
of their parts, arguing that adaptive mechanisms not previously appreci-
ated by evolutionary biologists are required to explain their existence. Those 
who promote the concept of the adaptive evolution of the above features 
are by no means members of the intelligent design movement, which 
invokes unknown mechanisms to explain biodiversity. However, as empha-
sized above, the burden of evidence for those who embrace an all-power-
ful guiding hand of natural selection should be no less stringent than what 
one would demand of a creationist. 
Interest in the emergent properties of organisms is derived in part from 
the massive amount of data now available on genome sequences and gene 
expression and a desire to reduce this information down to a few general-
ized descriptors. Such a philosophy has historical precedence in the field of 
systems ecology, which developed in the 1960s in response to the growing  
amount of information on ecosystem properties and a desire to reduce the 
data down to indices of energy flow, connectivity, diversity, and stability. 
Today, this field is essentially extinct, having been displaced by popula-
tion and community ecology as it became clear that the detailed interactions 
of individual species do matter. Will the field of systems biology suffer the 
same fate, or is there really something special about the emergent proper-
ties of organisms? The preceding paragraphs have already raised signifi-
cant questions about the adaptive nature of complexity, modularity, and 
robustness, but one final matter of tension over views of the evolutionary 
process merits consideration. 
All replicating populations are capable of evolution, but it has recently 
been argued that some species (multicellular organisms, in particular) have 
evolved to be better at it than others, with natural selection directly advanc-
ing features of genomic architecture, genetic networks, and developmen-
tal pathways so as to enhance their future ability to generate heritable adap-
tive variation. Such speculation is almost entirely restricted to molecular 
and cell biologists, engineers, physicists, and those who study digital organ-
isms (e.g., Depew and Weber 1985; Gerhart and Kirschner 1997; Kirschner 
and Gerhart 1998,2005; Rutherford and Lindquist 1998; True and Lindquist 
2000; Caporale 2003; Earl and Deem 2004; Bloom et al. 2006; Federici and 
Downing 2006), and there are good reasons to question its validity (e.g., 
Williams 1966; Dickinson and Seger 1999; Partridge and Barton 2000; Brook-
field 2001; Sniegowski and Murphy 2006). However, the issues apparently 
warrant reiteration, and it is worth doing so in the context of our knowl-
edge from comparative genomics. 

GENOMFART 
387 
Before proceeding, it must be emphasized that the word "evolvability" 
is deployed in very different ways by evolutionary biologists and by those 
outside the field. In quantitative genetics, the term "evolvability" has long 
had a definition closely related to the concept of heritability, i.e., the relative 
amount of standing variation that is subject to a response to natural selec-
tion (Houle 1992; Lynch and Walsh 1998). The above-mentioned authors, 
however, use the word in a rather different way, loosely defining "evolv-
ability" as the ability of a lineage to generate useful adaptive variation via 
mutational flexibility. Under neither view is there any question regarding 
the existence of variation in evolvability, as it has been known for decades 
that different organisms and classes of traits have different propensities to 
respond to natural selection (Falconer and Mackay 1996). Less clear, how-
ever, is whether the ability to evolve is itself actively promoted by direc-
tional selection. Four reasons for skepticism follow. 
First, evolution is a population-level feature: individuals are subject to 
selection, whereas populations evolve. Thus, in order for an aspect of evolv-
ability to be advanced directly by adaptive mechanisms, selection must oper-
ate efficiently at a higher level of organization than the individual. Not only 
must populations with different levels of evolvability exist, but evolvabil-
ity must be positively correlated with population longevity and/ or pro-
ductivity. Because populations survive longer than individuals, such group 
selection is necessarily a weaker force than individual selection (in gen-
eral, very much weaker) and necessarily operates on longer time scales. 
Thus, if evolvability is to be subject to selective advancement, at least three 
stringent conditions must be met: (1) the group-level advantages of any 
genomic attribute that enhances evolvability must exceed any conflicting 
pressures operating at the individual level; (2) the enhanced capacity for 
rapid evolutionary change must persist over the time scale of group-level 
selection; and (3) while en route to fixation at the population level, the alle-
les that promote evolvability must remain tightly linked to the loci under-
lying the phenotypic traits whose evolution is advantageous. The evidence 
for individual-level selection on phenotypes is overwhelming (Endler 1986; 
Kingsolver et al. 2001). The evidence for the operation of group-level selec-
tion in nature, aside from kin selection in the evolution of social behavior 
(Hamilton 1964a,b; Wilson 1975), is weak at best, although some investiga-
tors remain more optimistic than others [see the exchange between Coyne 
et al. (2000) and Goodnight and Wade (2000)]. 
Second, there is no evidence that a long-term elevation in the level of 
evolvability is generally advantageous. Surely, a complete inability to 
evolve would not be a good thing, but inaccuracies in replication prevent 
such a scenario from ever occuring. The dynamics of the heritabilities of 
quantitative traits are extraordinarily complex, and selection operating at 
the individual level can modify the frequencies of epistatically interacting 
genes in ways that can either indirectly increase or decrease heritabilities, 
regardless of the advantage of the traits under selection (Carter et al. 2005). 
In addition, one can just as easily point to a long list of pathologies that can 

388 
CHAPTER 1 3 
arise from an overly rapid proliferation of a new phenotype, including the 
overexploitation of resources resulting from the evolution of specialization, 
the reduced population size resulting from selective mortality, and the 
increase in mutational load associated with variance-generating mecha-
nisms. Indeed, such scenarios have motivated a completely different, and 
equally speculative, view: that selection can favor mechanisms that sup-
press evolvability (Altenberg 2005). Moreover, theoretical studies have also 
shown that the kinds of complexities that are often the focus of those enam-
ored with evolvability (e.g., increased dimensionality and modularity) can 
actually inhibit the rate of adaptive evolution, rather than promote it (Orr 
2000a; Welch and Waxman 2003; Haygood 2006). Although the arguments 
are technical, they are no more abstract than the verbal reasoning of the 
evolvability school. 
Third, there is no evidence that differences in short-term evolvability are 
anything more than simple by-products of phylogenetic diversity in the vari-
ation-generating and variation-maintaining factors that exist among species 
for purely physical reasons. For example, recombination and mutation rates 
vary by orders of magnitude among species, with no sudden discontinu-
ities in the lineages imagined to be most evolvable (animals and land plants), 
and such variation appears to be largely a consequence of variation in chro-
mosome length and number of germ line cell divisions per generation (see 
Chapter 4). The idea that alterations in the numbers and functions of prions 
and heat shock proteins serve to release new forms of cryptic variation on 
which natural selection can operate (e.g., Rutherford and Lindquist 1998; 
True and Lindquist 2000) is not very different from the now discredited idea 
that mobile elements are maintained to maximize the ability to evolve 
through a time of stress (see Chapter 7). To draw an analogy, free oxygen 
radicals, arising from intracellular metabolism, are a major source of muta-
tion, but it is exceedingly unlikely that oxidative metabolism arose to pro-
mote evolutionary change. 
Fourth, no observation from the several hundred genomes that have been 
sequenced can be taken as support for the idea that genomic architectural 
changes have been promoted in multicellular lineages so as to enhance their 
ability to evolve. Indeed, other than the appearance of spliceosomal introns, 
some forms of mobile elements, and organelles in the stem eukaryote (all of 
which arose prior to the origin of multicellularity), there is no discontinu-
ity in the basic features of genomes across the entire domain of cellular life. 
Yes, on average, the genomic attributes of multicellular eukaryotes are more 
complex than those of unicellular lineages, but such differences did not arise 
for the reasons imagined by the evolvability school. Many unicellular species 
are excluded from certain evolutionary pathways that are open to multi-
cellular species, and vice versa, but this is simply an indirect consequence 
of the altered power of random genetic drift in these different contexts, not 
a direct outcome of natural selection for the ability to engage in particular 
evolutionary pursuits. 

GENOMF=ART 
389 
In summary, if there is any validity to the notion that the ability to evolve 
is molded by natural selection, answers to several fundamental questions will 
need to be provided. What would serve as an objective measure of evolv-
ability? Given such a definition, where are the direct examples of evolvabil-
ity of traits being advanced by natural selection? What are the expected phy-
logenetic patterns of evolvability in the absence of selection? What would 
constitute a test of an evolvability hypothesis in a real living system, and what 
types of evidence would be acceptable as a falsification of the hypothesis? 
Closing Comments 
Because it deals with observations on historical outcomes, often in the face 
of incomplete information on intermediate steps (especially at the molecu-
lar level), the field of evolution attracts significantly more speculation than 
the average area of science. evertheless, the substantial body of well-tested 
theory established over the past century lays the groundwork for under-
standing the pathways that are open to evolutionary exploration in various 
population genetic contexts, providing guidance as to the likely reality of 
alternative evolutionary hypotheses. Because the nonadaptive forces of muta-
tion, recombination, and random genetic drift are now readily estimated in 
multiple species using molecular data, there is no longer any justification for 
rejecting the practical utility of population genetic theory based on its quan-
titative unreliability. And because of the enormous knowledge base that has 
grown out of molecular biology, there is no longer any compelling reason for 
blindly launching adaptive stories about genomic evolution without a rea-
sonably precise evaluation of the likelihood of nonadaptive alternatives. 
It is now clear that many (and probably most) aspects of genomic biol-
ogy that superficially appear to have adaptive roots-including the numer-
ous features that contribute to complexity, modularity, robustness, and 
evolvability-are almost certainly also products of nonadaptive processes, 
whereas others are readily understood only by invoking a near-complete 
relaxation of natural selection. It would have been difficult to reach such 
conclusions in the absence of a formal population genetic framework, but 
they are equally reliant on observations from molecular and cellular biol-
ogy. If the view that nonadaptive processes have played a central role in 
driving genomic evolution is correct, biological complexity should be 
viewed not as an extraordinarily low-probability outcome of unobservable 
adaptive challenges, but as an expected product of the special population 
genetic features of DNA-based genomes. A rather similar point was made 
previously by Kauffman (1993), although his conclusions were derived from 
models far removed from the mainstream of population genetics. The next 
step will be to evaluate whether nonadaptive evolutionary forces are largely 
confined to the level of DNA or whether the more visible aspects of biodi-
versity (at the cellular and organismallevels) can be understood only by 
extending our view beyond an idealized world of Darwinian adaptation. 

Glossary 
acrocentric a chromosome whose centromere is 
located near a tip. 
allele a particular variant at a specific genetic 
locus. 
allopolyploidy the form of polyploidy in which 
the full set of chromosomes is derived from a sin-
gle ancestral species. 
alpha-proteobacteria a group of eubacteria con-
taining the purple photosynthetic bacteria, the 
pathogenic rickettsia bacteria, and a number of 
other free-living species. 
alternative splicing the use of different 
intron-exon junctions to obtain alternative 
mRN As from a single gene. 
alveolates a monophyletic lineage of eukaryotes, 
united by the presence of alveoli (a system of sacs 
underlying the cell surface); contains the ciliated 
protozoa the apicomplexans. 
anticodon the nucleotide triplet in a transfer 
RNA used in the recognition of co dons in mes-
senger RNAs. 
antisense DNA the DNA on the strand comple-
mentary to the one from which transcription of a 
protein-coding gene proceeds. 
AP endonuclease an enzyme used in D A repair 
that recognizes sites missing a base and makes an 
incision that allows the insertion of an appropri-
ate nucleotide. 
apicomplexans a group of obligately parasitic, 
unicellular eukaryotes; includes the malarial par-
asite Plasmodium. 
apicoplast an organelle within the apicomplex-
ans that is derived from a chloroplast but no 
longer functional as such; thought to be involved 
in lipid metabolism. 
archaea one of the two major monophyletic lines 
of descent among prokaryotes. 
autopolyploidy the form of polyploidy in which 
the full set of chromosomes is derived from two 
ancestral species. 
autonomous element a mobile genetic element 
fully equipped with coding regions for the pro-
teins involved in mobilization and insertion. 
autotroph an organism that uses carbon dioxide 
as a carbon source, and light or the oxidation of 
inorganic compounds as a source of energy. 
bacteriophage a prokaryotic virus. 
balancing selection a selection scenario in which 
an allelic polymorphism is maintained by het-
erozygote advantage (owing to the fact that the 
most fit genotype carries both alleles). 
base pair (bp) a nucleotide position in double-
stranded DNA. 
B chromosome small and generally nonessential 
chromosomes found in some eukaryotes, which 
are capable of long-term proliferation by virtue of 
containing a centromere. 
bikonts the eukaryotic group in which all mem-
bers have cells with two flagella at some stage of 
the life cycle, or are thought to be derived from 
ancestors with such features. 

392 
GLOSSARY 
bilaterians the group of triploblast animals that 
are ancestrally bilaterially symmetrical. 
branchpoint sequence a central adenosine nu-
cleotide and / or small motif surrounding it within 
an intron, used in establishing a lariat in the first 
phase of splicing. 
BYA billion years ago. 
Cajal bodies organelles within the nuclei of eu-
karyotic cells, within which some assembly of the 
subunits of the spliceosome occurs. 
eDNA complementary DNA; a DNA copy of an 
mRNA derived by the use of reverse transcrip-
tase. 
centromere the region of a chromosome where 
sister chromatids join during mitosis and kineto-
chores assemble to provide anchor points for 
spindle formation during cell division. 
chromalveolates a diverse and putatively mono-
phyletic assemblage of eukaryotes, which 
includes the dinoflagellates, diatoms, coccolitho-
phores, cryptomonads, oomycetes, and apicom-
plexans, all of which are united by an ancestral 
event that gave rise to a chlorophyll c producing 
plastid via the preservation of an engulfed red 
alga (which was subsequently lost in some 
lineages). 
chromatin the complex of DNA and histone pro-
teins that make up eukaryotic chromosomes. 
cis-acting refers to a factor that affects the expres-
sion of a gene at a nearby chromosomal location; 
e.g., a transcription factor binding site or a core 
promoter. 
cis-splicing a mechanism used to attach two seg-
ments of RNA derived from the same transcript, 
after eliminating an intervening region. 
chlorarachniophytes a group of unicellular ma-
rine phytoplankton with amoeboid features and a 
capacity for acquiring energy by both photosyn-
thesis and ingestion of other small microbes. 
cnidarians a basal group of animals lacking 
mesoderm; includes corals, hydras, jellyfishes, 
and sea anemones. 
coalescence time the number of generations in 
the past to which a group of alleles within a pop-
ulation trace to a single common ancestor. 
codon a nucleotide triplet that corresponds to 
one of the 64 possibilities under a genetic code. 
codon bias the degree to which the usage of al-
ternative codons for a particular amino acid devi-
ates from some null model, usually the expecta-
tion in the absence of selection. 
consensus sequence a sequence that is viewed as 
representative of a broader set of related se-
quences. 
core promoter a short motif that binds the tran-
scription initiation machinery, thereby promoting 
the initiating transcription of the associated gene. 
cosuppression the post-transcriptional silencing 
of a gene via a double-stranded RNA intermedi-
ate; analogous to RNA interference. 
crossover a reciprocal exchange between two ho-
mologous chromosomes. 
cryptomonads a group of photosynthetic, flagel-
lated unicellular eukaryotes, generally inhabiting 
planktonic environments. 
cytidine deaminase an enzyme that removes an 
-NH2 group from cytosine, converting it to uracil. 
cytoskeleton the dynamic, internal structural 
support system in eukaryotic cells, comprised of 
several filamentous proteins. 
C value the total amount of DNA in a haploid 
genome. 
deme a subpopulation. 
dicer an enzyme used in the processing of 
miRNAs and siRNAs. 
diffusion theory a branch of mathematics that al-
lows the prediction of the probability distribution 
of allele frequencies at a locus, resulting from the 
joint operation of directional forces (e.g., mutation 
and/ or selection) and the stochastic force of ran-
dom genetic drift. 
dinoflagellates a diverse group of photosynthet-
ic eukaryotic flagellates, mostly unicellular; in-
habit both marine and freshwater ecosystems. 
diploblast basal lineages of metazoans, notable 
for their absence of mesoderm (e.g., the cnidari-
ans, which include corals, anemones, and jelly-
fishes). 
diplomonads a group of unicellular eukaryotes, 
lacking mitochondria; includes the parasite 
Giardia. 
diploid having two gene copies at a genetic 
locus; as in virtually all animals and land plants. 
DNA glycosylase an enzyme that removes erro-
neous uracil residues from DNA, leaving empty 
sites. 
DNA polymerase an enzyme used to replicate 
D A. 

ecdysozoa the phylogenetic grouping that con-
tains all molting invertebrate animals; not neces-
sarily monophyletic. 
ectopic recombination recombination between 
nonhomologous sites, which necessarily leads to a 
chromosomal rearrangement. 
effective neutrality refers to the situation in 
which the intensity of selection operating on an 
allele is small enough that the impact of selection 
is overwhelmed by the stochastic changes in allele 
frequencies caused by random genetic drift, i.e., 
l / (4Ne) > I s I, or equivalently l4Nes I > 1. 
effective number of genes a per-locus measure, 
equal to the effective population size for a hap-
loid species and double that for a diploid species. 
effective population size the size of an ideal 
Wright-Fisher population that most closely re-
flects the evolutionary behavior of a nonideal nat-
ural population; generally denoted as Ne. 
endonuclease an enzyme capable of cutting a 
double-strand of D A. 
endopolyploid a state in which a somatic cell has 
had one or more genomic duplications. 
endosymbiont an organism residing within the 
cells of a host organism, and generally providing 
a benefit to the latter; includes the mitochondria 
and chloroplasts of eukaryotes. 
enhancer a region of D A containing one or 
more transcription factor binding sites responsi-
ble for the regulation of gene expression. 
epigenetic refers to a heritable change on a chro-
mosome at a level other than the D A itself, e.g., 
methylation or histone modifications. 
error catastrophe the point at which the damage 
introduced by mutation is so great that the most 
highly fit genotype is unable to maintain itself in 
the population. 
eubacteria one of the two major monophyletic 
lines of descent among prokaryotes. 
euchromatin the relatively open, gene-rich re-
gions of eukaryotic chromosomes. 
euglenozoa a group of unicellular eukaryotes, 
which includes the euglenoids and the kineto-
plastids. 
eukaryotes cells with membrane-bound or-
ganelles, including a nucleus. 
exon a portion of a transcription unit that is re-
tained in a mature messenger RNA after splicing. 
exon junction complex a protein complex deposit-
ed just upstream of each exon-exon junction of the 
mature messenger RNAs of most eukaryotes. 
GLOSSARY 
393 
exon splicing enhancer (ESE) a sequence motif 
residing in an exon that positively influences the 
utilization of a neighboring site as a splicing sub-
strate. 
exon splicing silencer (ESS) a sequence motif re-
siding in an exon that negatively influences the 
utilization of a neighboring site as a splicing sub-
strate. 
exonuclease an enzyme that catalyzes the re-
moval of nucleotides from D A or RNA. 
fatty acid esters lipids used in the cell mem-
branes of the eubacteria. 
5' cap a modified base at the 5' end of eukaryotic 
messenger RNAs, essential for the initiation of 
translation. 
5' untranslated region (5' UIR) the leader se-
quence on a messenger RNA (prior to the transla-
tion initiation codon), which is not translated. 
fixation the increase of an allele to the point at 
which it has achieved a frequency of 1.0. 
functional domain a region of a protein with 
specific functional significance. 
gene conversion the process by which one partici-
pant in a recombination event is converted to the 
sequence of the partner participant; occurs during 
almost alJ recombination events, but is not neces-
sarily associated with crossing-over. 
genetic code the complete set of 64 nucleotide 
triplets (codons) and their assignments to the 20 
amino acids used in translation as well as to ter-
mination codons. 
genetic draft see hitchhiking effect. 
genetic map ordered arrays of molecular markers 
along chromosomes with the distances between 
markers defined by the expected number of 
crossovers per meiosis. 
germ line the specific cell lineage within a multi-
cellular organism that gives rise to gametes. 
group II intron a form of self-splicing intron 
largely restricted to prokaryotes and eukaryotic 
organelles. 
haploid having a single gene copy at a genetic 
locus; as in all prokaryotes and some unicellular 
eukaryotes. 
haploinsufficient implies that a single-gene 
dose (in a diploid species), caused by the presence 
of a null allele at a locus, compromises organism 
fitness. 

394 
GLOSSARY 
haplotype a particular version of a chromosomal 
region defined by a unique set of molecular 
markers. 
helicase an enzyme involved in the separation of 
the two strands of a DNA molecule. 
hemizygous refers to a locus in a diploid individ-
ual for which there is only a single copy, e.g., a Y-
linked gene in an XY male. 
heteroduplex a double-stranded form of D A 
whose two strands are derived from different 
sources; as in the recombination intermediate be-
tween two parental chromosomes. 
heterogametic sex the sex containing two nonre-
combining sex chromosomes, e.g., males in an 
X/ Y system. 
heteroplasmy refers to the presence of two dis-
tinct organelle genotypes within a single cell. 
heterotroph an organism that relies on organic 
compounds (generally derived from autotrophs 
or other heterotrophs) as carbon sources. 
Hill-Robertson effect see selective interference. 
hitchhiking effect the change in allele frequency 
at a locus caused by the stronger effects of selec-
tion on a linked locus. 
homeothermy the maintenance of stable body 
temperatures by internal physiological mecha-
nisms, primarily in birds and mammals. 
homogametic sex the sex containing a pair of 
morphologically similar sex chromosomes, e.g., 
XX females in an X/ Y system. 
homologous recombination recombination in-
volving regions of two partner chromosomes that 
are ancestrally related, e.g., two alleles at a locus. 
horizontal gene transfer gene acquisition from a 
distantly related lineage, as opposed to vertical 
transmission by direct inheritance from a parent. 
Hox cluster a linear array of a specific set of de-
velopmental genes that is central to body forma-
tion in animals; the spatial arrangement of such 
genes is generally collinear with anterior-posteri-
or patterns of expression. 
hybrid dysgenesis an elevated rate of mobile ge-
netic element activity that occurs when species 
are hybridized or when permissive and nonper-
missive strains are mated. 
hydrogenosome a membrane-bound organelle of 
anaerobic eukaryotes, believed to be related to the 
mitochondrion, which yields hydrogen and ATP. 
index of subdivision a measure of the degree to 
which the gene pool of a species varies among 
population segments; generally denoted by F, 
which falls in the range of zero (panmixia) to one 
(complete isolation of subpopulations). 
integrase an enzyme used by transposons to in-
sert copies into the host genome. 
intron a portion of a transcription unit that is re-
moved from a mature messenger RNA. 
intron splicing enhancer (ISE) a sequence motif 
residing in an intron that positively influences the 
utilization of a neighboring site as a splicing sub-
strate. 
intron splicing silencer (ISS) a sequence motif 
residing in an intron that negatively influences 
the utilization of a neighboring site as a splicing 
substrate. 
isochore a chromosomal region, often tens to 
hundreds of kb in length, of fairly homogeneous 
nucleotide composition, differing from adjacent 
regions. 
isoprene ethers lipids used in the cell mem-
branes of the archaea. 
karyotype a broad description of the chromoso-
mal set in a eukaryotic species, including chromo-
some number and centromere locations. 
kilobase (kb) one thousand nucleotide bases. 
kinetochore a protein structure that assembles on 
the centromere, linking the chromosome to the 
spindle fibers during cell division. 
kinetoplastids a group of unicellular eukaryotes, 
many of which are parasitic (e.g., Trypanosoma and 
Leishmania). 
linkage disequilibrium the degree of nonran-
dom association among markers at two chromo-
somal locations, often measured as the difference 
between the observed frequency of a gamete type 
and the expectation based on random assortment 
at the individual marker positions. 
LINEs long interspersed elements; a large family 
of retrotransposons found in the primate lineage. 
locus usually refers to the chromosomal location 
of a genetic factor, although sometimes used syn-
onymously with gene. 
locus control region a region containing regula-
tory elements shared by two or more genes. 
LTR element long terminal repeat element; one 
of the two major categories of retrotransposons; 

noted for the presence of direct terminal repeats, 
which are identical at the time of insertion. 
macroevolution arbitrarily refers to long-term 
evolutionary change (on time scales greater than 
a few millions of years); but also is often used to 
describe the view that long-term evolution is a 
process based on processes operating beyond the 
population level (such processes are rarely explic-
itly outlined, and arguably do not exist). 
macronucleus one of the two nuclei contained 
within the cells of all ciliated protozoans; the 
micronucleus is transcriptionally silent and serves 
as the germiine, while the macronucleus (a pro-
cessed version of the former) is the source of all 
transcription and is destroyed at the time of 
sexual reproduction. 
major-form exon an alternatively-spliced exon 
that is included in transcripts most of the time. 
megabase (Mb) one million nucleotide bases. 
messenger RNA (mRNA) a mature gene tran-
script, obtained after introns have been removed 
from an mRNA precursor. 
metacentric a chromosome whose centromere is 
centrally located. 
metapopulation the complete network of sub-
populations comprising the gene pool of an entire 
species. 
methanogens obligately anaerobic members of 
the archaea that produce methane as a by-product 
of the metabolism of organic matter. 
microarray a fabricated array of spotted D As 
used for evaluating relative levels of transcripts or 
fragments of genomic DNA. 
microevolution arbitrarily refers to short-term 
evolutionary change (on time scales of millions of 
years or less); but also is often used to describe 
the view that long-term evolution is a process 
based on principles of population genetics that 
apply to all known living organisms. 
micro RNA (miRNA) a small (generally 20 to 30 
bp) RNA processed from a transcribed "hairpin" 
precursor RNA; generally used in the regulation 
of gene expression by complementary binding to 
a nearly identical motif in the 3' UTRs of tran-
scripts. 
microsatellite a small repetitive DNA involving 
repeats of 1 to -6 nucleotides, e.g., a dinucleotide 
repeat. 
microsporidians a group of animal parasites 
with reduced genomes; belong to the fungal 
lineage. 
GLOSSARY 
395 
microtubules protein filaments that serve a num-
ber of structural functions with the eukaryotic 
cell, including formation of the cytoskeleton. 
minor-form exon an alternatively-spliced exon 
that is included in transcripts only infrequently. 
mismatch repair the process by which noncom-
plementary bases paired in double-stranded DNA 
are corrected by replacing one of the noncomple-
mentary bases, which returns the site to a stan-
dard Watson-Crick (A:T or G:C) pair. 
mobile-genetic element a segment of DNA capa-
ble of mobilizing and inserting into additional 
genome regions; includes transposons and retro-
transposons. 
mononucleotide run a sequential run of one par-
ticular nucleotide at the DNA or RNA level; e.g., 
AAAAA. 
monophyletic refers to a natural evolutionary 
lineage that contains a number of related species 
and includes their common ancestor; for example, 
the vertebrate group is monophyletic because all 
of its members derive from a single common an-
cestor, but an "algal" grouping would not be 
monophyletic because there are numerous lineag-
es of photosynthetic microbes distantly distrib-
uted over the tree of life. 
Muller's ratchet the process by which the best-fit 
genome in a population stochastically gains dele-
terious mutations by random genetic drift and/ or 
mutation pressure. 
mutational spectrum the full description of the 
frequency distribution of all forms of mutations 
arising in an organism, e.g., the 12 forms of base 
substitutions, and the insertion/ deletion size 
spectrum. 
mutational meltdown a phase of rapid extinction 
that results when a population experiences a situ-
ation in which the rate of fitness loss induced by 
recurrent spontaneous mutations exceeds the abil-
ity of natural selection to purge the mutational 
load. 
MYA million years ago. 
neofunctionalization the origin of a new gene 
function by mutation. 
neutral model a population genetic model that 
excludes selective forces; among other things, 
serves as an essential null hypothesis for testing 
for natural selection. 
neutral mutation a newly arisen allele that has 
no advantages or disadvantages relative to the al-
leles currently existing at the locus. 

396 
GLOSSARY 
nonautonomous element a mobile genetic ele-
ment lacking in one or more protein coding re-
gions that are essential for mobilization and/ or 
insertion, which nevertheless can be activated by 
parasitizing the mobilization machinery of related 
autonomous elements. 
non coding RNA (ncRNA) loosely defined as any 
transcript that does not encode for protein. 
nonfunctionalization the loss of gene function 
by mutation. 
nonhomologous end joining the repair of a dou-
ble-strand chromosome break by the direct liga-
tion of the two ends back together; mutations may 
be introduced in the process. 
nonLTR element non-long terminal repeat ele-
ment; one of the two major categories of retro-
transposons; noted for the absence of direct termi-
nal repeats. 
nonsense-mediated decay a surveillance path-
way in eukaryotes that identifies and eliminates 
aberrant messenger RNAs containing premature 
termination codons. 
nonsynonymous site a nucleotide within a cod-
ing region for which substitutions give rise to an 
alteration of the amino-acid sequence; also known 
as a replacement site. 
N terminus the end of a protein bearing a free 
-NH2 group; conventionally designated as the 
front end of a protein when the sequence is writ-
ten out. 
nucleomorph a remnant nuclear genome con-
tained within a chloroplast-containing inclusion in 
two lineages of algae (the cryptomonads and the 
chlorararchniophytes), which was acquired via a 
secondary endosymbiotic event (with the host 
species engulfing a photosynthetic eukaryote). 
nucleosome a repeating subunit of the chromo-
some, consisting of the DNA coiled around a set 
of histone proteins. 
oligocellular refers to a species with a small 
number of cell types, e.g., fungi. 
oligomer a specific, short nucleotide sequence. 
operon a cassette of cotranscribed and sometimes 
functionally related genes; generally but not en-
tirely restricted to prokaryotes. 
open reading frame a stretch of DNA that trans-
lates into a continuous tract of amino acids with-
out intervening stop codons. 
opisthokonts the eukaryotic assemblage contain-
ing animals, fungi, and slime molds; believed to 
be monophyletic. 
origin of replication (OR!) a location on a chro-
mosome from which strand replication is initiat-
ed, usually bidirectionally. 
orphan gene a generic term, used to refer to a 
gene with no known orthologous gene in another 
species. 
ortholog a gene that is specifically related to a 
copy in another species by vertical descent. 
outgroup a lineage that is clearly outside of the 
phylogenetic lineage under consideration, e.g., a 
bird for a mammalian phylogeny. 
overdominant refers to a form of gene action in 
which the joint effects of two alleles in a heterozy-
gote at a diploid locus are outside the range of 
that for the alternative homozygotes. 
paralog a gene that is related to another within 
the same genome, having arisen by a duplication 
event. 
parthenogenesis reproduction via an unfertilized 
egg. 
P bodies "processing bodies"; organelles in the 
cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells, within which 
degradation of mRNAs takes place. 
phagocytosis cellular ingestion involving the 
enveloping of the food particle by the cell mem-
brane, which is then internalized as a food 
vacuole. 
placozoans a basal group of marine invertebrates 
having only four celJ types. 
polyadenylation the addition of a string of 
adenines to the trailing end of a messenger RNA. 
poly(A) tail a homopolymeric run of adenines 
added to the end of transcripts. 
polycistronic transcription refers to the process-
ing of several genes from an operon into a single 
transcriptional unit. 
polymerase chain reaction (peR) a laboratory 
procedure used to amplify a small template into 
large quantities of D A for further molecular 
analysis. 
polymorphism the presence of alternative alleles 
at a locus, or nucleotide bases at a nucleotide site. 
polyphyletic refers to an unnatural evolutionary 
grouping that contains distantly related lineages, 
but does not include their common ancestor (see 
monophyletic). 
polyploidy a condition in which the genome has 
been derived from one or more complete genome 
duplication events (relative to the ancestral 
diploid state). 

polytene chromosome a giant chromosome re-
sulting from repeated rounds of chromosome 
replication without cell division, most notably 
found in the salivary-gland cells of D. 
melanogaster. 
post-transcriptional silencing any mechanism by 
which a messenger RNA is rendered unable to 
progress towards translation; e.g., the binding of a 
micro RNA to a 3' UTR. 
precursor messenger RNA the initial transcript 
of a gene, prior to processing events such as cap-
ping and intron removal. 
premature start codon (PSC) a translation initia-
tion codon upstream of the proper start site, i.e., 
in the 5' UTR. 
primase an enzyme that synthesizes a short 
A 
primer used in the initial step of D A replication. 
processed pseudogenes a putatively nonfunc-
tional gene derived from the reverse transcription 
of an mRNA and reinsertion into the genome. 
prokaryotes cells lacking membrane-bound or-
ganelles, often referred to as bacteria; includes 
two uruque, divergent clades, the eubacteria, and 
the archaea. 
promoter a DNA sequence that helps localize the 
point of transcription initiation. 
protists a general term used to describe urucellu-
lar eukaryotes. 
pseudoautosomal region the small, recombining 
region of an otherwise nonrecombining sex chro-
mosome, typically at the tip. 
pseudogene a nonfunctional copy of a previously 
normally functioning gene. 
purifying selection a form of natural selection 
that favors the maintenance of a particular allelic 
state, thereby encouraging the removal of most 
mutant alleles. 
purines the nucleotides adenine (A) and 
guanine (G). 
pyrimidines the nucleotides cytosine (C) and 
thymine (T). 
random genetic drift fluctuations in allele fre-
quencies across generations resulting from the 
derivation of gametes and offspring from a finite 
number of parents. 
replacement site a nucleotide within a coding re-
gion for which substitutions give rise to an alter-
ation of the amino-acid sequence; also known as a 
nonsynonymous site. 
GLOSSARY 
397 
. replicon a region of the genome whose replica-
tion is associated with a single origin of replica-
tion. 
retrohoming site fidelity characteristic of the in-
sertion of numerous group IT mobile elements. 
retrotransposons a broad class of mobile-genetic 
elements, which move by use of a messenger 
RNA intermediate. 
retrovirus a virus containing an RNA genome. 
reverse transcriptase an enzyme that produces a 
complementary strand of D JA from an RNA tem-
plate. 
rhodophytes the "red algae," a monophyletic lin-
eage of urucellular / oligocellular photosynthetic 
eukaryotes. 
ribonucleoprotein a generic term for a functional 
composite containing one or more proteins and 
RNAs. 
ribonucleotide reductases proteins used in the 
production of the nucleotide precursors: dAMPs, 
dCMPs, and dGMPs. 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) an RNA suburut of the 
ribosome. 
ribosome the cellular organelle at which mRNAs 
are translated into proteins. 
rooted phylogenetic tree the root on a phyloge-
netic tree denotes the lineage containing the most 
recent common ancestor from which all species in 
the tree descend. 
RNA interference (RNAi) a cellular response by 
which the recognition of double-stranded RNA 
leads to the post-transcriptional silenCing of a 
transcribed region. 
RNase H an enzyme that degrades the RNA in 
RNA:D A hybrid molecules. 
RNA polymerase an enzyme involved in the 
copying of a segment of nucleic acid (usually ge-
nomic D A) into a complementary RNA (usually 
a transcript). 
segmental duplication a duplicated region of 
sub-chromosomal length. 
selection coefficient a measure of the selective 
advantage or disadvantage of an allele relative to 
the standard index of 1.0; i.e., a selective disad-
vantage of 0.01 implies a 1% reduction in fitness 
for an individual carrying a single copy of the 
gene (assuming additive effects at a diploid 
locus); generally denoted as s. 

398 
GLOSSARY 
selective interference the reduction in the effi-
ciency of selection operating on a locus as a conse-
quence of simultaneous selection operating on 
linked loci. 
selective sweep the rapid passage of a particular 
variant within a genomic region through a popu-
lation, promoted by the force of directional selec-
tion. 
Shine-Delgamo sequence a short sequence just 
upstream of the translation initiation point in 
prokaryotic messenger RNAs; complementary to 
a key sequence in the ribosome. 
silent site a nucleotide within a coding region for 
which, due to the redundancy of the genetic code, 
substitutions do not give rise to an alteration of 
the amino-acid sequence; also known as a syn-
onymous site. 
SINEs small interspersed elements; a large family 
of retrotransposons found in the primate lineage; 
dependent on LINEs for mobility. 
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) refers to 
a segregating polymorphism at a single nucleo-
tide site. 
small RNA (sRNA) a generic term that encom-
passes miRNAs and siRNAs. 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) a small (general-
ly 20 to 30 bp) RNA processed from a longer dou-
ble-stranded RNA by the RNA interference path-
way; deployed in posttranscriptional gene 
silencing. 
small nuclear RNA (snRNA) refers to a member 
of a heterogeneous group of small RNAs whose 
functions are confined to the nucleus, including 
those involved in splicing introns out of precursor 
mRNAs and in telomere maintenance. 
small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP) a 
complex of RNA and protein deployed in the nu-
cleus; most notably, in the construction of the 
spliceosome. 
small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) an RNA mole-
cule involved in the chemical modifications made 
in the construction of ribosomes; often encoded 
within an intron of a ribosomal protein gene. 
spliced-leader sequence a separately transcribed 
external ex on that is spliced onto the front end of 
the primary transcripts in trypanosomes and sev-
eral other species. 
spliceosome the complex molecular machine re-
sponsible for the removal of introns from precur-
sor messenger RNAs for eukaryotic nuclear 
genes. 
stem eukaryote the direct lineage containing the 
most recent common ancestor of all eukaryotes. 
stochastic variable. 
stramenopiles a diverse group of 
unicellular l oligocellular eukaryotes; includes the 
diatoms, brown algae, and oomycetes. 
subfunctionalization the partial loss of one or 
more functions of a gene resulting from degenera-
tive mutation. 
synergistic epistasis the situation in which the 
joint effect of multiple mutations is greater than 
the sum of their individual effects, usually consid-
ered in the context of deleterious mutations, in 
which case fitness would decline at an accelerat-
ing rate with increasing numbers of mutations. 
synonymous site a nucleotide within a coding re-
gion for which, due to the redundancy of the ge-
netic code, substitutions do not give rise to an al-
teration of the amino acid sequence; also known 
as a silent site. 
target-primed reverse transcription the mecha-
nism by which nonLTR retrotransposons are in-
serted into DNA. 
telomeres the ends of linear chromosomes. 
terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) small inverted 
sequences, generally found at the two ends of a 
transposon. 
tetrad the array of four haploid products result-
ing from meiosis. 
3' poly(A) tail a string of adenines added to the 
end of a 3' UTR of a mature messenger RNA, es-
sential for translation initiation. 
3' untranslated region (3' UTR) the trailing se-
quence on a messenger RNA (beyond the transla-
tion-termination codon), which is not translated. 
thymidylate synthase catalyzes the production 
of dTMP nucleotide precursors by the methyla-
tion of dUMPs. 
trans-acting refers to a factor that affects the ex-
pression of a gene at another chromosomalloca-
tion; e.g., a transcription factor. 
transcription factor a protein whose function is 
to regulate the expression of another gene, usual-
ly by binding to a small binding site in the target 
gene's vicinity. 
transcription factor binding site a small DNA 
motif responsible for binding a specific protein 
used in the regulation of a gene's transcription. 

transcriptome the complete set of transcripts in a 
cell or organism. 
transfer RNA (tRNA) a small clover-leaf shaped 
molecule that serves as a vehicle for delivering a 
specific amino acid during the translation of 
mRNA. 
transgene a gene derived from an exogenous 
source, generally inserted into a foreign lab or-
ganism by various molecular techniques. 
transition a mutational change from purine to 
purine or pyrimidine to pyrimidine. 
transposase an enzyme used by a transposon 
during the "cut-and-paste" process used in the in-
tegration of a new copy. 
transposons a broad class of mobile-genetic ele-
ments, which move by use of "cut-and-paste" 
mechanisms. 
trans-splicing a mechanism used to attach two 
segments of RNA derived from separate tran-
scripts. 
transversion a mutational change from purine to 
pyrimidine or vice versa. 
trichomonads a group of unicellular eukaryotes, 
lacking mitochondria; includes the human sexual 
parasite Trichomonas. 
GLOSSARY 
399 
triploblasts animals with three cell layers (ecto-
derm, mesoderm, and endoderm). 
tubulin one of the classes of filamentous proteins 
involved in cytoskeletal support in eukaryotic 
cells. 
tunicate a phylogenetic group of invertebrate 
chordate, which includes the sea squirts. 
unikonts the eukaryotic group for which all 
members have cells with single flagella at some 
stage of the life cycle, or are thought to be derived 
from ancestors with such features. 
urochordates a subphylum of chordates, which 
includes sea squirts and larvaceans. 
upstream open reading frame (uORF) a short 
open reading frame in the 5' UIR of a transcript, 
followed by a termination codon, and preceding 
the true translation initiation site. 
Wright-Fisher population an idealized random-
mating population with discrete generations, with 
each member contributing equally and synchro-
nously to an effectively infinite gamete pool, from 
which pairs of gametes are drawn randomly to 
produce the next generation. 

