
OceanofPDF.com

About the Author
LUKE KEMP is a Senior Research Associate at the Centre for the Study of
Existential Risk (CSER) at the University of Cambridge. He has lectured in
the fields of economics and human geography, and has advised the World
Health Organization, the Australian Parliament, the UN Convention on
Biological Diversity and many other institutions. His research has been
covered by the BBC, The New York Times and the New Yorker.
OceanofPDF.com

Luke Kemp
GOLIATH'S CURSE
The History and Future of Societal Collapse
OceanofPDF.com

Contents
Introduction: A People's History of Collapse
PART ONE
Dawns and Ends
1 Hobbes's Delusion
2 Collapse for 99 per cent of Human History
3 From Hunting and Gathering to Being Hunted and Gathered
4 Abandoned Experiments I: Failed Farmers
5 Abandoned Experiments II: Voting With Feet and Fire
6 Goliath Rises
7 Goliath's Curse
PART TWO
Imperial March and Fall
8 Gang Warfare
9 Broken Bronze
10 Shattered Obsidian
11 The Rise and Fall of the Chinese Goliath
12 The Falls of Rome
13 Fear the Rise
14 Colonization and Collapse
15 Collapse in the Modern World
PART THREE
Endgame
16 Mors ex Machina
17 Gaia vs Goliath

18 The Death-Star Syndrome
19 The Rungless Ladder
20 The Roots of Our Endgame
21 The Fates of Goliath
22 After the Fall
23 Fiat Justitia, Ne Pereat Mundus
Epilogue: Slaying Goliath
Acknowledgements
Glossary
Lists of Figures and Tables
Notes
Index
OceanofPDF.com

For my brother David
OceanofPDF.com

Introduction: A People's History of Collapse
Unravelling History Through Collapse - Goliath's Curse - Our Fragile
Future - A Blessing in Disguise - A 1 per cent View of History - Is History
Relevant for the Future? - A Historical Autopsy
UNRAVELLING HISTORY THROUGH
COLLAPSE
Human history is the story of a power struggle. Power comes in four
different forms: control of decision-making, including by setting up a
centralized government; control of the resources that others depend on, such
as the wheat and rice that most people eat every day; control through threats
and violence; and control of information to understand and manipulate
others, whether by a bureaucracy, a priesthood, or a big tech company. Then
there is the great amplifier: power depends on who you are controlling - the
size, skills, and health of the population.1
Each of these power structures can fall apart. When a government -
whether in ancient Rome or modern-day Somalia - falls apart, we call it a
state collapse or 'state failure'. When the economy breaks down, as with the
Great Depression in the 1930s, we call it an economic collapse. When a
large number of people die, we call it a 'bust' or population collapse. When
all these power systems crumble together in a relatively rapid and enduring
manner we call it a societal collapse.2  Societal collapse has shaped our
history and will determine our future.
Around 500 kilometres south-west of modern-day Chicago, a city of flat-
topped earthen pyramids rises above the Mississippi River. At one stage

there were almost 200 of these mounds covering around thirteen square
kilometres. The largest pyramid - Monk's Mound - stands at almost thirty
metres, making it taller than the White House. These flat-topped pyramids
were made by hand. Villagers would dig up the rich soil, transport it with
baskets, and layer it carefully to form miniature mountains. They
surrounded a grand plaza 490 metres long and 265 metres wide. The layout
was eerily similar to those found over 2,000 kilometres south-west, in the
pyramid cities of Mesoamerica.3
This is Cahokia, the first true city of the US (Figure 1).4  Around 1,000
years ago (1050-1100 CE), the settlement grew into a city of 10,000-15,000
people.5  Just a century or so earlier in 900 CE corn had been introduced to
the area. The boom in agriculture, construction, and population was
accompanied by more disturbing practices. Within the abandoned pyramids
lie the remains of hundreds of men and women. One of the mounds (Mound
72) contains 272 burials, many of which were ritual sacrifices. They were
killed and then tossed into graves as part of an elite funeral.
One burial site alone has the skeletons of fifty-three women, all of which
are of reproducing age: fifty-two are fifteen to twenty-five years old and
one was around thirty-five. The women may have been virgins, or a harem
of slaves. Another pit contains four men with their heads and hands cut off.
Other victims kept their hands but suffered slower deaths, with their
fingerbones left digging into the sand as they tried to claw their way out. At
the top of the burial are two men who were buried lavishly, with one
sporting a 5cm-thick blanket of 20,000 shell beads. Cahokia had become
unequal and centralized, with a priestly ruling class who used human
sacrifice to legitimize their reign. It was on course to become the first state
of North America centuries before Europeans would arrive.6
A few decades later, the first signs of instability emerged. A farming
complex supplying the city with grain was abandoned, a palisade was
erected around the central settlement, and people began to exit the city.
Within fifty years its population had halved. Just over a century after that,
the entire site, and the area extending hundreds of kilometres to the south-
east of Cahokia - once full of similar pyramid-centred towns - had been
abandoned. It became known as 'the Vacant Quarter', a vast tract of
swampy land that was avoided by the indigenous people. Remarkably, the
Native Americans of the area have no stories or oral traditions about

Cahokia. It was as if they had intentionally forgotten it. This pioneering
civilization-building project was over and would never be resurrected.7
Figure 1: An artistic depiction of Cahokia around 1050 CE
Over 8,000 kilometres away, across the Atlantic, lies the city of Rome. It
was once the beating heart of Europe's largest, most enduring empire.
While relatively few know of or visit the ruins of Cahokia, millions flock to
see the remains of Rome: the stone and marble skeletons of the Forum and
the Colosseum. Rome collapsed, the western half of the empire fragmented,
and the population of the city shrank from around 1 million people to
30,000. Unlike Cahokia, Rome was never entirely abandoned. It remains a
thriving metropolis of 2.8 million people. And unlike Cahokia, the legacy of
Rome would be kept alive by dozens of later kingdoms and empires,
including the British. Cahokia's collapse was terminal, while the city of
Rome, its culture and institutions, and the eastern half of its empire
headquartered in Constantinople (now modern-day Istanbul) lived on.
Both Rome and Cahokia collapsed. How they fell and the legacy they left
varies dramatically. Rome was revered, while Cahokia was left as a bad
memory to rot in the swamps of the Mississippi.
To understand the similarities and differences of Rome and Cahokia we
need to unravel some of the biggest questions of history. Why did people
build these states and civilizations? Why did some of these first attempts to

build great power structures fall apart? Why was Rome replaced by dozens
of imitators while Cahokia's collapse was seemingly permanent? What did
these systems of power mean for the health and wealth of the people living
in them? What do these past collapses mean for us in the modern world?
Once you pull on the thread of collapse, the entire tapestry of history begins
to unravel.
GOLIATH'S CURSE
A state is a set of centralized institutions that imposes rules on and extracts
resources from a population in a territory, whether that be ancient Egypt or
the US today.8  All states throughout history have eventually ended. The
average lifespan of a state is 326 years. The largest states - mega-empires
covering over a million square kilometres - are more fragile, lasting on
average just 155 years. But these averages obscure a staggering range, from
the fleeting four-year reign of the Later Han Dynasty in China to the
Byzantine Empire of the Mediterranean, which lasted over 1,000 years.
While all states have ended, most did not end in societal collapse. Societal
collapse is a rarer phenomenon. A phenomenon that afflicts not only states
but also broader power structures. Structures that many would call
'civilization'.9
When most people speak of civilization they are referring to a few basic
ingredients: hierarchy (government, bureaucracy), the capture and use of
great amounts of energy (agriculture and monuments), and dense
populations living in close quarters (cities and urbanism). Collapse involves
a rapid and enduring loss of each of these ingredients of civilization.
Yet civilization seems to be a wholly inappropriate term for what we see
in Cahokia and Rome. It is derived from the Latin civilitas, which implies
restraint, moderation, and good political conduct. Slavery, war, patriarchy,
sacrificing teenage girls as the priests of Cahokia did, punishing slaves with
crucifixion as in Rome, or dropping atomic bombs on cities as the US did
less than a century ago, are not what most of us would consider civilized
conduct. Orchestrating mass sacrifices or building bombs that vaporize
cities does not require altruism, civility, or democracy. It requires top-down
obedience enforced through the threat of violence.

While the term 'civilization' is still commonly used, scholars have always
struggled to agree on a sensible definition. Some suggestions include an
advanced culture (an idea as vague as it is prejudiced against indigenous
peoples), or a random checklist of factors such as writing (which neither
Cahokia nor the Incan Empire had) and long-distance trade (which
essentially all hunter-gatherers conducted). The problem is that most of us
are uncomfortable in recognizing the most common element of civilization:
rule through domination.
A more apt label for these systems of violence is 'Goliath'. A Goliath is a
collection of hierarchies in which some individuals dominate others to
control energy and labour. Goliath refers to a figure from the Old Testament
(1 Samuel 17), a towering Bronze Age warrior who tormented the Israelites.
Despite his size he was eventually brought down by David, the future King
of Israel, who slung one smooth stone directly between his eyes. Similarly,
Goliath societies began in the Bronze Age, are imposing in size, rely on
violence, and can often be surprisingly fragile.
It was Goliath, not civilizations, that we saw arise in places such as
Egypt, China, and Cahokia thousands of years ago. 'Goliath' is a far more
useful term since it pinpoints what exactly changed in the lands around the
Nile, the Yellow River Valley, and the Mississippi. It was a move towards
human societies organizing, like many of our chimp cousins do, as a
dominance hierarchy. That is, a social-ranking system in which one group
or individual is placed above others owing to their ability to impose
penalties, including violence. It was the emergence of Goliath.
A Goliath is not just a state. While the Roman Empire was the political
heart of the Roman Goliath, there were other hierarchies that preceded it:
rich and poor, master and slave, man and woman. A Goliath is a collection
of dominance hierarchies organized primarily through authority and
violence.
We can use the term 'Goliath' in a similar way to civilization. We use
civilization to refer both to a general way of organizing society and to
specific societies. We speak of 'the rise of civilization', or of the 'global
civilization' of today, yet we also refer to specific civilizations, such as
China and Egypt. I'll be using Goliath in a similar manner. Goliath can
mean a general template of organizing society into dominance hierarchies
that control people and energy. It can also mean a specific set of dominance
hierarchies that often coincide with an empire, such as Rome or China.

Goliaths contain the seeds of their own demise: they are cursed. This is
why they have collapsed repeatedly throughout history.
Sometimes it is not just a single Goliath that is toppled, but an entire
group of them. Approximately three millennia ago, the Mediterranean and
Near East were ruled by a network of Bronze Age empires and states. This
Late Bronze Age world-system (around 1700-1200 BCE) included the
Egyptians, the Mycenaeans in ancient Greece, the Minoans in Crete, and
the Assyrians and Babylonians of Mesopotamia. In about 1200 BCE this
entire system began to unravel.
Around a millennium later, Europe and Asia were dominated by two
empires: the Roman Empire in western Europe and the Han Dynasty in
China. Each at their peak ruled over some 5-6 million square kilometres of
land and 60-70 million people.10
Collapses can be abrupt and unforeseen. The Han faced a small popular
uprising that snowballed into the capture of the capital and the end of their
dynasty within five years. It took under a century for Rome to go from rule
by a single emperor to being a fractured chessboard of competing
kingdoms. The fall of the Bronze Age system also took under a hundred
years to unfold. Even the most entrenched power structures can be torn
apart quickly and unpredictably.
As far as we can tell, no one living at the time anticipated the demise of
these empires. Apart from individual disasters, famines, and sacked cities,
they likely did not know they were living through a collapse. While a
historian may see collapse as a graph of falling population or territory, the
first-hand experience is far different. People living through collapse tasted
the fear on their tongue while fleeing a city, they felt the heady rush of
anger while raiding a granary, and they heard the screams of conflict
coming closer. But we can see clearly only when looking back. Collapse
may be invisible until after it has occurred. We may be today living through
a collapse that is for now slow and imperceptible.
Gazing up at the faded marble columns of Rome or the abandoned
granite bones of Machu Picchu often brings a sense of tragic inevitability. A
reminder that death comes not just for every individual, but also for every
great power structure. Percy Shelley caught that feeling in his sonnet
'Ozymandias':
And on the pedestal, these words appear:

'My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings,
Look on my Works ye Mighty, and despair!'
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay
Of that colossal Wreck, boundless and bare
The lone and level sands stretch far away.
Both Ozymandias and real-world examples, such as ancient Rome, evoke
a certain ominous uncertainty. Will we face the same fate? Collapse is the
spectre that haunts the victors of history.
Collapses throughout history can offer an insight into how and why
different power structures unravel, and whether there are any patterns
across the millennia. History is a vast database we can learn from, but it
must be done soberly. Bear in mind that Shelley's Ozymandias was
modelled on the Egyptian pharaoh Ramesses II (Ozymandias was the Greek
version of his name) and it was not a lament for pharaohs or for lost
civilizations. Shelley was a staunch believer in republican rule, and the
poem was a reminder about the ephemeral nature of tyrants such as
Ramesses II.
Historical collapses are neither uniform nor apocalyptic. Many historians
and archaeologists now prefer to speak of 'transformation' rather than
collapse. While some were quick, others were protracted, taking entire
centuries to play out. Cahokia lost half its population in half a century,
while the fall of the Western Roman Empire took multiple generations. The
effects also varied depending on who and where you were. A woman born
in Roman Britain in 360 CE could have grown up in a prosperous market
town using currency, speaking Latin, seeing columns of Roman soldiers,
and glimpsing the bathhouses of the elite. If she lived to sixty, she would
have inhabited a Britain with no large towns, no currency, no Roman
soldiers or administrators, abandoned bathhouses and monuments, and
surrounded by pagan immigrants who didn't speak a word of Latin. By
contrast, an aristocrat in southern France during the same period would
have experienced little change, apart from who they paid their taxes to. To a
historian, the fall of Rome may look like an obvious event in global history.
To a peasant in Spain, it may have barely been perceptible. Collapse is
partly in the eye of the beholder.11
The people and culture of collapsed states often persist after the fall. The
language, customs, and culture of Rome lived on through new Germanic

rulers, and the empire itself persisted for another millennium through the
Eastern Roman Empire. The US Senate was inspired by Rome, and the
Roman language of Latin is still used in institutions today. The Incan
language of Quechua is still spoken by around 10 million people today in
Peru and surrounding areas. Much of the Mississippian culture that Cahokia
pioneered lived on in future Native American communities for centuries,
even if the experiment with cities and rulers was forgotten.12  Collapse
reveals the fragility of empires, but also the resilience of culture and
communities.
Collapse doesn't just change across space, but also over time. And the
future of collapse looks far grimmer than the past.
OUR FRAGILE FUTURE
We live in a uniquely dangerous time. Our world is scarred by a pandemic,
beset by unprecedented global heating, riven by inequality, dizzied by rapid
technological change, and living under the shadow of around 10,000
stockpiled nuclear warheads. Since the invention of the atom bomb the
world has come frighteningly close to nuclear war at least a dozen times.
The climate change we face is an order of magnitude (ten-fold) faster than
the heating that triggered the world's greatest mass extinction event, the
Great Permian Dying, which wiped away 80-90 per cent of life on earth
252 million years ago. Viruses can now spread at the speed of a jet plane,
and computer viruses at the speed of an internet connection.13
The better-known and more deeply studied threats of nuclear war and
climate change are joined by new, more hypothetical technological terrors.
In 2023, hundreds of AI scientists and other luminaries (strangely including
the CEOs of the main companies building these new AI systems, such as
Sam Altman of OpenAI and Demis Hassabis of Google DeepMind)
released a statement warning against the risk of human extinction from AI.
They fear that an uncontrolled, ultra-intelligent machine whose interests are
not aligned with those of humanity (or at least most of us) will either
destroy or enslave us. Other scholars, including biological scientists, have
warned of advances in bioengineering that could create doomsday diseases
- far more contagious and deadly than anything that has ever existed. And

those are just the present threats. Who knows what new hazards rapid
technological change could conjure in the coming decades. The confluence
of these different threats has led some to call our current predicament the
'metacrisis', 'the precipice', or a 'global polycrisis'.14
Such apocalyptic angst is not new. Every age has its doomsayers and
extinction panics. In the 1920s Winston Churchill warned that humankind
was in the unprecedented situation of being able to 'unfailingly accomplish
its own extermination' in the morbidly titled essay 'Shall We All Commit
Suicide?' The Czech play R.U.R. (which coined the term 'robot', derived
from the Slavonic robota, meaning servitude or forced labour) told the story
of an uprising of intelligent machines that wiped out their human masters.
This occurred in the 1920s, a time still reeling from a global pandemic, the
First World War, and rapid industrialization. This doesn't mean that either
current concerns, or those from a century ago, are invalid. It means that we
need a reliable way to put the current threats we face into perspective.15
The history of collapse is the most relevant historical phenomenon we
can learn from. The present is an extension of the past. The past can tell us
how catastrophes have unfolded, how people have proved resilient to them,
and why we find ourselves in our own acutely dangerous predicament.
Looking at collapse also forces us to confront how societies can destroy
each other, as well as produce threats that undo themselves. Collapse isn't
just about how great power structures die, but also about how they kill.16
History can also help us understand the origins of the risk we are facing
today. Studies of current global risk tend to become a checklist of different
threats: nuclear weapons, climate change, pandemics, and AI. Focusing on
each in isolation and looking for technical solutions - such as building
benevolent, controllable AI systems - is useful yet short-termist. In 1950
there was only one well-known global risk: nuclear weapons. Diplomatic
efforts in the 1980s to reduce nuclear stockpiles by around 80 per cent were
welcome, yet they haven't stopped the world from spiralling into new arms
races with algorithms or killer drones, or stockpiles mushrooming again. If
we don't find a way to address the underlying drivers of arms races, then
we are doomed in the long term. We need to reverse the root causes of
global risk, not just build new technology to cope with the symptoms.
Competing companies and countries didn't just appear overnight; they
have a history that can be traced back to human psychology. Fundamental

psychological factors and the environmental changes that allowed them to
shape the world are the root causes.17  Excavating these root causes can
help us determine what we can do next to safely navigate the coming
decades and centuries. This excavation of root causes will take us all the
way back to 300,000 years ago, when we first developed as a species.
Yet while a future clouded by threats such as nuclear weapons, climate
change, and uncontrolled technological change may seem dire, collapse has
not always been a bad thing. Throughout history it has been a blessing for
many.
A BLESSING IN DISGUISE
Somalia is often used as an example of a modern-day collapse. In 1991, the
small sub-Saharan African country fell into civil war. It had been ruled by
the brutal dictator Mohamed Siad Barre since a bloodless coup in 1969 put
him in power. Armed rebel groups began to surface in the 1980s, before
overthrowing the Barre regime. Centralized government was lost, a power
vacuum opened, and Somalia became what many would call a 'failed state',
or even a collapsed one.
But the loss of the Somali state was a blessing for its citizens. A decade
later almost every indicator of welfare and development had improved
compared to life under the Barre regime. The number of mothers dying
during childbirth had decreased by 30 per cent, infant mortality had been
reduced by 24 per cent, and extreme poverty had dropped by almost 20 per
cent.
Many difficult-to-measure aspects of life also flourished. Under the Barre
regime, media was censored, foreign travel restricted, and many forms of
free speech (including 'gossip') and free association could be punished by
death. After the state collapsed, people spoke more openly and moved
freely across borders, while numerous media outlets thrived.
Yet these advances cannot be explained purely by the collapse of the
brutal Barre government. Somalis' lives improved in most development
indicators even relative to their more stable neighbours in Kenya, Djibouti,
and Ethiopia. The only areas of life that got worse were school enrolment
and adult literacy, mainly because Western donors withdrew their aid from

education programmes. Local militias and governments proved to be more
responsive and less extractive than the UN-recognized (and US-backed)
reign of Barre. Somalia was better off stateless.18
Somalia's experience is not unique.19  Many historical cases of collapse
may have been a net benefit for many citizens. This should not be too
surprising: most states of the past were predatory constructs not dissimilar
to Barre's government.
Despite their splendid ruins, we need to keep in mind the ugly reality of
past empires. Rome was an autocratic machine for turning grain into
swords. Between 410 and 101 BCE the Roman Republic was at war for well
over 90 per cent of the time.20  The Roman Empire was the largest slave
system ever to have existed, enslaving around 100-200 million people
during its reign.21  The Incan Empire was an ethnic pyramid scheme with
the ruling Sapa Inca regularly and forcibly displacing hundreds of
thousands of people (perhaps up to a third of the empire's population).22
The different Egyptian kingdoms were national economies organized
around a royal burial cult. Much of the workforce was mobilized to build
grand cemetery monuments, such as pyramids, to ensure a few leaders' safe
passage into the afterlife. Today, many look at the Great Wall of China as an
impressive achievement, a wonder of the world. It's easy to forget that it
was built by prisoners and slave labour, and was intended not just to keep
mounted raiders out but to keep citizens in.23
Most empires strove to be endless. The poet Virgil wrote of how the god
Jupiter gifted to Romulus, the founder of Rome, an 'empire without end'.
The Nazi regime dreamed of a thousand-year Reich. We should be grateful
that such quests for imperial immortality have been repeatedly
unsuccessful.
The collapse of a Goliath is not always a largely beneficial affair, as it
was with Somalia. It can involve mass displacement, the breakdown of
long-distance trade and communication, an end to government services,
increased violence, the abandonment of writing and loss of some
technologies, and large-scale loss of life. The more typical view of collapse
as a historical tragedy is not entirely unwarranted. Collapse is a process that
has costs and benefits, winners and losers.

This more complicated picture is often missing in popular depictions of
collapse. The experience of Somalia and the blessings of collapse may seem
unexpected because the entire idea of collapse is shrouded in myth. It is
rooted in deep beliefs about human nature and our apparent need for
hierarchy. The most popular image of collapse is that, in the absence of a
powerful authority, chaos and disorder reign; people turn to violence in a
panicked scramble for resources. Hence, the misguided doomsday 'prepper'
strategy of gathering guns, ammunition, and tinned foods into remote
bunkers. Such myths inform how we think about history. It's common to
envision the past as a series of rises into golden ages during the peak of an
empire and falls into post-collapse dark ages. These stories are the
hallmarks of disaster movies, fictional post-apocalyptic stories, and
bestselling non-fiction books. And these stories persist because the history
we have is, of course, not an objective account of the past. It was written on
parchment and engraved in stone by the conquerors and slave-owners of the
past.
A 1 PER CENT VIEW OF HISTORY
'The whole of Upper Egypt died of hunger and each individual had reached
such a state of hunger that he ate his own children.' This inscription comes
from the autobiography of Ankhtifi, a southern provincial governor of
Egypt during the end of the Old Egyptian Kingdom c. 2181-2055 BCE. The
story etched into his tomb depicts an almost cosmic breakdown of law and
order.
Ankhtifi was not alone in describing the loss of the Old Egyptian
Kingdom as a tragedy. The Admonitions of Ipuwer, a collection of poems
written on papyrus scrolls decades later, also paints an ugly picture. It is a
typical example of what historians call 'lamentation literature', which gazes
mournfully back at a fallen empire and lists a series of evils that befell it,
ranging from civil war to famine. The Admonitions of Ipuwer described
what is known in Egyptian history as the 'first intermediate period', or what
most of us know as a dark age.24
Yet the fall of the Old Egyptian Kingdom, as told through Ankhtifi's
autobiography, was deceptive. It seems that there was a drought, but there is

little evidence of mass death, starvation, or cannibalism as reported in his
inscription. The pharaoh lost power, and there does appear to have been
increased conflict, but it was not a complete catastrophe. Instead, non-elite
tombs became richer and more common. Grave goods, monuments, and
amuletic symbols that had previously been used only by an elite became
more widely available. Egyptologists refer to it as a 'democratization of
religion'. Government decentralized to provincial levels. Nobles became
more impoverished, while commoners appear to have become richer and
more socially mobile.25
The Admonitions of Ipuwer confirms this. Most of the text is a tirade
against the empowerment of the peasants and an inversion of the social
order:
The corn of Egypt is common property ...
Indeed, the poor man has attained to the state of the Nine Gods,
he who could not make a sarcophagus for himself is now the
possessor of a tomb ... Behold, noble ladies are now on rafts,
and magnates are in the labour establishment,
while he who could not sleep even on walls is now the possessor of
a bed.
Servants spoke freely. The nobles lamented. And the poor
rejoiced.26
The horror of servants gaining free speech and the collective ownership
of collectively produced food is not usually what comes to mind when one
thinks of collapse. Though clearly it was for the writers of the Admonitions
of Ipuwer. The poems expend far more energy fretting about this reversal of
fortunes than on war and starvation.
Many people benefited from the fall of the pharaoh and the Old Egyptian
Kingdom. As a nomarch (provincial governor) of Upper Egypt, Ankhtifi
himself may have been a beneficiary. When the authority of the pharaoh
disappeared, nomarchs took on more power. Ankhtifi was buried in a
lavishly decorated tomb, which portrays him as a great saviour during this
period of instability. His autobiography was mainly an exercise in self-
aggrandizement.
Ankhtifi and lamentation literature more generally are emblematic of a
key problem: the 1 per cent view of history. Most of the archaeological

evidence we have - palaces, pyramids, and written records - is all from the
smallest, wealthiest class.
We judge historical collapse based on what archaeologists have dug up.
The easiest remains to find are monumental structures such as palaces,
temples, and fortresses, as well as grand burials with a few prized
individuals buried with their weapons and jewellery. In short, the more stuff
you produced and left behind, the larger your entry in the archaeological
record. Unfortunately, the vast majority of people in the past left faint,
biodegradable fingerprints. For over 99 per cent of humanity's time on earth
people have not lived in cities but as foragers or as peasant farmers.27  Even
at the height of the Roman Empire around 90 per cent of the population
were rural farmers. And yet, we know most about what happened to a few
palaces and city centres, not the thousands of farms and villages.28
This leads to problems when studying ancient collapses. Did the fall of
the Classic Lowland Maya and the Western Roman Empire lead to large-
scale losses of life or mass displacement? People who leave cities and move
back to the land leave behind fewer traces. They become archaeologically
invisible. This migration from urban to rural areas can make it difficult to
tell whether much of the populace perished or simply moved away. It can
also make it difficult to know how their lifestyles changed, giving us a
skewed picture of how collapse unfolded.29
The elite bias is most evident in writing. Writing and other forms of
documentation were an exclusive art for government bureaucrats and
aristocratic representatives up until the invention of the printing press. The
earliest forms of fully fledged writing, dating back to around 3000 BCE in
Mesopotamia, were not letters or poems but tax records, administrative
documents, and government propaganda. The first writer was probably an
accountant.
Writing, for most of human history, has not been a widespread practice.
Most people in the world couldn't read or write until the nineteenth or
twentieth century. This was because the average individual faced numerous
impediments to literacy. Writing materials were expensive and hard to
procure, writing is often difficult to learn (it takes years of training for
children even today), there were frequently restrictions (particularly for
women) on who could learn, and there was usually little to no benefit if you
were a farmer or peasant. Before the advent of the printing press, writing

was dominated by a small, select number of scribes employed by rulers and
the richest families.30
Records are also mainly penned by the victors of history. We have a deep
insight into the lives of the Roman elite, but little knowledge of the non-
state peoples who covered most of the world.31
Most of our sources tend to show collapse through the eyes of its greatest
victims: enriched elites. 'Elite' does not mean individuals who are
particularly skilled or high-performing, but rather the top 1-10 per cent of
decision-makers and wealth-holders in a society. We need to go beyond the
elite view and provide a more realistic analysis of history and collapse.
What did it mean for the health and wealth of the slaves, peasants, and
farmers?32  We need something closer to a people's history of collapse.
IS HISTORY RELEVANT FOR THE FUTURE?
A common question is whether the history of crisis and collapse in
agricultural empires can provide lessons for the modern, globalized, and
industrialized world. While many factors distinguish the modern world
from ancient history, they don't make collapse less relevant. In each of the
key dimensions of collapse - energy capture, population density, and
hierarchy - the modern world is simply an intensification of the past. The
study of collapse is more relevant than ever.
Globalized society is dependent on unfathomable amounts of energy. In
just the last 200 years energy consumption has risen ten-fold.33  The surge
in energy use can also be seen in how much energy is 'captured' per person.
That is, how much energy - calculated in terms of calories - is taken from
the environment and used by humans, whether that be for food, heating,
electricity, or construction. The average ice-age hunter-gatherer in Europe
would have captured about 4,000 calories per day. The average European
now uses around 230,000 calories.34
While fossil fuels are a new source of energy, we are still dependent on
the same few types of grains to feed almost the entire world. About two-
thirds of the world's food energy intake comes from three staple grasses:
wheat, rice, and maize. Wheat alone provides about one-fifth of global

dietary calories. We are still agrarian in our tastes, even if we now rely on
fossil-fuel-devouring production.35
Collapse tended to hit urban areas far harder than rural ones. Today we
also live in an unprecedentedly urban age. For most of human history, the
majority of humanity has lived in rural settings. It was not until 2007-8 that
over half of the global population resided in urban areas. By 2050, around
two-thirds of the global population (6 billion) are expected to live in urban
areas.36
Societal collapse is mainly about the fall of great power structures. The
world is dominated not just by cities, but by hierarchy. It is covered by a
single political type: political states. If you are reading this, you are almost
certainly a citizen of one of the 205 states that cover the world. Modern
nation-states have their roots in far more ancient institutions. The first state
was the First Dynasty of Egypt (around 3100 BCE). Now, almost every
square inch of habitable land is under sovereign rule. Previously, large
states shaped how people and disease spilled across the land. Now, they can
unleash nuclear war across continents and change the global climate.
Perhaps most importantly, the basic human psychology that has driven
war and collapse throughout human history has not changed.
Modern technology may seem like a saviour, but it also brings
unprecedented threats, whether it be nuclear weapons or fossil-fuel-driven
climate disruption. Remember that it was innovations in gunpowder, steel,
and navigation that provided the basis for the transatlantic slave trade.
A HISTORICAL AUTOPSY
We'll examine dozens of cases of collapse, from the first cities to modern
state failure, as well as a novel database of over 300 states spanning the past
5,000 years. This is the Mortality of States (MOROS) dataset, named after
the Greek god of doom. It also includes the leading work of others, such as
the Seshat Global History Databank (named after the Egyptian goddess of
knowledge), the world's largest dataset on global history, maintained by a
group of archaeologists, historians, and others.
This broad-sweeping approach diverges from how others have analysed
collapse. Most popular books on collapse have tended to focus on a few

select examples. Jared Diamond's well-known Collapse: How Societies
Choose to Fail or Survive covers five historical cases: the Pitcairn and
Henderson Islands, the Rapa Nui, the Greenland Norse, the Anasazi, and the
Lowland Maya. Four of these are small, isolated communities and three
were islands. The Lowland Maya were a collection of competing city-states
with a common culture living in a unique environment with a tropical
climate and a fragile topsoil. While these are helpful as isolated examples,
they are not necessarily the most instructive cases for the globalized,
interconnected world of the twenty-first century.
Eric Cline's magisterial 1177 B.C.: The Year Civilization Collapsed
surveys a more relevant case: the Late Bronze Age (1200-1150). The Late
Bronze Age was, in many ways, a Mediterranean microcosm of our
contemporary world: a group of diverse empires, kingdoms, and cities with
close political and trade ties. The splintering of the Bronze Age world is
informative, but there are still thousands of years and hundreds of other
cases that need to be considered. We can't discern any general patterns, and
absorb their lessons, without taking a broader view across time and space,
one that reaches back to our very beginning as a species.37  Part One
examines collapse from the dawn of our species to the emergence of the
first states. Part Two surveys the rise and fall of empires over the past five
millennia. Part Three concludes by looking at the future and the prospect of
a modern global societal collapse.
OceanofPDF.com

Part One
DAWNS AND ENDS
OceanofPDF.com

1
Hobbes's Delusion
Collapsing Back into Human Nature - Fluid Civilizations - Neither Nasty
nor Brutish - The Myth of Mass Panic - Egalitarian Origins - Killing in
the Name of Equality - Status Competition
COLLAPSING BACK INTO HUMAN NATURE
Our views of human nature and collapse have been profoundly shaped by
one seventeenth-century philosopher: Thomas Hobbes. Hobbes's mother
reportedly entered labour in 1588 when she heard that a Spanish armada
was approaching the English coast. Later Hobbes remarked that 'my mother
gave birth to twins: myself and fear', and Hobbes's life was scarred with
fear and insecurity. He lived through repeated periods of political turmoil,
including the English Civil War, during which he was exiled for eleven
years to France. His pessimistic philosophy about human nature reflected
the chaotic life he endured.
Hobbes's most lasting idea was the 'social contract': a political bargain in
which citizens give up some liberty to a supreme ruler who can provide
them with security. The monarch protects the people from each other.
Hobbes saw 'the state of nature' - life without a central political authority -
as one of perpetual war of all against all. In a much-quoted passage Hobbes
decries how this 'state of nature' would entail no navigation, no industry,
and 'no commodious building; no instruments of moving, and removing,
such things as require much force; no knowledge of the face of the earth; no
account of time; no arts; no letters; no society; and which is worst of all,

continual fear, and danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary,
poor, nasty, brutish, and short.' Without government, chaos would rule
instead.1
Hobbes had no access to archaeological finds, psychological
experiments, or anthropological ethnographies to verify these theories. So
instead, he constructed a list of assumptions about human psychology and
used them to paint a dark picture of life without rulers. People lived in the
deadly and destitute 'state of nature' until they managed to agree on a social
contract and appoint a sovereign ruler to keep them from each other's
throats.
His views are also representative of why so many people fear collapse:
once the social contract breaks, the state of nature re-emerges with dire
consequences. This bleak vision is known as veneer theory: 'a thin veneer
hiding an otherwise selfish and brutish nature'. Once civilization is peeled
away, chaos spreads like brushfire. Whether it be in post-apocalyptic
fiction, disaster movies, or popular history books, collapse is often
portrayed as a Hobbesian nightmare.2
None of this originated with Hobbes. The story of kings rising up to tame
a primordial chaos is thousands of years old. One of the foundational
documents of Hinduism, the Mahabharata of the first millennium BCE, has a
warrior reflect, 'We have learned that peoples without kings have vanished
in the past, devouring each other, the way fishes in the water eat the smaller
ones.' The Buddhist scriptures known as the Dīgha Nikāya recount how
during a mythical time of discord and theft a group of people went to the
one 'who was most handsome and good-looking, most charismatic, and
with the greatest authority' and gifted them the powers of a ruler such as the
ability to accuse and banish others. In exchange, the people offered a
portion of rice to their new leader: an early, edible tax. Similar fables of
mutual dependence between the rabble and a necessary ruler are retold in
literature throughout the ages, from Aristotle's writings about an 'elected
dictator' through to Zhou-era songs in China. Hobbes merely gave the best-
known philosophical articulation to a story that has been told for thousands
of years.3
Hobbes's ideas weren't even novel for his own time. They reflected the
Puritan Christian belief that the natural state of humanity was one of
perpetual war against each other, God, and all creation. It was only through

God's grace that they could be peaceful with each other and eventually
reach heaven. Hobbes's contemporary John Milton claimed that states were
formed 'to avoid the discord and violence that sprang from Adam's
transgression'. Earlier leaders of the Church had similarly used the
supposed sinfulness of man since the fall of Adam and Eve from the Garden
of Eden to justify the establishment of governments. Church and state
became an extension of the heavenly hierarchy on earth. Hobbes borrowed
an idea from theology and applied it to political philosophy.4
The Hobbesian worldview is closely entwined with another collapse-
related stereotype: mass panic. The story goes that as soon as a crisis hits,
whether it be a war, pandemic, earthquake, volcanic eruption, asteroid
strike, or a plague of zombies, people will react with a selfish and irrational
rush for resources. This is related to what some call 'civil disorder'.
Disasters bring out the worst in people, leading to rioting, looting, robbery,
and violence.5  Scenes of mass panic can be seen in almost every disaster
film, including Independence Day, Armageddon, and Contagion. One
survey of 448 UK citizens and emergency-response professionals suggests
that this assumption about mass discord is common.6  The Hobbesian
nightmare of panic, disorder, and bloodshed colours how we think people
act in crises.
This Hobbesian nightmare of violence and mass panic is a theory not just
about life outside government but also about human nature. Hobbes built
his image of humanity on a mythical 'state of nature', a time before
government. This is a kind of fictional, primordial situation when true
human nature shone through. There is, of course, a non-fictional parallel we
can draw on, the period from around 300,000 years ago when humans
evolved in a world without governments or great power structures. This is
commonly called the 'Palaeolithic' (see Table 1; I'll be using 'Palaeolithic'
or 'ice age' throughout the rest of the book), a time before the unusually
warm and stable climate known as the 'Holocene' began 12,000 years ago.
When scholars claim that humans are innately violent or antisocial it is built
on how humans evolved during this stateless time. The Palaeolithic can
indeed help us see our evolutionary inclinations (what is usually referred to
as human nature). That is, the innate behaviours we tend to adopt unless
culture strongly compels us not to.7

Table 1: Human epochs (BP = Before Present)
Lower
Palaeolithic
Middle
Palaeolithic
Upper
Palaeolithic
Holocene
3.3 million -
300,000 BP
300, 000 -
50,000 BP
50, 000 - 12,000
BP
12, 000 - 80 BP
Everyone has assumptions about our evolutionary inclinations,
Hobbesian or otherwise. With so many blank pieces in the puzzle of history,
we fall back on our view of innate human drives to fill in the gaps. Even the
most careful historian will still end up stitching together any loose threads
using their own unspoken assumptions about humanity.
Rather than silent assumptions or old philosophers, we are better off
relying on evolutionary biology, studies of modern foragers, and the
thousands of archaeological sites and artefacts from the Palaeolithic to
construct a picture of how human societies organized during the ice age.8
That can give us an idea of our evolutionary inclinations: the behaviours
that shape the causes of collapse and our response to disaster. The picture
that is emerging is far more interesting, and hopeful, than a Hobbesian
chaos.
FLUID CIVILIZATIONS
The Palaeolithic was a challenging time to survive. The world went through
a period of glacial cycles. During the coldest periods global temperatures
were around 5°C lower than today and glaciers covered up to 30 per cent of
the earth's surface. This would have made prolonged, intensive agriculture
impossible.9  Africa was far drier than today and littered with around
eighty-six active volcanoes.10
During this time our ancestors wandered out of Africa into the wider
world in sociable, well-connected, egalitarian, nomadic bands. This was no
random choice of social structure: it was a winning strategy to survive the
ice age.11

These egalitarian bands were cosmopolitan and varied in size. The
average was likely to have been small, around twenty to forty individuals,
but may have ranged up to 150-200 people. They were not restricted to
family members. Recent genetic evidence suggests that in many hunter-
gatherer groups less than 10 per cent of individuals in a band were closely
related.12  Each group drew on a wider pool of non-genetically close
individuals, often from far-flung territories, who may not have even spoken
the same mother tongue.13  These unrelated friends are vital. Studies of the
Agta hunter-gatherers of the Philippines and the Bayaka of central Africa
show that some types of knowledge, such as information about plants, are
more commonly shared among close friends than family members. When it
comes to keeping groups together and progressing culture, friendship is as
thick as blood.14
This almost certainly held true for our ice-age ancestors. Without webs of
friendships, we also wouldn't have seen new stone tools and rituals develop
and spread. Without intermarriage across groups to encourage genetic
diversity, we would have fallen prey to inbreeding and other genetic
problems.
Our Palaeolithic ancestors were intensely social. Not just among their
bands, but also across far broader networks. For a long time, people
believed that close human connections had a ceiling of roughly 150 people.
This is called Dunbar's number and crops up in areas ranging from the size
of church congregations to Facebook groups.15  Dunbar estimated this by
looking at the size of the neocortex (a part of the brain responsible for
higher cognitive functions) of primates relative to the size of their groups
and then extrapolating this to humans. Whether this extends to humans is
questionable, and numerous studies using updated data and multiple
methods have tended to come up with larger numbers across a wider range,
the estimates varying from 2 to 520. There is no easy, clear ceiling to our
social connections.16  It is also a little misleading. While we might have a
flexible cap on how many people we can closely know at a given time, this
doesn't stop us from frequently changing and updating our connections to
create a far larger web. Hunter-gatherer groups of today have fluid, flexible
social networks with thousands of connections. Individuals are constantly
mobile and moving between groups, picking up new friends, family, and
sometimes partners along the way. They are more like a city dweller than an

isolated family in the countryside. There is no easily numbered ceiling on
human social group size.17
Our Palaeolithic predecessors were never antisocial loners focused solely
on their families and distrustful of strangers. They were well-travelled,
well-connected socialites who usually lived in vast societies. We inherited
their innate sociability. There is a good reason why solitary confinement is
the worst punishment that can be handed out, even in prisons. Our love of
other people led to vast webs of shared culture and trade.
Our ancestors constructed a regional microcosm of the current globalized
world. They were a people on the move who traded raw materials and shell
beads over distances of about 200 kilometres per year (as egalitarian hunter-
gatherers do today). Many of these networks are truly ancient. Obsidian - a
black, volcanic glass that can be used as a tool, decoration, or blade - was
traded over 160 kilometres around 200,000 years ago while ostrich eggs
were exchanged across eastern and southern Africa at least 50,000 years
ago. Much of this was built on gift-giving and reciprocity: the impulse to
give back whenever we receive, whether that be gifts, help, or favours.18
These trade networks could overlap to spin webs of shared culture and
technology. Across the world we see that Palaeolithic foragers crafted large,
continent-spanning zones of common tools, and rituals. We may have the
African Union today, but 120,000 years ago hunter-gatherers were
exchanging genes, tools and musical instruments from one side of the
continent to the other.19  Around 43,000-28,000 years ago, across Europe
and Asia, from Siberia to France, people left similarly crafted tools,
weapons, figurines, and even artwork in what archaeologists have called the
'Aurignacian' cultural tradition. It was a zone of common culture that
surpassed the European Union in size. Similarly, people across North
America 13,050-12,750 years ago all used the same 'Clovis' tipped
projectiles, stone blades, bone rods, and other tools. Mobility was the
connective tissue of these giant cultural bodies.20  As the Cambridge
anthropologist Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias observed, 'movement was never just
a means of finding food, but of finding one another across entire
continents'.21  Think of these as fluid civilizations: networks of cooperation
built on foot by people moving and intermixing (Figure 2).22

The lives of those within these fluid civilizations were not poor,
unhealthy, or doomed to be 'short' and 'nasty'. Ice-age foragers were taller
and in better health than the farmers who took over the world. Today,
foragers are less likely to face famine than non-industrial farmers.23  The
modern forager-horticulturalist Tsimané of the Bolivian Amazon have the
lowest rate of atherosclerosis (hardening and thickening of the arteries, a
key precursor to stroke and heart disease) of any recorded group. The
Tsimané also experience less brain atrophy than their industrial
counterparts. They lose 70 per cent less brain volume as they age than their
peers in Europe and the US.24  The Tsimané are not an outlier. Reviews of
hunter-gatherer populations have found that they have exceptional health,
with low rates of obesity, diabetes, cancer, stroke, heart disease, and other
cardiovascular and metabolic health problems.25  These findings are even
more impressive given that modern foragers are often marginalized
groups.26
OceanofPDF.com


Figure 2: Fluid civilizations in Europe and North America
OceanofPDF.com

Top is the Aurignacian Culture (41,000-26,000 BCE) and bottom is the Clovis Culture (around
11,000-10,800 BCE). For both, heavier shading shows key areas of dense and intense occupation,
while lighter shading shows the general reach of the cultural zone.
The working hours of foragers also compare favourably to both
agriculturalists and modern workers. One study compared the Agta foragers
of the Philippines to an Agta group that had been paid by governments to
settle and take up rice farming. The foragers had about ten hours more
leisure time per week than their farming neighbours. While estimates vary,
most studies suggest that hunter-gatherers work around forty hours (with a
range of approximately twenty to fifty) per week. This 'work' includes
hunting, fishing, gardening, foraging, cooking, and walking through natural
landscapes. Most people would not necessarily consider this work and go
hiking or hunting for holidays. Many of these studies also classify walking,
childcare, and domestic chores as work. If we applied that same definition
to the average American, they would spend around fifty-five to seventy-
seven hours a week working.27
There is a vast difference between spending your days following orders
in an office or factory, and fishing with friends. Critically, the average
person in the world today is also not a middle-class worker in Australia or
Norway with paid holiday leave. Instead, they are more like poor farmers or
sweatshop workers in India or China.
The lives of both our prehistoric ancestors and non-state foragers were
still far from ideal. Roughly a quarter of children died before reaching the
age of one, and only half made it to puberty. Literacy was non-existent, and
many tasks involved hard labour. There are reasons to pick being a citizen
of modern Denmark over being a Palaeolithic forager.
Still, hunter-gatherers who made it past childhood generally led healthy,
happy, relatively long, and deeply social lives. A centralized authority was
not necessary to ensure coordination or prevent deprivation. Instead, our
mobility and sociality allowed us to create great webs of shared culture and
technology. All of that would have been difficult if humans had been
trapped in a state of perpetual war against each other.

NEITHER NASTY NOR BRUTISH
The key to the Hobbesian story about human nature and collapse is
violence. Without an overseer, people allegedly turn on each other. An orgy
of disorder and bloodshed is not conducive to trade, constructing buildings,
or doing anything else that involves cooperation.
It is worth pausing here to specify what we mean by violence. In this case
we can focus narrowly on direct acts of lethal aggression. This includes
both interpersonal violence (between individuals) and warfare (between
groups). Just how violent are stateless foragers?28
Foragers without a government in the modern world vary dramatically in
their rates of violence. One study across fifteen hunter-gatherer groups
found homicide rates per 100,000 person-years of life ranging from 1 (in
the Batek of Malaysia) to 1,018 (in the Hiwi of Venezuela and Colombia).
In other words, for a population of 100,000, every year there would be one
murder among the Batek and 1,018 among the Hiwi. Another found a
spectrum from the peaceable Bakairi (of Brazil) who had 0 per cent of
deaths from violent causes to the Ache (of Paraguay) who had a chilling
55.5 per cent. We thus have a range from the safest people on earth to
people whose daily existence is more dangerous than in most war zones.
Rates of violence can also change substantially over time.29
Looking across all modern foragers isn't always the most reliable
method, since these groups have been shaped by their interactions with
farmers and colonizers, including invasions and confrontations. These rates
of lethal violence among non-state peoples also misleadingly include
massacres and murders inflicted by farmers, miners, and other intruders.
This makes the high estimates of violence among foragers entirely
misleading. For instance, all the cases of large numbers of Ache being killed
(often mistakenly reported as war-deaths) were due to slave-traders and
Paraguayan frontiersmen. Similarly, many of the instances of lethal
violence among the Hiwi (and all reported war-deaths) were caused by
invading ranchers.30  These statistics also include homicides fuelled by
alcohol or drugs, which were usually introduced by colonizers. Many of the
deaths are better attributed to colonization than to our immutable ancient
instincts.31

Rather than just looking at living examples of stateless hunter-gatherers,
we can turn to archaeological evidence. In 2013, the anthropologists
Jonathan Haas and Matthew Piscitelli of Chicago's Field Museum
conducted the most comprehensive analysis of violence in pre-history. They
looked at almost 3,000 skeletons from over 400 sites before 10,000 BCE.
They concluded that interpersonal violence in the Palaeolithic was rare and
warfare absent. Only six sites contained any indications of violence at all.
One was a triple burial in the Czech Republic, although none of the
skeletons bore any of the telltale signs of a grisly death. Four more sites had
one or more individuals with projectile points embedded into their bones.
However, these could have been accidents, perhaps a mishap while hunting.
The only legitimate site that indisputably shows interpersonal violence is as
famous (at least among archaeologists) as it is exceptional: Jebel Sahaba in
Sudan. At this site, fifty-eight skeletons were buried, twenty-four of which
had signs of violence etched into their remains. Yet the injuries seemed to
be repetitive, and some were healed. This may suggest occasional raids and
ambushes rather than a single bloody war. The site also dates to 12,000-
10,000 BCE, at the very end of the Palaeolithic during a time of
environmental upheaval when the planet warmed and exited the ice age.32
Another systematic study produced similar results to Haas and Piscitelli:
the observed deaths in the archaeological record equate to a 1.3 per cent
violent death rate. In other words, about one in every hundred people died
due to some form of physical violence, whether that be a hunting accident
or interpersonal conflict. This makes the Palaeolithic more or less as
peaceful as the modern world. Today, about 0.9 per cent of deaths globally
are due to homicides or war. Another 1.3 per cent are today due to suicide,
putting total violent deaths at 2.2 per cent.33
These numbers may seem surprising. Many famous accounts suggest that
the Palaeolithic was a war zone with homicide rates of 15-25 per cent.
Perhaps the most well-known is Steven Pinker's The Better Angels of Our
Nature, which estimates a Palaeolithic violence rate of 15 per cent. These
numbers don't stand up to scrutiny. The anthropologist Brian Ferguson has
shredded the list of twenty-one archaeological sites that Pinker draws from:
three are duplicates, three have only one case of violent death (no reliable
indication of war), and another has no war fatalities at all. Of the remaining
two-thirds, only one case dates to the Stone Age. The systematic studies of

Hass, Piscitelli, and others, which found a much lower rate, are a far better
guide to violence before the Holocene.34
The skeletal record of low rates of violence is reinforced by the history of
cave art. Before 8000 BCE, there are thousands of depictions of humans
hunting and butchering animals. There are only three caves with art that can
be interpreted as depicting human-on-human killing. Cosquer, Cougnac,
and Pech Merle in France collectively contain four images that could be
construed as a figure punctured with spears. Yet even that reading seems
suspect: two of the figures have tails (see Figure 3) and the other two more
closely resemble a goat antelope frequently drawn in other caves.35
Phylogenetic evidence (studying the evolutionary relationships between
species using genetics) can also shed light on our proclivities for both war
and peace. One study surveyed the rates of violence within species for
1,024 mammalian species to predict how violent humans should be. Species
that are genetically closer to us, such as chimpanzees, should be a better
predictor than mammals generally of how murderous humans are. Their
analysis suggests that prehistoric hunter-gatherers have an interpersonal kill
rate of about 2 per cent, similar to other great apes. In other words, for
every hundred ancient foragers, two would have died from a lethal attack
from another human. That is hardly evidence of a belligerent nature or of
Palaeolithic war. And it is ten times or so lower than the 15-25 per cent kill
rates that more pessimistic scholars have claimed. There is also evidence
that we are less violent than some of our primate relatives.36

Figure 3: Human or horse?
The figure on the left is from Cougnac cave and the one on the right is from Pech Merle cave, both in
France. Both have been interpreted by some as humans riddled with spears and arrows. Ask yourself,
do these look like unfortunate victims of war, or a successfully hunted horse, buffalo, or antelope
goat, complete with tail?
Scholars frequently cite examples of warfare and fighting among
chimpanzees as evidence that we are genetically predisposed towards
violence. Yet chimps and humans are quite different. Chimpanzees have
developed several genetic changes that allow them to endure more pain,
heal more rapidly, and stay calm during high levels of stress. These are
adaptations to higher levels of interpersonal violence. They were also all
genetic changes that appeared to have happened after humans and
chimpanzees diverged from a common ancestor.37  This is evidence of our
relative peacefulness, not aggression. And those few examples of chimp
'warfare'? Most of them seem to be caused by human interference, whether
that be the destruction of chimpanzee habitats causing territorial conflicts or
anthropologists feeding chimps.38  It's important to bear in mind that
chimpanzees are just one of our primate relatives which is often cherry-
picked to cast humans in a bloody light. We have other relatives, such as
bonobos, among whom violence between groups is virtually absent.
Perhaps the most compelling proof of our relative pacifism comes from
our simple reluctance to hurt each other. Interviews with soldiers,
examinations of weapons, analysis of combat photos, and re-enactments of
battles all suggest that in past conflicts weapons were often unused by well

over half the combatants, and that soldiers often misaimed intentionally to
avoid hurting their enemies.39
It wasn't until the Vietnam War that the US developed more immersive
training experiences to overcome this squeamishness and brainwash men
into being better fighters.40  The truth is that most of us are not hardwired to
hurt or kill each other. We need to be programmed to commit murder.
This doesn't match the Hobbesian story. If our deep past was marked by
persistent battles, then shouldn't we be aggressive killers? The pacifists and
peaceniks would have been killed off before they could reproduce. Soldiers
today shouldn't need so much training and moulding. They certainly
shouldn't be psychologically scarred by being on the battlefield.
This scenario of pre-history as a war zone also doesn't fit with the
presence of fluid civilizations. If there were such high rates of violence,
especially between groups, then long-distance trade and constant migration
across groups would have been offputtingly risky. No one wants to walk
across a war zone. Yet we see ample evidence of trade, intermingling, and
the sharing of culture and technologies across vast areas of the world. None
of this is to say that there wasn't competition between groups or that
violence didn't exist in the Palaeolithic. Rather, lethal conflict was muted
with a maximum of around two out of every hundred people dying owing to
interpersonal violence (if the genetic evidence proves reliable). That makes
the Palaeolithic a little safer than the modern world (if we include suicide)
and far safer than most other historical periods. Small-scale war may still
have existed, but we simply have no evidence for it.41
Palaeolithic violence was probably highly personal. With little inequality,
there would have been few material rewards for killing others. One study of
148 deaths in modern nomadic hunter-gatherers found that 55 per cent were
caused by violence between individuals. Two-thirds were due to interfamily
disputes, accidents, in-group executions (usually of an aspiring tyrant or
violent individual), and sexual jealousy.42  We should take evidence from
more recent hunter-gatherers with a dose of scepticism, but in this case it is
limited to nomadic groups who have lifestyles and food-gathering strategies
similar to those of our Palaeolithic ancestors. It is also simply logical that
violence in the Palaeolithic would be similarly personal, given the lack of
wealth to fight over. Crimes of passion will be as old as human emotions;
war, however, is a modern phenomenon.

At this point a sceptic might still argue that, while we can cooperate, our
true violent, disorderly tendencies emerge during a time of scarcity and
crisis. Disasters reveal our true nature. Palaeolithic foragers may overturn
Hobbes's view of human nature in general, but what about during a
collapse?
THE MYTH OF MASS PANIC
Scholars of modern disasters refer to the idea of 'mass panic' as a myth.
Groups panicking and devolving into a directionless rabble is ubiquitous in
Hollywood films and the warnings of politicians but is rarely spotted among
actual crises. Instead, people rapidly self-organize to provide medical care,
support, and essential services.43  Fifty years of sociological, psychological,
and documentary evidence has converged on this simple yet profound
finding. It has been reported in study after study, including earthquakes,
hurricanes, terrorist attacks such as 9/11, and the mass bombings of
cities.44  The world crumbles away, often revealing the best in us - our
cooperative, civil side.45
People not only tend to respond quickly, creating alternative
arrangements for services that may have been disrupted, but they also tend
to remember these moments of disruption with fondness. They describe a
peak experience where the fabric of reality split open and revealed not
chaos, but the possibility of a more intimate and meaningful community.
Rebecca Solnit explores this beautifully in A Paradise Built in Hell,
showing that, whether it be 9/11 or the 1985 Mexico City earthquake,
people usually respond with empathy, generosity, and resourcefulness.46
It makes sense when we think of this from an evolutionary perspective.
The winning strategy to surviving in the Palaeolithic was to use our
mobility, extreme sociality, and broad connections to our advantage during
calamity. If there was extreme weather in one area, rather than panic, you
could migrate to a set of friends or relatives elsewhere as a social safety net.
We still see this among the nomadic Ju/'hoansi of South Africa today. They
maintain long-distance gift-giving and sharing relationships (Hxaro
exchange partnerships) up to 200 kilometres away as a kind of insurance

policy. When disaster strikes, they can rely on these distant friends for
shelter, food, and companionship. Many other egalitarian foragers have
similar arrangements. This is logical: individuals who could rely on their
social networks during disaster were more likely to survive and pass on
their genes (as were their friends whom they would have supported as well).
That same evolutionary logic also applies to groups. If a Palaeolithic
group of hunter-gatherers were hit by a drought, a storm, or a volcanic
eruption, then responding with panic would have only made things worse.
Groups who reacted with disorder would have been less capable of an
effective emergency response, such as sharing food and migrating to
friends, while those who worked together would have survived and passed
their genes and culture on.
The prevalence of cultures of hospitality towards guests may even be a
relic of this ancient approach to handling disasters. The Greeks and Romans
had the idea of hospitium, the divine duty of the host to help, entertain, and
even give gifts to guests. Hospitium was underpinned by cautionary tales of
the god Zeus disguising himself as a beggar to punish those who abused
their guests and reward the hospitable hosts. The Norse too had an emphasis
on guest rites with similar stories of Odin dressing as a traveller to test
different households; the Indian Upanishads advise Atithi Devo Bhava: the
guest is akin to god. Being kind to visitors and strangers in need is perhaps
the lingering memory of how we helped each other through the ice age.
Fluid civilizations may have even been partly driven by this friendly
solution to managing disasters. Treating guests with great kindness would
have encouraged mobility and sharing, especially when faced with
disasters. That, of course, wouldn't have happened if mass panic had been
our automatic response.
It would be strange if people's response to historical collapse was
contrary to both modern behaviour and evolutionary logic. Rather,
historians see the same displays of communal resilience and solidarity
throughout cases of societal collapse from antiquity to the modern world.47
Collapse is not a matter of reverting to instinctual violence and civil
disorder. Whether it be the sack of Rome, or famine in Egypt, or Covid-19,
the response of most people is not mass hysteria, selfish struggle, or
pervasive conflict. It is instead often fairly egalitarian altruism.

EGALITARIAN ORIGINS
For the vast majority of human history there were no chiefs, commanders,
or aristocrats. There were none of the usual signs of disparities in power,
whether that be unequally sized dwellings or an individual or group buried
with especially extravagant goods. These indicators didn't unambiguously
appear until around 11,000 years ago, once we exited the ice age. Our
Palaeolithic ancestors were egalitarian.
Part of this was simply due to the environment they lived in. In a world
of volatile weather and scarce resources, being constantly on the move was
a necessity. That mobility also meant that few resources could be carried
around or hoarded. This prevented the build-up of economic inequality.
Human numbers were also incredibly low and widely dispersed. By the
Late Palaeolithic, the combined populations of Europe, Africa, Asia, and
Australia totalled roughly half a million people. That's about the population
of a small city such as Bristol in the UK or Atlanta in the US. It would have
been easy to escape anyone who tried to dominate a group.
Yet this egalitarianism was not a passive condition but an active choice.
Modern egalitarian foragers have an array of customs and traditions to
strictly enforce sharing. The Ju/'hoansi swap arrows before a hunt and it is
the original owner of the arrow - not the hunter who fires it - who allocates
the meat from a kill. Thus no single hunter is ever able to amass a resource
surplus over the rest of the group. Such food sharing is common across
egalitarian foragers where any refusal to share food or resources is met with
opprobrium (there is evidence of meat sharing from Palaeolithic carcasses
too).48  This makes good evolutionary sense: no individual could rely on
being the most successful hunter or gatherer every day. Sharing was both an
insurance mechanism and a bonding method. That love of sharing is deeply
ingrained in us. For most of us, the best activities are ones that are shared,
whether food, jokes, beds, or lives.49
Sharing also meant sharing political power. Democracy comes from the
Greek words demos ('people') and kratos ('power'). Democracy is people
power: how equally shared is the ability to govern and make decisions. It is
a spectrum of (more or less) equal and inclusive political practices. Any
endeavours that require collective decision-making can be democratic,
whether it be workplaces, families, or organizations. Across the board,

hunter-gatherers tended to be deliberative and inclusive, often more so than
even modern democracies.50
In many modern forager communities, decisions are made either by
individuals or by consensus. Many foragers, from the Huron peoples of
North America to foragers in central, southern and eastern Africa, regularly
practise small-scale consensus deliberations. There are no permanent chiefs
or commanders. When leaders do appear - individuals who are more
outspoken, persuasive, or respected and heeded by the community - they
are shackled by expectations. They are expected to be modest, generous,
and egalitarian, and are kept politically toothless. The anthropologist Robert
H. Lowie in his studies of numerous hunter-gatherer groups across the
Americas, such as the Ojibwa, the Dakota, and the Nambikuára, found that
chiefs had no power to impose decisions on others. They were more like
unpaid facilitators. Again, while we can't easily extrapolate from present
hunter-gatherers to ancient ones, the evidence suggests that a similar model
was followed in the Palaeolithic. We have no signs of enduring inequality or
hierarchy, and modern nomadic-egalitarian groups who have the lifestyles
closest to our deep past are especially democratic.
Today, we often make the mistake of thinking that democracy is a
Western invention and simply a form of representative government using
elected officials. This is just one recent, elitist model of democracy. It can
first be seen in the parliaments of bishops, warrior aristocrats, and the rich
organized by Alfonso IX in León, Spain, around 1188 CE to achieve support
for increased taxes. Britain later adopted a similar parliamentary system,
which it exported throughout the world during colonization.
Democracy goes far deeper than this. It can be direct democracy, like an
assembly of citizens collectively deciding on whether to go to war or what
to build. We see signs of these in ancient Africa, China, and Mesopotamia.
It can be sortition, where citizens are randomly selected to represent their
peers. Ancient Athenian democracy (from about 508 until 322 BCE) was a
combination of both assemblies of free men and magistrates selected
randomly by lottery. The democracy of hunter-gatherers, with major
decisions decided on by a group of equals, is even more intensely
democratic than the Greek version, which was restricted to free adult men.
All evidence suggests that political power was widely shared in the

Palaeolithic and group decisions were made democratically. Democracy is
humanity's default political system.51
When we think of this in terms of power, each form (political, economic,
violent, and information) was evenly distributed. Perhaps a particularly
skilled shaman or warrior may have temporarily gained an advantage over a
group, but we have no signs that this ever resulted in a lasting hierarchy. We
had a division of labour but this never resulted in a large, lasting division of
power. There is also a compelling evolutionary reason behind our
democratic-egalitarian origins. One written in blood.52
KILLING IN THE NAME OF EQUALITY
Those who didn't share, or tried to bully others, were met with harsh
sanctions. These 'counter-dominance' strategies were originally
documented by the anthropologist Christopher Boehm, for a wide variety of
foragers. Such strategies to keep would-be dominators in check included
teasing, gossiping, shaming, ridicule, and even expulsion from the group.
The most severe cases could result in death. Among the modern Ju/'hoansi
there was a skilled hunter named /Twa who was causing problems. He was
impulsive and brutal, having killed three others. The Ju/'hoansi took matters
into their own hands: 'All the men fired at him with poisoned arrows' until,
one informant recalled, 'he looked like a porcupine'. Then, after he was
dead, all the men and women stabbed him with spears. It was a symbolic
way to share responsibility for his death. /Twa's attempt to dominate his
peers cost him his life. The fate of /Twa might explain the few skeletons
marked by lethal violence in the Palaeolithic.
This violent edge to egalitarianism began around 2 million years ago.
Anatomical changes in our shoulder joint around this time allowed for
accurate throwing, whether that be of rocks or spears. (Other primates can,
of course, throw objects, but humans can do so with transformative power
and precision.)
These physical changes had momentous political implications. Projectiles
levelled the playing field, allowing for a single individual or small coalition
to easily defeat an aspiring alpha male (as David did Goliath). Even the
largest, most imposing fighter could easily be killed by a spear or poison

arrow during an ambush or while they slept. Around the same time, there
occurred a significant growth in brain size, with Homo erectus toting a
cranium with twice the capacity of a chimp. This growing brain seems to
have evolved largely for navigating more complex social environments,
helping our ancestors to build coalitions against any single individual who
wanted to dominate. Together, these were the evolutionary cornerstones of
counter-dominance. They led to the 'first great levelling in human
history'.53
Violence was also accompanied by more gentle pressures for
cooperation. Evolution selected for communities that could parent
collectively. Early humans faced a dilemma. Walking upright on two legs
required narrower hips, which was unfortunately a poor match for big-
brained babies. Those who had children at a younger age were more likely
to survive (as were their offspring). Unlike most mammals, our young are
helpless for their first few years of life. Individuals who could rely on help
from a community were more likely to have children who survived and
thrived (and to return the favour to those who helped them). Children
require constant care and attention, and, if the culture is to grow and evolve,
education. A group relying on a single male hunter to provide this would
quickly fall behind a more dynamic one where the youngsters are receiving
better attention, and lessons from the best hunters, fishers, cooks, and
storytellers.54
Our bodies reflect this egalitarian past. Ape groups where one alpha male
dominates, such as gorillas, tend to have much larger males with bigger
canine teeth. That is because the most physically dominant male could
defend a harem and pass on his genes. We don't see that in humans. We
have comparatively small canine teeth and the difference in stature between
men and women is a mere 15 per cent. As history played out, sharp teeth
and brawny physiques were of little use against multiple opponents hurling
spears and firing poison arrows.
Our eyes also betray our more equal past. Unlike gorillas or chimps, we
have 'cooperative eyes': you can see the whites of our eyes (the sclera),
which gives away what we are looking at. That's useful for cooperation but
isn't ideal for dominating others. It's difficult to launch a surprise attack if
your intentions are given away by your eyes. Similarly, lying, deceiving,
and manipulating others is harder to do with legible eyes. Hence why great

apes have round dark eyes, and why dictators, mafia dons, and poker
players prefer sunglasses. One study drawing on fifty-five primatologists
found that apes who were more tolerant of a direct gaze were more
egalitarian. Primates with dominance hierarchies showed little tolerance for
direct eye contact, which is associated with social status and imminent
aggression. By contrast, our high tolerance for it suggests that we evolved
in egalitarian social settings.55
This egalitarianism extended into a balance between the sexes. The fact
that hunter-gatherers usually settle in groups that are not based on kin might
seem strange from an evolutionary perspective. Surely you would want to
help and protect those who are more closely related to you and ensure your
genes get passed on? The fact that bands are so mixed and diverse can be
explained by men and women having equal choice in where to move to.
Modelling by anthropologists suggests that if men and women have the
same decision-making power and both want to live closer to their wider
family then it results in more mixed bands. Sometimes the men get their
way, sometimes the women do. The outcome is diverse, fluid groups, rather
than the men or women sticking rigidly to their families over generations.
Gender egalitarianism helped create our more mobile, diverse social
structure.56
Our ancestors did (as far as we can tell) have a rough division of labour
with men hunting and women gathering (although women occasionally
hunted too). However, a division of labour is not a division of power. Our
Palaeolithic ancestors probably had relative equality of the sexes, especially
when compared to the agricultural kingdoms that would come later.57
STATUS COMPETITION
This is no utopian vision of humanity. There would be no need for counter-
dominance strategies if at least some of us did not harbour a desire to rule.
That desire to rule stems from status competition. All of us crave status to
some degree: to be respected, admired, valued, and deferred to by others.
It's clearly visible throughout history. Emperors and kings regularly kept
harems of hundreds or thousands of wives and concubines. King Tamba of
Banaras in the sixth century BCE reportedly had a harem of 16,000

(probably an exaggeration). The conqueror Chinggis (often called Genghis)
Khan sired so many children across the lands he conquered that around 0.5
per cent of men today are directly related to him.58  Higher status through
conquest meant more children and a bigger genetic legacy. We see it
repeatedly throughout history, including with the Vikings invading eastern
England, Ireland, and Iceland, as well as the patriarchal, nomadic Yamnaya
of the Steppe sweeping through Europe.59  Similarly, genetic evidence
suggests that there was a collapse in male genetic diversity 8,000-4,000
years ago, coinciding with the intensification of agriculture and adoption of
more top-down social structures.60  The leading hypothesis is that the new
oligarchs, generals, and kings simply started to monopolize reproduction. A
few high-status individuals disproportionately passed on their genes by
having more children (and more who survived) than those of lower
status.61
This deeply ingrained desire for status is still central to the human
experience. Losing status or being humiliated is one of the worst things that
can happen to us. A dominant ethnic group losing status within a country is
the single best predictor of civil war today.62  The greatest shared common
characteristic across mass shooters is not mental illness but rather a sense of
frustrated status and a history of being socially humiliated. Because of that,
many warn against reporting about the individual killers to avoid giving
them the infamy - that is, the status - they crave.63  Falling down the status
ladder is also one of the key contributors to people taking their own lives.64
People are willing to kill for status, whether that be others or themselves.
Today, seeking to become a CEO, celebrity, billionaire, or world leader is
still often a pursuit of status. The Texas oil tycoon Haroldson L. Hunt, one
of the richest men in the world during the early twentieth century with an
estimated fortune of up to $700 million, once reflected that 'for practical
purposes, someone who has $200,000 a year is just as well off as I am.
Money's just a way of keeping score.' Getting a higher 'score' is a quest to
win the status game (Hunt had fifteen children from three wives).65  The
great longing for legacy that many of us feel, to be remembered after our
death (or the more modern desire to cheat death), is largely just a continued
quest for status beyond the grave. Status competition is hardwired into us.

Status comes in two flavours: prestige and domination. Prestige and
dominance have distinct behaviours and neurochemistry, and were selected
for by different evolutionary pressures.66  Prestige is when others want you
to lead based on the skills you can offer or your wisdom. We naturally
perceive the difference, with children as young as two readily
distinguishing between bullies and leaders.67  It's common in hunter-
gatherers that an outstanding hunter has a greater say during a hunt. They
may even be admired. Yet if the gifted hunter tries to aggrandize themselves
or order others around outside of a hunt, they will face a backlash. Prestige
existed, but it was limited and couldn't be passed down through
generations. Hence anthropologists speak of our ingrained appreciation of
'task-based leadership'.68  It's something that continues today: we admire
and often try to emulate great athletes, writers, and orators.
Domination is a different, darker strategy for achieving status. It is the
ability to gain status through violence, intimidation, or control of resources.
Dictators throughout the ages have built a towering social standing because
they could threaten to murder or starve much of the populace. We remember
Stalin, Hitler, Napoleon, and Alexander the Great because of the great
brutality they could and did wield over others. That was an enormous
change from our ancestral hyper-egalitarian foragers, who could gift
prestige and tolerate task-based leadership but were willing to kill to avoid
domination. Because of that, for most of human history, an attempt to
dominate others was more likely to get you an early burial than a place in
the history books.69
Nonetheless, a small fraction of our population persisted in their attempt
to dominate. While the desire for status is universal,70  it is not evenly
distributed. The need to compete for status varies across individuals; men
are more likely to be status-hungry. Men are also more likely to pursue
status through dominating others. In Boehm's work almost every upstart
trying to dominate the forager group was a man.71
Seeking status by dominating others isn't just more common among men.
It's also more common among certain types of people. That is, those who
rank high in what psychologists call the 'dark triad': psychopathy
(callousness, and a lack of empathy and remorse), narcissism (an inflated
sense of entitlement and self-importance), and Machiavellianism

(manipulating others for personal gain).72  It is unsurprising that the dark
triad leads to a greater tendency to try to dominate others. Psychopathy and
Machiavellianism are characterized by a disregard for others, while
narcissism is a desperation to have others recognize an overvalued ego.
The desire for dominance is not just a darker path, but also an older one.
It is one that we inherited from our primate ancestors. While higher status
does lead to greater reproductive success in humans, the effect is four-fold
higher among primates. Achieving status through dominance is also
stronger among primates. Chimps build intimidating coalitions to become
alpha males, while among gorillas a single male silverback monopolizes a
harem with size and strength.73  There is a clear evolutionary picture here:
status competition (especially through dominance) was more intense in our
hominid ancestors before Homo sapiens and then counter-dominance
strategies over the last 2 million years selected against would-be tyrants and
overly eager status seekers. Status competition - especially through
domination - is lower in modern humans but was never eliminated.74
We are stuck in this eternal bind between two evolved traits: a desire for
status and an aversion to dominance. Counter-dominance strategies and
more leadership based on prestige were reasonable outcomes, since only a
small proportion of us seek status through domination, while no one likes
being dominated. Some of us seek to rule, but if we can't then we prefer to
be equal. For 300,000 years the balance was maintained against dominance.
Not because we are innately good in our hearts, but rather because
egalitarianism was a winning strategy in the challenging conditions of the
Palaeolithic.
We can be sure that this view of our deep past is accurate because it is
supported by multiple lines of evidence, including archaeological finds,
studies in evolutionary biology, and observations of modern egalitarian
foragers. These groups include the Hadza of East Africa, the foragers of
central Africa (such as the Aka, Efe, and Mbuti), and the Khoisan of the
Kalahari Desert (especially the well-studied Ju/'hoansi of southern Africa).
These foragers are not relics from the Palaeolithic, but they are the closest
analogues of our Palaeolithic ancestors. Most live in Africa, the cradle of
humanity, and practise similar kinds of hunting and gathering to those of
our ice-age ancestors. All the archaeological sites we have from the
Palaeolithic left the footprint of egalitarian foragers with residential base

camps, hunting stands, lithic quarries, and evidence of food sharing.
Modern egalitarian foragers and ancient ice-age hunter-gatherers also
appear to have travelled and traded over similar distances.
Importantly, many of these groups appear to have had a continuous
cultural and genetic presence in their regions for over 100,000 years.
Genetic evidence for the Khoisan suggests that they diverged from other
groups around 300,000-200,000 years ago, and now represent the most
genetically diverse and divergent lineage of all living peoples in the world.
Similarly, foragers of central Africa have distinct lineages that are hundreds
of thousands of years old, and the Hadza diverged at least tens of thousands
of years ago. That is not to say that their culture has remained unchanged,
but we have no evidence that there have been large changes to their basic
egalitarian, democratic way of life.75  Indeed, remarkably they all seem to
share several characteristics; including a polyphonic song style, use of body
paint, similar creation myths and cosmologies, and an egalitarian way of
organizing.76  That is more likely to result from a shared origin, rather than
a mere coincidence. We'll never have a completely clear window into the
life of our ancestors in the Palaeolithic, but we have more than enough
evidence to be confident in this account of our egalitarian origins.
This account of our species is radically different from what Hobbes
envisaged and is one that has momentous implications. Doomsday preppers
today (and most post-apocalyptic fiction) imagine the survivors of a
collapse as being self-reliant individuals ready to deal death to stay alive.
It's a strategy that might work well in a Hobbesian fiction but bears little
resemblance to our shared history. For most of history people coped with
disasters and catastrophes by moving, giving and receiving aid, and
cooperating as equals.
We are a species that survived the ice age by being intensely social,
cooperative across groups, and equal, even during times of need and danger.
There appears to have been peace across groups, but individuals were
willing to kill, especially to avoid oppression. Those aggressively seeking
status or wanting to dominate others were both figuratively and literally cut
down. That egalitarianism is what made us human. Yet, deep down, our
primal heritage still hungers for status. Some of us are willing to lie, cheat,
threaten, and even murder for it. These traits - mobility, collaboration

(especially through reciprocity), status competition, the dark triad, and an
aversion to dominance - have shaped the course of collapse and history.
OceanofPDF.com

2
Collapse for 99 per cent of Human History
Homo solus - The History of Human Extinction - Collapse During the
Palaeolithic - Coming Together and Breaking Apart - Seasonal Cycles
HOMO SOLUS
Recorded human history is less than the tip of an iceberg. Just 10 per cent of
an iceberg is visible, while the remaining 90 per cent of its mass is hidden
beneath the surface of the water. Just the most recent ~1 per cent of human
history is visible through the lens of written records. Ninety-nine per cent of
human history occurred before the first symbols were stamped onto clay;
before states and Goliaths - hierarchies in which some individuals dominate
others to control energy and labour - emerged.
The first states arose approximately 5,100 years ago, with the First
Dynasty of Egypt. This represents around 1.7 per cent of the roughly
300,000 years that anatomically modern humans have wandered the earth.
The rise of agriculture and states across the world was unsteady and
uneven. We don't know when exactly empires and states came to capture
most of the human population. It was still an arduous process, and many
areas, such as North America, were free from permanent states until around
the eighteenth century. At best, states dominate less than 0.5 per cent of the
human timeline. What did collapse look like for non-state peoples, that is
for over 99 per cent of human history?1

For most of this time we weren't the only humans wandering the planet.
We once shared the earth with at least eight other human species including
Homo neanderthalensis (the Neanderthals). We shared territories with them,
bred with them, and likely even played and travelled with them. Our
deceased hominin ancestors left a lingering mark on most of us, with
modern non-African humans having inherited 1-3 per cent of their genome
from Neanderthals (since it was only the groups that emigrated to Europe
and Asia that met and interbred with the Neanderthals).2
It was a perilous existence for our ancestors. All our hominin cousins
died out by 40,000-30,000 years ago. Human extinction has happened
before numerous times, just not to us. We, the survivors, are Homo sapiens:
sapiens means 'one who knows' in Latin, and Homo sapiens means 'wise
man'. Perhaps we would better be known as Homo solus: the solo human,
or human alone.
THE HISTORY OF HUMAN EXTINCTION
Why did we end up alone? Extinction is the most extreme form of collapse:
energy capture, population, and hierarchy permanently reach zero.3  Such
complete ends to a social order and its people have very rarely happened
throughout history. Yet, understanding why our hominin relatives died out
can help us understand why we persisted, and what pressures ancient
sapiens would have faced. Unfortunately, apart from our genes, most of our
hominin cousins have left scant archaeological remains. This gives us few
clues as to why they perished. One exception is the Neanderthals. They left
enough evidence to permit some informed speculation about their
extinction.
It is easy to imagine that we outlasted the Neanderthals and came to
dominate the world owing to our intellectual superiority. That's part of the
story; we are remarkably intelligent but we often overestimate our
uniqueness and intelligence. For instance, chimpanzees have a better short-
term working memory than us. What is more important than our individual
intelligence is our ability to cooperate with one another.
We can cooperate flexibly and in large numbers partly because we can
share ideas to create imagined communities. It's a fundamental insight, one

that dates back at least as far as the sociologist Émile Durkheim in the
nineteenth century, before being summarized by the historian Benedict
Anderson, and later eloquently popularized by Yuval Noah Harari. A
monkey cannot identify itself as part of a mythical construct like a nation or
a company, but we humans can. Storytelling is key to our existence. Among
modern hunter-gatherers such as the Agta, storytelling is still the most
desired skill, and the best storytellers have the most children. Stories that
encourage cooperation and a shared identity also create stronger groups that
are more likely to survive. Good storytelling is evolutionarily advantageous
for the storytellers and their group.4
Stories are important not only because they create imaginary
communities but also because they can communicate ideas. Our great
superpower is 'social learning': our capacity to imitate and learn from each
other. Chimpanzees and other primates can create and use tools, such as
sticks for digging out termites, and they imitate each other. Of course, we
excel at this and can pass our ideas along to each other and down through
the generations. Tests between chimpanzees and toddlers show that, while
the chimps are comparable (and sometimes superior) in cognitive abilities,
toddlers completely outpace them when it comes to imitation and social
learning. If you and a chimpanzee were placed in a random patch of
wilderness with just your wits to survive, the chimp would outlast you. If
you had a few forager mentors who had generations of accumulated
knowledge of how to survive in that environment, you would beat the
chimp. This accumulation of selected knowledge is known as 'cumulative
cultural evolution' (for ease, I'll be calling it 'cultural evolution'). Culture
can evolve far more quickly than our bodies, which is what allows us to
adapt to a wide variety of environments, from the deserts of the Sahara to
the tundra of the Arctic. Cultural evolution, whether it be in language, tools,
technology, or traditions, is a human superpower.5
Cultural evolution is made possible by our egalitarianism and our wide
social networks. Chimpanzees lower in the pecking order are less likely to
be copied or show behaviours they learned from others if they are in the
vicinity of a dominant figure. The world is siloed in these hierarchies, and,
with fewer close interactions, juvenile chimpanzees have fewer
opportunities to master new tools and technologies. In contrast, in
egalitarian hunter-gatherers, children regularly observe and learn from

scores of individuals - individuals who walk hundreds of kilometres to
reach new groups, where they in turn share and learn. The breakdown of
social hierarchies enabled our superpower of cultural evolution.6
It was once believed that many of these traits were unique to us. The old
hypothesis was that we had a rapid 'cognitive revolution' 70,000 years ago
and acquired the magical gifts of language, imagination, and cultural
learning. The modern human brain was born. That idea is no longer tenable.
We now know that 600,000 years ago there was a radical increase in the
complexity of stone tools. In other words, hominids before us could already
learn from each other. Our ancestors were using the red pigment ochre
500,000 years ago. Ochre is commonly used for decoration during rituals.
There is evidence of abstract artwork on rocks dating from up to 158,000
years ago. These are signs that hominids already had imagination, as well as
shared ideas and rituals that were passed down across generations, well
before the so-called 'cognitive revolution'.7
We also overestimate how unique our brains are. Many of our hominid
cousins, especially the Neanderthals, were remarkably similar to us.
Neanderthals had brains that were larger than ours in size (cranial capacity).
They also had complex burial practices with their graves containing tools,
weapons, flowers, and sacrificed animals; they nursed their ill and injured;
they even appear to have adorned themselves with jewellery and feathered
decorations. All this suggests some capacity for imaginative thought,
perhaps even a belief in the afterlife, and an ability to share those ideas.8
Neanderthals even beat us to painting cave art. In three caves across
Spain are the earliest examples of cave art, which date back 64,000 years.
That is 20,000 years before we arrived in Europe. These collections of
sketched animals, handprints, and geometric shapes were created by
Neanderthal artists. The earliest cave art from modern humans - a depiction
of a human-like figure and a pig in Indonesia - is 51,200 years old.9
Neanderthals were not just similar to us mentally, but also physically. If
you walked past a Neanderthal in the street dressed in modern garb you
might not look twice (see Figure 4).10  Overall, it appears that the cognitive
differences between modern humans and Neanderthals are minor. This is a
radical change from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, when
Neanderthals were regularly depicted as club-toting brutes, to the extent
that the German Darwinist Ernst Haeckel suggested renaming them Homo

stupidus. Turns out they're just about as smart (or stupid) as we are, and
there is much to learn from their extinction.
Figure 4: 'The Neanderthal Businessman'
A model of a Neanderthal dressed as a modern businessman, contemplating what a freeze in the
mammoth market might mean for his investment portfolio.
Three possible explanations are usually offered for Neanderthal
extinction: competition, environmental change, or population vulnerability
(small, disconnected populations that could easily collapse). The
competition hypothesis posits that Neanderthals were either killed off by us,
or we were simply better hunters than they were, leaving them to starve.
Environmental factors include a cold snap that pushed Europe into subarctic
conditions 40,000 years ago. The demographic argument is that
Neanderthals were doomed in the long run owing to poorly connected,
small population numbers. This could have led to widespread problems
with fertility and inbreeding.11
One recent survey of 216 palaeoanthropologists who've published on
Neanderthal extinction shows a surprising consensus emerging:

demography was the principal cause.12  Neanderthals lived in small,
fragmented communities, making them less genetically diverse, more prone
to inbreeding, and vulnerable to population collapse owing to a small
increase in deaths (or decrease in births). An analysis of thirteen
Neanderthal remains in the Altai Mountains of southern Siberia found that
six of the members were relatives and all showed low levels of genetic
diversity. These levels are as low as those found in endangered mountain
gorillas, which live in tiny groups of four to twenty individuals.13  In
contrast, Palaeolithic humans are notable for having far higher levels of
genetic diversity and for usually being buried with distant strangers and
non-kin.
The Neanderthals' comparative lack of diversity and connection, as well
as high mortality rates, meant that all it might have taken was a few bad
winters, or an encounter with a new disease, to cause entire groups to fall
apart. With so few members, recovering without inbreeding and genetic
issues would have been difficult. Indeed, one calculation suggests that just a
1.5 per cent drop in how many Neanderthal children made it to adulthood
could have resulted in their extinction in just 2,000 years.14
These explanations are not mutually exclusive. Climate change, new
diseases, and competition with Homo sapiens could have all interacted and
led to population loss. The population vulnerability of Neanderthals made
these cuts in their numbers deeper and recovery less likely. The exact
contribution of demography, environment, and competition with humans
would have varied across time and place. Modelling by anthropologists and
physicists supports this idea that Neanderthals went extinct owing to
diverse, local causes rather than one single factor. Over centuries their
communities fragmented and diminished until the last breath of the last
Neanderthal was drawn in the cold.15
In the field of disaster risk, we refer to four determinants: threat,
vulnerability, exposure, and response (Figure 5).16  Take the case of a
tsunami. The tsunami (threat) is only dangerous if you lie in its way
(exposure), and you lack robust shelter that could withstand the wave
(vulnerability) or the ability to escape (response). For Neanderthals, climate
change and competition with us were hazards, while small, isolated
populations were their underlying vulnerability. We have little idea about
how they responded. We should think of the overall risk and how each of

these determinants contributed to the extinction of our Neanderthal cousins,
rather than bickering about whether it was just one factor.
Figure 5: The determinants of risk
Just as there was no single cause behind the extinction of the
Neanderthals, there was also no single extinction event. There were instead
a series of population collapses that eventually, cut by cut, drained the
species out of existence. Each of these local disasters would have had a
slightly different cause; one may have been triggered by disease and
another by a particularly bitter winter.
Competition with us may have been part of it, but there are no signs of
massacres or conflict. The strongest signs of violence we have are two
Neanderthal skeletons - one with a stabbed (and healed) rib and the other
with a fractured skull - but we have no idea whether these injuries were
accidental, intentional, or even caused by humans.17  No matter the threat,
the underlying vulnerability was the same: the disconnected nature of
Neanderthal communities.
The vulnerability for the Neanderthals was not their wits. Neanderthals,
too, were intelligent, and capable of making and sharing ideas and stories.
Their weakness was their fragmented, isolated groupings. In contrast,
humans had sprawling networks that formed a constant cultural and genetic
melting pot. Our fluid civilizations provided us with a safety net during lean
times, which Neanderthals lacked. We survived and became Homo solus not
(just) because of our intelligence but because of our interconnectedness.
Yet, like the Neanderthals, when those linkages were broken, calamity
wasn't far away.
COLLAPSE DURING THE PALAEOLITHIC
It was long believed that humans first left Africa in a 'Great Exit' 70,000-
55,000 years ago. The Apidima Cave in southern Greece tells a different

story. Archaeologists there uncovered a skull dating to 210,000 years ago.
That skull was of an anatomically modern human. In the same cave they
found a skull of a 170,000-year-old Neanderthal.18  Humans left Africa far
earlier than the Great Exit, spreading out to the Mediterranean and the
Levant. (However, it is likely that all non-Africans today are descended just
from that one Great Exit.)
Something clearly happened to these earlier scouting parties that departed
Africa. What fate befell them is unclear. Some may have gone extinct. Cut
off from the wider fluid civilization of humanity, they may have lacked the
genetic diversity and cultural know-how to survive in a new, alien world.
As the Neanderthals had learned, a small, isolated population is a
vulnerable one. Perhaps they fell apart in the face of ash and cold from one
of the volcanic eruptions that characterized the ice age. Maybe they were
outcompeted by their Neanderthal cousins. We like to think of ourselves as
the more successful human variant that always won out, yet there may have
been countless times when we were the losers.19
Perhaps some Homo sapiens did persist as small enclaves outside Africa
but left little to no archaeological footprint. They may have then been
subsumed by the larger wave of migrants out of the African continent
during the Great Exit. After tens of thousands of years of isolation, it must
have been quite the reunion.
Climatic swings, particularly those caused by volcanoes, can be blamed
for many of the failed migrations and losses of regional populations.
Variations in climate and hunter-gatherer populations were closely
entwined. Studies suggest that for Britain and Ireland during the Last
Glacial Maximum (27,000-19,000 years ago) climate was one of the key
drivers of population change. These changes could be dramatic.20
One event 73,000 years ago could have brought humanity close to
extinction: the massive volcanic eruption of Mount Toba, in what is now
Indonesia. This would have been the largest eruption in the past 2 million
years. It created a volcanic winter, dropping temperatures sharply in many
areas across the world and blanketing India with two and a half metres of
ash.21  The eruption seems to have created a genetic bottleneck across
Homo sapiens - a significant reduction in genetic diversity, suggesting a
large loss in population numbers. However, genetic bottlenecks don't
always mean large losses in people and many human settlements in

northern India and southern Africa continued relatively unfazed.22  North
America, Europe, and central Asia suffered far more severely than the
southern hemisphere.23  The global climate was disrupted, but regional
shelters persisted. We got lucky. It seems likely that Toba led to the die-off
of more isolated groups, such as those in the Levant, while many others in
India and elsewhere escaped relatively unscathed.
Dips in numbers, dispersal, and changes in culture were also found by
archaeologists across three large volcanic events in the northern
hemisphere: the Aniakchak eruption (~1645 BCE) in Alaska, the Mazama
eruption (~5630 BCE) in western North America, and the Laacher See
eruption (See is German for 'lake', and the explosion left a two-kilometre-
long lake in central Germany) (~11,000 BCE). The Aniakchak eruption
separated the Aleut and Inuit peoples in the Alaskan Peninsula, and may
have caused an ethnic and language divide between them that persists to
this day.24
Throughout the Palaeolithic the closest we have to a societal collapse is
the extinction of communities, largely due to environmental shocks,
especially volcanic eruptions. There were no Goliath structures like empires
to collapse. Ice-age foragers captured very little energy beyond what was
necessary for subsistence: the basic food, shelter, clothing, and technology
needed to survive and reproduce. Any large drops in energy capture meant
starvation and death. Reductions in the density of communities was one of
the few things that could happen. And it seemed to occur with surprising
frequency.
COMING TOGETHER AND BREAKING APART
Our ancestors led lives of constant flux and movement. They would break
apart during the day to hunt and gather before coming together in the
evening to share food, stories, and beds. In modern hunter-gatherers we see
groups can break off to join others, or even form their own enclave, for a
range of reasons from bickering to falling in and out of love. Sometimes
they rejoin the original community and sometimes they remain estranged.
(This could even have been a counter-dominance strategy to flee from a
megalomaniac.) These fission-fusion movements involve several smaller

groups briefly fusing together into a larger community, before dissolving
again. These patterns are common across cognitively advanced species such
as dolphins and elephants, but especially humans.25
While abandoning a city or town is a recurring feature of collapse, such
reductions in the concentration of communities were common and
advantageous for our ancestors. Moving, travelling, coming together, and
then breaking away have always been part of our human heritage. These
things helped make us human.
Constant movement across vast networks, and fission-fusion cycles, were
central to our Palaeolithic past.26  This was probably done to exchange
tools, gifts and knowledge, to build new relationships and search for
seasonal resources, and to use rituals to reaffirm the bonds that held
together scattered communities. It also helped create the social safety nets
and fluid civilizations that allowed us to survive the ice age.
There would have been the constant churn of individuals, couples, and
groups leaving one location to join friends and relatives elsewhere. There
may have been regular ceremonies throughout a year (or special events such
as marriages and funerals), which brought groups together as we see in
foragers today. For instance, the longest trips taken by the Mbendjele
Bayaka of central Africa are for Eboka ceremonies, in which they sing
together and conduct rituals to connect with forest spirits. Other times,
groups fleeing a catastrophe such as a drought would have joined far-flung
neighbours for safety. Our mobility and willingness to regularly change
groups may have even given us the unique human ability to gossip - to talk
about others who aren't currently present. Gossip was partly developed as
one way to keep a mental grasp on people who had temporarily left. It now
makes up around two-thirds of human conversation.27
Our genetics, as well as archaeological finds, suggest we lived through
cycles of isolation and connectivity. The failed early migrations out of
Africa are one example, but there are others. Researchers have found fossils
in the Democratic Republic of Congo that resemble 300,000-year-old
hominids but are only 22,000 years old.28  This seems to have been a group
that became cut-off from the broader fluid civilization of humanity. Then,
with the change of climate, they may have died off or rejoined the wider
web of people. They are just one indication of groups that became

environmentally dislocated yet persisted and developed their own unique
culture.
When these wayward communities rejoined the great human highway of
shared culture and genes, it could cause a renaissance. What have typically
been mistaken as 'cognitive revolutions' in tools and thinking are more
likely to have been the merging of previously separated groups, unions that
spark vast changes, much as the combining of cultures or technologies does
today.29
Such changes were not, of course, collapses. Yet they do show that
humans have always been mobile and prone to leaving arrangements that
were dangerous or no longer desirable. Leaving a city that is becoming
poorer with every passing year or departing an empire that is deteriorating
is not necessarily a bad thing. It is, in many ways, an entirely normal and
sensible adaptation. This was a precursor to collapse: a deeply encoded
survival strategy that can help us make sense of later collapse events. There
is another such precursor: our ability rapidly to build and dismantle entire
social structures.
SEASONAL CYCLES
Some modern hunter-gatherers don't just change the size of their
communities. At times they also shift their social structures.
We see this in the accounts of anthropologists over the past centuries
from North America to Australia. In the Great Plains, an expanse of
flatlands across the central United States and western Canada, the Lakota
and Cheyenne would change their societies with the rhythm of the seasons.
Typically, they existed in small groups reminiscent of the nomadic-
egalitarian model. That changed during the large bison hunts and 'sun
dance' rituals of the summer, when they congregated and organized into a
far more authoritarian society. A quasi-police force would form based on
clan affiliation, membership in a military club, or ad hoc appointment.
These soldiers could confiscate game, whip offenders, destroy their
property, and even kill those who disobeyed orders.30
This is not an isolated example. The Shoshone of the Great Plains of the
US lived most of the year in egalitarian, unranked families. Periodically

some would adopt 'rabbit bosses' and 'antelope shamans' to lead and
coordinate rabbit drives. In Australia, far north on the Cape York Peninsula,
the Wik-Mungkan lived nomadically during the dry season before settling
down into villages during the wet season when the plains were flooded.31
Far further north, the Inuit would hunt as small family groups under a
patriarchal figure in the summer, and then in the winter come together in
more communal, egalitarian settings where partner sharing was practised.32
Across the world, people came together and broke apart, fusing and
splitting, changing their customs, politics, and even sexual norms in the
process.
These seasonal gatherings also disproportionately resulted in the building
of impressive new ritual sites and temples. Stonehenge in the UK was built
between 3000 and 2600 BCE, probably by herders practising seasonal
ceremonies. For migrating pastoralists, such gatherings around great
monuments could have provided a time to cross-breed animals (to ensure
better genetic diversity and health), find partners, and host great feasts and
alliance-building marriages. Similarly, Göbleki Tepe in eastern Turkey was
seemingly built by foragers 9,000 years ago as a seasonal settlement near a
point where migrations of gazelle passed. It is a vast site of twenty
megalithic structures, including 5.5-metre-high, eight-tonne T-shaped pillars
sculpted with images of predators, prey, headless men, and a surprisingly
high number of phalluses.33
These seasonal cycles are, like fission-fusion patterns, another precursor
to collapse, a sign that groups can and do easily change their power
structures and populations. It should give us pause in thinking of collapse as
an aberration. These routine social shifts instead suggest that disassembling
a hierarchy is neither scary nor remarkable if that hierarchy was never
meant to be permanent. This precursor followed from our fission-fusion
practices and is a more recent phenomenon. We have little evidence that
these seasonal cycles occurred through most of human history.
The oldest evidence of such cycles comes from Europe during the Upper
Palaeolithic 36,000-30,000 years ago. The main signs come in the form of
grand burials. These include remains from Sungir, northern Russia, which
were adorned with thousands of perforated fox canine teeth and mammoth-
ivory beads. The fox teeth alone are estimated to have required 10,000
hours of work. The most lavish decoration is for a boy and girl who are

flanked by mammoth tusks. Then there is the burial of the Lady of Saint-
Germain-la-Rivière, in south-western France. An adult woman was
delicately placed on ornaments, shells, and stag teeth sourced from 300
kilometres away. Grand burials were also accompanied by grand buildings:
18,000-12,000 years ago, foragers across eastern Europe, from Kraków in
Poland to Kyiv in Ukraine, constructed small buildings from mammoth
tusks and bones. It was during this time of mammoth-bone houses and
opulent burials that the first examples of European cave art also appear.34
Most of these impressive and anomalous remains from Upper
Palaeolithic Europe occurred near points of rich, periodic resources, such as
floodplains or the choke points of migrating herds of deer, bison, or
mammoth. Just like the Shoshone, Lakota, and Cheyenne, ice-age hunters
adapted their social structures to their environments. Large collective hunts
brought together great populations of people, triggering artistic and
architectural booms.35  Then, once the season had changed or the hunt had
ended, people disbanded across the landscape once again.
These dynamics should be unsurprising since migrating animals were
central to the European way of life during the late ice age; so much so that
the very first stirrings of writing were created to help track them. At least
400 European caves contain hauntingly beautiful painted images of animals
and figures alongside strange dots, lines, and Y-marks (see Figure 6). They
range across France and Spain, in Lascaux, Chauvet, and Altamira. The dot
and line symbols began at least 42,000 years ago, and the depictions of
animals such as horses and aurochs date to 37,000 years ago. Analysing a
database of hundreds of images, researchers have proposed that this was a
kind of calendar and proto-writing system. The Y-marks show when an
animal gives birth, while the dots and lines represent lunar months after the
start of spring, when animal mating seasons began.36  These peoples were
tracking the birthing and mating of their prey. Seasons, and lunar months,
were so critical to Palaeolithic Europeans that they enshrined them into the
world's first recorded calendar and rudimentary writing system.

Figure 6: Examples of Palaeolithic proto-writing
The aurochs and deer are both from cave sites in Lascaux (France) and the salmon from Abri du
Poisson (also France).
The new relics we see during the seasonal cycles of Upper Palaeolithic
Europe - the artisan jewellery, large buildings, and rich burials - could have
been either celebrations of successful hunts or perhaps even temporary
bursts of inequality as a small group or individual used the surplus to
establish a fleeting ice-age nobility. The latter seems unlikely. Most of the
graves do not contain alpha-male leaders or their children but, rather
perplexingly, individuals who were disabled or disfigured. The finds are
also rare; humans lived in these areas for tens of thousands of years but left
only a handful of such relics.37
These seasonal cycles are highly unlikely to have occurred earlier than
the Upper Palaeolithic (c.50,000-10,000 BCE) in Europe. We have no
evidence of opulent burials or grand structures in Africa or elsewhere at any
earlier periods. That makes sense since ice-age Africa didn't experience the
same kind of seasons as we have today. The cold, arid, volatile climate of
the Palaeolithic also would have made seasonal changes more muted.38
What triggered this precursor to collapse? Understanding why people
propped up and then took down social structures can help us glean some
lessons for why people in more established kingdoms may have let them
fall (or even overturned them). The obvious answer is that they are adapting
to new material circumstances. The Wig-Mungkan dispersed when water
was scarce and came together when it was concentrated into a flood, and
the Inuit settled down into warmer, closer communities when faced with the
harsh, cold darkness of the Arctic winter. The Inuit 'are governed by
environmental circumstances', observed the famed anthropologist Marcel
Mauss, who wrote some of the most seminal studies of the Inuit.39  For the
Shoshone, Lakota, and Cheyenne people, migratory herds presented an

enviable, enormous source of food. To capitalize on that they needed a
larger group of swiftly coordinated hunters. It was task-based leadership on
steroids: good hunters and leaders were given temporary powers to make
the most of the situation. Once the emergency ended, so did their powers.40
Some scholars have suggested that these seasonal cycles were playful
political choices rather than savvy adaptations. Foragers had the political
superpower of being able to experiment with new social structures, erecting
and collapsing them for fun.41  But these shifts didn't happen at random:
they followed the seasons. Nor did the tribes sit down before each hunt or
season and agree on what new political structure to use that year (which
would give the young a say and help refresh old traditions). It's a tradition
they built over time to fit environmental conditions. This doesn't mean they
lacked choice or agency. It means that, like us, they were practical thinkers
who were shaped by their circumstances.
Fission-fusion dynamics and seasonal cycles are a happier alternative to
full-blown collapse. They suggest that collapse need not be seen as an
unintentional or undesired fall from grace. Instead, it was always part of our
adaptive strategy. Whether it be to prevent individuals from dominating the
group, to coordinate hunts, resolve conflicts, move with the availability of
water, or encourage marriage across groups, regular changes to population
concentration and sometimes culture were not something to be feared. They
were part of what it meant to be human. They were also precursors to
collapse. Given that we are a mobile, socially fluid people, the biggest
question is perhaps not why later empires and kingdoms fell apart, but how
they contained so many of us in the first place.
For the Palaeolithic, collapse usually meant local extinctions. For the
Neanderthals their disconnected groups were their weakness, and climatic
change was the threat. Similarly, for us, communities were vulnerable when
they were cut off from the wider fluid civilization and faced threats such as
volcanic eruptions. While the small-scale extinction of Neanderthal
communities eventually snowballed into the loss of their species, our local
failures never did. That is because we were flexible, able regularly to break
apart and come back together to find food, explore, trade and share, and
renew our connections. That connectivity is what allowed us to become
Homo solus, the sole human survivor of the ice age. A surviving species that
emerged into a warmer, different world.

OceanofPDF.com

3
From Hunting and Gathering to Being
Hunted and Gathered
When People Became Fierce - Goliath Fuel - The Origins of War -
Evolutionary Backsliding, or Dropping the Progress Narrative - The
Instability of Domination
WHEN PEOPLE BECAME FIERCE
In 1549 Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda was shipwrecked on the coast of
Florida. Hernando was a thirteen-year-old student, born in Colombia to
wealthy Spanish parents and on his way to Salamanca for his studies. He
never made it there. Instead, he became a captive among the indigenous
hunters of Florida. The native foragers he met there resembled Spanish
society more than the Hadza or Khoisan.
Fontaneda was taken captive by the Calusa, a name that meant 'fierce
people' in their own language. His brother and most of the other shipwreck
survivors were sacrificed. This was a normal practice for the Calusa, who
also used their captives as servants. The Calusa operated like a mini-
kingdom. It was a hereditary monarchy of sorts, with a ruler, elites, and
around 300 full-time warriors. They had a fleet of war canoes, which were
used to raid surrounding lands. The ruler of the Calusa was a supreme chief
who claimed to own the lands and renewed their fertility by undertaking
regular, secret rituals. He was so powerful that when he died children were
often sacrificed.1

The Calusa were not farmers; they were fisherfolk. They built great
houses that could hold up to 2,000 people and made watercourts covering
6,000 square kilometres to store fish. They controlled around fifty villages
that together contained some 20,000 people, including farmers who grew
corn and squashes. They demanded 'tribute' - irregular payments designed
to show submission, respect, or allegiance - from these surrounding
peoples. The Calusa exacted their tribute in the form of food, gold, and
European or African captives. The stratification of the Calusa resembled
Fontaneda's original destination of Spain: society split between nobles and
commoners, the rulers and the ruled. The Calusa were not an anomaly.2
If Fontaneda had been shipwrecked on the other side of the continent
further north he would have encountered the north-west coast Native
Americans. Some were egalitarian and subsisted on acorns and nuts as
staple crops. Others, such as the Kwakwaka'wakw and Tsimshian, more
closely resembled the Calusa. These north-west coast Native Americans
built long houses, had hereditary chiefs who waged war and took captives,
and even kept slaves. During the winter months they dwelled in large
coastal villages.
Most of these hierarchical foragers relied on great salmon runs that
passed through the rivers, which they caught, smoked, and stored. Elites
would also host decadent banquets. During these ceremonies one chief
would host another, as well as many onlookers, and either give away or
destroy a large amount of wealth in the form of food, canoes, and slaves.
These ceremonies served many purposes, increasing prestige, cementing
alliances, and destroying competitors. The guest chief was expected to host
an equally lavish feast in return. A failure to do so could result in a loss of
status and followers. The competing chief could even go into debt to host an
adequately opulent feast. For some groups, anyone who coughed or laughed
during the celebration would be coerced into throwing a feast themselves.
The chiefs who oversaw these feasts and ceremonies claimed exclusive
access to ritual knowledge and sometimes even heavenly beings. Some
ethnographers have referred to them as 'terrorist organizations' that ruled
through violence and black magic (which wouldn't put them out of place
among empires, with the Roman Republic once being described as a mafia
cartel). A leisure class of hereditary nobles with slaves competing through

banquets and dazzling aesthetic ceremonies looks more like the courtly
estates of medieval Europe than hyper-egalitarian foragers.3
Though far rarer than mobile, egalitarian groups, these unequal,
hierarchical foragers existed (and some still do) around the world. There
were the Chinchorro (7000 to 1500 BCE), violent fishermen of modern-day
Chile who mummified some of their dead, and the Jarildekald Aboriginal
people of Australia, who fished along the Murray River. Both were
sedentary, with bigger, more unequal populations than egalitarian foragers.
One review of past and present foragers found seventeen examples of
unequal, stratified hunter-gatherers, all of which were either semi- or fully
sedentary.4  Anthropologists imagine a spectrum of foragers, from nomadic
to sedentary, peaceful to warlike, equal to unequal. Nomadic egalitarian
foragers are at one end, hierarchical sedentary hunter-gatherers at the
other.5
Hierarchical hunter-gatherers are ancient. The first conclusive evidence
for them is around 12,500-10,800 BCE. This is when the earth began to
warm and exit the ice age. These were the early Natufians, who hunted and
gathered across modern-day Syria, Palestine, and Israel. Their descendants
would eventually be the first farmers and state-builders in the world.
As the climate changed, so too did the Natufians. They began to develop
more permanent settlements, including large stone huts. They wore personal
adornments such as shell, bone, and stone pendants, systematically buried
their dead, produced large amounts of refined stone tools, and domesticated
the dog. They may have also been the first to practise horticulture and
animal husbandry. They collected wild cereals, legumes, and nuts, and
hunted deer, aurochs, and gazelle.
The Natufians were also unequal. Some of the burials were lavish, with 8
per cent sporting pendants and beads imported from as far as 400
kilometres away. Some houses were larger than others and possessed larger
stone mortars that are typically used for feasting. The original 1 per cent
were foragers, not farmers.
Yet the Natufians were not purely foragers or farmers. They were on the
path to farming through the collection of wild cereals. While we often say
'farmers' or 'hunter-gatherers' for simplicity, in reality most people after the
Holocene almost always practised a combination of hunting, gathering,
foraging, pastoralism, fishing, horticulture, and agriculture. The Calusa, for

instance, were fishers and foragers who also demanded tribute from part-
time farmers. The first 'farmers' of the world in Mesopotamia, who
followed on from the Natufians, spent thousands of years still
supplementing their diet with fish, herded cattle, and hunted gazelle. Even
English peasants in the thirteenth century relied on foraging and hunting in
shared woodlands alongside farming. Nonetheless, the main resources a
group relied on tended to shape how they organized themselves. And if the
climate or availability of certain resources changed, societies usually did
too.
This happened with the Natufians. Those first stirrings of a rich class -
feasting and unequal burials - disappeared as the world temporarily re-
entered an ice age around 10,900-9700 BCE (known as the 'Younger Dryas'
period) and the Natufians returned to their more mobile ways. In the eyes of
some archaeologists, this represents the first collapse in history. That is
because they see the Natufians as the first stirrings of Goliath.6  The
Natufians were just the forerunner of what was to come.
GOLIATH FUEL
Entering the Holocene (around 9700 BCE) meant entering a new world (see
Figure 7).7  People began to settle into larger villages and become
sedentary. Agriculture was adopted and intensified, as was the rearing of
domesticated animals. Wealth inequality between people intensified.
Goliaths - whether they be hierarchical hunter-gatherers or agrarian states -
arose. This period after the ice age but before the first states is called 'the
Neolithic'.8
The usual story is that groups who developed a 'surplus' of resources
through agriculture could afford to support administrators and a ruling
class. There is undoubtedly some truth to this, but it isn't the full story.
Hierarchical foragers show that inequality, slavery, war, and hierarchy can
all occur without agriculture. Many of these hierarchical hunter-gatherers
also had only modest surpluses yet became mini-kingdoms. What mattered
was the type of resource they used.
Hierarchical foragers, violent pastoralists, and farming kingdoms all
gained access to resources that could be easily seen, stolen, and stored. In

other words, 'lootable resources'. Large stocks of these lootable resources
became available in the Holocene as the planet warmed and intensive
agriculture and animal rearing became possible.9
The Calusa ate shellfish, molluscs, and different types of fish. Similarly,
north-west Pacific coast Native Americans relied on salmon runs. The
Natufians had access to patches of wild cereals, which they harvested and
stored. Horseback kingdoms and hierarchical pastoralists prized horses and
livestock (as well as the grain of the communities they conquered). Great
runs of salmon, farms of shellfish, patches of wild cereals, domesticated
animals, and (more ideally) tilled fields of wheat, rice, or corn, could all be
easily monitored and controlled. When the resources were ready to harvest,
a tax collector would know and could easily take a share, transport it
elsewhere and store it. A commoner could not easily hide their flock or their
harvest of cereals, salmon, or shellfish. One review of eighty-nine forager
societies along the Pacific coast of North America found that clumped,
defensible (lootable) resources, especially aquatic ones such as salmon,
were associated with slavery, social ranking, and unequal access to food. It
is a trend we see across the world: certain resources tend to lead to
dominance hierarchies.10
Figure 7: Post-Holocene social trajectories in Eurasia and the Americas
While the timing varies, most world regions followed a similar post-Holocene trajectory: sedentism
(and more intensive agriculture) was followed thousands of years later by war and then the creation
of states.
Lootable resources didn't have to be edible. Some kingdoms could be
built solely on controlling trade and strategic resources. The Nabataeans

were originally Arabic nomads who built a kingdom by taxing the traders
who passed through their territory, which was on a popular route for
transporting incense. Other early states and hierarchical hunter-gatherers
have arisen in areas where they could control an unavoidable trade route
(like the Nabataeans) or around a highly prized and concentrated resource
like obsidian. Trade, like salmon, often had to pass through a choke point,
whether that be a desert, mine, or mountain pass, making it easy for
someone to establish an armed monopoly over it.11
That monopolized wealth could then be passed down through
generations. Before this moment, it was almost impossible for parents to
bequeath their own status or advantages to their children. A study of twenty-
one different populations across the world found that neither physical
ability nor social connections could be easily transmitted across generations
from parents to children, but material wealth such as land could.12
Lootable resources allowed for individuals and groups to become not just
rich but also powerful. The four fundamental ways to gain power over
others is to control valuable information (information power), to control by
threat or force (violent power), to control the decision-making (political
power), or to control the critical resources that others need (economic
power). In an egalitarian forager group with few status differences, an
ambitious status seeker could pursue one of these, but it was difficult if not
impossible to achieve all of them. You could become a shaman and claim
exclusive access to the spirits. You could try to bully others. You could use
charisma to build a coalition of supporters. But having the charisma, brawn,
and intelligence to be a master priest, negotiator, and hunter is rare,
especially since each requires dedicated time, practice, and innate talent.
The magnetic genius-prophet-warrior may be common in movies and comic
books, but not in reality. Even if some preternaturally talented figure did
emerge, they could not easily pass down their status and skills to their
progeny. Being rich was essentially impossible since critical resources were
spread far and wide across the landscape.
What changed between the egalitarian ice age and the rise of inequality in
the Holocene was the use of lootable resources. Once you had resources
that others depended on, you could leverage them for other forms of power.
The economic power of access to stores of fish or cereal could be converted
to other forms of power by throwing feasts, such as with the north-west

coast Native Americans, making others work for them in return for
resources, or gifting them to create debts and obligations. The Calusa king
was at once a religious head, a military commander, the supreme authority,
and disproportionately rich.
Lootable resources were, in the words of economists, 'fungible':
economic power could be transferred into other forms of power. Yet,
salmon, livestock, and grain did not automatically create dominance
hierarchies. A tyrant needed force to both take lootable resources and
defend their stockpiles.13
Taking and defending resources required weaponry - ideally these new
weapons or tactics would be concentrated and give one group an advantage
over competitors. For instance, the few who had access to bronze swords
and armour had a significant advantage over those fighting with wooden
spears. Warriors on horseback could outrun or run over those on foot. Think
of these as monopolizable weapons. Sometimes even minor changes could
provide a competitive edge over others. The Chumash of central and
southern California show no signs of inequality or warfare until after 600
CE, when they developed ocean-going canoes. This enabled them to hunt
not just marine mammals but also their neighbours along the coast.14
We see a similar story with the Comanche, a native American
confederation of nomadic peoples who practised no agriculture. Instead,
they relied on horses to raid their neighbours. Horses were introduced into
South America by European invaders, and by the early seventeenth century
had spread to North America via indigenous trade networks.15  Horses are
not just great for transport; when combined with projectiles and the right
tactics they become four-legged war machines. The Comanche put horses to
good use, becoming hierarchical raiders who took hold of the southern
plains and travelled as far south as Mexico.16  Monopolizable weaponry
allowed the few to conquer and hold the resources of the many (and
sometimes the many themselves as slaves). Monopolizable weapons were
also a post-Holocene invention: horses were domesticated in central Asia
around 3500 BCE and bronze weapons appear around 3300 BCE in the Near
East.17  Yet neither lootable resources nor military might would lead to
oppressive conditions if people could easily escape.
The geography of a Goliath is caged land: territory with few exit options.
Exit options are people's ability to vote with their feet and easily leave an

area. A bully or aspiring tyrant will be of little threat if people can easily
flee in the middle of the night. Even if a dictator can lay claim to a set of
lootable resources, they will be forced to negotiate with their subjects if the
subjects can simply walk away, taking their labour with them. This is
evident in the wider animal kingdom. Species with greater 'dispersal'
options usually develop weaker hierarchies.18  The same is true of humans.
For both the Calusa and north-west Pacific coast Native Americans it was
difficult for people to move away easily. The salmon runs and watercourts
were concentrated and not readily available elsewhere. People were trapped
and tethered to the rivers and coastline if they wanted easily available food.
The rich spots of cereals in the forests of the Natufians were scarce. When
people couldn't escape and were tied to their lands or herds, they were more
likely to accept subordination.19
Just growing wheat did not mean a society would automatically become
hierarchical, but more abundant lootable resources, monopolizable
weapons, and fewer exit options together pushed people towards hierarchy
(Figure 8).20  Culture and choice played an important role too, but over the
long term environmental conditions encouraged particular social
arrangements and made them easier to sustain.21
Lootable resources, monopolizable weapons, and caged land are all
sources of Goliath fuel. These are different conditions that allow one group
to control another; that allowed a group or individual to gather the greatest
resource of all: status. It took thousands of years, but our social
arrangements started to look more like the dominance hierarchies of gorillas
and chimpanzees. But while our social arrangements began to seem more
primal, there was one interesting, unique twist: power became hereditary.
Across other primates, status cannot be easily passed down from the parents
to their offspring. The son of a powerful silverback is not gifted the harem
once his father passes away. For us, resources and claims to a throne can be
inherited. In 2024, all billionaires under the age of thirty had inherited their
fortunes and all the status and power that accompany them.22

Figure 8: From Goliath fuel to Goliaths
Goliath fuel allowed for large differences in wealth and power that could be accumulated and passed
down through generations.
We were democratic, egalitarian foragers until Goliath fuel appeared in
the Holocene. The transition from egalitarianism to dominance hierarchies
thereafter was not smooth or straightforward. It was a bloody affair.
THE ORIGINS OF WAR
Warfare emerges as Goliaths develop. Violence develops from one-on-one
fights, through small groups raiding and skirmishing, to organized armies
waging mass warfare as societies become more unequal and centralized.
We see this development of war across the world. In the Oaxaca Valley in
Mexico, groups appear to have lived in peace for 6,000 years (8000-2000
BCE) before the first villages and settlements began to appear. Just over a
millennium later (800-450 BCE) signs of violent raids appear alongside the
first hierarchical societies. War arrives alongside the first state, the
Zapotec.23  In Japan during an earlier part (13,000-800 BCE) of the Jomon
Period there are no fortifications or other signs of warfare. Then weapons
and defensive structures begin to appear alongside the first signs of
agriculture.24  In eastern North America there were six millennia (11,000-
5000 BCE) of just interpersonal homicides. This was a time of egalitarian,
mobile foragers. It was then another four millennia (5000-1000 BCE) of
small-scale raiding as groups became stratified and settled into towns. Then

war took root alongside agriculture, large villages, and societies based on
domination and tribute.25
In Europe, there are no signs of war during the Palaeolithic. Around 9500
BCE, after the entry into the Holocene, evidence of lethal violence begins to
become more common. After around 5500 bce, as agriculture spreads
across Europe, people settle down, and inequality intensifies, clearer
indications of warfare, including fortifications, towns surrounded by
ditches, and evidence of massacres, all creep upwards.26
The Near East follows a similar trajectory. The Natufians killed each
other at low rates and didn't conduct war. For thousands of years we find
just a few skeletons with fractured skulls and embedded projectiles. Then in
the seventh century BCE, perhaps the first fortification in the world - Tell
Maghzaliyah in northern Mesopotamia - was constructed near a node of
long-distance obsidian trade. Thereafter, trade began to shift from obsidian
to flint, probably a reaction to someone restricting the supply of obsidian.
Around 5700-5600 BCE the Halafians, a culture from northern
Mesopotamia with a keen interest in the obsidian trade, began to leave
behind mass burials. The Halafians then moved south and built fortified
settlements along an east-west overland trade route (mainly for obsidian).
They razed pre-existing towns and built over the top of them.27  The war for
lootable resources had begun.
Societies, in different environments and even on opposite sides of the
world, all follow the same pattern. Organized warfare arises as groups
become more unequal, sedentary, and hierarchical.
This pattern is supported by artwork. After 8000 BCE, as settlements,
hierarchy, and farming spread across Europe, China, and the Near East,
cave art becomes increasingly populated with images of spear- and bow-
wielding groups (Figure 9).28
The relationship between organized conflict and hierarchy is also clear in
modern hunter-gatherers. One systematic analysis of thirty contemporary
forager groups (including twenty-one mobile, egalitarian ones and nine
settled, non-egalitarian ones) found that group-on-group violence was
correlated with bigger, denser, and more sedentary groups.29  This is just
one study in a larger literature on the correlation between violence and
inequality.30

This was not just about more people being involved in conflict. It was a
transformation of how and why we killed each other. Among egalitarian
hunter-gatherers, murdering another human is a personal affair: it usually
results from a quarrel or sexual jealousy, or perhaps the solemn execution of
a budding tyrant. In contrast, the larger-scale massacres we see after the end
of the ice age often involve the indiscriminate killing of entire communities,
including women and children. These atrocities also frequently involved
torture and mutilation. This is noticeable in a range of cases, including the
first farming communities in Europe.31  The target of violence shifts from
an individual wrongdoer to an entire group. It doesn't matter whether you
kill a particular individual since you can replace them with another member
of their group. The victim becomes interchangeable.32
Figure 9: A cave art battle scene (5000-3500 BCE) found in Sefar, southern Algeria
War transformed the very character of violence because the motivations
for violence changed. Conflict was no longer about personal grievances and
disagreements but about eliminating a threat, procuring resources, or, most
importantly, expanding the power and status of a group and its leader(s).

Who you killed became less important and violence became more
indiscriminate. As we can see with the early signs of torture, mutilation, and
genocide, it also became much more brutal.
War, or any large-scale act of violence, has three key ingredients, all of
which increased in the Neolithic. First, it needs a large-scale organization to
corral and coordinate troops. Second, it needs an ideology to inspire them to
fight, whether it be communism or nationalism. Third, it needs to create
tight bonds between groups of fighters (usually young men). Ideologies that
justify bloodshed and tightly connected groups of fighters don't come
naturally. They require extensive organization, training, and indoctrination.
That is something the first hierarchies and states started to offer. It is
something that the militaries of today provide even more successfully.
Rather than violence decreasing across history, the ingredients for warfare
have steadily increased, starting with the warmer, bloodier world of the
Neolithic.33
It's easy to see why the Palaeolithic was warless. There weren't the large-
scale organizations to coordinate mass killings, to craft ideologies
encouraging battle, and to train small groups of young men to become
efficient murder squads. An ambush, raid, or full campaign requires
planning, commitment, and the motivation to risk one's life. It wasn't
possible, nor was it worth risking death to strike another group that had no
accumulated riches and with whom you were probably trading. War was
pointless without lootable resources to battle over, or the advantage
provided by new battle aids such as horses and Bronze Age swords.
Some have suggested that we may have gone to war during the
Palaeolithic over women. One group would assault another to capture and
carry off new wives and partners. But intermarriage and continuous
migration across groups would have prevented the need for bloody raids to
capture women. We also simply don't see modern egalitarian foragers
commit these kinds of raids.34  One study of twenty-one nomadic forager
societies found that only 0.7 per cent of the cases of lethal violence were
due to the theft of women between neighbouring groups (and only 1.4 per
cent were due to disputes over resources or territory).35
Naturally, the skeletons we have dug up from the Palaeolithic are only a
small fraction of the people who lived and died. Nonetheless all the
evidence - skeletons, cave paintings, and cultural zones of open trade -

points to one conclusion: organized warfare came only after we entered the
Holocene.36
EVOLUTIONARY BACKSLIDING, OR
DROPPING THE PROGRESS NARRATIVE
War, inequality, patriarchy, and slavery are probably not what come to mind
when you hear 'progress'. Nor is it easy to see the move from nomadic
egalitarian hunter-gatherers like the Khoisan towards groups like the Calusa
as a social advance. Yet this is how these developments have historically
been framed.
Our ideas of progress have been shaped by nineteenth-century thinkers
such as Lewis Henry Morgan. In 1877 Morgan pioneered an influential
three-step blueprint in which societies moved up the staircase of progress,
with abrupt changes in technology and society marking the steps from one
stage to another. 'Savagery' was marked by a reliance on hunting,
gathering, fishing, and simple technology such as the bow and arrow.
'Barbarism' involved horticulture, domesticated plants and animals, as well
as new practices such as pottery. 'Civilization' was a stage where groups
adopted intensive agriculture, towns and cities, and innovations such as
writing.37
We now know that things are not that simple. Hierarchical hunter-
gatherers had many of the hallmarks of what most would see as civilization
(sedentism, inequality, rulers, war, and more monuments) yet relied on
foraging.38  They were denser, captured more energy, and had more
hierarchy but didn't farm. Some groups jumped straight from being mobile
foragers or herders to being states. Other groups, such as the north-west
coast Native Americans, stayed hierarchical without ever becoming a state.
Many regularly collapsed in a continuous process of fission-fusion, coming
together under a leader and then splintering apart, on either a seasonal or
more random basis.39  There is no stepladder.40
Because of these problems with the stepladder approach many historical
scientists don't talk about progress, savagery, barbarism, or civilization.
Instead, many now talk about an increase in 'complexity'. In the eyes of

many archaeologists the Calusa and north-west coast Native Americans
would be classified as 'complex hunter-gatherers', while the Khoisan would
be less complex or 'simple' hunter-gatherers. On that scale of complexity,
modern, industrialized societies are - of course - the most complex. Most
of the well-known books on collapse, whether Jared Diamond's Collapse or
Joseph Tainter's The Collapse of Complex Societies, define collapse as a
sudden and enduring loss of social complexity. It is, in essence, falling
down the stepladder of progress.41
While complexity may seem like a more savoury alternative to talking
about progress and civilization, the two are still largely interchangeable.
One of the most accepted and common definitions of early civilization is
'the earliest and simplest form of class-based society'.42  Similarly, many
archaeological definitions of complexity focus on hierarchy, inequality, and
centralization. It is about a small group controlling the labour and resources
of others. For many archaeologists, the first signs of rulers, a military,
bureaucracy, and inequality are the first signs of complexity.43
Characterizing the move towards hierarchical hunter-gatherers and states
as an increase in complexity doesn't make sense. Many democratic foragers
have more complex politics than the Calusa or even the Roman Empire.
Hierarchy, for example top-down orders from a Roman emperor, is intended
to simplify decision-making. By contrast, decisions among democratic
foragers require extensive debate, negotiation, and compromise among
equals. Something is more complex when it is has more diverse and
interconnected parts, not when one part controls the others through
violence.
This archaeological idea of complexity is also oddly selective and leaves
out most of what makes up a society. For instance, look at the Australian
Aboriginal peoples. These groups possessed at least 250 languages prior to
European invasion, practised ingenious environmental management tools
such as firestick farming (deliberate, controlled bush-fires), and have a
varied and rich 'dreamtime' set of beliefs that aid coordination, navigation,
and their understanding of the land. Yet if they dropped all the languages
and started speaking English, adopted a few staple crops for farming, built a
big bureaucracy rather than relying on subtle cultural practices, and dropped
their rich cosmology in favour of worshipping a single god-king, they
would apparently be becoming more 'complex'. They are clearly not: they

are getting more hierarchical, capturing more energy, and living more
densely. Yes, bureaucracies and monument-building might get bigger and
more complicated, but much of life, from diets to culture, is simplified. The
use of complexity is not just inaccurate; calling a society simple is akin to
accusing its people of backwardness.44
What we are seeing here during the Neolithic is not progress or
increasing complexity but rather the painful growth of a Goliath. A slow,
reversible, and messy shift towards social relations built on dominance
hierarchies. Hierarchy is when some are ranked above others in status and
authority. We are surrounded by these: CEOs are above managers who are
above workers.45  A hierarchy can be more democratic (with more people
sharing decision-making power), or more dominance-based (with just a few
wielding power backed by violence). Dominance hierarchies are imposed
by the powerful for their own benefit, usually through violence.
Such dominance hierarchies are essentially the opposite of the fluid
civilizations of the Palaeolithic, which had non-hierarchical, democratic
cooperation. In the Palaeolithic our hunter-gatherer ancestors relied on
trade, hospitality, reciprocity, and mutual aid to cooperate, maintain the
peace, and survive the ice age. They were practising what we usually think
of as 'civilized conduct': restraint, political wisdom, and cooperation
without coercion. Violence is still used in civilizations (remember the
counter-dominance executions of the Khoisan) but is only legitimate when
it's done collectively as a last resort, as opposed to being regularly imposed
top-down.46
Rather than a stepladder of progress, this movement from civilization to
Goliath is better described as evolutionary backsliding. Our egalitarianism
and counter-dominance shaped our bodies and minds and supercharged our
cultural evolution. They made us unique and helped us navigate the
Palaeolithic. The move towards Goliath - whether it be through class or
patriarchy - made us look more like the harems of patriarchal gorillas and
the chimpanzee hierarchies built on violence and politicking.
Goliath and civilization are not air-tight categories; they are a spectrum.
It is about the main way in which cooperation is organized in society:
hierarchy, violence, and rule by the few; or democracy and voluntary
cooperation. Whether we work together at the end of a handshake or the
barrel of a gun.

There are other types of social forms beyond the civilization-Goliath
spectrum. The temporary hierarchies we see in egalitarian hunter-gatherers,
such as in hunting parties, are democratic hierarchies: the members choose
a temporary, restrained ruler to achieve a common goal. Leaders exist for
the public good, rarely have violent power, and are always accountable to
their followers. A good way to distinguish between democratic and
dominance hierarchies is the consent test: if you say stop and the hierarchy
continues regardless and any resistance is met with force, then you are
existing in a dominance hierarchy.47  One could also have an arrangement
in which everyone is trying to relentlessly and violently dominate, but no
one ever succeeds. No dominance hierarchy is ever achieved: think of this
as 'chaos'. It's what Hobbes was envisaging in his fictional 'state of
nature'. For a pictorial overview, see Figure 10.48
Figure 10: Forms of human society

Some countries, such as the liberal democracies of Scandinavia, are more
like democratic hierarchies. Yet these democracies rely on the flimsy idea
that choosing between a few different potential rulers every four years or so
is a sufficient degree of power sharing. The party with the most funding
tends to win and governments rarely represent popular opinion or
implement policies with the strongest popular support. The ancient
Athenians would have recognized our current systems not as democracies,
but as oligarchies.49
This is at best a broad yet weak version of democracy, one in which the
rules are still applied using brute force. All other areas of life are still
organized into dominance hierarchies. Most of us work nine-to-five in mini-
dictatorships (where one individual or a small group can hire, fire, and
direct most others), pray in top-down churches, and invest in markets
controlled overwhelmingly by a few big firms. Even the citizens of Norway,
the US, or Australia still live in a Goliath. Indeed, humankind now lives in a
single Global Goliath.
The Goliath of today is the product of a 5,000-year process. One that was
marked by setbacks, reversals, and collapses.
THE INSTABILITY OF DOMINATION
In northern Iraq lies a hill jutting up from the desert, and inside it are
dozens of layers of settlements. When one was destroyed or decayed,
another would be built over it. The layered villages of Tepe Gawra can give
us a glimpse into just how dangerous the early Holocene was.
The first village was created 6,500 years ago, and over time became
increasingly unequal. Around a thousand years after its creation, three great
mudbrick temples painted red and purple were erected. Then they were
abandoned. Thereafter, the site was turned into a fortified village with a
single narrow entry road overlooked by a watchtower. Its defences didn't
work. The village was raided and burned, with its largest elite house hit
hardest. Inside, a baby and a twelve-to-fourteen-year-old child were buried
under 15cm of ash. The town remained abandoned for a century. It was
eventually reoccupied. And then burned down again. The cycle repeated
itself in the centuries thereafter.

Tepe Gawra is emblematic of the fate that befell many settlements in the
early Holocene. Inequality encouraged more people to turn to plundering
their neighbours. Villages, towns, and cities became prime targets. Other
times, there were no signs of invaders. Sites were constructed, grew more
unequal, and were simply abandoned. Why would people just walk away en
masse from a site that they had tied their lives to?
OceanofPDF.com

4
Abandoned Experiments I: Failed Farmers
A Slow and Resisted Revolution - Why Even Bother? - Growth Fetish -
Reversals of Agriculture - Cursed by Grain
A SLOW AND RESISTED REVOLUTION
While the 'agricultural revolution' was revolutionary in its consequences, it
was not so in its pace. The transition from agriculture and stationary living,
through cities and inequality to states, was a long, protracted affair. Each
step took thousands of years and there were many reversals.
Mesopotamia is the earliest and best-studied example of this transition.
Twelve thousand years ago, the Late Natufians started experimenting with
seasonal settlements. Then they collapsed and dispersed as the climate
changed. Around two millennia later the first signs of full-time sedentary
living begin. Pottery becomes commonplace 1,500 years after that. About
another 1,500 years later there is the first undisputed evidence of warfare.1
Then, two millennia later, the first state - Uruk (3200 BCE) - is built and the
first cuneiform documents are written. This is the slow, arduous
development of a Goliath (Figure 11).2
Across the world this sequence repeats itself again and again, though the
details and timing vary. For instance, South America was a late bloomer but
experienced a more rapid transition. It didn't see sedentism until around
4,000 years ago and states emerged 2,600 years later. On average, the lag
between the adoption of intensive agriculture and states was approximately

3,000 years - a period greater than that which separates today from the
beginnings of Classical Greece.3
Merely moving from part-time to full-time farming was a lengthy
process.4  In most fields in south-west Asia, it took over 5,000 years for the
share of grasses (such as wheat, emmer, and einkorn) to increase from
around 20-30 per cent to approximately 50-60 per cent of crops grown.5
That is roughly the same period that separates today from the first states in
Egypt and Mesopotamia.
Figure 11: The Mesopotamian post-Holocene social trajectory
While the exact sequence varied, sedentism and agriculture often went
hand in hand. As one became more dependent on tilled, fixed-field
agriculture, it usually became more sensible to stay put as the fields needed
the full-time work of sowing, weeding, and fending off pests. An agrarian
community was more likely to develop a larger population and eventually
become a city. In most of Mesopotamia and Egypt, people started to settle
down in sedentary communities while beginning the slow process of
intensifying crop cultivation. Still, it was entirely possible to be sedentary
without having agriculture, as we've seen with numerous cases of
hierarchical foragers.6
The adoption of agriculture was not always an inevitability. Numerous
areas with suitable ecological conditions and foragers who were almost
certainly aware of cereal farming never adopted it, such as in Native
American California. When farming did spread, whether it be from Turkey
into Europe or Mesoamerica into the south-west US, it was often a stop-
start affair. Arrival into a new region would often lead to a pause of a few
centuries before it spread once again. The lack of uptake wasn't due to the

ignorance of the hunter-gatherers surrounding farmer communities. The
farmers and their fields would have been hard to miss, and in some cases
hunter-gatherers were even having children with them. The picture is one of
foragers who were reluctant to adopt full-time farming.7  Indeed, the
strangest conundrum is why our ancestors chose to adopt farming and
sedentary living at all.
WHY EVEN BOTHER?
From our perspective, it's easy to assume that agriculture and cities were
steps forward in the march of progress. But in the beginning at least, they
were a disaster for health and well-being.
If living in villages and cities meant more disease, noisier neighbours,
and a greater threat of being raided, then why bother? We don't fully know
the answer, and multiple factors must have played into the decision to stay
put. Over the space of centuries and millennia people started spending more
time in seasonal camps. They may have used these temporary camps for
trade, rituals, or better access to seasonal food and migratory herds. People
then became tied to the land as populations grew and they became more
dependent on agriculture.8
The vast intensification of agriculture during the Neolithic is more
difficult to explain. Hunter-gatherer diets are substantially healthier and
involved more enjoyable labour than those of farmers. This decline in
health and diet is reflected in the height of people across the world. Height
is a decent indicator of general physical health. Eating more calories, more
protein, and a wider variety of foods tends to lead to a taller, healthier
population. What we see in skeletons during the transition to agriculture is a
decrease in height. While studies vary, most see a reduction of a few inches
in height between our ice-age ancestors and those who took up farming.
This shrinkage in stature is not the only marker of a decline in general
health.9
Agriculture meant a more restricted diet that was lower in protein and
nutritional quality. As people became increasingly sedentary, exercise and
physical activity were replaced by the repetitive physical stress of a
farmer's lifestyle. A telltale indicator of an early agriculturalist is deformed

bones in the knees and toes of women. These are the results of countless
hours spent rocking back and forth on one's knees to grind grain. Sedentary
communities that became increasingly reliant on grain also suffered from
substantial enamel defects, dental cavities, and oral infections. Agriculture
was a wrecking ball to human health and height, and it also meant more
work.10
Hunter-gatherers are also renowned for being work-shy. They produce far
less food than they are capable of producing and choose to maximize
leisure time instead of working harder to produce a surplus. They also tend
to view farming as unnecessary drudgery. As one Ju/'hoansi told an
anthropologist, 'Why should I farm when there are so many mongongo
nuts?' Australian Aborigines have a similar ethos: 'You people go to all that
trouble, working and planting seeds, but we don't have to do that. All these
things are there for us.'11
Across the world, foragers tend to act in a way that minimizes the
expenditure of energy. For instance, when population density is low, they
hunt big game, which often provides the biggest caloric return, before
moving on to collect tubers, plants, and animals that offer fewer calories for
the energy expended. We can still see this in farmers who tend to practise
less laborious forms of agriculture, such as shifting agriculture (in which a
field is used, burned, left fallow and then returned to later), unless they are
compelled to produce more by an external force, such as a market or master.
Similarly, pre-capitalist peasants would often take up wage work to meet a
certain target (for instance, to pay for a wedding) and would stop working
as soon as they reached it. If they were offered higher wages they would
simply work less, because their target would be reached sooner.12
It is a pattern that completely contradicts conventional economic logic
(you should want to work more when the wage is higher). Farmers also
often tend to return to these less onerous ways of producing food whenever
a collapse occurs, or when they are trying to evade a state. This is known as
'the principle of least effort'. Moving from this to intensified agriculture is
a radical change, not just in how one produces food but also in priorities.
It's unlikely they made such a change unless compelled by great benefits or
penalties.13
Farming does offer benefits. It can support denser populations and
sometimes provide more calories per hour of work. But it's hard to see why

the average hunter-gatherer would opt for more calories and bigger families
over better work, food, health and more leisure time. Even if they wanted
to, it wouldn't be an easy switch. Farming requires highly specialized
knowledge about seasons, crops, fertilizers, and techniques that take
painstaking time and effort to accumulate. It is unsurprising that we rarely
see hunter-gatherers voluntarily adopt farming. Instead, they are usually
displaced or killed off by, or intermingle and marry with, the intruding
farmers.14
Still, there clearly remained some populations that did adopt and expand
agriculture, even if slowly and reluctantly. Why? One hypothesis is that
population growth led to overhunting in some areas, such as the Near East.
Around Mesopotamia, big game dwindled and even became extinct during
the early Neolithic. Bigger communities with less protein-rich food had to
rely more and more on calorie-dense and predictable agriculture, as well as
on domesticated animals. They probably started by adopting easier farming
methods, such as flood-retreat agriculture. This entails waiting by a
floodplain, casting some seeds in the soil after a flood, and reaping the
harvest with little effort. That helps to explain why the earliest Goliaths
arose around flood-prone rivers, such as the Nile in Egypt, the Yellow River
in China, and the Tigris and Euphrates in Mesopotamia. Something then
gave them a gentle push towards relying more on agriculture. It could have
been a change in the climate or the collapse of other food sources, such as
large game.15  From there, population and agriculture reinforced each other
with farmers generally being more fertile and agriculture offering more
support for big, dense populations.16
Population may have been one factor that pushed us towards farming, but
it's not a complete explanation. One problem is that most areas that
developed intensive agriculture were areas of abundance, not scarcity. For
instance, the earliest Goliaths in Mesopotamia, as well as the cities of
Tiwanaku and Teotihuacan sprang up in rich wetland areas. Another issue is
that many early cultivated crops are not staples but more luxury foods, such
as avocados and chilli peppers in central America.17  Clearly, something
more than just population growth and a lack of big game was behind the
intensification of agriculture.

GROWTH FETISH
Status competition can help provide a more complete explanation of the
great intensification of food production. Signs of feasts, such as the
potlatches of north-west coast Native Americans, appear all over the world
after the Holocene. Neither avocados nor chilli peppers are commonly
eaten, but they're regular foods for feasts among the highland Maya and
others. That was the allure of these foods: avocados and chillis were all
scarce, high-status foods fit for a feast. Dogs, too, may have been
domesticated initially as high-status objects rather than four-legged helpers.
Throwing banquets is primarily an act to gain status and power: it can
aggrandize an individual or family, cement alliances, and even create debt
peonage. The catch is that feasts require more food and more work for
everyone in a community. Hierarchical hunter-gatherers across the world
marginalize those who refuse to work harder to support banquets.
Dissenters are harassed, ostracized, ridiculed as 'lazy moochers', 'rubbish
men', and 'abominable people' and are even physically attacked.18
The archaeologist Brian Hayden has compiled decades of work to show
how the transition to agriculture wasn't (just) a matter of more people
demanding more food, but rather a few status seekers cajoling, corralling,
and coercing others into producing a surplus. Once lootable resources
became accessible, cycles of feasting both exacerbated inequality and
demanded ever-greater quantities of food be produced. Nomadic-egalitarian
groups, too, often hold collective banquets, but these seem to be more for
group bonding rather than the aggrandizement of a single individual or
family. For many, feasting morphed into a tool of politics and status
competition.19
Status competition can help us make sense of not only the adoption and
intensification of farming, but also of many of the other trends we see in the
earliest farming communities and cities. When archaeologists look for signs
of inequality they search for feasts, human sacrifices, items imported from
vast distances (even further than hunter-gatherer trade), unequally sized
houses, great monuments such as palaces, and grand burials where an
individual is left with a disproportionate number of luxury items such as
jewellery, weaponry and even sacrificial victims.

Two things unite these indicators of inequality: they all signal distinction
and are of little practical use. More than being unnecessary, they are
detrimental for a group trying to live in a landscape with a paucity of food
or an abundance of enemies. These activities are now what we call
'conspicuous consumption': wasteful spending to enhance social status. It is
the inverse of the principle of least effort. If conserving energy is a common
intuition, then wastefully using resources and the labour of others is the
ultimate display of power. Having others expend time and energy building a
palace or a grand burial also helps to reinforce social divides. Nothing says
'I'm more important than you' like having masses of people spend their
living days toiling to create a tomb for a dead leader.20
That wasteful consumption to gain and signal status easily becomes a
preoccupation with growth. If you can improve your status through
throwing a feast, then an even larger feast with a greater variety and
abundance of foods will be even better. If you are competing with another
chief, then there is an even stronger compulsion to grow a bigger crop to
outdo them. The same goes for importing exotic jewellery from thousands
of kilometres away, conquering enemies, or building a great tomb. The
bigger the waste, the more status it signals, the wider the gap between you
and the others it creates and the greater the chance you will be remembered.
Today we still tend disproportionately to know of and value the biggest
monuments of the past: the Colosseum, the Great Wall of China, and the
pyramids of Giza. Unfortunately, status is an inexhaustible resource and
competition is endless. Hence, wasteful consumption becomes a fixation on
material growth and accumulation: a growth fetish.
Wasteful consumption and inequality were often not warmly welcomed,
as we see in the first farming communities across the world.
REVERSALS OF AGRICULTURE
Perhaps unsurprisingly, settling down and eating grain was far from
universally accepted - or irreversible. Fixed-field farming and sedentary
living were adopted and abandoned on multiple occasions throughout the
early Holocene. People rebelled, left, and went to war as the social
arrangements accompanying farming became more lopsided and

exploitative. Nowhere does the transition towards agriculture look more
chaotic and bloodier than in Europe.
Agriculture did not begin in Europe. Instead, it was imported from
modern-day Turkey through the Mediterranean and further north into
Britain and Scandinavia. Grain-based lifestyles appear to have first arrived
in south-eastern Europe around 6500 BCE. Genetic data suggests that native
Europeans rarely adopted farming practices. Instead, the intrusion of
farming came via migrants originating in modern-day Turkey and
Greece.21  Farming practices had expanded into the area of modern-day
Paris by approximately 5200-5100 BCE and took another millennium before
they reached Ireland, Britain, and Scandinavia.22  The time it took for
farming to spread from northern Turkey to Ireland was more than the same
span of time that separates us from the time of Jesus of Nazareth. This was
not a simple success story of the inexorable march of grain (see Figure
12).23
What followed was a boom-and-bust pattern of population growth and
collapse across Europe. Populations spiked, before dropping back to
preceding levels, or even dramatically below them.24  Farmers were
arriving, establishing a community, flourishing in numbers over several
generations, and then suddenly dying off or dispersing. Some settlements
just declined, while others were completely abandoned.
How long it took to go from boom to bust varied. For Ireland and Britain,
the arrival of farming (around 4000 BCE) was followed by a drop-off in
population after 300-400 or so years. Similarly, in Scandinavia a peak was
reached after 400 years, then populations dropped by some 70 per cent in
the next 300 years. In regions across central Germany there was a slower
population decline that took almost a thousand years.25
Despite differences in regions, all of them experienced some
depopulation.26  This was often accompanied by changes in diet and
agriculture. In Britain and Ireland, the initial population surge is associated
with increased use of wheat, while the decline sees wheat replaced with
hardier barley and hazelnuts.27  Eventually almost all the grain was phased
out in favour of hazelnuts.
Changes in population and diet were accompanied by another, more
disturbing, trend. As farmers settled down across Europe, their lives

changed. Prior to the arrival of farming, there are no signs of large-scale
violence or fortifications. Across the different communities there is then
evidence of wealth accumulation, inequality, and defensive structures such
as walls and palisades. In southern Britain we see the slow build-up of
defensive structures such as enclosed causeways. These are torn down or
abandoned once the population falls.
People didn't just pick up the plough; they also picked up the sword.
While interpersonal violence wasn't absent from Neolithic Europe before
farming, it was low, with no signs of warfare. This changed as farming
progressed. Around 11 per cent of skeletons from a sample of 2,363
individuals in Neolithic Europe have some form of cranial trauma. As signs
of inequality and stratification increased, violence intensified. Mass burials
begin to appear. Demographic collapses in Germany and Austria saw at
least three massacres numbering twenty-six, thirty-four, and sixty-seven
victims. In some areas, such as Hesse in central Germany, there were signs
of torture and mutilation.28  The victims included women and children,
suggesting it didn't matter whom you killed so long as they were from the
opposing group. If this was a battle for scarce productive land then mass
killings would help to dislodge existing communities, making it easier to
colonize. In other mass burial sites across Germany and Europe there is a
conspicuous lack of remains from adolescents or women. Many
archaeologists interpret this as evidence that they were taken as slaves and
spoils of war. The massacres were sometimes brutal and systematic enough
to have wiped out entire communities. This period may represent a 'high
watermark of human violence'.29  Farmers from Turkey and Greece didn't
just bring grain to Europe: they brought war and Goliath.
These bloody agrarian cycles happened not just in Europe. Across the
world in North America before European colonization we see the same
pattern unfolding in an entirely different landscape, with an utterly different
culture. In the arid deserts of the south-west United States lie the ruins of
clusters of sandstone houses. They seem impossible: great houses jutting
out from such an inhospitable terrain. They were the 'pueblos' (Spanish for
'village') of the Ancestral Puebloan people.30  Chaco Canyon, one of the
grandest locales, houses buildings that appear to be aligned to capture solar
and lunar cycles. They were the largest non-earthen buildings constructed in
North America until the nineteenth century. These were a people founded

on a trio of crops that would become known as 'the three sisters': beans,
squash, and maize. All of these were imported from the southern lands of
Mesoamerica. Maize was especially important, constituting up to 90 per
cent of their caloric intake. These resilient peoples settled down in villages,
took up increasingly ritualized, hierarchical arrangements, fell into
infighting then frequently left their increasingly unequal settlements.
Puebloan settlements in key parts of the Mesa Verde experienced four
boom-and-bust cycles. The busts were marked by drops in wood cuttings,
maize harvests, and population. These periods of crisis occurred in 700,
890, 1145, and 1285 CE. Each crisis saw a preceding increase in inequality,
followed by spikes in violence, depopulation, and then declines in
inequality. Each of these crises also coincides with a drying of the climate.
The final termination of 1285 was catastrophic.
OceanofPDF.com

Figure 12: The spread of the first farmers of Europe
OceanofPDF.com

It took over 4,000 years for farming to spread from Turkey to the British Isles. The map shows the
approximate dates of farmers' arrival into different areas of the continent (all dates are BCE).
In 1245 there were around 25,000 farmers in the northern south-west of
the US. Forty years later there were none. Climate change, in the form of
drought, played a key role in cutting maize production. In the first three
downturns, the droughts were not decisive; indeed, there were many similar
climatic fluctuations that the Puebloans had previously weathered with only
a few losses. The fourth drought was more severe. Across these boom-bust
cycles is another recurring feature. In each case the Puebloan communities
saw rising wealth inequality, more exploitative conditions, and falling social
cohesion. These deteriorating social conditions were the vulnerability and
climate change was the threat. When the two coincided, things fell apart.31
After the final depopulation of the northern south-west US by farmers in
1285 CE, people moved south and east to occupy larger, more peaceful
towns. These towns were placed in areas that were less reliant on variable
rainfall for their farming. This way of life proved to be far more resilient to
swings in the climate. Despite Spanish and then American colonization, the
Puebloans remain in their ancestral lands today.32
CURSED BY GRAIN
There are a few different reasons why the first experiments with farming in
North America, Europe, and elsewhere experienced such cycles of collapse.
All of them hinge on grain creating larger populations and bigger problems.
It should come as no surprise that climate change played a recurring role
across so many of these early collapses. Bigger populations with less
mobility and more restricted diets made these first farmers more vulnerable
and reliant on good weather. When that weather didn't come, disaster could
follow. The termination periods of the Ancestral Puebloan peoples
coincided with drought, and the swings in population among the first
farmers of Europe also show a loose relationship to the climate. The onset
of wetter and cooler conditions in Britain and Ireland had a deleterious
impact on food production and coincided with the population collapses.33

Farming communities were also the first in which humans, animals, and
crops were packed together along with commensals including mice, rats,
and crows, as well as a host of microparasites such as ticks, fleas, and
mosquitoes. This cramming together of species created a hotbed for
zoonotic infections. These are diseases that jump from animals to humans.
Many of the plagues of the world today, such as influenza, measles, mumps,
cholera, smallpox, chicken pox, and, of course, Covid-19 are all recent
developments from the past ten thousand years. Our hunter-gatherer
ancestors never had to endure the throaty cough of influenza or the painful
and disfiguring scabs of chicken pox or smallpox, which emerged only with
the advent of urbanism and agriculture. These 'density-dependent' diseases
require intense interaction between humans and animals, something many
of the earliest cities provided in abundance.34
Such diseases also need a sufficiently large population so they don't burn
themselves out by killing all their hosts. If a new infection passes through
the population, killing half, then the remaining half will be immune. A large
population and high birth rate are needed for the disease to continue to
infect and mutate. For smallpox, this is estimated to be a population of
around 300,000. Early farming settlements would have provided enough of
a crowd of people for some diseases to becomes self-perpetuating.35
Disease has been the scourge of cities throughout history. In London, for
every year until 1800, there were more deaths than births. The city required
a constant infusion of new people to survive. This was due in large part to
the spread of typhus, syphilis, cholera, and the plague (caused by Yersinia
pestis bacteria). And the same is true for many cities throughout history.36
Bigger groups also meant that there was more chance of a disease both
sparking in a population and spreading like fire. There is evidence this
occurred. An analysis of 108 Scandinavian skeletons from the Neolithic
found that 17 per cent contained the plague. It appears that 5,200 years ago
three waves of plague swept through at least some of these communities,
with the first two being smaller and the final one more severe. None
contained the gene that allows for transmission through fleas, meaning that
these would have been far less widespread than the later Black Death that
ravaged Europe. Such a horrific disease could have played a role in the
collapse of Europe's first farming communities. Yet the outbreaks can't
quite explain the boom-bust cycle, and don't appear to have played a role in

the similar cycles that the Puebloans experienced.37  Disease could have
also contributed to the abandonment of many other early settlements,
although we lack evidence for now.38
Larger densities of people can also cause conflict. Urban archaeologists
use the term 'scalar stress' to refer to how more people packed together
means more issues and disputes. Even today some crime increases more
than proportionally to population. For example, if you double the
population of a city then instances of theft more than double. Crime in this
case is just one example of the underlying increase in conflict and
disagreements. The theory of scalar stress suggests that people needed to
deal with this increased social friction. This included old ways, such as
breaking off to form new communities (fission) or using new or larger
rituals to give people a renewed sense of unity. Others suggest they took the
novel approach of organizing hierarchically.39
Scalar stress provides one potential explanation for the boom-bust cycles
we see with early farmers. Indeed, one study of the first farmers of Europe
found that a simple density-dependent conflict model matched the boom-
bust record well. Yet it isn't a convincing explanation as to why people left
the early European farms or Puebloan settlements just as inequality and
hierarchy were becoming entrenched. Moreover, coming from fluid
civilizations of hunter-gatherers, we were already evolved to deal with
strangers all the time. The bigger change we now faced was that we were no
longer equals.40
We see the same pattern in many of these first large settlements and cities
of deepening inequality preceding social breakdown.
OceanofPDF.com

5
Abandoned Experiments II: Voting With Feet
and Fire
Aborted Goliaths in Eurasia - Abandoning the First Goliaths of the
Americas - The Forgotten Pyramid Cities of North America - Forgetting
the Experiments - Walking Away from History
ABORTED GOLIATHS IN EURASIA
It wasn't just agriculture that was a slow, staccato process. The same can be
seen with the adoption of Goliaths and cities across the world. Cities are
permanent settlements with large, dense populations who have different
social and economic roles (such as traders, bakers, and soldiers). Both the
earliest large farming settlements and the earliest cities were slow to form
and often collapsed in a similar fashion. And this wasn't the case of the
occasional disaster pushing back the tide of progress. Rather, these early
collapses appear to have been a deliberate abortion of an experiment gone
wrong.1
*
Man-made mounds are scattered across the world, lumps rising out of
deserts and plains. Within them lies a trove of historical treasure. In
archaeology, these are called 'tells': hills built from previous settlements.
Layer after layer of refuse, buildings, and sediment are piled together into

one rounded legacy of a past community as at Tepe Gawra. There are
thousands of tells in the Near East alone. Some have never been excavated.
Others have been built over. Many are the remnants of settlements,
communities, cities, and villages built before the world's first states (Figure
13).
OceanofPDF.com

Figure 13: Abandoned experiments across the world
OceanofPDF.com

One of the best known is Çatalhöyük, in modern south-central Turkey.
Çatalhöyük is renowned as having been the largest village in the world at
the time. Around 9,000 years ago, 7-8,000 people lived there, packed
together in just ten hectares of land. It was a fascinating fractal of crowded,
near-identical houses. Each mud-brick residence acted as a house, temple,
and mausoleum. These were multifunctional houses where families slept on
platforms that contained the remains of their ancestors, often their preserved
skulls, which were modelled to resemble the living. The houses were
crammed together so closely that for many the only means of entry was
through holes in the rooftops and down ladders that descended directly into
the houses. They practised agriculture alongside foraging, with a diet of
wheat, barley, lentils, peas, goat, and mutton. Violating the usual
expectations about agriculture, men and women appear to have had the
same social status, and there were no walls, fortifications, or signs of
warfare.2
Perhaps the most striking feature of Çatalhöyük is its equality. The
houses are of similar size and there are almost no signs of large differences
in wealth, nor any administrative or government buildings. Ian Hodder, the
lead archaeologist of the Çatalhöyük excavation, once called it 'just a very,
very large village' that 'pushed the idea of an egalitarian village to its
extreme'.3  It was not a city, but it was long-lived. It persisted for around
1,000 years before something changed.
In the middle of the seventh millennium BCE, the equality between houses
came to an end. Larger complexes, dwarfing those of the preceding era and
of their neighbours, began to be built. The differences in the size of houses
show a dramatic increase in inequality. The Gini coefficient (a 0-1 measure
of inequality) more than doubled from 0.206 in 6650 BCE to 0.499 in around
6300 BCE. That is a larger jump than moving from being as equal as the
Netherlands to as lopsided as Brazil. There are fewer signs of communal
feasting and other collective activities. There are indications that animals
that may have been collectively stewarded previously were increasingly
under private ownership.4
This does not look to have been a welcome change. Around 6400-6300
BCE, the northern segment of Çatalhöyük was suddenly abandoned. The
southern side continued for another 400 years or so, although it shrank as
well. During this period, violence also increased. Many skulls with healed

fractures have been found across the site, alongside clay balls that were
hurled by slingshot.5  Many other factors could have contributed to the
abandonment, ranging from a drying climate to environmental destruction.
There was no single great sacking, riot, or terminating blaze. Instead, there
was a slow drain of occupants until this settlement was abandoned in
around 6000 BCE (Figure 14).6
Figure 14: A timeline of Çatalhöyük
The slow fade-out from around 6250 BCE marks a decline over time. It is used when there are
competing dates over exactly when a society collapsed and/or clear indicators of a strong
deterioration prior to the collapse.
A similar pattern can be seen further afield in Africa. Jenne-Jeno is one of
the oldest urban complexes in all of that continent. It was an ancient city,
embedded in the rich floodplain of the Niger Delta in modern Mali. It was
first settled in 250 BCE and over the course of centuries grew into an ancient
African metropolis. By 800 CE, 50,000 people lived within an afternoon's
walk of each other, all revolving around a forty-two-hectare urban centre.
That complex had no palace, plaza, or public buildings, but rather was a
maze of interwoven alleys and interlocking compounds. Like Çatalhöyük,
there are no signs of stratification or inequality. Like Çatalhöyük, the Jenne-
Jeno people were neither solely farmers, herders, nor foragers: they relied
on a cuisine of fish, cattle, and African rice. The site appears to have been
originally occupied during specific seasons, before groups began to settle
permanently and become more specialized. Potters, blacksmiths, fishers,
crafters, and herders all lived cheek-by-jowl.7
For over a thousand years Jenne-Jeno remained equal. Then, around 900
CE, the first monument was constructed. It was a wall around the urban
centre, erected at a time when trans-Saharan trade routes began to offer
novel opportunities for lavish wealth accumulation. The first signs of

increased wealth and power also appear to signal the decline of Jenne-
Jeno.8
About a century later, the abandonment of Jenne-Jeno began. Nearly two-
thirds of the settlement around the main mound was deserted. Some
families moved into the walled compound, but most dispersed into smaller,
self-sufficient villages. A chief took over the central mound and erected a
palace. In 1180 CE he converted to Islam and shifted his palace to the
nearby site of Djenné. The move coincided with flooding of the delta,
which may have spoiled the rice harvests. But it also gave the chief an
opportunity to break from the egalitarian tradition of Jenne-Jeno, or what
remained of it. Some of the families loyally followed the chief, while the
rest disappeared into the countryside.9
A similar yet subtly different trend unfolds some 11,000 kilometres away
in northern China. There, the city of Taosi is the site of one of the earliest
rebellions. In 2300 BCE, centuries before the earliest states of China, a
fortified sixty-hectare town grew into a city nearly five times as large. Both
the residences and burials were segregated, with the poor split off from the
wealthy. Wealthy burials were replete with hundreds of lacquered vessels,
jade axes, and traces of luxurious feasts. The city was ringed with walls,
criss-crossed with roads, and studded with monuments.10
Around 2000 BCE the city wall was razed to the ground. Ritual sites to the
south were abandoned, elite quarters were retrofitted to make stone-tool
workshops, royal tombs and monuments were destroyed, and the former
palace became occupied by commoners and surrounded by rubbish pits. It
was a clear act of rebellion.11  Now unwalled, the city swelled in size and
population. Some archaeologists lament that 'the city had clearly lost its
status as a capital and was in a state of anarchy' (described elsewhere as
'collapse and chaos').12  Yet it grew and flourished for another two
centuries in this apparently perilous state.
Taosi started as a Goliath before being overthrown. The city was reborn
in the ruins of the ruling class and lived on for two hundred years. Life did,
of course, change: the monuments, mansions, and palaces were no longer
maintained. This didn't mean that people's lives were worse. The palaces
were now dilapidated whispers of their former glory, but they housed more
people, while the old mansions produced practical stone tools rather than
richly dressed nobles.

Each of these cases is different. Jenne-Jeno and Çatalhöyük had
egalitarian origins, while Taosi started as a Goliath. There are also
similarities, with each one showing signs of either rebellion or
abandonment in reaction to inequality and centralization. In some ways, this
is not dissimilar to the counter-dominance strategies used by foragers.
Ostracizing an aspiring ruler develops into walking away from established
rulers, while execution of a domineering individual is scaled up to mass
rebellion. In Jenne-Jeno and Çatalhöyük it was accomplished by the people
voting with their feet, while the residents of Taosi voted with fire.
These abandonments were not rare. We see it not just in Eurasia but
across the Atlantic in the Americas, too.
ABANDONING THE FIRST GOLIATHS OF THE
AMERICAS
Stone heads engraved with eerie, lidless eyes mark the land of
Mesoamerica's oldest city. Now, it is a graveyard of basalt faces. The
largest of these weighs 40-50 tonnes. They were truly colossal
undertakings.
These heads were the work of the 'Olmecs', Mesoamerica's first Goliath.
San Lorenzo (we don't know what the Olmecs called it) was their capital
and it sat on a salt hill that rose almost fifty metres above the surrounding
plains of east-central Mexico. The ruby jewel atop this mountain was the
'Red Palace', a vast earthen temple that was stained rust-red by haematite
and held up by giant basalt columns. From here, the Olmec rulers held
feasts with copious quantities of maize-beer to legitimize and expand their
rule over the commoners who lived on the slopes and plains below.13
San Lorenzo didn't begin with a palace, colossal stone heads, and corn-
beer-keg parties, however. Instead, 800 years earlier, the site was occupied
by semi-sedentary hunter-gatherers who built artificial mounds on the
floodplains to act as island homes during inundations. The city itself
appears to have been a ceremonial centre. As the population grew, these
ceremonies would have become more important as a way of fostering a
sense of connection between larger groups. More rituals meant that more
maize was grown. It was during this period, which archaeologists call the

'Chicharras phase' (1250-1150 BCE), that an elite class began to emerge,
and the construction of the Red Palace commenced. The demand for
commoners to grow more maize for the rituals appears to have run contrary
to their hunter-gatherer traditions, stoking tension between them and the
elites. Shortly after its peak in power, around 1000 BCE, residents began to
drift away. Some scattered to the countryside while others emigrated to the
rival city of La Venta. As San Lorenzo declined, instability grew. Many of
the great stone heads were mutilated and buried, indicating a violent
rejection of elite rule and symbols. By 400 BCE, the city was a mausoleum
of basalt decapitations sinking into the mud.
This was not uncommon in Mesoamerica, although some early
settlements were much longer-lived.14  Take, for instance, one of San
Lorenzo's neighbours, Monte Albán. Around 1500 BCE farmers began to
settle permanently into the different arms of the Oaxaca Valley in southern
Mexico. A millennium later, a new settlement appeared on a central hill,
almost two kilometres above sea level, overlooking the surrounding plains.
Whoever built it levelled the top of the hill, creating a vast ceremonial
plaza. At 150 by 300 metres, this was large enough to host a small city for
public rituals. It also had a long, narrow stone ballcourt, used for playing a
popular Mesoamerican game in which opposing teams tried to strike a ball
through their opponent's hoops using their hips.15  Over the centuries,
thousands of people flocked to this new, growing city of Monte Albán. They
lived in dried mud-brick (called 'adobe') houses high above the valley, ate
hot tortillas made from corn, used tools made from imported obsidian, and
increasingly warred with their neighbours. By 150 BCE it was a city of
17,000, with irrigated canals and monuments celebrating their successful
raids.
It was a surprisingly equal city. There are no signs of a central palace, no
hoards of personal wealth, no centralized food storage, no large differences
in housing size, and no aggrandizing depictions of rulers. From 500 to 100
BCE the closest we have to a glorified advertisement for a ruler is a stone
carving of a masked individual leading a ritual procession. There may have
been some rulers and elites, but they were largely faceless. Then things
slowly began to change.16
In the seventh century CE, inequality began to rise.17  Rulers began to
erect carved stone artworks. These represent genealogies and marriages, a

way to flaunt hereditary prestige. Monte Albán was losing its collective
character. Eventually, the populace began to abandon the city. Two of the
most established archaeologists of Monte Albán, Gary Feinman and Linda
Nicholas, observe that commoners may have simply 'voted with their
feet'.18
There was an ancient conurbation in Mesoamerica even greater than
Monte Albán. On the outskirts of Mexico City lie the remains of a city
dating from around 100 BCE, crowned with colossal pyramids. We don't
know what the city was originally called, but 700 years after it fell apart the
Aztecs named it Teotihuacan, meaning 'place of the gods'. It was a pre-
Colombian metropolis, which held perhaps up to 100,000 people and
covered twenty square kilometres.
Between 100 BCE and 550 CE Teotihuacan appears to have been a planned
city. It was organized into quadrants, its north-south axis known as the
Street of the Dead and its east-west axis marked more prosaically by two
avenues named East and West. The settlement is framed by three gigantic
monuments: the Pyramid of the Sun, the Pyramid of the Moon, and the
Feathered Serpent Pyramid. Despite the glut of monuments, there are no
clear signs of centralized hierarchy, nor any artwork that shows one human
subjugating another. Its inhabitants appear to have known about the writing
systems of the Maya and the Zapotec, but rarely used their own, apart from
a few scant glyphs on murals.19
Whether Teotihuacan began with an oligarchy of kings or as some kind of
collective arrangement is unclear. What is clear, however, is that it changed
dramatically. That change occurred shortly after the Feathered Serpent
Pyramid was built, around 200 CE, with the sacrifice of some 200 victims.
Most were from outside the city, and had their hands tied behind their backs
before being killed. Despite this opening massacre, the pyramid didn't last
long. About fifty years later it was desecrated, its offerings looted, and the
plumed serpent statues that adorned it pulled down and smashed to the
ground. What was left of it was covered by a raised platform. This practice
of defacing or smashing items and then covering or burning them is
common in Mesoamerica, and is known as a 'termination ritual'. It is
designed to sever the cosmic connection between a site or object and a
deity.

After the termination of the Feathered Serpent Pyramid, no new pyramids
were built and no more people were sacrificed. Instead, wealth and energy
were channelled into an urban renewal. New great stone multi-occupancy
apartment buildings were erected across the city. It was not just the rich
who lived in these dwellings, but also the broader populace. Each dwelling
contained well-plastered walls and ceiling, internal drainage systems, and
around a hundred people. We don't know how they were governed, but it
does not appear to have been in a top-down manner (at least not one that
turns up in their art, writing, or buildings). The most likely reality is some
kind of decentralized management across twenty or so 'three-temple
complexes', with each overseeing around a hundred apartment blocks.
While there were probably still nobles and elites, the city was remarkably
equal in wealth. Some tentative calculations based on the size of houses
suggest that income inequality was under half that of modern-day
Denmark.20
It was not to last. Towards the final periods of Teotihuacan, the walled
compounds begin to become more isolated. Each developed its own trade
routes to foreign locations and controlled access points. Teotihuacan had
become a cluster of gated communities. More signs of wealth inequality
emerge. In about 500 CE, the city descended into flames. Over 150 buildings
across the city were burned, including almost all of those on the Street of
the Dead. All the temples, pyramids, and public buildings were demolished,
the images of gods destroyed, and people butchered in the palaces. There
appear to be no signs of foreign invaders. There is evidence of drought, but
this appears to occur after the great burning of Teotihuacan. Instead, this
appears to have been a case of popular rebellion and elite conflict. We can't
see the details, but archaeologists suggest that it could have been
'intermediate elites' (the rich or neighbourhood leaders) attempting to
topple the ruling class, or factional strife among elites, or a mass revolt, or a
bit of all three. We simply don't know. What we do know is that there was a
systematic campaign to incinerate the ritual heart of the city.21
Within a century the population of the city had dropped by half. It was
essentially abandoned but lingered. In the epi-classic period (550-850 CE)
the population dropped to 30,000 or lower as people retreated into the
surrounding hills and mountains. Teotihuacan never recovered.

Evidence of emigration and revolution can be seen in other areas, such as
the Andes of South America. Take, for instance, the collapse of the later city
of Tiwanaku (c.500-1000 CE).22  Tiwanaku, founded on the shores of Lake
Titicaca in western Bolivia, begins as an egalitarian site. After it grows into
a city of tens of thousands, inequality and hierarchy creep up. Massive
stone monoliths of high-status individuals are erected. Public ceremonial
centres begin to be cordoned off. The locally managed countryside that fed
the city is grabbed and remade into a top-down production system.23  It
results in over-exploitation of land, resources, and people.24  By 800 CE
Tiwanaku is a Goliath. It continues in this unequal state for around another
two centuries. Then, within a few decades, it falls apart. The monolithic
Gateway of the Sun is toppled, and storage jars smashed, in an act that
bears all the hallmarks of a revolution. The peoples who left the city
disregard the previous elite culture. Post-Tiwanaku pottery styles are bereft
of elite-imperial iconography such as the 'Front Face Deity' and 'Puma
Head'. The new, smaller, rural communities replicated many of the old
ceremonies performed at Tiwanaku, but these now took place in open,
collective spaces. Those who left Tiwanaku seemed intent on rejecting the
power and authority of its previous elite.25
Tiwanaku and San Lorenzo faced additional pressure in the form of
climate change: these highland peoples were reliant on an agricultural
system that was susceptible to drought. The abandonment of San Lorenzo
coincided with a prolonged phase of drought. And the flight from Tiwanaku
and reorganization of its politics also seems to have coincided with a period
of drought, indicated by the fluctuating levels of Lake Titicaca. Notably, as
they move away from Tiwanaku, they become reliant on a more flexible
combination of fishing, hunting, gathering, and herding.26
This is not a comprehensive account of the different sites that were
abandoned in a similar way across southern and central America. There are
signs of revolt across the Andes, largely in modern-day Peru, including the
Wari culture (c.600-1000 CE), the Moche (100-700 CE), and the ritual site
of Pukura.27  What we see across all of them is a pattern (see Figure 15).28
People revolted and abandoned urban settlements as they became
increasingly unequal and hierarchical. It looks similar to what happened
thousands of kilometres away with Çatalhöyük, Jenne-Jeno, and Taosi.29

These weren't just abandonments or rebellions. People were choosing to
walk away from what we tend to see as the natural course of history: the
adoption of cities, agriculture, and states.
Figure 15: Inequality and collapse in early Goliaths
THE FORGOTTEN PYRAMID CITIES OF NORTH
AMERICA
The first European explorers often portrayed the land they invaded as an
empty wilderness filled with wild animals and even wilder humans. In
North America, they overlooked the signs of more urban, centralized
peoples who farmed and built monuments. The Puebloans of the south-west
US were not the only pre-European farmers and builders of North America.
European colonizers came across the remains of numerous old cities and
towns built around great flat-topped pyramids made from soil. They
dismissed these as being either inspired by the Spanish or built by a more
advanced and civilized people who preceded the indigenous Americans.
They ignored the fact that the modern-day United States was once littered
with indigenous farming cities. All of which collapsed prior to European
arrival.
A millennium ago, in a land of dispersed hunter-gatherers, arose a city of
vast earthen temples and powerful priests. This was Cahokia, the first city
of the US. Before Cahokia there had been villages with no signs of war and
some indications of democracy, such as longhouses that could have held
councils of two to three dozen people. Domesticated corn arrived in the area
in 900 CE and took an increasingly prominent role in the diet of the Native

Americans there. Just over a century later the 'big bang' of Cahokia
occurred. Neighbouring villages were drained of their populaces, who
resettled into Cahokia. Cahokia appears to have been a ceremonial centre
and the sacrifices were one element of its ritualistic practices. Whatever
services it did provide, they didn't last long.30  As we've already seen,
Cahokia was abandoned and became a haunted marsh of derelict
pyramids.31
A thousand years ago, the US was dotted with urban centres and
emerging Goliaths built around great piles of earth. In northern Alabama
there is 'Moundville', a collection of twenty-eight flat-topped mounds
housing perhaps 10,000 people. Stretching across the southern
Appalachians (northern Georgia and some of the surrounding areas of
Alabama, Tennessee, and South Carolina) are dozens of similar sites.
Bordering the Puebloan farming communities of the south-western US were
the Huhugam (previously called the Hohokam by archaeologists), who had
flat-topped pyramids for public rituals. They also had plazas and ballcourts,
much like Mesoamerican cities such as San Lorenzo. The Huhugam built all
this in the desert of modern-day Arizona using vast networks of irrigation
canals. Hiding in plain sight are a host of ancient North American
Goliaths.32
Despite being thousands of kilometres apart, these different sites have
much in common. All were built at similar times, with initial construction
for both Moundville and Cahokia beginning in 1000 CE, and 1050-1150 CE
for a range of sites across the Huhugam culture, due probably to favourable
climatic conditions. During 950-1250 CE the northern hemisphere
underwent an unusual period of warmth known as the Medieval Warm
Period. This would have provided better conditions for growing crops and
supporting bigger populations. Like the Puebloans, all these sites and cities
were built on the three sisters of corn, beans, and squash. The Huhugam,
Moundville, and the mounds of northern Georgia all also look strikingly
similar to the cities of the Maya and the Aztecs, with flat-topped pyramids
and grand plazas (the ancestral Puebloans are a notable exception to this
architectural trend). The Huhugam even had a similar ballgame to the one
played in San Lorenzo and Monte Albán.
Many of the ingredients for cities and Goliaths seem to have been
imports from Mesoamerican empires. The three sister crops were first

grown in Mesoamerica and then spread via indigenous trade routes through
the deserts of the south-western US (the Puebloans and Huhugam) before
disseminating across North America and even into Canada. They flowed
into Cahokia, Moundville, and northern Georgia. These routes that snaked
up and across the Americas may have carried not just food, crops, and
jewels, but also ideas, stories of cities, great rectangular ballcourts, and
imposing religious rulers who cemented their reigns through the blood of
sacrificed men, women, and children. Some activities, like mound building,
preceded the influence of Mesoamerica. For instance, the first earthen
pyramids in the Americas dating back to 3500 BCE can be found in north-
eastern Louisiana, not in Mexico or the Yucatán. Other practices among the
first Goliaths of North America, such as growing the three sisters,
ballcourts, using stone-chipped daggers that represented gods, and much of
the cosmology, seem to have been inspired by Mesoamerica. Nonetheless,
in North America these were combined to make new, unique societies.33
All these sites progressed in a fashion that will by now be familiar.
Moundville began as a small settlement of dispersed mounds. Two centuries
later the two largest temples, a plaza, and a surrounding palisade were built.
Shortly thereafter there are signs of a religious elite receiving tribute in the
form of food from the surrounding villages. Elite burials adorned with
costumes and jewellery begin to turn up in the pyramids.34  Over the course
of two centuries people began to leave Moundville, returning to the
surrounding villages. The palisade was no longer repaired or replaced and
many of the pyramids became unused shells. What was once a city of up to
10,000 people became a purely ceremonial centre populated by a few elite
families. By the end of the sixteenth century, all the pyramids had been
abandoned. The exact reason for the slow drain away from Moundville is
unclear. However, it's hard to ignore the pattern of inequality rising and
then the commoners making an exodus from the city.35
Around 2,500 kilometres across the green ridges and valleys, and the
burnt-gold deserts of southern North America, lies the Sonoran Desert.
There the people known as the Huhugam built open, small, rounded
platforms that were used for public events and ceremonies. These platforms
were accompanied by open ballcourts for public games. Dozens of stadium-
mound-centred villages were sprinkled across the Gila River to form a hive

of thriving towns, often within a day's round trip of each other. The
indigenous peoples made an oasis in the deserts of the south-western US.36
Then things began to change. Many of the towns were consolidated into
cities as populations surged. The rounded mounds became taller, steeper,
flat-topped pyramids. The public stadiums were vacated. The games were
clearly over. Rich residences began to be placed atop these stepped
monuments, which now leered over the city. Elites began to be buried
differently, in their own adobe sarcophagi.
Around the year 1300 CE the Huhugam chief Siwani would have sat over
an ancient desert metropolis full of pyramids and a sixty-square-kilometre
irrigation system that fed another five cities and a castle that the Spanish
would later call Casa Grande. By the end of the century the cities and
villages lay largely empty. The irrigation systems fell into disuse and the
canals were not repaired. Specialists have pointed to numerous reasons for
this decline, including disease, drought, conflict, overpopulation, and
environmental degradation.37  The Huhugam ditched their cities and
powerful chief in favour of more resilient smaller communities.38
Other areas seem to have undergone periodic collapses that look more
like the Puebloans. The mini-Goliaths throughout the Appalachians would
rise up, last a century or two, and then contract and collapse. Accounts from
the first Spanish invaders, archaeological remains of palisades and warfare,
and studies of similar societies can give us some insights. Across these
mini-kingdoms individual warriors and leaders would compete for status,
leading not only to infighting among elites, but also to warfare between
neighbours. In some ways, war was an extension of elite conflict: a pursuit
of power and status through violence scaled up from individuals to larger
groups. A lack of control over citizens, who regularly left, and uprisings
also seem to have been factors. The Appalachian mini-Goliaths are not
remarkable: these problems of elite competition, warfare, instability, and
abandonment were often endemic in chiefdoms, hierarchical hunter-
gatherers, and Goliaths that had yet to become states.39
In each of these cases (as well as those of the Puebloans, the Calusa, and
north-west coast Native Americans) we see a similar phenomenon. A small
priestly class emerges and begins to boss others around. They display their
power, sometimes through innocent means such as feasts and opulent
burials, and sometimes through more unsettling methods, such as slavery

and human sacrifice. Many archaeologists have pointed to these 'secret
societies' as being one of the original blueprints for gaining power.
Exclusive groups claiming access to special knowledge and skills would
use their religious advantage to threaten others, gain political power, and
amass more resources. Once lootable resources appeared, these covert
cabals could fuse together all the sources of power: control of information,
violence, authority, and resources.40
All these sites across North America share another trait. All of them
collapsed around the same time. Warmer conditions helped to create larger
surpluses that these cities and pyramids were built on. Similarly, cooler
conditions seem to have played a key role in their demise. The ends of the
cities and hierarchies of Cahokia, Moundville, the Puebloans, and the
Huhugam all came with the end of the Medieval Warm Period and the onset
of the 'Little Ice Age', c.1250-1850 CE (Figure 16). There were a series of
pulses of cooling across the northern hemisphere, with some areas cooling
by around 1°C. In some cases, a changing climate seems to have played a
central role. The big bang of Cahokia coincided with one of the wettest
fifty-year periods in the last 1,000 years, while the abandonment of upland
farming complexes occurred during a series of severe droughts.41
Figure 16: A timeline of the first Goliaths of North America

FORGETTING THE EXPERIMENTS
What is most telling is how this period of nascent cities and urbanism was
remembered by later generations. It was not looked on fondly. Indigenous
people today across these regions have oral traditions, stories passed down
by word of mouth, which recount this as a time of rebellions against
overbearing despots. The modern Puebloans recall the Chacoan collapse as
a reaction to the concentration of power in leaders. In the Navajo rendition,
a stranger called the 'Great Gambler' (or Noqoìlpi) descended to the
Puebloans. He challenged them to games, beating them so consistently that
he came to own much of their property, as well as their men, children, and
women. He then tricked the rest of the Puebloans into building Chaco
Canyon on the false promise that he would release their property and
people. Eventually the people aligned with a group of gods to overthrow
him.42
The Cherokee, whose nation covers much of the mounded territory of
northern Georgia, Alabama, and Tennessee, recall once being ruled by the
Ani-Kutani, a hereditary secret society who built the pyramids that the
abandoned towns were once centred around. These rulers grew arrogant and
oppressive and, in some versions, even became cannibals. The people
despised these tyrants, but also feared them, and so endured their fate in
silence. Eventually, the people rose up in revolt and destroyed the mound-
builders.43
The O'odham descendants of the Huhugam pyramid builders see the
collapse of these earlier cities and pyramids as stemming from a fight
between the cultural hero Elder Brother and the ruling priest class at the
time. The ruling priests grew arrogant, suggesting that they knew more than
Elder Brother. They offended him, and rather than apologize, they tried to
murder him on multiple occasions. Elder Brother retaliated and assembled
an army of the disenfranchised. As they approached Casa Grande the rebels
sang 'Yonder stands the doomed habitation. About the pueblo runs its
frightened chieftain.' The chieftain ran, never to return.44
Then there is of course Cahokia, which the Native Americans chose not
to remember at all.

The Native Americans didn't just drop their elites and cities; they
organized themselves in such a way as to prevent them from re-emerging.
The peoples of Moundville, Cahokia, and the Huhugam dispersed into
smaller towns and farms. Across the Mississippi, these towns still often
contained mounds, but they were usually open, smaller, and used for public
ceremonial celebrations. The O'odham descendants of the Huhugam started
to build new stadiums with a ballcourt game played by women. Some
mound-based mini-kingdoms remained around the Mississippi, such as the
Natchez and Tunicas in the Lower Mississippi Valley (crossing Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Mississippi), but these were smaller and fewer than before.
Religion became decentralized: priests no longer ruled towns and
ceremonies. Spirituality and medicine became more shared, public
practices. The Cherokee replaced the fabled Ani-Kutani with individual
healers and conjurers. The Huhugam stopped burying elites in adobe
coffins. Instead, they cremated the remains of all the dead. The priests of
Cahokia, Moundville, and Huhugam likely justified their rule through
exclusive access to rituals and the supernatural. These peoples were
rearranging religious practices to ensure that no such imbalance could form
and be exploited again.
Leaders still existed across North America in the centuries that followed
the fall of the Goliaths. Yet these communities tended to be democratic
hierarchies with strict checks and balances. Each Cherokee town had both a
council of men and a council of women, while family-based clans spread
their members across towns as a check against the councils and chiefs. Most
Native Americans (both men and women) contributed to major decisions,
such as whether to go war. Sometimes great assemblies convened to seek a
consensus decision. These decentralized political webs were held together
by threads of reciprocal gift-giving, trade, and, in some cases, food sharing.
Diplomatic arrangements, like confederacies of different nations (such as
the Haudenosaunee, or Iroquois people) helped to bring people into larger
groups without over-centralizing power.
Most of these dispersed, egalitarian peoples began to rely more on
hunting and gathering and less on farming. After the Huhugam, the Tohono
O'odham (desert people) derived less than 20 per cent of their calories from
agriculture, while the Hia-Ced O'odham got even less than that. The
arrangements were not perfect: there was still war and suffering, as well as
some inequality and hierarchy. Yet it is hard to see this as a worse

arrangement than their world before the collapse. For most people it meant
healthier diets, more movement, and freedom from the threat of having a
loved one, or yourself, beheaded and thrown into a shallow grave beneath a
pyramid of dirt. There is a good reason why the later generations organized
themselves to prevent a Goliath from being reborn.45
This pattern of organizing to prevent Goliath rebirth was aided by the
climate. The cooler, more drought-prone conditions of the Little Ice Age
would have made creating large agricultural surpluses much more difficult.
This is perhaps why the Calusa and other hierarchical foragers (who relied
on fish rather than grain) persisted until European contact, while the
agrarian pyramid builders of Cahokia and Moundville fell apart and never
returned. The climate conspired against Goliath.46
WALKING AWAY FROM HISTORY
Twelve thousand years ago, our communities changed alongside the
climate. Yet our psychology did not. As lootable resources were gathered,
some came to try to dominate others in a slow, protracted struggle. Some
chose to accept the new arrangement, while many suffered, rebelled, or
simply walked away. The adoption of agriculture, cities, and states took
thousands of years partly because it was resisted by so many of us. That
was due to our deeply ingrained psychological traits.
One was our aversion to being dominated. Many of the cases here are not
just collapses but also examples of successful counter-dominance strategies.
Intentionally destroying elite monuments and exiting (voting with both feet
and fire) are a larger-scale version of ostracizing or eliminating an upstart
hunter. Groups coming together and then breaking apart when conflict
arises are also not dissimilar to earlier fission-fusion patterns. Indeed, some
scholars have even described the rise and fall of mini-Goliaths across
northern Georgia as exactly this kind of process.47
Interestingly, many of the cases, such as Tiwanaku, San Lorenzo, and
Jenne-Jeno, cut against the conventional wisdom that states allowed for the
creation of large-scale farming and eventually cities. The logic was that
people needed rulers and bureaucracy to create stable food production to
sustain a city's large population. This clearly wasn't necessary: across the

world cities and large-scale irrigation preceded centralized, hierarchical
arrangements. And they often fell apart once a domineering Goliath
emerged.
Rather than people willingly and logically choosing to adopt rulers and
then cities, they were developing agriculture and cities (in different orders)
and sometimes aborting them once these social experiments became
infected with dominance hierarchies. Rather than states being constructed to
allow for irrigation and cities, we often see cities arising first, elite groups
hijacking and repurposing pre-existing food production, then people often
resisting an emerging hierarchy. It's not a universal pattern. Other areas of
the world see a smoother rise from inequality to hierarchical cities. Yet,
history and the march towards states was far slower, messier, and more
resisted than is commonly assumed.48
Cahokia, and the other cases covered here, are indicative of the fate that
befell many infant Goliaths, not just in the Americas but across the world.
Cities and settlements often began in an egalitarian fashion with no signs of
leaders and roughly equal-sized houses. These more collective communities
often persisted for an extraordinarily long time: Çatalhöyük for some two
millennia, and both Jenne-Jeno and Monte Albán for around a thousand
years. (Only a few exceptional empires, such as the Byzantine, persisted for
a thousand years or more.) Then, inequality slowly, haltingly grew into
more entrenched forms of rulership, a process that was often accompanied
by war, fortifications, centralized agriculture, and human sacrifice. Then,
people left. Sometimes it was a more peaceful affair; at other times their
exit was celebrated with smashed gates and monuments and cities set
ablaze.
This trend would continue for millennia. The boundary between Goliaths
and surrounding non-state peoples was porous. Whether it was Chinese
peasants joining the nomadic raiders to the north or Romans defecting to
the Huns, citizens regularly and voluntarily left Goliaths. When the walls
were weak and social control underdeveloped, fading back into the
periphery was a tempting option.49
Despite this general pattern, we also need to be aware of the differences.
The collapse of Tiwanaku and Cahokia took a generation or two, while the
draining of Çatalhöyük and San Lorenzo played out over centuries. The
aftermath of the collapse also varied. While swathes of land around Cahokia

and the Mississippi Basin were left vacant, the communities that followed
Monte Albán in the Oaxaca Valley were even more unequal and autocratic
with bigger, richer palaces. These differences, while important, should still
not distract us from the underlying picture that early Goliaths were
frequently fragile and rejected. It's a trend we can see beyond the case
studies covered here.50
There were thousands of villages and settlements during the Neolithic.
While we can't carry out a systematic investigation, there is some evidence
of a similar pattern. In 2023, the archaeologist Dan Lawrence and his
colleagues examined the long-term trends of several hundred urban sites
across south-west Asia, from 12,000 to 2,000 years ago. They initially
expected that the longest-lived settlements would be those with the most
productive agricultural land. That wasn't the case. Many of the most
persistent settlements were in marginal environments. Instead, settlement
longevity was negatively correlated with more centralized arrangements.
Whether due to war or abandonment, longevity declined as hierarchy
increased. The earlier settlements were astonishingly persistent. Their
average age during the period 12,000-10,000 years before today is over
3,000 years. This drops in subsequent periods as Goliaths grow and take
over.51  The earlier settlements were perhaps more egalitarian, but also
much more resilient. We'll need to wait for more evidence and bigger
studies to see whether or not this trend is a statistically significant one
across the world.52
This pattern, if robust, could even extend to more recent finds. Laser
scanning across the Amazon has revealed cities and settlements with
advanced irrigation systems hidden beneath the lush canopy. In the
Ecuadorian Amazon 2,500 years ago, the inhabitants crafted a city of 6,000
earthen platforms that would have held tens of thousands of people. Those
platforms, like those in Cahokia and the Maya, were organized around a
central structure that itself had a raised platform. The platforms were
connected by roads, the longest of which is 25 kilometres. In the south-west
Amazon are several urban sites dotted with rectangular platform mounds,
stepped platforms, and conical pyramids standing up to twenty-two metres
tall. The Ecuadorian sites were inhabited for around a millennium. Yet
eventually all these cities and settlements were abandoned in favour of
more dispersed lifestyles. For now, we don't know why. But it is yet another

reminder that the path towards urbanism, and often the inequality that
accompanied it, was reversible.53
Not all early Goliaths were aborted or abandoned, however. Some
became far larger, more permanent structures that spread across the world.
OceanofPDF.com

6
Goliath Rises
New Fuels, New Goliaths - How to Escape a Goliath - Goliath Evolution -
Our Sacrifice - Stories of Subjugation - A Gendered Goliath - The Losers
of Evolution
NEW FUELS, NEW GOLIATHS
Sixteenth-century New Guinea had practised agriculture for as long as
Egypt (since 5000-4500 BCE), growing yam, taro, and bananas. Despite
this, New Guinea looked rather different from Egypt. It never developed a
large, stratified society, let alone a pharaonic ruler and towering pyramids.
In the seventeenth century a new crop was introduced to the archipelago
of New Guinea: the starchy orange tuber that we call sweet potato.
Portuguese colonizers took it into their Indonesian provinces, and it
travelled from there through the hands of local traders. For a time, it
appeared that the introduction of the sweet potato might lead to an
indigenous state arising in New Guinea. This new staple led to a surge in
agricultural productivity and a boom in population. People began to craft
and trade more prestige goods. Yet, no group ever went the way of Egypt. A
state never arose, and the politics remained fragmented in competing
communities.1
Understanding why some areas of the world established enduring empires
and kingdoms while others didn't means understanding not just how

Goliaths were created, but how they evolved the right structures to
persevere and avoid collapse.
The famed economist Adam Smith, the forefathers of communism Karl
Marx and Friedrich Engels, and many big history books have all theorized
that agriculture created a surplus of resources, thus enabling full-time rulers
to manage everyone else without wasting time on producing food. It's clear
that this isn't the full picture. We have already encountered hunter-gatherers
who produced hierarchies and a surplus but never tilled a field. Then there
is New Guinea, which developed large agricultural surpluses yet never
produced a state or a large-scale Goliath.
There were ten centres of independent agricultural production around the
world, and only around four of them (the Near East, the Yellow River Basin
in China, the Andes, and Mesoamerica) developed states (see Figure 17).2
These were the five original states (initial experiments that did not emulate
a neighbour or competitor): the First Dynasty of Egypt, Uruk in
Mesopotamia, the Xia Dynasty in China, Monte Albán in Mesoamerica, and
the Wari (or potentially Tiwanaku) in the Andes. Original states were only
ever created in these centres of food production. States became the political
scaffolding for Goliaths, creating far more organized, stable, and large-scale
societies. All the abandoned experiments we've covered, from the first
farmers of Europe to the pyramid cities of North America, also relied on
agriculture. Clearly, agriculture is a necessary but not sufficient condition
for creating a state.3
Goliath fuel (caged land, lootable resources, and monopolizable
weapons) can help explain why states arose in these areas yet not in Japan
or New Guinea. They all required restricted exit options, monopolizable
weapons, and new lootable resources in the form of domesticated crops and
animals. Growing populations and a reliance on agriculture shrank exit
options. Mesopotamia was a land cordoned off by two rivers (the name
quite literally means 'the land between rivers' in Greek), while Egypt was
trapped between the Red Sea and Sahara Desert.4  New weapons were still
needed to capitalize on greater masses of trapped people.5  The rise of the
earliest macro-states (covering an area of more than 100,000 square
kilometres) - such as Akkad in Mesopotamia and the Old Egyptian
Kingdom - coincided with the spread of bronze metallurgy in the region
and the proliferation of hand-held weapons such as bronze swords (around

3000 BCE).6  These probably would not have been enough without the new
lootable resources that became available after the end of the ice age:
domesticated crops and animals.7
Cereals are the ultimate lootable resource. Wheat and barley (in
Mesopotamia and Egypt), rice and millet (in China), and maize (in
Mesoamerica) all have regular harvest periods, are all calorically dense, and
can be easily spotted, confiscated, and carted off to a distant ruler. They
can't be easily hidden by a farmer from a tax collector or harvested at
unpredictable times. One broad-spanning analysis over several millennia
found that the production of cultivated cereals was the strongest predictor
for the development of states.8  Another, covering Europe in the period
1300-1700, showed that observable calories (easily seen food sources)
were highly correlated with stronger states with a greater tax base.9  Unlike
salmon or other fish, cereal cultivation can also support far larger, denser
populations. The world relies on a handful of cereals today largely because
they were an ideal tax crop five thousand years ago. As James C. Scott
proclaimed, 'grains make states'.10
OceanofPDF.com

Figure 17: Original states and independent food production centres
OceanofPDF.com

Although it wasn't just grains. Domesticated animals helped as well.
Cattle, goats, and sheep provided a storable and mobile source of calories
and protein, as well as materials such as hide, wool, bone, and sinew.
Horses can aid in war and trade. Cattle and horses can both assist and
supercharge agriculture. We see this when we compare Mesoamerica and
North America to Eurasia. Eurasia developed far greater disparities in
wealth than Mesoamerica or North America did. That is largely because
Eurasia had horses and other large, domesticated mammals (such as cows,
goats, and sheep), while the Americas did not. Ploughs pulled by horse and
ox allowed for a greater surplus and disproportionately benefited the few
who owned land and could afford them. Eventually, warriors mounted
horses to conquer others.11
The new lootable resources of domesticated crops and animals were not
evenly distributed. They were largely a matter of geographical fortune.12
China got pigs, rice, and millet; Mesopotamia and Egypt received cattle,
goats, sheep, wheat, barley, and einkorn; Mesoamerica was bequeathed
turkey, beans, squash, and maize; and the Andes were handed llamas,
alpacas, and potatoes.
Goliath fuel can also explain why some regions of the world had
agriculture but never built a state. New Guinea, western Africa, the Sahel,
Ecuador, and the eastern US had domesticated crops but few to no lootable
ones. New Guinea had bananas that can only be stored for a month or so
before rotting. Ecuador and the eastern US had squash that does not have
one easy harvest period during which a tax collector could drop by. Rather,
they can be harvested over a period of several months. Taro, potatoes, and
sweet potatoes are all grown underground and can only be stored for around
1-6 months. They can also often be left underground after their harvest
period. These were not crops that were easily captured and monopolized by
an elite class. In contrast, wheat, rice, and corn are all highly visible: corn
advertises itself with high stalks, while rice paddies and waving golden
fields of wheat are difficult to miss. All of them require significant labour,
have predictable harvest times, and can be stored for years or decades in the
right circumstances. Crops such as corn, rice, wheat, and barley are highly
lootable (see Table 2).13

Table 2: The lootability of different crops
Crop
Visibilit
y
Post-
harvest
storabilit
y (in
optimal
conditio
ns)
Labour
intensity
Lootabili
ty
Banana 
High
1-2
months
Low
Low
Maize 
High
Around a
decade
Moderat
e
High
Potato 
Low
4-5
months
Low
Low
Squash 
Moderat
e
2-6
months
Moderat
e
Low
Sweet Potato 
Low
6 months
Low
Low
Taro 
Low
1 month
High
(moderat
e if
irrigated)
Medium
Rice 
High
Decades
High
High
Wheat 
High
Decades
High
High
While western Africa and the Sahel had more lootable resources such as
African rice and pearl millet, they lacked domesticated animals and had a

low population density. The geography was made up of flat coastal plains
and inland hilly plateaus, providing plenty of exit options. Eventually, the
rice-growing Ghana Empire (300-1050 CE) did emerge in the western
Sahel, although likely after having interacted with other states.14  While
northern Japan did have millet, it was cultivated late (around 689-1015 CE)
and after the introduction of rice.15  Rice laid the foundation for later elite
groups and an empire. When exactly an empire was established in Japan is
shrouded in myth, but the current Japanese emperor (Naruhito) appears to
have an unbroken lineage from around 500 CE.
Eastern North America was well on its way to building a state with
Cahokia before it fell apart. Even then, these pyramid cities arose only after
the importation of corn from Mesoamerica. And they struggled to rebuild
large Goliaths during the Little Ice Age when the conditions meant less
Goliath fuel to support and tax big, dense populations. North America also
had bountiful exit options.
However, the fall of Cahokia, Moundville, the Huhugam, and the
Puebloans does not mean that North America would never have seen an
indigenous empire arise. On the contrary, across the world state-building
was a slow process that took centuries or millennia and was littered with
failed attempts. It was less than two centuries between the failure of the first
Goliaths of North America (about 1250-1350 CE) and the arrival of the first
European invaders (around the 1530s). On the coast, European expeditions
encountered the Calusa. Further inland, when they arrived at the Mississippi
Basin, they still encountered several small, mound-based mini-kingdoms.
Imagine if the Europeans hadn't arrived for several more centuries,
indigenous populations had continued to grow (decreasing exit options),
trade had intensified with Mesoamerica, and North America had had time to
emerge from the Little Ice Age. North America would still almost certainly
have built an indigenous state eventually, as did all other world regions with
Goliath fuel.
Well, all except one. The Indus Valley Civilization is the only remaining
case of a centre of agricultural food production that never developed a
Goliath. This group (beginning around 3200 BCE) was a collection of
commercially connected cities across the Indus Valley in modern Pakistan.
The largest city of Mohenjo-daro housed roughly 40,000-60,000 people at
its peak. They had plumbing for communal bathhouses and communal halls

that appeared to be open to the public. Despite having lootable resources
(namely rice and millet) and being located in a riverine valley, there are no
signs of inequality or hierarchy. Here was a community with plenty of
Goliath fuel but no Goliath.16
The Indus perhaps never developed a Goliath owing to low population
density. The Indus cities were more spread out than those in Uruk or Egypt,
which meant that people had less need to protect their assets or compete for
status with neighbours. Or perhaps the Indus simply managed to maintain
norms and counter-dominance mechanisms that prevented state formation.
Such cultural safeguards would largely be invisible to us today. For now, we
don't know. Whatever the reason for its exceptional equality (and longevity,
having lasted almost a thousand years) it eventually broke apart. A
millennium later South Asia was dominated by kingdoms such as the
Magadha Empire.17
Once a Goliath emerges in a world region - as we see in China, Egypt,
and Mesopotamia - it tends to re-emerge despite collapses. Yet, history is
not just a story of the endless march of empire. People regularly escaped
from Goliaths and tens of millions still do so today.
HOW TO ESCAPE A GOLIATH
In the highlands of Southeast Asia lies an unusual land. It is a 2.5-million-
square-kilometre expanse containing 130 million people. If it were a
country, it would be the tenth largest in both land area and population. It
crosses ten states - China, Taiwan, India, Thailand, Laos, Vietnam,
Malaysia, Cambodia, Myanmar, and Bangladesh - yet none of them control
it. It is called Zomia and its population is, practically speaking, stateless. It
contains a plethora of peoples with hundreds of different languages,
ethnicities, and cultures. Many are resolutely egalitarian, but there are also
some smaller feudal and hierarchical societies, such as the Shan (in
Myanmar), as well as the Tay and Nung (in Vietnam). Yet none are full-
blown states, nor have they been incorporated into their larger neighbours.
For all intents Zomia is a stateless giant hidden in plain sight.
Zomia appears to be an intentional creation rather than the remnants of
ancient 'uncivilized' peoples. For the past few centuries, both the

surrounding states and many scholars believed that the highlands were
populated by barbarians who pre-dated the rice-growing lowland kingdoms
and empires around them. That's why they lacked kings, writing, and
intensive agriculture. But the anthropologist James C. Scott, who spent
months living in Zomia, came to the opposite conclusion: Zomia was
mainly created in opposition to the states surrounding it. It was a haven of
people trying to evade state capture, whether they be refugees, exiles,
bandits, rogues, escaped slaves, or oppressed minorities. For instance, the
Akha recall their origins as highlanders who moved to the lowlands to farm
before being pushed back to the highlands by Tai warriors. Sure enough,
their accounts seem to chime with the creation of the first city-state by Tai
raiders in the twelfth century, followed by the expansion of the Chinese
Yuan Dynasty in the thirteenth century. The lifestyles of the Akha and many
others were not archaic relics, but active attempts to escape empire.18
The violence of building and growing empires in the lowlands, as well as
the pandemics that accompanied them, quite literally made people run for
the hills. Sometimes what made them flee were the violence and economic
losses that accompanied a collapse. There was a constant churn of new
identities as more groups migrated into the area, mixing into the cultural
soup. Some of those who walked and ran into the hills maintained a
semblance of hierarchy. Yet most became dispersed and egalitarian. Zomia
is a land that is not ruled by a Goliath. That appears to be an intentional
choice rather than a historical accident.
The location of Zomia, the mobile ways in which these groups live, the
crops they grow, and even the stories they tell, were all designed to evade
being detected and caught by their Goliath neighbours. Not only that, but
also to prevent their own societies from generating systems of domination.
In many ways they resembled the several Native American groups who
turned towards more mobile hunting and gathering, and egalitarian
practices and stories, after the collapse of the first Goliaths. Both were
practising what Scott called the 'art of not being governed'.19
This art of not being governed can help us understand how people behave
during collapse: how many return to more mobile, rural ways of life, and
how many avoid returning to a Goliath.
The people of Zomia, and countless non-state refuges over the past 5,000
years, have relied on their landscape, mobility, agriculture, and culture to

avoid being caught by a Goliath.
Zomia's geography is made up of hilly highlands that range from 300 to
4,000 metres above sea level. The mountains and the hills are difficult for
an army to invade, easy to hide in, have plenty of bottlenecks to fight off a
far larger foe, and provide ample exit options for fleeing people. It's an
inaccessible terrain that is difficult to conquer and even harder to keep hold
of. The landscape provides opportunities for hit-and-run tactics, is difficult
to operate in, and gives those who have local knowledge a critical
advantage. That's partly why the highly trained technologically supreme US
military struggled to beat the Viet Cong in the wetland forest of Vietnam
and Laos, or Taliban fighters in the mountains of Afghanistan (which has
earned the country the moniker of 'the graveyard of empires'). Similarly,
governments throughout South America have laboured against insurgents
and crime syndicates who hide in the jungle. They are choosing land that
favours guerilla warfare.
It's not just rebels, outlaws, and criminals who use geography to their
advantage. Escaped slaves (maroons) did too. Many of the slaves who
broke away from the cotton-plantations of the American South fled to the
'Great Dismal Swamp' that lies across Virginia and North Carolina. Others
stayed closer to the slave plantations, concealed in nearby wilderness. Some
started families, built homes, and cultivated farms in the impenetrable
marshes that separated them from the grasp and lashes of their former
masters. Geography can help create distance and friction between
dominators and the oppressed, and people have used that to their advantage
perennially.20
The influence of geography in limiting the spread of Goliath can be seen
across the world. One analysis of 1,094 traditional societies found that
environmental barriers, such as higher elevations or more hard-to-traverse
terrain, led to less diffusion of culture. Interestingly, this was the same for
Eurasia and Mesoamerica, undermining the famous idea that Eurasia saw
more cultural transmission owing to its east-west axis. Instead, Eurasia
likely developed earlier, larger Goliaths simply because it had more Goliath
fuel and domesticated its crops and animals earlier.21
How you get your food can also help evade a Goliath. Crops such as
cassava, taro, and potatoes are less lootable since, unlike grain, they can't
be stored for very long and can be left in the ground. Colonial

administrators in the Americas deplored these crops and actively tried to
paint those who farmed them as lazy. Their fear was that someone with
cassava, fishing gear, and a shotgun to defend themselves had no reason to
take on wage labour working on the hacienda plantations. Foods such as
potatoes also made their way back to Europe, causing similar problems for
overseers. Many Europeans adopted the potato during the Dutch Revolt
(1556-1648) for the simple reason that it couldn't be easily confiscated.
Peasants could leave their crop buried when a marauding army passed
through and dig it up after they had left. The soldiers were left hungrier and
the poor a little richer. Across Europe, most of the areas that adopted these
'escape crops' tended to experience increases in population without an
increase in hierarchy. Escape crops are essentially the opposite of lootable
resources: they have low storability once harvested, are less visible, have
more unpredictable harvest times, and often require less labour to grow.22
It wasn't just what you grew, but how you grew it. Shifting agriculture
(also known as 'swidden' farming) makes farmers far more mobile. More
mobile people are harder to control. The Punan Lusong people in Malaysia
left rice farming and returned to the forests as foragers and swiddeners
when the Japanese invaded. They returned to their farms in 1961, once the
Japanese threat had well and truly subsided. Across Zomia and many other
stateless areas we see the same use of these 'escape crops' and a greater
reliance on hunting-gathering and swiddening.23
Like the Native Americans, many of the peoples of Zomia have stories
and traditions that warn against rulers. The Akha people have a tale of a
thirteenth-century king (Dzjawbang) who tried to create the first census
before being executed by his own people. His son is recalled as an Icarus-
like figure who flew a shamanic horse with wings glued with beeswax too
close to the sun before plummeting back to earth. They are tales warning
about hubris and hierarchy. Dzjawbang is slain for trying to control his
subjects too closely, and his son for soaring too high into the heavens. The
Native Americans remembered their old rulers as evil, oppressive magicians
(such as the Ani-Kutani) and malicious trickster gods (such as the 'Great
Gambler') who eventually faced justice. The generations who lived after a
failed Goliath project tended to remember them very differently from how
we often recount history. Westerners still often look back to Rome with
nostalgia, many Egyptians take great pride in the sandy tombs of the

pyramids jutting up from the desert, and the Chinese often celebrate their
2,000 years of 'civilization'. Yet imagine if the earliest Goliaths in the Near
East and China had collapsed and never returned. How would we remember
them today? Would we reminiscence about great kings with advanced
civilizations who drove progress, or remember them as mad wizards and
corrupt tyrants who were overcome by their people? Or, would we have just
forgotten them entirely, as the Native Americans did with Cahokia?
Stateless peoples, whether in the wake of a collapse or fleeing a Goliath,
often turn to the same strategies. They limit access to Goliath fuel by
dwelling in inaccessible lands and staying mobile to help maximize exit
options. They avoid growing lootable resources. They create cautionary
tales of how hierarchy went wrong in the past. The exact approach depends
on the circumstances. In the Andes, people usually fled to the lowlands and
jungles rather than the mountains, simply because these tended to be
forested and have less lootable resources. Many escaped slaves in the Great
Dismal Swamp in the south-eastern US did grow rice and maize, but only
when they were truly camouflaged by the land.24
While places such as Zomia may have avoided dominance hierarchies,
they are still a tiny minority today. That's because Goliaths have evolved
over time, developing better ways to control and coordinate larger groups of
people without collapsing.
GOLIATH EVOLUTION
In 1519 a group of Spanish conquistadors led by Hernán Cortés arrived in
Mesoamerica and met the Aztec Empire. Like Fontaneda meeting the
Calusa, they did not encounter an entirely alien society. Instead, they saw a
remarkably familiar one: the Aztec Empire was organized into commoners
and elites, with a central government ruled by a king; the commoners gave
away resources in tax and tribute; the elites intermarried and threw great
feasts; they had a writing system that helped keep records and celebrate
leaders; they had cities that were fed by the surrounding towns, as well as a
road system for moving troops and trade goods. Out of the myriad ways in
which one could organize a society, the Aztec Empire looked astoundingly

like its Spanish counterpart. Two societies separated by 8,000 kilometres
and the Atlantic Ocean somehow came up with similar social blueprints.
We see this around the world. Different Goliaths from Cahokia and the
Maya in the Americas to Egypt and Benin in Africa, and the earliest states
of China, may have had different conceptions of kings and class, but that
doesn't change the remarkable fact that they all had them, as well as slavery
and ideologies that justified domination. This is what is commonly called
'convergent evolution': different Goliaths independently evolved similar
structures.25
Part of this convergent evolution is that early rulers faced similar
challenges and often devised similar solutions - solutions that, if they
worked, were more likely to survive and be passed down over time. For
instance, early states all faced the common problem of controlling lands
that were too far away from the capital and the direct grasp of the ruler.
Goliaths began to develop internal administrations when they conquered
territories that lay beyond a day trip from the capital. This appears to have
happened to some extent in Mesoamerica (Monte Albán), Egypt,
Mesopotamia (Uruk), and China.26
When an early state expanded too far the leaders had to (begrudgingly)
delegate authority to bureaucrats, governors, princes, and local elites. They
had to do 'government at a distance'. This included relying on governors
while trying to ensure they didn't break away and form their own
kingdoms. Every empire thereafter has had to do the same, even today.
Bureaucracy and administrations were a case of convergent evolution.
It wasn't just that rulers developed similar strategies to shared problems;
they also created more effective ways of spreading them across time and
space. Agrarian, state-based communities usually had effective ways of
faithfully transmitting culture through generations and regimes, particularly
through writing. Leaders and elites could also actively adopt and amplify
certain practices and ideas. Coin-based currencies in both China and Lydia
(modern-day Turkey) seem to have been set up by private individuals
before being embraced and spread by governments. Christianity was
already becoming widespread across Rome, but its official adoption by
Emperor Constantine (which outlawed the persecution of Christians and
supported the Church) aided its ascent. Hence there was sometimes a
conscious process of either adopting and spreading innovations or

emulating the successful structure of other groups and empires. It wasn't
perfect but, in the long run, evolution selected for larger, more powerful
Goliaths.27
Those who were the most successful at violent conflict tended to last
longer and grow larger, making it more likely that their religions, warfare
tactics, and models of governance would be adopted by others. Through
cultural evolution, empires slowly accumulated technologies and practices
that let them conquer and control larger groups of people over larger
stretches of land. Most of the first states conquered and demanded tribute to
siphon off resources, used human sacrifices and ceremonies to entrench
their rule, and often had minor part-time bureaucrats and accountants help
administer the territory. Scripts, when they did exist, were initially
rudimentary, such as cuneiform, hieroglyphs, and Mayan glyphs, rather than
fully fledged writing systems. These first states developed roads for
shuttling troops and messages. While impressive, these mechanisms still
meant that how much territory an empire could closely control was
significantly limited. As we'll see, these limits were slowly lifted over time
as technology and culture developed. The outcome was not just that
Goliaths evolved but also that they often ended up on similar evolutionary
trajectories.28
OUR SACRIFICE
We've already seen numerous cases of convergent evolution in the earliest
Goliaths. One is human sacrifice, which was practised in Cahokia,
Tiwanaku, Teotihuacan, Monte Albán, and by the Olmecs of San Lorenzo.
Almost all the earliest states across Mesopotamia, China, the Americas, and
western Africa practised it as well. The burial of a ruler alongside dozens,
hundreds, or even thousands of human victims occurs across the world in
early states from the Shang Dynasty in China, Ur in Mesopotamia, Keber in
Nubia, as well as the Wari and Moche in South America (the precursors to
the Inca). At Yinxu, the capital of the Shang Dynasty, China's second
earliest state, around 13,000 people were sacrificed over two centuries.
Many appear to have been slaves and war captives who were brought into

the city, forced to work with a restricted diet, and then executed. Hundreds
at a time were sacrificed, with the victims often beheaded and mutilated.29
Human sacrifice was a popular practice partly because it helped to
establish early Goliaths. It is a political performance that intimidates
challengers and justifies the political order. Most cultures have taboos
against in-group killing. A ruler can legitimate their rule by showing that in-
group killing is acceptable only when the ruler does it. Studies suggest that
the biggest predictors of human sacrifice across cultures are hereditary
rulers, bigger populations, and internal conflict over resources.30
Publicly showing that you can legitimately murder others, and that the
lives of the many are worth less than one elite individual, can help a
budding ruler demonstrate their power to a big crowd of allies (and rivals).
It even happens outside states. A study of ninety-seven pre-colonization
Austronesian societies found a clear correlation between human sacrifice
and social hierarchy. Over two-thirds of the cases with a strong hierarchy
practised human sacrifice, while just a quarter with little to no stratification
chose to sacrifice people. Those who used human sacrifice were less likely
to revert to egalitarianism.31
But as hierarchies became entrenched, the practice of human sacrifice fell
out of favour. Relying on a bureaucracy and religion was less costly and
less prone to backlash than the spectacle of public murders. Administration
trumped intimidation. Emerging kings across the world faced a similar
problem in trying to prove they had the right to rule. Human sacrifice was a
solution that many converged on and then later dropped.32
Human sacrifice may have provided the grounds for other points of
convergence. Sacrificing people was usually a way of giving a gift to
superior beings (such as gods or revered spirits and ancestors) to avoid
punishment and gain favour. In other words, it was a supernatural form of
tribute. You were simply offering human lives to a god or ancestor, rather
than slaves or gold to a monarch.
It also hints at one of the most powerful commonalties across every
Goliath: the ability to deal out random violence. Over time, leaders have
become more constrained by law and expectations against the arbitrary
execution of their citizens, but this was once the ultimate primeval display
of power. It's an act that puts the ruler above ordinary morality. Polities

across the world have all settled on the importance of violence to make
rulers legitimate.33
STORIES OF SUBJUGATION
We also see convergent evolution when it comes to stories that defend the
domination of the few over the many. One version of this propaganda is the
Hobbesian story. Hobbes's philosophy is not just about bringing peace to a
violent world, but also about bringing order to a supposedly chaotic one. It
crops up across the world, from Europe to China and India. Empires have
always made similar claims that they bring unity and equilibrium to the
cosmos. The Assyrian Empire (2025-609 BCE) depicted their lands outside
their borders as an 'outer realm' of chaos. The emperor was morally obliged
to expand the frontier and tame the chaos into civilization. It was a divinely
sanctioned duty. Like human sacrifice, the Hobbesian story was adopted by
many early rulers to help lower the natural aversion of their subjects to
dominance.
That Hobbesian tale was part of another common story that almost all
Goliaths developed: the battle between the civilized and the uncivilized. It's
a near universal myth. The Toltecs and people of Teotihuacan of
Mesoamerica labelled non-state foragers as chichimeca (dog people). In
Imperial China non-state peoples were split into categories of 'raw' (sheng)
and 'cooked' (shu). The cooked were those who had been incorporated into
the empire and could become normal (good, or liang) subjects. The raw
were those who were still too uncivilized to be properly integrated into the
empire. The very term 'barbarian' is derived from the Greek noun barbaros:
an insult, indicating that, to the Greeks, foreigners spoke rough, staccato
tongues that sounded like 'ba-ba'. The transatlantic slave trade and mass
killings across the Americas and Australia were also defended as fulfilling a
sacred duty to bring civilization to savages.
Today, civilization is still largely used as a positive term associated with
progress. We have popular stories of how the adoption of agriculture and
states has been a march towards less violence and more prosperity. The
narrative of civilization makes those outside the state look backward and
dangerous, and those within the walls more refined and superior. It's a

useful fiction for making the existing order seem just and to deter anyone
from leaving.34
Accompanying these stories of civilization have been stories to justify the
inequalities integral to Goliaths. Egyptian pharaohs were supposedly
reincarnations of gods. Sumerian kings usually referred to themselves as
representatives of gods on earth. In China, the first rulers painted
themselves as oracles, and later kings and emperors claimed that heaven
had bestowed on them the right to rule for the good of the people (the
'Mandate of Heaven'). Even the king of the Calusa was a divine figure.35
The historian and archaeologist Ian Morris once defined ideology as 'a
pack of lies that benefits someone'. Most ideologies are ideologies of
domination: they benefit those atop a hierarchy. Whether it's the Hobbesian
story, the caste system, racism to justify slavery, kings representing gods, or
the myth that progress rests on the indispensable genius of a few
billionaires, every society has stories to justify their inequalities.36  Such
stories overcame our dominance aversion by justifying hierarchies as a
matter of equity, fairness, or simply sheer superiority.
These stories still work today. The modern story for inequality is the
myth of meritocracy: the fable that people attain power thanks to individual
skill and performance (see the above number of hereditary billionaires).
One study of twenty-three modern, rich countries found that those with
higher levels of economic inequality had stronger beliefs that wealth was
earned meritocratically. Stories and inequality work in a feedback loop: the
myth of meritocracy justifies higher inequality and higher levels of
inequality result in more powerful people reaffirming the myth.37
Moralizing religions too are an outcome of Goliath evolution. Across the
world it appears that people moved from general animist beliefs as hunter-
gatherers (a belief that spirits or life-force permeate all the things around
us) to a belief in the afterlife, a veneration of ancestors, and eventually the
adoption of punitive gods. Gods who constantly watch people and punish or
reward moral behaviour are a highly effective force for controlling large
groups. These surround us today in the gods of the Abrahamic religions -
Islam, Christianity, and Judaism - and reappear across different continents
and time periods, such as the Incan supreme god Viracocha. One systematic
analysis of hundreds of sites found that in all cases these gods appeared
only after large, unequal, hierarchical societies developed. Big kings

preceded big gods. It makes sense: a hierarchy in heaven justifies a
hierarchy on earth.38
What we see in the first Goliaths is a slow fusing of the different forms of
social power. All the first states had some form of authoritative hierarchy
(political power), backed by force (violent power), with rituals and a story
that bequeathed a right to rule (information power), and took resources
(economic power) from a community of people (demographic power).
There was no single path to statehood, yet they all looked remarkably
similar: elites taking wealth and labour from a mass of commoners. They all
converged on a similar evolutionary pathway: a pathway that placed men on
top.39
A GENDERED GOLIATH
Patriarchy - a social arrangement in which men hold most power and
women are excluded - is one of the most common shared characteristics
across states and Goliaths. The Aztec Empire, the Spanish Empire, the
imperial dynasties of China, and the kingdoms of Mesopotamia were all
dominance hierarchies based on gender. Patriarchy was another point of
evolutionary convergence.
Patriarchy had modest beginnings. As covered earlier, men have stronger
inclinations for status competition and are far more likely to pursue it
through violence and domination. On top of that, men are more capable of
achieving status through force. Men are generally larger, stronger, and more
aggressive (women on average have 52 per cent of men's upper-body
strength and 66 per cent of their lower-body strength).40  There is a reason
why men have been the main soldiers and killers across history. While it is
not the strongest or meanest who commands the military, mafia, or state
today, physical strength and aggression were far more vital in the wars that
involved the use of axes, bows, and spears.41
Within early hunter-gatherer groups these differences did not seem to
translate into large-scale male oppression. That is because violence was
muted. This changed as lootable resources became available and war arose.
Lootable resources are storable but also make a society a prime target for

raiding. Having a close-knit group of male fighters who know and trust
each other is advantageous in a conflict. Groups that were regularly
engaged in warfare tended to need to keep fighting men together and hence
were disproportionately likely to be patrilineal. That is, when marriage
across groups occurred, the men stayed in their own group while the women
migrated. A migrating woman who was in a new setting and uprooted from
her family and friends had far less social power than the man she was now
married to. The power balance between the sexes shifts dramatically when
this happens.42
The groups that persisted and won battles were more likely to be the
patrilocal ones that favoured keeping their male fighters together. Such
groups were also more likely to become conquerors and pass on their
patriarchal practices and beliefs. That is what we see throughout history.
Successful early conquerors tended to have strongly patriarchal cultures
with a glorification of male violence and rule. The Akkadian Empire, which
conquered much of Mesopotamia, Anatolia [modern-day Turkey] and the
Levant, and the Yamnaya raiders from the Pontic Steppe both shaped the
early culture of Eurasia, and both were aggressively patriarchal.
Patriarchal societies also tended to become more oppressive over time.
Institutions, religions, and legal codes all reinforced and amplified male
rule and shrank women's status. The first states were a turning point with
large-scale, centralized hierarchies that celebrated and endorsed male
rule.43  This was reflected in their legal doctrines. The Code of Ur-Nammu
(2100 BCE), the first-known legal code in the world, was obsessed with sex;
one of its rules was that if a married woman committed adultery she would
be put to death (but her lover would receive no punishment). Such rules
tended to spread. For instance, biblical laws on sex, such as cutting off the
hand of a woman who injures the testicles of a man (Deuteronomy 25:11-
12), seem to be borrowed from the Assyrian Empire, a rival neighbour to
the Kingdom of Israel.44  Similarly, monotheistic religions - including the
Abrahamic faiths - valued sexual segregation, valorized male rule, and
praised chastity as well as practices such as veiling. Whether it be states,
legal codes, or monotheistic religions, the rules disproportionately benefited
men and reinforced their privilege. Such rules may have also helped to quell
infighting over women and property in larger societies. Patriarchy is
another example of Goliath evolution.45

Patriarchy was not (and still isn't) in the interests of all men. As we've
already covered, the adoption of lootable resources 8,000-4,000 years ago
happened alongside a collapse in the male gene pool.46  That's because a
small number of men were dominating reproduction. Similarly, harems and
polygyny only benefit a sliver of men in a society. Patriarchy was not a
social blueprint created by men for men.
Instead, patriarchy was the outcome of a blind process of Goliath
evolution. Goliath fuel such as monopolizable weapons and lootable
resources also fuelled male domination. A few minor differences in
psychology and physiology meant men were more likely to try to seize
power by violence, and violent conquerors were more likely to be
patriarchal. Over time the power imbalance between the sexes was
amplified by new rules and religions, resulting in the deep divides that are
carved into history. Domination of women by men became central to the
story of Goliath.
THE LOSERS OF EVOLUTION
These different features of convergent evolution were attempts to stabilize a
Goliath. In the language of systems, they are 'balancing feedbacks': they
serve to resist change and reinforce existing structures. (Think of a
thermostat. It monitors the temperature of a room and turns on the heating if
it gets too cold or turns it off if it's too hot. Similarly, balancing feedbacks
dampen and resist attempts to change the system.) There is evidence that
they worked and that a failure to evolve the right mechanisms often led to
collapse.
The original states all developed some kind of internal administration and
bureaucracy. They formalized their structures of rule and eventually
developed state religions. One study using the Seshat databank found a
clear correlation between the size of the polity and its 'information
processing' tools (mechanisms to order and store information, such as
writing and bureaucracy).47  Such tools allow for better tracking of citizens
(for tax, conscription, and even to identify dissidents), propaganda, and
government at a distance. When we look at many of the earliest Goliaths,
whether it be the Puebloans, the first farmers of Europe, or the mound-

based kingdoms of the Mississippi, most of them never developed those
kinds of tools. Tellingly, they often went through fission-fusion cycles and
showed higher levels of hierarchy and inequality before collapsing,
fragmenting, and repeating.
Hierarchical hunter-gatherers and other unequal farmers seem to have
experienced a similar fate of fission-fusion. Across modern India, Tibet, and
Bhutan are different traditional societies that practise shifting agriculture
(also known as 'slash-and-burn' or 'swidden' agriculture), in which a field
is used, burned, left fallow, and then returned to later. Societies such as the
Konyak Naga of modern north-eastern India frequently cycle between
hierarchical societies in which people are ranked - and those social
positions are passed down through birth - and more egalitarian settings in
which people are unranked, with leaders who are not hereditary and have
more limited power. This looks much like the fission-fusion patterns that
have been practised for millennia. Part of this may be due to shifting
agriculture, whereby lootable resource are created, but the constant
movement of people and their homes undermines centralized control. Part
of it may be that they have never had the Goliath fuel to develop greater
mechanisms for stability and control. These live examples of inequality in
the making show that inequality does not occur automatically. It is fought
for and often resisted.48
The Calusa and north-west coast Native Americans underwent centuries
of struggle to create a dominance hierarchy. Trying to gain control over a
community with a deep history of egalitarianism is a momentous challenge.
These hierarchical foragers would have been preceded by many failed
attempts to create a Goliath. Even then they tended to be small, unstable,
not highly centralized, and prone to infighting. Some archaeologists have
referred to these early Goliaths as 'fragile': leaders vie for status and
authority; people seek independence; and there is no well-developed
bureaucracy to hold everything together.49  A fission-fusion cycle tends to
ensue. The battle for status, with either words or weapons, made the
transition to Goliaths fraught, haphazard, and prone to failure.50
This lack of mechanisms to control a populace was one curse that
plagued the earliest Goliaths.
OceanofPDF.com

7
Goliath's Curse
Do Societies Age? - Why Inequality Grows With Lootable Resources -
Extractive Institutions and Unequal Exchange - How Extraction Creates
Fragility - Triggering Collapse - Survival of the Fairest - The Wisdom of
Democracy
DO SOCIETIES AGE?
There is a trend that we see over the past ten millennia. Over time many
hierarchical societies appear to become more fragile. They seem to be
ageing.
This doesn't just happen in the earliest Goliaths, like Cahokia and
Tiwanaku; it is common in far more developed empires and kingdoms as
well. The Western Roman Empire fell to infighting and invaders but had
been successfully coping with both for centuries. The Lowland Maya
(neighbours to Monte Albán and Teotihuacan) collapsed during one severe
period of drought but had navigated earlier ones.
Does this apparent pattern of ageing hold true for a larger selection of
cases? To find out, I and a group of complexity scientists led by Professor
Marten Scheffer analysed two databases of state lifespans: the Seshat
Global History Databank (the world's largest historical dataset) and the
Mortality of States database (MOROS, a collection of 324 states from 2000
BCE to 1800 CE). This study covered fully developed states, not just early
Goliaths. We've encountered only a few of these thus far, such as Monte
Albán and Tiwanaku, but most collapses are usually centred on states.

We found that states were increasingly more likely to terminate over the
first two centuries of their existence. After this point, they had a high but
stable rate of termination. Imagine that your likelihood of dying increases
as you age up until seventy. Thereafter your odds of perishing each year
stay at that high rate until you do eventually go to your grave. We saw a
similar pattern in states: a rising risk over the first 200 years followed by a
constant high risk of termination. It's not a one-off result either. One
database of 168 crisis events (the 'Crisis Database') showed that the
average duration for polities was 201 years.1
As something grows more vulnerable it often begins to recover more
slowly from disturbances. We see this in the elderly, who begin to struggle
more with recovering from illness or injury, such as a broken hip. This is
called 'critical slowing down' and tends to precede a 'tipping point' before a
rapid, large-scale shift. That critical slowing down appears to have occurred
in cases we've already encountered, such as the first farmers of Europe and
the Pueblo societies of south-western America. Analyses of population
levels among the first farmers of Europe and construction efforts (measured
by the number of trees felled) among the Puebloans suggest that these
communities recovered more slowly from shocks such as droughts and
population losses just before their collapse.2
The statistics reflect what we've seen in the case studies: many societies
do appear to become more fragile over time.
WHY INEQUALITY GROWS WITH LOOTABLE
RESOURCES
The first farmers of both Europe and the American south-west, and many of
the earliest cities and settlements, faced a similar problem. Inequality and
rulers began to creep up from within their communities. It is a persistent
trend throughout history: inequality tends to increase once a community
becomes hierarchical. That is, until it undergoes a major institutional reform
or is hit by a great leveller: a bloody revolution, mass mobilization warfare,
a mass-mortality pandemic, or a deep collapse. Fire and sword often leave a
level playing field.3

This trend of rising inequality is because of Goliath fuel (lootable
resources, caged land, monopolizable weapons). One global review by
archaeologists highlighted that lowered mobility (caged land), big
populations, and surplus resources that were predictable, dense, and could
be transferred across generations (lootable resources), were the key factors
that led to inequality. Similarly, a review of the global history of democracy
found that the factors favouring early democracy were an abundance of exit
options, smaller populations, and a lack of knowledge by rulers about what
citizens were producing (lootable resources are easy to observe). In other
words, all the sources of Goliath fuel favoured inequality and autocracy.4
Once a Goliath was created, inequality tended to increase over time and
in turn favour more autocratic arrangements. There are two key reasons for
this persistent pattern. First, wealth can easily be translated into other forms
of power (and vice versa). Richer families with more land among the first
farmers of Europe would have had not just more food, but also more riches
to purchase weapons with. The feast-throwing leaders of hierarchical
hunter-gatherers were essentially turning edible wealth into political power
in the form of debts, prestige, and alliances. We still see this today. It can be
as subtle as companies lobbying regulators and politicians for rules that
increase their profits, or as blatant as a billionaire becoming president and
then introducing tax breaks for the rich. Power begets more power.5
Second, the value of capital (assets such as land and stocks) tends to rise
more quickly than the value of labour. The economist Thomas Piketty
famously showed that the financial returns on capital (land, assets, stocks)
have outpaced the returns on labour (wages) for at least the past two
centuries. That is despite labour requiring more effort and skill than does
charging rent on land or betting on stocks. Simply put: the rich get richer
quicker than the poor can get richer, and often the poor simply get poorer.
More riches can then be transferred into other forms of power and the cycle
continues. Some have taken to calling this a 'wealth pump': money is
transferred from the bottom of society to the top.6
If a Goliath didn't collapse, the levels of inequality reached were often
staggering. One review of twenty-eight pre-modern states, from the time of
Rome to British India in 1947, found that they were on average 77 per cent
towards the theoretical maximum level of wealth inequality. That maximum
means a situation where an individual or small group takes all the excess

produced by a society ('the surplus'), leaving just enough for the rest to
survive and reproduce ('subsistence'). Sixteen of those kingdoms and
empires were close to being as unequal as possible. Things have improved
as most modern states today are around 44 per cent towards the maximum
level of inequality (from a low of the Netherlands of 29 per cent to a high of
63 per cent in Brazil).7
A few cases even exceeded this maximum level. That could be due to bad
measurement, or because a proportion of the population was being worked
to death.
Throughout most of history, the top 1 per cent tended to capture 10-40
per cent or so of the total income of a society, and even more of its wealth.
Egypt and Cahokia didn't just build pyramids: they were social pyramids.8
There are a few cases that were more equal, such as ancient Athens, and
early modern Holland and England, but these were far from democratic,
egalitarian arrangements. Athens was a slave-holding society where only
10-15 per cent of the population - just free, male citizens - could
participate through voting and speaking at the assembly (ekklēsia) or being
picked for the law courts that oversaw legal decisions (the dikasteria that
were randomly chosen). Holland and England were aristocratic monarchies.
Inequality has been the rule of history since the first Goliaths.
EXTRACTIVE INSTITUTIONS AND UNEQUAL
EXCHANGE
Not all Goliaths are the same. They can diverge in how unequal the
distribution of power is. More concentrated power (including control of
resources, decision-making, violence, and information) within a society
tended to lead to elites extracting more wealth, energy, and labour from the
rest of society. Hence extractive institutions are effectively a measure of
how concentrated social power is. A society may be a Goliath but have a
broader distribution of power: compare the more egalitarian, semi-
democracy of ancient Athens to the highly unequal militarized dictatorship
of the Assyrian Empire, or Norway to Saudi Arabia today. All of them
technically still organize into dominance hierarchies in which a few make

rules that are enforced with the threat of violence, but there is still an
enormous difference in how democratic they are, or how free and diverse
their media is. In other words, it's not just wealth inequality, but how
unequal the other forms of power are, including how autocratic decision-
making is in government, companies, and families.9
Increasing wealth inequality tends to spill over into other forms of power
and make the overall society more extractive. Tiwanaku and Monte Albán
didn't only become more unequal; they also became politically lopsided
with rulers rising up and becoming more powerful and self-aggrandizing.
Rome fell from republic to dictatorship as inequality rose, and that
dictatorship and its bureaucracy became increasingly captured by rival elite
families and power-hungry generals. In each case, Goliaths were becoming
more unequal and extractive: all four forms of power were becoming more
concentrated, and these inequalities in power were used by elites to take
more energy, labour, and resources from the rest of the populace.10
Concentrations of power are extractive because they tend to lead to
unequal exchange. Imagine two traders with equal power. Their exchange
of goods should be relatively fair. Now imagine one of them suddenly
acquires a large arsenal of weapons that they brandish in front of their
trading partner. Suddenly one trader may be more likely to accept a bad
deal. One actor having more power has changed the bargain and made the
exchange more unequal and extractive. We see this in the case studies
covered thus far. The maize beer feasts provided by the elites of Monte
Albán (or later by the Incan emperor to his subjects) was only a small
fraction of the corn that he took from them. Rulers would keep the rest of
the surplus for themselves, which of course showed up in the larger houses
they dwelled in, the more lavish decorations they adorned themselves with,
and the grander monuments they had built to celebrate themselves with (all
acts of conspicuous consumption for status).
Often the benefits provided by leaders as part of the exchange were
immaterial. The priests of Cahokia might well have claimed that they
controlled the weather (and the harvest) but they did not. Nonetheless, in
exchange for their ineffective services they were rich and powerful in life,
and were gifted thousands of beads and dozens of sacrificed lives in death.
This is key to why stories of subjugation - be it weather-controlling priests,
kings who represent gods, or billionaires taking us to space - work: they

justify unequal exchange. They give an explanation as to what the leader is
providing (as invisible or fake as that might be) and why the exchange is
fair. Suddenly giving up a quarter of your wheat harvest may seem
reasonable if the ruler is protecting you from evil spirits or a nearby
neighbour.11
Many of these early Goliaths did offer benefits even if they were an
unequal exchange. The rituals of Cahokia could have built camaraderie, and
the leaders of Monte Albán may have been skilled military commanders
(although we have no evidence that early pharaohs or kings were
particularly good decision-makers). Yet as the society grew more unequal
and extractive, the costs began to pile up and exceed the benefits.
HOW EXTRACTION CREATES FRAGILITY
The people of Tiwanaku, Çatalhöyük, and San Lorenzo did not just walk
away from their homes as a way of avoiding domination. We have signs
that inequality by itself is corrosive to societies. More unequal countries
tend to have poorer physical health, worse mental health, more violence,
and suffer from other social ills ranging from more crime to more teenage
pregnancy. It's unsurprising that a species evolved in conditions of general
equality has a rough time living in unbalanced communities.12
As inequality rises, the society becomes more extractive. A wealth pump
is established in which social arrangements increasingly benefit elites at the
expense of the poor. In short, the exchange across societies gets more
unequal. That could be due to ancient kings and elites demanding more and
more grain from their subjects while offering less and less in return, or
lobbying by the rich in the modern world to give themselves tax breaks
while more heavily taxing (or eliminating benefits for) the poor. The cost of
living gets higher and higher, leading to worsening health and decreasing
standards of living. This is what some refer to as 'popular immiseration':
the impoverishment of the masses.13
Inequality also tends to trigger other knock-on effects. One of the most
important is elite competition. We see signs of this through the rebellion in
the grand city of Teotihuacan to the fission and fusion of mound-based
societies across the south-east of the US. It will become even more apparent

in larger empires. As wealth inequality grows and the society becomes more
top-heavy, the competition for high-status positions intensifies. The rich and
powerful tend to have more resources to cause trouble, whether that be
starting a war with a neighbour (as with the first farmers of Europe),
stoking a revolution (potentially in the case of Teotihuacan), or creating an
outright civil war.
Goliath's Curse is that extractive institutions hold the seeds of their own
demise. The abandonment of many early Goliaths is the first manifestation
of that curse. Counter-dominance intuitions meeting new rulers, the costs of
inequality, and rising elite competition all eroded societies from within.
Early Goliaths also lacked the mechanisms to control their populace,
leading to either fission-fusion/boom-bust patterns or wholesale
abandonment. This meant that even emerging Goliaths with low levels of
inequality (such as many of the mini-Goliaths of North America) could
prove unstable and fall apart. Sometimes the rejection of a new elite was
swift, while at other times it was a slow process of growing fragility. Yet,
weak institutions and growing inequality were sometimes not enough to
cause a collapse. Something more was needed.
TRIGGERING COLLAPSE
One verbal retelling of the Huhugam collapse involves a great chief
(Siwani) and two servants. The servants are the Wind and Storm Cloud.
Together they provided great harvests for their people. Then, one day, the
Siwani grew irritated with the Wind and Storm Cloud and ordered them
both to leave. Naturally, this didn't end well. The harvest came to a halt and
then there was a great flood. The Siwani was deposed by an angry, starving
mob.14
Many early rulers, like the Siwani of the Huhugam, seemingly built their
authority on an ability to ensure good harvests and avoid the ill will of the
spirits. We still see this in religions across the world, which regularly
include gods for the harvest, the sun, and even lightning and thunder
(notably, the Norse god and now Marvel character Thor). When the weather
turned foul and a flood or drought struck, it was a blow to the legitimacy of
the ruling class (much as incumbent politicians tend to lose popularity when

the economy tanks or inflation rises today). Even without weather-
controlling kings, a few bad harvests could make living in a hierarchical
city look far less appealing.
Climate change is a common presence across collapses. Sometimes it
played a central role in causing collapse and sometimes it didn't. Not all
droughts are created equal, and more severe ones could do far greater
damage, as was the case with the final termination of the Puebloans. In
Monte Albán, nearby settlements experienced a similar drought but were
not abandoned. While the climatic record matches some of the collapses of
the first farmers of Europe, it's not a perfect fit and can't explain the boom-
bust pattern they experienced. Moreover, different farming communities
responded differently to climatic shifts. We see this in the first farmers of
Europe. Scotland experienced similar conditions to England and Ireland yet
did not see the same downturn in population. Climate change as a threat
was most dangerous when it hit an already vulnerable society, one that was
already riven with discontent against rulers and rising inequality. Climate
change was most often the trigger that exploded a society flammable with
social tension.15
Another trigger could have been disease. Packing people and animals
together into cities created a hotbed for new infections. Although the telltale
signs of an outbreak, such as mass burials, aren't always in evidence, we
can't rule out the possibility that diseases caused by crowded people and
animals instigated a slow or rapid exodus from early settlements. Then there
is the threat of invaders. Many early European farming communities were
wiped out by their neighbours.
When faced with such threats, communities that were increasingly
vulnerable often collapsed. Tiwanaku, Cahokia, San Lorenzo, Monte Albán,
the Puebloans, and the first farmers of Europe were all becoming more
fragile as they became more extractive and then fell apart as they faced
shocks, usually in the form of drought. A useful metaphor here is that of a
ball (a system or community) rocking in a valley (a particular structure or
way of life). More extractive institutions made the valley shallower, while
shocks such as war, rebellion, and drought all violently knocked the ball
around (see Figure 18).
When the ball sits on the cusp, ready to roll out of the valley or back, we
can think of it as a 'crisis': a tumultuous period that can lead to a collapse,

reform, or an entrenchment of the regime.16  When the ball is finally
knocked out of the valley, we call it a collapse. Sometimes a big shock
might knock a ball out, but sometimes the valley is so shallow that just a
small nudge might be enough to dislodge the ball. We call this a 'tipping
point': a critical threshold where a small disturbance can change the entire
state and future of the system.17  The more vulnerabilities a community
possessed, the fewer mechanisms it had to control its subjects, and the more
shocks it faced, the more likely it was to be knocked out of the valley and
collapse.18
Figure 18: From societal resilience to vulnerability
There is a consistent picture emerging of the collapse of the first
Goliaths. Societies became fragile as they became more unequal and
hierarchical. Discontent and elite conflict appeared. These societies lacked
the mechanisms to control large and increasingly hostile groups of people.
Once this increasing stress was hit by a large enough shock, whether that be
a drought or an invader, a crisis or even collapse ensued. It fits the details
we have of the boom-bust cycles of the Puebloans and first farmers of
Europe, the abandonment of many of the earliest cities and settlements, and
the synchronized collapse of the pyramid cities of North America. It was
often a social tipping point. As we see in the Puebloans and the first farmers
of Europe, they were recovering more and more slowly from shocks, which
suggests that their valley was getting shallower and shallower. Some could

collapse just from this growing internal vulnerability. Many others fell apart
once this growing fragility met a shock: such as a drought, disease, or
invaders.19
Experts in disaster risk management often say that no disaster is ever
natural. It always depends on the vulnerability of the community it hits, and
how that community responds. Remember that risk is not just a matter of
threats and vulnerability, but also of exposure and responses. More
extractive arrangements also worsened a society's capacity to respond
quickly and effectively to a crisis.
SURVIVAL OF THE FAIREST
Monte Albán fell apart amidst a drought, while settlements around it living
under the same dry conditions expanded. Something was clearly different in
their responses. We see this in examples across history. Societies could
experience similar climatic challenges and fare remarkably differently.
One example is the 'Late Antique Little Ice Age' (536-660 CE). Three
different volcanic eruptions (536, 540, and 547 CE) led to several pulses of
cooling temperatures across the northern hemisphere. While the exact
effects varied (overall cooling may have been up to 1°C) across regions,
this was generally a cold time for the north. Thirteen out of the twenty
coldest winters in the last 2,000 years occurred during it.20  Not every
society experienced the same amount of cooling or transformation. The
Merovingian Dynasty that ruled over much of modern France after the fall
of Rome experienced a temperature drop of 0.79°C, the pottery-producing
hunter-gatherers of Ontario got 0.74°C colder, Jenne-Jeno cooled by
0.26°C, and Monte Albán got just 0.15°C chillier. One study of twenty
communities across five world regions and four continents during the Late
Antique Little Ice Age found that climate did have some correlation with
social change, but the effect varied. The hunter-gatherers of Ontario had the
equal lowest amount of social change, despite experiencing the third
greatest drop in temperature, while Monte Albán had the equal lowest
amount of cooling and highest possible level of change (it both became a
full-blown state and then collapsed). Some societies were simply more
resilient to temperature swings than others.21

The biggest predictor of resilience was how democratic or extractive the
society was.22  One study of the Late Antique Little Ice Age found that
more inclusive societies had less famine, disease, and conflict, and less
change in their rituals or how they were organized. Those results have been
verified in another study of thirty-three societies covering twenty-two
climate-related disasters over nine world regions, four continents, and a
thousand years. More democratic groups tend to respond better to crises.23
The question is, why? Local people could respond more quickly and
effectively to new challenges than distant elites who were often buffered
from threats such as a drought. This meant that more dramatic changes
(such as collapse) were needed. A second benefit is that shared decision-
making means that people in a community had more social connections,
which created more effective collaboration (what academics usually call
'social capital') during times of stress. This holds true today: acts such as
voting, deliberating, and being meaningfully involved in civic institutions
(whether that be a sports club or a political group) foster closer and wider
social ties. Those ties keep communities together when catastrophe
strikes.24
A plethora of studies on modern disasters support the idea that more
politically inclusive societies are more resilient ones.25  As one group of
disaster-risk experts concluded, 'there is near-unanimous agreement that
people's participation is essential to reducing the impacts of disasters on
society'.26  One indicative study used the Emergency Event Database, an
international repository of information on disasters across the globe. This
analysis of 150 countries over the period 1995-2009 found that more
democratic countries, with more state capacity, had fewer fatalities and
fewer people affected during disasters. This was true for a range of
disasters, from floods to earthquakes. Strong states have more resources to
deal with disasters, while democratic accountability ensures that aid is
distributed wisely and not just concentrated on the rich and powerful.
Inclusive political institutions create more flexibility, effective responses,
and unified societies, and they prevent abuses of power.27
The opposite naturally holds true. Societies with more extractive
institutions are likely to have fewer social bonds and respond more poorly
to natural disasters, whether that be the droughts that plagued the Puebloans

or the droughts and floods that hit Cahokia. There is, moreover, another
reason that extractive institutions tend to be fragile and inclusive
institutions resilient: more democracy means better decision-making.
THE WISDOM OF DEMOCRACY
We have ample theoretical and empirical evidence that, over the long run, a
large, diverse group of people sharing information leads to better choices
being made on average than an 'enlightened dictator' or small cadre of
technocrats. The logic behind this is the 'wisdom of crowds': the
knowledge of the many outperforms the knowledge of the few. The wisdom
of crowds was first posited by the statistician Francis Galton during a
county fair. He observed 800 people guess the weight of an ox. While most
were off the mark, the median estimate of 1,207 pounds was, remarkably,
less than 1 per cent off the true weight.
Since then, a variety of studies have shown that crowds outperform
individuals when it comes to predicting the outcomes of sporting events and
geopolitical events and even answering general knowledge questions.
Prediction markets, in which a large group of people bet on different
outcomes, have also had significant success. The benefit of having large
and diverse groups of people is at the cutting edge of forecasting (making
numerical predictions about a future event), foresight (creating plausible
pictures of the future), and studies of 'collective intelligence' in swarms of
insects, flocks of birds, and groups of people. Even large, important
scientific endeavours, such as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC), hinge on the group judgement of a large set of scientists
from different backgrounds and disciplines. While most of our modern
systems are built on a small number of overly powerful decision-makers
making rushed choices - from CEOs to presidents - when it comes to trying
to predict the future or reach the best judgements, scientists rely on large
diverse groups.28
What is just as important as having large diverse groups is ensuring that
individuals in those groups share information. Think of a complex problem
as a jigsaw puzzle with numerous pieces. Everyone brings a different piece
of the puzzle: different information, a different perspective. But it is only

when they talk in an open-minded fashion and exchange information freely
that they can put their different pieces together and complete the picture.
Deliberation works. When it comes to predicting future events the gold-
standard approach is 'superforecasters'. That is, creating teams of expert
forecasters with unique traits and impressive track records (their past
accuracy with prediction is calculated as a 'Brier score'), letting them share
information, taking the average of their guesses (weighted by their Brier
score), and then 'extremizing' (for instance, an estimate below 50 per cent
would be nudged further down, and one above 50 per cent would be pushed
slightly higher with an algorithm). Despite the details, it really comes down
to using the wisdom of democracy within a group of exceptional
forecasters. Similar approaches have proved to be most effective at
identifying long-term issues in areas such as healthcare and biodiversity
conservation.
Experiments with 'deliberative democracy' in which a randomly selected
group of citizens gather together, are briefed by experts, deliberate, and
make policy (either in a small jury of nine to twelve members, or
assemblies in the hundreds or thousands) have been shown to reduce
political polarization and even aid reconciliation in war-torn countries such
as Bosnia. A deliberative assembly even helped Ireland legalize and
regulate abortion (2018-19), which had previously been an intractably
fraught issue. And of course, the backbone of science, including peer-
review publications, is built on open debate and discussion of findings. In
both theory and practice, it's becoming increasingly clear that inclusive
institutions make better decisions (and promote social cohesion too).29
Making good decisions is paramount to ensure that a shock or a crisis
doesn't spiral into a collapse. Notably, most historical polities weren't
particularly democratic; nor are our modern democracies. Modern
parliamentary systems rely on aggregating votes to select a few
homogeneous leaders (overwhelmingly old and rich) who then engage in
little genuine deliberation (often due to being overburdened, time-poor, and
lacking expertise). This is on top of the sheer impossibility of expecting just
a few people to solve the myriad problems of transport, energy, defence,
and welfare. In modern electoral parliaments, people consent to being ruled;
ruling itself isn't widely shared. In other words, most societies have seen
only a sliver of the resilience benefits that inclusive institutions have to
offer.

The opposite holds true. An oligarchy with smaller, more homogeneous
groups of elites who are cushioned from shocks is more likely to make bad
decisions and delay necessary change. Writers of collapse history have
often puzzled over why leaders and groups seem to make bad decisions in
the face of disaster. There is a simple answer: oligarchy. As societies grow
more unequal and extractive, decision-making becomes worse.
It's not just that small groups of elites make poorer decisions; they tend to
be overinvested in the status quo and buffered from disaster. Even when
there is an impending threat, they are more likely to defend their own
interests. During the late sixteenth century, the Ottoman Empire was struck
by a prolonged drought; the government chose to alleviate tax burdens for
local elites rather than for struggling farmers. The latter were more affected
and vulnerable, but the former were central to imperial stability. This
caused farmers to flee to the cities, eroding the tax base and stirring social
conflict. The social burden of a crisis is rarely placed on elites. We don't
have enough data to see conclusively whether this was the case in the
earliest Goliaths, but history is replete with cases of environmental
degradation and climate change compounded by poor elite choices. It's part
of why inclusive institutions have tended to handle climatic swings better
than extractive ones.30
More inequality and extractive institutions both increased the
vulnerability of societies (through counter-dominance intuitions, inequality,
and elite competition) while oligarchy and weak control mechanisms
hindered their response to disasters. All it then took was exposure to a
threat, such as a sufficiently bad drought, disease outbreak, war, or
rebellion, to break the hollowed-out society apart. This increasing risk of
collapse due to extractive institutions is Goliath's Curse. Over time, as
societies have changed, so has the curse.
Think of this first package of rising inequality, poor decision-making,
counter-dominance intuitions, and weak institutions as the 'Primal Curse'
that struck the earliest Goliaths. This first manifestation of the curse often
meant swifter and deeper collapses (such as Cahokia, Tiwanaku, and San
Lorenzo being permanently abandoned) because there were often still many
exit options and the first Goliaths had not developed strong mechanisms to
control their populace. Worse still, people were moving from egalitarianism
into a new, perturbing environment. They were now surrounded by more
people with bigger disparities in treasures and even kings who would

behead, cut open, or bury alive others in front of them. It was an unequal,
violent world.
Yet that violence could worsen once a Goliath broke apart.
OceanofPDF.com

Part Two
IMPERIAL MARCH AND FALL
OceanofPDF.com

8
Gang Warfare
The Warlord Beneath - History as a Story of Organized Crime - A War of
the Few Against the Many - A Pyramid of Bodies - Selected by the Sword -
The Authoritarian Impulse - The Darker Angels of Our Nature
THE WARLORD BENEATH
In the Egyptian Museum of Cairo sits the Palette of King Narmer, the first
king of Egypt. It is over 5,000 years old, stands more than two feet tall, and
is made of an eerie grey-green siltstone. It is the earliest depiction of the
first known ruler of a unified Egypt - what many consider to be the first
state of the world (Figure 19).1

Figure 19: A sketch of the Palette of Narmer
While the artwork is beautiful, the scenes it depicts are not. The palette
shows Narmer wearing the white crown of Upper Egypt and standing over a
kneeling foe. In one hand he holds a raised mace and in the other he grasps
the hair of his enemy. He is bludgeoning to death a ruler from the Western
Delta: a final bloody victory that sealed his control of all Egypt. Another
part of the palette shows Narmer wearing Lower Egypt's red crown in a
procession to view decapitated prisoners at Buto (in the Western Delta).
They are not only dead: their genitals have been severed and placed atop
their heads in a final act of humiliation. These scenes, surrounded by
images of approving gods, show Narmer uniting Lower and Upper Egypt,
before going on to conquer Canaan. Narmer was a successful warlord, not a
freely elected leader.
It seems to be a common motif for state formation. Many of the earliest
kings and emperors of Mesopotamia had artworks of themselves maiming
and killing their enemies. The artists of Cahokia left a similar image on a
flint-clay statue. It shows a warrior crouched over a naked enemy, holding
the enemy's hair with one hand and a stone axe or mace in the other. He's
just smashed his victim's face in.2
Such scenes are unsettling. To paraphrase the German Chancellor Otto
von Bismark: states are like sausages - it is best not to see them being

made. Yet little has changed for much of history right through to the twenty-
first century.
In less than a decade Charles Taylor went from being president of Liberia
to being sentenced to half a century in jail. A UN-backed special court in
2012 indicted him on eleven charges, including murder, sexual
enslavement, and conscription of children under the age of fifteen. Just a
few years earlier he had been a legitimate president recognized by the UN.
Before being a president or a prisoner, Taylor was a warlord. He
supported Samuel Doe's coup against the Liberian government in 1980 but
fled the country after being indicted for embezzling $1 million. After a
prison break in the US and militia training in Libya, he returned to Liberia.
He was now at the head of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL),
an armed militia group that promised revenge and a more favourable order
to ethnic groups and wealthy individuals who had been mistreated by Doe's
regime.
A civil war lasting almost a decade (1989-97) was unleashed. Several
factions fought over the control of Liberia's natural resources such as
diamonds and rubber. Taylor controlled a swathe of territory dubbed
'Taylorland', which crossed into neighbouring countries such as Sierra
Leone, where he held monopolies over diamonds, timber, and rubber
resources. Taylor's forces were partly funded by the tyre company
Firestone, which gave him over $2.3 million in food, cash, and cheques. In
return, Taylor's cronies protected a rubber plantation that Firestone owned.
(Firestone has said that it did not have a collaborative relationship with
Taylor at any time.) The civil war claimed as many as a quarter of a million
lives.3
In 1997, Taylor won the post-war general election. His victory was a
surprise, given his campaign's motto of 'He killed my ma, he killed my pa,
but I will vote for him.' While the election was judged to be fairly run by
international observers, Taylor had an advantage in having captured most of
the country's radio stations, using them to warn the listeners that the civil
war would resume if he lost. Once elected, Taylor aided the smuggling of
blood diamonds and weapons and embezzled $100 million from the
Liberian government.
The career trajectories of Narmer and Taylor are by no means unique.
There is a glut of leaders who went from warlord or general to head of state
through violence. Most (perhaps all) of the original states besides Egypt

were also based on military strongmen successfully conquering their
neighbours. In China, there have been at least a dozen cases of dynastic
transitions based on a warlord taking over. Chinggis Khan was originally a
warlord who subdued and then allied with Mongol tribes to form an empire.
This is the main historical template of becoming a sovereign leader. Take
power by force and negotiate with other elites to create a stable new order.4
Despite the popular idea of countries being built on a 'social contract', there
is no observed example of a state being created by a freely negotiated
consensus contract between citizens.
The overlap between warlords and state executives should come as no
surprise. Warlords are usually defined as individuals who control territory
using force and patronage. Organized crime is often defined as the
organization of unregulated markets into hierarchical, extractive
monopolies ruled through violence. These definitions are, as one scholar put
it, 'virtually interchangeable' with the description of a state. Warlordism,
statehood, and organized crime all have similar ingredients: a hierarchy that
coercively extracts resources from a territory and population.5
Understanding how and why men like Narmer and Taylor came to power
can help us understand both why collapse occurs and why it can involve so
much bloodshed.
HISTORY AS A STORY OF ORGANIZED CRIME
From 2009 through to 2012 Medellín, Colombia, was one of the most
dangerous places on the planet. Two organized gangs (razones) vied for
control of the streets. The almost 400 street gangs (combos) allied with one
of the two razones, turning the city into a war zone. The costs were high,
both for the public and for the gang leaders, whom the police began to
target. Their profits declined as their customers' fear of being shot
overcame their need to buy drugs. In response, the razones declared a truce
and started governing themselves: they set up a criminal council called La
Oficina (The Office). To keep the peace and enforce rules they adopted El
Pacto del Fusil - The Pact of the Machine Gun. The conflict was quelled as
each razone started to act like a mini-state in its territory: managing

borders, settling disputes between combos (with the threat of the machine
gun), and helping to set high prices for drugs.6
A similar process occurred in Africa in 2000. The Democratic Republic
of Congo (DRC), located in central Africa, is the continent's second largest
country by area. It is rich in rare earth metals that have been a source of
incessant conflict. Battles over the control of its diamond mines have cost
hundreds of thousands of lives, hence the label 'blood diamonds'. In 2000,
the price of the rare earth mineral coltan shot up from $90 to $590 per
kilogram. In response, armed criminals began making permanent bases
around coltan mines, 'taxing' the miners in exchange for 'protection'. There
was a similar response to a price jump for gold, except the militias began to
set up more sophisticated administrations, with a court system and refined
tax systems (including poll taxes).
In both cases, armed groups in the DRC responded to a lootable resource
becoming more valuable by establishing state-like functions around it, but
in the case of gold the tax system and bureaucracy was more elaborate. The
difference arises because a coltan miner can extract kilograms of product
every day, while gold miners discover only small amounts, which can be
easily hidden (even, sometimes, by swallowing them). This makes gold less
lootable, meaning the Goliath needs to negotiate more with its citizens,
provide more services (such as a court system), and use more bureaucracy
to extract taxes (such as a poll tax).7
Mafias, warlords, and crime syndicates have a long track record of
providing services and sometimes even becoming beloved by the
communities they rule. Tajikistan warlords established rackets over
lucrative smuggling routes after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the
1990s.8  Despite presiding over worsening health, epidemics, and excessive
taxation of local farmers, they often enjoyed popular support because they
did protect citizens from crime.9
Both the razones and the militias of the DRC show the process of state
creation in real time. They were criminal rackets, but as they gathered more
lootable resources and were unified by external threats, they started to
provide services to their citizens. It is, after all, in the interests of even the
most self-centred despot to ensure that the people they are stealing from
have a measure of welfare. A bigger, healthier population means more
lootable resources, a bigger defence force, and more status. The basic

services that the DRC militias and the razones provided are emblematic of
what the first states under Narmer and others usually offered: protection,
basic infrastructure (whether that be for mines or farms), and dispute
settlement. Most of us are lucky enough to be experiencing a unique, recent
period of human history where states provide far more and are far more
accountable than they once were.
Seeing states as similar to criminal gangs running protection rackets can
help explain what exactly happens during collapse. The best example of
trying to do so is the brilliant 2015 book Gangster States by Katherine
Hirschfeld. Hirschfeld, an associate professor in anthropology, marshals
modern and ancient case studies to show that state formation and collapse
are best understood as a criminal enterprise being established and then
broken apart by infighting or pressure from competitor rackets. Once there
is enough of a stationary economic surplus, then establishing a predatory
monopoly is a profitable strategy. As we've seen, lootable resources,
monopolizable weapons, and a lack of exit options all make it easier to
create a racket or state.10
We see it in the origins of war and the state. War in Mesopotamia
originated with the Halafians taking over obsidian trade routes by force.
Prior to Narmer, Canaan had been a trading partner of Egypt, undertaking a
fair exchange of wine, metals, and olive oil. That changes towards more
extractive arrangements after Narmer conquers them.11  Suddenly they
were giving more, and in the form of tribute (probably in 'exchange' for
protection and perhaps mystical services) instead of trade. Rather than a
mutually beneficial negotiation, rackets had transformed fair-trading
relationships into unequal exchanges.
The collapse of such rackets involves both their destruction and
regeneration. The racket may break down, yet the lootable resources usually
remain. That means there is an incentive for either neighbours or internal
competitors to violently re-establish the scheme. Hirschfeld shows this
occurring in a range of modern cases, such as Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union,
Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Sierra Leone, Moldova, and Bosnia.12  It also
matches what we saw in the long-term rise in warfare: it rose alongside
higher levels of competition for lootable resources.

A WAR OF THE FEW AGAINST THE MANY
Creating states, establishing a racket, is bloody work. The Palette of Narmer
is just the tip of the spear. Figure 20 is taken from the systematic study of
violence across almost 12,000 years (12,000-400 BCE). The researchers
drew on a set of 3,539 skeletons and examined the frequency of cranial
trauma and weapon-related wounds such as embedded arrowheads. The
story it tells is clear: violence was low throughout the Neolithic; it then
spiked drastically during the building of the first states such as Uruk and the
First Dynasty of Egypt (4500-3300 BCE, known as the 'Chalcolithic'). At
this high point, somewhere between 20 and 30 per cent of skeletons have
signs of conflict on them. That figure then drops throughout the period of
empire (the Early and Middle Bronze Age). Violence then spikes back up as
the last empires of the Bronze Age come to an end. This rising tide of
bloodshed continues during the Iron Age while new empires, such as the
Neo-Assyrian Empire, are being forged. We see it elsewhere: increased
levels of violence mark the formation of states in the Americas (such as
Monte Albán) too.13
The pattern is that violence peaks when states are being formed. It is not
the absence of authority per se that spurs violence, but the frantic efforts of
a few to create structures of authority and monopolize lootable resources. In
the case of collapse, this would often be accompanied by 'score-settling',
with previously oppressed peoples seeking vengeance on their erstwhile
masters. In any case, this involved only a peculiar sliver of society.14
Violence, including during collapse, is a gendered phenomenon. Soldiers,
mercenaries, brigands, and other violent actors have almost invariably been
men. In 2001 99.9 per cent of armed combat forces were men. A
conservative estimate is that across history 99 per cent of soldiers have been
men.15

Figure 20: Violence in the Near East: 12,500 to 400 BCE
It's not just men, but also a particular demographic of men: fighting-age
men. The Romans conscripted men aged sixteen to forty-six. The levée en
masse, a policy of mass conscription during the French Revolutionary Wars
from 1793, focused on men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-six.
Even among fighting-age men, perpetrators of violence are usually a select
group. In the 1994 Rwandan genocide, court convictions suggest that less
than 3 per cent of the population at the time committed violent crimes. Over
90 per cent of those involved were male, with a median age of thirty-one.16
It is a common finding in criminology that just a minor fraction of people
are responsible for a high proportion of violent crimes.17
During collapse and crisis, most of the combatants tend not to be random
young men. They are those who have already been trained. They are
soldiers and mercenaries either of foreign powers or of the previous
government. This is not a Hobbesian war of all against all. It is a war of the
few against the many. It is a concerted effort by a small portion of the
population - young-to-middle-aged men, usually with previous training - to
take advantage of the situation and establish a new racket. Violence during

the collapse of the Western Roman Empire was dominated by both
Germanic soldiers previously employed by the empire and the invading
Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire. Violence in Saddam Hussein's Iraq
was driven mainly by paramilitary groups previously part of his security
forces, as well as by the US Army. The recurring image of violence during
collapse is one of young, trained, armed men fighting.
This war of the few against the many can explain why so many people
die and disappear during a collapse.
A PYRAMID OF BODIES
The Wari (600-1000 CE) were the first empire of the Andes, and they
endured a bloody breakdown. The collapse of the Wari saw the incidence of
non-lethal head injuries triple from 20 per cent to 60 per cent. The situation
becomes more dire centuries later. Fatal head injuries during the collapse
were 10 per cent and this quadrupled to 40 per cent among adults and 44
per cent in children in the post-collapse period. Skeletons begin to show
peculiar cut marks. These marks suggest that rather than victims having
been stabbed or slashed, the blade had sliced close to the bone. It's a tell-
tale sign of cannibalism, with survivors carving up the flesh of the deceased
(tellingly, this occurred during a drought).18
We don't need to look back a millennium to the Wari to see the dangers
posed by a state collapse. Iraq during the 2003-6 invasion saw around
600,000 deaths and the emergence of ISIS. The overthrow of the Libyan
government in 2011 led to the re-emergence of the slave trade. Recurring
civil conflict in Congo, after the atrocities of Belgian colonization, have
claimed somewhere in the range of 900,000 to 5.4 million lives. Gang
warfare during a power vacuum can take a toll.
Behind the dilapidated temples of the Maya or the charred remains of
cities from the Bronze Age lay the masses of faces who died or fled. Their
names are often lost but their suffering was real. While the numbers are
highly uncertain, many collapse events may have led to enormous
population declines. Table 3 summarizes the high-end estimates of some of
the worst cases from across the world. Each one involves staggering

amounts of displacement and death, with losses ranging between 30 and
over 95 per cent of the entire population.19
While the numbers may seem horrifying, they are exaggerations, or at
least misleading. Most of the population losses result from people moving
away rather than dying - it's often difficult to distinguish between the two
historically. People who move into more rural areas or melt into a non-state
territory often become less archaeologically visible. Their remains and signs
of their activities become smaller, more dispersed, and relegated to rural
areas that archaeologists don't excavate as often.20
Collapse is more a story of movement than of an ancient apocalypse.
When we look at modern examples, the number of people displaced from
their homes vastly outnumbers those lying lifeless in streets and morgues.
Take the case of the recent Syrian civil war. Since 2011, 14 million people
have left their homes. 6.9 million of these are displaced within Syria while
the remainder have fled to other countries. In contrast, estimates of the
death toll from the war range from around 500,000 to 600,000, almost thirty
times lower than the number of people displaced. Syria is indicative of the
norm: most people make the difficult decision to move out of harm's way
before facing the threat of death. Historical collapses involved the same
dynamic, with most of these massive declines in population reflecting
migration rather than deaths. People usually used the old ways of mobility
and fission-fusion rather than face a grisly fate at the end of an arrow.
Table 3: Worst-case population decline during
collapse
Case study
Timeframe
Population loss estimate
LBA collapse
1200 - 1000
BCE
30 - 75 per cent
Mayan Lowlands
800 - 1000
CE
Up to 90 per cent
Invasion of the Americas
1500 - 1600
Up to 90 per cent

Case study
Timeframe
Population loss estimate
CE
The late Roman imperial
system
400 - 600 CE
Up to 50 per cent in some
regions. Over 95 per cent
for the city of Rome
Rapa Nui
1722 - 1877
CE
Over 95 per cent
Estimates of the number of deaths from collapse are also inflated owing
to inaccurate record-keeping. For most of history we have poor, highly
uncertain estimates of how many people were alive at any given time. The
most reliable data comes from the occasional state censuses taken by large
administrations, such as Rome and the Tang Dynasty in China, and even
these usually surveyed far below half of the population. The Roman and
Tang examples are also exceptional: none of the other cases we've covered,
from Cahokia to Tiwanaku, conducted censuses. Even when these numbers
exist, they often reflect the bureaucratic capacity of the state, rather than the
actual number of people living on the land. This makes them particularly
untrustworthy during a collapse. The priority of a state that is falling apart is
not to count its citizens. This can lead to enormous problems with trying to
tally the lives lost during a period of turmoil. The An Lushan Rebellion was
estimated in The Better Angels of Our Nature as having cost 36 million
lives, a sixth of the world's population at the time. Because of the problems
with relying on census information, this estimate was later cut by almost
two-thirds, to 13 million.21
Nonetheless, many did die and entire cities of people moved. Why? The
most recurrent culprits are conflict, disease, famine, malnutrition, and the
break-up of trade. The loss of a centralized authority frequently involves
war or civil strife as groups battle to recreate some version of the state. A
review of ten cases studies of collapse I organized with a group of
archaeologists and historians found that every case involved some kind of
war. In the Crisis Database around three-quarters involve civil wars or
revolutions (or both). One-fifth of these are protracted affairs that last a

century or longer. Yet the bigger killer was not from axes or arrows, but
rather germs.22
Throughout history, disease has been the most dangerous foe on the
battlefield. Deaths from disease regularly outstrip direct casualties in a war.
About three times more people died from the influenza pandemic of 1918
than were killed in the First World War, and twice as many from disease
than war wounds during the American Civil War. The squalid conditions of
warfare, the splattering of blood and flesh from one soldier onto another,
and the weakened immune systems of frequently malnourished and injured
fighters living in close quarters, all make the battlefield a dangerous petri
dish. In our review of ten case studies of collapse, eight involved diseases
and seven involved signs of starvation and malnourishment. This echoes the
findings of the Crisis Database in that a third of cases are marked by disease
outbreaks. Disease could act as a trigger for a collapse, such as with the
invasion of the Aztec Empire by Spanish conquistadors, or simply be spread
alongside moving troops or migrants during a crisis. Often it was both.23
SELECTED BY THE SWORD
Violence lurks beneath the first Goliaths. Across different world regions,
more unequal, dense, hierarchical communities were associated with more
violence and eventually the onset of warfare. The introduction of new
weapons, such as hand-held bronze swords and axes in China, Egypt, and
Mesopotamia, were pivotal in the creation of centralized states. The hilltop
city of Monte Albán in Mesoamerica seems to be partly a creation of
migrants fleeing raided cities and seeking a more defensible location.
Monte Albán's transformation into a more organized state (known as the
Zapotec) roughly coincides with a major regional conquest (of Cuicatlán),
the construction of its first fortress (in Quiotepec), and the building of a
skull rack containing the skulls of sixty-one people.24
Then there is the Palette of Narmer and similar records and artwork.
Mesopotamian steles (large slabs used as monuments) regularly show great
processions of captured prisoners and lines of slain bodies. The inscriptions
are usually just as brutal. The Neo-Assyrian King Ashurnasirpal II (910-
859 BCE) described his gory celebrations of one of his victories: 'I erected a

pile [and] flayed as many nobles as had rebelled against me [and] draped
their skins over the pile; some I spread out within the pile, some I erected
on stakes upon the pile, [and] some I placed on stakes around about the pile.
I flayed many right through my land [and] draped their skins over the
walls.' Using human skin for decoration is usually the domain of serial
killers, but in this case it was a useful way of sending a message: obey and
do not rebel.25  Whether it be in politics or religion, violence was central to
Mesopotamia where kings promised to win wars abroad and prevent
bloodshed at home (well, except when they spilled it). In art and writing
they were even given the same weapons and killed their enemies in the
same way as the gods. Most early leaders flaunted and deified rather than
hid their warlord nature.26
War drove state formation. Every single one of the cases of original state
formation involves some kind of conquest.27  We even see it in recent states
being formed, such as the creation of the Zulu by Shaka (1816 CE),
Madagascar by Andrianampoinimerina (1787 CE), and the unification of
Hawaii by Kamehameha (1810 CE) after the introduction of firearms by
European traders.28  'War made the state and the state made war', the
political scientist Charles Tilly wrote.29  He was referring to states in early
modern Europe, a hypothesis that has been supported by studies decades
later.30  His theory was too modest. War wasn't just a central contributor to
Europe during that period; it was the key driver of state formation
throughout history. Communities rarely give up their autonomy willingly.
It's when they are conquered, or facing conquest by another enemy, that
they cede it to a greater power.
Studies using Seshat, the world's largest historical database, have also
pointed to agricultural productivity and military innovations as being the
key drivers of bigger, more hierarchical societies. The adoption of bronze
weapons paved the way for the first states in the Near East, while iron
weapons and cavalry laid the foundation for far larger empires such as the
Western Roman Empire, the Han Dynasty, and the Achaemenid Empire (the
first Persian Empire). Groups that were located closer to the Steppe - the
grassy plains separating Europe from Asia that were full of mounted
warriors - were also more likely to adopt big dominance hierarchies. If you
had lootable resources and felt under threat, you were more likely to band

together and adopt kings and generals or be conquered by someone who
did.31
Unsurprisingly, war-making has until recently been the biggest item on a
state's budget. The Roman Empire spent half to three-quarters of its budget
on the military, the Song Dynasty in 1065 directed around five-sixths of its
resources towards the military, in early modern Britain between 1685 and
1813 it was about 75 per cent, and in early modern France in 1630-59 it
was around 89-93 per cent. Countries spending more on healthcare and
welfare than the military is a recent phenomenon limited to the last century
or so. Even then there are exceptions: a plethora of countries spent half or
more of their budget on bullets and bombs during the First World War.32
The fact that kingdoms were often created through conquest explains
why kings often appeared to be foreigners to those they were ruling. The
ruler claims to be different from the masses, whether that be due to a
connection with God, or a different, special ethnicity. Many early kings
were 'stranger-kings'. We see this in Mesopotamia; the names of early city-
states such as Ur, Uruk, and Eridu are all not from the native tongue of
Sumerian. These Mesopotamian cities were more likely agricultural
communities conquered by outsiders.33
Enslavement, especially of war captives, was a by-product of conquest.
Goliaths refined slavery into an industrial-style project. Some records from
ancient Mesopotamia claim that up to 36,000 prisoners were taken as
captives of war. These are almost certainly an exaggeration but do show the
value placed on captured humans. Even in 1800 up to three-quarters of the
global population was in some form of bondage.34  Some became slaves not
because they were captured during war, but rather to work off a debt.35
Debt slavery is, in many ways, a perversion of the ancient instinct of
reciprocity: to repay the actions of others. In this case, payment is by any
means necessary, including by owning another person and having them
serve for every moment of every day.36  Slavery wasn't the only form of
dominance that accompanied Goliath states. The first states often amplified
male dominance and over time led to more patriarchal structures.37
This doesn't mean that participation in early Goliaths was always done at
the point of a blade. Opportunities for trade and work, bigger social
networks, religious rituals, and awe-inspiring monuments may have also

made people gravitate towards living under a Goliath. Many of the first
Goliath-building projects, such as Cahokia and the Puebloans, appear to
have begun as ceremonial centres that linked people together. Not everyone
living in early states did so in chains; for many it may have been
enticing.38
Importantly, most states were relatively authoritarian, but some offered
more benefits than others. One study of state formation across thirty cases
found significant differences in the number of public goods produced.39
Many states did settle disputes, hand out grain during famines, and
coordinate labour to construct roads, bridges, and irrigation canals, although
most of this infrastructure was mainly built for moving troops and goods
around, not for public welfare. These greater amounts of coordinated action
were often better for the people living under a state.40  They also tend to
correlate with states that had more difficulty in extracting resources from
their citizens and had to rely more on negotiating with them. We see this in
many cases from the Americas, such as the more egalitarian beginnings of
Teotihuacan and Monte Albán. That's probably because they didn't have
domesticated animals or bronze weapons. Less Goliath fuel often meant
rulers had to resort to more inclusive arrangements.41
Not all leaders were rapacious pirate-kings. Some pre-modern polities
were far more democratic and had far more benevolent leaders than others.
The early cities of Jenne-Jeno, Tiwanaku, and Monte Albán, as well as later
Teotihuacan, were more egalitarian in how they were governed and how
riches were distributed. Similarly, Athens had its famous deliberative
democracy, Rome had a republic with some democratic representation
(although this was often a thin veil for oligarchy), and the Venetians had a
leader (doge) who was chosen by a council of leading families and closely
monitored for corruption. Notably, all these examples had representation
restricted to free men; and the wealthy and powerful maintained
disproportionate influence. Unsurprisingly, it was adult men, especially
elites, who were the ones using violence to set up states. In short, the gang
members who built the racket ensured that they maintained some control,
leading to a more inclusive touch. Well, inclusive as long as you weren't a
slave or a woman.42
As with militias in the DRC trying to build a racket around gold mines, a
more sophisticated and benevolent approach was usually needed when

subjects had more exit options and less easily lootable resources.43
Tellingly, early statehood is one of the best predictors of how autocratic a
state is today. Areas with more Goliath fuel created states sooner and they
have left a long dictatorial legacy: just think of China, Egypt, and the Near
East.44
Even the autocratic rackets could offer numerous benefits to at least a
portion of the populace. The free adult males of Athens not only were given
a political voice, but also benefited from slavery and patriarchy. Conquests,
whether it be in Monte Albán or Rome, meant more booty, plunder, and
slaves not just for elites, but also for much of the general populace. Some of
the populace was complicit in building Goliaths and putting them back
together once they fell apart.45
States can and did offer benefits, and some were more inclusive than
others, but this shouldn't hide the fact that most were deeply extractive
arrangements. Ones that needed to be propped up by armed forces and
elaborate ideologies. Gang warfare is still the most apt analogy. Even those
that started from more democratic and egalitarian origins tended to drift
towards oligarchy, greater concentrations of power, and greater extraction
of resources by elites over time.
We've already seen some of the reasons as to why early states were
Goliaths. Lootable resources usually resulted in growing wealth inequality
over time, which tended eventually to spill over into politics and other
forms of power. A second reason is Goliath evolution: societies that were
more successful at conquest outcompeted those that were less effective.
They grew larger and more persistent over time. And those conquering
polities were usually Goliaths. The reason why is rooted in basic human
psychology.46
THE AUTHORITARIAN IMPULSE
Conflict isn't a completely destructive force. It can spur cooperation, at
least within a group. Data from sixteen studies covering forty countries all
suggest that exposure to violence from war increases local cooperation
within groups.47  Groups who have suffered an external attack tend to

develop symbols, stories, and behaviours that bond them together, such as a
shared sense of patriotism. We saw that in the wake of the 9/11 terrorist
attacks in the US. The day after the attacks, Walmart sold 250,000 US flags;
it had only sold 10,000 the same day the previous year. The supermarket
chain was almost running out of flags by the end of the week.48
Unfortunately, that increased coordination within a group does seem to
come at a cost. It requires having an 'other' group or enemy to rally against.
Across the world the best predictor of levels of prejudice and 'cultural
tightness' (tighter cultures have stricter norms, harsher punishments, and
less tolerance for deviant behaviour) globally is how much a society has
been exposed to threats such as war, disease, and scarcity. A people under
threat stand together but apart from others.49
Conflict, or even just the threat of an external enemy, changes our brains.
One study scanned the brains of ninety Chinese students while they read
about a potential threat from Japan. Remarkably, their brainwaves started to
synchronize. This led to better coordination and completing group tasks
more quickly.50  It makes sense: if your group is in trouble then the ability
to cooperate intensely and survive is critical. It's a finding backed up by
decades of research on terrorist cells, revolutionary groups, and squads of
soldiers, all of whom develop strong emotional ties and a willingness to
sacrifice themselves for each other (hence phrases like 'esprit de corps' and
'brothers in arms'). It's a phenomenon that militaries capitalize on, by
training small units under duress to break down the individuals and rebuild
them into a single team that is both more organized and more willing to kill.
An external threat supercharges cooperation within groups and the capacity
for violence against outsiders.51
External threats change our brains in another way. They make us more
open to being dominated. Authoritarianism - obedience to high-status
authorities and the desire to punish rule-breakers - increases when
individuals face a threat to their safety and security. Some percentage of a
population appears always to harbour stronger authoritarianism, and studies
of twins suggest that it may be largely genetic. Surveys across eight modern
high-income countries found that around 10-25 per cent ranked as highly
authoritarian (with the US scoring the highest).52  These authoritarians tend
to become more politically active and aggressive when they are activated by

a social change, most commonly the emergence of a threat.53  Threats
triggering authoritarian behaviour don't just happen to those with
underlying authoritarian tendencies. They happen to those who generally
see the world as a dangerous place and affect even the most devoted
peacenik (albeit to a lesser extent).54
This authoritarian impulse during crisis is so primal that it changes who
we prefer as our leaders. Studies show that people want taller leaders with
more masculine features during wartime. The old trope that fearful people
will turn towards a 'strongman' leader turns out to be true.55
There is no shortage of modern-day examples. Vladimir Putin soared into
power on the back of a heavy-handed response to a series of unexplained
bombings (usually blamed on Chechen rebels). Israeli prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu experienced a resurgence in popularity after invading
Gaza. Leaders like Bolsonaro in Brazil and Trump in the US have made a
fine art of gaining votes by blaming foreigners for a country's woes. The
rise of authoritarian regimes prior to the Second World War was similarly
littered with politicians using a dangerous 'other' to activate the
authoritarian impulse. Even in democracies, during emergencies, whether it
be a war or a pandemic, people are far more likely to (sometimes eagerly)
accept less government transparency and more draconian measures. The
normal response is to invoke martial law or national emergencies that give
sweeping powers to an executive and tend to involve more surveillance and
armed enforcement (through the police and military), despite the fact that
people usually respond well to disasters and the idea of mass panic is a
myth. After 9/11, increased flag sales wasn't the only change: the US
government also adopted the 'Patriot Act' that allowed for the indefinite
detaining of migrants without charge and permitted the FBI to search email,
financial, and telephone records without a warrant.56
The threat of violence allowed some groups to become more inwardly
cooperative, murderous, and willing to accept authoritarian structures. In
other words, simply the shadow of war helped to build Goliaths. More than
that, Goliaths then became viral. Once one group becomes a conquering
dominance hierarchy, the others who are threatened become more likely to
imitate it. We see it in ancient Egypt. Under Narmer's rule Egypt begins to
expand and conquer surrounding territories, such as in Canaan; the
settlements in these areas begin to erect walls, build fortifications, and arm

themselves.57  The Germanic tribes on the frontiers of the Roman Empire,
or the nomadic Xiongnu and Xianbei on the edge of China, became more
regimented and hierarchically organized in response to conflict with Rome
and China.58  It can also help explain the patterns we have seen when it
comes to war driving state formation: threats triggered people to start to
adopt more top-down, authoritarian structures. More aggressive, conquering
polities not only had an evolutionary advantage but were also contagious.
Violence also selected for certain types of leaders.
THE DARKER ANGELS OF OUR NATURE
Psychologically, not everyone has an equal desire for status or openness to
aggression. Those with high rankings in the triad of psychopathy,
narcissism, and Machiavellianism are more predisposed to dominating
others and are forceful status seekers. Today roughly one in a hundred
people or fewer is a psychopath. The most common place to find
psychopaths is in prison, where they make up around 25 per cent of the
population.59  The second most common place is the executive suite.
Among CEOs, the rate of psychopaths rises from 1 per cent to 3-21 per
cent (the numbers are uncertain, especially as all the dark-triad traits exist
on a spectrum).60  Psychologists tend to distinguish between 'successful'
and 'unsuccessful' psychopaths. The successful ones end up in boardrooms
and parliaments, while the unsuccessful end up in prison.61
Those ranking highly in the dark triad are the most probable candidates
for those who broke the fragile peace of the Palaeolithic and started cycles
of violence. The authors of the most recent survey of pre-agricultural
violence speculate that violence in the pre-agricultural period may have
been driven by a few psychopaths.62  Psychopaths are not only strong
dominance status seekers, but are also predisposed towards aggression with
little empathy holding them back.63  Such individuals, not the average
forager, would have been the most likely to break the norms of peace
between groups, sparking reprisals and escalation. Once these cycles of
conflict began, they were hard to stop.

Psychological phenomena such as the authoritarian impulse and the dark
triad are not recent. Like our egalitarianism or love of status, they are
ancient, evolved behavioural patterns. Counter-dominance measures and a
lack of Goliath fuel both kept a check on dominance-based status-seeking
behaviour and the dark triad. That is, until the world warmed, the
environment changed, and Goliath fuel became available.
Place yourself back in the body of a forager in the early Holocene.
You've started settling down every summer to harvest stands of wild cereal
throughout a forest. They are nourishing but leave you stationary and
vulnerable. One brash young man begins warning you and your family that
he overheard strangers were planning a raid to take the crops. Your group
may have good fighters, but humans are fragile, especially when sleeping.
There is always an advantage to striking first and using the element of
surprise. The usual channels of communication are not open with these new
groups and the young upstart continues his warnings and offers to lead a
pre-emptive attack. One summer a drought strikes. Your wild stands of
grass are low; sharing with your neighbours is becoming increasingly
difficult, and those neighbours are growing increasingly anxious.
Eventually, you give in and agree to the attack.
The dawn ambush on your new neighbours is hurried and panicked, but
successful. Unfortunately, you leave many survivors. A month later, they
strike back, launching spears through your camp in the middle of the night.
The proud young upstart begins to present himself as a war chief. He is
fearless, charismatic, and an excellent tactician. The others listen and begin
to shower him with gifts after every victory.
Little do you know that he is a sociopath who had planned this the entire
time. The other group never intended to attack you. That doesn't matter
now; the slow and bloody spiral towards Goliaths has begun.
Today, many countries have checks and balances on leaders, a media that
watches and critiques them, well-established electoral procedures, and, of
course, a knowledge of psychological issues such as narcissism and
psychopathy. Yet even with that we still end up with world leaders who
seem to be steeped in the dark triad. It is difficult to look at some of the
most powerful men in recent times and not see signs of narcissism,
psychopathy, Machiavellian politicking, or just grandiose ambition. This is
a feature of our political systems, not a bug. Politics doesn't select for those
who are the most virtuous or most competent, or those who would wield

power best. It selects primarily for those who are the best manipulators and
negotiators and are willing to invest the enormous amounts of time and
effort (and often relax their morals) necessary to achieve status.
The selection mechanism would have been even worse in the past. The
time of the first states lacked many of these accountability mechanisms, and
pre-modern leaders tended to be overwhelmingly successful warlords, like
Narmer.
Upon taking power, the need to go to battle and the threat of being the
victim of a counter-dominance revolution also would have selected for only
the strongest status seekers. All of this means that those who were selected
- those comfortable with violence, capable of activating the authoritarian
impulse in their followers, and ambitious enough to risk death - would have
been far more likely to rank high in the dark triad and have stronger status
desires. The proportion of psychopaths among the first leaders was
probably even higher than it is in boardrooms and parliaments today.
Even those who were more benevolent and ended up in power would
probably have become corrupted by it over time. Holding a position high up
in a hierarchy leads to marked changes in behaviour, and even in the brain.
In one study, college students who had been primed to feel powerful were
placed under a brain scanner. The researchers found that a neural process in
the students called 'mirroring' had been impaired. Mirroring is a kind of
neurological mimicry whereby when we see an action performed our brain
lights up the same pathways required for that action. Mirroring is a
cornerstone of empathy.64
Numerous studies, experiments, and laboratory games have repeatedly
shown that powerful people tend to have less empathy and less compassion,
take more risks, have more affairs, act more impulsively, are more
hypocritical, and lie and cheat more frequently.65  As summarized by Brian
Klaas in his book Corruptible: 'all the available evidence points in one
direction. Becoming powerful makes you more selfish, reduces enpathy,
increases hypocrisy, and makes you more likely to commit abuse.'66  Or as
Lord Acton once put it: 'Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power
corrupts absolutely.'
Think of this collection of traits - status seeking through dominance, the
dark triad, the authoritarian impulse, and power corrupting - as the 'darker
angels of our nature'. They had been kept in check by counter-dominance

measures previously, but were unleashed by Goliath fuel - lootable
resources, monopolizable weapons, and caged land - all allowing for the
few to dominate the many. It wasn't just about the leaders who were
selected for but also about a devoted group of authoritarian followers. The
environmental upheaval of the Holocene, growing populations, and the
development of Goliaths all provided external threats that made much of the
populace more willing to accept authoritarian arrangements.
We'll never fully know what happened during these thousands of years
when warfare and Goliaths emerged. We certainly can't run psychology
tests on the long-dead leaders and warriors of the time. Yet this explanation
- the availability of Goliath fuel meeting the darker angels of our nature and
gang warfare ensuing - fits the historical record and what we know of
human psychology.
It also helps to explain why early states tended to be so unequal and
extractive. A usual explanation for state formation is that big projects
(roads, bridges, irrigation, and granaries) and populations needed big rulers
to organize them. Yet, irrigation schemes and urban centres often preceded
hierarchy. Most importantly, even if a ruler provided decent coordination or
military command, why did they need to be worshipped as a god and be
given hundreds of times more wealth than the average person? Why didn't
we coordinate through democratic coalitions of workers? It's not because
we needed big coordinators who demanded even bigger rewards or
incentives. It's because of violence, power, the drive for status, and the fear
of losing it.67
Of course, not all early elites were megalomaniacs, psychopaths, or
power-drunk. Many could have been well-meaning and well-behaved
leaders. Yet even a few rogue rulers would have created a system in which
aggression, cheating, and self-aggrandizing were more acceptable (at least
among certain classes). And once a few bad precedents were set, it became
easier for others to respond and establish similar dynamics. One bellicose
city-state could have easily triggered others to devote more resources to
walls and spears, and less to growing food and building roads. Those who
did not were conquered. It created a new evolutionary pressure, and arms
races were born. One egotistical ruler who centralized power and built up a
cult of personality provided both a blueprint and justification for others to
do the same. Those who didn't had less of a claim to being leader. It
became a race to the bottom.

Arms races, races to the bottom, and status races using conspicuous
consumption (such as feasts and great monuments) all became competitive
traps. Those who chose not to play (pacifists, those who had little desire to
rule, or animists who refused to exploit the environment for better
weaponry) were either outcompeted or had to change their mind. Think of
these as 'Goliath traps': destructive competitive dynamics that dominance
hierarchies are prone to fall into. They might be good for a few individuals
in the short term but are not in the long-term interest of the majority.
The darker angels of our nature - status competition through dominance,
the dark triad, the authoritarian impulse, and power corrupting - all
combined to help create systems in which one group exploits the rest. The
violence of collapse and state formation is just the collateral damage of
trying to set up an effective racket. Many were successful in creating vast
systems of interconnected states and empires. Like the first Goliaths, these
rackets would also eventually break down owing largely to inequality, albeit
at a larger scale with far more serious consequences.68
OceanofPDF.com

9
Broken Bronze
In Sargon's Footsteps - The Blurry Line Between State and Empire - The
Early Bronze Age Collapse - The Beginnings of the West and Capitalism -
The Late Bronze Age Systems Collapse - Collapse as a Blessing - The
Bright Side of Dark Ages
IN SARGON'S FOOTSTEPS
We do not know the birth name of the world's first emperor. We simply
know him as Sargon: 'the true king'.
As with Narmer, we have an engraving that depicts his ascent to power.
It's known as the Sargon Victory Stele (from the third millennium BCE) and
is held in the Louvre in Paris. It looks unsettlingly similar to the Palette of
Narmer. Sargon is shown holding a net of captured enemies in front of the
goddess Ishtar while smashing a slave's head with a club (Figure 21).1  It is
partly a claim to divinity, with the image closely resembling an earlier stele
of the god Ninĝirsu (tellingly, a god of farming who later also became a god
of war) holding a net of enemies in a similar fashion.2
Sargon's origins are shrouded in myth. In the legend, Sargon is said to
have been the illegitimate child of a high priestess. She secretly birthed him
and then placed him in a basket to float down the river, a story that would
later be echoed by the tale of baby Moses floating in a basket on the Nile.
Sargon was adopted by a humble gardener, Akki. In this telling, Sargon is a
self-made man who rose to be a cupbearer to the king of Kish, Ur-Zababa.

He overthrew his boss and mobilized Kish for war. He first marched south
to conquer the great city of Uruk. He didn't stop there. He conquered cities
throughout southern Mesopotamia and then northern Mesopotamia. He
founded a new capital called Akkad, the centrepiece of the Akkadian
Empire, and changed the official script of the region from Sumerian to
Akkadian. The exact date of his reign is unclear, but would have been
around 2334-2279 BCE.
Figure 21: Victory Stele SB2 of Sargon of Akkad
Sargon was a 'marcher king'. He would lead his small army from city to
city, conquering, demanding tribute, and installing a puppet leader to rule in
his absence. Those leaders often didn't share Sargon's culture and weren't
monitored, hence were liable to revolt. It was a tenuous affair, with Sargon
frequently needing to revisit cities to quell rebellions and reinstate his
authority.
The Akkadian Empire lasted a century after Sargon's death - an
impressive length of time, given how difficult the work of maintaining an
empire is.
Sargon faced clear limits to his ambitions, as has every emperor since.
There were two key problems that plagued any attempt to create lasting
social control. First, people abhorred domination. Cities didn't want to
remain conquered, and the foragers and herders outside them were reluctant
to give up their resources or independence. Ideology and external threats

could help people to accept dominance hierarchies, but it wasn't a stable
affair. Second was status competition. A ruler could not be everywhere at
once, and Sargon's strategy of constantly marching from community to
community was not sustainable. Instead, the rulers had to rely on local
elites, governors, and eventually bureaucrats to impose rules and extract
resources. These elites had their own aspirations for greater status and
wealth, and the state had created a hierarchy with a throne and positions of
power: the ultimate visible ladder of status. Status competition through
dominance was now legitimate, and the stakes were far higher with entire
swathes of cities, temples, and armies up for grabs. Elite competition
became endemic.
Dominance aversion and status competition made empire-building the
equivalent of trying to construct a human pyramid from hostile strangers.
Most wanted to be on top, and no one wanted to be shouldering the burden
at the bottom. Enormous empires were still eventually built, but only after
millennia of struggle and innovation.
We can see it in numbers. For the first 3,600 years after Narmer (3000
BCE to 600 CE) empires varied in size between 0.15 and 1.3 million square
kilometres. To put that in perspective, the country of Egypt today is around
1 million square kilometres and 3,600 years is about the same amount of
time separating us from the times of Socrates and Classical Greece plus
more than another 1,000 years. (Those area estimates are generous, since
empires rarely effectively controlled much of their territory.3 ) Scholars
often liken empires to a rimless wheel: an original homeland (the core)
conquered lands and cities outside it (the periphery) but kept them separated
to ensure they couldn't coordinate against the conqueror. That wheel was
usually unstable. Conquerors usually had little control over far-flung
territories, with little to no full-time bureaucracy and poor communication
technologies (the horse wasn't even introduced into the Near East until
2000 BCE). Conquerors like Narmer and Sargon had to rely on vulgar
displays of brute force and punishment - whether that be public monuments
showing them smashing people's heads in or hanging flayed skins from city
walls - not because they were powerful, but because they were weak. They
governed through intimidation.
Over time this changed. Empires found ways to shorten the distance
between rulers and the ruled by developing better bureaucracies and quicker
transportation and communication technologies, and making the landscape

more easily traversed by chopping down forests, draining swamps,
channelling rivers, and laying down roads. It was a long process, but
empires evolved and grew in size. As rulers became more powerful and
logistically organized they came to rely more and more on bureaucracy,
propaganda, and religion to assert their power. It was a move over
thousands of years from intimidation to administration.4
Throughout history empires have been the default setting for any large-
scale state.5  China's history is one of empire for over 2,000 years, from the
reign of the Qin (221 BCE) until today, punctuated by periods of
fragmentation. Empires drove colonization and drew the current borders of
the world. Most stories of collapse are stories of empire. Most of what we
consider history is just the stories and actions of a few dozen empires.6
THE BLURRY LINE BETWEEN STATE AND
EMPIRE
While Sargon is usually remembered as the first emperor, he wasn't.
Narmer is closer to claiming that title. That's because all states are empires.
Empires are systems of political control in which one group dominates
and assimilates others. This control can be either direct conquest and rule
(formal) or the effective control of resources (informal).7  Sargon's
Akkadian Empire is a paradigmatic example of the former: the empire
would conquer a city, install a puppet ruler, and then demand tribute (such
as gold and slaves). Some claim that the modern US is an example of the
latter. It uses unfair 'free-trade' agreements that result in it getting cheaper
imports and selling its products at a premium. Empires require violence, or
at least the threat of it, to create a system of unequal exchange. The
Akkadians ruled through military prowess. The US is a superpower in large
part because it has the most advanced military force and arsenal of nuclear
weapons in the world. Whether it be through the sword, or negotiations
conducted in the shadow of that sword, empires are about domination. In
the simplest terms, empire is just the quest of one society to control the
resources and people of another.8

The borders separating hierarchical hunter-gatherers, states, and empires
are blurry. There were frequently enormous differences in the size of the
territory and the population they covered, but the way they operated was
often similar. The Calusa were one small, concentrated group of fisherfolk
violently extracting resources from the communities around them. The
earliest city-states were usually a core of palaces and temples dominating a
wider hinterland. Archaeologists in general look for a small number of large
sites and many small sites as one sign of 'settlement hierarchy'. Rome was
just a city that grew by conquering its neighbours. The British Empire
began with the conquest of what we now call England by the Normans.
They then slowly subdued the Irish and Welsh. Centuries later, this English
empire expanded across the seas, invading India, Australia, the Caribbean,
Africa, and North America. The Calusa, Rome, and the British Empire all
involved one group dominating and extracting resources from others. Some
grew far bigger in size and bureaucracy than others, but the fundamental
approach of unequal exchange was the same. All of them were rimless
wheels with a core homeland dominating a periphery: the Calusa capital of
Calos dominated the surrounding lands and farmers; Rome dominated much
of Europe, North Africa, and the Near East; London dominated Britain, then
its neighbours, then the world.
Scholars have tied themselves into knots trying to define empire, separate
empire from colonization, and decide whether England/Britain was an
empire before it began its overseas colonies. It had, after all, already
conquered the Irish before it took India.9  The reason why empire is so hard
to define is because of the unsettling truth that all states are essentially
empires. It's a spectrum, a matter of degree. For simplicity, we can still call
states that conquer other states 'empires', but the difference is minor.10
Empires vary in size and rule.11  The Assyrian Empire ruled over 1.4
million square kilometres of land and obsessed over ensuring that its
subjects all prioritized the god Assur. The Western Roman Empire covered
5 million square kilometres and cared little about the gods its citizens
worshipped, as long as they paid their taxes and didn't rebel.12
Many empires would link together in webs of trade and diplomacy, like
the ancient beginnings of the modern hyper-connected, globalized world.
The Early and Late Bronze Age of the Mediterranean are both examples of
these great Goliath systems of competing and cooperating empires. Both

would undergo a systems collapse: a collapse not just of one city or empire,
but of an entire interconnected system of them. If we want to understand
how a collapse could unfold in the modern world, then these are some of
the more instructive examples.
THE EARLY BRONZE AGE COLLAPSE
Sargon's Akkadian Empire was not alone in the world. To the south was the
Old Egyptian Kingdom. Thousands of kilometres to the east was the Indus
Valley Civilization: those egalitarian cities full of plumbing and public
bathhouses. To the north, in Malta, we have the 'Temple Period'. It was not
an empire or state, but a time when thirty gigantic stone buildings were
erected across the islands (perhaps by hierarchical early farmers).
All of these groups eventually failed. The Akkadian Empire that had
begun with Sargon in around 2334 BCE had fallen apart by 2150 BCE. The
Old Egyptian Kingdom decentralized. There was no longer a single
pharaoh, but rather multiple competing claimants to different regions.
Numerous settlements throughout Mesopotamia, the Levant, and the
Mediterranean were abandoned. The Indus Valley Civilization, which
traded with Mesopotamia, reorganized many of its metropolises. The people
slowly began to leak from the cities into the surrounding countryside. In
Malta, the Temple Period came to an end.
These polities are grouped under what we call the Early Bronze Age, and
they all appear to have experienced transformations, even collapses, around
2200-2000 BCE.
It is unclear what caused the collapse of the Early Bronze Age systems.
The most widely cited culprit is climate change, in particular a
'megadrought' that appears to have struck the region. Evidence of drought
stretches from the Nile to Spain and coincides with the shrinkage of cities
and the abandonment of settlements across the area (Figure 22).13
While there is a clear correlation between the drought and the collapses,
it is difficult to establish direct causation. We also know that there was
significant regional climatic variation. Different areas responded differently
and some, such as western Syria, seem to have barely been affected.14

Some dried abruptly, while for others the reduction in rainfall occurred over
centuries and there was little significant change.15
Figure 22: A timeline of Early Bronze Age polities
None of this signalled a fatal end for these populations. Instead, it meant
a decentralization of power. Emperors, pharaohs, and kings lost centralized
authority, while local leaders and assemblies gained it. Like the fission-
fusion processes of the past, it was a disaggregation. In this case a
disaggregation into the building blocks of an empire. In Syria's Euphrates
Valley, the Bronze Age had seen a combination of kings ruling alongside
popular assemblies and councils of elders. As the region decentralized, the
assemblies and councils became more prominent. They even appear to have
been a source of resilience, cushioning the fall.16
Egypt had a similar democratization of both religion and politics. The
First Dynasty was, like its monuments, pyramidal in structure. There was a
rigid class system, centralized government, and the veneration of leaders,
including the ritualistic sacrifice of hundreds at royal funerals. The collapse
period is marked by tombs and jewellery becoming more widely available,
alongside other signs of greater collective access to religion. While a new
pharaoh eventually regained control, the Middle Kingdom was marked by a
blurring of class boundaries with new rulers who portrayed themselves as
modest shepherds of their people.17
For Mesopotamia, collapses of empires and kingdoms, such as Sargon's
Akkad or the Babylonian Empire (c.1880-1595 BCE), often just meant a

switch back to more autonomous city-states and localized forms of
collective governance. Emperors usually had little interest in local matters
such as resolving disputes and organizing the day-to-day running of the city,
leaving these to local government. This was far from a dreadful outcome.
The Akkadian Empire was a predatory, militaristic juggernaut that many
would have been delighted to see fall apart.18
In the Indus Valley, the collapse was more of a slow transformation as
people moved from cities into a more village-dominant economy. Over
centuries people moved east, began to plant more hardy crops like drought-
tolerant millet, and became less reliant on trade between cities and with
Mesopotamia.19
While the drought may have been a catalyst for collapse across the Early
Bronze Age, the responses of different regions and polities varied
dramatically. None of this constituted an ancient apocalypse. While it was
not an overly negative outcome, it was still a systems collapse. It was also
not the last time this would happen in the Bronze Age Mediterranean.
THE BEGINNINGS OF THE WEST AND
CAPITALISM
A few centuries later, the eastern Mediterranean, south-west Asia, and
Aegean was home to a web of interconnected Goliaths (1700 to 1200 BCE).
Among them we can count the Mycenaeans of Greece, Minoans, the
Hittites of Anatolia (modern Turkey), Cypriots (in Cyprus), the Canaanites
of the southern Levant, Egyptians, the Mitanni and Assyrians in
Mesopotamia, and the Kassites of Babylon. The Mycenaeans were the
original ruthless warrior kings of Greece, residing in multiple palaces across
the islands. They received animals and grain from the rural populace in
exchange for protection and hosting great feasts. The New Egyptian
Kingdom was home to some of the most well-known pharaohs such as
Tutankhamun and Ramesses II. It even saw the first possible monotheistic
religion in Atenism, the worship of Aten, originally a god who was depicted
as a sun disc. The Minoans covered numerous port cities across the Aegean

that had no depictions of male rulers. This Bronze Age network included
the fabled city of Troy.
It was a time that also saw the earliest glimpses of capitalism. When
capitalism begins depends on how you define it. Most dictionaries give us
the rough definition of an economic system where industry has private
owners. Academics tend to define capitalism by a list of certain traits:
private property, enforceable contracts, wage labour, markets with
responsive prices, and supportive governments. We can see most of these
traits thousands of years ago in the Bronze Age.20
In Assyria, around 4,000-3,000 years ago, we have ample evidence of the
basic features of capitalism. Over 1,000 recovered cuneiform documents
record the use of credit and debt as virtual money, the use of 'joint-stock'
agreements, interest-bearing debts, and an autonomous merchant class.
These were not state-run endeavours overseen by a king. They were
privately governed by an assembly of elite merchant families. These
families held a monopoly on the trade of certain goods, guaranteed
contracts, undertook diplomacy, and regulated the weighing and
measurement of precious metals.21
It is during this time that we see the first signs of multinational
corporations as well. In Assyria, different businesses set up shop around the
trading city of Kanesh (in modern-day Turkey), a midway point for trading
tin from Afghanistan into the Assyrian Empire. These companies had all the
hallmarks of what we would call today a multinational corporation:
common stock ownership, an organizational hierarchy, and a drive for
profit, as well as foreign activities and employees. It's also in the Bronze
Age Assyrian business community of Kanesh that we see the first evidence
of businesswomen (and investors), who even penned their own cuneiform
letters.22
States were highly supportive of such arrangements. In one of the first
instances of financial deregulation, royal inscriptions from Assur record
generous tax breaks given to merchants to encourage commerce in the city.
Even the famed 'Code of Hammurabi' has rules for granting credit and
places taxes and tariffs on commerce. Whether it be capitalism,
multinationals, Greek culture, or monotheistic religion, this system was, in
short, the root of what many would now call 'the West'.23

By 1500 BCE, this Bronze Age network was one of interconnected trade.
Each state relied on exchange with others. Most of the gold came from
Egypt (Nubia and Sudan), the silver from Greece (the Laurion mines),
copper from Cyprus, and tin from modern-day Afghanistan. Tin and copper
were vital as they made the alloy bronze.24  There is a reason the Bronze
Age was so called, with some comparing the role of bronze to that of oil in
the modern world.25  (Well, at least for elites: bronze was primarily a luxury
item for weapons, buildings, and decorations - and less used by
commoners.) There is an unfortunate penchant for labelling historical
periods after metals (such as bronze and iron) that tend to characterize elite
life in cities. If we are to name periods after the most used and vital
resource, then most of human history should be called the wood age.
Regardless, bronze and trade were central to empire in the Bronze Age.26
If one state wasn't directly trading or bargaining with another then it had
indirect contact through one of its neighbours. Tonnes of raw materials and
finished goods, as well as dowries, were exchanged across the leaders of
Egypt, Mitanni, Assyria, and Babylonia, usually under the guise of gift-
giving.27  For instance, one letter detailing gifts from the pharaoh
Akhenaten to the Kassite king Burnaburiash II includes gold, copper, silver,
bronze, bracelets, necklaces, perfume, mirrors, and ebony boxes.28  The
exchange and benefits were limited to the upper echelons of the Bronze Age
with little trickling down.
The elite Late Bronze Age trade network happened across cities and was
controlled by urban aristocrats who built fortunes off conquest, forced
labour, and taxing farmers and client states. Like today, there were tax
breaks for the wealthiest. One rich Ugarit trader boasted in a letter of not
having to pay import tax when returning from Greece with a ship loaded
with beer, grain, and olive oil.29
It wasn't necessarily a pleasant life for the average commoner. Estimates
of inequality in the Near East using house sizes suggest that inequality rose
with the first cities and states. It continued to increase throughout the
Bronze Age in both cities and rural areas.30
The oppression and inequality are reflected in the skeletons of the Bronze
Age people. For instance, pharaohs were taller than the rest of the male
population. That's because they had access not only to more food but also to

medical services and they lived longer, more leisurely lives. By contrast,
Egyptian peasants appear to have suffered regularly from tuberculosis and
hernias - the effects of heavy labour. In the Greek Mycenae, kings and
elites averaged a height of 172.5cm compared with 166.1cm for the average
male population. High-status women were also taller than their poorer peers
by around 6cm. This system of bronze Goliaths was deeply unequal.31
By 1100 BCE this system had disintegrated. It was a swift unravelling:
within two or three generations the small world elite network had collapsed;
many of the individual states had ceased to exist, and dozens of cities had
been abandoned or burned to the ground. In some cases, even writing was
lost, such as the disappearance of the script of Ugarit and the Linear B
script from Mycenaean Greece.
THE LATE BRONZE AGE SYSTEMS COLLAPSE
Around 1185 BCE a merchant called Banniya hurriedly penned a letter to his
boss. It read, 'There is famine in your house; we will all die of hunger. If
you do not quickly arrive here, we ourselves will die of hunger. You will not
see a living soul from your land.' Banniya was working in the outpost of a
commercial company in the city of Emar, located inland in Syria, and
messaging his superior in Ugarit, a trading hub on the coast around 250
kilometres away.
Ugarit seems to have been gripped by drought around the same time as
Banniya's letter. In response to a plea from the king of Ugarit the Egyptian
pharaoh sent gold, fish, and textiles as aid, yet it was to no avail. Both Emar
and Ugarit were destroyed shortly thereafter. The debris left from the razing
of Ugarit was two metres high. We do not know who burned the city
down.32
This was the death knell of the Late Bronze Age (Figure 23).
The Late Bronze Age was hit by a variety of shocks. Perhaps the most
decisive was a drought that struck the region around 3,200 years ago and
lasted 150 to 300 years.33  The drought extended from northern Italy down
through Greece and Turkey to Cyprus, the Levant, and Egypt, and east to
Iran and Iraq. The arid conditions appear to have caused crop yield

shortages and famine. In Egypt, grain prices rose. Some areas appear to
have been particularly hard hit as we can see in the letter of Banniya.34
Figure 23: A timeline of Late Bronze Age polities
As with the earlier Bronze Age, the drought was not universal. Some
areas do not seem to have experienced a drought at all. Climatic data from a
stalagmite near the Pylos palace in Greece suggests that there were wetter
conditions before the collapse of the palace, and drier conditions after. The
Bronze Age people were also not placid targets. They adapted. During the
drought the Egyptians bred more tolerant cattle in Canaan and extended dry
farming in the southern and eastern fringes of the Levant to make up for the
lower grain production in the north. The drought contributed to the collapse,
but its effects differed greatly across regions.35
Alongside the drought came a series of earthquakes. The entire region is
riven with fault lines, including the Anatolian Faultline across northern
Turkey. Maps of the areas most affected by earthquakes in the twentieth
century show an overlap with many sites that were destroyed during the
Late Bronze Age. Earthquakes in the region often come in groups, or
earthquake 'storms', and can be of 6.5 or greater magnitudes, enough to
destroy even modern buildings.36  There is evidence of a storm of
earthquakes across Mycenaean Greece, Troy, and settlements across Canaan
(modern Israel and Jordan). Earthquakes alone, however, seem insufficient

to account for such a broad systems collapse. In both Ugarit and Mycenaean
Greece there is evidence of sites being rebuilt after earthquakes around
1250 BCE.37
These natural disasters may have also been accompanied by pestilence.
We now know that the pharaoh Ramesses V died of smallpox, while the
entire royal Hittite family was eliminated by an epidemic c.1350 BCE. Yet,
there is otherwise little evidence: we've yet to discover any mass graves, or
texts that mention an outbreak.38
These environmental hazards were accompanied by threats with a human
face. Perhaps the most well-known and maligned are the 'Sea Peoples'.
These were purportedly invaders who swept through the Mediterranean
razing cities to the ground. The idea of marauding Sea Peoples comes from
inscriptions by the pharaohs Merneptah and Ramesses III recounting battles
in 1207 and 1177 BCE. Ramesses casts himself as the last heroic bastion of
civilization holding out against a tide of barbarians: 'They laid their hands
upon the lands, as far as the circuit of the earth, their hearts were trusting
and confident as they thought '"our plans will succeed".' According to
Ramesses, their schemes came to nought, for once they met him they were
'slain and made into heaps from head to tail'.
It's a rousing tale but there are a few reasons to not trust Ramesses III.
His records aggrandize him as a military genius, but there is essentially no
evidence to support his account. Some of the cities Ramesses claimed were
destroyed were not, and for other cases much of the destruction occurred
before the arrival of the Sea Peoples. In most cases we know it wasn't Sea
Peoples who invaded. The Elamites conquered the Hittites, and the Hittites
appear to have conquered Cyprus. Some areas, such as Mycenaean Greece,
show no signs of external attackers. The more likely culprit is rebellion or
conflict between the different palaces within Greece rather than foreign
invaders.
There was also no single invading force. Instead, this was more likely to
have been a mixed group of refugees, migrants, pirates, and just savvy
mobile people from the Aegean and eastern Mediterranean who were
moving because of drought, warfare, oppression, and economic hardship. In
many cases they would have settled with little conflict, bringing new
culture with them (such as Philistine migrants settling in what is modern-
day Israel and bringing Aegean-style pottery and architecture). There is, if

anything, an odd double standard in how the migrants of the Late Bronze
Age have often been portrayed. When the elites of the Bronze Age traded or
warred it was a sign of a thriving culture; but when commoners moved,
they are seen as mysterious, apocalyptic invaders.39
A clearer contributor to the systems collapse is civil strife. Rising
inequality and conquest empires were not the most stable basis for a social
system. Conquered subjects actively resisted and undermined their imperial
overlords. There is evidence of rebellion - such as burned settlements and
arrowheads from battles but without signs of foreign invasions or a
marching army - in Greece, Hazor in Canaan, and many other sites
throughout the levant.40  Whether it be rebels or invaders, a swathe of cities
across the Bronze Age system were razed, as seen in Figure 24.41
Figure 24: A map of the Late Bronze Age collapse
This map shows the rough extent of key empires and cultures preceding the Late Bronze Age
collapse, as well as some of the major sites destroyed during the collapse.

My colleague Eric Cline, one of the leading archaeologists of the Late
Bronze Age collapse, has suggested that it was caused by no one factor, but
by the interaction of many. It was a perfect storm of drought, famine,
earthquakes, disease, invasions, and rebellions. More than that, each of
these factors created ripple effects that worsened the situation. Revolts
spread as commoners stormed palaces and grain stores. The supply of gold
from Egypt, silver from Greece, and tin and copper from Afghanistan would
have been disrupted. Bronze came in increasingly short supply.42
The very way that the Bronze Age system was structured could have
contributed to its swift fall.43  Multiple different stressors cause one system
to enter a crisis, which triggers another one to do the same. This can worsen
the initial crisis, creating a 'systems death spiral'.44
Two key potential death spirals drove the disintegration of the Bronze
Age system. First, drought and rising inequality created more rebellions and
interstate wars. Those revolts and invasions destroyed cities, including key
trading hubs, destabilizing the trade network. As the trade network frayed
and fewer goods were moved around, there was even more resource
scarcity, fuelling further conflict. The sheer drop in trade made trading
cities less profitable and more vulnerable, making abandonment or external
invasion more likely (see Figure 25). Compounding matters was the impact
of the earthquake storm. Pirates emerging from the broken cities, as well as
driven by climate change into the area, could have made trade even more
dangerous, further unsettling the Bronze Age network. The key behind it all
is that the interdependence of the Bronze Age Goliaths was a weakness.
Once enough cities were lost it destabilized the network, encouraging more
cities to fall apart, slowly unknitting the Late Bronze Age system.45
The interdependence of the Bronze Age was a blessing for Goliaths in the
good times, but a liability during a time of multiple shocks. One study that
mapped the trade and diplomatic networks of the Late Bronze Age found
that while it was usually robust, it may have taken just the loss of an empire
or two to throw it into disarray. Their model suggests that just the loss of
Ugarit and the Hittite Empire could have been enough to upend the Late
Bronze Age system. It's a plausible scenario given that the two seem to
have collapsed at roughly the same time.46

Figure 25: Death spirals in the Bronze Age collapse
COLLAPSE AS A BLESSING
The Late Bronze Age collapse was no apocalypse. Each polity changed and
recovered in different ways. The Hittite Empire fell apart, and its capital of
Hattusa was abandoned and then razed. Just a few cities and smaller
kingdoms across south-eastern Anatolia and northern Syria were left
behind. Egypt broke into rival factions and competing pharaohs, yet its
culture and population remained relatively stable. The Assyrians were
resilient, with one expert perhaps over-optimistically describing it as a
'recession'. The palaces of Mycenaean Greece were utterly levelled and
used by squatters and herders. Cities and trading hubs such as Ugarit were

burned to the ground. From a wide lens the Late Bronze Age collapse looks
like a single systems collapse, but a closer look shows it to be a
kaleidoscope of different processes of collapse, resilience, and recovery
occurring differently across the region.47
We have little idea how this systems collapse impacted people living in
rural areas that would have made up 95 per cent of the population. The end
of the Hittite Empire and the palace economies of Greece would have
meant relief from tax and corvée labour (unpaid, forced labour for a certain
period of time, usually for state projects) for most subjects.
The few bits of evidence we do have suggest that the collapse may have
been a boon for most people. Inequality estimates based on housing sizes
suggest that rural areas became more equal. In contrast, urban settlements
continued to become more unequal from the Late Bronze Age into the Iron
Age. This is because empires could no longer effectively extract wealth
from the countryside.48
Tellingly, those who lived under the empires that experienced little
change during the collapse did poorly. The Assyrian Empire had a relatively
(compared to the Hittites or Mycenaeans) smooth transition into the Neo-
Assyrian military juggernaut. It's also one of the few areas where we have
data on how people's wealth varied over time, thanks to buried grave goods.
In Assyria we see inequality grow from the Late Bronze Age to the Iron
Age. Commoners in the Iron Age get buried with fewer and lower-quality
grave goods such as pieces of pottery and jewellery. That decrease is
probably due to a greater reliance on migrant labour and the Assyrian crown
demanding more tax and corvée labour. We don't know if the rich were
getting richer, but the poor were clearly getting poorer.49
In Greece, more egalitarian regions without palaces didn't even appear to
experience a collapse. Areas such as Corinthia, Achaea, and the Euboean
Gulf didn't undergo a collapse, and seem to have prospered after the palaces
elsewhere fell apart. Unlike the situation with the Assyrians, the poor didn't
get poorer. The more egalitarian communities were both more resilient to
external shocks and better for those living within them. And the collapse
was largely an elite phenomenon driven by inequality. Without palaces and
elites there was no conflict and no collapse.50
We don't have a sharp, high-resolution image of life during the Late
Bronze Age collapse for peasant farmers. Did they really worry much about

their previous Hittite overlords no longer receiving gold and ostrich eggs
from overseas? Or did they simply shrug and continue ploughing and enjoy
the less frequent visits from the tax collector? We can easily see Mycenaean
Greece as a case of 'escape' from an unsustainable system of competing
palaces extracting wealth from the lands and people around them. Their end
was brought about by war and revolt, and the ensuing drought helped to
ensure they were never rebuilt. You were better off as a pastoralist grazing
your sheep in the ruined palaces of Greece than as a peasant under the
extractive dictatorship of the Assyrians.51
One Bronze Age expert suggested that, rather than think of it as a
civilizational collapse, we should view it as a time 'during which a few
large imperial polities succumbed to their structural weaknesses and
corruption', which allowed repressed groups and communities to reorganize
and flourish.52  While we shouldn't turn away from the lives lost or the
smoke of the burned cities, it is an apt interpretation of the collapse.
Perhaps the very idea of civilizational catastrophe followed by a dark age in
the Late Bronze Age is 'imperial rhetoric from beyond the grave'.53
Perhaps we shouldn't mourn the Egyptians, Hittites, and Mycenaeans.
There may even be grounds for celebrating the 'dark age' that followed.
THE BRIGHT SIDE OF DARK AGES
What followed the Late Bronze Age collapse is what was once called a
'dark age'. It is a common trope in the rise-and-fall vision of history that
collapses were followed by dark ages.
It's a difficult position to hold once you look at what happened in the
wake of the Late Bronze Age. Homer, author of the Odyssey and the Iliad,
was a poet of these Greek dark ages.54  As was Hesiod, the poet of
Theogony and Work and Days. They are almost certainly part of a wider set
of heroic poetry developed during the dark age. Without collapse the world
would be bereft of Homer and reams of epic literature.55
Collapse could also provide space for more democratic arrangements.
The collapse of Mycenae levelled wealth inequality. In the long run, this
left emerging aristocrats even after the early iron age (750-480 BCE) weak

and divided. The initial law codes (from around 620 BCE) the Greeks crafted
aimed to limit the ability of an individual to dominate the rest. By 525 BCE,
many adult males had decided to make collective decisions via mass
assemblies. These practices and norms were the foundations for later
Athenian democracy.56
Athens was a limited democracy that permitted slavery and had political
representation for only 10-15 per cent of the population (just free, male,
adult citizens). It was nonetheless a significant step beyond the previous
autocracy of Mycenaean Greece. With their random selection of
representatives and emphasis on deliberation, it may well have been a more
advanced and intense form of democracy than the practice of modern, rich
countries of simply voting once every four or so years.
Many other benefits accompanied the collapse. New groups formed and
prospered. In Canaan, the late-thirteenth- to eleventh-century highlands saw
the emergence of village dwellers who were the precursors of the Israelites.
Other independent cities such as Tyre and Byblos rose up and took over the
trading routes previously serviced by Ugarit. They became the pioneering
Phoenicians, who would eventually form a Carthage-based empire. The
Phoenicians introduced a new alphabet to the world. Alphabetic scripts had
existed before, with Ugarit possessing two of them, but these were elitist
scripts with hundreds of symbols that were difficult to learn. In contrast, the
Phoenician alphabet was short, simple, and easy to master. Because of that,
it spread widely, becoming the basis of the Greek alphabet as well as the
Latin alphabet that underpins many languages used across the world today,
including English, French, and Spanish.
We see a similar pattern with technology. Most of the key technological
breakthroughs of the Bronze Age, such as the alphabet and ironworking,
occurred on the peripheries of empire, and/or after the Bronze Age
collapse.57  Other technologies and practices such as animal husbandry, the
plough, irrigation through canals and ditches, the sailing boat, and pottery
all preceded the first states of the Bronze Age and were often developed by
stateless hunter-gatherers. The idea of golden ages of empire leading to
technological and cultural progress, and the fall of empires leading to
regression, is at best mistaken.
The term 'dark age' has fallen out of favour among historians and
archaeologists for good reason. Far from being the beginning of a period of

gloom, the end of the Late Bronze Age led to healthier, wealthier people in
many regions, gave us the Latin alphabet and new technology, and made
room for the democratic model and culture of Classical Greece.58
The systems collapses of the Early and Late Bronze Age are not the only
ones to have occurred in world history. Around two millennia later and
11,000 kilometres away a similar phenomenon unfolded across the Atlantic
Ocean. There, another Goliath system of numerous states faced drought,
war, rebellion, and their own interdependence turning against them.
OceanofPDF.com

10
Shattered Obsidian
Collapse in the Yucatán - From Drought and Warfare to Alien Invaders -
When Does the Collapse End? - When Writing Becomes Obsolete -
Collapse in East and West Africa - Systems Collapses Across the World
COLLAPSE IN THE YUCATáN
In 1696 the Spanish friar Andrés de Avendaño was one of the first
Europeans to encounter the Mayan city-state of Tikal - or what was left of
it. His surprise was clear, as he and his companions emerged from thick
jungle and stumbled upon a 'great variety of buildings ... it seemed to us
that these buildings must be near a settlement, but we found ourselves, as
we saw afterwards, very far from a settlement'. Cities resplendent with
great stone pyramids jutted above the canopy, yet they were completely
empty. Tikal had largely been abandoned five hundred years earlier. It was
one of many Mayan cities that littered the Yucatán peninsula before the
arrival of the Spanish.
The Classic Lowland Maya (150-900 CE) followed the same blueprint
that we see in the earliest cities of North and Central America, from Monte
Albán up to Cahokia. Stone ballcourts and great plazas were enclosed by
towering flat-topped pyramid-temples. The deep black volcanic glass of
obsidian was an analogue to bronze: it was traded over long distances and
used in weapons, jewellery, and tools, mainly by elites (at least initially).
The Maya also developed a complicated cosmic calendar replete with

rituals to celebrate royal ancestors, and a glyphic writing system that was
regularly used to memorialize the deeds of dead kings.
The Classic Lowland Maya did not comprise a single empire; rather it
was a collection of around sixty to seventy different city-states spread
across a territory encompassing Guatemala, Belize, and parts of Mexico,
Honduras, and El Salvador. Each city varied in size and power, but all
shared a culture, much like the Greek or Sumerian city-states. Some of the
cities were vast, holding up to 120,000 people, not including the network of
farms and villages that surrounded them. They dwarfed most of the cities of
Europe at the time. The Lowlands were a dense metropolis of 7-11 million
people. One airborne laser scan of a 2,144-square-kilometre swathe of
Guatemala found 61,480 ancient structures (or twenty-nine for every square
kilometre) connected by 106 kilometres of canals.1  It's difficult to tell how
extensive this tropical urban maze was. As recently as October 2024
another previously unexcavated city that would have once housed tens of
thousands - nicknamed Valeriana - was found.2  The Lowlands were a
teeming, sophisticated web of jungle metropolises.
It was also a warring political ecosystem, with cities frequently raiding
and conquering each other. This led to a series of cycles in which one polity
would expand, often conquering others nearby and becoming an empire,
before the conquered would break away and become their own states. For
instance, the city-state of Copán expanded to dominate a territory of 10,000
square kilometres from eastern Guatemala to Belize around 500-600 CE.
Within 140 years, Quiriguá on its eastern border broke away, celebrating
their independence in hieroglyphic texts and expanding. This cycle of rise
and fall, expansion and contraction, continued for decades. These cycles are
seen periodically, each lasting around 300 years, with the centre of power
shifting between different kingdoms and their capitals. In the Classic period
it was the Kaanul kingdom centred at Dzibanche, then Calakmul and its
rival Tikal. It's hard not to see similarities with the boom-bust/fission-fusion
cycles in the Puebloans, first farmers of Europe, and others. As with them,
such regular cycles cannot be easily explained by fluctuations in the climate
(which tend to lack such regularity).3
The collapse of the southern Lowland Maya (known as the 'Terminal
Classical Period', approximately 800-1100 CE) saw multiple cities emptied
out. Some cities, such as Tikal, lost nine out of ten residents. The

production of monuments was choked off. The creation of luxury goods and
the use of the calendar and glyphic writing system all plummeted. The long-
count calendar (an astronomical calendar used to keep track of longer
periods of time) was lost altogether. In many cases it's unclear what exactly
happened to cause such a collapse.
In others, what happened is all too clear. In about 800 CE the city of
Cancuén was attacked suddenly. Unfinished stone and wooden palisades
surround the site; spearheads are scattered within it, as are numerous
skeletons displaying wounds from axes and spears. The elite were
slaughtered and discarded into water storage tanks, along with their sceptres
and regalia. The ruling family was dumped into shallow graves outside the
city. Whether it was an invasion, peasant rebellion, or coup by noble
families is unknown. In other cases, the picture is murkier. But during this
period, the Lowlands were a site of war, strife, and flight. By the end of the
period, the Goliath of the southern Lowlands - the systems of religious and
economic domination we previously would have called Mayan 'civilization'
- had vanished. The ruling class had, in the words of one expert, 'gone with
the wind' (Figure 26).4
Figure 26: A timeline of the Lowland Maya collapse
FROM DROUGHT AND WARFARE TO ALIEN
INVADERS
As in the Late Bronze Age, the Maya faced a storm of challenges during
this terminal period. Among the different failing states, we frequently see
massacres of rulers and aristocratic families and targeted destruction of elite
monuments and insignia. People, whether they be nobles or peasants,
appear to be rejecting the Mayan holy lords, the k'uhul ajaw, who
previously ruled. What triggered this conflict?

Most of the southern Lowlands appear to have faced an unprecedented
drought during this period. The Maya had extensively reshaped the land to
produce large amounts of corn, beans, and squash. These were cultivated on
terraced hills, forming a cascade of farms down the slope. Unfortunately,
corns, beans, and squash are all particularly vulnerable to drought. Even
minor reductions in rainfall can have severe effects on both crop harvests
and how many people could be fed. Worse, this wasn't just a period of
drought. During 700-800 CE rainfall in the area became far less predictable
and far more volatile.
Most Mayan cities had experienced periods of drought before, even
growing and expanding during them. Most people also farmed far more
drought-tolerant crops such as manioc and chaya (tree spinach), drew on
forest gardens rich with fruit, and kept extensive home gardens. Even corn
could be stored for years, so they weren't entirely vulnerable to climate
change. The depopulation of the cities may have been due not only to war
and famine, but also to people departing to regional areas to depend on
more reliable crops during a period of drought.
Drought was also not uniform for the southern Lowland Maya. The
timing and severity varied across the region. For instance, the city-state of
Peten appears to have collapsed before any drought occurred. While some
cities like Tikal and Cancuén were abandoned in a bloody fashion, these
events are spaced out over centuries, and some settlements were never
abandoned at all. The western part of the southern Maya Lowlands shows
little to no environmental stress, but high levels of warfare. The emerging
picture is one of drought playing a role in triggering breakdown, but it was
a role that was heavy in some cities and light or even absent in others.
When a failure in rain and crops met already fragile states, the result was
usually chaotic, but others that were more robust could weather the
change.5
A key factor here appears to be environmental degradation. In many of
the areas of the Maya Lowlands we see increased soil deposited in lakes
before the collapse period. It suggests that deforestation was increasing, and
soils were being washed away. Similarly, there are often few animal bones
discovered in many archaeological sites during this period, suggesting a
depletion of forests and animals. This may be one more reason why the

Lowland Maya more easily navigated earlier droughts but suffered during
later ones.6
We can think of environmental degradation as one way in which societies
create energy problems. Societies are in some ways a big marketplace, with
energy as the universal currency. Every building, every calorie, is captured
solar energy. Taking energy from the environment requires expending
energy. That could be the labour required to till, sow, and harvest a field. It
could be the rigs, mines, and pipes needed to pull up coal and oil from
underground and shuttle it across the world. The ratio of the energy used to
extract a resource relative to how much it provides is called the 'Energy
Return on Investment' (or, EROI). For simplicity, let's just call it the energy
ratio. If I get ten barrels of oil from the ground by using just one barrel to
power the machinery used to dig it up, then the energy ratio is 10:1. The
energy ratio can, of course, drop, whether that be due to exhausting mines
that provide precious metals, or exhausting soils until their yields decline.
The energy ratio for the Maya was dropping as they faced drought.
We've seen this in other cases too. The Indus Valley Civilization
switched to drought-tolerant crops as an adaptation to climate change.7
This unfortunately meant lower yields and a lower energy ratio. The first
farmers of Europe had to contend with poorer harvests and declining soil
quality. Again, their energy ratio suffered, making droughts worse.
While environmental degradation is a favoured explanation for the
Lowland Maya collapse and other cases, it is rarely the sole or primary
culprit, as the archaeologist Guy Middleton has shown extensively.8  The
few cases where it plays a larger role involved bungled responses from
rulers in fragile environments.9  For example, the Abbasid Caliphate (750-
1258 CE) inherited a vast irrigation network across the dry lands of
Mesopotamia. Yet the fall of the caliphate was marked by wasteful
expenditure, elite competition, and exploitative tax-farming, all of which
led to the slow deterioration of the irrigation system. Not only did the
caliphate fall apart, but so did the irrigation system. By 1258, as little as
only 5 per cent of the population that had resided there during Sassanid
times remained. The land had become the wasteland that nineteenth-century
European travellers chronicled. Lower Mesopotamia was a unique case: the
landscape was especially dry, fragile, and dependent on human
infrastructure. The Yucatán too is a fragile ecosystem. In contrast, mainland

Europe, with its varied and temperate climate, never experienced such a
catastrophic environmental disruption of a similar scale. Ecocide can
happen, but it is thankfully rare.10
Even taking the fragile environment of the Yucatán into account, collapse
there was clearly not just about drought or a declining energy ratio. The
environments of the southern Lowlands had bounced back within a century
after the collapse, with archaeological digs showing an abundance of
animals, including high-canopy animals such as the pig-like tapir. In some
sites archaeologists report that a four-square-metre patch of land 10-20cm
deep will fill a gallon bag with the bones of animals from this period. This
was a time of abundance, yet people didn't move back. If it was purely for
environmental reasons we would expect a return to such productive land.11
The most overlooked and perhaps critical source of the collapse was a
seemingly innocent one: a movement in trade. Southern Lowland kingdoms
were dependent on trade, and their competitors on the coast were booming.
People moved from the interior Lowlands to the north, as well as the east
and west coasts. It's during this time that states in the north, among them
the famed Chichén Itzá, reached their peak in size and prestige. The rise of
these areas and the lack of resettlement after the drought ended both support
the idea that people were moving to avoid war and seek better economic
prospects rather than to escape complete environmental breakdown,
although all these factors would probably have contributed: Mayan
kingdoms relied most on trade during times of drought, and with less trade
available were more likely to turn to war instead.
A final factor is a now familiar one: inequality. Housing sizes suggest that
wealth inequality rose steadily throughout the Classical Period and
worsened going into the Terminal Period. The great leveller of collapse
struck, destroying elite fortunes, and wealth inequality finally declined.12
The most autocratic kingdoms had the highest levels of inequality, a sign of
the link between inequality and extractive institutions.13  The cities to the
north and the coastal ports that people migrated to were also more equal
than the Lowlands they escaped.
The southern Lowland Maya were an increasingly unequal set of
kingdoms with a degraded environment and a dependency on trade. As
drought struck and trade dried up, the kingdoms turned to war instead.
People, predictably, died or moved. Like the Bronze Age collapse, this one

was multicausal, with many threats and vulnerabilities, but the underlying
driver was once again a group of polities becoming increasingly top-heavy
and extractive.14
WHEN DOES THE COLLAPSE END?
The Maya did not disappear. While the southern Lowland Maya collapsed,
glyphic writing and trade continued. There were hundreds of towns and
city-states in the north that grew. The story of the Maya appears to be partly
one of people in the south giving up more oppressive religious leaders for
more commercial, seafaring societies, particularly in the east, west, and
north. Chichén Itzá in the north became a new dominant centre as the
imperial cycle restarted. Although these northern settlements also
eventually fell apart during a period of drought.15
Yet even after this period, new cities sprang up and grew. There were still
numerous interconnected towns as well as cities resplendent with pyramids
and populations of 10,000-20,000. The rebound of the population and
regeneration of the Goliath was impressive. The imperial cycle turned once
more as power shifted from Chichén Itzá to the city-state of Mayapan
(1200-1450) in the Lowlands. It grew to 15,000-20,000 people during this
'post-Classic' period. The Mayapan state then collapsed decades before the
arrival of the Spanish.16
The end of the Mayapan polity seems to be a familiar cocktail of drought,
inequality, and elite infighting. The period recorded in the Maya K'atun
calendar (and evident in a range of archaeological data) includes a time of
'terror and war' (1302-23 CE), an inquisition across the noble Xiu family
(1361-81 CE), population decline (1381-1401 CE), a massacre of the Cocom
noble family (1440-61 CE), and then the eventual abandonment of the city
after 1450 CE. These events left behind a series of mass graves. One
example from 1302-62 (a likely period of terror and war) contained twenty-
five skeletons of people who appear to have been killed by blows to the
head and then dismembered after death. Shortly thereafter is another
massacre of around twenty individuals who were butchered and burned.
This was during a time when one elite faction began to persecute and
torture their rivals. The final massacre of the ruling Cocom noble family

and abandonment of the city coincides with a drought. Mayapan had a
strong reliance on rain-fed agriculture and lacked centralized grain storage.
Rulers who were supposed to be a conduit to the gods could easily be
blamed for failed harvests, hence drought could have been used as a way
for competing elites to sow discontent.17
The collapses, including the dramatic southern Lowland collapse, were
not wholly negative affairs. Chichén Itzá and Mayapan had greater wealth
equality and more open hierarchies than previous polities such as Tikal.
While more inclusive, they were still conquest states that venerated priests
and rulers in similar ways to those that had occurred in the southern
Lowlands.18
The Mayan story is one not just of collapse but also of resilience and
resistance. When the Spanish arrived, they found a prosperous people
trading across a vast network of smaller towns and settlements, with
different currencies such as cacao beans, shells, stone beads, copper, and
cotton. They still wrote in their glyphic script, lived in cities, and warred
with each other. Around fifteen states remained. Some had kings while
others had ranked noble families. It was a world with fewer people, smaller
cities and smaller, less powerful kings. That doesn't mean a worse world.
Its size and decentralization might have even been advantageous when they
faced European invaders.19
The Spanish struggled to defeat the Maya. In some battles the Spanish
were even defeated by them. In the 1533 Battle of Chichén Itzá the Mayan
cities joined together in a force of tens of thousands to repel a Spanish
siege. They killed many of the invaders, forcing them to retreat. This was
one among several Mayan victories. It is little wonder that it took the
colonizers around 170 years to conquer their lands. The dispersed regional
population would also have blunted the effects of disease imported by the
invading Europeans. Cities like Tikal would have been a demographic time
bomb for smallpox, while scattered townships were less vulnerable.
The Mayan people continue to this day, with 6 million speaking different
Mayan dialects across countries such as Belize, Mexico, and Guatemala.
While the Mayan language and much of their culture persist, other
traditions including their glyphic writing system fell into disuse during
colonization. Mayan became a dead script.

WHEN WRITING BECOMES OBSOLETE
Both the Maya and Mycenaean Greece are (in)famous for losing their
scripts. The Indus Valley Civilization script and the Linear A script of the
Minoans on Crete also expired during collapses. The loss of writing is
central to the story of collapse. What is true about the 'dark ages' is that
they often leave historians and archaeologists in the dark about what
happened during them. That is because writing dwindles or is lost entirely.
Writing has historically been about power, and writing systems have
often been linked to a specific state. Mayan glyphs may have been an
original script (or it may have been inspired by the Olmecs), and all the
original forms of script such as Mesopotamian cuneiform, Egyptian
hieroglyphs, Shang Dynasty oracle bones, and the Olmec script (and the
later Zapotec script) were associated with states.20  Similarly, Brāhmī
relates to the Mauryan Empire in India, and Kharoṣṭhī to the Kushan
Empire that stretched across southern and south-eastern Asia.21  Their
initial purposes tended to be limited to propaganda, accounting, and
administration: tools to stabilize a Goliath. Writing is a recent invention
used by very few for most of history for specific elite purposes. This was its
weakness.
When power changes, so too do scripts and writing. Use of the Mayan
script plummeted during the collapse since the elite class who used it fell
apart. Yet it survived. It didn't die until it was intentionally and
systematically exterminated by the Spanish in order to impose their own
regime. They banned the use of glyphs, burned hundreds of books and
scrolls, enforced the use of Spanish, and prosecuted, tortured, and murdered
Mayan writers. Nonetheless, the Maya defiantly continued to write in
Yucatec (using Spanish script) and record their traditional texts (such as the
Chilam Balam books). We see similar cases elsewhere. Egyptian
hieroglyphs and other indigenous writing systems were connected to the
state. Once Egypt became a Roman province, the use of these writing
systems was restricted to temples, which were reliant on state support. This
support failed during the early first century CE and Egyptian writing
systems were slowly lost in favour of Greek ones (Figure 27).22

Writing was often easier to kill because it was practised by a small, elite
class. The exclusivity of writing and scripts made them fragile. Mayan was
used mainly by a small section of the populace whom the Spanish could
effectively target. Similarly, Linear B of the Mycenaeans (mainly used for
documenting commercial transactions and the palace production of wool
and linen) appears to have been used only in palaces and only by a few
dozen writers. In Pylos (southern Greece) there were only some forty-five
writers of Linear B and sixty-six in Knossos (Crete). It should be little
surprise that Linear B was lost once the palaces were abandoned. Few if
any outside of the citadels knew it and the scribes had little use for it (or
employment) once the kings were gone.23
Figure 27: The original scripts of the world
These four scripts are the most widely accepted original scripts in the world. Each was connected to
the emergence of a Goliath and an original state. Each eventually led to more developed writing
systems.
Languages also tend to reflect power. Mayan still exists, but the lands it
once spread over now all have Spanish or, in Belize, English as their official

tongue. Latin, the official language of the Western Roman Empire, also
reflected power in the way it changed. It became restricted to powerful
networks such as the Church, while local peoples transformed it into
dialects, resulting in the Romance languages of today: French, Spanish,
Italian, Catalan, and Portuguese.
Collapse rearranges power structures, and the obsolescence of scripts,
writing, and language is often just collateral damage.
COLLAPSE IN EAST AND WEST AFRICA
Latin wasn't the only language to become obsolete and restricted to a tiny
elite class after a collapse. Another example is Ge'ez, a script created in the
Horn of Africa. It is now largely a liturgical language used primarily in
Orthodox and Catholic churches throughout Ethiopia, with no one using it
as a first language. Once, it was far more widely used, for Ge'ez rose and
fell alongside a powerful African empire.
Ge'ez was once the main language and script of the Aksumite Empire
(c.150-900 CE). The Aksumite Empire was a trading empire centred on the
east coast, stretching across the Red Sea as well as into the modern-day
Sudans, Djibouti, Eritrea, and Ethiopia. Its two key cities were Adulis and
Axum on the Eritrean coast, both perfectly placed to control the bottleneck
of the Red Sea where it meets the Indian Ocean. The Aksumite Empire
grew in size and stature as it used its strategic location to dominate the trade
network through the Red Sea, establishing a near-monopoly (and, in the
process, creating an abundant source of lootable resources, much like a
chokepoint of salmon running through a river). It grew rich through
controlling the trade in luxury goods including gold, cattle, ivory, and
incense. Its power was also built on good environmental luck: from around
100-350 CE there was a shift in the climate towards wetter conditions. The
rainy season may have almost doubled in length from about three and a half
months to six months.24
The good fortune was not to last. The rains must have seemed like a
blessing, but every drop had a cost. The dry soil became increasingly
dislocated. Soil erosion was a particular problem since farms were often
built on hills. Environmental degradation was causing an energy ratio

problem for the empire that would soon be exacerbated by another even
bigger one.25  Regional politics began to drain the Aksumite Empire of its
lifeblood: trade. Wars between the Byzantine and Persian empires (540-561
and 602-632 CE) both slowly sapped the demand for luxury goods. Then
things went from bad to worse. The Umayyad Caliphate expanded south
and destroyed both Adulis and the Aksumite fleet (702-15 CE). With the
loss of its trade networks the Aksumite needed to farm even more intensely,
leading to increasingly disastrous soil erosion after 650 CE. The energy ratio
of the empire plummeted owing to a combination of soil erosion and the
breakdown of trade. The empire stopped minting its own coins and the
capital was abandoned within a few generations, becoming a loose cluster
of villages. In the tenth century the remnants of the empire were conquered
by Queen Gudit, a marauding Jewish-Ethiopian monarch. The language of
Ge'ez fell alongside it. The future empires of Ethiopia emerged further
south, away from the now barren soils of the land where the Aksumite had
once dwelled.26
The Aksumite Empire was not alone in its fate. Africa was the birthplace
of numerous indigenous empires, many of which declined or broke down
even prior to European invasion.
Five and a half thousand kilometres away on the other side of the
continent a different empire rose: the Ghana Empire (around 300-1203 CE).
Both Ghana and the Aksumite Empire have a similar origin story: they were
both creations of the Sahara Desert. From around 12,500-3000 BCE the
Sahara was not an endless expanse of rolling dunes. It was full of lush
forests, woodlands, and grassland savannah, home to antelopes, giraffes,
gazelles, hyenas, hippos, rhinos, and zebras. We even have cave art in the
Sahara depicting cattle and boats. This has been called the African Humid
Period, a climatic age that birthed a 'Green Sahara'. When the climate
changed and the area began to desiccate into the sandy waves we know
today, the inhabitants were largely pushed to its fringes; the eastern edge
was where the Aksumite and Egyptian empires emerged while the western
frontier was where the Ghana Empire would eventually take root (Figure
28). (A third exodus was to the north-east, where Egypt emerged.)
The Ghana Empire rose thanks to the introduction of lootable resources
and monopolizable weapons. Camels were introduced in the third century,
allowing for more effective trade networks across the Sahara, especially the

export of gold, salt, and slaves. The widespread production of iron weapons
allowed for an army that was up to 200,000 strong. And there was ongoing
conflict with Berber raiders (a group of indigenous pastoralists in north-
western Africa).
Figure 28: A timeline of key west African empires
Like Sargon's Akkadian Empire, Ghana's was built on one group
dominating many others, in this case several other city-states and kingdoms
such as the Sosso, Jolof, and Mali. While the exact reasons are unclear, the
Ghana Empire eventually fragmented, giving way to the Mali Empire
(c.1230-1650 CE).27
The Mali Empire proved to be even larger and more powerful than its
predecessor, growing to cover over 1 million square kilometres. The empire
reached its zenith during the reign of Mansa Musa. Mansa Musa was
renowned for his great wealth (he may have been the richest individual ever
to have lived), his face even appearing on a medieval map.
After Musa's reign the Mali Empire began to slowly deteriorate. Musa's
successor was deposed by his uncle, Sulayman, after four years. After
Sulayman's lengthy reign of nineteen years, things got worse. There was a
series of succession crises and short-lived leaders, with the reigns of the
next seven kings lasting four, nineteen, less than one, fourteen, eleven, two,
and one year respectively. In the late fourteenth century two leaders were
assassinated in just three years. With the empire riven by infighting, Berber
raiders to the north began their plunder, cutting off its economic umbilical
cord: trans-Saharan trade. Other cities began to break away, including Gao.
The city of Gao would slowly take over the empire from Mali, re-establish
the cross-desert trade route and entrench in place the Songhai Empire (c.
1376-1591).28
The Songhai suffered much the same fate as Mali. They grew even larger
than Mali but were plagued with succession disputes and civil wars. The

sheer amount of elite infighting meant that the hold of the empire on its
subjects was minimal. It mainly claimed tribute and did little else to
contribute to the kingdoms it ruled.29  Like the Aksumite and Ghana
empires, it also suffered from a decline in trade. In this case it was due to
Portuguese ships using the west African coast as a new supply line for gold
from Africa to Europe, diverting goods away from the trans-Saharan
trade.30
Eventually, Morocco, a new regional power armed with Portuguese guns
and cannons, defeated the Songhai. The raiding Berbers redoubled their
efforts; the empire fractured once again. The feuding kingdoms and cities
began to raid each other for slaves as the Songhai Empire fell into decay. It
was finally conquered by European colonizers. Its capital, Gao, was slowly
abandoned and had become just a cluster of a few hundred huts when the
German explorer Heinrich Barth visited it in 1854.31
The rise and fall of west African kingdoms in many ways resembles the
problems that Sargon encountered: the difficulty of one kingdom trying to
control many. It was a constant vulnerability, an original wound that
threatened to burst open whenever there was a large enough shock such as a
loss of trade or a succession crisis. It also looks like the Maya, with a cycle
of one city or kingdom growing strong before being eclipsed by another. It
was a cycle of capture and then fracture.
Yet, there was also an additional problem. The kings of west Africa
practised polygyny, taking multiple wives. Under medieval laws kings
could take up to four wives, a rule they seemingly made ample use of. One
king, Askiya Muhammad, had somewhere between thirty and five hundred
children (depending on which source you trust). This was compounded by a
second problem: the rules for succession were often unclear, leading to
frequent disputes over the throne. These plagued the west African
kingdoms, often leaving the regimes weak and distracted.
The Goliaths of the Yucatán and west Africa may have been separated by
over 9,000 kilometres and the Atlantic Ocean, yet both learned that
interdependence and status competition was deadly.

SYSTEMS COLLAPSES ACROSS THE WORLD
Groups of closely located cities and empires tended to become connected
into larger systems. Some, like the Lowland Maya, were highly
decentralized and no city or kingdom could ever develop a lasting large-
scale empire. Others, like the Early and Late Bronze Age systems, were still
more decentralized but had a few larger empires knitted together into one
extractive quilt. West Africa had a sequence of three lasting empires
(Ghana, Mali, and Songhai), but each struggled to keep hold of its
constituent kingdoms. Like the Lowland Maya it was an imperial cycle of
one power capturing the others before fracturing and the cycle restarting
(much like the fission-fusion processes of early Goliaths). The Aksumite
Empire was unified but dependent on the larger system of trade into Egypt
and Eurasia. Each represents a different step on the spectrum from more or
less integrated Goliath systems. And each had similarities in the way they
collapsed.
System collapses across the world varied across time and space. The
Hittite Empire collapsed during the Late Bronze Age, but the Phoenicians
expanded; most cities in the Mayan Lowlands were abandoned, but others
in the north grew. The end of the Mali Empire was a boon for the city of
Gao, just as the end of the Ghana Empire had been for Mali.
We see the same variation in the modern world. Talk of the 'failed state'
of Somalia hides the fact that Somalia broke down into four different
regions with four different arrangements and outcomes: there is Ogaden
(ruled by an authoritarian single party with little power to tax); Somaliland
(an independent republic built on multiparty clan democracy); Puntland (an
autonomous region full of warlords); and the southern part of Somalia (an
internationally recognized and supported government that has essentially no
ability to tax or deliver services and is riven by conflict). Collapse is not a
uniform phenomenon.32
There were also differences in how quickly individual cities and empires
collapsed, and how long it took for the overarching system to fall apart. The
former could happen in months, while the latter took a century or more.
When a change takes centuries, it is almost imperceptible to the people
living through it. Individuals rarely recognize that they are living through a
collapse. Instead, they sensibly perceive the discrete disasters unfolding in

front of them. They feel the pang of hunger when a grain shipment doesn't
arrive. They feel the fear coursing through a city under siege. They smell
the smoke and feel the broken rubble under foot as they inspect a house
burned in a rebellion. The historian sees the collapse across generations, but
those generations experience it very differently. Many would have felt it
more as an unfortunate series of wars, crises, and famines, or perhaps not at
all.
Systems collapses in Africa, the Americas, and the Mediterranean can be
seen as another kind of failed experiment. Large-scale empires in the
Mediterranean were a relatively recent invention that had been cobbled
together from previous city-states. Think of it as a reversal of Sargon's
conquests: an empire was decomposed into its building blocks of
independent cities and territories. What followed was often a reversion to
more egalitarian city-states, such as those of Classical Greece and the
Phoenicians. These proved to be more innovative and resilient in the face of
climatic change. Among the Maya, shifts towards more democratic,
seafaring polities in the north, and more rural living, can also be seen as a
reasonable response to drought and rampant oppression in the Lowlands.
It was also an example of failed interdependence. The Aksumite Empire
and other African kingdoms were partly founded on favourable trade
monopolies. Both the Late Bronze Age and the Mayan Lowlands were
exceptionally interdependent. Those links, especially in the Late Bronze
Age, allowed for the intense exchange of letters, goods, and people,
including for diplomacy and alliances through intermarriage. These elite
networks helped foster thriving empires and city-states, but eventually
became a liability. It meant that shocks - whether in the form of disease,
aggressive neighbours, or the loss of trading partners - were more easily
spread during a period of tumult. Breaking those elite links and dispersing,
including to new areas whether it be commoners migrating to northern
Mayan cities or the Philistines arriving into Palestine, may have once again
been a sensible adjustment.33
We can see ancient roots behind these systems collapses. Early leaders
would use long-distance trade to acquire scarce, distant goods (primarily for
status). Similarly, even among hierarchical hunter-gatherers, feasts,
alliances, and marriages were all used as tools to bolster power. This had
been intensified and scaled up into an entire network of trade in the Bronze
Age, as well as among the Maya and the west African kingdoms. Inequality,

status competition, numerous shocks, and the very structure of elite
networks proved to be the downfall of these systems. The capture and
fracture of the Maya or west African kingdoms is not entirely different from
the fission and fusion of early Goliaths, but these Goliath systems had
managed to grow far larger and more unequal owing to better systems of
control. That growth in scale and interdependence ended up being another
vulnerability. Collapse could now occur over a much larger area.
In eastern Asia, collapse looked different. Rather than there being a norm
of multiple competing cities and states, China was usually covered by one
unified empire. While the Mycenaeans and the Maya lost their scripts,
China never did. Yet this empire of eastern Asia was not always unified or
stable: it would fall apart again and again.
OceanofPDF.com

11
The Rise and Fall of the Chinese Goliath
Bronze, Bones, and Betrayal: The Beginnings of Chinese Empire - Cycling
in China - Elite Competition, Cooperation, and Corruption - Elite Flight
and Eating the Rich - Why Collapse Never Seems to Last
BRONZE, BONES, AND BETRAYAL: THE
BEGINNINGS OF CHINESE EMPIRE
China has had over 2,000 years of near-continuous imperial reign. Yet this
masks more tentative beginnings.
Sometime between 2200 and 1850 BCE, the Xia Dynasty was established
in the north of China, near the Yellow River. It appears at the same time as
bronze weapons (another case of monopolizable weapons at work). We
know little about the end of the Xia aside from myth. Legend has it that the
ruling family grew tyrannical and were eventually overthrown by new
rulers: the Shang Dynasty (Figure 29).
The Shang ruled from 1600 to 1046 BCE, their reign marked by mass
sacrifices and Asia's first form of writing. The king, royal family, and
special diviners would heat bones (usually from an ox shoulder or tortoise
shell) and interpret the heat-induced cracks to predict the future. Despite the
purported prophetic power of the 'oracle bones', the Shang did not foresee
their own end. The dynasty fell in the same way it had risen, being
overthrown by the Zhou.

The Zhou were the first to introduce the Mandate of Heaven: the idea that
virtuous rulers were divinely sanctioned by the heavens to oversee the
populace. Conversely, a ruler who reigned over a time of drought, flood,
famine, and conflict was seen to have lost favour with the heavens. They
were no longer fit to rule and their ousting would be entirely legitimate. The
Zhou clearly used this to justify their overthrow of the Shang. One of
China's oldest, most central ideas is a relic of rebel propaganda. It is also an
ideological time bomb: when things go wrong any regime can be accused of
having lost the Mandate of Heaven.
Figure 29: A timeline of early imperial China (Xia to Jin)
After around three centuries the Zhou began to decline. We don't know
exactly why but hymns from the time hint at factional infighting, and feudal
lords appear to have become increasingly autonomous over time.1  By 481
BCE, these feudal lords had fallen into a state of perpetual war. China's first
collapse, known as the Warring States period, had begun.2
It was one of the bloodiest periods of Chinese history. The eventual
victors, the Qin Dynasty, slaughtered an estimated 1.5 million soldiers and
civilians in their quest to unify China. That included enormous mass
murders, such as in 293 BCE when the Qin killed around 240,000 troops.
After occupying a territory, the Qin would systematically execute any adult
males they found. It was a terror tactic used to minimize the chance of
future rebellions.3  One of the Qin's most prolific generals, Bo Qi, would
later be branded by some as the 'super butcher'. That butchery laid the
gruesome foundations for a continuous period of empire over China.4
The Warring States period was also a period of new thinking. Dozens of
new ideas and philosophies arose during this time, including two that we
associate with China today: legalism and Confucianism. These were among

many doctrines that flourished during this period, an era that would later
become known as the time of a 'Hundred Schools of Thought'.5
The Qin (221-206 BCE) brought that time of philosophical innovation to
an end. They systematically tried to purge China of these other
philosophies, burning countless books. Their aim was to leave no
alternative to their preferred philosophy of legalism. This was just one part
of a strategy to centralize Chinese society.
The Qin created the first unified large-scale empire across northern China
and ushered in a new era. The first emperor, Qin Shihuang, enshrined
himself not as a king or an oracle, but as a truly divine being: a
manifestation of heaven on earth.6  This new godly leader imposed a
simplified script, enforced standardized weight, length, and volume
measurements, standardized the currency, and ordered the construction of a
6,840-kilometre imperial highway system (mainly for shuttling troops). He
moved elite families to the capital so they could be closely monitored. The
empire also began construction of a vast wall of packed earth to the north,
to help keep invaders out, taxpayers in, and to better control trade. This was
the precursor to the Great Wall of China.7
Creating such a vast, new bureaucratic and religious system of authority
would usually have taken centuries; the Qin accomplished it within two
decades. However, that accomplishment came at a cost. Elites and
commoners alike rebelled, labour gangs mutinied, and 'even many of the
Qin state's own officers and people turned against their rulers'.8  Once
again, counter-dominance, and conflict between elites, had torn apart a
fledgling new Goliath. China's first large, unified empire had been hoisted
up and then burned down in less than fifteen years.
While the Qin's rule was brief, their project of a divine empire was
enduring. Four years later, after a brief civil war, the Han Dynasty was
established. The Han is usually portrayed as a golden age for China. They
oversaw the invention of paper and the sundial. People in modern China
still refer to themselves as 'Han Chinese' and to written Chinese as 'Han
characters'. These achievements were built on crushing inequality, which
grew over time.
The empire supported a small number of exorbitantly wealthy families of
officials, landlords, and merchants. Rich merchants bought land and joined
the ranks of government despite bans against them doing so, often amassing

riches that were as great as those held by the highest-ranked imperial
officials.9  Twenty sub-kings of the Han had fiefs containing 1.35 million
households in 2 CE. Just over a century later, in 140 CE, this had swollen to 2
million (a growth from 11 to 20 per cent of the population). During that
time the registered households under the Eastern Han fell from 12 million
to 10 million, despite the empire expanding. That is because these sub-kings
were dodging taxes by hiding their peasants away from government tax
collectors. At least a few million peasants were being taxed by their private
overlords rather than by the government. The growing elite persuaded the
government to abolish conscription and began to grow their own private
armies.10  This was the beginning of the end for the Han. Two million
rebelled against a combination of high taxes, corruption, disasters, and
disease in a revolution led by a faith ruler (the Yellow Turban Rebellion:
184-205 CE). Eventually, a warlord captured the throne (establishing the Jin
Dynasty) before corruption and bickering between elites led to its end.11
Unlike in systems collapses across the world, imperial China always
regenerated, and periods of fracture were ultimately brief. China is a story
of both how a Goliath can persist despite collapse, as well as of the role of
corruption and elite competition in collapse.
CYCLING IN CHINA
The fall of the Han and Jin set in motion a series of imperial cycles in
China. After a civil war China saw five periods of unified empire: the Tang
(618-907 CE), the Song (960-1276 CE), the Yuan (a foreign occupation by
raiders from the Steppe that lasted from 1276 to 1368 CE), the Ming (1368-
1644 CE), and the Qing (1644-1912 CE).12  The interruption during the first
millennium from 907 to 960 CE was due to a series of battles among
kingdoms called the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period; the second
millennium was a time of stable empire. There were still rebellions and
disasters that could cost millions of lives, and these often occurred at the
end of a dynasty, but the imperial architecture of China never truly lapsed.
Historians of China may talk about the collapse of a particular dynasty or
regime, but rarely of a societal collapse.13  This is because while a regime

might be overthrown and thousands might die, the bureaucracy, writing, and
overall system of government were never lost.
While imperial rule was stable, being a ruler was a perilous affair. From
the first empire of the Qin Dynasty (221-206 BCE) to the Qing Dynasty
(1644-1912 CE) China had almost 300 emperors, each reigning on average
between six and seven years. That average hides great variation: Emperor
Mo of Jin (1234) was on the throne for less than a day, while Emperor
Kangxi, the third head of the Qing Dynasty, lasted sixty-two years. Sixty-
two was a ripe old age for that time, let alone for an imperial reign. Perhaps
the most peculiar trend is that the longest-lasting emperors tended to rule
the weakest empires and vice versa. For instance, the Tang Dynasty is
renowned as a high point for China, yet the late Tang emperors had a one in
two chance of being killed in office. Conversely, Kangxi's extended reign
occurred during the Qing Dynasty, an exceptionally weak empire that taxed
less than 1 per cent of its economy. The early Song a millennium earlier had
taxed around 15 per cent of economic output.14
Why did weak Chinese empires have long-lived rulers? Yuhua Wang, a
professor of government at Harvard University, has used a complex dataset
of 282 emperors and 50,000 genealogies to craft a simple answer: elite
competition. China faced 'the sovereign's dilemma': a strong, coherent elite
that can bolster the state by providing more taxes and resources can also
overthrow it. And it did, regularly. The Tang Dynasty shared power more
equally between the emperor and other leading aristocratic families and
officials. It was a golden age for trade across the silk roads into Europe and
the Near East, and a time when China heavily influenced the culture of
Japan. Yet five out of a dozen emperors during the late Tang period were
ousted through coups.
China was also under consistent threat from horseback warriors from the
eastern Steppe (modern Mongolia), including the Xianbei and Xiongnu, and
needed a unified elite to defend itself.15  In one telling example, Emperor
Shenzong (1067-1085 CE) of the Northern Song kept his elites so divided to
avoid a coup that it weakened the military until the Steppe raiders swept in,
conquered the Song, and established the Jin Dynasty. A unified elite meant
that the imperial government tended to be eroded by corruption, tax
evasion, and coups, while a divided elite meant that the state often lacked
the resources and unity to defend against invaders.16

Status competition between aristocrats and government officials was
accompanied by regular popular uprisings, whether it be the Yellow Turban
Rebellion (around 184 CE), the Sun En Rebellion (399-403 CE), the Red
Turban Rebellions (1351-68 CE), the Nian Rebellion (1851-68 CE), the
Taiping Rebellion (1850-64 CE), or the 1899-1901 Boxer Rebellion.
Climate change, when it met elite conflict and rebellion, could trigger
collapse. The Qing Dynasty (1644-1912 CE) is one instructive case.
Droughts and famines triggered rebellions throughout the Qing Dynasty,
including the Nian Rebellion and the Taiping Rebellion. The Taiping
Rebellion was the bloodiest civil war in human history, potentially carrying
off 20 million human souls. It was also an example of elite infighting,
having been instigated by budding young bureaucrats who passed their
exams but couldn't achieve prestigious positions in the Chinese
government. Droughts and floods in the Yellow River region triggered the
Boxer Rebellion, which led to the loss of 100,000 lives and temporarily
split the Qing government. All these uprisings took a toll on the Qing, until
this last (formally) imperial dynasty of China came to an end. Fittingly it
was through another rebellion, in 1911-12.17
The Qing were not alone in being plagued by droughts and floods
catalysing slaughter. One study comparing a 1,062-year reconstruction of
Chinese warfare against documented periods of cooling caused by volcanic
eruptions found a strong correlation between the two. Another drew on
millennia of climate data and compared it to a catalogue of 789 rebellions
and 2,214 external wars, again finding a significant correlation. While
correlation isn't causation, the pattern is difficult to ignore. There are also
some compelling explanations. The Mandate of Heaven meant that the
moral authority of the emperor could be called into question when natural
disasters struck, the weather turned, and harvests shrank. With the Mandate
of Heaven lost, rebellion and elite infighting often followed.18
As with the first farmers of Europe or the Maya, climate alone cannot
explain the cycles of dynastic collapse that China experienced. There are
numerous cases of crisis where climate played no role. For instance, the
Tang Dynasty collapsed without any major environmental stress.
Throughout Chinese history there were also many droughts and floods that
were handled with little issue. The severity of the drought or flood mattered,
and the vulnerability of the dynasty mattered even more. Environmental

shocks triggered a collapse usually only when accompanied by inequality
and elite competition. Corruption also seems to have played a recurring
starring role.19
ELITE COMPETITION, COOPERATION, AND
CORRUPTION
Dynastic cycles in China demonstrate how elite infighting tears societies
apart. The fate of different dynasties depended not just on the intensity of
elite infighting, but also on the very structure of elite networks.20
The dynamic is simple: as elite numbers grow, so too do status-seeking
aspirants. The powerful are rarely happy to have just one form of power. As
we see throughout Chinese history, wealthy merchants try to buy their way
into the political system (as with the Han); learned bureaucrats and princes
use their positions to amass fortunes; generals regularly use their swords
and axes to take a throne; and religious leaders aren't content to sit in God's
good grace, but also need to sit in a palace (the Taiping Rebellion was led
by Hong Xiuquan, a disgruntled school teacher who claimed to be the
younger brother of Jesus Christ). A more unequal society with a larger
number of elites tended to mean more infighting and more potential
demagogues looking to capitalize on peasant uprisings. Power politics and
status competition are ever-present but tend to escalate as the numbers of
those with both the means and desire to seek thrones climb, and as they
begin to outpace the number of high-status positions that are available.21
Such elite competition can be seen in cases of crisis and collapse well
beyond China. Lenin was a lawyer, Fidel Castro was a lawyer and a son of
wealthy sugarcane planters, and the men who warred over control of Rome
were sons of senators, magistrates, and generals from elite families.
Increased elite competition tends to happen alongside rising popular
immiseration: as inequality rises elite competition intensifies and the rest of
society is left poorer and sicker (creating ample opportunity for warring
elites to foment rebellion). Researchers, led by Seshat database curators
Peter Turchin and Dan Hoyer, have shown that increasing inequality,
popular immiseration, and elite competition appear to have played a key

role in a range of collapses throughout history, from the Western Roman
Empire in the fifth century CE to the Qing Dynasty in the twentieth (this is
commonly referred to as Structural-Demographic Theory).22  It may have
even played a role in the collapse of many of the earliest Goliaths, although
more evidence is needed.
The driver behind this common story of feuding nobles is, of course,
status. We even see it today. Donald Trump's quest to become president
intensified after being humiliated by Barack Obama at the White House
Correspondents' Dinner in 2011. Just five years later he won the US
presidential election. The right-wing firebrand Tucker Carlson refashioned
himself as an anti-elite populist after being publicly savaged by comedian
Jon Stewart and subsequently fired from CNN. The public loss of status is a
great motivator. While both use anti-elite rhetoric, they clearly are elites.
They were born into wealth: Trump was a millionaire by age eight thanks to
his father, while Carlson's step-mother was an heiress to the Swanson
frozen food giant. Both are famous figures and have no material need to
work tirelessly to amass even more influence. Yet they do. Status is
inexhaustible, especially when you are surrounded by other ambitious
competitors.23
There are two caveats to be aware of when it comes to elite infighting.
First, this tends to be a competition between the powerful, seen as much in
the billionaires of today as in the princes, wealthy families, and generals of
Chinese history. We see that in the largest collapses throughout Chinese
history, whether it be the leading general Zhu Wen overthrowing the Tang
or the Zhou being carved up by feudal lords. The most common pattern is
that it is elites who struggle to transform their wealth into another form of
power (usually the power form which is most valued in that society). In
China, information power was particularly prized, and hence a surprising
number of rebels were individuals who failed to pass their civil service
examination, such as Hong Xiuquan, the instigator of the Taiping Rebellion.
We see something similar today: it's billionaires such as Donald Trump and
Elon Musk trying to weaponize popular discontent and transform their
economic power into political power by capturing the US government.24
Second, it's not just a matter of elite competition. It is also about
cooperation. Remember the razones gangs of Colombia: they would have
shoot-outs in the streets over territory but came together and forged pacts

once they jointly faced a larger threat from the police. Similarly, Chinese
princes would regularly work together to oust an unwanted emperor such as
Wang Mang before turning back to competing with each other. We see the
same pattern today with big tech and fossil-fuel companies commercially in
competition while jointly lobbying in politics to block legislation that
would regulate them. A common part of racketeering is not just that
powerful actors will compete to extract resources from those below, but
also that they will regularly band together if it's in their own interests,
whether that be to quell an uprising or combat an external foe. This is a kind
of shifting elite factionalism.
Alongside this competition and cooperation also tends to come
corruption. Corruption (the misuse of positions of authority for private gain)
has been rife throughout history - from Bronze Age traders and Chinese
princes dodging taxes to politicians lowering taxes and regulations to
benefit their rich donors (and potential future employers). While beneficial
for the individual or industry, such gain comes at the cost of trust and
shrinking revenues for the state. In the worst cases, it could lead directly to
a crisis. The Yellow Turban Rebellion brought about the deaths of hundreds
of thousands and left the Han Dynasty in disarray. It was a rebellion fed by
the belief that the ruling dynasty had become too corrupt, losing its
Mandate of Heaven and causing floods and plagues. It is a repeated
grievance in Chinese history: a regime had lost the Mandate of Heaven
owing to fraud and mismanagement. (We also see it in the Old and New
Egyptian Kingdoms, along with multiple regimes in Mesopotamia.) Across
these cases a common, fundamental cause of societal breakdown was
institutional failure, especially through incompetence and corruption.
Corruption robs the state of its revenue and legitimacy.25
Corruption tends to increase over time, alongside wealth inequality.
Today, we have ample evidence that inequality and corruption accelerate
one another. The greater the discrepancy in power, the more opportunity
there is to abuse it. Likewise, corruption can help the rich get richer. In the
pre-modern world, with less-advanced bureaucracies and weaker
accountability mechanisms, there would have been even more opportunities
to exploit the system.26
China is revealing not just of the role of elite factionalism and corruption,
but also of how collapse can affect inequality and elites.

ELITE FLIGHT AND EATING THE RICH
In China, rebellions and coups often meant not only a new regime or
breakdown of government but also the intentional culling of the old. We see
this during the end of the Tang Dynasty in China. This period witnessed a
series of atrocities that 'effectively wiped out the metropolitan elite'. One of
the best-known occurred in 900 CE, when the court eunuchs systematically
murdered elites and government officials who were close to the emperor. It
was a pre-emptive strike against those who were plotting to eliminate them.
It didn't work, and they were promptly killed in response. A few years later
seven of the most powerful remaining ministers were thrown into the
Yellow River.27
In older case studies, such as Tiwanaku and Taosi, we see some evidence
of targeting the upper classes, mainly through the defacement of elite
monuments and residences. Even without focused assault, elites could often
lose more. Their wealth and power were dependent on the status quo; and as
the world fractured, much of their fortunes could slip away into the cracks
of the social order. Their wealth was either burned, plundered, or meant
little in the new, post-collapse world.
Being rich can be a liability in a crisis. It's a trend not restricted to China
or the Americas. In the Crisis Database around a third of the cases involve
assassinations. That includes seven in China alone (including the Qin and
Han) as well as a host of others, such as the end of the Mali Empire in
Western Africa and the fall of the Western Roman Empire. In about 10 per
cent of the cases there was an attempt to systematically target and kill off
elites. China alone has five of these elite 'extermination' events, including
the ends of the Tang and Qing, as do many others we've encountered,
including the Neo-Assyrian Empire that made it through the Late Bronze
Age collapse.28
Being an elite in the time of a crisis is risky. It can be incredibly
dangerous, yet when elites are not directly targeted during a collapse, and
the collapse isn't too deep, the rich can often escape the worst effects of
collapse and even benefit from them. Bureaucrats and wealthy merchants in
China often just changed their loyalties when a new regime came into
power, which is a key reason why many of the basic structures of Chinese
bureaucracy and writing showed such continuity across dozens of centuries

and regimes.29  Middling elites of the Western Roman Empire that were
less affected by the collapse often continued to hold a great degree of
property and power. The same happened after the fall of their competitors in
the Persian Sasanian Empire. Many Byzantine (the Eastern Roman Empire)
elites simply adopted Muslim names and emigrated with much of their
wealth after the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople (1453 CE). Powerful
individuals usually had more means to escape a crisis and were of great use
to lazy conquerors, who could use their cultural knowledge and connections
to easily administer and tax their newly acquired territory. Elites frequently
escaped the worst effects of collapse by moving or by blending in with the
new ruling class. This is often referred to as 'elite migration': the powerful
and wealthy either changing location or simply shifting their allegiances to
stay in high-status positions despite a crisis or collapse.30
Whether elites successfully escape collapse or are swallowed up in the
tumult depends on a few factors. Rebellions and revolutions with an anti-
elite fervour will usually result in landlords, masters, and royals losing their
wealth and their lives via confiscation and executions. It's a dynamic we see
in crises that didn't even reach the level of collapse, such as the 1793-4
'Reign of Terror' in the wake of the French Revolution and the effects of
the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution in Russia. Collapses that are significantly
deep will also cost elites more. The ruling priests of Cahokia and the
Huhugam probably had nowhere to run and their previous power meant
little in the new world born from the collapse.
Yet elites, especially in China, almost always had another empire or
kingdom to migrate to. That is because collapse rarely lasts for long.
Despite the talk and fear of dark ages, Goliaths, especially in China, are
persistent and are almost always reborn.
WHY COLLAPSE NEVER SEEMS TO LAST
We are often enamoured with the question of what causes collapse, yet we
ignore the perhaps more interesting question: Why are Goliath societies
almost always resurrected?
That question is most pertinent for the case of China. Ever since the Qin,
China has tended to be unified by a large-scale empire. Historians don't

speak of 'dark ages' in China since writing, bureaucracy, and empire were
never lost.31
There are surprisingly few cases of a Goliath-building project failing in a
region and not being emulated or reanimated within a century or two. In all
five regions of the world where Goliaths first emerged - China, Egypt,
Mesopotamia, Mesoamerica, and the Andes - empires would eventually
take over. Collapses are rarely permanent or even long-lasting in these
regions. Even the deepest collapses, which entirely wipe away the elite
class, their culture, and writing - such as in Mycenaean Greece - still led,
after a few centuries of more democratic rule, to more kings and militant
emperors. The consistent trend is that wherever states reigned and fell, they
returned and expanded. The Shang Dynasty was replaced by the Zhou in
China, the Wari by the Inca in the Andes, and Egypt had pharaoh after
pharaoh for almost three thousand years, interspersed with three periods of
more decentralized rule. While early experiments with Goliaths were often
abandoned, those that progressed far enough seemed to be surprisingly easy
to reboot.
There are a few exceptions where Goliaths either never emerged, or fell
and never rose again. People in both North America and Zomia dispersed
into smaller groups, sowed less grain and did more foraging (or relied on
escape crops), and told tales that warned of the perils of corrupt rulers. Yet,
these are rare and peculiar cases: Zomia is an incredibly mountainous and
inhospitable terrain; while Cahokia and the Huhugam were novel
experiments in areas with low population density and ample exit options,
which had entered a prolonged cold spell that depressed crop growth. This
geography and the novelty of unequal kingdoms made it easier to avoid
Goliath.
Goliath fuel - lootable resources, monopolizable weapons, and caged
land - can explain why Goliaths persisted in places like China and the Near
East but could be lost elsewhere. Wherever Goliath fuel remained, there
was always a decent probability that someone could start and grow another
centralized polity. Lootable resources tend not to disappear even if an
individual state or Goliath does. There's a reason why the Kwakwaka'wakw
(north-west coast Native Americans) remained as hierarchical slave-owners
for centuries: the salmon kept coming. Similarly, once a landscape is tilled
into fixed fields and the people are dependent on farming, then there is an
ongoing supply of lootable resources. A landscape with few exit options is

also not going to change spontaneously. Population growth will, if anything,
reduce exit options as the land becomes more crowded. Similarly, if there
were new weapons that allowed one group to dominate another, then they
had to be entirely forgotten or intentionally destroyed to avoid being reused.
Goliath fuel tends to be sticky, making Goliaths persistent.
The recurring trend is that the longer Goliaths had been around, the more
likely it was that one would be reincarnated. A land that has been
transformed into tilled fields of wheat or rice paddies cannot easily or
quickly be made suitable for hunting and gathering. Nor can farmers
quickly learn and adopt an entirely different lifestyle. After a few
generations of intensive agriculture, the land is tilted towards a dominance
hierarchy.
This is also true of weapons. The longer weapons circulate among a
population, and the more people who know about how to build them, the
harder it is to dislodge them from the collective memory. If most families
have iron weapons and most blacksmiths know how to smelt iron, then it
will be difficult to lose iron axes and swords completely from the arsenal of
different groups.32
One of the hardest things to permanently kill is not swords or crops but
ideas. Once a legitimized hierarchy is deeply rooted in a culture, it becomes
hard to remove. Entire systems for justifying inequality are carried forward
for thousands of years. The Mandate of Heaven began with the Zhou
around 3,000 years ago yet was still invoked during rebellions against the
Qing in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Genetic evidence suggests
that the caste system of India began around 1,500 years ago with little
mixing and births across castes. Once stories of distinction and hierarchy
become prevalent, they can easily be picked up again and reused by future
leaders after a collapse. An appeal to old symbols and stories is often
powerful.33
Culture can also plant Goliath fuel deeply, making lootable resources
seem indispensable. Sierra Leone lies on the Upper Guinea Coast, an area
of West Africa known as the 'Grain Coast' or 'Rice Coast'. Declining soil
fertility has made rice farming more and more difficult, forcing many
farmers to take rice loans (loans of rice seeds to plant). These usually lead
to the farmers getting trapped in debt owing to their inability to grow
enough rice to pay back the loan. They continue to grow rice despite the

land being better suited for growing alternatives such as potatoes and
cassava. Why? School fees are traditionally paid in rice. Many now simply
identify as rice farmers and refuse to change or claim that they can't feel
'full' without rice. As one local exclaimed, the problem isn't the land but
that 'Sierra Leoneans can only dream of rice!' And of course, grain is
central to many modern cultures today whether it be throwing rice at
weddings, reaping what you sow, or praying to God to 'give us our daily
bread' (a line from the Lord's Prayer). Lootable resources tend to be deeply
culturally ingrained.34
Culture played a critical role in the persistence of empire in China. The
Qin were successful in establishing a larger-scale bureaucracy as well as
standardizing and spreading a single language and writing system across
China. Widespread literacy, lengthy historical records, and a tradition of
bureaucracy all made it easy to regenerate empire after it fell. Especially
after the even more organized Tang Dynasty, rulers always had an easy
template to emulate and a workforce to administrate it. Goliath was
enshrined into the culture.35
That stronger foundation of bureaucracy and writing was not just a
random coincidence. Geography influenced it. China was closely placed to
the Steppe and its horseback raiders. The constant threat of invasion helped
hasten the construction of empires as farmers had their authoritarian
impulse kick in and turned towards hierarchy. All unifications of China,
except for one, started in the north or north-east of the country, an area
particularly exposed to Steppe raiders. Some have referred to these as
'shadow' or 'mirror' empires: China organized itself more hierarchically in
response to mounted warriors from the Steppe, who also adopted more
organized hierarchies and formed their own empires (including over China
during the Yuan Dynasty). China has few high mountain ranges east of
Tibet. Most of the 'core' area of imperial China is relatively flat, lying
mainly below 300m and with few areas above 1,500m. It's criss-crossed by
rivers that encouraged large-scale farming, supported dense populations,
and helped with the shuttling of goods and troops via ships. The geography
allowed for an easier expansion of Goliaths with few refuges where people
could practise the art of not being governed.36
Modifying the landscape to grow lootable resources, creating stockpiles
of monopolizable weapons, spreading ideologies that justify subjugation,

and using bureaucracy and writing to create templates for creating Goliaths
made it easy to resurrect them.
Every Goliath leaves its bootprints on the land and people, and the
Chinese Goliath left remarkably deep ones. There is perhaps only one other
Goliath that rivals the legacy of the Chinese: the Roman Goliath.
OceanofPDF.com

12
The Falls of Rome
Born from War - The Three Falls of Rome - Imperial Overstretch -
Diminishing Returns on Extraction - Learning from the Oldest Empire -
Shrinking Houses and Fractured Trade - Why Crises Can Be Good for You
- Eat or Be Eaten
BORN FROM WAR
In the second century CE, as the Han Dynasty reigned over eastern Asia, the
Roman Empire had become the pinnacle of power in the west. It had
aqueducts collectively spanning more than 800 kilometres, public baths
supplied with plumbing and insulated with double-glazing, and imported
goods from over 6,000 kilometres away. Rome, its epicentre, was the first
city in human history to reach a population of a million. The influence of
Rome stretched north to Germany, east to Mesopotamia, north-west to
Britain, and south across parts of northern Africa, including Egypt. In 390
CE the empire covered 4.4 million square kilometres, an area greater than
the European Union today.1
Within a century the reach of the western half of the Empire was
effectively nil. It had splintered into several competing kingdoms. And
around another century later the city of Rome had dwindled to a mere
30,000 people. It would not reach a million citizens again for more than a
thousand years. Europe has never had a lasting empire stretch across it since
Rome. Napoleon came closest, establishing a French Empire that spanned

from Spain to Poland in 1812. But the French Empire lasted just ten years.
The Western Roman Empire lasted over five hundred. Rome retains an
almost mythical status among people of the West today.2
Despite its fabled reputation, Rome began as just one among hundreds of
city-states dotting the Mediterranean. The legend is that it was founded in
753 BCE by the twin brothers Romulus and Remus. The two had a human
mother and a god for a father: Mars, the god of war.3
It's unsurprising that the Romans imagined their founders to be sons of
the god of war, since warriors were the creators of Rome. During the sixth
and fifth centuries BCE Italy was a land of budding settlements and roving
aristocratic raiders who left behind rich burials replete with weapons.
Coalitions of mobile warriors began to slowly settle down in these early
city-states. Ruling over a people and continuously taking their resources,
rather than occasionally attacking them for plunder, was a more sustainable
strategy.4
Rome slowly began to scale up and dominate the region from the sixth
century BCE onwards. The neighbouring city-states that it did not conquer it
controlled through bilateral treaties (150 of them). These 'allies' were
forbidden from speaking to one another, lest they band together against
Rome. Allies provided military levies while those who were conquered
became citizens but had to pay tax to fund military operations. Rome
adopted and adapted the culture of those it conquered. The Greek pantheon
became the Roman pantheon, with Ares, the god of war, becoming Mars.
Yet while the Greeks disliked Ares, Rome celebrated Mars, a god who was
literally the legendary father of Rome.5
Rome mobilized enormous numbers of young men for battle. From the
fourth to the first centuries BCE, 10-25 per cent of men above the age of
seventeen were deployed for combat in the Roman Republic. At its peak
Rome had an army of around 400,000-500,000. In contrast, most of the
armies in Europe during the Middle Ages that followed Rome tended to
have just 10,000-20,000 troops.
This enormous military juggernaut was the centrepiece of the Roman
strategy of expanding quickly, governing lightly, and using conquest to
subsidize even more military campaigns. Taxes were kept low for everyone,
especially elites, and Rome interfered little with the governance of its
subjects. It thoroughly integrated conquered elites, having them adopt Latin

and Roman customs. It was essentially a pyramid scheme: conquering
neighbours and then enlisting them to conquer lands even further abroad.6
Rome depended on the fruits of conquest. Gold, silver, slaves (used as
both house and farm workers, as well as gladiators for entertainment),
booty, and even exotic animals from newly conquered territories were
paraded in the city of Rome, enriched its citizens, and placated their allies.
These invasions could often be highly lucrative. The capture of the treasury
of Macedonia in 167 BCE allowed the republic to eliminate taxes back in
Rome. The conquered province of Egypt became the breadbasket of the
empire, with Rome receiving over half of its subsidized grain (around
200,000 tonnes per annum) from harvests watered by the Nile. Most of the
benefits of empire were channelled to the capital, which remained as its
'core'. By the end of the Republic, those living in Rome received free grain,
a provision called the cura annonae. The Roman poet Juvenal suggested
that the citizens were distracted by the superficial attraction of 'bread and
circuses'.7
Rome thrived owing to the swords, shields, and spears of its legionaries.
THE THREE FALLS OF ROME
During this expansion Rome was a Republic (beginning in 509 BCE, Figure
30) with some semblance of democracy, including assemblies and voting
held in the city of Rome and open to all citizens. This was a thin façade for
oligarchy. A few dozen elite families dominated the higher offices of the
Senate and the magistrates.8  As inequality and the power of the rich and
the military grew, the Republic famously fell into empire with a coup by
Julius Caesar. This was, in many ways, the first fall of Rome. Rome had
always been historically exceptional as a large-scale republic. Now it was
just another military dictatorship ruled by a monarch: the Roman Empire
(although Rome had effectively been an empire for centuries, having
conquered dozens of city-states).

Figure 30: A timeline of Rome
Despite its success in war, Rome was constantly threatened. To the north
were the Germanic tribes that it frequently warred with; to the east was its
rival the Parthian Empire (and the last Sassanid Empire), while others such
as Carthage recurred throughout Roman history. Nonetheless, the Roman
Empire persisted and grew, bringing great wealth, especially to its highest
classes.
Rome tends to be associated with its famous and infamous emperors,
such as Julius Caesar, Augustus, Nero, and Marcus Aurelius. This overlooks
the fact that Rome was as much about a land-owning aristocracy as it was
about decorated commanders and mad kings. Two of the most important
classes were the Senate (around 300-600 individuals who were elected
from the patrician aristocracy and acted as public servants) and the
governors who oversaw the different provinces. The bureaucracy too was
staffed with leading families and local elites. The emperor could not survive
without the support of these elites, as Julius Caesar discovered with every
blade that was pushed into him. This elite class distinguished themselves
from the common folk, whom they branded as vulgus, from which we now
derive the word 'vulgar'. Even the expansion of the empire was a matter of
distinction: a display of the superiority of Rome over its neighbours.
The power of the elite over the empire meant that they could act with a
great degree of autonomy. Since taxes were low and oversight was minimal,
governors, senators, and the rich were prone to corruption, rule-breaking,
and tax evasion. Despite the occasional exception, they were rarely held
responsible for crimes and corruption, with one historian observing that 'as
a general rule a rapacious governor might never expect to be held to
account'. This led to gratuitous exploitation of the populace. One governor
of southern Spain boasted in private letters of extorting 4 million sesterces

(bronze Roman coins; to put that into perspective, to qualify for the Senate
at the end of the Roman Republic you needed a fortune worth 1 million
sesterces) from his subjects and then selling some into slavery. Local elites
would also shield peasants under their control from taxes and conscription.
This was a form of tax evasion, hiding peasants from the imperial tax
collector and privately taxing them instead.
Such practices made Rome more economically and politically lopsided.
The inequality of Rome had always caused problems. Three Jewish revolts
took place between 66 and 135 CE, while uprisings in Gaul and Spain
attracted participation from both peasants and the middle class. Slave
revolts occurred periodically, including the famous doomed rebellion of ex-
gladiator Spartacus. Approximately 6,000 of the surviving rebels were
crucified.
The inequality worsened over time. By the peak of the empire one
conservative estimate suggests that around a third of economic output was
owned by just the top 1.5 per cent of households. Despite the striking villas,
bathhouses, and aqueducts, only about a tenth of Rome's people beyond the
wealthiest elite were living significantly above subsistence. Most of the
population didn't have much beyond what was needed to survive and
reproduce.9  At least early in the Empire, what was lost in low taxes and
corruption was made up for through revenue from conquest which was also
used to placate the masses.10
This arrangement was not sustainable. Rome's invasions further afield
became more and more expensive. Ever-longer supply chains of grain and
equipment to support armies and fortresses hundreds of kilometres away
meant higher costs. At the same time, the most lucrative silver mines of the
empire located in Spain began to dry up. Corruption, a costly military, less
plunder and booty, and lower silver yields created a fiscal crisis. During
times of crisis and war, the denarius - the silver coin of the Romans - was
debased to increase the supply of precious metals. This became a common
tactic for emperors, who increasingly depleted the amount of gold and
silver in the currency. The amount of silver in the denarius fell from 3.5
grams per coin in 50 CE to approximately zero by 269 CE.11
This devaluation of the currency meant that the empire struggled to pay
its soldiers. A large, underpaid group of young, trained and armed men is
usually a liability - as Rome soon discovered. The third century saw almost

fifty years of civil war from 235 to 284 CE, a period that became known as
the 'Third Century Crisis'. Competing generals turned on the empire with
the support of disgruntled Roman armies, whom they promised to pay in
coin and plunder. Eventually, the crisis was brought under control by
Diocletian (284-305 CE) who vanquished the other claimants to the throne.
Yet, it came at a cost.
Diocletian introduced a set of reforms, including a significant expansion
of the bureaucracy and a doubling of both the empire's military and land
taxes (between 324 and 364 CE).12  Hereditary occupations, conscription,
and assessment of all lands for tax purposes were introduced. The reforms
shifted power away from local elites towards the bureaucracy and
transformed the empire. But it was only a temporary solution, and it never
resolved the underlying problem of the wealth pump. Inequality and
oligarchy continued to grow across the empire.13
The combination of crippling inequality, low returns from conquests, and
over-taxation led to the abandonment of land by farmers and an inability to
raise large families. This meant that the empire had to rely increasingly on
Germanic mercenaries rather than the traditional approach of using
conscripted farmer-soldiers. In 476 CE the Germanic troops enacted a coup
on the last emperor, Romulus Augustus, when they could no longer be paid.
It wasn't just the lack of pay. Germanic migrants were chronically
marginalized and mistreated. Military officials who were supposed to
dispense grain to them hoarded it for themselves, leading to starvation
among the migrants and some purportedly selling their children into slavery
to pay for dog meat.
This was the second fall of Rome: the end of the Western Roman Empire.
Its woes did not end there. Volcanic eruptions in 536 CE cooled and dried
out much of the Mediterranean, while the Plague of Justinian took even
more lives. While the effect of this 'one-two punch' of climate and disease
is contested, it undoubtedly acted as an additional stressor to an already
fragile situation. The Byzantines sought to reclaim Rome and reunite the
western and eastern halves of the empire. They succeeded, but not for long,
and the capital was lost once again. Their military escapades left the city of
Rome and much of Italy depopulated and devastated.14
Politically the fall was swift. At the beginning of 395 CE, the Western
Roman Empire was ruled by a single emperor. Within seventy years,

Roman Britain had been abandoned, the emperor had been deposed, and the
city of Rome had been sacked twice. During the fifth century many urban
centres were abandoned and much of the empire was depopulated, by
almost half in some regions. Other changes were far slower and subtler.
Latin slowly over centuries became a secondary language, restricted to
elites and monks, and literacy dropped. The eastern half of the empire
continued on for centuries until it was defeated by the Ottomans in 1453,
marking the third and final fall of Rome. For the Western Roman Empire,
many elites simply merged with new Germanic rulers. The Germanic rulers
themselves were Roman: they continued on with Roman customs and
culture, combining them with their own. With the fall of Rome over the
fifth century CE, the Christian Church grew in power, becoming the
connective tissue across the new fractured political body of Europe.15
IMPERIAL OVERSTRETCH
There is ... one nation that at its own cost, through its own exertions,
at its own risk has gone to war on behalf of the liberty of others. It
renders this service not to those across its frontiers, or to the peoples
of neighbouring States or to those who dwell on the same mainland,
but it crosses the seas in order that nowhere in the wide world may
injustice and tyranny exist, but that right and equity and law may be
everywhere supreme.
This statement was penned by the historian Livy, referring to the Roman
Republic. Rome never saw itself as the imperial aggressor. Its wars were
either (sometimes pre-emptive) self-defence, or in defence of its allies. In
the view of some of its members, it created an empire almost accidentally
by pursuing noble goals.
This is difficult to believe, given the scale of Rome's growth. In 500 BCE
Rome was just one city-state with around 60,000 people and 1,000 square
kilometres in territory. It would eventually increase 5,000-fold in size,
reaching a peak of about 5 million square kilometres. That is the rough
equivalent of the people of a medium-sized American city conquering the
entire continental USA. Rome and many of the post Qin-dynasties of China
seemed to push the boundaries of size for Iron Age empires. Others, such as

the Mongol empires from the Steppe and different Islamic caliphates, would
sometimes surpass this size, but not for long. The Mongol Empire led by
Chinggis Khan reached a peak area of 24 million square kilometres but had
fractured into four competing khanates within two decades or so.16
All empires, whether it be Rome, the Qin, or the Mongols, followed
expansionist policies. They often depicted their reign not just as legitimate
but also as a divine mission to rule all humanity. The British and other
colonizing powers believed that they were bringing civilization to savages.
Islamic rulers were required to expand their own moral community of
believers (the umma). Jihad translates to 'struggle': the struggle to expand
the umma. The Islamic caliphate was meant to be (eventually) universal.
Similarly, Chinggis Khan and the empires that directly followed from the
Mongol Empire were all supposed to conquer the entire world.17
Conquest didn't just provide growth, status, and legitimacy; it could also
offer many practical benefits. It could neutralize hostile neighbours, provide
a new source of revenue, offer new lands that could be gifted to competing
elites, gift fresh plunder and slaves to placate the masses at home, and allow
for low taxes.
As we've seen with Rome, the problem is that universal conquest has
never been achieved and the benefits of conquest tend to dry up over time.
New territories require maintenance. Invasions further away from home
cost more and more. New borders and interventions create new enemies.
The Germanic tribes on Rome's borders began to organize themselves more
hierarchically in response to Roman expansion. Eventually the costs of
maintaining, let alone growing, an empire begin to outstrip the benefits.
This is the idea of 'imperial overstretch'.
Modern empires, such as the Spanish, Ottoman, and British, all
overextended the capacity of their militaries. Their vast navies stretched
across numerous oceans required more and more resources to run, slowly
draining their domestic budgets. Their debts grew and they struggled to
procure more money for further wars and military spending, let alone to
finance the rest of the economy. Eventually a new competitor less
encumbered by an overstretched military rose up and took their spot, much
as the US did with the British.18
While Cahokia and Tiwanaku had to deal more with a lack of
mechanisms for controlling a populace, this wasn't as large a problem for

later Goliaths. Rome introduced the first census (counting of citizens) in
Europe, while the Han were the first to do so in China. At its height, Rome
had a civil service of around 34,000 people. To put that into perspective, the
current European Commission employs only 32,000. Large administrations
with better tools acted as watchdogs over elites and unwieldy groups (like
the rebelling city-states conquered by Sargon) that were far away from the
capital. Rome and the Han were far better equipped than Cahokia or
Tiwanaku but had to deal with new problems like corruption and imperial
overexpansion. As Goliaths grew bigger and more organized, the Curse
transformed accordingly.19
DIMINISHING RETURNS ON EXTRACTION
We see a pattern re-emerging across case studies. Societies grow more
fragile over time and more prone to collapse. Threats that they had always
faced such as invaders, disease, and drought seem to take a heavier toll. In
the first iteration of Goliath's Curse - the Primal Curse - the primary issue
was incompetence and resisted hierarchy. An aversion to dominance, the
negative effects of inequality, and different threats collided with states that
had little capacity to control their citizens. Because there were so few other
Goliaths, collapse could sometimes mean permanent abandonment, as was
the case with Cahokia.
Over millennia societies grew bigger - whether it be into systems of
interconnected states (such as the Maya and Late Bronze Age) or enormous
overarching empires (like Rome or the Han Dynasty) - and more organized.
They used administration, innovation, and new sources of Goliath fuel to
overcome the Primal Curse and control far larger groups for longer. They
no longer faced the same constraints as the earliest Goliaths. As Goliaths
transformed, so too did their curse.
They still faced the underlying (and ongoing) problem of rising
inequality creating societies where power was more concentrated and
institutions more extractive. This had several knock-on effects, some of
which were novel for these larger imperial systems. Inequality tends to
exacerbate social problems, whether it be violent crime or the mental health
of the populace.20  A swelling number of elites increases inequality by

finding ways to transfer wealth from the poorest to the richest,
impoverishing the masses. Elites with increasing influence find more ways
to siphon money and power away from the state, including through
corruption and tax evasion. It's a relationship that multiple studies confirm
in the modern world and a pattern we see, whether it be through the princes
of China, the governors of Rome, or tax-dodging traders in the Late Bronze
Age.21
A growing pool of elites competing for status, power, and a limited
number of high-status positions turn towards more extreme measures,
whether it be starting coups, civil wars, or rebellions (or simply hijacking
existing ones). We see it most clearly through feuding nobles and emperors
in China conducting coups and rebellions, elite-led coups and civil wars in
Rome, a constant 'game of thrones' in West Africa, as well as the city-states
of the Maya and the Mycenaean palaces turning on each other. These are
just a few examples among a wealth of evidence that shows the importance
of elite factionalism to crisis and collapse across the millennia.22
To appease a disenfranchised populace, and to calm growing elite strife,
the state will often push for increasingly expensive conquests or
intensifying agricultural and mining production. This degrades the
environment, making a society more vulnerable to drought, as we've seen
most clearly in the cases of Rome and the Maya. A society that is
increasingly top-heavy with a larger class of powerful elites will be less
likely to make effective decisions, especially when they involve changing
the status quo that they benefit from.23  One review of sustainability
throughout history that I was part of found that responses to environmental
disasters - whether it be floods, droughts, or soil erosion - tended to be
worse when the decisions were co-opted by elites and prioritized their
short-term interests.24  Many have lamented that past societies seem to have
suffered paralysis when asked to address obvious problems.25  Oligarchy is
why.
The result is more extractive institutions creating growing instability,
internal conflict, a drain of resources away from government, state capture
by private elites, and worse decision-making. Society - especially the state
- becomes more fragile. Private elites tend to take a larger share of
extractive benefits. The state, and many of the power structures it helps
prop up, then usually falls apart once a shock hits: for Rome it was climate

change, disease, and rebelling Germanic mercenaries; for China it was often
floods, droughts, disease, and horseback raiders; for the west African
kingdoms it was invaders and a loss of trade; for the Maya it was drought
and a loss of trade; and for the Bronze Age it was drought, a disruption of
trade, and an earthquake storm.
I call this 'diminishing returns on extraction'. States seek to extract more
resources by becoming more bureaucratic to closely control citizens,
intensifying production (whether it be from mines or fields), and expanding
through conquest. Elites seek to extract more resources through tax evasion,
corruption, private armies, and other means to compete with each other and
capture the state. Whether wealth is extracted from the populace, the land,
or neighbours, there are eventually diminishing returns. Conquests become
more costly over time until they provide more trouble and problems than
benefits. More intensive agriculture and mining can mean more
productivity, until deforestation, soil erosion, and lowered mine yields set
in. An expanding bureaucracy can result in more control at first, but can
eventually drain the government coffers. Elites extracting wealth from a
populace - and even the state through corruption and oligarchy - can be
good for them initially, but eventually they impoverish and deplete the
people and government they are dependent on. Similarly, large trade
networks primarily used for elite trade can bring prosperity and cultural
exchange, but eventually become a liability as they transfer shocks or as a
society becomes overly reliant upon them (as was the case for the Aksumite
Empire and west African kingdoms). This is why societies appear to
become more fragile over time and why there is this repeated cycle of
fission and fusion among early Goliaths or capture and fracture among
larger empires. It is due to diminishing returns on extraction.26
Table 4: Diminishing returns on extraction
Contributor
Benefits
Diminishing
returns
Consequences
Conquest
Benefits from
legitimacy,
Benefits dwindle
over time as
conquering and
Large-scale
debt, creation of
new enemies,

Contributor
Benefits
Diminishing
returns
Consequences
plunder, and
slaves.
maintaining
territories further
from home cost
more and new
enemies are created
by expansion.
overstretched
state capacity,
diversion of
resources from
productive
sectors.
Corruption
Initial benefits
for elites.
Tends to increase as
both inequality and
the number of elites
increase.
Loss of revenue,
loss of
legitimacy, and
loss of trust in
the state.
Declining
energy ratio
More intensive
production can
aid economic
growth initially.
Eventually depletion
and environmental
degradation can
weaken the resource
base of a society.
Loss of revenue,
and lower
agricultural and
mining
productivity.
Elite
factionalism
Beneficial for
the swelling
class of elites
initially.
As the number of
elites and their
power grow (the
society becomes
top-heavy) they
intensify
competition for
scarce high-status
positions.
Polarization,
coups, civil war,
and rebellion.
Inequality
and popular
immiseration
Benefits initially
for elites who
reap the reward
of unequal
exchange
The benefits
eventually fall away
as the populace
begins to rebel.
Lower
government
revenue,
populace more
susceptible to
disease, state

Contributor
Benefits
Diminishing
returns
Consequences
between the rich
and poor.
capture, and
rebellion.
Oligarchy
Hierarchy can
initially be
quicker, more
efficient, and
helpful in
unifying a
populace
through an
imposed
identity.
A growing
concentration of
decision-making
among elites leads
to worse decisions
and an inability to
reform the status
quo.
Poor decision-
making and
maladaptive
responses to
disasters.
We see this process embodied in the case of Rome. To begin with, Rome
was a republic with at least some limited political enfranchisement.
Inequality was lower, and power was more balanced. Over time, it became
more unequal, overexpanded, and fell into autocracy. Rome developed a
surplus of disenfranchised citizens and ambitious elites. Then there was
ample corruption, with Roman governors who would swindle their subjects
and sell them into slavery. It also appeared to be suffering from declining
yields from both mining and agriculture. The supply of silver from mines in
Spain began to dwindle, while deforestation across Italy may have led to
eroding soils and lower crop yields in different areas. Like the Maya, they
had a dwindling energy ratio.27  Corruption, inequality, oligarchy, and elite
factionalism were the key culprits that hollowed out the Roman Empire.
These created a predicament in that the populace had become impoverished
and hostile, the military was largely privatized, the government had racked
up an enormous debt, it was crippled internally owing to elite capture of the
highest offices, and had a bloated military and bureaucracy. It had become a
brittle shell that was sundered by invaders, civil war, droughts, and disease.
There is a rough consensus on what factors led to Rome's fall, such as
corruption, decaying institutions, invaders, climate change, plague, and
power struggles over the surplus lootable resources and high-status

positions. Historians now mainly argue about which ones were the most
important.28  Diminishing returns on extraction combines all of them into
one process. The pre-eminent historian of empire Walter Scheidel has
already labelled the collapse of both the Han (and Jin) and the Western
Roman Empire as cases of diminishing returns on extraction. Growing
inequality along with corruption, elite factionalism, and oligarchic decision-
making drained the world's two largest ancient empires.29
Across all the cases of collapse, from the systems collapses in the
Mediterranean and Yucatán, to China and Rome, we see similarities. In
every case prior to the collapse there is a slow growth in inequality,
oligarchy, corruption, and factionalism between elites over the surplus of
lootable resources. Diminishing returns on extraction set in. This eventually
collides with a set of shocks, usually drought, disease, invaders, floods, or
earthquakes. Then things fall apart (Figure 31).
Figure 31: Diminishing returns on extraction
The first Goliaths and their Primal Curse had some similar elements. For
instance, we see some evidence of elite factionalism in cases such as
Teotihuacan. They in all likelihood also suffered from poorer decision-
making due to oligarchy. Some, such as the first farmers of Europe and the
Puebloans, were also facing a declining energy ratio. Yet the bigger problem
for the earliest Goliaths was stronger counter-dominance intuitions meeting
weak control mechanisms. Other factors - such as imperial overstretch and
corruption - began only with large imperial systems. The stronger control

mechanisms of empires like Rome and the Han also meant there was more
time for diminishing returns to set in. The commonality across the Primal
Curse and diminishing returns on extraction is that more inequality and
more extractive institutions made societies more fragile.30
These trends transcend such examples. One review I led looked at ten
case studies including the Late Bronze Age collapse, the fall of Rome and
several others, such as the Tang Dynasty, the Achaemenid Empire, and the
first Arab-Islamic Empire. In almost all of them there was growing
inequality and fiercer battles between elites over the surplus wealth and
positions of status. Collapse in each case coincided with shocks such as
disease, drought, and warfare. The result was that the state fractured, elites
and soldiers became more regional, the beliefs justifying hierarchy
transformed, and the population dispersed or died.31
Behind each of these contributors to imperial collapse we can glimpse
cold, ice-age roots. Inequality clashed with our ingrained aversion to
dominance. That aversion could be overcome by shared fictions,
particularly those that justify hierarchy, such as the Mandate of Heaven. Yet
it was a delicate affair, and our allergic reaction to oppression never fully
left us. Elite factionalism is principally a battle for higher status, especially
given that these elites typically had more than enough riches and security
compared with the rest of the population.32
Yet, some empires seemed to defy the curse for a surprisingly long period
of time.
LEARNING FROM THE OLDEST EMPIRE
In the Mortality of States (MOROS) dataset (a compilation of states
throughout history) one state stands out: the Eastern Roman Empire, also
known as the Byzantine. It is exceptionally long-lived, having lasted over a
thousand years. It was, in the words of the historian John Haldon, 'the
empire that would not die'.33
The Byzantine period began in 330 CE when Rome was split into Western
and Eastern empires. Despite the western half falling, the eastern half
persisted, even expanding after the fall of Rome to take back most of Italy

and northern Africa by 541 CE. It was then hit by both bubonic plague and
the Late Antique Little Ice Age. It struggled with Avars (nomadic raiders)
and Slavs invading its eastern front across the Balkans, and a war with the
Sasanian Empire across northern Africa and the Near East. Then things got
even worse. The Rashidun Caliphate exploded out of the Near East, taking
the wealthiest provinces of the Byzantine Empire: Syria, Egypt, and
Palestine. The Byzantine capital of Constantinople was besieged every year
from 674 to 678. The empire lost around two-thirds of its territory and
three-quarters of its income. All seemed lost. Yet somehow it survived and
even recovered. Within two centuries the empire had pushed back the Arab
forces and regained much of its territory, nearly doubling in size.
What explains the resilience and longevity of the Byzantine Empire?
First, it had a strong shared religion in its Orthodox Christian beliefs. These
bonds were strengthened by the looming religious enemy of Islam on the
borders. This helped to unite the elites as well as the broader populace
during the times of crisis. Second, elites at the provincial level became
dependent on the empire as the civil administration and military were
combined and they were given military titles. Third, it was flexible in its
response and willingness to decentralize. After losing so much territory, the
empire could barely pay its troops and had to cut military pay by half in 616
and again in 659. As a substitute, soldiers were given land in exchange for
military service. The bureaucracy was simplified and the troops, now
defending their own land and families, fought more fiercely and came to
identify with the empire more strongly. Fourth, the Late Antique Little Ice
Age created cooler, wetter conditions that favoured keeping cattle and
growing cereals. This meant more food, a healthier population, and less
chance of famine. Fifth, the empire was lucky enough to have an easily
defended geography, with the Taurus mountain range in the south acting as
a natural barrier to the expansion of the caliphate (this became part of the
border between the two).34
Geography and climate were largely matters of luck, but the other three
factors were not. They were all responses that helped to unify the populace
and quell elite competition. The shared ideology and interests of the empire
and local elites reduced status competition, while the more decentralized
arrangements bolstered local belief in the empire. The shared religion of
Orthodox Christianity across elites and local peasant-soldiers made for a
more effective fighting machine while reducing the threats of rebellion and

elite infighting. While the Byzantines were eventually defeated by the
Ottoman Empire they managed to reach an unparalleled longevity. Despite
their longevity, the fall of the western half of the empire had enormous
consequences for Europe.
SHRINKING HOUSES AND FRACTURED
TRADE
Collapse destroys wealth and flattens its distribution. As a state falls, state-
protected merchants and trade also decline. Luxury goods fall away, and
trade becomes more localized.
For much of the former territory of the Roman Empire, especially Roman
Britain, the end of the empire meant smaller houses and less wealth. In
Britain the median house size went from approximately 150 square metres,
prior to Roman occupation, to a high point of around 200 square metres
during the empire, before shrinking to under 100 square metres after the
Romans left.35
Losses in wealth can also empty cities and may be responsible for much
of the displacement we see during collapse. Rome lost over 95 per cent of
its population but this was unlikely to have been due primarily to war or
disease. Rome had weathered sieges and outbreaks for centuries. What it
could not withstand was the cutting of the cura annonae, the shipment of
subsidized grain from northern Africa into the city. Free grain had
artificially inflated the city's population; once its life-support system was
severed, it shrank to a few tens of thousands. There was little point staying
in a city that was a target for invaders and pathogens if you no longer had
free grain, free entertainment, and reliable protection.36  Settlements and
cities were often dependent on such imperial support from far-flung
territories. Once those fell away, these places lost their lustre and purpose.
We see this from the earliest settlements across Mesopotamia through to the
movement of the Maya to coastal areas, and even in the modern 'rust-belt'
cities of the Midwest and north-eastern US. People naturally move to
follow opportunity.37

The fall of a Goliath was not always as economically devastating as with
Rome, and less overall wealth does not mean that everyone was worse off.
It meant greater wealth equality and sometimes even a rise in living
standards. Remarkably, collapse, even of the economy, is often beneficial
for the health of the populace.
WHY CRISES CAN BE GOOD FOR YOU
The skeletons of Europeans tell a very different story of the Roman Empire
from the one most of us have heard. The rise of Rome in the first century CE
saw a deterioration in height: Romans were 8cm shorter than they should
have been according to projections based on trends prior to its rise. While
Roman heights stagnated over the following centuries, areas that were not
occupied by the empire, such as eastern Europe, continued to grow in
stature. There is a reason why the Germanic 'barbarians' were remembered
as hulking giants. People in the Roman Empire (with the odd exception of
Roman Britain), particularly around the Mediterranean, didn't start to get
taller again until the fifth and sixth centuries, after the empire fell apart.
Dental caries and bone lesions decreased, also indicating improved health
after the fall. From the point of view of human health, the Roman Empire
was the dark age, and the medieval period was the Golden Age.38
We see a similar pattern in the people of the eastern Mediterranean during
the Bronze Age. Height decreases over centuries as people turn increasingly
towards urban living. The height of men increases slightly during the early
Bronze Age and then stagnates for centuries, while the height of women
falls and then slowly starts to rise. The Late Bronze Age collapse
reinvigorates health. The height of men begins to increase again, and the
growth in women's height accelerates. The fall of empires often meant a
rise in human stature.39
There are a few contributors to this surprising trend. First, people shifted
towards increasingly grain-heavy diets. Most Goliaths relied on grain as a
tax crop and feeding larger amounts of people crammed together in cities
usually meant eating more wheat, barley, corn, or rice. Crowding also often
meant more disease, which would have taken its toll on human health and
height. Diets heavier in animal protein tend to result in taller, healthier

populations. Most people in a 'dark age' took on more diverse diets with
more herding and hunting, less agriculture and less exposure to infectious
disease.40
Second, the destruction of overarching economic systems can often lead
to more free time and healthier habits. Economic recessions and depressions
over the last century have often unexpectedly increased life expectancy
owing to less air pollution (from less traffic), less drinking and smoking
(because people have less money), fewer fatal accidents in the workplace or
on the roads, and more leisure and social time (one of the few benefits of
losing a job). We see this in the 2008 recession in Europe: the regions with
the biggest economic slowdown also experienced the biggest increase in
life expectancy. While economic downturns can worsen other health
outcomes - such as mental health and rates of suicide - they can also save
lives.41
Third, collapse often resulted in far greater equality. Collapse is a great
leveller. If you were to look for one consistent, unwavering commonality
across case studies - the Lowland Maya, Rome, the Han, the Late Bronze
Age, and the first Goliaths - it would be the simple rule of the deeper the
collapse, the greater the wealth equality it produced. This is for a few
simple reasons. The destruction of capital - temples, palaces, manors,
monuments, bathhouses, and wealthy properties - all disproportionately
hurt the rich. The powerful also lost their usual ways of accumulating more
riches as centralized institutions fragmented. The dispersal of people, and in
some cases loss of life, meant that there were fewer labourers. Those who
remained had more bargaining power with bosses and landlords, resulting
in higher wages and taller people.
EAT OR BE EATEN
Both antiquity and medieval Europe had the idea of the translatio imperii:
the handing down (or, often, brutal grabbing) of authority from one empire
to another. Empires may fall, but they usually pass the baton, creating a
running lineage. The idea dates back to at least the ancient Greek historian
Herodotus detailing how the Achaemenid Persian Empire was the direct
successor of the Assyrian and Median empires.

Rome is the ultimate example of translatio imperii. Many European
kingdoms have claimed to be carrying the mantle of Rome ever since its
fall. As Voltaire quipped, the Holy Roman Empire of the European Middle
Ages was famously not holy, Roman, or an empire. Instead, it was trying to
make itself legitimate by invoking the Roman legacy, as did most European
empires. Many within the British Empire saw themselves as the inheritors
of a Roman tradition. And there is no shortage of comparisons between the
US and Rome.
Rome has left a particularly deep legacy beyond the translatio imperii.
The emergency powers we use during crises (such as the introduction of
martial law and states of emergency) were inspired by the Roman practice
of selecting a dictator to run things temporarily when facing an immediate
threat. Modern notions of property are also rooted in Roman law. We still
conceive of property in terms of usus (the right to use), fructus (the right to
enjoy the products of a property, for instance the fruit of a tree), and abusus
(the right to damage or destroy).42
We have been indelibly moulded by Rome, yet the Etruscans and the
Celts whom they conquered left little imprint on the modern world. It's not
because they were inferior to Rome. Rather it's because Rome was an
unusually large and persistent empire. Evolution is often framed as
'survival of the fittest': those who are best adapted to a particular
environment survive and reproduce. Selection of the fittest is caused by
competition. In the case of Goliath evolution, it's not the most benevolent
groups that leave a lasting mark, but those that are the most successful at
conquering others and controlling larger swathes of territory and masses of
people. The empires that were the best at doing so tended to have more of
their ideas, technology, and culture carried into the future, even through
collapses. The world of today is built on that evolutionary process.
Yet when we look back with a more sober gaze, it's clear that evolution
does not always select for the wisest or fairest. Rome wasn't just deeply
unbalanced and oligarchic, and it wasn't just bad for the health and height
of most of its populace. It was also spectacularly savage. Armed gangs of
young men selling women into slavery and the public execution of
thousands by nailing them to crosses were hallmarks of Roman rule. And
we can still see such things in the modern world. Just look at the actions of
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.43  Yet, across the fog of history and through

the lens of the 1 per cent we view Rome far differently from how we see the
Islamic State.
Try peering beyond that foggy lens and feeling what the victims of
empire must have felt. Try to imagine what it must have been like to be
crucified. Crucifixion was designed to be the most public and torturous
form of capital punishment.44  Every full inhalation would have been
excruciating as you dragged your flayed back up the splintered wood and
increased the pressure of the ropes and nails on your flesh. Death, when it
came, was usually not from dehydration or starvation but from
asphyxiation.45  You slowly suffocate as you become too exhausted to take
another breath. That was, for many, the experience of a golden age.
Our fascination with the power of Rome also tends to make us enraptured
by its collapse and forget all those that it absorbed or destroyed on its way
to glory. Take the case of ancient Carthage, once a prosperous trading
empire centred in modern Tunisia. In 146 BCE, at the end of the third and
final Punic War, Rome razed the city of Carthage to the ground. Roman
soldiers went house to house, systematically killing the inhabitants before
setting fire to the buildings behind them. The surviving 50,000 citizens
were sold into slavery.46
History has often been a case of eat or be eaten. Either organize into a
conquering dominance hierarchy that will suffer from Goliath's Curse or be
consumed by someone else who does. We are the inheritors of that process,
not of a linear stepladder of progress.
Underlying this evolutionary race of eat or be eaten are, once again, our
old, Palaeolithic roots. Warfare between states and empires is an extension
of status competition, no longer between individuals or groups but between
entire polities. People commonly think that countries go to war for
resources or security. That is a mistaken view, or at least overly narrow. It's
increasingly clear that states often go to war for reputation and status.
Vladimir Putin has been outspoken in his desire to regain Ukraine in order
to restore Russia's status as a great imperial power (and undoubtedly to add
to his own legacy). For Rome too, war was often not just about booty or
revenge, but also for the glory and prestige of rulers and their empire.
Scholars have now amassed a wealth of data showing how concerns for
status, honour, and reputation have shaped both war and peace. The general
and military strategist Carl von Clausewitz remarked that 'war is nothing

but the continuation of policy by other means'. War is also nothing but the
continuation of status competition by other means.47
Our basic human drivers of dominance aversion and status competition
didn't change, but the way they were expressed did. They were scaled up as
empires grew and technology developed. Collapse too would eventually
change as empires devised new weapons and began to cross oceans.
Exploration by colonial ships and the beginning of the modern world would
not have occurred without the falls of Rome. Our world is built on collapse.
OceanofPDF.com

13
Fear the Rise
Petrarch's Mistakes - Forgetting Technology - Progress and Collapse -
Blessed by the Black Death - How the Fall of Rome Led to the Rise of
Colonial Europe - The Origins of Colonial Capitalism - Global
Decimation
PETRARCH'S MISTAKES
The term 'dark age' was coined by the fourteenth-century Italian scholar
Petrarch. Travelling across Europe, he collected manuscripts, particularly
the literature and philosophy of antiquity. Petrarch was such a lover of the
Greco-Roman world that he even penned letters to the long-deceased
Roman writers Virgil and Cicero.
As much as he was impressed by the writers and art of Classical Greece
and Rome, Petrarch was appalled by what he saw as the dearth of good
literature and the death of good culture that followed the fall of the Western
Roman Empire. He disdained the 'dark' ignorance of his post-Roman time
and admired the 'light' of Greece and Rome. In his eyes, the eight centuries
from 500 to 1300 were a time of stunted cultural achievement and outright
barbarism.
The irony is that the Classical Greece Petrarch longed for was the product
of a 'dark age'. The very alphabet that Petrarch wrote in emerged during the
Late Bronze Age collapse.
Petrarch made another critical mistake: he saw the end of Rome as a
purely catastrophic outcome. When we look at Europe in the wake of Rome

it becomes clear that Petrarch and this 'rise and fall' vision of history is
spectacularly wrong.
FORGETTING TECHNOLOGY
The history of collapse is tied to the story of progress. The 'rise and fall'
usually refers not just to the heights of a society's walls and monuments,
but also to the heights and well-being of its people, the dynamism of its
culture, and the sophistication of its technology. History is often painted as
a long arc of improvement, punctuated by the occasional collapse-induced
dark age (such as the medieval ages after Rome).
This isn't just baked into the outdated notion of dark ages. Even the
official chronologies by historians and archaeologists centre and praise state
power. The time before the rise of the pharaohs in Egypt is labelled the
'Pre-Dynastic' period. In Cambodia, the adoption of indigenous writing and
the expansion of the first kingdom is the 'Pre-Angkorian', and the height of
empire is the 'Mature Angkorian' period. For the Maya, their peak of
urbanism and elite power is designated as the 'Classic' period, bookended
by the 'Pre-Classic' and 'Post-Classic'. It is as if people were waiting for
empire, fleetingly enjoying its rich fruits, and then lapsing back into
obscurity.1
This progress narrative is often attached to the belief that progress is
driven by technological change. It's best summarized by Microsoft founder
Bill Gates, who declared that 'Innovation is the real driver of progress.'
OpenAI's Sam Altman put it less elegantly when saying 'the default state of
the world is that things decay and get worse and worse, and the only way
that not only do we make life better, but even push against that, like, decay,
and all like kill each, destroy each other, is with progress and increasing
quality of life. And the only way we get that is through technology.' Gates
and Altman represent a common view: that progress is a train moving
forward across history and its engine is technological improvement.
For many, this is why Rome and other peaks in empire are seen to be
golden ages: their roads, aqueducts, bathhouses, amphitheatres, and
towering monuments all reflect a richer, more technologically advanced
society. That technological ability, it is assumed, spilled over into the

welfare and livelihoods of the populace. Neither of these assumptions is
true.
Technological change was slow under the Western Roman Empire. Most
key productive technologies such as glassblowing and the use of watermills
and water-lifting devices were developed in the first three centuries BCE in
the Hellenistic east. Rome simply dispersed and further modified these
innovations.2  There is even a famous story of an inventor who proposed a
labour-saving device that could transport heavy columns cheaply. It was
rejected by Emperor Vespasian, who preferred to keep his people busy and
employed. As we've seen, the virtue of Rome lay in war-making and
administration, not in innovation.3
Just as we tend to overestimate the ingenuity of Roman technology, we
also underestimate the inventiveness of the period that followed its fall.
Medieval England, after the fall of Rome, was not mired in a technological
dark age but was genuinely innovative and productive. This period saw the
introduction of mechanical clocks, better mirrors, and tidal mills, as well as
improved windmills and watermills and the heavy plough, which were
deeply helpful for agriculture. In England in the three centuries between
1000 and 1300, agricultural productivity per person looks to have increased
by roughly 15 per cent and yields per hectare doubled.
Technologies were lost during collapses. One of the best-known losses is
Roman concrete - a unique blend that had been used across Roman
architecture since the time of the Republic. It was low-emissions and
unusually durable. It can still be seen in some of the empire's surviving
bridges, aqueducts, and even the Pantheon. None of the preserved texts
after Rome's fall describe how it was made. Only today are scientists
discovering its secrets. Another prominent example is the plumbing and
underground drainage systems of the Indus Valley Civilization. These were
ahead of their time, but they were abandoned alongside the cities they lay
under.4
Yet we need to bear in mind that technological development is not a
straight, rising line across history. Nor is the loss of innovation innately tied
to collapse. Even the most basic tools have sometimes been forgotten.
When Europeans arrived in Australia the indigenous people didn't have a
single bow or arrow, despite both having been invented up to 70,000 years
ago in Africa. Instead, they had invented and relied on the boomerang rather

than the bow (alongside spears and throwing clubs). Somehow during the
migration from Africa to Australia the technology had been lost. Something
similar happened across Oceania, not just for bows and arrows, but also
pottery and ocean-going canoes. Some forager groups even lost the ability
to make fire.5
This collective forgetting was often caused by a catastrophe. In the 1820s
the Polar Inuit were struck by an unknown epidemic. Many of the oldest,
most learned individuals perished, and their knowledge passed away with
them. The group lost basic, critical technologies such as kayaks and bows
and arrows. It had taken generations to craft and refine these instruments
and, once those who knew how to make them had gone without passing on
those skills, they were lost. Technology is a product of cultural learning,
and if an event is sufficiently catastrophic it can disrupt the
intergenerational chain of learning.6
Loss of technology is generally rarer among large societies. That's simply
because a larger number of more interconnected people means that
knowledge tends to be more widely shared. Writing too helped with this,
acting as a source of information storage outside the human brain.
A number of factors could lead to the loss of technology during a
collapse. The knowledge behind the technology may have been limited to a
small class. As we saw with the Inuit, relying on a small group to carry
collective knowledge is a shaky strategy. If the class died, became
unemployed, or simply fell out of favour, the techniques were forgotten.
This was especially true of technologies that were kept secret, such as
Greek Fire: a petroleum-based chemical weapon used by the Byzantines to
burn enemy ships. It was tossed in grenades or even sprayed through a
pressure-pump like a kind of flamethrower. It was so potent that it could
burn on water and may have even led to entire Byzantine naval victories.
Yet it was lost, probably in the late twelfth century as the Byzantines' oil
supplies were cut off by invaders. Thereafter the fire-projector used on
ships disappears and its use in catapults slowly dwindles. The likely reason
is that the recipe for Greek Fire was a tightly guarded state secret that only a
handful of imperial agents knew. Once the empire lost resources and power,
it was no longer made and eventually passed into history. If knowledge is
closely tied to a power structure, then it can fall alongside it.7

Another cause is that the technology loses its utility. For instance, there
was less need for Indus or Roman plumbing after people had moved from
cities to rural communities, where they could rely on simpler, cheaper
cesspits. Roman concrete was of little use if grand monuments to celebrate
the empire were no longer being built. A further reason is deliberate
rejection and abandonment. Native Americans in the aftermath of Cahokia
stopped building pyramids throughout much of the Mississippi basin.
Rather than being the result of social regression or barbarism, lost
technology is - like lost scripts and writing - a matter of technologies
becoming obsolescent or rejected during a reshuffling of power. It was, if
anything, an adaptation: people dropped and adopted technologies that
better suited their circumstances. As we've seen in both post-Roman Europe
and the Mediterranean after the Late Bronze Age collapse, technological
regression due to collapse is also often an exaggeration. Large empires did
not necessarily mean more innovation and their fall was not necessarily
accompanied by a loss of inventive ingenuity. And even when technology
was lost it did not automatically mean that people led worse lives.
PROGRESS AND COLLAPSE
Across history, neither improved technology nor bigger, wealthier empires
have resulted in better lives for most of the populace. Let's look at three
things that many would broadly agree are vital to a flourishing life: welfare,
health, and happiness (or, as the ancient Egyptians would have said, 'life,
prosperity, and happiness').8
Welfare and standards of living can be roughly measured and compared
across ancient studies using real income (often expressed as kilograms of
grain received per year). One of the few studies to do so found fairly small
differences in the welfare of most labourers between sixth- and second-
century BCE Babylon, the Han Dynasty, and the Roman Empire. There was
not a big difference even when comparing them to thirteenth-century
England, almost 2,000 years later. Another more systematic study found the
same trend. There may have been minor fluctuations and some exceptions
such as Athenian Greece. Yet even here, the wealth of Athens was built on
the backs of slaves and on the exacting of tribute.

In other words, the average citizen living under a state would have seen
little improvement in welfare in the 6,000 years between around 3600 BCE
and 1700 CE. An eighteenth-century European peasant was about as well off
as an Egyptian peasant 7,000 years earlier. GDP per capita (in real, price-
adjusted terms) essentially plateaued during the first millennium CE. These
years saw enormous technological change, particularly in agriculture.9
The overall trend is that living standards for most people did not improve
dramatically over the long run of history. In terms of quality of life, history
largely stood still between the transition to agriculture and the end of the
Industrial Revolution. This is astounding, given the thousands of years of
technological improvements that occurred.
A similar pattern occurs with human height. We've already seen that
average height dropped with the move from hunting and gathering to
intensified agriculture. Heights also became more variable. In the modern
world, differences in wealth both within and between countries are echoed
in differences in height. The poor are shorter and the rich taller. This is a
historically consistent trend over thousands of years. It wasn't just pharaohs
and Mycenaean kings who were taller than their peasants: in the antebellum
American South, enslaved women were 6.5cm shorter than southern white
women, while the gap for men was 4cm. In contrast, Native American
hunter-gatherers were fairly equal in height for both men and women. This
is simply a reflection of economic inequality's impact on health.10
Across the world, height has hovered around 170cm for the past 2,000
years. There were fluctuations, but no lasting increases until the nineteenth
century. Peculiarly, as we've seen with both Rome and the Late Bronze
Age, height tended to fall under empire and increase during periods of
collapse. For human health, the idea of progress rising and falling with
empire isn't supported by the evidence.11
Is the same true for happiness? Happiness is perhaps the most important
and most difficult to measure variable of progress. We unfortunately have
little idea how happy the average citizen was in the Roman Empire or Han
Dynasty. What we do have are studies comparing the happiness of modern
peoples and hunter-gatherers. One of the few studies to do so focused on the
modern Hadza people of northern Tanzania. They were found to be, on
average, happier than the inhabitants of over a dozen industrialized
countries for which there was comparable data, including the US and Spain.

Other studies have reached similar conclusions. Perhaps most tellingly,
ethnographies of hunter-gatherers are replete with reflections on how
carefree and happy they are, with close-knit communities and a propensity
to spontaneously burst into song and dance.12
The historical data is patchy and often hard to measure, but it points
towards a surprising and grim conclusion. Despite 11,000 years since the
transition towards domesticated crops and animals, most people are sadder
and smaller than their Palaeolithic ancestors.13
Why was progress painfully slow and new technology not a benefit to
most people? Most of the surplus created by technology and economic
growth was taken by elites. One estimate from medieval France (1100-
1250) suggests that 20 per cent of output went to the construction of
cathedrals and churches. Essentially, everything that was not being used to
feed people went to building churches and expanding monasteries.14  As
we've seen already, most pre-modern states were staggeringly unequal.
In general, across history, the poorest half of the population would hold
less than 5 per cent of the wealth while the top 1 to 10 per cent, comprising
merchants, soldiers, priests, and rulers, owned 60-90 per cent.15  This
minority elite extracted essentially all the surplus from the masses of
impoverished farmers working the land.16  That's why thousands of years
of technological advances didn't improve the lives of most and why kings
stood taller than workers. Technology and wealth can, of course, help
immensely (as we see in the modern world), but only when the benefits are
widely dispersed.
A more reliable way to boost heights and welfare has been to redistribute
power. Sometimes, that has been via collapse, and sometimes in more
sinister ways. We can glimpse both in Latin Europe in the wake of Rome.
BLESSED BY THE BLACK DEATH
Alas, this mortality devoured such a multitude of both sexes that no
one could be found to carry the bodies of the dead to burial, but men
and women carried the bodies of their own little ones to church on
their shoulders and threw them into mass graves, from which arose

such a stink that it was barely possible for anyone to go past a
churchyard.
This is an extract from the chronicles of one observer of the Black Death
in the cathedral priory of Rochester in Kent. The repeated bouts of the
Black Death ravaged Europe between 1346 and 1353 CE, killing between a
third and over half of the population.17
It was incredibly traumatic, yet a boon for the lucky survivors. Halving
the population meant that, on average, everyone now had twice as much of
everything, from ships to land to grain. Because labour had become scarce
and land was now abundant, peasants had more bargaining power. And they
used it. Uprisings and rebellions occurred across Europe in the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries. The 1381 Peasants' Revolt in England, led by Wat
Tyler, was inspired by the preacher John Ball's famous rallying cry of 'Now
the time is come in which ye may (if ye will) cast off the yoke of bondage
and recover liberty.' Ball was executed, but the push for equality he called
for was successful. Peasants were now valuable enough to force
concessions out of the landlords and barons. Wages doubled or tripled in
many regions, and the pay gap between men and women decreased. People
grew taller and healthier. Life expectancy increased and heights grew from
a low of 168cm during the Black Death to a high of around 174 cm.18
While the Black Death was a blessing for the survivors and their
descendants, these positive effects were not evenly distributed.19
Regions that already had inclusive institutions benefited in the long term
from the Black Death, while those without them did not. North-western
Europe had the strongest presence of guilds, village communities,
fraternities, and groups for managing the commons. In these regions the
plague acted as a leveller, slashing wealth inequality and potentially helping
to hasten the overthrow of feudalism. In contrast, eastern Europe, Russia,
the Baltic, Castile, and north and central Italy lacked these inclusive
networks and ended up more unequal after the Black Death. Eastern Europe
and Russia were also far slower to exit feudalism. In north-western Europe
inclusive networks mobilized to ensure elites didn't use the crisis to further
their power.20
The blessings of the Black Death arose not only from the loss of life but
also because of the way it shifted power. Mexico in the sixteenth century

provides a useful case study of how power stifled widespread prosperity.
Recurrent waves of disease killed off large numbers of workers. This in
theory should have given them greater negotiating power and wages, just as
the Black Death did in Europe, but the Spanish colonizers suppressed the
bargaining power of labourers and wages stagnated. A century later, when
these controls were relaxed, real wages shot up.21
The fall of Rome and the Black Death not only give us an insight into the
surprising relationship between collapse and prosperity, but they can also
help us to understand how petty European kingdoms became colonial
conquerors.
HOW THE FALL OF ROME LED TO THE RISE
OF COLONIAL EUROPE
In the 1480s, Christopher Columbus dreamed of finding a western route to
Asia from Europe. He pitched his idea to rulers in England, France, and
Portugal, and was promptly rejected. They correctly identified that
Columbus massively underestimated the circumference of the earth and size
of the oceans. Then, in 1492, he finally received support for his expedition
from Spain's Queen Isabella and King Ferdinand.
Columbus got lucky and wandered into the unknown continent of the
Americas. He was also fortunate in that he did not live in a unified empire
in which a single rejection would have ruined his prospects. He lived in a
competitive marketplace of states, and was able to pitch his proposition
more widely.
This decentralized landscape of competing states was due to the fall of
Rome, following which Europe became a chessboard of warring kingdoms
with a common Christian culture. These conditions created a fertile
environment for new thinkers to develop and sell their ideas, however crazy
they may have been. The relentless competition between European elites
also drove a need to innovate, especially in warfare. The advance of science
accelerated, resulting in a host of new technologies, including the compass,
oceangoing ships, muskets, and cannons.22  Together, these technologies,

and competition to find new lands and trade routes, fuelled the rise of
European colonial powers such as Spain and England.
Competing European powers were incessantly at war and strapped for
cash. This drove even further innovations. For instance, England's empire
created elaborate financial mechanisms to finance bigger overseas
conquests, including central banks and joint-stock exchanges in the late
seventeenth century. The private sector was combined with the state in new
ways to help aid conquest. Private trading companies (such as the Dutch
East India Company) were given monopoly rights over newly conquered
territories and then jealously defended with vast navies. They became
company-states with the ability to raise taxes, punish crimes, and enact
treaties with local rulers. Even the conquistadors who invaded the Americas
- such as Hernán Cortés and Francisco Pizarro - were not soldiers of Spain.
They were armed entrepreneurs who led private expeditions.
Scholars have argued for decades over why the West took over the world.
The answers have ranged from geography and better weapons to a better
culture for science and invention. Yet, as Walter Scheidel has shown,
underpinning all these was an intense competition that wouldn't have
existed if Rome hadn't fallen. What did the Romans ever do for us? Well,
for future European power, they got out of the way.23
THE ORIGINS OF COLONIAL CAPITALISM
Colonialism is neither recent nor uniquely European. Colonization, the act
of planting settlements of one's own citizens into foreign lands, pre-dates
the colonial empires of Spain, Britain, and Portugal. Invaders displacing
locals was done by the first farmers of Europe and the Romans.
What was new in post-Roman Europe was that colonization was
combined with capitalism, and both accelerated. Capitalism, as we've seen
in Assyria, is also ancient. Classical Greece, Rome, Song China, and the
Venetian Empire all had the ingredients of capitalism such as wage labour,
private property, and profit-orientated entrepreneurs. Yet something
changed in the sixteenth century. In this case, a key spur was not the
collapse of Rome but the demographic collapse caused by the Black
Death.24

The economic boon for the survivors of the plague meant that they had
more disposable income, and a newfound ability to move up the social
ladder. Because of this, the demand for luxury items such as gold, furs, silk,
sugar, and spices increased. These were goods that needed to be imported
from faraway lands, stimulating the demand for colonial ventures to the
Caribbean and the Americas.25  A lack of labour meant a higher demand for
machines, including a boom in the construction of watermills and
windmills. Similarly, the deaths of so many scribes during the plague
hastened the mass production of books.26
It wasn't just about the impacts of the plague, but also the eventual
response of the rulers. Peasants were getting taller and wealthier - until the
rich reacted. As one writer put it in the early 1500s, 'The peasants are too
rich ... and do not know what obedience means; they don't take law into
any account, they wish there were no nobles ... and they would like to
decide what rent we should get for our lands.' The means for putting the
peasants in their place was enclosure: the wealthy kicked peasants off their
collectively managed lands and commons. Words such as 'pauper' and
'poverty' came into common usage, despite having barely been used in
earlier periods. The eighteenth-century protest song 'The Goose and the
Common' summarized enclosure in one verse:
The law locks up the man or woman
Who steals the goose from off the common,
But turns the bigger robber loose
Who steals the common from off the goose.
Much of the land that had been unowned was seized by nobles, who then
demanded rent. It was the artificial manufacture of poverty through theft.
The peasants became a dispossessed, cheap source of labour for factories in
urban areas in the north of England.27  There they were combined with a
cheap source of energy in coal. Coal-fired steam engines were less reliable
than wind and water power at this time, but had some unique benefits. First,
watermills required cooperation between competing owners of mills that
drew from the same watercourse, while coal-powered factories could be
operated by an independent capitalist. Second, watermills were located in
upland river valleys, while coal-powered factories could be placed in cities

to make use of the cheap, excess labour that had been created by enclosure.
Factories became the new engines of this European Goliath.28
These factories were supplied by overseas colonies built on stolen land.
In 1492 Columbus made landfall in the Bahamas (he was searching for
Asia, and died in 1499, convinced he had found it). A year later Spanish
settlers began to arrive. Within half a century they had invaded much of the
Caribbean and the Americas. A century later, the British had joined. This
wasn't just a typical case of conquest. They systematically killed or
enslaved the indigenous population, transforming the lands into plantations
full of cash crops such as cotton, sugar, and tobacco, or stripped for gold
and silver. Lootable resources bloomed. The violent fruits of these
plantations were then shipped back to the imperial homelands at low prices,
or as gifts to the monarchs. These were new empires built on cash crops,
slave-manned plantations, and unequal trade rather than the simpler
approach of conquer and demand tribute (or conquer and tax).29
It led to unprecedented imperial expansion. The British Empire became
the largest empire to have existed. In 1925 the British Empire controlled 35
million square kilometres, or around a quarter of the world's total land area
(approximately seven times the size of the Roman Empire). Sargon's Akkad
was stuck in one time zone, while the British just over 4,000 years later had
become an empire upon which the sun never set.30  This was an extension
of the long-running trend of empires getting bigger and bigger over time
(see Figure 32).31

Figure 32: The maximum territorial extent of the largest empires throughout history
These unfathomably large empires required new technology and
governance to remain intact. Colonial empires delegated power to formal
bureaucracies, local indigenous elites, and state-owned companies to help
manage the overseas colonies, while overseas administrators would often
settle on informal measures such as taking a local mistress to learn the
country's language, customs, and culture. Technology was perhaps even
more pivotal. The British used the telegraph and railways to oversee their
colonies, rather than runners and horses. In India alone, the British laid
down 84,000 kilometres of telegraph lines between 1853 and 1900.32
These proved decisive in allowing the British to react rapidly to rebellions.
After the British successfully quelled the 1857 Indian rebellion, one
colonial official exclaimed 'The Electric Telegraph has saved India' (saved
it for British occupation, that is).33  Goliath continued to evolve and began
to cross oceans.
This new form of Goliath was all built on the fall of Rome. Not only that,
but the rise of the new empires would prove to be far worse than any
imperial collapse had been.

GLOBAL DECIMATION
The emergence of these colonial Goliaths was one of the most violent
processes of human history. The colonization of the Americas itself may
have claimed up to 10-11 per cent of the world's people at the time. While
the numbers are highly uncertain, only one other event seems to come close
to this: the waves of the Black Death in the fourteenth century (see Table
5).34  We can think of these as 'global decimations'. Decimation means
'removal of one tenth', derived from the Roman military punishment for
insubordination in which a cohort (around 480 soldiers) was forced to
murder a randomly selected tenth of their comrades.35
Table 5: Historical global decimation
Event
Timeframe
% of global population
lost
Black Death
1345-1353
~9.7-10
Invasion of the Americas
1492-1600
~10-11
Global decimation is rare and isn't about collapse. Instead, it is about
disease and the rise of empires. The invasion of the Americas didn't cause
such an enormous body count by collapsing the Inca and Aztec empires. It
was due to the actions of European invaders, as well as the diseases they
introduced.
Collapse is also rarely the culprit for the worst atrocities that fail to meet
global decimation criteria. Mass killings tend to be Goliath-organized
affairs. Take, for instance, the case of the Züngharian Empire (1634-1755
CE), the last nomadic, Mongolian empire to threaten China. A combination
of elite fracture and conquest by the nearby Qing Dynasty led to its
devastation. The Qianlong emperor ordered, 'Show no mercy at all to these
rebels.' The result was not just the destruction of the state but the genocide
of a people. One estimate suggests that 30 per cent of Zünghars were killed,
40 per cent died of disease, 20 per cent fled to Russia, and just 10 per cent

remained as a small minority in Xinjiang province. The Han Chinese then
resettled the emptied territory with forced relocations, primarily by ethnic
Han Chinese.36
The transatlantic slave trade was also a matter of imperial 'success' rather
than collapse. And it wasn't just Europe. The Ottoman Empire took in
(including from African slavers) around 2 million slaves from sub-Saharan
Africa over the course of its existence. Europeans tapped into pre-existing
slave markets in Africa, which were usually run by local Goliaths.37
The driver behind these horrors is not a lack of authority structures, but
rather organized brutality. As professor of sociology Siniša Malešević has
demonstrated, large-scale violence needs highly organized authority
structures such as an empire like the British, Spanish, or Qing.
Systematically killing, enslaving, or oppressing millions relies on ideology,
organization, and creating tight groups unified against an external enemy.
Most people do not have a natural proclivity for mutilation, murder, torture,
and subjugating others. We do have the capacity for it, but that usually
requires a strict chain of command (even the most egregious crimes are
often defended as 'just following orders'), extensive training, and rewiring
the brains of soldiers. You need highly organized dominance hierarchies to
do this.38
In some cases, state collapse could even prevent such atrocities. One
large data analysis found that failed and failing states are far less likely or
able to conduct genocide than a functioning government. That is for the
obvious reason that systematic identification and murder require a strong
centralized institution.39
Societal collapse can still carry a heavy toll. Yet its costs are usually due
to the quest to create a new racket, such as in the gory rise of the Qin.
Historically, collapse has not been the source of the greatest mass killings or
atrocities. That we owe, instead, to the creation and expansion of Goliaths.
And the creation of the Global Goliath carried the highest price in human
life.
OceanofPDF.com

14
Colonization and Collapse
Why Did Cortés Win and Córdoba Fail? - Guns, Germs, Steel, Revolt, and
Elite Conflict - Indigenous Allies and Rebellion - Local Apocalypses - The
Shatterzone - When Indigenous Elites Helped Europe Eat the World -
Babies, Bacteria, Bombs, and Barbarism - Is Colonization Collapse?
WHY DID CORTéS WIN AND CóRDOBA FAIL?
The Spanish slaver Francisco Hernández de Córdoba led the first European
expedition to the mainland of the Americas in 1517.1  He headed a group of
110 Spaniards from Cuba to Isla Mujeres, off the coast of the modern resort
city of Cancún. There they spotted the pyramids of the Mayan city El Meco,
which they nicknamed 'El Gran Cairo' (Great Cairo) because of its
resemblance to the Egyptian pyramids. On 5 March 1517, the crew were
beckoned ashore by a group of Maya and given an unwelcome surprise.
They were met with a hail of arrows, spears, and stones. Over a dozen
Spaniards were injured and the group quickly retreated. They continued to
circle the Yucatán coast, going further north and then east towards what is
now Mexico City. They grew dehydrated and made the mistake of stopping
at the Mayan land of Chakanputún, which they named Champoton, for
water. They soon found themselves surrounded by around a thousand
Mayan soldiers. The next day, the Mayans closed in on them. Spanish steel
blades clashed with wood and obsidian swords. Despite their technological
advantage, the Spaniards were soundly defeated. Two were captured, over

fifty were killed, and more succumbed to their wounds while retreating.
They eventually made it back to their base in Cuba, where Córdoba died of
his injuries. This initial Spanish invasion attempt of Mesoamerica was a
disaster.
Two years later, in 1519, the Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés arrived
on the Yucatán coast with an unauthorized expedition of a hundred sailors,
eleven ships, 508 soldiers, and sixteen horses. Within two years the Aztec
capital of Tenochtitlán was captured and the Aztec Empire had collapsed
(Figure 33).
Colonization resulted in a new wave of collapses across the world. As
we'll see, many cases of colonization were collapses, while others were not.
Understanding how colonization could cause collapse - and why sometimes
it did not - can in part be unravelled by exploring why the Maya soundly
defeated Córdoba, while Cortés seemed to swiftly conquer the larger and
better organized Aztecs two years later.
Figure 33: A timeline of the Incan and Aztec empires
GUNS, GERMS, STEEL, REVOLT, AND ELITE
CONFLICT
Jared Diamond famously summarized the reasons why Cortés won in three
words: guns, germs, and steel. Crossbows and muskets could cut through
cotton armour at a distance, while metal armour was largely impervious to
arrows and obsidian blades. Indigenous Americans could shoot arrows at
six times the rate of a Spanish blunderbuss, but to no avail. The Europeans
also carried a more silent but deadly weapon: disease. The immune systems
of the indigenous Americans were completely unprepared for the diseases
the Europeans brought with them: smallpox, bubonic plague, measles,

mumps, chickenpox, scarlet fever, typhus, cholera, and pneumonic plague.
It became part of what's called the Columbian Exchange: the widespread
transfer of plants, people, pathogens, and culture across the Atlantic Ocean
in both directions (with the Europeans taking such crops as corn, tomatoes,
and potatoes back with them).2
These reasons alone can't account for why empires such as the Aztec and
Incan collapsed. Córdoba had the same military advantages yet was easily
crushed by the Maya. There is another critical reason why colonization
efforts succeeded: indigenous allies.
The Aztec Empire had inherent vulnerabilities that the Spanish exploited.
After the fall of Teotihuacan (c.550 CE), numerous city-states competed,
rose, and fell across the Basin of Mexico. Then, an alliance of three Nahua
cities - Tenochtitlán, Tetzcoco, and Tlacopan - managed to subdue the
others and craft an enduring empire (1428-1521). They became known as
the 'Triple Alliance' or the Aztec Empire. This was the largest pre-Hispanic
empire in Central America, covering over 200,000 square kilometres. They
had their own novel number system, a calendar, aqueducts, a taxation
system (with taxes paid by provinces in maize, amaranth, textiles, and even
warrior costumes), and their capital of Tenochtitlán was built on an island
surrounded by floating gardens. Despite this sophistication, it was still a
loose empire based on the recent subjugation of many cities by just three.
Like Rome, the Aztecs dominated through their military might. They
arose after the introduction of new weapons such as stone swords into the
region. The Aztecs believed that humans had a debt to the gods, one that
could be repaid through sacrifice and blood offerings. Newly conquered
territories didn't just provide sacrificial victims; they also gave tribute to the
Aztecs before they were eventually incorporated and graduated to paying
tax. It was highly unequal, with the top 1 per cent taking around 41.8 per
cent of total income (their share of wealth would have been even higher).
Those who resisted the imperial expansion of the Aztecs faced higher taxes
and harsher working conditions.3  Many of the conquered territories
resented such domination, while unconquered neighbours such as the
Tlaxcalans (a confederation of four oligarchic republics) were in a state of
near perpetual war with the Aztecs.4
Rebellion or total war, however, was not advisable. The Aztecs had mass
conscription and could reportedly field an army of 200,000. Imagine a small

city of soldiers sporting obsidian swords, looking to gain status by
capturing as many enemies as possible to sacrifice. It was obvious why
many, despite despising Aztec rule, acquiesced.
The arrival of the Spanish changed this calculus. At first, the
conquistadors fought against the Tlaxcalans. Thanks to their guns, steel, and
horses, the Spanish won these battles against the far larger Tlaxcalan forces.
It was not all good news for the Spanish, as their numbers dwindled after
each fight. Technological advantages could not overcome being massively
outnumbered. Cortés and his conquistadors were on the verge of being
defeated. Then, the Tlaxcalans changed their minds. They decided that
while they could destroy the Spanish, it would cost them too many of their
own. Instead, impressed by the Spaniards' prowess in battle, they offered an
alliance. The Aztecs would spare Cortés and his men if they would join the
Tlaxcalans in attacking the Aztec Triple Alliance. The Spanish wisely
agreed.5
The Spaniards became one part of a far larger army. A group of 10,000
marched on the Aztec stronghold of Tenochtitlán. Indigenous troops from
the Totonac of the Gulf Coast and the Tlaxcalans of the highlands
outnumbered their Spanish allies fifty to one and Cortés was by no means
the sole head of the army. When they arrived, they were unexpectedly
invited into the capital. The emperor, Motecuhzoma II (sometimes known
as Montezuma), was a ruthless conqueror, but he was also curious. He
wanted to observe these strange Spaniards up close. Motecuhzoma had
made a fatal mistake.6
Cortés took Motecuhzoma hostage on 14 November 1519 and held him
captive inside his own city for over six months. During the months without
a leader, the Aztec Empire was largely paralysed and tensions mounted
between the occupying Spaniards and the Aztecs. Later, following a
massacre by the Spanish of dozens of Aztec nobles and warriors after
misinterpreting a ritual as preparation for war, fighting broke out and on 29
June 1520 Motecuhzoma was killed. Spanish accounts blame the Aztec
people, claiming they stoned Motecuhzoma to death. The more likely
scenario is that the Spanish killed him. As soon as he was dead, the Aztecs
elected a new king and ejected the Spanish from Tenochtitlán within days.
The retreat of the alliance from Tenochtitlán proved costly for the Spaniards
and their allies. While estimates vary, it seems that hundreds of Spaniards

and thousands of indigenous allies were lost. They called it La Noche
Triste: The Night of Sorrows.7
The Spanish-indigenous alliance returned just under a year later, now
with a force of 100,000-200,000. Again, the vast majority were indigenous
rebels, not conquistadors. The city-states of Tetzcoco and Tlacopan, two of
the original members of the Aztec Triple Alliance, had also defected,
swelling the numbers of the anti-Aztec force. To make things worse for the
Aztecs, there was an outbreak of smallpox (introduced by the Spanish) in
the city of Tenochtitlán.
The second siege of Tenochtitlán was successful. The superior numbers
and devastating effects of smallpox were too much for the Aztec capital.
Even so, the small Spanish force is unlikely to have been capable of taking
Tenochtitlán (or simply to have survived up till that point). They needed the
assistance of indigenous allies.8
INDIGENOUS ALLIES AND REBELLION
The key role of indigenous allies can also be seen in the exploits of a
relative of Cortés: Francisco Pizarro. Pizarro arrived on the borders of the
Incan Empire with 168 soldiers in 1528. Within a decade the Incan Empire
had collapsed.9
As with Cortés and the Aztecs, Pizarro was not the first European to
encounter the Incans. Three years earlier, the Portuguese explorer Aleixo
Garcia had led an expedition (including a small army of native allies)
against the Incans and was easily defeated. It was such a disaster that the
natives turned on Garcia and killed him during the retreat from the Incans.
Garcia's struggles should be unsurprising, given the power of the Incan
Empire.
The Incan Empire was the largest empire the Americas had ever seen. It
encompassed Peru, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Colombia, and parts of
Argentina with 40,000 kilometres of roads. An ethnic group (the Inca) of
just 100,000 people ruled over between 9 and 11.7 million subjects in a
centralized-command economy. It had no traders and the necessities of life
were distributed to subjects through state warehouses. With no horses to
speed up communication and transport, they had to rely on less orthodox

approaches to administer the empire. Relay runners (chasquis) could use the
road network to cover an astonishing 200 kilometres per day (four times
faster than Spaniards on horseback).10  They would run with rolled
messages, held like a baton, or deliver them by word of mouth, repeating
them while running so as not to forget.11
The Incan Empire was also unstable: it had doubled in size in less than a
century and maintained a tenuous grip over dozens of different ethnic
groups and communities with hundreds of languages.12  Like most empires,
it also suffered from disputes over who should rule. Aleixo Garcia had
mistimed his attack; just two years later the Incan Empire would descend
into civil war.13
In 1527 the Incan emperor Huayna Capac died from a mysterious disease
(most likely smallpox introduced by the Spanish). The empire was quickly
engulfed by infighting over which of Capac's sons would inherit the throne:
Huáscar, who was favoured by the nobility, or Atahualpa, who was backed
by the military. The two battled for five years until 1532, when Atahualpa
emerged victorious and Huáscar was defeated. Pizarro and his
conquistadors walked into the middle of a civil war and made the most of it.
They cobbled together an army of disaffected indigenous groups previously
oppressed by the Inca, including the Huancas, Chankas, Cañaris, and
Chachapoya.
Pizarro confronted the victorious Atahualpa on his return. As with the
Aztecs, the element of surprise was key: Atahualpa went with an unarmed
contingent to greet the Spanish and was captured. In 1533, Atahualpa was
baptized into the Roman Catholic faith. Then, in the main square of Cuzco,
he was strangled to death. It was not just a victory due to superior weapons
or deadlier bugs; it was, like the defeat of the Aztecs, centrally about
conflict between elites and resistance from local elites and commoners
against empire.14
The collapse of the Aztecs and the Incas were not clear-cut cases of
'conquest'. Both can easily be seen as successful rebellions rather than
signs of Spanish superiority. Indeed, that's how the Aztec and Incan locals
saw them. The allies of Cortés viewed it as a battle against Aztec
imperialism with foreign assistance, rather than a foreign invasion. They

saw themselves as successful revolutionaries who overthrew the oppressive
Triple Alliance, not as losers against the Spanish.15
It was only afterwards that the self-aggrandizing accounts penned by
conquistadors reframed the conflicts. Suddenly they became legendary
stories of a few exceptional Spaniards defeating empires of millions
through guile and superior arms. During that time, other more pernicious
myths crept in. One is that the Aztecs were overawed by the arrival of
Cortés and his conquistadors, mistaking them for gods, particularly the
feathered-serpent god Quetzalcoatl. The historian Camilla Townsend has
thoroughly debunked this as a myth created in 1552 by Francisco López de
Gómara, a chaplain-biographer of Cortés who had never visited Mexico.
The Aztecs instead fought bitterly against the invaders, saw them as vile
and bizarre beings, and after the conquest frequently refused to adopt their
customs, such as Spanish schools and Catholic marriage. Not exactly how
one would treat gods. Quetzalcoatl was not even normally depicted as
having white skin: he was called the 'white god' because it was the colour
associated with him, not because it was his ethnicity.16
Guns, germs (especially), steel, and horses played a role, but elite conflict
and local resistance were key. Cortés and his conquistadors were almost
defeated by the Tlaxcalans and certainly wouldn't have managed to beat
them and the Aztecs without help. Pizarro would have met the same fate as
Aleixo Garcia if he had walked into a unified Incan Empire. And the
oligarchic structure of both the Aztecs and the Incans hindered their
response: the Aztecs were paralysed when Motecuhzoma was captured, and
the Incans were distracted by petty squabbles over the throne.
The critical role of indigenous allies is evident when we look further
north. After the conquest of Central America, the Spanish invasion
strangely halted. They didn't move much further north of the present US-
Mexico border. But it wasn't for lack of trying. There were numerous
attempts by conquistadors to invade North America, but they failed. Juan
Ponce de León attempted to plant a Spanish colony in Florida in 1521. The
Calusa (the kingdom of slaving fishers) vehemently disagreed and repelled
the Spanish. De León died of wounds received in battle against the Calusa.
Several years later Pánfilo de Narváez attempted to lead a conquering
Spanish force of 400 inland from Florida. They were constantly attacked by
Mississippians and struggled in the terrain. Only four of the original group

survived. Another conquistador, Hernando de Soto, led a group of around
600 Spaniards from Florida to the Mississippi River during 1539-42. The
Mississippians constantly harried and ambushed the Spanish, while burning
crops to ensure that de Soto's force had nothing to eat. De Soto died of
disease on the banks of the Mississippi. Only around half of his force
limped back to Mexico.
The English didn't do much better. There were over a dozen attempts to
settle the North Atlantic seaboard during the sixteenth century. They all
were abandoned, either because of an inability to grow crops and live in the
foreign environment or because they were destroyed by Native Americans.
The few that did survive, such as the famous first settlement of Jamestown,
did so because of support from Native Americans. The colonization of
North America took centuries to play out and the colonizers once again had
to rely on exploiting pre-existing divisions. The conquest of North America
is replete with tales of French and English forces facing off against each
other while allied with rival tribes.
The importance of weapons, novel diseases, and native allies varies case
by case. Australia was more clearly a matter of guns, germs, and steel. The
Aboriginal people had far smaller, dispersed populations that were not well
organized for war. This was more a story of newly introduced disease and
superior technology leading to a devastated population. In some cases, such
as Tasmania, it was simple, brutal colonial genocide.
In contrast, the collapse of the Incan and Aztec empires doesn't look all
that different from the cases of Rome or the Han: status competition among
elites and counter-dominance across the masses were underlying drivers.
All of them faced invaders: the Spanish for the Aztecs and Incans, the
Xiongnu for the Chinese, and Germanic tribes and the Sassanids for the
Romans. The Spanish had a greater advantage in technology, disease, and
surprise, but it was not an entirely different situation. These collapses all
had similar root causes.
LOCAL APOCALYPSES
The story of so many kingdoms and empires ends abruptly with these
simple words: 'and then the Spanish arrived'. Or the British. Or the
Portuguese. Or the Dutch.

There is a long list of states subjugated by European powers. It's easy to
forget that Africa was already covered with a litany of different indigenous
empires prior to colonization, including the Songhai Empire, the Bamana
Kingdom, the Kingdom of Burundi, the Kingdom of Mutapa, the Kingdom
of Kongo, the Luba Empire, and the Zulu Kingdom. This map of
indigenous African empires would soon be wiped away and redrawn by
colonial powers.
Apart from empires and kingdoms, countless indigenous communities,
cities, and peoples were lost to colonial expansion. It would take a book
thousands of pages long to do justice to the myriad cultures and groups
across Australia, Southeast Asia, and the Americas who were hunted,
enslaved, and dispossessed. Millions of lives, thousands of cultures, and
hundreds of languages were sacrificed for millions of tonnes of gold, silver,
sugar, cotton, cardamon, and slaves.
Some of the most tragic examples are the most misunderstood. One such
is the Rapa Nui (the natives of what we know as Easter Island). The island
off the coast of Chile is renowned for its mysterious moai - vast carved
stone statues that each weigh up to 270 tons. These dot the coasts and
landscapes like eerie sentinels. The Rapa Nui were victims of colonization.
A community of 3,000-4,000 had sustainably inhabited the islands for
centuries. Then the Europeans arrived. They unintentionally introduced
deadly disease, such as smallpox, which ravaged the island. Once
discovered, the island became a target. Slavers from Peru carried off
hundreds, perhaps as much as half the population, as domestic servants or
to work in guano mines. By 1877, only 111 islanders remained.17
The Rapa Nui are often mistakenly portrayed as a legendary case of self-
inflicted environmental collapse. The common story is that they (or
imported rats) deforested the island,18  causing massive soil erosion,
leading to a decline in agriculture and eventually famine, warfare, and
cannibalism before Europeans arrived. This account doesn't withstand
scrutiny. There's little evidence of population collapse or warfare prior to
the arrival of Europeans. The spears that the Rapa Nui used against each
other during their supposed civil war do not appear to be spears, but rather
general-purpose tools. While the Rapa Nui did significantly deforest the
island, there is little evidence of a mass dying until contact with the
Europeans. One DNA analysis of the remains of fifteen Rapa Nui

individuals found no evidence of a large drop in population in the 1600s.
Satellite imaging of the island to create estimates of food production
produced the same results: there was no collapse prior to European contact.
Instead, it appears that their population consistently and gradually increased
until the Europeans arrived in the 1860s. The best-known case of collapse is
an example of genocide, not ecocide.19
The mountains of bodies produced by colonization make most other
historical collapses pale by comparison. That is not just because the
population had grown since the Bronze Age. The proportion of the
population killed was also astounding. In the Basin of Mexico, in the
century after the conquest of the Aztec Empire, around 55-95 per cent of
the population perished. It's easy to brush over those numbers, but pause
and ponder it. Imagine your closest friend or partner dying from an
unknown disease. They lie writhing in pain, as small blisters form and burst
across their body. There is nothing you can do as they take their final
rattling breath. Within your lifetime, you lose half or more of the people
you are closest to. This was the reality for many communities. In terms of
sheer human suffering, these were some of the worst events in history.20
And it wasn't due only to disease. After the Black Death, which killed up
to a third or even half of Europe's population in the fourteenth century,
Europe recovered in less than a century. In the Basin of Mexico, and many
more areas of the Americas, it took two, three, or more centuries to recover.
Partly that was because there were multiple waves of different diseases. Yet
calculations suggest that if this was due only to disease, the population
should have bounced back more quickly, within a few generations. What
explains the difference between the Black Death and colonization is
oppression. Indigenous groups were frequently starved, brutally
overworked, and forced into crowded camps and settlements with poor
sanitation and unsafe drinking water. Weakened people died more easily
and the camps were superspreaders for imported germs.21
This happened around the world, and not just in the Americas. Hawaii
and Australia seem to have suffered similar mass death rates of up to 90 per
cent over a century or two. Europeans arriving on previously isolated
continents would turn 'virgin soils' into bloody fields. In Australia, one
official report in the state of Victoria read: 'the most extensive ravages ...
will render them extinct within a few years'. Again, diseases were not the

sole culprit. In Australia, the land was treated as terra nullius (an empty
land, or 'a territory without a master') and the indigenous population was
forcibly displaced and either detained or killed when they resisted.22
THE SHATTERZONE
The pustules of smallpox and chickenpox, and the black swellings of the
plague, even extended into lands that had not been conquered. The
disastrous expeditions of de Soto and other Spaniards into the Mississippi
might have failed to claim the land for Spain, but they did succeed in
causing numerous societies to collapse. When they had arrived in 1539-40,
there were dozens of mound-based chiefdoms and kingdoms with towns of
up to 5,000 people. When the French paddled up the Mississippi roughly
135 years later, there were only around three (the Quapaw, the Tunica, and
the Natchez). De Soto and other Spaniards had left an unwelcome and fatal
legacy. Disease, war, and incessant slave raids were the hammers that
shattered these regions, which scholars refer to as the 'shatterzone': a realm
of instability in which tribes and communities were broken down and new
ones were created from the pieces.23
The shatterzone is essentially a systems collapse of non-state societies. A
large group of interconnected, mainly foraging-based groups all fell apart,
creating waves of movement and social change. The effects were often hard
to predict. Some communities went entirely extinct, their numbers
destroyed by outbreaks of disease, slave raids, or attacks from Europeans or
other native groups. Some dispersed into smaller egalitarian towns that
were more mobile and more easily hidden. In Zomia, huge movements of
people fleeing disease and states created a changing mosaic of new groups,
identities, and cultures. We see the same occur in the shatterzone of the
colonial US. Many of the nations we are familiar with today, such as the
Cherokee, were created by people coalescing in the shatterzone.
Others chose a darker path.24  Some groups, such as the Westo, Savannah
(Shawnee), and Haudenosaunee (Iroquois), became slavers, incessantly
kidnapping their neighbours to sell to the colonists. For the Westo and
Savannah, it was good business: they traded slaves for guns, ammunition,

and metal tools, which they could use to catch more people.25  Slave raids
by both colonizers and indigenous slavers over the space of a century or
two would have chained and dragged away tens of thousands of Native
Americans, perhaps over 100,000. In one particularly intense period in
Florida (1704-7), native slavers snatched up to 12,000 people from their
homes.26
The indigenous groups within the shatterzone became increasingly
aggressive, which was an outcome that the colonizers welcomed. In 1680
Governor of South Carolina John Archdale remarked that 'the Hand of God
was eminently seen in thinning the Indians, to make room for the English'
as he watched a civil war unfold between the Westo and the Savannah. The
Savannah wiped out the Westo and became the main trading partner of the
Carolinian colonists. The Creek (also known as the Muscogee Creek
Confederacy), another key slave raider and colonist trader, were later
compensated by being recognized as the first Native American group to be
'civilized' by the American government. For the Creek and other groups,
slaving and aggression was handsomely rewarded.27
The shatterzone was a zone of intermittent collapse. Of the mini-
kingdoms or chiefdoms then in existence, few survived. New groups
emerged, but into a different world. War and slavery had already existed for
centuries, but the shatterzone put these on steroids. Suddenly slavery
became a large-scale, commercial endeavour; armed groups would rove
over long distances to capture women and children. An arms race developed
as new communities competed to sell furs and people in exchange for new
iron tools and weapons. Some practices continued: people still hunted,
gathered, grew corn, cooperated through reciprocity, had matrilineal kin
systems, and organized themselves through clans. Despite these threads
connecting them to the past, they suffered a kind of local apocalypse, the
end of a world.28

WHEN INDIGENOUS ELITES HELPED EUROPE
EAT THE WORLD
Two strange statues flank the entrance of the Royal Palace of Madrid. Both
are noticeably different from the other statues of the palace. They don't look
European, and are wearing a radically different garb, replete with leg bands
and feathered crowns. They are the vanquished Aztec and Incan rulers
Motecuhzoma and Atahualpa (Figure 34). They're not just there to
commemorate the conquest of the two empires. Instead, Spanish kings saw
themselves as the legal inheritors of the Aztec and Incan crowns. By taking
on the crown of the King of the West Indies they were also making
themselves the new emperor of the Aztecs and Sapa Inca (the ruler, Sapa
Inca meaning 'the one true Inca'). This also meant that the new Incan
nobility would become Spanish nobility too under law. It is just another
example of translatio imperii; even for colonial powers, empire was
hereditary.
Figure 34: Statues of Atahualpa (left) and Motecuhzoma (right) at the Royal Palace,
Madrid

The Spanish didn't see the Incan and Aztec empires as having collapsed
per se. Instead, they had transformed and come under colonial rule. There is
a truth to this. There was, at least initially, often little change in the
hierarchies of colonized areas. When the Spanish took over the Aztec
Empire, they largely adopted the existing taxation system. For the Incans,
they simply repurposed the mita system of mandatory labour that was
already in place. It became the repartimiento system, in which Spanish
colonists could use indigenous people for forced labour (essentially what
was temporary slavery). Similarly, the British initially used the Mughal
Empire's taxation system in India and reinforced the caste system.
This was a common approach. European rulers lacked the means,
language, or knowledge to govern vast tracts of land and negotiate across
myriad groups and dialects. They had to bargain with and rely on
indigenous elites. Colonization was not just a matter of subjugation and
opposition, but also collusion. In exchange, native elites would get
preferential treatment or riches. As noted, Incan and Aztec nobles legally
became Spanish nobles, this in return for their assistance in both
administering the empire and helping avoid rebellion. Local rulers kept
their status by funnelling tax and tribute to the invaders while keeping the
peace. It is yet another example of elite migration during a collapse.
European colonialism had non-European assistance.29
Like the slavers of the shatterzone, many local elites and groups became
complicit in the subjugation of their own people. Their cooperation was
often not out of a fear of death: indigenous slavers such as the Westo had
other options and the local elites of the Incan and Aztec empires still
significantly outnumbered their European invaders. Indigenous peoples
often allied with invaders out of the allure of benefits, such as guns and
tools in exchange for slaves, or the continuation of their high-status noble
positions.
That is how remarkably a small group of men managed to take over and
run these empires: they relied on striking deals with local elites until more
Spaniards arrived. This collaboration meant that the existing culture and
systems were often slow to change. It took well over a century for the
Spanish to recraft indigenous institutions and impose their language and
writing.
Politically and culturally, farmers and peasants would have noticed little
change. These were collapses of the pre-existing states - the Aztec and

Incan - and an often slower transformation of much of the rest of the
society.30
The economy of colonized lands was melted down and reforged. The
Spanish demanded tribute mainly in the form of gold and silver, much of
which was then shipped back to Spain. Over the period 1500-1650 around
180 tons of gold, and a staggering 16,000 tons of silver crossed the Atlantic
from the Americas to Europe. In agriculture, the exact commodity that was
grown varied across colonized lands: in the Caribbean the main exports
were 'cash crops' such as sugar and tobacco, in the US it was cotton, and in
Congo it was ivory and rubber. What this meant was often a simplification
of the economy as it became focused on frenetically growing and shipping
off luxury commodities to Europe. Energy capture (and often overall
economic activity) decreased initially with the large-scale loss of life caused
by conquest, but tended to increase over time as more sophisticated tools
were introduced to aid the production and distribution of exports.31
Some colonized countries did not collapse,32  but nonetheless
experienced terrible hardship. In India, GDP growth (a rough proxy for
energy capture) increased up to nine-fold during the reign of the British Raj,
as did the population and urbanization. It was still a horrifying process. The
gutting of India's manufacturing industry, the introduction of exploitative
labour conditions, and a forced shift towards cotton and opium production
led to a decline in real wages and an increase in extreme poverty from 23
per cent in 1810 (under the Mughal Empire) to more than 50 per cent in the
mid-twentieth century. Life expectancy declined from 26.7 years to 21.9
years. Famines became more frequent and severe, and India experienced
somewhere between 50 million and 165 million premature deaths during
1891-1920. Comparing India to Tiwanaku, or many of the other ancient
cases we have discussed, is a reminder that there are fates worse than
collapse.33
Perhaps because of cases like India, colonization is often strangely absent
from most discussions of societal collapse. Apart from the few cases where
an empire quickly unravelled - such as the Aztec and Incan - it is
conspicuously missing in most coverage. That is because colonization
perversely boosted economic growth and urbanization, even while it ate
away the culture, simplified the economy, and murdered millions.

Colonization wasn't just a matter of collapse and genocide; it also marked
the global triumph of Goliath.
BABIES, BACTERIA, BOMBS, AND
BARBARISM
Five thousand years ago, Uruk and Egypt were fledgling polities covering
just a pixel or two of the world map. Despite systems collapses and
setbacks, Goliath came to rule the world. While European colonization was
the most decisive step in the march of Goliath, empires were already
spreading across South and Central America well before the conquistadors
arrived. The dominance of Goliath is due to a few basic reasons: bigger
populations, more disease, and stronger militaries.
The strongest factor is simple: groups with lootable resources tended to
have far more people to stock their armies and economies with. Dense,
lootable resources, especially agriculture, allow for far larger, denser
populations. It also encourages greater fertility. A carbohydrate-rich, grain-
based diet means that children can be weaned onto softer foods earlier,
ovulation is encouraged, and a woman's reproductive period is lengthened.
Farmers also needed more children to help work the fields.34  Modern
studies suggest that, despite significant variation, farmers do seem to be
more fertile than foragers.35  Foragers also need far more land. Depending
on the environment, a hunter-gatherer may need somewhere between 0.4
and 140 square kilometres. In contrast, Italy has a population density of
around 200 people for every square kilometre, while India has 475.36
Agriculture tended to lead to Goliaths with big populations.
Grain states didn't just have higher fertility rates. They also had an
obsession with encouraging reproduction. In 18 BCE Emperor Augustus
passed a series of laws to increase marriage and children. The Qin of China
gave tax breaks to women and their families if they had more kids. And
there's no shortage of modern examples of pro-natalist policies that try to
boost reproduction. Japan and South Korea both pay people to have babies
(about $2,000 per child). Australia also provides such a subsidy, aptly
named the 'baby bonus', and France has had a similar subsidy for years.

Hungary spends 5 per cent of its GDP on trying to stimulate population
growth with a slew of loans, grants, and tax-breaks for parents and would-
be parents.37  The world's most prominent religions have also promoted
patriarchal norms and encouraged fertility. One study of 141 countries
found that religiosity was the factor with the strongest correlation to
fertility.38
More people living closely together gifted Goliaths with advantages in
avoiding disease and winning wars. The barrage of zoonotic infections that
developed alongside the first states was initially a curse. Epidemics
controlled population levels and tens of thousands died. But the survivors
had natural resistances that they passed on. Subsequent generations,
especially those living in densely populated urban areas, inherited this
biological resilience. Stateless foragers remained vulnerable to these
density-dependent diseases; hence first contact, and the first transmissions
of tuberculosis, smallpox, syphilis, gonorrhoea, and influenza, proved
deadly.39  We see the effects of novel diseases through the mass graves
across the Americas and Australia. It may have also been true of earlier
forager groups: their mass deaths are just invisible in the archaeological
record.
Weapons too made an enormous difference. Steppe-based horseback
groups, such as those from the Mongol Empire, periodically invaded and
conquered Europe and China because of their mastery of the horse as a tool
of war. Their skill as mounted archers and their shrewd tactics made them
difficult to defeat. (That is, until military technology outpaced them. Their
recurve bows had a longer range than most early guns, but were no match
for cannons and rifled breech-loaders.)40
Even when non-hierarchical groups did successfully fight back, they
usually ended up imitating their enemies. We've seen this repeatedly, such
as the Germanic tribes to the north of Rome becoming more state-like. The
authoritarian impulse made people more likely to accept a new hierarchy
and invading states provided a model to emulate. Even traders introducing
new military technology could lead to dominance hierarchies emerging, as
with Native American groups turning into militaristic slavers after the
introduction of guns. If military innovations didn't lead to the direct
conquest of a non-state society, that society would typically convert into a
Goliath.

If they didn't change willingly, they were often forced to. The British,
when they invaded Burma, preferred to work with autocratic tribes. They
had a leader they could directly negotiate with (and bribe) and local elites
who could work on their behalf. In contrast, egalitarian groups were a
headache to control. To manage the more democratic Chin area of Burma,
the British tried to create a Goliath from scratch. They started funding
opulent community feasts to help create a high-status chief. In this case it
didn't work: the Chins' culture and history proved too powerful and they
rejected the chiefly feasts. But for every such failure there are multiple
examples where the colonizers got their way and managed at least partly to
enforce a new hierarchical structure.41
The final and most overlooked cause for a Goliath's domination is its
willingness to exploit land, animals, and people. Bronze requires tin and
copper; iron needs iron ore and smelting; muskets require gunpowder; and
the nuclear weapons of today require uranium. All of these involve difficult
and often undesirable work such as logging, mining, and smelting. They are
usually unscrupulous arrangements involving low pay, gruelling hours, and
conditions that will steal years from a worker's life.42  As with sugar and
cotton plantations, the answer was often to rely on slaves or exploitatively
underpaid labourers. That also required an extractive attitude towards the
environment and animals. Animist groups who tried to tread lightly on the
earth and forbade slavery (like most nomadic egalitarian foragers) were at
an evolutionary disadvantage. Without being able to make bronze or steel
weapons, or innovate towards guns and bombs, they were likely to be
conquered in the long term.
Four key factors led to the global conquest of the world by Goliaths:
large populations, better military technology, pandemics, and an eagerness
to exploit people and places. In other words: babies, bombs, bacteria, and
barbarism. High fertility and large populations protected against disease,
allowed for more economic exploitation, and helped maintain stronger
militaries. The selection pressure was never for those societies that were the
best at maximizing the welfare of their citizens. Rather, it was for who was
the best equipped for war. In Mesoamerica that was the Aztecs, until the
Spanish arrived. In India it was the Mughal Empire, until the British
arrived. European colonizers were just one particularly barbaric and
successful example of a long evolutionary process. An evolutionary process

that has always been uniquely tied to collapse. As with Rome, it was eat or
be eaten.43
IS COLONIZATION COLLAPSE?
Colonization meant a new age of collapse. While it paints a complicated
picture, there are some general patterns in the relationship between collapse
and colonization. When it involved the colonizers meeting a previously
separate population, there was almost invariably a demographic collapse
owing to the lethal combination of disease and oppression. Where there was
already an empire in place, the colonizers would simply hijack the existing
arrangements while more slowly destroying and transforming the culture
and the economy. When there was no empire, colonization tended to create
shatterzones of smashed non-state peoples owing to disease, warfare, or
divide-and-conquer tactics. Whether colonization led to collapse, and what
the impacts were, depended on geography and the pre-existing polities.
Was colonization collapse? In most cases yes, but colonization was not a
single homogeneous force. Instead, colonization was responsible for a
mosaic of different collapses across the world. In the Americas entire
empires fell apart in years, but the underlying culture took far longer to
change. In Australia and elsewhere in the Americas there were shatterzones
of transforming indigenous groups that unfolded over centuries. These were
far more brutal and horrific than most of the other cases of collapse but
tended to involve both hierarchy and energy capture swelling in these newly
conquered territories. In places such as India there was extreme hardship
yet no collapse. Across the world not all cases of colonization led to
collapse, but many did, and, worse, some even resulted in the annihilation
of entire peoples and ways of life.
The societies of colonizers themselves never seemed to face a similarly
debilitating societal collapse, but there were nonetheless more subdued
declines. In the sixteenth century Spain was the most powerful state on the
planet with a worldwide empire. Two centuries later it was a second-rate
power that had been eclipsed by England and the Netherlands. That decline
was largely due to more extractive institutions. The royal fifth - 20 per cent
of commodities, including gold and silver, from colonial conquests - was

funnelled straight to the royal treasury. As power was concentrated in the
Habsburg monarchy, arrangements became more extractive in general. The
monarchs failed to tax the nobility, granted monopolies to preferred guilds,
and confiscated property from marginalized groups. The inflow of precious
metals from the Americas triggered inflation and led to the Spanish failing
to properly allocate resources to productive sectors. They became
overstretched and began to fall behind more inclusive and innovative
competitors like England.44
We see a similar trend take place among European powers even before
colonization. In the twelfth to thirteenth centuries, prior to the Black Death,
Venice, Florence, and some other Italian city-states became autonomous
and began growing rapidly. They still eventually declined, and none became
a globe-spanning colonial power. Extractive intuitions were again the cause.
In Venice, elites used their power to restrict access to the ruling council and
long-distance trade. Eventually, the previously open council became a set of
hereditary positions filled by the nobility, who took control of the Venetian
navy and used it to monopolize trade. In Florence, elites began to tax the
poor heavily and control who could access key markets. The banking sector
became monopolized until a few families owned most of it; then one - the
Medicis - took political control of the city. Both city-states declined owing
to extractive institutions.45
While diminishing returns on extraction led to the decline of Spain,
Venice, and Florence among others, there were no full-blown societal
collapses in the core of Europe. Collapse is a systems-level phenomenon,
whether that be of a single unified imperial system like Rome or of a
system of states like the Maya or Late Bronze Age. Even if one power
(Spain, for example) began to decline, another (England, for example)
simply took its place, and the entire system continued to grow. There were
crises, but the overall Goliath system ensured that these didn't spiral into
collapse. Europe had found a way to subdue Goliath's Curse through
technological change, economic development, and more inclusive
institutions (in general), and by extracting cheap materials (and later fossil
fuels) from abroad. Collapse was something colonizers inflicted on faraway
others, not something they suffered themselves.46
Some fates were even worse than societal collapse. Working on colonial
plantations involved long, intense hours in hot climates in abysmal

conditions rife with tropical disease. For the colonizers, the cost of paying
free people a fair wage would have been too high and the huge loss of life
in the Americas had made labour scarce and expensive. The easiest
alternative was to use slaves. Millions of Africans were captured and
transported across the Atlantic to work on sugar, cotton, and other
commodity plantations across the Caribbean and the Americas. By the
1780s, almost a million souls were being shipped from Africa every year,
accounting for 90 per cent of the trade between Europe and Africa.
Europeans also imported malaria into many plantation areas, especially
across the southern US, making plantation work even more dangerous. This
fed the demand for more malaria-resistant African slaves. There evolved a
worldwide military-industrial-slavery complex for producing cheap
commodities.47
It is hard to overstate the cruelty involved in the transatlantic slave trade.
At times the price of slaves was so low that it was simply cheaper for their
profit-obsessed owners to work them to death. The conditions were so
horrific that the average field hand working on a Caribbean sugar slave
plantation would usually only survive for about seven years. The Caribbean
became, in the words of one pre-eminent expert on slavery, 'a
slaughterhouse'.48  While living, slaves were also subject to humiliation.
Slaves under British control were sometimes branded with 'DY' (Duke of
York) to designate ownership by the British monarchy.
The influx of cheap labour from disposed farms and cheap, often slave-
produced raw materials from overseas colonies meant windfall profits for
factory owners in Europe, especially England. These enormous sums were
reinvested into more equipment and factories, or into the British Navy to
help procure more colonies, and hence more slaves and goods. Britain
became a machine for accumulating wealth. Capitalism and colonization
were combined in slave plantations and crowded factories, beginning
around half a millennium ago. This grisly steamroller passing through the
colonies also wreaked destruction closer to home, causing the deterioration
of the masses of farmers, peasants, and workers back in the European
heartland.
Height, wages, health, and life expectancy all fell in England and much
of Europe as colonial capitalism rose. Real incomes plummeted as
capitalism became ascendant during the 'long sixteenth century' (1450-

1640) and enclosure pushed people from the land into towns. In England,
life expectancy declined from a high of forty-three in the 1500s to the low
twenties during the 1700s. Men shrank from their peak of around 174cm in
the wake of the Black Death to around 168cm in 1800. Industrialization and
colonial capitalism didn't just usher in a new age of collapse; they also
impoverished the ordinary subjects at the core of empire.49
Collapse and catastrophe looked different in each region of the world,
whether it be imperial collapse in the Americas, shatterzones in Mississippi
and Australia, or plummeting health in England. Yet when we zoom out and
look at the world across centuries there is one coherent picture. All these
collapses and transformation were the labour pains of birthing a new
Goliath.
Violence had accompanied the creation of the very first Goliaths across
the world. In this case, however, it was not a single state like Uruk or the
Xia Dynasty being born; it was a new world system - a global Goliath.
*
This long and bloody genesis is carved into the city of Madrid. Just 900
metres from the statues of Motecuhzoma and Atahualpa is the Kilómetro
Zero, the point from which distances from the capital are measured and
from which six great highways snake out across Spain.
To stand on the Kilómetro Zero is to stand on the physical representation
of the rimless wheel of empire, six roads radiating out from one core, one
capital. Many capitals have such a monument. Rome's Milliarium Aureum
(Golden Milestone) is believed to be the origin of the phrase 'All roads lead
to Rome'. The rail networks of the UK and France look alike: rimless
wheels leading to London and Paris, respectively. Even Cahokia was
structured similarly, with paths across the Mississippi converging on the
now desolate collection of earthen pyramids.
The rimless wheel no longer stops at the oceans. In Ghana the railway
lines from the interior to key ports on the coast continue as shipping lanes,
along which goods such as cocoa from the plantations are sent to Britain.
Colonization created a global set of such rimless wheels whose spokes led
back to European capitals.
Colonization brought about a new age of collapse, but underlying it are
the same old root causes of status competition and dominance aversion.

Colonization was underpinned by a search for luxury commodities such as
tea, sugar, tobacco, and coffee - all of which were initially status goods.
The empires of the Aztecs and the Incas, as well as many not covered here,
were weakened by elite infighting and popular rebellion, which the
colonizers then exploited. The Spanish monarchs who approved expeditions
into the Americas were searching not just for gold and silver, but ultimately
for power and status. Conquistadors such as Cortés and Pizarro were also
searching for riches and fame. Their pursuits were successful.
Just over a kilometre away from Kilómetro Zero are streets named Calle
De Hernán Cortés and Calle De Pizarro. The two conquistadors received the
fame and status they craved. Back at the Royal Palace, beyond the statues
of Motecuhzoma and Atahualpa, are vast rooms full of golden chandeliers,
ornaments coated in gold and silver from the Americas, walls plastered in
ceramics from Paris, the finest fabrics from weavers from Brussels, feasting
tables, and marble statues of Spanish kings posing as Caesar. The Royal
Palace is not unique; you can see similar opulence in the castles and palaces
of Paris and Vienna. They are greats acts of conspicuous consumption,
physical embodiments of status competition.
But if we dig beneath the palaces and plantations we find ice-age roots. It
took just a few psychological features to reshape the world into a system
ruled by a few empires and a single, global Goliath.
OceanofPDF.com

15
Collapse in the Modern World
The End of Empire? - Goliath Goes Global - How to Kill a Modern State -
A Failed Order - Becoming Anti-Fragile - Earned Through Struggle - A
World Without Collapse?
THE END OF EMPIRE?
At the start of the First World War, European empires controlled around 84
per cent of the world's land surface. The Austro-Hungarian Empire covered
over 600,000 square kilometres of central Europe, the Ottoman Empire
stretched over most of the Near East, the French ruled most of western and
northern Africa, while Britain still possessed Australia, Canada, and India.
The US was also a colonial power. It had acquired what presidents
Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt unashamedly called colonies:
Hawaii, Guam, the Wake Islands, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, and the
Philippines. Together these accounted for around a fifth of the land area of
US territory and 19 million people.1
At least officially, there are no empires left. Over the course of the
twentieth century the last land empires fell apart, the maritime empires
fragmented, the colonies became independent, and everyone started calling
themselves nation-states instead of empires.
As we'll see, collapse today appears to be slowly becoming less common.
Yet it would be unwise to assume that Goliath's Curse is disappearing.

The two world wars were the primary spurs to imperial disintegration.
The first marked the loss of the Ottoman, Austro-Hungarian, and German
empires. While Germany contracted into a smaller nation-state, the Austro-
Hungarians lost their empire and became the smaller states of Austria and
Hungary (alongside a host of smaller states), and the Ottoman Empire was
abolished and eventually divided into countries including Iraq, Syria,
Egypt, Turkey, and Palestine. The second war saw the end of the short-lived
German Third Reich and the Japanese Empire. The next few decades saw
the break-up of the former colonial empires of the British, Spanish, and
Portuguese.2
These failures and the contraction of empires were not, however, caused
by the external shock of the world wars. Instead, the world wars were
battles for empire. While the Second World War is often framed as an epic
clash between democracies and fascism, it was primarily a conflict over
land and people (and thus an extension of its predecessor). In 1939, Britain,
the Netherlands, France, Belgium, China, the USSR, and the US all had
empires. Together they held about a quarter of the global population at the
time (some 600 million people) in colonial shackles. They controlled
around fifteen times as much land as the Axis powers of Italy, Japan, and
Germany combined.
The Axis powers were all growing economies that had largely missed out
on the colonial scramble for Africa, the Pacific, and South America. They
had increasing power, but few colonies. This was at a time when shipping
raw materials from distant colonies was a key driver of economic growth.
Hitler's obsession with Lebensraum (which roughly translates to living
room or space) was forged in the colonial spirit of the day. The Allies were
happy with the world order, while the Axis powers wanted to redistribute
the spoils. As Hitler himself said, 'What India was for England the spaces
of the East will be for us,' adding that the German conquerors would 'look
upon the natives as Redskins'. He was mainly referring to eastern Europe.
The Axis empires were unsuccessful imperial upstarts thirsting for
colonies.3
It clearly wasn't mainly a war of ideals for the Allies either. The US,
despite its apparent hatred of fascism, only reluctantly joined the war in
December 1941 once it was attacked by Japan.4  The allies of the US,
Britain, France and the Netherlands - despite their claim to be the defenders

of freedom - still didn't allow their colonies to operate democratically or
independently. Just over a year before the beginning of the war, British
troops at Vidurashwatha massacred thirty Indians and wounded another
hundred for the crime of trying to hoist the flag of the Indian National
Congress. The British also showed little concern for their colonies once the
war started. During 1943 in Bengal, they seized 40,000 tons of rice and
65,000 boats to deny the advancing Japanese army food and resources; up
to 3 million people died during the ensuing famine. Many in India still refer
to it as the 'Bengal Holocaust'. Churchill attributed the disaster to the
Indians 'breeding like rabbits' and asked why the shortages hadn't killed
Gandhi. Such actions are those of empires exploiting their colonial assets to
defend their power, not democratic ideals.5
The world wars laid the basis for decolonization in the decades that
followed. At home, governments struggled to convince citizens who were
still recovering from a war to retain possession of their overseas assets.
Colonies became a luxury too expensive to keep. Internationally, it seemed
hypocritical to keep hold of foreign lands after ostensibly fighting a war in
the name of democracy and basic human rights. In the colonies, the wars
left populations that were armed and not eager to return to European
powers. The indigenous elites who had once collaborated in colonial rule
began to turn on their former masters. They joined anti-colonial nationalists
and overturned European rule. Importantly, the US and USSR actively
supported different independence movements to win them over to their side.
The colonial administrators exited in a panicked hurry, often leaving broken
and divided countries in their wake.6
These were not societal collapses but imperial contractions. There were
no large-scale or enduring losses of energy capture or population, and often
little change in the rulers, elites, culture, government, or tax system. What
did happen is that the empires shrank back to their core homelands.
They shrank, but they didn't disappear. Most countries are the direct
progeny of empires. Even in 1948, inhabitants of the UK were still referred
to as 'subjects' of the Crown, not citizens. Despite now using the term
'citizens', the country is still built on the past subjugation of many nations.
Similarly, France may have lost its overseas colonies, but it was created by
the kings of the Île-de-France (where modern-day Paris sits), expanding
their rule over surrounding principalities such as Burgundy and Brittany.

The borders of Russia, Germany, and Italy represent previous Russian,
Prussian, and Piedmontese aggression. China is the direct descendant of the
Qin and in its annexation of Tibet still acts like an empire. The US has 750
military bases scattered across eighty countries around the world and
spends $849 billion annually on defence: around 40 per cent of all
government spending on defence globally, and more than the next nine
countries combined.7  Between 1776 and 2023 it conducted roughly 400
military interventions, with about half of those since 1950.8  That long list
includes Korea (1950-53), Guatemala (1954), the Congo (1960), Laos
(1962), Ecuador (1963), Panama (1964), Brazil (1964), Vietnam (1965-73),
Ghana (1966), Cambodia (1969), Chile (1973), and Grenada (1983). The
US uses its economic clout, subtly backed by its military might, to shape
international policy and acquire favourable trade arrangements. It also still
has its overseas territories such as Puerto Rico. Many other former colonial
empires still maintain island possessions, with the UK alone having
fourteen overseas territories.9
Occasionally the mask slips and empire is spoken of clearly. As a senior
advisor to President George W. Bush said, 'We're an empire now, and when
we act, we create our own reality. And while you're studying that reality ...
we'll act again, creating other new realities ... We're history's actors ... and
you, all of you, will be left to just study what we do.'10
We tend to think of the world as being made up of 'nation-states'. A
nation is a group with a claim to a common ancestry - derived from the
Latin nascor, meaning to be born - yet those rarely exist. Most nations are
recent, artificial creations while others with a shared language and history,
such as the Kurds (15 million), the Catalans (over 7 million), and the Scots
(over 5 million), don't have their own state. We are closer to living in a
world of united empires than united nations.11
Empire in the twenty-first century has also taken a new, subtler form.
Demanding tribute as did the Assyrians or tax like the Romans has been
phased out in favour of unequal trade. After the end of the Second World
War, both of the new superpowers - the US and the Soviet Union - flexed
their newfound status. The US would have the more prominent legacy of
the two. It helped to shape the global institutions that order the world's
finances today: the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Since then, the decolonized countries have been saddled with onerous debt

and an unbalanced trade system. For instance, the EU heavily subsidizes its
agricultural products, which are then imported into Africa at low costs,
undermining local producers who don't have the benefit of government
support. It's easier, cheaper, and now more politically acceptable to take
resources through loans, debt, unfair agreements, and infrastructure projects
than to send out an army to a distant land.12
The result is a new global system of extraction. Industrialized countries,
including all the former colonial empires, extract cheap labour and
materials from poorer countries. Researchers in 2022 tallied up the costs
and benefits of this unequal international trade. They found that over the
period 1990-2015 $10 trillion was transferred every year from the global
south to the global north. That is thirty times what poorer countries receive
in aid each year. Overall, $242 trillion was moved during that twenty-five-
year period, enough to eliminate extreme poverty seventy times in a row.13
A more recent study just looking at labour over the period found that there
was a net flow of $17.6 trillion. This is largely due to differences in wages:
labourers in the global south are paid 87-95 per cent less than their northern
counterparts even when equally skilled.14
Unequal trade isn't the only reason these countries are rich, but it is one
key contributor. The more autocratic institutions left by some colonizers in
former colonial countries also contribute to large differences in economic
growth today.15  Empire never truly came to an end. The world is still
covered with empires operating under a single Goliath system.
GOLIATH GOES GLOBAL
We can use the different sources of power to understand the Goliath we live
under today. Economically, every country is now capitalist.16  They all
abide by similar rules and agreements, with many enforced by a few
international bureaucracies such as the IMF, World Bank, and World Trade
Organization. The flow of capital is dictated by shared blueprints of
collateral law, property law, trust law, and corporate law. It's why money
and capital can flow so easily across borders. Most of these legal systems
are modelled on English common law and New York state law. Information

power is increasingly concentrated. A small network of surveillance
capitalist firms - such as Google, Amazon, and Meta - gather, direct and
monetize data. This network of surveillance capitalists is accompanied by
emerging mass surveillance states - especially in the UK, the US and China
- that unblinkingly monitor these streams of data.
Many of the world's elite, tyrants and progressives alike, have had a
similar cultural upbringing and education. Monarchs, oligarchs, and the
megarich tend to be educated at a handful of elite schools and universities
in the UK, US, and Switzerland. North Korean leader Kim Jong Un was
schooled in Bern, Switzerland. The former kings and princes of Belgium,
Burundi, Iran, and Yugoslavia all attended the Institut Le Rosey in
Switzerland, sharing the playground with members of dynastic families
such as the Rockefellers and Rothschilds.
Even the practice of shaping the world through law is clustered. All the
world's top hundred law firms are headquartered in just two cities: London
and New York. Politically, every polity is now a nation-state. To be part of
the UN (headquartered in New York) you need to have a state and be
recognized by other major powers.
Violence is still mainly (although not always successfully) controlled by
a few key powers, namely the US and, to a lesser extent, China and Russia.
Yet violence is no longer the main source of control. Why launch a missile
or a battleship when you can rely on the law to enforce extractive
arrangements? We now all live in a single capitalist system pioneered by the
British and then moulded by the US.17
The creation of that single Goliath has also changed the nature of
collapse itself.
HOW TO KILL A MODERN STATE
Modern states die regularly. Since 1816, 202 states have existed. Fifty of
those no longer exist, including imperial powerhouses such as the Ottoman
Empire as well as the lesser-known Kingdom of Hawaii.18  Thirty-five of
them came to violent ends.
Academics usually call these examples 'state death'. State death can be
something of a misnomer. It is not that the government entirely disappears,

or everyone dies. Rather it is simply the loss of sovereignty. The state
formally loses its ability to make foreign policy and is no longer recognized
as independent. It usually means one state conquering another or breaking
up into multiple smaller ones. A violent (albeit temporary) example would
be that of Poland being invaded by Germany at the outset of the Second
World War. A less bloody case would be Bavaria joining the Prussian
Kingdom in 1871.19
The two most common causes of sovereignty loss are being a 'buffer
state' trapped between two great powers and getting caught in a territorial
dispute. One review of hundreds of cases during the period 1816 to 2004
found that being a buffer state, like Poland caught between Germany and
the Soviet Union, was the leading cause of sovereignty loss.20  An updated
analysis found that conflict over territory is 40 per cent more likely to
contribute to a loss of sovereignty than being a buffer state.21
Small states with little power over the international system have been the
biggest victims. While great powers like the US have proved robust, small
states tend to lose their sovereignty frequently. We currently have around
150 small states in the world, but there were fewer than forty in 1900, and
almost 200 in 1648.22  That is a lot of state births and many losses in
sovereignty. The key reason seems to be the actions of great powers. For
instance, the explosion in state numbers during the twentieth century was
largely down to the break-up of imperial powers and competitive
decolonization between the US and the Soviet Union.
Today sovereignty loss appears to be disappearing from the world. Only
nine states have lost their sovereignty since the end of the Second World
War. States today are 94 per cent more likely to survive in any given year
than states prior to 1945.
Again, the actions of the most powerful are the reason for the slow
vanishing of sovereignty loss. Since 1945 a strong norm of 'territorial
integrity' has reigned over the world order. International outrage follows
any intervention or invasion into a sovereign country.23  This regard for
sovereignty has been largely enforced by the nuclear-armed US to protect
the world order it built. In the twenty-first century we still have the
hypocritical invasions of Iraq and Afghanistan, the invasion of Ukraine by
Russia, and the brutal campaign of Israel in Gaza. While this is still far less

than what was experienced in the twentieth century or earlier, they are signs
that the protection of sovereignty may be eroding.24
Most cases of sovereignty loss were transfers of power, not societal
collapses. Even the few examples where a state did entirely fall apart follow
a peculiar pattern.
A FAILED ORDER
The modern world has seen many cases not only of sovereignty loss but
also of 'state failure'. These are what most of us think of as modern
collapses: Somalia, Sudan, Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, and many others.
There is no single universal definition of state failure, which has made
analysis of modern collapse difficult. One of the few systematic
investigations of state failure tried to address this by providing a clear,
operational definition.25  Failed states were defined as those that had lost
their capacity to make laws, extract taxes, and control violence within their
borders. Indicators were made for each of these and then searched for case
studies, and then applied to seventeen cases of potential state collapse over
the period 1946 to 2014. The study found five cases that met all these
criteria, five that met two, and four that met only one. Yet not one of these
cases lasted longer than six months. Within half a year, each one had a
government that was able to collect taxes, make laws, or enforce some
control over violence.26
Fragile and failed states too are largely a legacy of colonial empires. Both
colonization and the hurried, muddled process of decolonization left a
patchwork of scarred countries with nonsensical borders. About 40 per cent
of the world's borders today were drawn up by France or Britain. These
borders were usually imposed for the convenience of colonial
administrators and rarely reflect the different political and ethnic groups
they encompass. It's entirely unsurprising that artificial borders drawn by
foreigners with a history of stripping the land for slaves and resources left
many countries fragile.27

Not all colonizers were equally brutal. The British and the Spanish,
despite their atrocities, were more light-handed than the French and
Portuguese. We see this in rates of modern state failure today. One study of
118 states found that those with more European intervention, especially the
more extractive French or Portuguese empires, had a higher risk of state
failure. The actions of colonial administrators, including the judicial
systems they put in place, the ethnic divides they deepened, and the groups
they empowered, all left weak, divided, unaccountable governments that
were more prone to falling apart.28  As the English writer and
correspondent Robert Fisk reflected,
After the Allied victory of 1918, at the end of my father's war, the
victors divided up the lands of their former enemies. In the space of
just seventeen months, they created the borders of Northern Ireland,
Yugoslavia and most of the Middle East. And I have spent my entire
career - in Belfast and Sarajevo, in Beirut and Baghdad - watching
the people within those borders burn.29
We can also see the legacy of colonialism when we contrast different
kinds of colonized countries. Compare the settler colony of Australia to the
non-settler colony of Sudan. Both were colonized by the British, but while
settler Australians were given stable property rights and relatively inclusive
governmental institutions modelled on Britain's, Sudan got neither. Those
differences in institutions made for large changes in their long-term
trajectories. (Notably, even in the case of Australia, Britain actively
demolished the property rights and inclusive institutions of the indigenous
Australians.)30
The corrosive effect of extractive institutions isn't just an economic or
political phenomenon. It is also gendered. The more strongly states
subjugate women, the more likely they are to be both autocratic and prone
to failure.31
Given their colonial origins as extractive constructs, it is difficult to call
most of these 'failed states'. Afghanistan, Congo, and Somalia were never
'successful' and robust modern welfare states. They were the haphazard
constructs built from the last dying gasp of colonialism. The failure here is
more the international order, rather than the states that were born from it.

And there is the genuine problem that thinking of them as 'failed' can
justify military interventions rather than humane policy.32
There was more to it than just colonization. Colonial institutions were a
key vulnerability, but other factors such as environmental degradation and
population pressure may have played a role. These varied across cases and
don't appear to be as common or strong a contributor as colonial
institutions.33
State failure, when it happens in our modern world, seems to be briefer
(usually less than six months) and more quickly recovered from. Look at
the fall of the Soviet Union in 1989-91. GDP was halved within a few years
but it had tripled above pre-fall levels within two decades.34  The ruling
elites changed, but not dramatically. Putin was, after all, already a high-
ranking lieutenant colonel in the KGB before the Soviet Union fell apart
and he switched to politics. We can talk about the collapse of the
Communist regime, but not of societal collapse.
There's a clear trend here: societal collapse, or anything remotely close to
it, like state collapse, is happening more quickly, as is recovery. This is part
of a longer-term process of the world accelerating, and both people and
Goliaths getting better at dealing with collapse.
BECOMING ANTI-FRAGILE
The history of humanity is one long story of resilience. Global population
has grown steadily over the past 12,000 years. Despite plague, earthquakes,
societal collapses, world wars, and volcanic eruptions, our numbers climbed
from around 4 million at the beginning of the Holocene 11,700 years ago to
around 600 million by 1700 (Figure 35). From there it exploded to the 8
billion souls living today.35

Figure 35: World population 10,000 BCE to 1700 CE
We see that same resilience at a more zoomed-in level in the most
extreme scenarios - even a nuclear attack. In August 1945, Hiroshima was
struck by a sixteen-kiloton atomic bomb, reducing 40 per cent of the city to
ash, destroying 90 per cent of the buildings, and extinguishing 140,000
souls. Yet, within a day 30 per cent of homes had electricity restored, within
two days the local Bank of Japan was running again, and within a week
some telephone lines were working again. Today Hiroshima is a thriving
city with over 1 million inhabitants.36
Resilience is the flipside of collapse. It is the ability of a system to
experience disturbances without changing its fundamental functions or
identity. Imagine a tree being buffeted by a hurricane but never breaking, or

a blade of grass being stepped on but springing back up. Both are
displaying resilience.37
Societies can be something even stronger than resilient: they can be anti-
fragile. That is, they gain and improve from disturbances and disorder.
Think of the human body. Lifting a heavy object will temporarily shred
your muscle fibres, but they will grow back stronger. A healthy amount of
stress makes us stronger. It appears that this may hold true not just for
human bodies, but for entire human populations.38
Populations that have experienced more downturns in the past tend to be
more resilient and more likely to recover from later downturns. One study
covering sixteen world regions (including China, Europe, Australia, North
America, South America, South Africa, and the Near East) over 30,000
years found that populations that had experienced more frequent downturns
became more resilient to later ones. The effect appeared to be more
pronounced in herders and farmers than in hunter-gatherers. Farmers and
herders faced far more demographic busts but became more resilient in the
long term. In other words, their populations are anti-fragile.39
The reason for this anti-fragility is cultural evolution. Over time, people
develop technologies and cultural practices that allow them to survive and
prosper in hostile environments. Indigenous Australians have developed
cooking methods to detoxify local foods and the Inuit built kayaks and
specialized harpoons to prosper in the Arctic.40  This is not a matter of
individual intelligence, but rather methods to deal with adversity that are
refined and passed on down numerous generations.41
When societies encounter frequent hardships, such as climate change or
disease, they tend to learn from experience and develop better ways of
coping and even benefiting from shocks. Learning from disasters has been
the trigger for a range of innovations, including quarantine for managing
the spread of disease, buildings that can sway and buckle without breaking
during earthquakes, and the use of back-burning to prevent bush-fires.
Communities that experienced these shocks more frequently were more
likely to develop the technologies and practices to survive and even
thrive.42
This effect is even stronger among farming societies across the world
because their reliance on agriculture meant they faced more shocks. While

hunter-gatherers could move and switch to other food sources, farmers were
often tied to their lands and particular crops. They were forced to
experiment more. Technologies such as writing then enabled the larger-
scale storage of information. This helped ensure that more successful
adaptations were identified and passed down to the next generation.43
Goliath evolution is an extension of this. Bigger, longer-living empires
tended to pass on their ideas, not only to their own citizens, but also to those
they conquered. Those that were bigger tended to have technology and
practices that allowed them to control more people, more tightly, and field
larger, better-equipped armies. The growing size of empires over time is a
sign of their anti-fragility. Individual empires like Rome may have fallen
apart, but the project of empire became more effective over time.
We see this in the increasing maximum size of empires over the course of
history. Between 3000 and 600 BCE empires varied in size between 0.15 and
1.3 million square kilometres. Then there was a burst in growth between
600 BCE and 1600 CE, to between 2.3 and 24 million square kilometres.
While the Mongol Empire reached 24 million, it couldn't hold it for long;
instead, most lasting empires, such as Rome or the longest Chinese
dynasties, tended to be 5-6 million square kilometres. The maximum size
advanced again after 1600 with the ascent of maritime colonial powers.
Then, empires became enmeshed to create the Global Goliath we have
today.44
This slow change in the size (in both territory and population) of empires
and Goliaths represents a slow accumulation of new forms of Goliath fuel.
The most obvious was monopolizable weapons. Hand-held bronze weapons
provided the bloodied bricks for building the original states in Egypt,
China, and Mesopotamia. Later, larger empires like the Achaemenid,
Roman, and Han all came to rely on horses and iron weapons. The spread of
colonial maritime empires was similarly in part due to their advanced guns,
ships, cannons, and steel weaponry.
Lootable resources have also changed and scaled up over time. Grain has
been a perennial example of a lootable resource. Not only is it highly
stealable, but it also favours fertility and bigger populations. For most of
history, this didn't change much.45  The biggest change came with
colonization, when slavery-based mines and plantations allowed for the far
greater production of lootable resources.

Ways to cage land also transformed over time. While many of the earliest
states erected walls, others had to settle for smaller palisades (as was the
case for Cahokia). Later empires made a fine art of wall building. One only
needs to look at the Great Wall of China or the Romans' Hadrian's Wall.
Modern empires established far clearer borders with customs, passports,
and hawkishly guarded points of entry (and exit).
Goliath fuel didn't just change; Goliaths also developed better ways of
governing. The Iron Age didn't just see the formation of larger empires like
Rome and the Han; it also saw the creation of far bigger bureaucracies and
the first censuses.46  New transportation and communication tools enabled
rulers to send orders and troops more quickly across vast distances. For
thousands of years Goliaths could not cross the ocean. Then, European
caravels allowed for it, while the telegraph and rail allowed for the control
of distant colonies.
That process of Goliath evolution - developing new fuel, as well as better
governance and technology - was driven by competition. The collapse, or at
least decline, of some states, was a requirement for a Goliath to evolve.
Some states have even proved to be anti-fragile during a systems collapse.
This can be seen during the Late Bronze Age collapse. The Phoenicians
profited immensely from taking over the trade routes that had previously
been run by the now destroyed city of Ugarit as well as by the Egyptians
and the Hittites. They pushed their trade south and west, becoming a key
regional player in the wake of the collapse. By contrast, the Neo-Assyrians
(911-609 BCE) opted for a more sinister approach. They began to conquer
the weakened states that surrounded them in the post-collapse region. They
slowly annexed the remains of the Hittite Empire (the 'Neo-Hittite' states),
defeated the Armenian Kingdom of Urartu (in modern Turkey), and
marched all the way to the Egyptian border. They became the largest empire
the world had seen until then. Both the Phoenicians and the Neo-Assyrians
were anti-fragile, but in dramatically different ways. Yet the most persistent
and anti-fragile project is the 5,000-year-long process of Goliath, not any
individual empire.47
The quicker recovery from state failures in the modern world may partly
reflect this long history of anti-fragility. States have developed police
forces, full-time militaries, and administrations that make it easier to regain
control after a disaster - or even a civil war - has struck. Similarly,

emergency-response and risk-management professionals can draw on
decades of studies and accumulated practices to deal better with new crises.
It doesn't mean they always get it right, but it may help explain why state
failures today are usually so brief.
The brevity may also simply be due to technology. Military, police,
peacekeepers, diplomats, and aid workers can now be quickly deployed by
air and closely coordinated using the internet. Whatever the reasons,
collapse is certainly shortening and disappearing while many areas of life
are improving.
EARNED THROUGH STRUGGLE
The modern world has undoubtedly experienced enormous improvements
that should be celebrated. It is a lengthy list that includes eliminating
smallpox, increasing literacy from 12 per cent in 1820 to 87 per cent in
2022, and, over the past 120 years, cutting infant mortality from 43 per cent
to 4.5 per cent, and doubling average life expectancy. As a testament to our
burgeoning health, we are also now taller. Since around the nineteenth
century, global average height has increased by around 8cm for women and
9cm for men, although men today are still shorter than their Palaeolithic
forefathers. These are momentous achievements that we should
appreciate.48
The catch is that all these trends are recent, usually within the last century
or two. The long-run history of progress is something more akin to a U-
curve. Happiness, health, peace, and prosperity start relatively high, fall
during the adoption of Goliaths, stagnate for about 5,000 years, and then
begin to rise again (at least in some areas). That rise is primarily for two
reasons: massive increases in energy capture and collective action.
In the last two centuries, humankind has tapped into a geological gift.
Fossil fuels have bequeathed us a previously unimaginable source of
energy. Measured in calories, the average modern European captures over
fifty times more than the average European ice-age hunter-gatherer. This
enormous increase is largely recent: global energy consumption increased
over thirty-five-fold from 1800 to 2022.

We tend to forget that fossil fuels come primarily from long-dead plants
and animals. These organisms died between 360 and 286 million years ago
during the Carboniferous period, after capturing sunlight through
photosynthesis or other means. It is that fossilized energy that we are
consuming. According to one estimate, it would take 400 years of global
photosynthesis to power the modern world for one year. It takes ninety-
eight tons of organic matter buried during the Carboniferous to become just
five litres of petrol. We are now a high-energy Goliath, powered by dead
matter.49
With such gargantuan increases in energy, it would be surprising if we
did not see significant bursts of human progress. It's easy to assume that the
rise of capitalism around 1600 CE, and then industrialization about 150
years later, led to improvements in the human condition. But this isn't the
case. In fact, the opposite occurred.
As we've seen, even the vast releases of power and energy during
industrialization in the mid-eighteenth to nineteenth centuries did not
automatically lead to better living conditions for most. Early on it was a
period of exploitation and deterioration, with both heights and real wages
falling. In England, the pioneer of industrialization, reports by Parliament in
1833 detailed children working twelve- to fifteen-hour days in overheated
and cramped coal mines, who were beaten near daily, and had little in the
way of compensation or rights. Reliable figures are hard to come by, but
fatalities must have numbered in the thousands per year and injuries in the
tens of thousands. Many were caused by unguarded machinery and children
fitted with loose clothing, leading to truly grisly reports of children being
pulverized in machines. One 1892 memoir recounts the death of Mary
Richards, who was caught in a malfunctioning drawing frame before being
dashed to the ground and when 'she was extricated, every bone was found
broken - her head dreadfully crushed'. The average height of men enlisting
in the army in the 1890s through to the First World War was 168cm, still
below their peak before capitalism. There is a reason why the poet William
Blake referred to factories at the time as 'dark Satanic Mills'.50
What eventually caused industrialization to translate into shared
prosperity was shared struggle. Improvements in health and welfare
occurred during the 1880s in northern Europe and the mid-twentieth
century in Latin America, south Asia, and sub-Saharan Africa. In Europe

this coincided with the rise of unions, public health movements, and the
expansion of the vote. Elsewhere it was anti-colonial movements and public
pressure for improved services that turned the wheels of progress. The
biggest single measure to lengthen life expectancy - the gift of sanitation -
was rolled out following public protests, especially from unions. Innovation
and invention are important: vaccines and sanitation needed technological
breakthroughs. Energy and technology are vital: they are necessary
conditions for the improvements we've seen in the past two centuries. But
they weren't enough in and of themselves. Improvements needed to be
demanded and fought for.51  It needs the right social structures and sharing
of power. As Frederick Douglass once said, 'If there is no struggle, there is
no progress.'
If power structures remain exploitative, human welfare can even worsen
while technology improves. It is visible across history and even today. The
US has the most well-funded and advanced biotechnology sector in the
world. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) funds around $9 billion in
biotech research every year, while tens of billions are invested in the private
sector. Despite this, the US has the highest rate of maternal and infant
mortality, the highest death rates for avoidable conditions, and the lowest
life expectancy at birth among rich countries. The US may have far more
start-ups and investment, but what it lacks is universal healthcare. Having
the government negotiate with big pharma on behalf of people would make
a bigger difference to people's lives (and premature deaths) than the next
innovation breakthrough.52
Progress is also always a matter of perspective. We forever need to ask:
progress of what? The advances we usually talk about and plot onto graphs
are improvements in health and material comfort. But if we begin to talk
about improvement in our inner lives - happiness and social connection -
or treatment of the environment, suddenly it appears that most societies
have regressed since egalitarian hunter-gatherers. As we've already seen,
happiness studies of nomadic egalitarian groups suggest that they are
happier than their industrial counterparts in over a dozen countries
examined. The average life today is, though, not that of a middle-class
Dane, but closer to a far less happy Chinese factory worker or Indian
peasant farmer.53

We also need to ask: progress for whom? The rise and expansion of the
Global Goliath has been responsible for the extinction of tens of thousands
of species. Countless unique pieces of life trampled under an industrial
boot. In the eyes of the dodo or the passenger pigeon, our recent advances
don't seem particularly admirable. The over 100 billion animals that are
tortured and killed every year in factory farms might not find our increasing
heights or health to be a sufficient excuse for their unimaginable suffering.
The same can be said for the ways of life that have been devastated and
sidelined at the barrel of a gun. Today there are a maximum of only 5
million hunter-gatherers across the globe and their numbers dwindle every
decade, alongside hundreds of languages and cultures.54
A WORLD WITHOUT COLLAPSE?
Since at least 1945, enduring societal collapse has been absent from the
world. The decades have been scarred by civil wars, genocide, losses of
sovereignty, and state failure, but none has resulted in a lasting societal
collapse.55
This suppression of collapse is caused by a globalized, state-based,
capitalist system underpinned by US supremacy. Whenever a state is even
close to falling apart, the international community tends to mobilize. The
US, desiring stability and seeking to prevent any potential wellspring for
terrorism, has deterred most territorial conquests and subtly interfered to
prevent (and sometimes induce) state failure. It even had its own
government-sponsored and CIA-commissioned taskforce on political
instability and state failure.56
Fossil-fuelled capitalist growth has similarly ensured that losses in energy
capture are not long-lasting. As Naomi Klein documents in The Shock
Doctrine, natural disasters, coups, and state failures were instead often seen
as a commercial opportunity. These ruptures were capitalized on by outside
forces to open new markets and force in 'free-market' policies. These were
often a thin veil for economic exploitation and unequal exchange.57  For
instance, US economists and international institutions pushed for
privatization in the wake of the fall of the Soviet Union. The result was the

rise of Russian oligarchs who picked up former government enterprises at
bargain prices, often promising favourable deals with the US and others.58
It may seem that Goliath is on an arc towards defeating the curse. Goliath
first faced the Primal Curse of a rebellious populace and weak ways to
control them. Larger empires overcame these challenges but faced
diminishing returns on extraction. More advanced colonial empires
appeared to find a way of avoiding the curse: rapid technological change
and overseas extraction allowed them to spread globally without a societal
collapse in Europe. States still eventually fell apart during the world wars
and decolonization, but it was more of a transformation than a collapse.
True collapse appears to be slowly disappearing from the modern world.
That 'disappearance' is, however, an illusion. Over the long run, collapse
appears to have, if anything, accelerated from hunter-gatherer cultures
which endured for tens or hundreds of thousands of years, through the long-
lived earliest settlements and cities, fragile empires, to often short-lived and
quick-collapsing modern regimes. While states have taken over the world,
they are not particularly long-lived.59  Collapse just seems to have
temporarily slowed, but has been accelerating ever since the Holocene and
the creation of Goliaths. Yet the threat of collapse still hangs overhead and,
if it comes, it will be far worse than anything that has gone before. The
curse is now global and more dangerous than ever.
OceanofPDF.com

Part Three
ENDGAME
OceanofPDF.com

16
Mors ex Machina
Digging Up Death - From Human Exploitation to Human Extinction -
Goliath Becomes Death - When Our Luck Runs Out - Reviving (and
Upgrading) our Greatest Killers - Automated Cognition - The AI
Accelerant
DIGGING UP DEATH
Your plastic flip-flops slip in the dirt as you swing the pickaxe. The earth is
red, but down here deep in the bowels of Congo, it looks a shadowed,
bloody brown. It's dark and the walls seem to press around you. Those
walls have always seemed closer, more ominous, ever since your oldest
brother, Akile, died when a tunnel collapsed on him. Your other brother,
Kijani, was pulled out but hasn't walked since. You remember that day, the
way the tears felt on your dusty face, that moment you realized that Akile's
smile wasn't coming up from the ground ever again. The crying didn't last
long. You have to work, especially now that Kijani can't.
Your stomach rumbles as you swing again. You skipped lunch and now
your head aches with exhaustion as you pass your tenth hour of work. It
seemed like a good idea at the time: you'll make an extra dollar without the
lunch break and by working overtime. It wasn't a hard choice since lunch is
just two tasteless bread rolls and a carton of sugary water that barely passes
as juice. The air is heavy with black dust which sticks to your clothes and
coats your throat. If you're lucky, you might make a bit over $4 today.1

The cobalt - that bright, blue-green-grey rubble that you smash out from
the rocks a hundred metres below the surface - will be worth far more than
your tears. After being carried by wheelbarrow to the truck it'll be shipped
to China for transformation into those tiny, patterned silver and gold
squares that we call microchips.
Some of the cobalt you have mined eventually ends up in a chip that is
soldered to a computer now in San Francisco, powering a new Large
Language Model for an AI company. The owner of that company has over
1,000,000 times more wealth than you do. That won't change, no matter
how long you spend toiling underground.fn1
Other grains of cobalt line the chips inside a drone that cuts through the
dry desert air of Libya at 72 kph. Packed snugly next to those microchips
are explosives. When it spots its target, the multicopter drone will dive
down at 120 kph until it smashes into them. It won't even need a human to
approve of that kamikaze murder. The microchips are all the authorization it
needs. It's killing autonomously. Blood and bone will blend with the cobalt
you once dug out of the ground.
This is just one story of the unseen faces that lurk behind the production
of global catastrophic risk today. The specific names are fictional, but the
story is not. And that one tale doesn't do justice to the scale of the
exploitation. Around three-quarters of the global cobalt supply - used in the
manufacture of batteries for phones, computers, and electric vehicles -
today comes from the Democratic Republic of Congo. Some 15 to 30 per
cent of that is mined by what are referred to as 'artisanal' miners. It's a
euphemism for people working in unregulated and dangerous conditions.
Up to 40,000 of them are children who spend their days in squalid tunnels
that are prone to collapse. Around the world there could be up to 100
million informal miners of all ages digging up not just cobalt, but many
other rare earth metals such as the lithium used in your phone, or the
tantalum used in semiconductors. The costs of quarrying cobalt are carried
across bloodlines. Workers have such high rates of toxic metals in their
blood that they are five times more likely than average to have children
with birth defects.2
Over eight decades ago, in what was then the Belgian Congo, a different
mine was birthing a different global threat. The Shinkolobwe mine was
worked by Congolese miners day and night in appalling conditions under

the draconian supervision of its colonizing authorities. Medical and birth
records were seldom kept, but there are reports of many children born with
congenital defects (as with cobalt). The mine is named after a kind of apple
that, if squeezed, leaves a skin burn. It's a telling name, since many of the
people working in the mine suffered from the hallmarks of radiation
sickness. That's because Shinkolobwe is the world's purest uranium mine.
Shinkolobwe was the mine that provided around two-thirds of the
uranium for the Manhattan Project: the 1940s US research and development
programme to build the first atomic weapons. Uranium from Shinkolobwe
was present in the first atomic test bomb - the Trinity bomb - that was
detonated in the deserts of New Mexico in 1945. Shinkolobwe uranium was
also in the two bombs (named 'Little Boy' and 'Fat Man') dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki later that year. Some of the 1,000 tons of silvery-
white rock that was carved out of the Congo would eventually be vaporized
and its particles burned into the bodies and buildings of Japan.3
There are many links in this chain of production from exploited miners to
global risk. Another is the coal miners in the Shanxi province of western
China during the rise of that country's economy two decades ago. There,
workers lived in shared dormitories with unclean sheets and beds as hard as
stale bread. They were paid $7.50 a day to risk their lives. One man whose
injuries when a mine caved in resulted in him becoming a paraplegic
received no compensation from his employers, nor even a car ride to the
hospital. Another, already without front teeth owing to mining accidents,
continued to work despite having a broken shoulder.4
The coal the Shanxi miners excavate is shipped both across China and
around the world to be burned at around 400-500°C. Coal is around 45-86
per cent carbon, and that carbon reacts with oxygen during the burning
process to create carbon dioxide (CO2), a greenhouse gas that floats into the
atmosphere and acts like a blanket, trapping solar radiation and heating the
earth. The earth's atmosphere now includes 427 parts per million of CO2,
and that figure is growing every year. The coal dug up in Shanxi will
eventually become the gases that supercharge hurricanes and melt the polar
ice caps.

FROM HUMAN EXPLOITATION TO HUMAN
EXTINCTION
It is deceptively easy to think about killer drones, AI, nuclear weapons, and
climate change as being separate, isolatable threats. Scholars and politicians
alike have tended to regard these as a list of distinct global problems -
unfortunate side-effects spewed out by innovative technology, whether that
be the machinery of the Industrial Revolution or the algorithms of today.5
They are not. Each is a link in an economic chain from toiling miners to the
cleaners sweeping the floors of a military base or a fossil-fuel-company
headquarters. These threats are not unavoidable; they are consciously
created by powerful groups who profit handsomely from the endeavour.
Global catastrophic risk is the product of a worldwide system of extraction:
the Global Goliath.
Global catastrophic risk means the likelihood of a severe, unprecedented,
and irreversible catastrophe that could happen in the space of decades. Past
generations have experienced the global decimation of the Black Death and
the invasion of the Americas. A worldwide disaster that kills more than 10
per cent of the global population while disrupting the critical systems the
world depends on, such as food and telecommunications, would be an
unprecedented global catastrophe. If that were to happen, we would enter
into dark, uncertain territory and a potential spiral into global societal
collapse.6
Scholars today aren't worried just about global catastrophes or even a
global societal collapse; some also fear even worse fates, such as human
extinction. Think of this as a spectrum of catastrophe, from precedented
global decimation risk through to unprecedented global catastrophic risk,
including global societal collapse and human extinction. The upper end of
this spectrum, from a deep collapse to human extinction, is often called
'existential risk'. This would be a catastrophe that threatens the existence of
either global society or our species, Homo sapiens (Figure 36).7
This is not about individual threats like AI or nuclear weapons. This is
about the overall level of risk produced by the Global Goliath. The world is
not just facing one individual challenge like climate change, thermonuclear
war, autonomous armed drones, enormous volcanic eruptions, or dangerous

new technologies. It is facing all of them at the same time. And alongside
these threats are new vulnerabilities, such as interconnected global financial
markets where a failure in one country can quickly spread across the world.
Then there are responses that could make a collapse worse, such as our
tendency to turn to autocrats during times of crisis. We call issues that can
significantly contribute to catastrophic risk across these risk areas (threats,
vulnerabilities, exposure, and responses) 'drivers' (for instance, climate
change creates certain hazards such as lethal heatwaves, spawns new
vulnerabilities like droughts, deepening debt, and may worsen other threats
like conflict). All these drivers are interrelated.
Figure 36: The spectrum of global catastrophe

Think about climate change. We should not ask whether climate change
is an existential risk but rather try to discover how much climate change
contributes to the level of existential risk. Whether the world can handle
3°C of warming above pre-industrial temperatures depends on how the
future looks. A world characterized by strong international cooperation,
high trust in public institutions, and few other problems may be able to
handle that level of global heating. A world that is riven with conflict,
distrust, autocracy, rampant inequality, and out-of-control technology might
well collapse.8
These drivers share another feature: many are driven by modern
technology. The Latin phrase deus ex machina, a god from the machine,
was used in the theatres of antiquity to describe a situation in which a
character required divine intervention to escape from an impossible
situation. A god figure was then lowered onto the stage from above. Gods
don't just bring salvation, of course; they also mete out punishment and
death. The world today faces a set of problems that could be termed mors ex
machina: death from the machine. Advanced technology can help improve
our standard of living and manage global problems, but it has also
introduced unprecedentedly destructive threats. Collapse in the future is
likely to be global and far worse than in the past. That is in large part
because of the technological threats being spawned by the Global Goliath.
Threats such as nuclear weapons, engineered pandemics, AI, and killer
robots.
GOLIATH BECOMES DEATH
On 16 July 1945 Robert J. Oppenheimer uttered the words 'now I am
become death, the destroyer of worlds', quoting the Bhagavad Gita. He was
watching a fireball erupt in the deserts of New Mexico, the first explosion
of a nuclear weapon. This was the Trinity Test. Within a month two atomic
bombs had been dropped on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing
between 110,000 and 210,000 people.9  The blast in Hiroshima was so
powerful that it etched the shadows of some of the victims into stone.
Less than a decade later, in 1954, the US conducted the Castle Bravo test,
which ignited a thermonuclear bomb around 1,000 times more powerful

than the one dropped on Hiroshima. Since then, over 2,000 nuclear
weapons have exploded across a dozen or more sites around the world.
Tests have been conducted by at least eight countries, although two have
dominated: the US and Russia. There was a distinct colonial flavour to the
test sites. France picked Algeria (the Algerians won their fight for
independence within two years of the first test); the UK used its former
colony Australia, and the US used the Marshall Islands in the central Pacific
as a test ground for Castle Bravo.
The constant pursuit of bigger arsenals that could be more easily
concealed from the enemy, and deliver missiles more quickly, continued
throughout the Cold War. By 1986 - just over four decades since the
Manhattan Project - over 70,000 nuclear weapons had been built.10
Imagine just a single 800-kiloton weapon dropped in the middle of New
York City. Everything within a five-kilometre radius would be vaporized.
Everyone within twelve kilometres would be killed almost instantly. Even
concrete buildings would be demolished. All those within eighteen
kilometres who survived would die within a month or two of radiation
poisoning. Within the first twenty-four hours a minimum of around 1.5
million people would be dead. Another 1.5 million would be injured and the
Manhattan skyline would be essentially empty: a flat line of smouldering
rubble.11
Nuclear war is unlikely to end after the first explosion. Imagine in this
case that the US is struck by Russia. Russia is unlikely just to bomb New
York City. They are more likely to send a swarm of missiles with the aim of
crippling the US economy and military, ideally minimizing the ability of the
US to retaliate. However, the US has nuclear submarines scattered around
the world, hidden silos, and more than sixty nuclear bombers (the forces of
land, sea, and air are referred to as the 'nuclear triad'), all of which could be
quickly mobilized. Nuclear war will not be easily contained: even a single
nuclear missile is more likely to spiral into thousands of explosions than
remain unanswered. A plausible simulation of a nuclear war between the
US and Russia predicted that within the first few hours 34.1 million people
would die and another 57.4 million would be left injured.12
Covering the earth with mushroom clouds brings a new, even darker
threat into play: nuclear winter. Nuclear blasts turn cities into infernos and
skyscrapers into billowing chimneys of burned materials and soot. These

particles float up high into the atmosphere and act as heat sponges,
absorbing incoming solar radiation and preventing it from reaching the
surface below. This cools the planet. A war between India and Pakistan
(both countries with nuclear weapons) resulting in around 47 million tons of
soot in the skies would cause global temperatures to drop by around 4°C. A
war between the US and Russia would throw up about 150 million tons of
soot, dropping global temperatures by 9-10°C. The latest modelling
suggests that the ensuing famines would kill up to 5 billion people, well
over half the world's current population.13
It could be worse, as there are many impacts not included in such
models.14  When a nuclear bomb explodes it produces a pulse of
electromagnetic radiation (commonly called an EMP). This EMP explodes
outwards, a bubble that expands at the speed of light. It acts like a powerful
lightning strike, overcharging and frying any electrical infrastructure it
touches. Depending on the power of the bomb and the height of the
detonation, one EMP could affect the entirety of the contiguous US. Think
of hundreds of these across the world. What regions would be engulfed by
these EMPs depends on who is involved in the war. One involving the
widespread participation of nuclear powers would see most of the northern
hemisphere fried. Much of the electrical infrastructure in these areas would
be rendered useless. Electricity and the internet would be lost. For how
long, we don't know.
It wouldn't be easy to replace all the now impotent electrical
infrastructure. Large power transformers are highly customized and take up
to two years to manufacture. It would take far longer to produce one in a
world without the internet and with most of its factories and supply chains
destroyed. It's also difficult to tell how long it would take to recover the
internet. The internet relies on Border Gateway Protocol (a standardized set
of rules that determines how connections between computers are routed),
which assumes that any servers that go offline can reconnect to a
functioning network. If most servers have been destroyed, the protocol may
fail.15
In the aftermath, people would, of course, move, seeking shelter, food
and loved ones, relying on our old power of mobility, as always.
Unfortunately, unlike in the Palaeolithic, this could have a severe downside.
A large movement of people with compromised immune systems (due to

both malnutrition and radiation sickness), alongside a rapid change in the
climate and animal movement, would turn the world into a breeding ground
for new zoonotic infections. Medicines and vaccines would dry up and
healthcare would be limited in a world where the internet, electricity grids,
and supply chains are severed.
It's hard to imagine what the knock-on effects would be on war and
politics. Fewer than 3,000 people died in the 9/11 terrorist attacks and that
led to $4-6 trillion dollars' worth of wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well
as the approximately 777,000 killed and the 13.4 million displaced. Imagine
what millions dead and a levelling of the richest city in the world might do.
Or what would happen if thousands of cities were annihilated, with the sky
becoming a web of criss-crossing missiles and then a veil of ash.
The existential risk and collapse expert Florian Jehn has explored how a
nuclear winter could impact the natural world. The release of nitrogen oxide
and smoke from the nuclear firestorms would degrade the ozone layer that
shields the earth from ultraviolet radiation. We could lose up to three-
quarters of ozone, resulting in UV levels of 35-45. (The current advice is to
stay indoors if UV levels are above 11.) The oceans would turn more acidic
(by around 0.05 on the fourteen-point pH scale). The acidified oceans,
winter conditions, and radiation from both sun and bombs would strangle
an already struggling biosphere. How much extinction rates would further
increase is unknown (and perhaps unknowable), but it would be
devastating.16
WHEN OUR LUCK RUNS OUT
A nuclear war would be the worst event in human history. It is difficult to
see how such a conflict between the US and Russia would not result in a
global collapse. That day could still occur at any time.
Currently nine countries have stockpiled around 10,000 nuclear
warheads. That's a welcome relief and a sevenfold reduction from the high
of over 70,000 weapons some four decades ago. Mass protest movements
and successful arms-reduction agreements (such as the 1979 Strategic Arms
Limitation Treaty and the 1988 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty)
drove these reductions. The spread of nuclear weapons has also been

restricted. One country (South Africa) has willingly dismantled its
stockpile, Ukraine gave up 1,900 warheads it had inherited from the Soviet
Union, and several countries with the capability to produce those weapons
chose not to.
Despite these achievements, the threat remains. The nuclear war
scenarios outlined above are all possible with existing nuclear arsenals.
Unfortunately, all signs now point towards these arsenals growing in both
size and strength. China has expanded its nuclear arsenal from around 200
in 2020 to 500 in 2023. The US and Russia are both developing new
technologies that could make the use of nuclear weapons more likely and
the global situation more precarious. Russia's hypersonic missiles are
harder to detect and intercept than older, slower-moving weapons, and they
reduce the time available for any target to react to an incoming barrage. The
US is planning to spend $1.7 trillion over three decades to upgrade and
modernize its own nuclear arsenal.
All this creates unnecessary risk. There is in any case no strong evidence
that nuclear weapons are effective in preventing wars or ensuring peace.
Some have argued that the deterrent effect has ushered in a 'long peace',
and at first glance the second half of the twentieth century does seem
relatively peaceful. But this is an illusion that has been debunked on
numerous occasions. The number of wars increased for three decades after
nuclear weapons were built, and didn't decline even at the point when
nuclear arsenals were largest. Yes, international conflict has decreased
slightly since the fall of the Berlin Wall, but that might be due to random
chance. (If it was attributable to nuclear weapons, we should have expected
that fall to coincide with their invention, not the end of the Soviet Union.
Even if the world has seen a decrease in conflict between countries since
the world wars, that would need to last another 100-140 years before it
became statistically significant.)17  What is true is that we haven't seen any
great-power wars - such as a direct conflict between the US and Russia -
since the invention of nuclear weapons. Yet even here, we'd still need a
longer time frame to know that this was due to nuclear deterrence and not
just luck.18
We do have evidence that the absence of nuclear war is largely down to
sheer dumb luck. On 26 September 1983, the Soviet duty officer Stanislav
Petrov saw on his screen a wave of nuclear missiles coming towards Russia.

He faced a choice: escalate the decision to his superior officer (who might
have launched a massive retaliation, given tensions at the time), or not.
Luckily for all of us, Petrov decided not to. He reasoned that the US would
have sent a far larger fleet of warheads if this was a first strike intended to
wipe out the USSR. He was right: it was a false alarm caused by a
malfunction in the satellite warning system. Later Petrov reflected that if
someone else had been on shift, it could easily have resulted in a global
nuclear holocaust. Even at the time, he said it was a 50/50 decision for
himself.19
Such nuclear 'near misses' have occurred at least a dozen times
throughout history. As my colleague Professor Benoît Pelopidas (the
leading expert on luck and nuclear weapons) suggests, this may be an
underestimate since nuclear-armed states have been notoriously secretive
and many details are still classified. States also show few signs of learning
from these near misses.20  And each time one of these near misses occurs
we should consider the existing peace to have been shattered.21
Today, our luck looks increasingly fragile. Russian President Vladimir
Putin has already warned that a deployment of NATO troops into Ukraine
would result in 'tragic consequences' - one of several not-so-subtle
allusions to a nuclear strike. Meanwhile China has more than doubled its
nuclear arsenal. A senior US official announced that the US may expand its
own stockpile of nuclear weapons. That expansion would be in addition to
the $1.5-trillion overhaul and upgrade of the US nuclear arsenal. The fact
that we have yet to face a thermonuclear war is not because of strategic
brilliance or a sign of a functioning balance of power. It's mainly a matter
of chance. If tensions continue to escalate between nuclear-armed states,
then it becomes ever more likely that our luck will finally run out.22
REVIVING (AND UPGRADING) OUR
GREATEST KILLERS
Manipulating subatomic particles for weapons is a dangerous affair that
threatens the entire world, and so is manipulating viruses. Avian influenza,
also known as the H5N1 virus, has a mortality rate of over 50 per cent. It is

over fifty times deadlier than Covid-19. Luckily, we know of only a handful
of cases making a leap from birds to humans, in none of which it has been
contagious. Had it been, then potentially the worst pandemic in history
would have begun.
It is the sheer lethality of H5N1 that made a series of experiments in 2011
so concerning. A group of researchers across the US, Japan, and the
Netherlands found a way to mutate the virus and make it transmissible
between ferrets. In one study they spliced together genes from the H5N1
virus with swine flu (H1N1); in another they modified H5N1 and then ran it
through numerous generations of ferrets until it had mutated. The scientists
made a virus that could now spread through the air between mammals.
While they didn't create a virus that could be passed between humans, and
the lethality of what they had made is debated, for many it was one step too
close. This is called 'gain-of-function' research: experiments that add to or
enhance the functions of an organism, such as the transmissibility, lethality,
or types of hosts a virus can infect compared with the original versions
found in the wild. Advocates claim that such research can help us identify
and prepare for the next pandemic; critics say it isn't worth the risk of
starting the next pandemic.
Gain-of-function research is just one example of 'dual-use research of
concern': research in the life sciences that can be misused to do great harm.
There are others. In 2017 a small group of Canadian scientists spent less
than $100,000 to recreate the then-extinct horsepox virus in six months
using mail-order DNA. Synthesizing a virus from scratch ('de-novo
synthesis') has now been done with poliovirus and influenza virus. There
are fears that this could be done with variola virus, the virus that causes
smallpox. That is a disease that kills roughly a third of its victims and
leaves most of the survivors with deep pitted scars. It has through decades
of global effort now been eradicated, but its genome is publicly available
and there are no substantial technical barriers to reviving it like the small
group did with horsepox.23
It's plausible that such a high-mortality pandemic could trigger a global
collapse. If we were hit by a plague such as the Black Death, we would be
likely to fall apart in a way that medieval Europe did not. The people of
medieval Europe were not dependent on collective infrastructure such as
electricity grids and mass transit systems, and their governments didn't base
their legitimacy on providing public goods like healthcare. The modern

world is different. Even a virus with a lower fatality rate, like smallpox,
would almost certainly break the world's healthcare system. Existing
systems are already under strain and increasingly overburdened by climate-
change-related chronic illnesses and infectious diseases. They are also just
not equipped to handle a huge influx of patients. Bear in mind that Covid-
19 had a fatality rate of less than 1 per cent. Even then, during the height of
the pandemic Italian hospitals could not always provide ventilators for
those who were struggling to breathe. A high-mortality pandemic would
also hit front-line health-service workers incredibly hard. If a third of them
were to die, while others were left incapacitated for weeks, how would an
already overwhelmed healthcare system cope?
Without the guarantee of a functioning system to take care of the ill, the
legitimacy of states would begin to dissolve, and those employed in many
other essential sectors would probably stop working: why expose yourself
to a one-in-three chance of dying, especially if you won't even be able to
get professional treatment? Suddenly, rubbish piles up in the streets. Power
lines are no longer repaired. Deliveries fail to arrive. Water and sewage
systems begin to falter. Undoubtedly, our old altruistic ways would kick in:
many would still go outside and brave the risk. Yet even courage and
compassion have limits. Our entire economic system would begin to fray.
The peasants of medieval Europe didn't expect hospital care from their
states as part of a 'social contract', nor did they rely on large, complicated,
collective infrastructure like we do. Global society appears to have become
better-equipped to produce vaccines, yet we are also more vulnerable to a
large enough disease shock.24
That situation is likely to get worse. In 2020 I led a WHO process to
identify the most significant issues in dual-use research of concern. The
process didn't just highlight the reconstruction of the variola virus as one
frightening possibility; the convened group of experts also foresaw several
others, including the use of machine-learning algorithms that trawl through
vast amounts of data to identify new dangerous pathogens that don't yet
exist, and platforms that allow for the quick reconstruction and engineering
of different diseases and bacteria.25
Our ability to create new, dangerous pathogens is increasing rapidly
alongside our technology. Sequencing the human genome, a project that
began in 1990, took thirteen years and cost $2.7 billion. By 2020

sequencing a human genome cost less than $300 and could be performed in
days. We can now also modify and edit genomes in real time thanks to
CRISPR-Cas9 (a technology that essentially allows us to cut, copy, and
paste genes). Both the new dual-use problems on the horizon and the rapid
development of biotechnology have led many to fear that a small, untrained
group may soon be able to create something far worse than smallpox.
Evolution tends to constrain naturally occurring viruses such as smallpox:
those that are too lethal kill off their hosts, while those that kill too quickly
don't spread far enough or infect enough people. An engineered virus would
be designed rather than evolved and, at least in theory, would not face such
limits. Rather than reviving a natural virus, a group could create an
unnaturally lethal one that kills more of its victims than the plague but
spreads quicker than Covid-19. In other words, an engineered doomsday
disease.
Luckily, carrying out a large-scale bioterror attack is exceedingly
difficult. It requires researchers with extensive training, tacit knowledge of
how to work in a lab with pathogens, access to advanced labs and
equipment, substantial experience with clandestine operations to avoid
being caught (probably someone who is a former military or intelligence
operative), and the fortunately rare desire to murder all of humanity.
Finding a highly trained virologist who is capable of recreating a virus, let
alone designing and creating a new one, is already exceptionally difficult.
Finding all these skills and experience in one individual is nigh impossible.
And more people means more coordination and an even greater chance that
someone will defect and tell the authorities.26
Even with current advanced technology, bioterror is surprisingly rare and
ineffective. Currently we have a biocrime or bioterrorism incident around
every 2.9 to 3.5 years. Most are hoaxes, and even those that do kill usually
only claim a few casualties.27  The largest one to date was carried out by
followers of the cult leader Rajneesh (also known as Osho) who poisoned
ten salad bars in Oregon with salmonella, resulting in 751 cases of food
poisoning and luckily no deaths. This had led some researchers to conclude
that even if you have the right amount of money and resources, killing large
numbers of people with germs is just incredibly hard.28
We should still guard against the possibility of catastrophic bioterrorism,
but be aware that this is a highly unlikely possibility. For now, the risk

comes from large, powerful organizations such as militaries and giant
bioengineering firms. These are the institutions that will have the resources
to create and release an engineered virus. That's true historically as well.
While the greatest bioterror incident injured fewer than a thousand people,
Japan killed around 300,000 Chinese during the Second World War by
experimenting with typhus, cholera, the plague, and a host of other
bioweapons.29
Even if there was a collapse-inducing bioterror attack because of cheap,
dangerous technology, the bigger cause would be the governments who fail
to regulate these technologies appropriately, and their failure to invest in
public healthcare and pandemic preparedness. Our most robust line of
defence against pandemics - whether they be natural or lab-made - is still
the simple, often overlooked and underfunded work of having well-
resourced functioning healthcare systems, a healthy populace with strong
immune systems, strong biosecurity practices in labs, ample vaccine
capacity, effective contact-tracing processes, and other pandemic
preparedness measures. These remain largely absent, despite the fresh scars
of Covid-19.
The risk of collapse is likely to rise over the coming decades, driven in
part by advances in another potentially dangerous technology: AI.
AUTOMATED COGNITION
In 2023 a long list of AI luminaries signed a letter on the risks of AI. These
included Geoffrey Hinton (known as the 'Godfather of AI'), Stuart Russell
(who co-wrote the textbook on AI: Artificial Intelligence: A Modern
Approach), Demis Hassabis (head of Google DeepMind), Sam Altman
(head of OpenAI), and Dario Amodei (leader of Anthropic). The letter
stated that 'Mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global
priority alongside other societal-scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear
war.'30
That concern has been expressed in more modern language by the rapper
Snoop Dogg: 'And I heard the dude, the old dude that created AI [referring
to Hinton] saying, "This is not safe, 'cause the AIs got their own minds, and

these mother----ers gonna start doing their own s---." I'm like, are we in a f-
--ing movie right now, or what? The f--- man?'
One problem is that it's unclear what Hinton or Snoop are talking about.
In general, AI tends to be used as a vague term to cover the technologies
that make machines do things that, if a human did them, we would consider
intelligent. That's a capacious and ambiguous definition.31  Intelligence
alone has dozens of potential definitions, from achieving goals in a complex
environment through to acting appropriately with foresight.32  AI is, of
course, also a marketing term that can overstate the capabilities of many
algorithms and make them seem almost ethereal.33
Let's not get distracted by abstract, marketing terms and stick to what
these machines actually do. They are material systems that vastly speed and
scale up specific cognitive tasks. That could be moving a robotic arm
(spatial navigation), recognizing faces (image recognition), or stringing
together words to maximize the probability of providing the correct answer
to a question (text processing). While intelligence is a broad, fuzzy term,
cognition refers to specific, concrete abilities that different algorithms can
excel at. As the Oxford cognitive scientist Carla Zoe Cremer observes, we
are better off thinking of this as 'automated cognition'.
What Hinton and others truly fear is that one algorithm will be able to
automate and combine a large number of different cognitive abilities. It will
start to possess the kind of broad, flexible abilities that a human has. It may
even be able to learn and develop new cognitive abilities. Think of this as
'automated general cognition'. Then there is the much more speculative
chance that an algorithm might not just become general, but also orders of
magnitude quicker and better performing than a human. From now on,
when I use 'AI' or 'AGI', I'll be referring to automated cognition or
automated general cognition.34
The idea of machines annihilating or enslaving humans is by no means
new. In 1872 the novel Erewhon by Samuel Butler depicted a society that
had destroyed most of its mechanical inventions after the machines began to
gain consciousness, self-replicate, and rise up owing to natural selection
among machines.35  In 1965 the Oxford-based AI researcher I. J. Good
published an essay on 'Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent
Machine'. He hypothesized that if a machine were to become more
intelligent than its human programmers then it could design even smarter

algorithms, triggering an explosion in AI. Humans would be quickly left
behind. Good warned, 'Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last
invention that man need ever make provided that the machine is docile
enough to tell us how to keep it under control.'36
In the past few decades, experts, including leading computer scientists,
have joined Good in taking this risk seriously. The perceived threat is the
creation of an 'unaligned' AGI. That is, an AGI with a mission that is either
not under human control or does not reflect human values (as difficult as
they may be to define across 8 billion people). The concern is not that the
machine will be malevolent or murderous; rather, we'll just be collateral
damage for them to achieve their programmed goals.
This wouldn't be a mere collapse, but potentially complete human
extinction, or perhaps an even worse fate, like perpetual enslavement.37
Unlike nuclear weapons, this is a hypothetical concern. We don't know
exactly what such a machine would look like. We don't know how it would
control or destroy all humanity. The ways that scholars have suggested all
tend to be sci-fi-like, such as the algorithm manufacturing and releasing
billions of microscopic drones to simultaneously assassinate all 8 billion of
us.38  The ultraintelligent machine quickly begins to sound like a
malevolent technological god. And we should always be sceptical of
appeals to gods, whether they reside in real clouds or the digital one.
We don't even know if such a machine can be built, or how long it would
take. Numerous attempts have been made to find out. A 2022 survey asked
352 AI experts when unaided machines would be able to complete every
task better and cheaper than a human: 90 per cent said it would occur within
a century and 1.1 per cent said it would never be built. The most recent
survey of 2,778 researchers found a 5 per cent chance that superhuman AI
would result in extremely bad outcomes by the end of the century, such as
human extinction. Superforecasters put the risk of AI causing human
extinction lower, at around 0.38 per cent. Few of us would hop on a plane
with a 5 per cent (or even 0.38 per cent) chance of crashing. In this case, a
crash would potentially kill not just a few hundred, but billions.39
There are reasons to be sceptical about these results: surveys are one of
the least accurate forms of forecasting. We have no evidence that they work
on long time frames for such a complex question as the creation of an
unprecedented technology. They don't allow experts to deliberate, and

individual experts don't have a great track record of prediction, even in
their own fields.40  Importantly, these surveys show an enormous range of
opinions, all the way from 'it will be built within years' to 'it will never be
built'.41
AI could also slow or stagnate for a range of reasons, including
increasing scarcity of the materials needed for labs and microchips, hard
physical limits (such as how small one can make a microchip), or
innovations simply becoming too difficult and costly. The polymath Vaclav
Smil, in his magisterial book Growth, puts forward the case that the growth
of all systems eventually stops. Diminishing returns doesn't just apply to
extraction, but also to innovation: every dollar of investment results in
fewer and fewer benefits. That halting point for new technologies, whether
it be in bioengineering or AI, may be far sooner than anticipated.42
AI may already be facing limits. Projections suggest that large text
models like ChatGPT will be using datasets equivalent to all the available
online, public human-generated text by 2026 to 2032. Within a few years
we could run out of data to develop bigger, better algorithms. This limit to
data could be overcome by relying more on 'synthetic data' created by AI,
but whether it's possible and what problems this would create is
uncertain.43  There could also be limits to energy use. One report estimated
that energy usage by data centres could more than double between 2023 and
2027, causing 40 per cent of data centres to face energy constraints.44  The
approach of building bigger algorithms to get better results could also
plateau. Some researchers in the field of machine learning think that the
approach of simply scaling up existing algorithms (with more data and
more parameters) may already be hitting a wall.45
AI itself is an industry product that is already prone to hyperbole and
exaggeration. The heads of AI companies, such as OpenAI's Sam Altman,
are happy to feed the concerns about AI safety because it makes their
products seem far more powerful than they are. They are artificial hype-
men.46  Today we have forecasts of AI significantly boosting the economy
and speculative visions of a world run by virtual AI workers. Yet we haven't
seen AI have much impact on growth or productivity. Even going back to
1987 the Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert Solow quipped, 'You can
see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.' That

fundamentally hasn't changed: we still haven't seen any significant
economic boost from AI.
We also don't know what is necessary to build intelligence. One
hypothesis is that intelligence only evolves in a body. It is an outcome of an
embodied interaction with an environment using different senses. This
would make the proposition of building machine intelligence far more
difficult. Robotics lag far behind the development of large text models,
while computer simulations would need to be run at an incredibly high
resolution (requiring an enormous amount of data and raw materials like
semiconductors) to produce an embodied intelligence.47
Despite all these reasons for caution, we still can't rely on the assumption
that an AGI is impossible to build or will face limits to growth. History
shows how quickly previously unthinkable technology can be built. On 12
September 1933 the physicist Leo Szilard read a newspaper that would
shape history. An article in it quoted Lord Rutherford, the man known as the
father of nuclear physics, who dismissed the use of nuclear fission as
'moonshine'. Szilard took a walk afterwards. During that stroll he came up
with the idea of a nuclear chain reaction. That became central to the
creation of the atomic bomb, which was built just a dozen years later. AGI
may seem unlikely now, but in an uncertain world we can't blithely dismiss
fears of powerful new machines. We need to be cautious. The stakes are so
grave that even an incredibly low likelihood of building a catastrophic AGI
should give us concern. More importantly it should give us a reason to
pause efforts to construct such a machine. We need to stop efforts to build
something that could potentially kill everyone until we can make an
informed, genuinely democratic decision about whether it is worth the
risk.48
Stopping AI is possible. All it may require is simply addressing the
economic exploitation that underpins increasingly powerful machines. Even
the most impressive algorithms are still built on cobalt miners in the DRC,
unfathomable amounts of data provided by artists, writers, and ordinary
people, and hundreds of hours of training and reviewing by flesh-and-blood
humans. Some of that work is done by humans known as 'content
moderators'. These poor souls need to trawl through thousands of sentences
and images, telling the algorithm whether or not material is appropriate.
Every day they are exposed to the worst of humanity, ranging from torture

to sexual abuse. OpenAI hired many of its content moderators from Kenya,
paying them between $1.46 and $3.74 per hour and offering them no
support. Many of the workers have complained of psychological trauma.49
Data annotators in Uganda are paid similarly low wages, despite the fact
that building an algorithm requires far more hours of work in annotating,
organizing and checking data than coding an algorithm.
The data that is annotated in Uganda is then exported along a fibreoptic
cable that runs close to the old East African railway. That was a railway
financed by the British to take resources from Uganda's interior to the port
of Mombasa, from where it was shipped back to the imperial core. Lurking
even under AI there is the global, rimless wheel of empire. Now, data,
finance, cobalt, and silicon are moving along these spokes, not just colonial
commodities.50
All this data is, of course, stolen.51  Data is fast becoming the latest
lootable resource that can be easily seen, captured, transported, and stored.
While we celebrate the CEOs of leading AI companies, the algorithms
themselves are models of collective intelligence founded on our collective
data. All this data is extracted from the web without our consent, while none
of us receives a single dollar in compensation for our valuable data. AI is
more extractive than artificial: it's dependent on cheap workers, cheap
materials, and stolen information. It wouldn't be possible (or at least
inexpensive and highly profitable) without the Global Goliath. If we started
paying workers fairly and requiring consent and compensation for the use
of public data, the development of AI would both slow and become far
more controllable.52
THE AI ACCELERANT
AI doesn't even need to reach such heights to be dangerous. It already poses
enough problems. That is because AI accelerates many existing concerns,
such as allowing for sophisticated automation of hacking, amplifying the
threat of cyberwarfare between countries, and allowing for the construction
of deepfake videos, causing problems for both our political and personal
lives.53  That is just the beginning of a far longer list of potential woes.

One particularly worrisome possibility is that the responsibility of
whether to fire nuclear missiles is placed in the digital hands of an
algorithm. There is already a precedent for this. Russia has since 1985
possessed the Perimetr system, more charmingly known as 'the Dead
Hand'. When activated it has contact with Russian command. If that
connection were to be lost, the computer system would assume that they
had been destroyed and automatically launch a radio-tipped rocket that
would shower down radio signals instructing all nuclear silos below to
launch. The intention is to provide foolproof deterrence: even if the Soviet
commanders are killed in a first strike, the rest of their arsenal will still
launch on the US. It's a pre-programmed doomsday device. Fortunately, it's
active only during crises, though we don't know whether it is active at the
moment.
In 2024 Adam Lowther, former professor of the US Army's School of
Advanced Military Studies, and former US Air Force Colonel Curtis
McGiffin advocated for the US to adopt its own dead-hand system through
the integration of AI. The US military already has a worrying fondness for
automation and integrating AI into its forces. This has led to a growing
chorus of scholars warning the government not to hand over the nuclear
launch codes to an algorithm. It would be the automation of nuclear
holocaust.54
The military has already shown a willingness to use AI to scale and speed
up murder. In 2016 the National Security Agency (NSA) of the US hooked
up a new machine-learning algorithm to its drones hunting across the skies
of Pakistan. For over a decade the US had been using drones to launch
missile strikes against people and compounds across the country. This new
programme was different. It used the metadata (information about data, for
instance where and when a call took place) of 55 million Pakistanis to
determine how likely they were to be a messenger for terrorist cells. It
analysed how they moved, who they called, and who they met, to decide
whether they should die. The programme would then create a 'final kill list'
of the most suspicious suspects for the drones to target. The program's
name was SKYNET. We don't know how many were killed because of
SKYNET, or even whether they were guilty of aiding terrorist
organizations.55

Using AI to accelerate bombing campaigns isn't just a US pastime. In
2023, in the opening weeks of Israel's bombing campaign of Gaza, a new
set of AI systems was deployed. It had been developed by Unit 8200,
Israel's version of the NSA. The 'Lavender' system would use swathes of
data to predict who was an appropriate target connected to Hamas or the
Palestinian Islamic Jihad. At its height Lavender identified as many as
37,000 Palestinian men. These had to be vetted by a human operator, but
the procedure was inappropriately brisk. One Israeli using the Lavender
system admitted they would spend around twenty seconds checking a target
before giving approval for them to be bombed. Another AI system called
'The Gospel' would identify buildings and facilities that were most likely
used by targets. The targets were then tracked and a third algorithm called
'Where's Daddy?' would alert the Israeli military when the targets had
arrived back at their family homes and were ready to be assassinated.
Dropping a bomb on an unguarded house was seen to be more reliable than
attacking military facilities. According to internal sources, the Israeli
military used cheap 'dumb bombs' that wiped out entire houses and were
permitted to kill up to twenty civilians for every target. This was largely
done as a cost-cutting measure. We don't know how many innocent lives
were lost due to these AI systems, but it could easily be in the thousands.56
Lavender at least required some oversight. There are some AI military
systems that require no human approval at all to decide who lives and who
dies. These are usually called 'lethal autonomous weapons', but for clarity
let's just call them 'killer robots'. The first confirmed attack from a killer
robot came in 2020, when a Turkish-made Kargu-2 drone (the same
kamikaze drone mentioned earlier) hunted down and assaulted people in
Libya. A year later in 2021, Israel launched a swarm of AI-coordinated
autonomous drones during an attack on Gaza. AI-enhanced drones packed
with explosives are, of course, already being used in the war between
Russia and Ukraine.
This is just a small taste of things to come. The US is developing fleets of
unmanned ships and swarms of up to 250 AI-managed drones. This is likely
to be boosted by the $1 billion Replicator Initiative that plans to build even
larger AI-managed drone swarms that will hunt down targets. Not to be
outdone, the US Air Force is also looking to construct a fleet of 1,000
unmanned fighter jets to be flown by AI systems. Russia is also working on

AI-run drones, vehicles, and even missiles. Perhaps the most concerning is
an autonomous, nuclear-armed underwater vehicle called Poseidon.57
Proponents of AI warfare suggest that the use of killer robots and
integration of AI into military operations could make war more restricted
and humane. Algorithms are not expected to be clouded by emotion or
bloodlust and could be hypothetically programmed to abide by strict rules.
After looking at operations like Lavender and SKYNET, it is hard to take
such a position seriously. The goal of using these systems is speed, scale,
and cost, not compassion, restraint, or a desire to abide by the rules of
warfare.
The debate over whether killer robots will be humane also overlooks
bigger problems. Killer robots won't stay on the battlefield. It is only a
matter of time before one is used to assassinate a head of state, or a swarm
is outfitted with facial recognition to exterminate a rival political group (a
scenario chillingly depicted in a short video titled 'slaughterbots'). Even
that may not be as bad as how a government could use killer robots to
intimidate and even kill its own citizens. Historically, larger, non-violent
movements are more likely to succeed.58  Part of that is because violent
action is less likely to be carried out by police and the military when a
gathering has such a broad cross-section of society. Will you still fire into a
crowd when you might shoot a cousin or a friend? Killer robots, however,
would have no such qualms. They would, at least in theory, be obedient to
whoever controls the code.59  The scenario of killer robots becoming
widespread across a population is terrifying. The scenario in which they
become the ultimate monopolizable weapons - a new, modern Goliath fuel
- is perhaps worse.60
Machine learning could also supercharge our global ecological crisis.
One search on Google uses as much electricity as is required to power a
lightbulb for two minutes. One query to ChatGPT is twenty-five times more
costly: you could light up a bulb for fifty minutes. That is an enormous
increase, and one that can accelerate the already substantial emissions of the
digital world. If all our digital technology was a single country, it would be
the third highest consumer of electricity, behind the US and China.61
Major fossil-fuel companies such as Shell intend to use machine learning
to improve their ability to find and tap new sources of oil and gas.62  Any

new fossil-fuel developments are completely incompatible with limiting
global heating to 1-2°C. To have just a one in two chance of keeping the
planet below a safer 1.5°C level of warming, around 60 per cent of oil and
gas, and 90 per cent of known coal reserves, need to remain in the
ground.63  Using AI to search for more at this stage is a public commitment
to heating the planet.
An automated nuclear response, killer robots, mass surveillance, digging
up and burning more coal: these are all outcomes of AI. Then there are the
myriad other problems that just the first wave of chatbots and generative
algorithms have created: supercharging plagiarism in school,
recommendation algorithms that deepen political divisions, bots that speed
up cyberwar and cybercrime, the theft of intellectual property from artists
and writers, and the spectre of mass unemployment due to automation.
These systems offer numerous benefits as well. AI-enhanced detection of
cancers and identifying new drugs is important, AI-generated art is cool,
chatbots can be nifty, and AI could help progress areas of science, but it's
hard to see these outbalancing the shadow of a crowd of protesters being cut
down by a buzzing cloud of drones.
This is the biggest threat of AI: it accelerates the creation of global
catastrophic risk. Arms races and military operations - whether it be the
race to a bigger swarm of autonomous armed drones or deciding which
families to drop bombs on - get speeded up. The hunger of the global
economy for data, energy, and resources will deepen. The need for more
and more data for better algorithms will drive mass surveillance. While
thermonuclear war or engineered pandemics (or, more speculatively, AGI)
could directly cause collapse, this AI accelerant is closer to a collapse by a
thousand cuts. It is the equivalent of pouring a tank of petrol onto an
inferno.
AI will also slowly and irrevocably take our fate out of our own hands.
As the world speeds up, humans can no longer keep pace. That slow theft of
decision-making power is already happening on battlefields and in
courtrooms across the world. Speed comes at a price. Algorithms may be
quicker and more efficient than humans, but we just need to think of
Stanislav Petrov to remember the costs. If an algorithm had automatically
responded to that nuclear alert forty years ago, it would have made a
different decision from Petrov's. You wouldn't be reading this book.

OceanofPDF.com

17
Gaia vs Goliath
Forever Corrupted - Playing With the Planetary Life-Support System -
How Bad Could Climate Change Get? - Tipping into Catastrophe -
Breaking Boundaries - The Roots of the Anthropocene
FOREVER CORRUPTED
If you've been out in the rain recently, or drunk a glass of water, then you
have probably been exposed to poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances, also
known as PFAS. They have been called 'forever chemicals' owing to their
persistence. They can last for years, as the environment has no clear way to
break them down. There are around 4,500 of these fluorine-based chemicals
that were originally intended to be used in heat-, water-, and stain-resistant
products. Since then, they have spread from these materials into the earth
and our bodies. PFAS are now found in the bodies of 97 per cent of
Americans. They have also been found in soils and rainwater around the
world. Often in levels that exceed European and US safety guidelines. Even
if you are in remote regions of Antarctica, you will be exposed to PFAS.
There is simply no way to avoid them.1
Substances such as PFAS have been linked to a range of health outcomes
globally, including higher cancer rates as well as declining fertility and
sperm count levels. They have also been associated with an increase in birth
defects, less-effective vaccination responses, raised levels of liver enzymes
and cholesterol, and kidney and testicular cancer. What is more worrying is

what we don't know. We lack long-term safety assessments for most of
these long-lasting pollutants. We know even less about how they interact
with the environment and other compounds. Such assessments may be
impossible, given the quantities in which these artificial compounds are
produced: over 100,000 types and 2 billion tonnes every year.2  Also, they
may not be reversible, since PFAS cycle continuously through rivers, rain,
and other water sources. Concerningly, the costs of trying to clean them up
may simply be prohibitive. It is currently estimated that trying to remove
just one type of PFAS, perfluoroalkyl acids (PFAAs), at the same rate they
are produced every year would cost between $20 trillion and $7,000 trillion.
In other words, the cost of just cleaning up one type of PFAS probably
exceeds the global GDP (which is around $106 trillion). And that wouldn't
even get rid of what has already been released. These truly are forever
chemicals.3
PFAS are part of a wider basket of synthetic compounds and chemicals
that are called 'novel entities'. They are geologically novel, as they are
synthetic and have never previously existed on earth. Novel entities include
PFAS alongside different types of plastics (including microplastics),
bisphenol A (BPA), and persistent organic pollutants such as aldrin (a
pesticide), highly carcinogenic polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and
DDT. DDT was banned after decades of use since it was found to be highly
persistent and toxic to many forms of life, as well as carcinogenic to
humans.4
The amount of novel entities like PFAS that the earth system can handle
is what researchers now consider to be a 'planetary boundary'. Planetary
boundaries are zones of human impact on the earth system. Once you pass a
boundary, the risk of abrupt and irreversible change increases dramatically.
Change that could have disastrous consequences for humanity and the
planet. We are now thought to be beyond the boundary for PFAS: we have
already entered the uncertain danger zone for novel entities. This is not the
only planetary boundary we have crossed. We are already feeling the effects
of a more visible trespassed boundary: climate change.5

PLAYING WITH THE PLANETARY LIFE-
SUPPORT SYSTEM
The history of life on earth is a story about the climate. We've had four
mass extinction events in the last 541 million years (the Phanerozoic period
of earth with larger-scale multicellular lifeforms).6  Each of these is
associated with a loss of around 75 per cent or more of species. Climate
change, namely global warming, played a key role in all of them.7
The human story is also entwined with the climate. For the first 95-99
per cent of our species' history, we lived in climatic conditions in which
sustained, intensive agriculture was almost impossible. The dry, cold
conditions with abrupt, volatile climatic shifts weighed against intensive
food production, or even just settling down in one place.8  Then, 12,000
years ago, the entry into the warmer, more stable Holocene allowed for
Goliath fuel, especially lootable resources, leading to the incredibly slow
but fundamental shift from hunting and gathering to farming, from
civilization to Goliath.
Ever since then we have been fundamentally constrained by the climate.
For the past 6,000 years the vast majority of humans have lived in a narrow
climatic envelope of ~11-15°C (along with a second smaller envelope of
~20-25°C, for India's monsoon region).
This is the 'climate niche' of Goliath. The first five original political
states of the world all arose in this peculiar climatic bandwidth. Since then,
most cities, crops, people, and livestock have stayed clustered in these
areas. Even today, this climatic zone contains the greatest amount of
economic activity. While we can live in numerous other environments, such
as the Arctic and the Sahara, those areas don't tend to support cities or
industrial infrastructure.9
Shifts in temperature have played a major part in shaping human history.
We've repeatedly seen the fingerprints of climate change, from the fall of
the Late Bronze Age during a megadrought to the synchronized collapse of
Goliath systems across the north of America during the Little Ice Age. This
was never a straightforward relationship of climate causing collapse, but we
shouldn't ignore the role that climate plays. Even the rise of great empires
often coincided with a change in the climate. Rome's expansion coincides

with the 'Roman climatic optimum': conditions that were favourable for
growing crops and supporting a larger army.10  The formation of the
Mongol Empire was also given a helping push by the climate. The rise of
Chinggis Khan's empire, the largest contiguous empire in history, occurred
during a period of persistent wet and warm conditions.11  These conditions
meant more productive grasslands that Mongol horses grazed. More and
healthier horses meant a stronger army. The contraction of the Mongol
Empire and its sudden retreat from Hungary in 1242 occurred during a
period of colder conditions that undermined the pastureland and mobile
cavalry.12  Climate is one important factor that moved the needle of history.
It would be a mistake to feel as though our industrial Global Goliath is
now outside the reach of the effect of climatic shifts. That overlooks how
dramatic the amount of warming we are facing is. The changes that rocked
and directed the world in the past were regional, short term and usually less
than 1°C. We are now sitting at the precipice of global heating of perhaps
2-6°C above pre-industrial levels within the next hundred years. By the end
of this century we could experience temperatures that have not been felt
since the Early Eocene, around 55-50 million years ago.13  Even a rise of
just 2°C would lead to temperatures that have not been experienced for over
2.6 million years, since the Pleistocene epoch.14  We are facing an
atmosphere and a climate that will be radically different from the one in
which our species and Goliath evolved (Figure 37).15

Figure 37: Temperature change from 1000 to 2100 CE
The greatest mass extinction event in the earth's history, the Great
Permian Dying (around 252 million years ago), was sparked by an initial
temperature rise of 6-8°C over tens of thousands of years; 80-90 per cent
of all life on earth was eventually lost. We are releasing carbon today ten
times faster than the carbon pulse that caused the Great Dying. What we are
doing to the climate is geologically unprecedented. We are playing with the
atmospheric life-support system of the planet.
HOW BAD COULD CLIMATE CHANGE GET?
The declaration that followed the 1988 Toronto Conference, one of the first
climate summits, described the consequences of climate change as

potentially 'second only to a global nuclear war'. We've already seen how
cataclysmic nuclear war could be. Could climate change approach that level
of global destruction?
In truth, we don't know. Both higher-temperature scenarios and climate
risk are dangerously understudied. Analysis of reports by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the wider
scientific literature shows that they disproportionately focus on warming of
2°C or less. We are betting on the best case.16
What we do know is that the warming we are facing is severe and
unprecedented. Our current emissions trajectory puts us on track for a
temperature rise of around 2.1-3.9°C above pre-industrial levels by
2100.17  These numbers are highly uncertain. It all depends on the
tremendously difficult task of predicting economic growth, energy
technologies, and geopolitics decades ahead. It also depends on how the
earth reacts. The earth system could be more sensitive to our emissions than
we are expecting, meaning we get more warming than anticipated for every
additional tonne of carbon put into the atmosphere. Our best estimates
forecast that a doubling of CO2 will see temperatures rise by around 2.5-
4°C. Yet that leaves an 18 per cent chance of warming of more than
4.5°C.18  This is not exactly what anyone would call 'low probability'. One
recent (and controversial) paper led by NASA scientist James Hansen
suggests that a doubling is highly likely to cause warming of 4.5°C. In the
long run, over more than a century, this could result in heating of 10°C.19
It could be even worse than that if the earth system springs any hidden
surprises. One poorly understood factor is how clouds respond. One recent
simulation suggests that at very high levels of greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere (roughly a tripling of current levels), the
stratocumulus cloud decks (fluffy, low-lying clouds) around the tropics will
begin to break up. Clouds usually reflect sunlight, effectively cooling the
earth. Their loss will result in even more warming, perhaps up to 8°C of
it.20  This would be in addition to the warming of around 6°C already
caused by high concentrations, resulting in a spike of heating of about
14°C. This is, for now, a speculative simulation. Let's hope we don't get the
chance to test its accuracy.

So far, it appears that we are on track for higher levels of warming and
may have been underestimating how sensitive the climate system is. As of
2025 we have already temporarily exceeded 1.5°C. Over the period June
2023 to May 2024 global temperatures were 1.63°C above pre-industrial
levels. This is a significant acceleration of previous warming trends, but
whether it is temporary is unclear.
Even a rise of 1.5°C would have dramatic consequences. It would
significantly increase the likelihood of 'multiple breadbasket failures':
simultaneous failed harvests in the major crop-production centres of the
world, such as the US Midwest.21  This would shock the price of staple
crops like maize and wheat, with repercussions for the world. One small
example of such a ripple effect comes from over a decade ago. In 2010 a
climate-change-driven heatwave scorched Russia. Wheat yields dropped,
causing Russia to institute a cereal export ban. This caused a spike in global
cereal prices, especially wheat. In the UK, food-bank usage surged as
people struggled to pay for increasingly expensive staples. In Egypt, where
40 per cent of people lived below the poverty line, the effect was even more
noticeable. Bread is crucial in Egypt, where it is referred to as aish,
meaning 'life'. The increasing price of bread contributed significantly to the
2011 Arab Spring revolts there, which were initially dismissed as yet
another bread riot. Now imagine that rather than a single heatwave in
Russia, a far worse surge in temperatures occurred simultaneously in
Russia, Brazil, and the US Midwest. We don't know what the knock-on
effects would be, and our models don't even try to capture such
possibilities, but it's safe to assume they wouldn't be good.22
That is just for 1.5°C. The impacts of climate change do not scale linearly
with temperature. That means a temperature rise of 3°C would be more than
twice as damaging as 1.5°C. Such levels of warming would violently shift
the climatic niche that our societies are adapted to, with over a third of
people pushed beyond the niche by the end of the century.23  Some areas
would be especially hard hit. Currently only about 30 million people live in
areas that have average yearly temperatures above 29°C. These are largely
non-urban peoples living in the Sahara Desert or on the Gulf Coast. Under a
medium-high emission scenario, by 2070 around 2 billion people are
expected to live in regions where the average yearly temperature exceeds
29°C.24  Much will depend on whether they can successfully adapt.

This extreme heat will make for a far more volatile world and could even
trigger other catastrophic threats. These domes of extreme heat will also
encompass two nuclear states (Pakistan and India) and seven Biosafety
Level 4 labs (labs that handle the most dangerous pathogens in the world).
They would also disproportionately fry the countries that are already
politically fragile and likely to fall into state failure (see Figure 38).25
What would happen next is necessarily speculative. Pakistan and India have
always had a tense relationship, with several border skirmishes over the
past decades. They also share a water resource in the Indus River. Around
70 per cent of Pakistan's economy relies on the Indus, which is set to dry up
under future climate change.26  The chances of a nuclear conflict, accidental
or intentional, increase alongside geopolitical tensions. Without remedying
action, climate change in the Indus Basin is likely to inflame these tensions.
(This doesn't mean that climate change will directly cause a nuclear war
between the two, simply that it heightens the conditions for conflict that
could escalate into one.)27
Then there is, of course, the heat. Humans have a physiological limit to
how much heat they can withstand. Prolonged exposure to heat can be
lethal, even for young healthy adults. Such lethal effects are usually reached
once the wet-bulb temperature - the temperature at 100 per cent humidity -
of 31°C is reached.28
Under global warming of 4°C vast swathes of the Middle East, South and
East Asia, and North and South America would experience extreme heat
conditions that reach lethal levels. Every year 2.7 billion people would have
to endure weeks of such heat during the daytime; 1.5 billion would
experience a month of it and 363 million would face an entire season of
such intolerable outdoor temperatures.29  Global supply chains would be
strained as people are limited to working outside for a few hours during
darkness for weeks or months on end. Air conditioning isn't a sustainable
solution as it would simply increase energy demand, emissions, and
blackouts.30  (It is also an option that the poor of the world rarely have
access to.) The ripple effects of such a rise would make the 2010 Russian
heatwave look mild.
OceanofPDF.com

Figure 38: Extreme heat, fragile states, and the production of global catastrophe
OceanofPDF.com

This map depicts the overlap between fragile states (rated on a scale of 0-120, with higher numbers
meaning greater fragility), nuclear weapons producers (in this case, the capitals of countries that
possess nuclear weapons), Biosafety Level 4 labs, and areas of extreme heat. The shaded areas show
regions of extreme heat exceeding 29°C Mean Annual Temperature (MAT) by 2070. SSP5-8.5 is the
highest emissions scenario used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). SSP3-
7.0 is a medium-high emissions scenario.
A rise of 6°C or more would lead to mass extinction. Lethal heat would
engulf even more than 3 billion every year. The Arctic would be ice-free
year-round while Antarctica would lose around 70 per cent of its ice,
leading to sea levels twelve metres higher than today.31  Billions would be
displaced from the climate niche. As the world warms, animals and
infectious diseases will also move with the changing climate niche. This
will all heighten the risk of new zoonotic infections (like Covid-19) as we
get novel mixes of people and animals in hot conditions.
This picture of the future is bleak enough, but it gets worse once we
consider tipping points in the climate system.
TIPPING INTO CATASTROPHE
Tipping points are thresholds where just a small push can propel a system
into a totally different state, sometimes with no possibility of return, just as
when you rock too far back on a chair you commit yourself to toppling
over. Tipping points are one of the key reasons that 1.5°C is considered the
planetary threshold for dangerous climate change. Even at this temperature,
six global tipping elements are at a high risk of being passed. These include
the collapse of the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets as well as the
loss of low-latitude coral reefs.32  In other words, we are already careening
into a world that will lose its coral reefs and two of its largest ice sheets.
These tipping points don't just threaten to create significant disruption.
They could also propel further warming. They are what we call 'positive
feedbacks': self-amplifying changes. Think of the loss of an ice sheet. The
bright white of snow reflects sunlight back out into space. Dark seawater
absorbs sunlight, heating the earth. As ice sheets shrink and more seawater
is exposed, the earth warms up even more, melting even more sea ice. It
becomes a self-propelling, sometimes runaway, change.

We already have numerous reasons to worry about such self-perpetuating
cycles. Currently, the Arctic is heating nearly four times faster than the
global average rate and twice as fast as previously expected. The permafrost
across the Arctic hides a ticking time bomb: it holds nearly twice as much
carbon as the atmosphere. As it thaws, increasing amounts of methane are
released. It's a process that is irreversible over the space of centuries (it
would take far longer to reverse). According to one model, we may have
already reached the point of no return: methane will continue to leak from
the Arctic for hundreds of years even if we don't release one more tonne of
carbon. These are just the tipping points we know of. A world that is 3-4°C
warmer than pre-industrial temperatures would be radically unfamiliar. If it
happens, it will be so different that it is immensely difficult to know when
the warming will stop.33
Even tipping points that could occur this century with lower levels of
warming are alarming. One of the most concerning is the shutdown of the
Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, known as the AMOC. The
AMOC acts as a huge, liquid conveyor belt, taking warm salty water from
the tropics and transporting it to the North Atlantic. This warmer water
releases heat before cooling and becoming denser, sinking down before
moving south back towards the tropics. Melting ice from the polar regions
and higher temperatures in the ocean are combining to slow the AMOC.
A complete shutdown of the AMOC was once considered a speculative
possibility. That is no longer the case. The latest evidence using sea surface
temperatures over the past two decades suggests that the AMOC could pass
the threshold towards collapse during 2025-95.34  A shutdown of the
AMOC would reshape the world. It would plunge Europe into an ice age
while warming the tropics. London could be cooled by around 10°C, while
areas further north could be worse. Bergen in Norway could see
temperatures drop by 15°C.35  Much of the arable farming land in the UK
would become unsuitable for growing crops. Globally, land that can be used
for growing corn and wheat would be halved compared to a world without
climate change.36  This is not a far-fetched or distant scenario. Once the
AMOC passes a tipping point the collapse can unfold within decades. While
the numbers are highly uncertain, Stefan Rahmstorf, one expert studying
the AMOC, put the odds of crossing the tipping point by the end of this
century at 50/50, the flip of a coin. As with AI, we shouldn't rely on the

estimates of a single individual, but all the evidence points towards an
AMOC collapse within the next century as being plausible and not even
low probability. While the AMOC would lead to a regional ice age in
western Europe, unfortunately the rest of the globe would continue to
heat.37
The danger of the AMOC is that, once we cross a certain threshold, we
are committed to its collapse, even if we stop global carbon emissions
entirely. This is the unsettling dynamic of how most tipping points work.
The AMOC is only one among several interlinked tipping points that are
now coming to light, including the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (a current
surrounding Antarctica that could be 20 per cent slower by 2050 owing to
climate change). Tipping points don't just characterize the climate system,
but also much of the earth system that we are degrading. We aren't just
risking pushing the climate system over the edge, or pushing into hazardous
unknown territory with novel entities; we are wading into the danger zone
for multiple planetary boundaries.
BREAKING BOUNDARIES
There are nine planetary boundaries. These are estimated thresholds past
which we will leave the safety of Holocene-like conditions for the planet
and enter a state in which the earth can no longer effectively self-regulate.
We've transgressed six of these, four of which are in the high-risk zone
(Figure 39).38  None of these show any signs of abating. The high-risk zone
for these boundaries means two things. First, we've moved beyond the
conditions in which our societies developed (as with our shift of the human
climate niche). Second, the potential for uncertain, abrupt, and irreversible
change and damage increases significantly. We've already seen this for
novel entities and climate change: tipping points and uncertainties are in
many ways the scariest part of what we are doing to the earth system.39
Regardless of tipping points and uncertainties, we are already heading
towards the next mass extinction event. Current rates of species extinction
are around 10,000 times what they would be without human intervention.40
In other words, species are going extinct 10,000 times quicker than they

otherwise would because of human activity. Thirty per cent of all mammals
are now at risk of extinction. Some species are suffering far more than
others. Insects are dying out at rates eight times those of birds, reptiles, and
mammals. Total insect populations are decreasing by around 2.5 per cent
per year. Based on current trends, there is the real possibility of most insect
species disappearing from the earth by the end of the century.41  Again,
there are potential tipping points. The fear here is that the loss of enough
critical species will start a cascade across the webs of life. As one prey
species dies, its predator goes extinct, and the losses of both ripple across
ecosystems.
Figure 39: Transgressing the planetary boundaries
All planetary boundaries are interconnected; transgressing any one of
them could plausibly be a key contributor to collapse. We are transgressing

six so far. One study of extinction rates among marine fossils found that a
temperature rise of around >5.2°C tends to be a trigger for mass
extinction.42  Similarly, other studies have found that large changes in the
earth's carbon cycle are associated with mass extinction events. The current
burst of carbon we are releasing may have already passed the threshold for
previous mass extinction events.43  That is just the interaction between
biodiversity loss and climate change; there are many others.
These are just the boundaries we have studied and know about. There
may be others that we are already beginning to transgress. These include
deoxygenation of the oceans and the cycling of different elements in the
earth such as boron, arsenic, and mercury. One could even be in space.
Competing companies are racing to fill the atmosphere with fleets of
satellites. Projects such as SpaceX's Starlink will lead to up to a million
new spacecraft being launched in the coming decades. This wave of floating
metal has foreseeable dangers. As the defunct satellites drop from orbit,
they burn up in the lower atmosphere, leaving conductive, electrically
charged particles. The earth is surrounded by a magnetic sphere that holds
in place two belts of charged particles (known as the Van Allen Radiation
Belts). The debris from burned satellites will leave a trail of conductive
particles that is billions of times greater than the current Van Allen Belts.
Adding billions of tonnes of unknown chemicals to the atmosphere hasn't
worked out well so far. Doing the same to the earth's magnetic field is also
unlikely to be a wise move. There is already evidence that this could
weaken the earth's magnetic field, and the re-entry of spacecraft could
deplete the earth's repairing ozone layer. The weakening of both the
magnetic field and the ozone layer will leave humanity even more
vulnerable to solar storms (which could destroy electrical infrastructure)
and cancer-causing solar radiation. It could eventually push us into the
high-risk zone for a fifth planetary boundary: stratospheric ozone
depletion.44  Then there are the unknown effects, for instance whether
billions of floating metal particles littering the atmosphere could warm or
cool the planet.45
From the oceans and soils to the skies and beyond into space, the earth
system is being pushed into a perilous state.
Infringing on some of these planetary boundaries, such as climate
change, could directly lead to collapse. Others act as indirect drivers of

collapse by slowly weakening societies. For instance, novel entities could
lift the rate of chronic illnesses and disease, overburdening already
struggling healthcare systems and creating further distrust in public
institutions. This doesn't make such drivers less relevant to collapse.
Remember that the fall of Rome and Chinese dynasties were occasioned by
both numerous vulnerabilities (such as corruption and elite competition)
and bigger shocks (like disease and invaders). The important lesson is that
these interacting contributors to collapse all emerge from an extractive
Goliath system.
THE ROOTS OF THE ANTHROPOCENE
We no longer live in the Holocene but in the Anthropocene. Ours is a
geological epoch in which human activities have become a key shaper of
the earth system. Today you can find not only PFAS in the Arctic but also
plastic 10,975 metres below sea level in the deep-ocean Mariana trench.
Our gouging environmental fingerprints are now inescapable.46
While our actions now will determine both the climate and the fate of
most species (including our own), the Anthropocene is not a recent
phenomenon. It is a process with deep historical roots. Early hominids were
habitually using fire at least 400,000 years ago, and perhaps as early as
800,000 years ago. Fire remade the landscape. It not only favoured species
that could withstand burning (pyrophytes), or benefited from it (pyrophiles),
but also selected for certain types of animals. As we spread from Africa, our
footsteps on the land became heavier. Hunting animals, burning forests, and
harvesting wild crops started to transform the earth. Before the first plough
had been picked up, foragers had already modified over three-quarters of
the world's regions.47
As we raised sickles and scythes our prints on the land deepened. The
turn towards domesticated crops and animals meant a new kind of
landscaping. The wetlands of Mesopotamia were slowly replaced with man-
made irrigation canals and pastures for goats, sheep, and cattle. These new
lands looked wild and diverse compared with the cash-crop plantations of
spices, sugar, tea, and cotton that would follow 4,500 years later under
colonization.

The biggest acceleration of our environmental impact came with the end
of the Second World War. If a future archaeologist were to examine this
point in the fossil record, they would notice some peculiar trends. From
1952 to 1962 there would be a thin layer of radioactive materials such as
plutonium spread across the world due to nuclear tests. Plastics and
previously unseen novel entities would begin to appear. The fossils of
animals become increasingly scarce. As the Global Goliath grew the entire
world was re-engineered.48
One leading candidate for the date that should mark the beginning of the
Anthropocene is 1945. Others think it should be the invasion of the
Americas, when the sheer scale of death cooled the climate. Some believe it
began when our ancestors begin to pick up ploughs to farm the land. Yet,
any single date would be misleading. The Anthropocene isn't an event; it's
a long, accelerating process. We've now entered a thick-and-fast
Anthropocene that is rapidly pushing beyond our planetary boundaries.49
This quickening, deepening stamp on the land is not mainly due to human
numbers or the general greed of humans. When we look at human activity
across the tropics, whether it be the Yucatán, or Africa, there are clear
thresholds past which our environmental impact intensifies. The
introduction of domesticated crops such as rice, colonization, and the post-
1945 acceleration are the three clearest turning points. Each of these is
marked by the creation and evolution of Goliath: the first states, colonial
empires, and the forging of the Global Goliath. At each point there was a
clear acceleration in the acres of forests cleared, the number of species
wiped out, and the amount of pollution released into the soil, rivers, and
oceans. The Anthropocene is the environmental bootprint of Goliath.50

Figure 40: Land use over the past 12,000 years
Land use is a measurement of how humans have modified the global
environment. It is one key indicator of the Anthropocene. The story of land
use is simple. The conversion of land into fields for crops and pasture for
grazing animals began to pick up around 8,000 years ago as lootable
resources were adopted and Goliaths began to emerge. It has grown and
accelerated over time with two big upticks in the eighteenth century (the
Industrial Revolution and spread of Goliath) and the 1950s (the
entrenchment of the Global Goliath) (see Figure 40).
Not everyone bears equal culpability for this planetary conundrum. The
rich are disproportionately responsible for our current ecological
predicament. The richest 1 per cent worldwide account for more emissions
than the poorest 66 per cent.51  Those living in high-income countries use
six times as many resources and produce ten times more emissions than

those living in low-income countries.52  One study across five planetary
boundaries found that the top 10 per cent of income earners globally were
responsible for between 31 and 67 per cent of planetary degradation.53
The richest 1-10 per cent not only exert the biggest environmental impact
but also tend to set status and consumption norms for everyone else to strive
for. There is a reason why the most expensive perfumes and designer bags
are marketed by the richest and most glamorous celebrities. It is also the
wealthiest who hire lobbyists, make hefty political donations, and even run
for office (Trump being one recent example). Lurking beneath the crisis of
planetary boundaries is inequality and status competition.
The Anthropocene is largely driven by the long historical process of
turning the principle of least effort of our ancestors on its head and instead
using the environment and the labour of others for conspicuous
consumption. The principle of least effort was all about expending as little
energy as possible to meet your needs so you can maximize leisure.
Conspicuous consumption is about wastefully using as much energy as
possible to signal power and status to others. Chiefs and kings of
hierarchical hunter-gatherers regularly cajoled, coerced, and encouraged
their wider communities to intensify the production of food for feasts. This
may have even been a historical contributor to the uptake of domesticated
crops and animals. It continued from there with growing a greater surplus
(usually through conquest or intensifying agriculture) to fuel more material
displays of status. Whether it be throwing a feast in Mycenaean Greece (or
essentially anywhere else for that matter), a maize-beer party in Monte
Albán, human sacrifices by the Shang Dynasty, a parade of war captives
through Rome, the colonial gold and silver that lines the churches and
palaces of Spain, mountains of plantation-grown sugar and tea in Britain, or
showing off a lavish set of private jets and yachts in New York, material
growth is needed when the underlying goal is status. From feasts and
pyramids to rockets and skyscrapers (especially those emblazoned with one
man's name), such conspicuous consumption is largely status competition
that has become manifest in grain, stone, metal, and concrete.
Today, this growth fetish underpins our environmental problems.
Economic growth is one of the few factors that pushes against each of the
planetary boundaries. To date, economic growth and the material footprint
of societies are closely correlated. Growth across countries is set to increase

material extraction and is expected to rise by 60 per cent by 2060,
endangering our ability to meet climate, biodiversity, and pollution
targets.54  Economic growth de facto makes us less likely to keep the
climate sufficiently cool. Higher growth means we need to cut emissions
more rapidly, a task we are already failing at abysmally. Plausibly high
economic growth rates could make the worst-case emissions trajectory
(which puts us on track for warming of around 4-6°C) 35 per cent likely.55
Although it is possible to grow the economy while reducing emissions
(usually called 'decoupling', a phenomenon we've seen in countries such as
the UK) the rates required go far beyond anything we've seen. Equitably
limiting warming to 1.5°C means that high-income countries would need to
decouple emissions from growth an average of ten times faster than current
rates.56  There is just the raw, inescapable reality that more growth means
sharper, more difficult emissions cuts. Staying within 1.5°C of temperature
rise means annual reductions of global emissions of 7.6 per cent, a rate
faster than that achieved by Covid-19 (6.3 per cent), for decades.57  Doing
that while rapidly expanding the economy - which would increase the
amount of reductions required - seems at best unwise and at worst
impossible. Moreover, even if we did miraculously decouple emissions
sufficiently, we'd still have the problem of such material consumption
pushing against the rest of the (too frequently ignored) planetary
boundaries. The more we remain enslaved to Goliath's impulse to grow, the
less likely we are to keep the planet stable.
This is not to say that we should stop all economic growth: the poorest
countries - from Afghanistan to Zambia - still desperately need to grow
economically to eliminate poverty and increase prosperity. Instead, to stay
within planetary boundaries we'll need to eventually overcome the growth
fetish and rein in conspicuous consumption. We'll also need to realize that,
past a certain point (which rich countries have already passed), growth
doesn't mean progress. Simon Kuznets, the inventor of Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), our modern measure of economic growth, remarked in
1934 that 'the welfare of a nation can scarcely be inferred from a measure
of national income'. GDP was never intended to be a yardstick of progress,
and it is a mistake to consider it as such: Portugal, for example, has 65 per
cent less income per capita than the US but outranks it on almost every
social indicator.58

Rather than focusing on raw numbers of GDP, we should focus on what
we are growing. Renewable energy, vaccine capacity, affordable housing,
and leisure time are all things we should all be striving to increase and
innovate in. Not bullets, bombs, cigarettes, SUVs, private aeroplanes,
fossil-fuel infrastructure, or algorithms to keep teenagers glued to their
screens. We need to start focusing on progress rather than growth. That
means moving beyond growth and putting our production back under
democratic control.
Growth simply measures economic activity, which includes the
production of risk. The construction of every nuclear warhead, the
manufacturing of every killer robot, and the chemical synthesis of every
tonne of novel entities contributes to GDP. The biggest contributors to
global catastrophic risk, whether it be in emissions, dangerous new
technologies, powerful new AI models, nuclear arsenals, carbon emissions,
or novel entities, are also the biggest economies: the US and China.
This isn't a problem of humans in general eating the earth. It's Gaia vs
Goliath.59
OceanofPDF.com

18
The Death-Star Syndrome
When the World Stood Still - The Hyperconnected World - The
Accelerating World - The Concentrated World - Falling from the Zenith
WHEN THE WORLD STOOD STILL
As a species, we are more powerful than ever. In the last 10,000 years the
yields of our food supply have grown by an order of magnitude. We can
move 50 to 150 times faster than walking. Our life expectancy has tripled,
thanks largely to reducing infant mortality and combating bacteria through
better sanitation and antibiotics. Economic activity per person in wealthy
nations is around a hundred times higher than at the peak of the Roman
Empire. Availability of knowledge for the average individual has increased
by an unfathomable amount. Today, a simple internet connection gives you
access to 64 trillion gigabytes of data, a complete compendium from
astronomy to zoology.1
We are more powerful than ever, yet in some ways we are also more
vulnerable than ever, as we discovered in 2020. New Year's Day that year
was much like any other, but within four months over 3 million people had
died, entire countries had been turned into fortresses and hundreds of
millions had been locked in their homes.
This wasn't just a moment where we realized our own collective
biological vulnerability. It was also a triumph of sorts. Vaccines were
developed within weeks and it ended up being the fastest vaccine

development and rollout in history. It could have been far quicker if
countries had invested more in vaccine production and companies had not
hoarded the intellectual property of life-saving drugs.2
In March 2021, while the pandemic was still unfolding, another shock hit
the globe when the Ever Given, a 200,000-tonne, 400-metre-long container
ship, became stuck in the Suez Canal. Around 369 ships, representing
approximately 30 per cent of global container traffic, backed up at either
end of the waterway, costing the world $6-10 billion in lost trade.3
Both these events could have been much worse: a virus that had killed 10
per cent of its victims rather than <1 per cent would have had a very
different outcome, and the canal could have taken far longer to clear.
The world appears to be growing both increasingly robust and more
fragile. I call this the 'Death-Star Syndrome', after the space-weapon in the
film Star Wars: A New Hope that can annihilate entire planets but can itself
be destroyed by a single well-placed blow. Our world is incredibly powerful
and robust, yet surprisingly fragile if hit hard enough in the right place.
THE HYPERCONNECTED WORLD
Both the spread of Covid-19 and the economic fallout from the blockage of
the Suez Canal were worsened by the interconnectedness of the world.
During the twenty years from 1950, commercial air traffic grew in volume
by over 10 per cent per year. By 2014 around 3.3 billion passengers were
being carried every year. In 2024 that number was around 5 billion, and it
could double in the 2030s. We can see a similar trend in shipping. Over the
past 150 years, global shipping capacity has increased around sixty-fold.4
Today, exported goods account for around 25 per cent of global economic
activity by value compared with 8 per cent or less before the Industrial
Revolution.5
The world is economically more connected than ever. This can mean
more connections between people, cheaper goods, and more countries
dependent on one another and so less likely to go to war. Hyperconnectivity
is also a key reason why collapse is suppressed in the modern world. When
a state begins to fall, the international community can and usually does

mobilize resources to prop it back up (although, as we can see in Palestine,
this depends on geopolitics). Yet this is not a complete good-news story.
The same links that can aid in recovery can also transmit a crisis around
the entire system. One of the most striking examples was the WannaCry
ransomware attack. WannaCry was a computer virus that could replicate
itself through a network. The initial attack occurred at 07:44 UTC on 12
May 2017. In less than eight hours it had corrupted 300,000 computers
across 150 countries, including networks in FedEx and the UK's National
Health Service. Again, we got lucky: the virus just demanded a ransom
payment from victims rather than destroying data, and it was able to be
quickly defused. At 15:03 UTC the hacker turned cybersecurity expert
Marcus Hutchins found a way to prevent the virus from spreading further.
The problem with connectivity can be seen not just in computer viruses, but
also in biological ones: the hyperconnected world enabled Covid-19 to
move across entire continents and leapfrog oceans in just a few days.
Connectivity can often make a system resilient to small shocks but
vulnerable to large ones. It is a pattern we see across systems, be they
financial, digital, or ecological.6  Think of how quickly the global financial
crisis of 2008 spread from a single housing bubble in the US across most of
the world in the space of months.7
In the Late Bronze Age, interdependence was a blessing for elites in the
best of times but became an Achilles heel in the worst. Their close trade in
tin and copper - the prerequisites for making bronze - and their close
diplomatic links, led to a state of independence. This meant that just the loss
of a few key hubs, such as Ugarit and the Hittite Empire, was potentially
enough to destabilize the system. The countries of today are, of course, far
more technologically advanced and resilient than the Hittite and Assyrian
empires of the Late Bronze Age, but the world is also far more
interconnected and fast-moving. The Late Bronze Age also reveals that the
problem is not connectivity per se but rather deep interdependence: when
one part falls, so too do all those that are overly reliant on it.

THE ACCELERATING WORLD
The Black Death of the fourteenth century spread at the speed of medieval
sailing ships; the Covid-19 virus, carried on a commercial airliner, travelled
one hundred times faster; our online financial systems communicate around
a hundred times faster than the speed of sound; most stock-market trading is
outsourced to algorithms that can react far faster to minuscule microsecond-
to-microsecond changes in the market and maximize profit.
A market ruled by lightning-quick machines can lead to lightning-quick
disaster. In 2010 the US stock market lost over $1 trillion on stock indices
within thirty-six minutes. That flash-crash was caused by algorithmic
trading, which accounts for about three-quarters of stock-market trades. The
system operates far too quickly for any human to intervene and prevent a
crash.8
Algorithmic trading is one example of 'tight-coupling': when two
components in a system are closely interdependent and respond quickly to
each other's moves. Another common example is 'just-in-time' supply
chains, whereby manufacturers avoid keeping expensive inventories by
having parts arrive when needed. As with algorithmic trading, it makes for
an efficient but vulnerable system. In 2011, floods in Thailand engulfed a
central hub for producing car parts and hard-disk semiconductors that most
of their customers relied on for just-in-time delivery. There were factory
slowdowns and closures across Japan, Malaysia, and Indonesia. The price
of hard drives rose by up to 190 per cent, exports from Thailand to the
European Union decreased by 35 per cent (and over 20 per cent for the US),
and car manufacturers in Japan saw a decrease of up to 50 per cent in
profits as well as 174 days of disrupted production.9
Having more back-up stockpiles and slower trading with more human
involvement would lessen the potential for factory shutdowns and flash-
crashes, yet countries and companies have little incentive to do so.
Efficiency, low costs, and speed are essential in a deregulated, high-
competition, profit-driven economy, and building resilience costs money.
Under the tyranny of the quarterly earnings report, long-term planning takes
a back seat.
That quickening pace is also evident in the environmental footprint of the
Global Goliath. After 1945 most socioeconomic trends speeded up rapidly,

whether it be population growth, the production of paper, the consumption
of fertilizers, or the constructions of dams. Between 1950 and 2022 the
global economy increased fourteen times over, going from around $10
trillion to approximately $140 trillion.10  All of those rapid increases
required huge material extraction from the environment. Whether it be the
amount of water dammed, greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere,
or the number of shrimps farmed, human impacts on the environment all
soared dramatically. This is sometimes called 'the Great Acceleration'
(Figure 41).11
OceanofPDF.com


Figure 41: The Great Acceleration
OceanofPDF.com

The upper graph shows global GDP (international $ at 2017 prices) over the past 2,000 years, while
the lower shows energy consumption over roughly the last two centuries. Economic growth was
incredibly slow over most of history: global GDP was around $213 billion in 1 CE and took around
1,500 years to double to $500 billion. Both global GDP and energy consumption have a similar trend,
accelerating with the Industrial Revolution and again in the 1950s. Many other indicators, whether it
be plastic production, water consumption, global greenhouse-gas emissions, or the number of fish
caught globally, all show a similar spike around the 1950s.
But it wasn't just a great acceleration; it was a great coupling. The fate of
the earth system - whether it be through the proliferation of novel entities
into water streams, the number of species going extinct, or changes in the
temperature of the planet - is now tightly intertwined with the Global
Goliath. And whether we like it or not, the Global Goliath is still dependent
on the earth system (remember where all that cobalt, silicon, uranium, steel,
and coal comes from).
THE CONCENTRATED WORLD
The world is becoming increasingly monopolized. Economic power, the
goods and services we use, and even our infrastructure are all becoming
more monopolized and concentrated. You can taste it in every meal you eat.
Around 60 per cent of calories consumed globally come from just four
crops: soy, corn, rice, and wheat (the last three were the original lootable
resources and tax crops), and around three-quarters of global production of
these four staples comes from just five countries.12  In the private sector,
two companies own about 40 per cent of the global seed market, four
control 44 per cent of the global agricultural machinery markets, and four
dominate 62 per cent of the market for agrochemicals.13  That concentration
of market power and control shows no signs of reversing: mergers and
acquisitions between companies are making the global food system more
and more concentrated. It's a process driven by dynamics we've already
seen throughout history: those who have power (or in this case, market
share) find it easy to acquire more power.14
The concentration and monopolization of market shares can be seen
everywhere one looks. In the US in 1993 there were 193 defence
contractors. Now it is essentially just five colossal firms. In the US, over
half of printed book sales and 80 per cent of eBook sales happen through

Amazon (the numbers globally are about the same). In 2015, 64 per cent of
internet advertisement revenue went to either Google or Facebook
(although Google's share triples that of Facebook). One city (Hsinchu) and
two companies (UMC and TSMC) in Taiwan satisfy 60 per cent of the
world's appetite for semiconductors. And finance is so concentrated that
some institutions are now deemed 'too big to fail'. This is a problem in
itself: banks and airlines can often indulge in risky and irresponsible
behaviours because they know they can rely on government bail-outs (a
phenomenon known as 'moral hazard').15
These concentrated, homogeneous systems tend to be the most vulnerable
to shocks.16  If diets are highly dependent on one crop, then one disease or
shock can create a famine, as in 1845-52, when Ireland lost about a quarter
of its population due to potato blight in combination with the policies of the
British government.
There is also some evidence to support the old truism 'the bigger they
are, the harder they fall'. A 2020 study found that larger ecosystems tend to
shift more sharply than smaller ones. Think of the change from a coral reef
to an algae-dominated ecosystem after bleaching. After analysing twenty-
five marine ecosystems, fifteen freshwater ones, and five terrestrial
environments, one study found that that any increase in ecosystem size
meant quicker change. The team concluded: 'The collapse of large
vulnerable ecosystems, such as the Amazon rainforest and Caribbean coral
reefs, may take only a few decades once triggered.' Whether this applies to
societies is unknown.17
A more concentrated world poses vulnerabilities that could be
catastrophic. Some scholars think that a volcano would need to rank as an 8
on the volcanic explosivity index (VEI) (a phenomenon colloquially called
a 'supervolcano') to trigger a global catastrophe in the modern world.18  Yet
a smaller volcano could also have an equally high impact owing to the
structure of our world.
There are spots critical to the global economy where shipping lines,
underwater internet cables, telecommunications cables, and other
international infrastructure are clustered. These are what the University of
Cambridge volcanologist Lara Mani has called 'pinch points'.19  A category
7 volcano hitting one of these vulnerable pinch points could be calamitous.
The chance of one of these erupting in the next century is around one in

five.20  Vulnerable points, interdependence, and rapidly reacting systems
are all key ingredients that allow for a big shock or crisis to spiral into
collapse.
FALLING FROM THE ZENITH
'From morn to noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve/ a summer's day; and
with the setting sun/ dropped from the zenith like a falling star.' John Milton
penned those lines in 1667 for the epic poem Paradise Lost, yet they are
surprisingly relevant to our modern world. While the current Global Goliath
may seem unassailable, it contains several chinks in its silicon armour.
More hyperconnected, hyperconcentrated, hyperhomogeneous, and
hyperaccelerated systems make sufficiently large shocks more likely to
occur and spread. This is systemic risk: the potential for individual
disruptions or failures to cascade into a system-wide failure.21  It's
something that scholars have been warning about for over a decade. Such
systems create 'synchronous failures' in which crises spill across
systems.22  We see that in the global, industrial world in the close
association of oil crises with financial crises: financial crises tend to impact
fossil fuels heavily, and often vice versa (such as when the 1973 oil crisis
helped trigger the 1973-5 financial crisis).23  Today, crises across global
systems - like food, energy, and finance - are entangled in causes and
effects, creating what some call a 'global polycrisis'.24  Underneath all this
are just some simple structural features that are fundamental to the Global
Goliath: speed, connectivity, and concentration.25
None of this is about bad luck; it's about the structure of the system. The
Global Goliath is like a stack of ladders. Imagine a hundred ladders lined up
against a wall. Individually, it's easy to make any of them topple, but you
must hit them one by one. Now, imagine you tie them together into a single
giant ladder. It takes an act of great strength to push this one over, but
everything falls together in a single gargantuan crash.26  That is the
situation we find ourselves in today.
OceanofPDF.com

19
The Rungless Ladder
Swords of Damocles - Fattening Tails - Termination Shock - The Problem
With Techno-Fixes - The Somalia-Denmark Rule - Not as Improbable as
You Might Think - Falling Fossil Fuels - The Rungless Ladder
SWORDS OF DAMOCLES
In Greek mythology, Damocles, a courtier of the ancient King Dionysius I
of Syracuse, Sicily, is fawning over the monarch and telling him how lucky
he is to be king. Dionysius offers to let him take his place on a throne at the
head of a table overflowing with the finest food and surrounded by
flatterers. The catch is that he hoists a sword directly above Damocles'
head. Suspended by a single horse hair, it could fall at any time. It is the
king's way of showing that, while he may have wealth and power, he lives
every moment under constant threat of assassination. Power sits in the dark
shadow of precariousness.
This is a fable made for our modern world. Dan Zimmer, a catastrophic-
risk researcher at Stanford University, has compared the creation of nuclear
weapons and surging economic growth in the post-war period to a
contemporary Sword of Damocles. Distracted by growing material comfort,
we ignore the atomic sword hanging overhead. We live under not one
sword, but many. As riches multiply, so too do the existential threats
delicately suspended above us.
Violence and deaths from infectious disease are at historical lows and life
expectancy is at a historical high. Yet we also live in the most dangerous

time in human history. This is because of catastrophic technological threats,
planetary boundaries, systemic risk, and our responses to the prospect of
catastrophe. Together these are all building up 'latent risk': risk that does
not cause harm today but would do so in a post-collapse world. Our Global
Goliath is continuously inflating the costs of collapse, meaning that a future
societal breakdown will be far worse than any we have seen in the past.
FATTENING TAILS
You are about twice as likely to take your own life than to be murdered. You
are more likely to die from cancer than from any infectious disease.
Unfortunately, this does not mean that we live in the safest of times or are
on the cusp of defeating disease. Far from it.
Deaths from disease and violence follow a 'fat-tailed distribution'.1
They are marked by a few outsized events, such as the Spanish flu, the
Black Death, and the Columbian Exchange. This makes observing an
average from one year, or even ten, essentially meaningless. The average
will be brutally skewed by these 'tail events'. The extremes, not the
average, are the main source of risk. Importantly, these tails are becoming
fatter and longer over time. Even if the world on average seems safer and
healthier, the extremes are growing in likelihood and severity.
When it comes to violence, you may have a lower probability of being
bludgeoned to death than a citizen of Uruk in 4000 BCE. But in 4000 BCE
there was no weapon that could kill half of the people on the planet. The
risk of violence hasn't decreased per se; we've simply lowered the number
of observed killings per year while enormously inflating the risk of global
mass murder. All it takes is one bad day, one mistake, and suddenly the
violence statistics begin to look very different.
Every action or scenario has risks that vary according to their likelihood
and severity. The combination of those will form a 'risk distribution'.
Imagine you are forced to play one of two games of chance. In one, you are
flipping a coin for a prize and penalty of $10,000. There's a 50 per cent
chance you lose $10,000 and a 50 per cent chance you win $10,000.
Imagine a second game: Russian roulette. You sit around a table with five
others, a revolver loaded with a single bullet in front of you. If you survive,

you win $1 million. There is a five in six chance you walk out a millionaire,
and a one in six chance that you die. Technically, your odds of victory are
far higher, and the monetary payoff is far larger, yet most of us would opt to
flip the coin instead. That is because the risk distribution of the two games
is overwhelmingly different, especially the 'tail risk' of a low-probability,
high-impact bad outcome. The two games have different risk distributions:
Russian roulette has a better average outcome, but a huge tail risk.2
What we have done with violence is to shift the risk distribution much
more towards a game of Russian roulette. We have inflated the tail risk,
while making the average outcome better.
It is illogical to say that the world is becoming safer while tail risk is
growing. It's like saying that your neighbour is a pacifist, except for that
one stabbing spree when they killed fifty-five people.3  It is a fallacy to
believe that we live in a peaceful age with the nuclear Sword of Damocles
hanging overhead. This is true for disease as well. Infectious disease has
followed a fat-tail distribution throughout history.4  A mass-fatality
engineered virus would, like nuclear weapons, be growing the tail risk
(Figure 42).
The greatest threats we face today, whether it be from AI, climate change,
or nuclear weapons, all began after the Industrial Revolution. They all
require combustion engines, electricity, and international supply chains
fuelled by oil, coal, and gas. Coal, cobalt, and uranium are all built on
cheap, exploited labour arrangements that began with colonization. These
threats are the tail risk of the Global Goliath.

Figure 42: Fat Tails
The taller curve is roughly a 'normal' distribution, while the dashed line is a 'fat tail' distribution.
The key difference between the two is that the fat tail distribution has higher probabilities of big
losses or big gains. This can be seen in the gap between the tails of the two distributions.
This is pivotal for collapse. These tail risks are either key triggers for a
collapse or could be set off domino-like during a societal breakdown. A
nuclear war could trigger a global breakdown, or, conversely, a period of
international instability and conflict due to climate change and runaway
technology could trigger a nuclear war. These planetary Swords of
Damocles make collapse a dark prospect. Latent risk is growing not only
due to fatter tail risk, but also because of our responses to managing
catastrophe.
TERMINATION SHOCK
In the future, we may live in a world where a fleet of planes patrol the skies
24/7, pumping out chemicals that reflect sunlight, such as sulphur dioxide,
to cool the earth - a process known as stratospheric aerosol injection. It is
the cheapest and most likely form of solar geoengineering: large-scale
efforts to change the reflectiveness of the earth and so lower global
temperatures and combat climate change. (For simplicity I'll be using 'solar
geoengineering' in place of 'stratospheric aerosol injection'). It involves

spraying particles that reflect sunlight, such as sulphur dioxide, to reduce
temperatures. These aerosols act as minuscule space mirrors, reflecting
incoming solar radiation back out to space and cooling the planet. Solar
geoengineering would reduce global temperatures.
Solar geoengineering will be experimented with, and perhaps even
globally deployed, in the coming decades. It's relatively cheap: solar
geoengineering would cost only around $2-10 billion per year.5  To put that
into perspective, the US Department of Defense requested a budget of
$849.8 billion for 2025. It's also likely to work. Solar geoengineering
replicates volcanic eruptions, which also spew reflective particles into the
sky with similar effect, as in the 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruption that cooled
the earth by around 0.5°C during the following year. Oil-producing
countries (and their rich customer states) would support such a move, of
course, since it would allow more breathing space to use fossil fuels. The
most vulnerable might eventually see it as the lesser of two evils.
Ironically, human-emitted pollutants are already cooling the planet by
about 0.5°C. If we were to ban them, we would experience a surge in
warming that would push up temperature increases close to 2°C. In 2020
the International Maritime Organization (IMO) introduced new regulations
that lowered the sulphur content of shipping fuels from a maximum of 3.5
per cent to 0.5 per cent. It effectively cut sulphur emissions from shipping
by 70 per cent.6  Since then, the world has experienced an acceleration of
global warming, with temperature increases now exceeding 1.5°C. This
speeding-up of warming has probably been due to the reduction of shipping
pollution that has lowered the amount of coolants in the atmosphere.
Whether we like it or not, we are already solar geoengineering the climate
by emitting both aerosols and greenhouse gases.
Is solar geoengineering safe? Or could the cure be worse than the
disease? In 2021 Dr Aaron Tang and I examined what its catastrophic
downsides could be. We discovered that, unlike the potential of global
warming, surprisingly little is known about the impacts of cooling by solar
geoengineering. It could slow the monsoon and change rainfall patterns
across the world, but much remains uncertain. The risk will also depend on
how it is deployed, the amount of cooling, and the kind of world it is used
in. Most models bet on the best-case scenario by assuming solar
geoengineering will be deployed with perfect international cooperation for

decades on end. This isn't a safe assumption. It is more likely that a small
cadre of countries will resort to a rushed deployment because the world is
warming even more rapidly than expected.7
Solar geoengineering will also pose other unique problems such as
political instability. After a solar geoengineering project is initiated, every
extreme weather event may be attributed to it. Conspiracy theories and
accusations of wrongdoing will abound, especially if there are no reliable
scientific methods to determine just how much a solar geoengineering
experiment contributed to a drought, flood, or hurricane. If the project were
to be undertaken unilaterally, the country responsible would be blamed by
the rest of the world.
Finally, solar geoengineering creates the problem of termination shock.8
Imagine that the world is facing a temperature rise of 4°C by 2100. In one
future, we didn't use solar geoengineering. It took 250 years to go from pre-
industrial temperatures to this hothouse earth state. That is because
temperature rises alongside increasing greenhouse-gas emissions. Now
think of a second future where the world implemented a solar
geoengineering system in 2040. We've had six decades of cooler, more
stable temperatures. Then, in 2100, the system is knocked out by a major
event such as a geomagnetic storm, a nuclear war, or a severe pandemic.
The solar-reflective particles unfortunately wash out of the atmosphere with
a half-life of around eight months. Within a year and a half, over 75 per cent
of the chemical mirrors that have been cooling the earth are gone, yet we
still have high levels of greenhouse gases blanketing the atmosphere.9  The
world begins to heat up fast. Rather than taking 250 years to reach 4°C of
heating, it only takes about two decades. This failure of solar
geoengineering would result in a warming rate a hundred times faster than
the greatest mass extinction event in history. This is termination shock: it is
the latent risk of solar geoengineering.
Termination shock is not inevitable. Perhaps we won't be hit by a
debilitating catastrophe; perhaps we'll wisely use the time that solar
geoengineering provides to reduce emissions until we can safely phase out
the system. Yet it is nonetheless a gamble. Solar geoengineering does not
solve climate change per se: it reduces the average risk but fattens the tail
risk. The average outcome of a solar geoengineering effort might be far less

damaging than the climate change it is preventing, but in the worst-case
scenario termination shock could make matters far worse.
Solar geoengineering would also only be a partial fix. It wouldn't stop the
oceans from turning more acidic because ocean acidification is primarily
caused by a chemical reaction between ocean water and carbon in the
atmosphere. Solar geoengineering would also be helpless to reverse the
effects of passing certain tipping points. Lowering global temperatures can't
stop the AMOC from shutting down once a threshold has been breached or
reverse it once it has shut down because the tipping-point-induced
shutdown is driven by dynamics in the ocean, not by global temperature.
Similarly, if we lose ice sheets in the future, we won't regain them by
lowering the temperature back to present levels.10
Even so, solar geoengineering could be one way to significantly reduce
climate risk. We could also try to design a system to safeguard against
different potential catastrophes, such as strong insulation against
electromagnetic pulses and multiple back-ups. A well-constructed solar
geoengineering system that is implemented with global cooperation, that
doesn't act as an incentive to keep burning fossil fuels with impunity, that is
robust to most global catastrophes, and that is used temporarily to shield the
world while we rapidly decrease emissions, would be better than facing the
direct impacts of climate change. We need to question how likely such a
scenario is and how much of an increased tail risk we are willing to tolerate.
There is no right or wrong answer as to whether that trade-off is worth it.
We simply need to carefully and democratically pick our poison.
THE PROBLEM WITH TECHNO-FIXES
Solar geoengineering is representative of a wider set of techno-fixes to
environmental problems. Almost every environmental threat has a matching
engineering solution that mitigates the hazard without addressing the causes
of the risk.
This holds true for even regional-scale disasters such as cyclones.11
There are several engineering interventions to prevent the formation or
decrease the intensity and duration of cyclones. These include cloud
seeding (injecting silver iodide or other chemicals that help form clouds and

precipitation), and aerosol injection (firing up sunlight-reflecting or other
particles to de-energize the cyclone or influence clouds). This has yet to be
done at scale, but it would probably work, and a group of Australian
scientists have already floated the idea.12
Similarly, there are many ways to prevent the threat of volcanoes,
whether at a regional or global level. These include drilling, fracturing
volcanic rocks, and cooling off the magma that surrounds the central
reservoir. These volcanic interventions could help release gas that is pent
up, lower the intensity of an eruption, or even completely prevent it.13  For
now, all these remain understudied and none has been implemented at scale.
There are even ways to use engineering to combat the biodiversity crisis.
Imagine a world in which you go to smell a flower and a robot bee flies off
the stamens. This is not sci-fi. The world is losing pollinators such as honey
bees at an alarming rate and potential replacements include mechanical
ones.14  It has also been suggested that we could artificially resurrect or 'de-
extinct' lost species. There are multiple ways of doing so, but the one that
has received the most attention involves using preserved genetic material to
create a clone embryo that is then carried to birth and raised by a near
relative (an elephant raising a woolly mammoth, for example).
These are all part of a wholesale drift towards a more artificial world.15
In this case, deeper institutional, or behavioural policies are overlooked in
favour of a techno-fix. This doesn't mean that all these interventions are
undesirable. Volcanic engineering is something we'll have to turn to
eventually if we want to avoid the devastation that would accompany a
large-scale eruption. It is something that we should be putting far more
money into researching and exploring. Similarly, given the rate of warming
and consequences of climate change, we should be exploring and ramping
up technical efforts to either delay or reverse warming. This could include
attempts to restabilize melting ice sheets or to draw down large amounts of
carbon by growing trees and using mechanical filters.
But we also need to be aware that an increasingly artificial world comes
with a cost. Technological solutions to environmental problems are more
likely to fall apart during a collapse. If we rely on using aerosols to prevent
cyclones, then imagine what the loss of such methods during collapse
would mean: an unprepared and unprotected world would be facing
cyclones intensified by global heating. Becoming dependent on mechanical

pollinators means exactly that: relying on a pollinator that can be lost owing
to fracturing of the energy supply or a breakdown of industrial
infrastructure. A nuclear war, or even an explosion of solar energy from the
sun, could knock out the global electricity supply and all our techno-fixes
with them.
Growing latent risk can also be seen in disease. Conditions such as HIV
are treatable and manageable with modern medicine, but in a post-collapse
world without antiretrovirals, HIV could become an even more dangerous
prospect than in the 1980s. The same applies to the many devastating
diseases that today have been neutered by improved nutrition, health, and
treatments.
As with ecological risk, there are tempting techno-fixes for the next
pandemic. For instance, some biosecurity experts have pushed for fitting
Far UVC lighting across as many buildings as possible.16  These are
essentially lights that sterilize a room without negatively impacting human
health. Yet, if overused, a decreased exposure to bacteria could leave our
immune systems weak and vulnerable. This could still be an intervention
worth exploring, but we do need to think about the downsides and
unintended consequences.
New technologies, including techno-fixes, tend to be built on the pre-
existing stack of technology. AI requires reams of data sourced from the
internet, all of which depend on computers, and computers in turn rely on
electricity, which is built on an expanse of industrial infrastructure from
tankers moving coal to the mass smelting of steel. The constant layering of
technologies on top of each other makes the overall technological system
more complicated, interconnected, and potentially fragile. If the electricity
grid goes down, it would take most technology with it. Technological
complexity and dependency carry a cost.17
THE SOMALIA-DENMARK RULE
Not all states are alike. Many states today are far more accountable and
spend far more on welfare (and far less on the military) than in the past. The
US government (in 2025), which has a much larger military than any other
country, still spends only 13 per cent of its budget on its military while

allocating 21 per cent for social security. If you are a citizen of Denmark,
you'll get twenty-four weeks of paid leave after having a child (as will your
partner), whom you can then send to heavily subsidized childcare. When
they leave school they can study for free at a university, before eventually
retiring with a decent pension. The benefits offered by these democratic
welfare states, and the amount of control citizens have over them, is almost
unimaginably high when compared with the Aztec or Akkadian empires.
States of today are also far more robust than those of the past. Sargon and
Narmer had to rely on exaggerated intimidation, and most states throughout
history didn't even have a full-time police force. In contrast, rich states
today have sophisticated bureaucracies (including specialized emergency
services), full-time policing and defence forces, mass surveillance systems,
and sophisticated intelligence agencies. There has been an enormous shift
from intimidation to administration. In short, most citizens in rich countries
have less reason to revolt, and far less likelihood of doing so successfully,
than those in pre-modern states. After five millennia of Goliath evolution,
states have reached an unprecedented level of power and stability. More
democratic states tend to provide more public goods, maintain a social
safety net, and integrate their citizens more thoroughly.
As always, however, the benefits come at a cost. A welfare state is a good
thing, but it becomes a liability if the state disappears. One survey of thirty
historical regimes found that good governments (more democratic states
providing public goods) were more likely than autocracies to experience
severe collapses marked by severe, system-wide decline and a significant
population loss.18
Today's inclusive, highly centralized institutions handle crises well, but
the strong reliance they generate means that if they do go down, the fall can
be harder.
We can think of this as the Somalia-Denmark rule: the more predatory a
state, the less harmful (or even more beneficial) its collapse; the more
inclusive and benevolent a state, the more costly its collapse. If you are a
citizen of Denmark, you depend on a relatively benevolent state. You have
much to lose from its collapse. A Somali living under the Barre regime was
better off being governed by a local warlord.
Not only are more of us dependent on states, but we are also simply more
dependent on globalized infrastructure. You might be reading this while
sipping coffee grown in Guatemala, made using a machine powered by a

national electricity grid reliant on coal from China or gas from the US, with
a phone next to you that is partly composed of rare earth metals from across
the horn of Africa. Not only that, but most of us outsource vast amounts of
knowledge to the systems around us. Individually, we know infinitesimally
little about how the world works. Most of us lack the knowledge of how
even basic items such as zips work. Scholars have compared us to ants: as
we have come together in larger, more hierarchical groups, individuals have
become more specialized.19  Individual hunter-gatherers might have had the
knowledge to live from the land. Most of us now are hyperspecialized while
lacking basic survival skills. Knowledge is increasingly held not by
individuals but rather by groups and institutions. Our hyper-specialization
and dependence on global supply chains can give us great power, but that
dependencey is also a vulnerability.
This might not be an issue if the risk of a global catastrophe or of these
systems failing were sufficiently low. Unfortunately, that is not the case.
NOT AS IMPROBABLE AS YOU MIGHT THINK
Global catastrophe is often written off as being speculative, long term, and
of such a low probability that we don't need to worry. For instance, some
analysts of solar geoengineering have downplayed termination shock, since
a calamity large enough to knock the system offline is too rare and
humanity would simply recover and reinstall it.20  Most estimates suggest
that running a solar geoengineering system would cost less than 1 per cent
of global GDP. Even an unprecedented economic catastrophe, something
that wipes out 75 per cent of economic activity, would still leave plenty of
money to reactivate the system.
Neither of these is a convincing objection. Assuming states will swiftly
reinstate solar geoengineering, or another artificial support system, in the
wake of calamity means ignoring recent experience. In 2021, creating 3
billion doses of Covid-19 vaccines would have cost $18-120 billion and
provided benefits of $17.4 trillion.21  Despite this, vaccine production
remained stubbornly low. States and leaders are not rational actors who
always act in the wisest, most cost-effective ways during a catastrophe.

Relying on them to coolly and quickly reactivate a solar geoengineering
system is naïve.
Moreover, global crises are not as improbable as commonly assumed.
The chance of a high-impact volcanic eruption in a century is one in five.
Extreme space weather events are also unnervingly likely. These include
solar flares (mass ejections of electromagnetism from the sun) that cause
geomagnetic storms in the earth's magnetic field, disrupting and frying
electrical infrastructure. The 1859 Carrington Event is usually used as the
threshold for a space weather disaster. This was an intense geomagnetic
storm that luckily occurred before most of the world was dependent on
electricity. If it occurred today, a similar event would cause widespread
electrical failure and disruptions for months. It would probably be enough
to knock out a solar geoengineering system. Estimates for a future event
that is as bad as or worse than the Carrington Event, range up to 20.3 per
cent per decade. While there is no consensus, and we should place little
faith in these numbers, they are not negligible either.22
The same can be said of nuclear weapons. We don't - and can't - know
the exact likelihood of a nuclear war, but all the estimates agree that it isn't
low. One study mathematically modelled the likelihood of an inadvertent
nuclear war between the US and Russia based on past near misses and false
alarms. They calculated an annual probability of between 0.001 per cent
and 7 per cent.23  One expert suggested it was closer to 1 per cent per
year.24  In 2022, Harvard Professor Graham Allison put the odds of Russia
nuclear bombing the US at between 0.1 and 1 per cent.25  It's unclear
whether that likelihood has since increased. Since Russia invaded Ukraine,
superforecasters have calculated the likelihood of Russia using nuclear
weapons outside its territories at 2 per cent.26
Pandemics too are not a very low-probability occurrence. Pandemic
outbreaks are a matter of when, not if. Using a well-documented track
record of outbreaks since at least 1600, scientists have calculated that one
occurs roughly every 129 years. That means there is a 38 per cent chance of
experiencing a pandemic similar to Covid-19 within an average lifetime.
This risk is based on past experience, but the world is changing. As
deforestation, environmental destruction, and climate change worsen, more
animals are pushed out of their usual habitats and the chances of another

zoonotic infection increase. The probability of a pandemic could double in
the coming decade.27
Then there are other, more speculative threats that we can't place clear
numbers on, such as the creation of a powerful AGI or an engineered virus.
All these threats add up. Even just one, like nuclear war, might seem low at
1 per cent per year, but becomes unnervingly high over the space of a
century. We are not just facing the threat of nuclear war, but of all these
agents of catastrophe together. These drivers also interact. For instance,
extreme climate change both heightens the risk of a mass extinction event
and inflames geopolitical tensions.
If such a catastrophe does occur it may be far more difficult to recover
from than is commonly assumed. That is because the energy ratio of fossil
fuels is drying up.
FALLING FOSSIL FUELS
On 10 January 1901, the Texas Oil boom began. An oil drill tapped into the
Spindletop Hill reservoir, sending a forty-five-metre geyser of oil into the
sky.
These 'gushers' can now be seen only in black and white photos. The
fossil-fuel industry is instead having to resort to increasingly technical,
complicated, and costly procedures, such as fracking for shale oil and gas.
They have also had to resort to extracting oil from dirtier, 'unconventional'
sources like tar sands. Tar sands are seas of loose sand that contain bitumen
(a kind of crude oil) mixed with clay, sand, and water. Tar sands are hard to
extract oil from and produce around 31 per cent more emissions than
conventional oil wells.28  And fossil-fuel companies are also turning to
machine learning to locate harder-to-find sources of coal, oil, and gas.
While these techniques have expanded the supply of fossil fuels, they're
also more costly, in both money and energy.
Over the years, it is taking more oil to extract a barrel of oil from the
ground. In the US, by 2007 the energy ratio of oil and gas (that is, the
number of barrels that can be extracted from the ground using one barrel of
oil) had plummeted from 1200:1 to 5:1. That is a 240-fold decrease.
Globally, there is a race between a decline in the energy ratio due to the

depletion of fossil fuels and technological efforts to increase it. Right now,
depletion is winning.29  The energy ratio of coal is expected to fall similarly
by 2040 at the latest.30  One study looked at the ratio at the final stage, once
energy reaches the economy, rather than when it is first extracted from the
earth. The researchers suggests that we are overestimating the current
energy ratio of fossil fuels. By their calculations it is currently just 6:1
worldwide and declining.31
Future projections are no less comforting. By 2050 the energy ratio for
oil could fall to 1.5:1.32  The long-term energy ratio of gas is also set to fall
dramatically.33
The trajectory of the energy ratio has led to fears of an 'energy cliff' or
'energy cannibalism'. If the energy ratio drops to such a level then the
world can no longer maintain its current production or affluence. One
solution would be to move to renewable energy. The downside is that the
energy ratio of renewables is not particularly high compared to the fossil
fuels extracted during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The upside is
that they are still reasonable (approximately 10:1 for wind and solar) and
increasing owing to technical improvements.34  If we look at the energy
ratio for when energy reaches the economy, then renewables may already
offer better returns than fossil fuels. All technologies tend to reach a point
of diminishing returns and stagnate, but hopefully the improving energy
ratio of renewables continues for decades to come.35
It is difficult to overstate how important this trend - and the race between
the energy ratio of renewables and the falling energy ratio of fossil fuels -
may be. Progress over the past two centuries has been dependent on vast
infusions of low-cost fossil fuels. We often don't see it since we are largely
'energy blind' to how much coal, oil, and gas goes into the food we eat and
the systems that warm, cool, and illuminate our homes.36
The first wave of industrialization was fuelled by geysers of oil and
seemingly bottomless pits of easily accessed coal. These low-cost sources
are no more. If the world collapses, it may be impossible to re-industrialize.

THE RUNGLESS LADDER
Think of our global society as a poorly built ladder. As we climb, the rung
we have just used falls away. The higher you climb, the more dangerous the
fall. Eventually, any drop from the ladder becomes fatal. The missing rungs
represent the heightened severity of collapse due to more powerful
weapons, more disease burden, a more deteriorated global environment, and
a reliance on industrial agriculture, states, increasingly complex
technological systems, and global systems suffering from the Death-Star
Syndrome. The first farmers of Europe had only axes and arrows to fight
with, had room to disperse, and could slowly transition towards doing more
herding and foraging and less farming. Their fall, when it came, was
piecemeal, gradual, and from just a few rungs high. It was often even
beneficial. Now the fall is likely to be far more bruising.
The global technological and environmental threats we face today along
with our hyperconnected and hypercoupled system breed new
vulnerabilities, making it easier for big shocks to travel across both borders
and sectors, gaining in power as they do. And some of our attempts to ward
off disaster build latent risk into the system. The Global Goliath is creating
new, unprecedentedly destructive threats, new vulnerabilities through
systemic risk, increasing the ability for regional shocks to amplify into
global ones, and inflating latent risk. Collapse today looks very different
from the liberation of Cahokia or the decay of Rome. We are facing a
genuine global catastrophe that could end our industrial world and much of
life with it.
In chess, the endgame refers to the stage where only a few last moves are
left. The world of Goliath that started around five millennia ago also
appears to be reaching its endgame (Figure 43).The endgame is when we
face the genuine possibility of existential risk: deep, potentially permanent,
global collapse or even human extinction. In the next few decades or
centuries, it is highly likely that the system will self-terminate unless it is
fundamentally reformed. For the first time, there is the alarmingly high risk
that Goliath will destroy itself permanently and may even take our species
with it. Such high stakes naturally raise the question of who or what is to
blame for this precarious predicament.

Figure 43: The endgame
All the contributors to global catastrophic risk, whether it be fat-tail threats like nuclear weapons,
planetary boundaries like climate change, systemic risk or latent risk, are driven by the Global
Goliath. The Global Goliath doesn't only grow or drive technological development. Since the social
and environmental costs (like the costs of coal in terms of air pollution and climate change) aren't
included in the price, it selects for particularly environmentally and socially destructive types of
technology and economic growth.
OceanofPDF.com

20
The Roots of Our Endgame
Are We All to Blame? - The Agents of Doom - Crafting Threats in the Dark
- Make Your Own Nightmare - Hate the Game and the Players - Root
Causes - The Tree of Doom
ARE WE ALL TO BLAME?
It's easy to think that we are all to blame for any future collapse. That we
find ourselves in the precipitous position of facing unprecedented climate
change, thermonuclear war, systemic risk, and dangerously rapid
technological change due to human nature or each of our everyday choices.
This idea of collective blame did not spontaneously appear; it was
planted into the public conversation by a few powerful actors. This can be
clearly seen in the case of climate change. In 2004 the fossil-fuel giant
British Petroleum (BP) hired the public relations firm Ogilvy & Mather to
help deflect responsibility away from itself and onto consumers. As part of
this 'beyond petroleum' media campaign (which cost over $100 million)
they popularized the term 'carbon footprint', a measure of how much
carbon individuals emit going about their everyday activities, whether it be
eating breakfast or taking the bus to work. They even developed their own
carbon footprint calculator to help everyone estimate just how ashamed
they should be of their lifestyle. In 2019 they revamped their efforts through
a 'Know Your Carbon Footprint' campaign. While individual action is, of

course, important, the aim was always to shift responsibility onto the
public.1
It was a strategy that was more broadly shared. One analysis of 212
documents from Exxon, another leading fossil-fuel producer, found that
they had systematically framed climate change as a problem of individual
culpability. For instance, in 1998 Exxon asked the public to combat
growing emissions by exercising 'a little voluntary "can do"', before
merging with Mobil to become the largest oil company in the world, selling
5.4 million barrels of oil per day and reaping an annual revenue of $137.2
billion. For decades, oil producers have framed rising fossil-fuel demand as
inevitable and placed the burden of cutting emissions squarely on the
shoulders of the masses. It was only in internal memos and articles in little-
read scientific journals that they admitted their own culpability.2
The argument that we are all to blame occurs again and again. Sometimes
we are all to blame because of our desires: people endorse nuclear weapons
because they want security or are content with dangerous algorithms
because they want convenience, entertainment, and economic growth.
Sometimes we are all to blame because the root of our problems is human
nature itself: nuclear arms races and a lack of cooperation on climate
change are because of our innately parochial, suspicious, and self-interested
nature.3  But blaming the public is a manufactured distraction - a PR myth
that dissolves as soon as the hard figures on who produces catastrophic risk
are examined. The reality is that a mere handful of giant corporations,
countries, and militaries are responsible for creating the great majority of
catastrophic risk, shrouding their activities in secrecy to avoid scrutiny, and
undermining efforts to regulate them. Think of this small number of
companies and institutions - big tech, the fossil-fuel industry, and military-
industrial complexes (a collection of militaries and the arms manufacturers
they tend to contract to) - who disproportionately contribute to the
apocalypse as the 'Agents of Doom'.
Agents of Doom are in turn shaped and driven by larger incentives. At
root, there lie just a few causes that are embedded in both the earth and our
skulls. We can trace the causal chain of catastrophic risk from these roots
via the primary producers of risk to the endgame we face today (Figure 44).
Most catastrophic risk doesn't emerge randomly but is produced by just a
few actors for profit and power.

Figure 44: The causal chain of global catastrophic risk
We can think of global catastrophic risk as being part of a chain of cause-and-effect. For human-
made threats, this causal chain goes back from catastrophic risk today to the actors producing it,
through the structures which shape their behaviour, back to the deepest root causes which have
created those structural drivers.
THE AGENTS OF DOOM
There's a good reason that Exxon and BP were so eager to shift the blame
onto individuals. Both are part of a cohort of just thirty companies that
between them are responsible for a third of global energy emissions. No
matter how we slice up responsibility, these fossil-fuel giants are some of
the key drivers of climate change. Over half of the greenhouse gases
pumped into the atmosphere from 1854 to 2022 stem from just seventy-
eight corporate and state-owned companies. Since 2016, with the legal
adoption of the Paris Climate Agreement, 80 per cent of the rise in
emissions has come from just fifty-seven fossil-fuel and cement
companies.4
It's not due to a lack of knowledge. The greenhouse effect was
discovered in 1856 by US scientist Eunice Foote and we've had a high-
resolution understanding of climate change since the publication of the first
IPCC report in 1989.5  These companies are well aware of the damage that
each tonne of carbon is causing, yet they are choosing to ignore it.
It's a similar picture regarding countries. Just ten states (counting the EU
as one) are responsible for around 80 per cent of cumulative global
emissions since the Industrial Revolution. The US alone accounts for about
a quarter of greenhouse gases presently in the atmosphere.6  It's a trend that
is consistent over time. Even today the top ten emitters account for roughly
three-quarters of global emissions.7
Two countries, the US and Russia, hold 85 per cent of stockpiled nuclear
warheads and continue to develop their technological advancement in

delivery.8  The production and maintenance of those weapons is carried out
mainly by a small group of twenty-four companies who operate largely out
of the public eye but are financed by 287 financial institutions (such as
banks and, ironically, pension funds and insurance companies).9
Biological weapons, now officially outlawed, followed a similar
historical pattern from the First World War onwards. As with nuclear
weapons, it was the most powerful and technologically advanced states -
eleven countries such as Japan, Russia, Germany, the US, and the UK - that
created biological weapons. Since then, there have been around eighteen
incidents from biological weapons, the worst being Japan's attacks on
China during the Second World War. It remains states and large biotech
companies who have the necessary resources, equipment, and expertise to
create new dangerous pathogens.
This tendency for a few powerful actors to produce new world-damaging
technologies holds true for AI as well. The frontier of large text models is
largely concentrated in three key companies: Microsoft's OpenAI, Google
DeepMind, and Anthropic. Microsoft and Google rank third and fifth as the
richest companies in the world. They are all headquartered on the US west
coast (although Google's DeepMind itself is in London). That means they
all fall under the jurisdiction of one country: the US. Even if we cast a
wider net beyond large text models, we still see just a small number of
actors trying to build AGI. In 2020 over seventy projects were explicitly
trying to build an AGI, around half of them in the US, as were eight of the
nine projects with military connections.10
There are just a handful of powerful actors that are producing the world's
greatest threats. These Agents of Doom are large fossil-fuel companies, big-
tech titans, and the military-industrial complexes of a few empires such as
the US, China, and Russia. One could, of course, argue that, while the
creation of these global threats stems from just a few agents, they are
responding to the demands of the masses. It's another myth that doesn't
hold up to scrutiny.

CRAFTING THREATS IN THE DARK
Democracy dies in the dark. It is exceedingly difficult to democratically
regulate any activity that is kept out of the public eye. Yet, that is exactly
what is done when it comes to the production of the world's greatest threats.
It is an approach that is, despite their efforts to hide it, all too visible in
fossil-fuel companies, who have known about climate change and its
potential dangers for decades. The largest trade association for the oil and
gas industry has known since the 1950s, the coal industry since the 1960s,
and fossil-fuel giants such as Total and Exxon since the 1970s. During the
1970s Exxon made remarkably accurate internal forecasts of future global
warming, as did many of their employees in scientific journals. In 1979 an
internal Exxon study even admitted fossil fuels were causing climate
change and could be responsible for 'dramatic environmental effects before
the year 2050 ... the potential problem is great and urgent'. Rather than
alert the public, they buried the evidence. Then they collaborated to cast
doubt on the science of climate change.11
Fossil-fuel companies have since at least the 1970s run well-funded
disinformation campaigns to undermine action on climate change. They
funded conservative think-tanks with millions of dollars, which in turn
financed and gave a prominent platform to scientists infamous for falsely
challenging the scientific consensus on issues such as the link between
smoking and lung cancer, the effects of acid rain, and the existence of the
hole in the ozone layer. They included the tobacco lobbyist Frederick Seitz
and William Nierenberg, who was both a scientist in the Manhattan Project
and co-founded the conservative think-tank the George C. Marshall
Institute. Oil, coal, and gas companies didn't just fund and platform
professional contrarians who were sympathetic to their cause; they even
helped set up and fund fake grass-roots organizations that pushed against
the science of climate change.12  Much of this strategy was coordinated by
the International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conservation
Association (IPIECA) lobbying group, which has over forty corporate
members including BP, Shell, Chevron, and ExxonMobil.13  This deliberate
campaign of misinformation successfully set back the public discussion
(and action) on climate change by decades.

The fossil-fuel companies are not alone in their deception. While
microplastics and PFAS may be novel, the dangers were not unforeseen by
the companies producing them. The largest industrial producers of PFAS
such as 3M and DuPont were running safety studies on these compounds
for decades. By 1970 they had established that the chemical C8 (a type of
PFAS known as PFOA) was 'highly toxic when inhaled and moderately
toxic when ingested'. They didn't publish the findings. Instead, a decade
later 3M announced to the public that C8 was 'about as toxic as table salt'.
Their internal findings included reports on the possible links between PFAS
and prostate cancer that were shared between 3M and DuPont, and records
of children with eye and facial defects born to workers exposed to PFAS.
While the manufacturers shared this information among themselves, they
did not share it with the public. Instead, these studies on the negative health
impacts were intentionally buried and suppressed.14
They and others continued to insist that these products were safe for
decades, sought approval for them from the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), and denied the adverse health impacts of PFOA. The
producers knew these chemicals were potentially toxic forty years before
the public health community yet chose to endanger the public in pursuit of
profit. Their disinformation campaigns and lobbying efforts would never
have been possible if it had not been for their own internal secrecy.15
Secrecy has also been central to the production of nuclear weapons. The
public has been largely kept in the dark since their very invention. Both the
Manhattan and Castle Bravo projects of the US are now almost
synonymous with 'large, secretive government project'. The initial
classification system was so extensive that even basic physics published in
textbooks were considered 'born secret' (i.e. classified as soon as they were
written). The obsession with secrecy even led to the Atomic Energy
Commission burning hundreds of copies of an edition of the Scientific
American in 1950. Since then, nuclear weapons have remained staunchly
overclassified and outside the domain of public oversight.16
A key point of US secrecy was to prevent proliferation. It failed. Eight
other countries subsequently developed atomic weapons after the US did,
while numerous others could have (and had the knowledge to do so) but
chose not to. Similarly, secrecy played no role in having Ukraine give up
their inherited stockpile or South Africa dismantling theirs. What secrecy

has done instead is handicap public discussion of nuclear weapons. The
clandestine approach of the US has been replicated elsewhere. Israel has not
admitted to having nuclear weapons, although it is an open secret that they
do. Some believe that powerful states still have illegal biological weapons
capabilities that have successfully been kept secret.
It's not just the threats themselves that are being hidden; it's often also
crude corruption, lobbying, and profiteering in the companies and
organizations. One of the most common approaches is the creation of
'revolving doors' in which individuals move between lucrative positions in
industry (or lobbying for industry) and powerful political positions which
are supposed to regulate that industry. One illuminating example comes
from the US nuclear-defence industry. The former senator for Arizona Jon
Kyl was one of the key politicians who pushed for more money to be spent
on the multi-trillion-dollar US nuclear modernization programme in 2010.
In 2013 he left office and joined the lobbying group Covington & Burling,
working on behalf of the defence contractor Northrop Grumman, the same
company that had received the contract to modernize the US arsenal.
Northrop Grumman also spent $1.55 million on political donations in 2020,
while its Political Action Committees (PACs) doled out $3.77 million to
both Democrats and Republicans. Together, Boeing, Raytheon, Northrop
Grumman, and other aeronautical defence companies spent $46.9 million
on lobbying.17
Kyl is just one example of dozens of generals and politicians who push
for increased military spending while in office and then cycle into
handsomely paid positions with defence contractors (who benefited from
their actions) afterwards. It is an endemic problem that amounts to legalized
bribery: making the right moves while in office can guarantee a career with
a six-figure salary in industry later.
It also doesn't just happen in the US military. One report in the EU found
that six fossil-fuel companies (Shell, BP, ENI, Total, Galp, and Equinor)
and five of their lobby groups were involved in seventy-one 'revolving
door' cases over the period 2015-21. During that time, they also averaged
six meetings a month with the European Commission and spent €170
million on lobbying.18  In Australia, there is the well-documented case of
how oil, coal, and aluminium lobby groups - a coalition who call
themselves 'the Greenhouse Mafia' - have shaped the country's energy and

environment policies.19  There is also another revolving door between
politics and industry. Every resources minister in the Australian government
since 2001 who has retired from parliament has taken a position in the
mining, consultancy, or fossil-fuel industries after finishing their time in
office. Since 1990 more than a quarter of federal or assistant federal
ministers have taken jobs with special interest groups after their political
careers ended. It's why Australia, the world's sunniest and second-windiest
continent, has no price on carbon emissions and also has some of the
highest emissions per person in the world. Action on nuclear weapons,
climate change, and other global threats are the products of intentional
efforts to undermine democracy and capture state power.
We see the same revolving-door problem even when it comes to
responses to pandemics. In 2021 the Moderna vaccine was approved by
Stephen M. Hahn, the head of the US Food and Drug Administration
(FDA). Moderna was created by Flagship Pioneering, a bioengineering
venture-capital firm that spits out enormous numbers of start-up firms (with
the strategy of having the vast majority fail but winning big on one or two).
The vaccine wasn't even a Moderna invention: it relied on innovations from
the US government-owned National Institutes of Health (NIH) as well as
Scripps and Dartmouth universities. Moderna was then given $10 billion in
taxpayer-funded money before making $36 billion in profit. Hahn left the
FDA a year after authorizing the vaccine and joined Flagship as its chief
medical officer. He remains there as CEO-Partner. This happens not just
with Flagship. One of Hahn's predecessors, Scott Gottlieb, moved from
being head of the FDA to being on the board of the pharmaceutical
company Pfizer. Between 2001 and 2010 over a quarter of FDA employees
who approved cancer and haematology drugs went on to work in or consult
for biopharmaceutical companies.20  It is little wonder that the US public
has such a deep distrust of public institutions and why there has been such a
fertile ground for vaccine conspiracy theories. The revolving door also
makes proper regulation of biotechnology far less likely: if you are going to
go and work in the industry afterwards then you have far less incentive to
burden them with legislation to improve risk management. Those revolving
doors and legalized corruption undermine efforts to reduce and respond to
global risk.

Survey after survey has shown strong public support for reducing
catastrophic risk. One survey across six countries found that a strong
majority in each one, including Israel and the US, supported the creation of
an enforceable international agreement that would eliminate all nuclear
weapons. Europeans in particular heavily endorse a ban on nuclear
weapons. For years, opinion polls across the US, EU, China, Australia; and
others have shown substantial support for greater action on climate change.
One poll covering twenty-six countries found that a majority in each
country opposed the development and use of lethal autonomous weapons. If
anything, these surveys underestimate public support, since they are just
gathering the opinion of people who often aren't fully informed (especially
given government and corporate secrecy). Open democratic experiments
where citizens are convened in a jury (of 9-12 people) or assembly (of a
few hundred), are briefed by experts, and then deliberate, tend to show even
stronger support for aggressively tackling global risks such as climate
change.21
Whatever the threat, we see the same pattern of a few Agents of Doom
profiting from creating global catastrophic risk while cloaking their actions
in secrecy and extensively lobbying to prevent regulation.
MAKE YOUR OWN NIGHTMARE
In 2023 when a long list of academics and corporate leaders signed a letter
warning of the risk that machine intelligence could wipe out the human
race, a few names stood out. Sam Altman, Demis Hassabis, and Dario
Amodei are the leaders of the three largest, most advanced AI companies in
the world, constructing the most dangerous algorithms.
They continue to fret publicly about the machines they are building.
Amodei, CEO of Anthropic, thinks there is a 10-25 per cent chance of AI
destroying humanity; Altman, CEO of Open AI, has worried that the
'development of superhuman machine intelligence is probably the greatest
threat to the continued existence of humanity'. There are dozens of other
remarks from AI pioneers and producers warning that it could cause human
extinction. Yet these tech giants continue to pursue an invention they
believe could destroy all humanity, perhaps all life on earth. Even though

Amodei thinks there is around a one in four chance that the algorithms he is
helping to construct could murder not only all his closest family and
friends, but also you and everyone you know, every single one of us, he
continues to go to work every day.22
Not only are these leaders ostensibly making their own nightmare while
warning the world about their actions, but they are also actively thwarting
attempts to better oversee and regulate the creation of dangerous
algorithms. Whistleblowers at OpenAI have warned that employees must
gain permission from the company first before they contact the media.
That's the equivalent of asking a local mafia for permission to tell the police
about their drug deals. Employees leaving the firm also need to sign highly
secretive non-disclosure agreements or else they will lose their shares in the
company. They are also bound by 'non-disparagement agreements', which
essentially mean that employees who have left the company cannot say
anything critical of OpenAI, again at risk of losing their shares. It seems to
be a widespread practice, with past and present employees at both OpenAI
and DeepMind having penned an open letter calling for greater
whistleblower protection and safety measures. 'Open' AI appears to be
ironic at best.23
While coders get most of the attention, the role of lobbyists should not be
underestimated. From 2022 to 2023 the number of groups lobbying the US
government about AI almost tripled. These lobbyists are, perhaps
unsurprisingly, not pushing for tighter regulation to prevent human
extinction. On the contrary, Google, Meta, OpenAI, and TechNET (an
industry-wide lobbying group representing Google, OpenAI, Anthropic,
Amazon, and others) have all openly opposed SB 1047, a regulation under
the California State Legislature. The bill would require risk assessment of
any models that cost more than $100 million to train and are bigger than
1026 FLOPS (a measurement for the number of calculations a computer can
perform in a second) before they are deployed to ensure that these programs
can't cause catastrophic harms by, for example, carrying out cyberattacks or
helping to build nuclear weapons. It would also provide whistleblower
protections. In September 2024, Gavin Newsome, the governor of
California, vetoed the bill. He did so largely because of immense industry
pressure from the likes of Meta, OpenAI, and Google, all of whom
cautioned that the bill would lead to an exodus of AI firms from California.

The same companies warning that their machines could threaten human
extinction successfully helped veto policy that would better control these
machines. They are crying out for regulation in the abstract while killing
specific policies which could regulate them.24
Perhaps that's because people like Altman don't truly fear their own
creations. Warning of an apocalypse is instead a way to build hype about
their products while gaining more leverage over regulators. Their plea to
governments is that if you want to regulate a doomsday machine then you
need the advice of those building it. Their motive is profit and power, not
safety.
There are two alternative, more charitable explanations, ones that the
developers themselves have offered. One is that the technology is so
powerful that there is a moral imperative to build it. AI has been declared a
potential solution to extreme poverty, energy shortages, climate change, and
essentially every other global challenge faced by humanity. This belief that
a technology will create utopia is by no means new. Proponents of weapons
of mass destruction have repeatedly claimed that more advanced weaponry
could end all wars by simply making conflict too dangerous and inhumane.
That was said for artillery, dynamite, machine guns, submarines, smokeless
powder, and nuclear weapons. Every time, that claim of using more
powerful weapons to end war has been proved wrong.25  It's also an
argument that is more about a messiah complex (essentially a declaration
that 'I'll decide whether the potential benefits justify the risk to humanity')
than altruism.
The other excuse offered by developers is that they need to build the
potentially world-ending machine first because if they don't, someone else
will. And they are the (self-proclaimed) good actors who can build it safely
and benevolently. It's a view summarized in a 2024 op-ed by Sam Altman
in which he framed AI as a race between democracies and
authoritarianism.26  Often the developers use both utopian aspirations and
fears of a race simultaneously as excuses. On another occasion Altman said
'the upside of AGI is so great, we do not believe it is possible or desirable
for society to stop its development forever'.27  Similarly, the machine-
learning expert Geoffrey Hinton once responded to a question of whether
the development of AI could be stopped with, 'I don't think that's possible,

and I think we should continue to develop it because it could do wonderful
things.'28
The arms-race defence is interesting because it is so common. CEOs have
used it to explain why they need to build AI, and to defend environmentally
destructive practices; generals have used the same excuse to justify building
nuclear weapons and killer robots; and presidents have used it to explain
why they can't cut emissions. The excuse is that if we don't do it, someone
else will, and it's better if we 'good guys' do it first.
We shouldn't allow this arms-race defence let the Agents of Doom off the
hook. Even if you need to compete, no one is forcing chemical companies
to bury the evidence on the harms of PFAS, or fossil-fuel companies to run
scientific disinformation campaigns, or defence contractors to lobby and
use revolving doors to push for bigger defence budgets and nuclear
arsenals. That is clearly being done for the benefit of a small number of
firms and individuals. Yet there are also deeper incentives at play here.
Unless we address those structural incentives, then regulating or penalizing
the Agents of Doom will not be a lasting solution.
HATE THE GAME AND THE PLAYERS
In 1928 the polymath John von Neumann wrote a paper called 'On the
Theory of Games of Strategy' and started the now popular field of game
theory. Its aim was to identify what would be the mathematically optimum
course of action for a rational agent to take when trying to win a game,
whether it be chess or war. Game theory is one of the commonly used
explainers of arms races.
Arms races have often been explained in game theory as an example of a
'security dilemma'. Imagine two neighbours, both self-interested, rational
(they act logically to achieve their self-interested goals) individuals who
prioritize their own survival.29  They would prefer a situation in which both
remain unarmed. Guns are expensive and fatal accidents can occur.
However, they can't trust their neighbour's benevolence. The worst-case
scenario is you have no weapons when your neighbour attacks. The better
alternative would be if you get weapons and your neighbour doesn't. If your
neighbour has also chosen to purchase weapons, then you are of course

relieved that you decided to stockpile armaments as well. Hence, both are
incentivized to begin stockpiling weapons just in case. A move which is
good for each actor individually is bad for the collective.
Globally, it's often assumed that this security dilemma and subsequent
arms races are the result of 'international anarchy'. In the absence of one
overarching arbiter or world government, states can't help but compete with
one another.
A similar game-theoretic explanation is often used to justify
environmental destruction. Different competing groups overusing a
common resource has often been referred to as a 'tragedy of the commons'.
The tragedy is usually posed as a thought experiment: imagine an open-
access good (a common) such as a sea shared between fishers. If all of them
overfish, it will lead to the destruction of the resource. However, if one of
them does so, they can get away with it while getting a larger catch (at least
in the short term). A few will always act selfishly, and those who practise
restraint will be outcompeted. As with an arms race, individual actors
pursue rational short-term concerns, and the result is collective tragedy.
This idea was first proposed by the American ecologist Garrett Hardin in a
1968 essay. Hardin wasn't interested in environmental commons but was
instead trying to argue for population control. Nonetheless, his essay has
become a classic explanation for our environmental woes, from regional
overfishing to global climate change.30
We can think of the tragedy of the commons as emblematic of a wider
problem: a race to the bottom. Imagine a confectionery company that wants
to create sweets without the involvement of child labour. Paying adults a
fair wage will put altruistic firms at a disadvantage compared with those
who opt for the cheapest but most exploitative labour conditions. The
company with no scruples and a cheaper product will win out. Both arms
races and races to the bottom are underpinned by game-theoretic logic: self-
interested, rational actors pursuing short-term, self-interested goals results
in collective harm. It's easy to see how such dynamics can be used to
explain the actions of the Agents of Doom, increasing the likelihood of
nuclear war or extreme climate change.
We have already seen the problem of a third type of race that underlies
the others: status races. Whether it be between chiefs competing with feasts,
rulers through monuments, or billionaires through high-emissions stocks,
superyachts, and private jets, status races tend to drive conspicuous

consumption and expansion. In the long run, it is driving us into an
unpleasant collision with planetary boundaries. As we've seen, that race for
status also partly underpins arms races and races to the bottom.
While appealing, there are a few issues with viewing the problem through
this game-theoretic lens. While it's mathematically neat, we now have years
of studies showing that people aren't as rational as game theory assumes
they are. In laboratory experiments, irrational humans frequently fail to
match the predictions of game theory. Rather than being rational and self-
interested, people often show strong signs of reciprocity, a concern for self-
image (strongly related to status), and an aversion to inequity (which often
overlaps with an aversion to dominance).31  They often don't end up in
arms races. Similarly, if you put people in a tragedy-of-the-commons-type
situation in a laboratory, they rarely end up enacting a tragedy. Simply
allowing them to talk to each other prevents the tragedy of the commons
from emerging.32
The tragedy of the commons also frequently doesn't occur in the world
outside of lab experiments. For instance, Hardin was quickly disproved by
the economists Elinor and Vincent Ostrom, who showed that many
communities (including non-state groups) regularly solve the tragedy of the
commons. Groups such as the Khoisan and central African hunter-gatherers
seem to have managed their environment just fine for hundreds of
thousands of years.33
Our deep past also undermines the idea that security dilemmas plague all
humans and human groups. Our Palaeolithic fluid civilizations lived in a
state of 'anarchy', yet appear to have been peaceful. The first signs of
organized war and arms races begin only with the rise of dominance
hierarchies. There is also a wide array of different 'peace systems'
throughout world history (including hunter-gatherers) that don't fall into
arms-race-type dynamics. They manage to create peace not just through
governments but also through norms and culture.34
Yet, there is a reason that game theory seems convincing. It does seem to
explain how many states and corporations today behave, as well as the
struggle between elites and empires in the past. Clearly some groups fall
prey to this dynamic far more than others. Why?

ROOT CAUSES
There is a reason why arms races often happen across empires of the past
and the Agents of Doom today but rarely occur among most individuals.
Empires and the Agents of Doom are not human beings; they are
dominance hierarchies. They are artificial agents who act very differently
from the average person. Hobbes, when he first spoke of the Leviathan
state, defined it as 'an artificial man, though of greater stature and strength
than the natural, for whose protection and defence it was intended; and in
which the sovereignty is an artificial soul, as giving life and motion to the
whole body'. The courts were its artificial joints, the administration its
memory, its economic riches were its strength, and collapse was its death.
Similarly, the corporation is a legal entity imbued with the rights of an
individual. Legally, it is an artificial person. Alongside states and
corporations, large-scale algorithms are fast becoming a third type of
artificial agent, although one largely controlled by states and companies.35
Both states and companies are artificial creations: inventions that both
amplify decision-making power and allow for a being that could outlive its
creators. A state can enter agreements and take on loans, which it is
expected to fulfil, even if the signing head of state has died. 'Corporation' is
derived from the Latin corpus meaning body (which, ironically, is one thing
they lack). The 'state' is derived from the Latin status, for a manner of
standing or ranking. In perhaps the ultimate Freudian slip, the roots of the
state are in status.36
States and companies (and perhaps now algorithms) are not just
amplifiers of power and decision-making; they also inflate the worst in us:
the darker angels of our nature. Think of a modern state, such as the US or
Russia, embodied as a single person stalking the streets. Imagine what they
are like. Overwhelmingly self-obsessed and self-interested, constantly
boasting of their achievements, continuously suspicious of their neighbours,
persistently posturing and hoarding guns and knives, and greedy to the
extent of never giving even just 1 per cent of their earnings to those in
need.37  That state person, if it took a psychiatry test, would rate
disturbingly high on the dark triad (psychopathy, narcissism, and
Machiavellianism). Bear in mind that Machiavellianism comes from the

Florentine philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli (1469-1527), famous for his
work The Prince, which advises leaders to be amoral to achieve political
glory. A corporation as a person is much the same: status-seeking, profit-
focused, self-interested, Machiavellian, and overly competitive. When
Hobbes thought about the state of nature, he appears to have been thinking
of a world populated by these artificial agents, not with actual flesh-and-
blood humans.38
In both game theory and economics, the model used for humans (often
called Homo economicus) resembles these artificial persons much more
than the average human. They are self-interested, attempt to act rationally,
and pursue material wealth. Races for arms, resources, or status aren't
innate to human groups. They are more likely to occur only among groups
that exhibit some peculiar characteristics: dominance hierarchies marked by
status competition, corruption by power, higher levels of the dark triad, and
bureaucracies that aim for rationality (although they rarely completely
achieve it).39  While game theory often does a poor job of predicting the
behaviour of people as a whole, it does work better for smaller segments of
the population. In laboratory experiments, individuals who rank higher on
the dark triad (specifically psychopathy and Machiavellianism) are more
likely to defect and not cooperate.40  Dominance hierarchies are not just
less likely to cooperate and fall into harmful race dynamics; they also select
for and amplify the individuals and characteristics that hinder cooperation.
This is not just about races and competition. Militaries and defence
companies regularly trade, collaborate, and cooperate. In 2016 the Israeli
NSO Group developed a powerful spyware weapon called Pegasus that
could covertly hack into phones and laptops. It didn't share this only with
allies but also with ostensible enemies such as Saudi Arabia and the United
Arab Emirates. These sales needed formal approval by the Israeli Defense
Forces. Today the US accounts for around 42 per cent of global arms
exports, including to its rivals. Profit was, and often is, deemed more
important than national defence. Countries and companies don't just
compete and race; they collude and cooperate.41
The same is true of the global ecological crisis. Fossil-fuel companies
and PFAS manufacturers are technically competitors. They are fighting
each other for a bigger market share. Yet, when necessary, they will lobby
and work together to suppress science and undermine policy.

This witches' brew of competition and cooperation is a common feature
of racketeering. We saw earlier how the razones gangs of Columbia
competed for territory and drug sales, but still governed among themselves
and could combine forces against a common enemy, such as the police.
They weren't just racing against each other to control turf and the drug
market; they were part of a wider racket that was trying to maximize
extraction. Similarly, emperors and competitors for the throne regularly
cooperate to tax the peasants or fight off invaders, all while still feuding. It
is equally accurate to describe this as a racket rather than a race. We can see
the modern world in a similar light. As states mainly developed as
protection rackets to begin with, so too do Agents of Doom both produce
the risk and then benefit by offering the solution. Even OpenAI began with
the ostensible goal of creating 'safe' and 'aligned' AI. They are rackets
made up not by communities or individuals, but by very strange artificial
agents.
THE TREE OF DOOM
The root causes of our endgame were put down when the darker angels of
our nature (status competition, power corrupting, the dark triad, and the
authoritarian impulse) met the new environmental conditions of the
Holocene (such as lootable resources). Goliaths began to emerge. At the
individual level, those who were the strongest status seekers (and often the
most adept at violence and manipulation) were selected for. At the group
level, communities that were more effective at conquest tended to
outcompete their neighbours and grow. It was multi-level selection. These
new groups even invented myths to valorize growth and conquest. From the
civilizing mission of European colonizers to the jihad of the Islamic
caliphate, dominance hierarchies have had ideologies which justify
universal expansion.
These new Goliaths amplified our darker angels. They fell into
competitive 'Goliath traps': arms races, races to the bottom, and status races
using conspicuous consumption. Yet these weren't just races; they were
rackets. Groups who were competing to extract resources from a given
population would regularly trade (as with the Late Bronze Age or today)
and band together when necessary. Those races/rackets, whether it be for

protection or the extraction of data or fossil fuels, are the main drivers of
our endgame today (Figures 45 and 46).42
Figure 45: The Tree of Doom
Figure 46: From root causes to our modern endgame, or the Tree of Doom
The Tree of Doom is at heart a causal chain from root causes (the combination of Goliath fuel and the
darker angels of our nature) through to the endgame we face today.
Goliath fuel and our darker angels are the root causes of our endgame.
They spurred the creation of Goliath systems which became stuck in
different, interlinked races whether it be for status, security, or a
competitive advantage. Today these Goliath traps have branched out into all
the contributors to global catastrophic risk: nuclear weapons, AI, killer

robots, climate change, the infringement of planetary boundaries, and
others. This tree, from the root causes to our unfolding endgame, is still
growing.43  Unfortunately, it's difficult to see how this thousand-year-old
process is going to end well.
OceanofPDF.com

21
The Fates of Goliath
Putting a Date on Doomsday - Our Curse - Evolutionary Suicide - When
Ideas Dry Up - Silicon Goliath - Killing Goliath - Choose Your Curse
PUTTING A DATE ON DOOMSDAY
Table 6: Apocalyptic probabilities
Probability
Timeline
Conditions
49 per cent
2050
Collapse
50 per cent
2100
Collapse or extinction
>25 per cent
2100
Existential risk
19 per cent
2100
Extinction
16 per cent (1 in 6)
2100
Existential risk
The most common way of trying to calculate when doomsday might arrive
has been for experts to guess what our odds are of making it past 2100
(Table 6). The Astronomer Royal Lord Martin Rees says it's a coin flip
between survival and collapse or extinction. Jared Diamond is even more
pessimistic, giving us a 49 per cent chance of collapsing by 2050.

University of Oxford researcher Toby Ord believes it is more like Russian
roulette, our chances of being wiped out within the next eighty years being
one in six. His colleague Nick Bostrom believes it is at least one in four.
Averaging these experts' opinions gives us a one in three chance of facing a
global collapse, or something far worse, by the end of the century.1
These numbers are frighteningly high. They also tend towards
suspiciously round figures and clichés, such as 50/50, a quarter, or Russian
roulette. This is just one sign that they aren't to be trusted. These are all
examples of unreliable forecasts. Superforecasters (the gold standard of
forecasters) draw on an exceptional group of experts with diverse
information to make predictions about specific, concrete questions. Even
superforecasters have little predictive ability beyond a year or two and there
is little evidence that they have any accuracy after a decade.2  These
apocalyptic predictions are being made about a vague question, looking
decades ahead, usually by individuals who aren't superforecasters. Don't
trust any particular date on doomsday.3
While we can't put clear numbers on the likelihood of collapse, what we
can do is understand the most likely future scenarios based on the
characteristics of Goliath and how they have changed over time.
OUR CURSE
The Global Goliath we inhabit has its own unique fuels. The most powerful
monopolizable weapons are now nuclear: the US and Russia achieved
superpower status by having bigger, more advanced nuclear arsenals (and
militaries) than anybody else. More than that, the decision to commit the
world to a war that could cost billions of lives lies in the hands of one
individual: the US president. It is the most consequential and important
decision any leader could make, yet no democratic deliberation or approval
is required. It has led some to brand the US a 'thermonuclear monarchy'.4
The dead-hand in Russia is, of course, no better. These monopolizable
weapons have tilted the world away from democracy.
The lootable resources that enable and power the Global Goliath are
fossil fuels. Fossil fuels, like grain, are concentrated, defensible, and easily

monitored, moved, and stored. Unsurprisingly, they have regularly been
appropriated at massive scale by states and corporations. Most of the
world's flows of oil, gas, and coal are controlled by a few companies that
are or were often state-owned. Saudi Aramco is Saudi Arabia's state-owned
oil and gas company, the gas titan Gazprom was previously owned by
Russia (which maintains a majority share), and Royal Dutch Shell is the
merger of Royal Dutch Petroleum and Shell Transport and Trading
Company (the former was strongly connected with the Dutch government,
and the latter to the UK).
Also, like grain, fossil fuels are energy-dense and have permitted a surge
in population. Global population has ballooned from 1 billion prior to the
Industrial Revolution to 8 billion today, fed in large part thanks to synthetic
fertilizers derived from fossil fuels: grain-based agriculture on
petrochemical steroids. Hence, lootable resources tend to build on each
other rather than replace each other: fossil fuels enabled larger harvests of
grain rather than replacing them. Today, every calorie we eat was produced
using around ten calories from fossil fuels.
Land is also now more caged than ever. The world is carved into precise
borders that are often hawkishly monitored. Some are physical: Israel,
Egypt, India, and Saudi Arabia have all erected border walls and fences
covering thousands of kilometres and surpassing the efforts of Rome,
China, and Persia.5  We now also have invisible cages: identity cards,
passports, and mass surveillance systems have all become new ways to
control borders and people.
Most people alive today have been lucky enough to inhabit a world in
which many of the most powerful countries at the core of the Goliath were,
by historical standards, inclusive and democratic. This was in large part due
to the two twentieth-century world wars, which destroyed enormous
amounts of capital that was primarily held by the wealthy. Governments
began to tax the rich more aggressively to bankroll the war effort and put in
place measures to appease workers (who were now armed, and upon which
countries were entirely dependent) such as rent, wage, and price controls.
Unionization rates peaked shortly after the Second World War. Scholars
have come to call this great levelling of wealth the 'Great Compression'.
The world wars didn't just level wealth. Wealth equality spilled into the
other forms of power and made countries less extractive in general. Key
welfare-state provisions were passed directly afterwards, and democracy

was strengthened. Conscription during the world wars was frequently
followed by extending the vote in many countries, including to women in
the US and UK directly after the First World War.6
It would be a mistake to think that this was a lasting and global
transformation. The global political and economic system is still grossly
unequal. Wealth inequality began to creep back up across many countries in
the 1970s. Now the richest 1 per cent of the world own almost half its
wealth, while just eighty-one billionaires possess more wealth than the
poorest half of humanity. The situation appears to be worsening. The share
of global wealth for the top 1 per cent swelled from 25-30 per cent in the
1980s to approximately 40 per cent in 2022. For the US, China, and Europe,
the share of the top 1 per cent rose from 28 per cent in 1980 to
approximately 33 per cent in 2022. In contrast, the share of the bottom
three-quarters has continued to hover around 10 per cent. These numbers
are underestimates. They don't capture the money and capital siphoned into
overseas tax havens, for instance (Figure 47).7
Wealth inequality has spilled over into our politics globally. Democracy
is backsliding. The number of people living in democracies has been
decreasing and the number living in autocracies has been increasing over
the last fifteen years. Today 5.7 billion (around 71 per cent of the global
population) live in an autocracy. Forty-two countries are currently
becoming more autocratic while just eighteen are becoming more
democratic by a measurement that includes sixty indicators such as the
fairness of elections, independence of the media, and equality of access to
resources. Such democracy measurements don't include workplace
democracy or even whether the most pivotal decisions - like whether to
launch a nuclear weapon - are made democratically.
The democracy and public services we often take as being the natural
condition of states are an historical aberration. One that is slowly being
undone as the world drifts back towards the historical default of greater
inequality, autocracy, and extraction of wealth and power by elites. There
may be a lag (as there was between wealth inequality rising and democratic
backsliding), and some reversals, but in the long run we can expect wealth
inequality to spill into the other forms of power. It is happening today. Elon
Musk is not only one of the world's richest men but also owns X, wields
enormous cultural clout, played a starring role in getting Donald Trump re-

elected, and will be instrumental in making policy during Trump's second
term. He is melding together all the different forms of power. Similarly,
Amazon founder Jeff Bezos is not just one of the world's richest men; he
also owns the Washington Post (the third largest newspaper by readership in
the US), audiobook giant Audible, the streaming service Twitch, and the
film company MGM. Similar patterns have been repeated throughout
history, including the gilded age of the late nineteenth century and the rise
of autocracies in the 1930s. The record is simply replaying today.
Figure 47: Inequality in key empires across the twentieth century
All major countries share a rough trend of inequality peaking before the world wars, plummeting
during them (especially during the Second World War), and then rising again from the 1970s
onwards. Wealth inequality follows a similar pattern but at a higher rate. Today, the top 10 per cent
capture around half of global income, but three-quarters of global wealth.
The curse of our Global Goliath is not necessarily diminishing returns on
extraction, though the US does show many signs of this. There remains
intense elite capture of politics and factionalism. In 1983 the number of US
households worth over $10 million was 66,000. It increased (in real terms)
within a few decades to 693,000 in 2019. Since the late 1970s real wages
for most of the population have remained largely stagnant (or even
declining) despite GDP per capita more than doubling. As Peter Turchin has
shown, the role of popular immiseration and inequality in driving populism

and political division is far too apparent.8  The enormous military
overstretch of the US has helped fuel a growing public debt of $35 trillion.
Yet, this is not the most worrisome curse. The US may decline: a civil war
could even break out, although this seems unlikely, given its large full-time,
well-equipped police force, military, and intelligence agencies. Even if it
were to happen, the Global Goliath might be shocked for a few years or
even a decade, but it is difficult to imagine how it would trigger a global
societal collapse. And the US staying as a stable, coherent society is also
not an antidote to our global woes. Remember that it was during the 1950s,
60s, and 70s, when elite competition was low and wealth equality higher,
that the US built a nuclear stockpile that could destroy the world and had
the largest acceleration in its environmental impact. Diminishing returns on
extraction remains important and relevant. Yet there is now a new and more
dangerous curse: global existential risk. The global system of extraction
now creates threats and vulnerabilities which could destroy the whole
world.
EVOLUTIONARY SUICIDE
The most likely fate of the Global Goliath is self-termination. The pressures
that have been selected for over time - larger populations, more disease,
greater military capacity, and economic exploitation (categorized earlier as
'babies, bombs, bacteria, and barbarism') - may have been evolutionarily
advantageous for individual empires, but now underpin the catastrophic risk
we face today. Bigger, more interconnected populations mean worse disease
outbreaks; stronger militaries mean more damaging arms races; and
barbarism is the economic backbone of the systems that produce carbon,
weapons, and dangerous technology.
It is a persistent and long-running trend that is difficult to stop. Goliaths
have reliably turned economic power and larger populations into worse
weapons. Human history is one of growing tail risk. Take the history of
projectile weapons. The power and speed of projectile weaponry have
grown consistently over time. An average modern-day nuclear weapon is
fifty trillion times more powerful than a bow and arrow (as measured in
joules of energy released). When we plot the most effective projectile

weapons of different ages, we see a steadily rising line, with a sharp uptick
in the twentieth century (see Figure 48).9  GDP shows a similar trend over
that same period. Increases in economic power have reliably been translated
into more potent weapons.
There is no sign of this trend abating. Even today we see the mass
development of killer robots and other even more disturbing weapons,
including the weaponization of space. States are now competing to create
and unleash space-based directed-energy weapons (DEWs), such as ultra-
short-pulse lasers. The end goal is to have these space-weapons establish an
orbital 'kill web' that can identify and eliminate targets anywhere on the
planet.10
Figure 48: Energy released by projectiles over time
The shape of this graph will be familiar by now. It is similar to what we've seen with global GDP,
land use change, and energy consumption. More energy and money have been reliably transformed
into more destructive weapons.
We see the same trend when we look at environmental impacts over time.
The problem is that the selection pressure for Goliaths has created entities

more effective at extraction, whether it be from people or the environment.
Goliaths have evolved new forms of Goliath fuel - such as fossil fuels, data,
and nuclear weapons - to persist and grow larger over time. Yet now those
new sources of fuel threaten to destroy the entire planet.
Think of this as evolutionary suicide: short-term evolutionary pressures
lock the population into a path of self-destruction. Short-term adaptation
leads to long-term extinction. We see such a pattern with cancer (which
destroys its host and itself in the process) and in laboratory experiments
where profligate bacteria change the pH of their environment, slowly
rendering it inhospitable and committing themselves to extinction.
Given how deeply locked in are Goliath traps (status races, arms races,
and races to the bottom) and other problems, it is hard to see how we can
escape without a global collapse unfolding.
Technology is usually mooted as the potential saviour from evolutionary
suicide. Bioterrorism can be prevented through mass surveillance and
nuclear weapons can be deterred by better nuclear weapons. Many powerful
figures now hold up AI as a solution to all our woes. Demis Hassabis
explained his motivation for developing AI as to 'solve the problem of
intelligence and then use intelligence to solve everything else'. Some are
even willing to take the bet that technological progress will outpace and
solve any problems it creates along the way. Ex-Google CEO Eric Schmidt
said in 2024, responding to a question about the emissions and energy
demand of AI, 'we're not going to hit the climate goals anyway because we
are not organized to do it and yes the needs in this area [AI] will be a
problem. But I'd rather bet on AI solving the problem than constraining it.'
That rhetoric from the producers of AI has proved influential, with AI now
almost always framed as not only a positive development, but one that is
necessary for economic growth and meeting the challenges of today.11  For
many, technology is a deus ex machina. Unfortunately, there is little reason
to believe that betting on technology indefinitely is going to work out.
WHEN IDEAS DRY UP
The belief that we can engineer our way out of Goliath's Curse is
widespread. Cleaning up PFAS and other novel entities may be exceedingly

expensive, but we can perhaps engineer a new bacterium to eat it away at a
lower cost. AI systems might be dangerous, but we just need more technical
research to make sure they are faithful to human values and commands.
This approach is what most of the world's economic system is relying on.
Yet it is a huge gamble that hinges on our ability to endlessly find new ideas
to address new problems before they become irreversible.
Most economists seem to think this is a safe bet; that human ingenuity is
a bottomless resource. They place particular faith in 'recombinant growth':
new inventions in one area spilling over into others, sparking more
innovation. Think of how computers could be used to increase our
knowledge in areas ranging from finance to climate modelling, so enabling
even more developments. Innovation should create constant or even
accelerating returns.12
Yet innovation appears to be slowing down. In the US, the average
number of patents-per-inventor has decreased since the 1970s. This does
not seem to be compensated for by higher-quality inventions. On the
contrary, early innovations in a field tend to be the ones that produce the
largest improvement.13  The first combustion engines were revelatory
compared with the incremental improvement in engines today. Research
productivity is also declining across almost all sectors at the rate of around
50 per cent every thirteen years.14  Ideas appear to be getting harder to find.
Why is this? One explanation is that we have picked all the lowest-
hanging fruit. New inventions require bigger research teams, more money,
and more effort. Another is that materials used in technology are becoming
more costly (true for some, but certainly not all industries). There is also a
political component: industries often suffocate new competitors, including
through 'defensive' research and development. This means investing to
protect market share and using tactics such as lobbying, secrecy, buying up
potential competitors, and using legal teams to tie up competitors with
patent-infringement lawsuits.15  For instance, fossil-fuel companies such as
ExxonMobil had a significant hand in the demise of early electrical cars.
Oil companies filed for over twenty patents for electric vehicles since the
1940s as a way to block their production. They simultaneously lobbied
against policies that would encourage consumers to adopt electric cars.16
Companies don't want innovation per se; they want profit.

It's not impossible that there could be a technological revolution that
resets the playing field and allows for a new wave of inventions and
growth, as happened during the Industrial Revolution. Many see AI as
filling this role, while others suggest more bizarre (and disturbing)
workarounds such as cloning particularly gifted researchers to boost
research productivity.17
Even if such an AI revolution were to occur, it's not guaranteed that it
would be an effective or sustainable cure. A new age of innovation would
come with a host of new problems. Indeed, most of the core problems we
have covered thus far have been enabled by advances in technology:
splitting the atom created nuclear weapons; the combustion engine spews
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Outrunning technological problems
by developing more technology doesn't seem like a sensible long-term
strategy. Especially if technological development is still being driven
largely by Goliath traps: the pursuit of profit, status, and a military edge.
Even overcoming the current hurdle of diminishing returns on research
productivity might simply worsen our situation. The acceleration of
economic growth and innovation may be the sickness rather than the
remedy. As we've already covered, growth makes staying within planetary
boundaries more challenging. Given that this is already a Herculean task,
growing for growth's sake (or because of status competition) is not a
prudent course of action.
Economic and technological growth has another downside: legal lag.
Every new technology introduces new problems. Legal and regulatory
systems are already struggling to produce new norms, laws, and legislation
to keep up with issues such as copyright infringement in large text models,
whether armed drones can kill without human supervision, and the
regulation of novel entities such as PFAS. Further accelerating the Global
Goliath will exponentially increase the number of issues our already slow
and overburdened policy systems need to manage. And there is little
evidence that we will solve these international problems. A review of 224
studies found that the vast majority of international treaties don't achieve
their intended outcomes. This is especially true of treaties that deal with
areas such as environmental protection and human rights. The few
exceptions relate to trade and finance, domains that tend to serve the

wealthiest.18  We should have little confidence that our global governance
can keep up.
Exponential growth could eventually simply outstrip the ability of our
societies to adapt. Using simple yet sound mathematics, the complexity
scientist Geoffrey West has shown that exponential economic growth
requires increasingly quick paradigm shifts to keep pace. It took around two
millennia to go from the Iron Age to the age of navigation, two more
centuries to leap to the Industrial Revolution, just over a century to move
into the computer age, and just forty years to accelerate into the digital age.
It's like having to jump from one treadmill to another, each one running
faster than the last (Figure 49).19
Figure 49: Accelerating waves of innovation and economic growth across human history
The lines tracing energy consumption and GDP per capita are for the US.
If the next treadmill is fast enough, we may be thrown off. Our societies
might simply not be equipped to adapt to a new internet-level innovation
every ten, five, or even two years. Human societies simply cannot keep up
with the changes and problems generated by unregulated innovations and

the speeding up of life. This is to say nothing of whether the earth system
can withstand even further demands created from ballooning growth. A
technological singularity could lead to collapse, not utopia.20
Apart from technological stagnation and over-acceleration there is still
the slim chance of a deus ex machina that will allow us to innovate our way
out of catastrophic risk while growing exponentially, but even this does not
necessarily offer a bright future.
SILICON GOLIATH
In 2023, 230,000 tonnes of cobalt and 9 million tonnes of silicon were
exhumed from the earth. That is 10 million tonnes less than the amount of
plastic that is leaked into the environment every year. That exchange of
materials - the extraction of silicon and cobalt and the dumping of synthetic
materials into the waters of the world - in many ways summarizes our
global system of extraction. Cheap materials, fuel, data, and labour go into
the Global Goliath; profit, plastic, carbon, novel entities, and new
technologies and weapons (as well as many good things, like medical
devices) come out.21
It is the unequal exchange of a new type of emerging system: the Silicon
Goliath. Silicon is still not the most important or bountiful of our resources:
cement, steel, and ammonia are far more vital.22  Silicon is, however,
representative of a new Goliath fuel that is reshaping and speeding up the
world system. Data is a crucial new lootable resource. The world's most
powerful intelligence agencies capture vast streams of it to enable mass
surveillance. The world's most powerful companies strip-trawl the internet
to gather the data to train new generative AI systems and to better target
advertisements. That data is being used to automate cognition, to speed up
and scale up all the existing global systems, whether it be the search for
fossil fuels, the production of novel entities, mass surveillance, or the
organization of robust-yet-fragile global supply chains.
Data and AI are also critical to new monopolizable weapons such as
coordinated swarms of killer robots. Imagine a leader who can not only fire
a nuclear weapon without democratic oversight (which is already a reality),
but also enforce martial law through fleets of armed and loyal killer robots.

Then there is the silicon-laced cage of surveillance. Mass surveillance
systems are of little use without vast streams of data and sophisticated AI
systems to process them. Disturbingly, unless you are protecting your
privacy, almost everything you've searched on the internet, every email
you've sent, and every phone call you've made or received is likely to be
stored in a server in the US where an agent of the National Security Agency
(NSA) can access it. This is due to the 'PRISM' program, a mass
surveillance system that was exposed by the former NSA analyst Edward
Snowden in 2013. PRISM taps into the data flowing through big network
providers, such as AT&T and Verizon in the US, as well as companies such
as Meta, Google, and Microsoft.
It doesn't just capture the data of US citizens, either, but also that of most
people across the world. Around 25 per cent of internet traffic is routed
through (and 30-40 per cent of data centres are contained in) the US (where
it is tapped by intelligence agencies), while a lot more is captured by
tapping big-tech conglomerates such as Google, and sharing data from mass
surveillance systems with allies such as the UK.23  PRISM is just one
example of a government-led mass surveillance system; Australia, the UK,
China, Russia, and many others all have their own. That is in addition to the
extensive 'surveillance capitalism' programs from which Google and Meta
profit handsomely.24  Searching and organizing all that data wouldn't be
possible without AI.
Surveillance capitalists are accompanied by intelligence communities to
create a 'stalker complex' that constantly watches the world. The breadth
and intrusiveness of this mass surveillance apparatus is the work of a small
number of intelligence agencies such as the NSA and its UK counterpart the
Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ). That stalker complex
is constantly seeking to use technology to more closely watch and
understand people, whether it be to better target ads or to identify terrorists
and political dissidents.25
Such AI-based massive surveillance programs are increasingly being
paired with robotics and other technologies. In 1993 the US government's
Defense Advanced Research Project Agency (DARPA) awarded grants for
the development of insect-sized drones that could carry out surveillance.26
The US today has a range of sci-fi-like surveillance projects, including the
SMART program, which looks to create a planet-wide monitoring system

by harvesting data from different sources such as satellites, drones, and
planes. China, during the Covid-19 pandemic, used drones employing
facial-recognition technology to enforce lockdowns.27  Then there is the
sheer size of the rollout of surveillance cameras. The UK alone has
somewhere between 4 and 6 million CCTV cameras, or roughly one for
every ten citizens. That is just a small taste of things to come.
Goliaths looking to improve ways to control and coordinate their citizens
is a long-running trend. As we've seen, societies across history have
steadily marched from relying on intimidation to increasingly relying on
more effective forms of administration and control. It's a trend reflected in
the growing size and effectiveness of bureaucracies across history, as well
as an inexorable increase in the amount of information processed by states.
While Narmer and Sargon knew vanishingly little about their subjects, the
CEOs and executives in charge of the stalker complex have a wealth of
information about citizens of the modern world, including their names,
income, addresses, immigration histories, political beliefs, purchases, and
even their movements and whereabouts. Rather than relying on a few part-
time bureaucrats, they have enormous highly skilled administrations aided
by algorithms.28
The modern world is no exception to this trend. Governments everywhere
are investing hundreds of millions of dollars to improve a range of
surveillance measures, including facial recognition. As new disasters
emerge, surveillance will only deepen. The PRISM program was built off
the Patriot Act, a piece of legislation that was rushed through Congress just
forty-five days after the 9/11 terrorist attacks. It is a classic ploy to use
crises as an opportunity to expand surveillance powers, as also occurred
during Covid-19, a savvy way in which the powerful capitalize on our
authoritarian impulse during a disaster.
A world of growing catastrophic threats will provide ample opportunities
to expand the unblinking eyes of the stalker complex.29  Some scholars
have already suggested installing a system of ubiquitous surveillance and
pre-emptive policing to stop any (for now, imaginary) decentralized
weapons of mass destruction like engineered pathogens. Imagine what kind
of security and surveillance measures the US or China might respond with
if they suffered a case of nuclear terrorism? Simply the spectre of

catastrophic terrorism may be enough to scare the world into greater
autocracy.30
Such systems don't seem to be effective at catching terrorists at the
moment, let alone creating a comprehensive, real-time watchful eye over
the entire world. Similarly, the production and abilities of killer robots are
limited and crude. We should be sceptical of techno-hype, yet the levels of
power and precision they could reach as the decades pass is significant.31
For some, this may not be worrisome. Being watched is barely noticeable
for the luckiest of us, except for the occasional creepy indication like seeing
more tailored ads. But relying on these systems to remain in relatively safe,
accountable hands in a world of democratic backsliding is unwise. We are
constructing systems of extensive control in a world that is becoming more
unequal and extractive.32
The transition between one form of Goliath and another is rarely a clear-
cut matter. The same is true of the current transition from the Global
Goliath to Silicon Goliath (Table 7). As our systems become more
dependent on advanced algorithms, and as mass surveillance (and new
weapons) curtails the ability to resist through protest, we cross increasingly
into the realm of Silicon Goliath. We aren't quite there yet: many systems
around the world can still effectively function without AI, mass surveillance
often lacks effectiveness, and new monopolizable weapons such as drone
swarms are still limited in their use. Yet we are transforming into a Silicon
Goliath at a rapid pace.
Table 7: The evolution of Goliath across history
Goliath
Main
lootable
resources
Main form
of caging
Main
monopoliza
ble weapons
Curse
Early
Goliaths
Aquatic
resources,
grain
Geographic,
palisades
Stone,
obsidian,
copper
Primal Curse
Empires
Grain
Walls
Bronze, iron,
horses
Diminishing
returns on

Goliath
Main
lootable
resources
Main form
of caging
Main
monopoliza
ble weapons
Curse
extraction
Colonial
empires
Grain,
commodities
Walls
Gunpowder
(cannons and
muskets)
Shatterzones
, genocide,
and collapse
caused by
colonial
expansion
Global
Goliath
Fossil fuels,
grain, and
commodities
Passports,
identity
cards, walls,
surveillance
Nuclear
weapons
State failure
and global
catastrophic
risk
Silicon
Goliath
Data, fossil
fuels, grain,
and
commodities
Advanced
mass
surveillance
systems
Nuclear
weapons,
killer robots,
space
weapons, and
others
Global
catastrophic
risk and
locked- in
mass
surveillance
and
autocracy
Even if the best-case scenario of techno-optimists occurs and we manage
to technofix our way out of all the catastrophic risk we face, if we reach
some kind of technological singularity, the outcome is unlikely to be
appealing to many. Yes, we may have far greater power over nature and
technological prowess - perhaps even space flights and robotic slaves - but
probably far less freedom, democracy, equality, and human connection. The
same rule throughout all history applies to the future too: technology alone
won't give us a civilization. Yet there are actions that will.

KILLING GOLIATH
The last path forward is the least likely: that we collectively kill (or perhaps
tame) the Global Goliath. Across history Goliaths have collapsed, but
wherever there has been Goliath fuel, they have tended to rise again. While
some societies have been more democratic, they have tended to be either
outcompeted by others or become more extractive over time. There are a
few factors in the modern world that could help us to kill Goliath and create
a more equal and less exploitative global system. That is, a global
civilization.
The first is making resources less lootable. Imagine if the data of today
could be gathered only with the full and informed consent of citizens and
was fairly remunerated. The world of AI would change dramatically as the
development of algorithms slowed and the risk was alleviated.
The second is increasing exit options. Creating more open borders and,
importantly, more ways for people to escape mass surveillance, would mean
that states would have to negotiate more with their citizens. It's a trend
we've seen throughout history: geographies with more exit options
favoured democracy. While this would need to be done carefully to address
security and cultural concerns, it would be a step towards the fluid
civilizations of the past.
A third is using technology to enable both larger-scale democracy and
greater oversight of the powerful. The Agents of Doom use secrecy because
they know that transparency would lead to greater regulation. While Rome
and other early republics and democracies were limited in how many
citizens could attend assemblies, today we can use online platforms and
deliberative assemblies to run democracy at a far larger scale more
intensely. Technology is expanding the realm of what is democratically
possible.
The fourth and final possibility is knowledge. The survivors of the first
Goliaths of northern America knew the oppression that accompanied a
dominance hierarchy and could organize to avoid it. Yet no society through
history understood the darker angels of our nature or Goliath fuel.
Understanding why Goliaths emerge and how they fall into Goliath traps
can help us to create interventions and institutions able to stop history from
repeating (I'll highlight several promising interventions in the Epilogue).

The final two factors - technology and knowledge - have changed
dramatically in the past two decades. They are also the two that give the
modern world the best chance of escape from Goliath. But it is a path with
few precedents, and there is little sign that we are currently on it.
CHOOSE YOUR CURSE
A new Silicon Goliath is emerging. The existential risk we face is in many
ways the same risk that always accompanies the rise of a new Goliath. The
first states were littered with blood-covered bronze swords and pits of
sacrificed slaves. The creation of empires like the Qin and Rome created
seas of fractured skulls. The establishment of a new colonial, capitalist
world system was enabled by the sacrifice of the tens of millions made to
work under the whip, or die alone drowned in the Atlantic, crushed in
mines, or slowly perishing from the pitted skin and scarred lungs of
smallpox. The legacy of the Silicon Goliath could be the destruction of the
entire planet, already disrupted by new weapons that can annihilate cities in
the blink of an eye, and the slow removal of decision-making and autonomy
from our hands into the cold and fast machinations of AI. Ironically, the rise
of our Silicon Goliath could trigger its fall.
Looking at both the long-run trajectory of Goliath and current trends, our
Global Goliath appears destined to hurtle down one of three paths. The first,
and most likely, is self-termination. The second is a world in chains. The
third is a world in which we somehow manage to shackle and control it.
Reversing inequality and establishing deep democracy in a lasting fashion
has unfortunately been a rarity throughout history. It is a highly unlikely
outcome, which makes it worth fighting for even more desperately. While
throughout history the collapse of a Goliath was usually temporary and a
liberation, in the future it threatens to be permanent and take us and much
of the planet with it. We are passengers on a journey that looks likely to end
in chains or evolutionary suicide. Our Global Goliath will die explosively
unless we kill it first.
The prognosis here may seem dire and speculative. Yet, ask yourself,
where do races to the bottom and arms races lead to in the long term but
large-scale destruction? We can't rely on our luck never running out or
somehow finding a plucky technical fix to every new technological

problem. Similarly, are there any signs of the drive towards mass
surveillance slowing or reversing? Even the world's most ardent
democracies are spending at least an order of magnitude more on improving
facial recognition and surveillance, and at least a hundred times more on
their militaries, than they are on improving democracy (whether that be
through initiatives to improve voter turnout or experiments in deliberative
democracy). This is what economists call 'revealed preferences': follow
actions and money to understand the underlying motivations. The
preferences of our emerging Silicon Goliath are clear.
This is not to say that these scenarios will come to fruition in a few years,
or even a decade. There will be delays and reversals. But over the course of
decades and centuries, the deeper trends we've seen across history will
show through.
If self-termination, some kind of global societal collapse, is the most
probable trajectory for our Silicon Goliath, we have to ask: just how bad
could it get?
OceanofPDF.com

22
After the Fall
Hart's Mystery - From Homo solus to Homo finalis - A Second Industrial
Revolution? - A Hellish Earth - Survival of the Richest? - Goliath
Rebooted? - A Kaleidoscope of Futures
HART'S MYSTERY
Are we alone in the universe? Some think that, despite there being no signs
of extraterrestrial life, the universe should be teeming with technologically
advanced species. This riddle began with an equation formulated by the
astrophysicist Frank Drake in 1961. Drake calculated that the number of
alien societies we could contact is determined by the number of planets that
could carry life, the number of times that life begins and evolves into an
intelligent, advanced society, and the length of time for which it has
persisted. Given that the universe is around 13.7 billion years old, and
contains 100 billion planets, it seems highly unlikely that there are no
spacefaring aliens out there. But where are they?
This is often mistakenly termed the 'Fermi Paradox'. The legend is that
during a lunch with colleagues in the 1950s the physicist Enrico Fermi (one
of the architects of the first atomic bomb) asked, 'Where is everybody?
Where are all the aliens if there should be so many of them out there?' The
truth is that Fermi was actually complaining about the impossibility of
intergalactic space travel. The question of 'Where is everybody?' was, in
fact, first asked by the astrophysicist Frank Hart in 1975.1  It is also not a

paradox. You can end up with an infinitesimal number of potential
extraterrestrial cultures if the number of habitable planets or the likelihood
of life beginning is tiny. Once you factor in the uncertainty about how likely
life is to start, suddenly the paradox dissolves and it becomes
mathematically unsurprising that we might be alone in the universe.2
Rather than dealing with Fermi's Paradox we are dealing with Hart's
Mystery: the mystery of our seemingly solitary existence. When we gaze
out to the stars, we realize that for now we are more than likely the only
flickering light of sentience in a vast sea of empty blackness. That raises the
stakes of continuing life on this planet: the choices we make now could
determine whether the universe is potentially left as a collection of rock and
burning stars whirling in a lifeless vacuum for millennia to come. If a
global societal collapse does happen, then will it be our species' final
curtain call or just another rebirth?
FROM HOMO SOLUS TO HOMO FINALIS
Of all the species that have ever existed, 99.9 per cent are now gone.
It's almost certain that Homo sapiens will eventually go the same way.
Unless other realities exist that we can access with god-like technology (an
enormous if), then when this universe ends - whether it is ripped apart
owing to its own expansion or collapses in on itself - we will too. The more
pressing question is whether a collapse in the coming decades or centuries
could spiral into human extinction. It's a difficult question to answer since
collapse can take so many forms, from a relatively non-violent decline of
our global economy and power structures over decades to an apocalyptic
spasm of nuclear-fuelled destruction. Still, it's important to trace how many
people would need to perish for it to result in probable longer-term
extinction and what impediments the survivors would face to surviving.3
Humans have survived for at least 200,000 years. If one looks at the
extinction rates of other mammals, then statistically that makes our odds of
being wiped out in any given year (naïvely not assuming any other
catastrophe) one in 14,000. That figure balloons out to one in 870,000 if we
consider all our hominid ancestors.4  Yet it is questionable how relevant
such calculations are for a species that is spread across the entirety of earth

and which can piece cities back together after they have been split apart by
atom bombs. There are other, more useful ways of trying to calculate our
odds of survival.
Imagine you are one of a group arriving on a lush, deserted island. How
big would the group need to be in order to survive and create a self-
sustaining society? You need enough to avoid inbreeding and other
deleterious effects of a too-small gene pool. You also need a few extra as a
buffer to guard against accident, drought, or disease. This is known as the
'minimum viable population'.
We have some historical examples which can give us a glimpse of what
this number is likely to be. The original peopling of both the Americas (at
least 23,000 years ago) and Polynesia (around 1000 BCE to 700 CE) may
have occurred with a group of around only a hundred. The initial raft of
people landing in Polynesia who eventually led to the indigenous cultures
of the Māori and the Samoans may have just been a few dozen. We get
other surprisingly low numbers when we look further back in time. The first
successful migrations out of Africa into Europe and east Asia may have
totalled as few as 1,000-3,000 people. The human groups there still
thrived.5
Others have looked to the stars to estimate the minimum viable
population. How many people would it take to start an intergalactic colony?
Australian geneticist Ian Franklin and American biologist Michael Soulé in
1980 proposed that fifty individuals would be needed to combat inbreeding,
and 500 to prevent genetic drift (small random fluctuations in genes can
lead to certain alleles disappearing in a small population, leading to a loss
of genetic variation). More recent, refined guesses have turned up larger
figures of 14,000-44,000. The big spread in numbers is due to varying
estimates of the required buffer against calamity. Disasters happen, and
even if a minimum viable number is enough in theory, it would be
precarious in practice. As the Neanderthals found out, sparse dispersed
populations can dwindle into extinction with just a bit of bad luck. That
larger estimate of 14,000-44,000 would also need to be in close proximity
so they could reproduce, protect each other, and form a community. Even a
community of 44,000 might be vulnerable if the conditions were dangerous
enough.6  While few have explored it, these numbers also depend on the
genetic diversity of the group.

Even a minimum viable population number of 44,000 is, of course, very
low compared with the current global population of 8.2 billion. This makes
the possibility of extinction appear far-fetched. The only attempt to examine
this issue suggested that even an extreme collapse with extensive
infrastructure damage, temporary climate change, and a population loss of
99.99 per cent would have only a 0.1-0.3 per cent chance of causing
extinction. There would still be 810,000 survivors, who would have a 'grace
period' of easy access to remaining supplies (canned goods and produce)
and equipment. That might buy them enough time to learn the necessary
survival skills such as basic foraging and agriculture. Killing off every
single human is an incredibly high bar.7
That said, there are also reasons to believe that it will be trickier in the
future for a population to bounce back post-collapse. The survivors would
be living in an environment that is more hostile than settling the warm,
bountiful islands of Polynesia. That is due to the latent risk we face: the
survivors would not be trying to scavenge and rebuild in the stable climate
we've had throughout the Holocene. They would be living in a far warmer
world, one with fewer survivable habitats and where foraging or farming
would be far more difficult. They would also potentially have to cope with
more diseases than our ancestors did, and far fewer means of control or cure
once the supply of leftovers available in hospitals and health centres ran
out.8  Survivors would be affected by the long-term effects of novel
entities,9  including declining fertility and sperm counts.10  All this means
that the viable population is more likely to be at the 44,000 end of the
range, or perhaps even higher.
How we would fare in a global collapse is also dependent on how
prepared we are. In the north of Norway in the Svalbard archipelago is the
Svalbard Global Seed Vault, also known as the 'Doomsday Vault'. There
are over 1,700 gene banks around the world which house different seed
types (for agricultural research and development) and the Doomsday Vault
aims to have a copy of each unique seed. It was intended to be an icy,
impregnable fortress sunk into the permafrost, but in a warming world, that
permafrost is now melting. In 2017 the vault was flooded, although luckily
the meltwater did not reach the seeds. Nonetheless, it's hard to predict how
well the vault will fare in a 4°C warmer world.11

Whether we survive a catastrophe depends in large part on what food is
available afterwards. Most scenarios of global catastrophe involve a large-
scale climatic disruption, whether that be a post-war nuclear winter, a high-
impact volcanic eruption, or extreme climate change. Scientists at the
organization ALLFED (the Alliance to Feed Earth in Disasters) have
already started to cook up schemes of how to feed the entirety of the
world's population if traditional agriculture fails. Such plans include mass
food factories producing mushrooms, insects, algae, and seaweed, or even
the straight chemical synthesis of food. However, the research is nascent
and more needs to be done at scale. Certainly, we are nowhere close to
being able to feed the survivors of a nuclear war. Even if we do scale up
these systems, they don't solve the political problem of distribution. (Today,
the world produces more than enough food to provide 2,750 calories per
person every day, yet 9 million people starve every year because food isn't
distributed appropriately.) More support is needed for the vital work of
organizations like ALLFED if we are to be prepared for the worst-case
scenario.12
There are a few lessons we can draw from all this. First, extinction is
implausible unless a truly cataclysmic situation involving a combination of
catastrophic threats and vulnerabilities occurs. Second, even under these
conditions humanity is likely to survive in the short term, at least. Third, we
are dramatically underprepared. Fourth, the longer the status quo persists,
the worse a future collapse will be. We need to start worrying not just about
the fall, but also where we are falling from.
Extinction in the longer term, over a span of thousands of years, might
also be more likely if we aren't able to rebuild a sufficient level of cultural
and technological power.13
A SECOND INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION?
Almost every collapse has been followed by a 'technical recovery':
regaining the previously established levels of energy capture and population
density. This doesn't mean recovery in the sense of improving people's
lives. If a future technical recovery is anything like the first bout of

industrialization, it will carve deep scars into the body of humanity all over
again.
Whether the survivors of a deep global collapse would be able to recover
is questionable. We've only ever had one industrial revolution, and that was
an exceptional one-off that occurred in a stable climate with plentiful, easily
accessed coal and oil. If we had a deep collapse and the entire industrial
skeleton of the modern world fell to pieces, would we be able to repeat it?
It is a topic that few have dared broach. There have been some pieces of
analysis, ranging from presentations and blog posts through to Lewis
Dartnell's The Knowledge: How to Rebuild Our World from Scratch.14  It is
an absurdly underexplored topic, given its importance, partly because it is
necessarily speculative. It would depend on how deep the collapse is, and
how great is the energy ratio of the fossil fuels that remain in the ground (as
well as the renewable energy we have at our disposal). These are largely
unknowable factors. Dartnell is the only one to have seriously tried to
answer the question.
He took a related but different approach: could the Industrial Revolution
have been achieved without fossil fuels? His answer is a tepid maybe.
Charcoal from sustainably harvested trees could provide one source of
dense energy, although lack of land would keep the supply limited. Solar
PV is durable but difficult to make. It relies on extremely thin slices of pure
silicon components. This, in turn, needs technology similar to that required
to make semiconductor electronics components. Renewable electricity from
wind and water are more promising. We could start with windmills and
watermills before progressing to wind turbines and hydroelectric dams. This
would be possible only in a few favourable locations. The second industrial
revolution would not take place in the UK but more likely in Scandinavia.
Dartnell concluded ambivalently: 'An industrial revolution without coal
would be, at a minimum, very difficult ... a combination of renewable
electricity and sustainably grown biomass, might be possible after all. Then
again, it might not.'15
Dartnell is right: an industrial revolution without coal would be a
momentous challenge at best and physically impossible at worst. We don't
know, but there are reasons to think that the challenge may be easier in a
post-collapse world. Even a (near-term) collapse that incurred large-scale
infrastructure loss, such as a nuclear war, would still leave plenty of

working coal mines, oil rigs, and stored gas. Knowledge of high-efficiency
engines and power plants would smooth the transition. If it happened within
the coming decades, there would still be many fossil fuels to draw on. There
are currently around 1.7 trillion tonnes of coal that could be profitably
recovered using existing technology, and 188 trillion cubic metres of gas. If
we continue at the current rate of production, we have around 134 years of
coal reserves left, 51 of oil, and 44 of gas.
Burning coal, oil, and gas is, of course, eating the future in more ways
than one. Using those reserves would be more than enough to cause climate
chaos. That is a problem that a second industrial revolution would face:
achieving a technical recovery while worsening climate change. This in
itself may make the task insurmountable. There is then a second problem.
The main impediment is not the amount of fossil fuels left in the ground but
rather their energy ratio.16  We would be approaching industrialization with
hard-to-reach and hard-to-use resources. The declining energy ratio of fossil
fuels is likely to make a second industrial revolution impractical.
Would post-collapse communities even want to reindustrialize? Studies
almost always assume that of course they would want to.17  Yet it's not a
given that a post-collapse population would have the same pro-technology
sentiments that many have today. If collapse was triggered by a nuclear war,
extreme climate change, or another technological calamity, then the
survivors might have little appetite to repeat past mistakes. They might
choose to reject the old system, like the people of Cahokia and Tiwanaku,
who destroyed elite symbols and monuments as they walked away. In a
world ruined by runaway technology, that might be an entirely sensible
decision.
The downside is that, although in the short term an unregenerated
industrial collapse would almost certainly lower the threat of human
extinction, in the very long term we'll require advanced technology to
survive.
A HELLISH EARTH
Over tens or hundreds of millennia we are likely to face many world-
shattering natural hazards, such as gargantuan volcanic eruptions. Over

millions of years, the chance of a collision with a large asteroid or comet
suddenly becomes non-negligible. Survivors living in a non-industrialized
world would not have the resources to deflect an asteroid or prevent an
eruption. However, the potentially biggest threat is the changes in the earth
we are triggering today.
Climate change and temperature rise will not magically stop in 2100
(where the models frequently end). The earth will continue to transform.
There were once fears that enough global warming could trigger a runaway
greenhouse effect which would boil the water on the surface and sterilize
the earth, turning it into a planet essentially like Venus. To everyone's relief,
the IPCC suggested in 2009 that there was virtually no chance of human
activities creating a runaway greenhouse effect (although there are a few
theoretical models and scenarios that disagree).18  It would also be a
process more likely to unfold over hundreds of thousands of years.
A runaway greenhouse effect is not needed to reach human extinction,
though. Over tens of thousands of years, the world would be utterly
unrecognizable with 6°C of warming. The most deadly and disturbing
change would come from the oceans, carbon in the atmosphere making
them more acidic while melting ice caps dump freshwater into them,
blocking deep-sea circulation and cutting off the circulation of oxygen. This
would create 'anoxic' oceans with little oxygen and essentially no marine
life. The sea would become a dead zone colonized by purple and green
sulphur bacteria. The surface would become a vast expanse of purple with a
slick oil-like surface. Hydrogen sulphide gas produced by bacteria would
belch from its surface, destroying the ozone layer. Along with lethal heat,
mass extinction, and dead oceans, we would also have to contend with more
ultraviolet radiation. This would skyrocket skin cancer rates among the
already ragged, vulnerable survivors.19
These anoxic oceans and their effects seem to be key to explaining how
climate change has triggered mass extinction events in the past.20  Add in
the destruction we have wreaked on other planetary boundaries and long-
term extinction doesn't seem implausible. Certain parts of the earth may
still be technically habitable, and we are a remarkably ingenious and
resilient species that has weathered ice ages and dramatic climate swings
before. Yet every species has its limits. That's true of even our species' most
powerful members.

SURVIVAL OF THE RICHEST?
In the past, elites have used their wealth to migrate or change their identities
when trouble looms. Power is helpful even during a crisis (unless the
holders of it are directly targeted and killed off during the tumult). For now,
the mega-rich seem convinced that they will repeat the feats of past elite
survivors and escape the apocalypse.
The main customers of the most luxurious doomsday bunkers are
billionaires. Peter Thiel, the billionaire co-founder of PayPal and AI (or
rather, AI for military, security, and policing) company Palantir is a prime
example. In 2011, Thiel bought a 477-acre former sheep station in the South
Island of New Zealand. He also purchased New Zealand citizenship,
secretly lobbying the government and pledging to invest in New Zealand
start-ups as part of his application. Citizenship was granted, even though he
had spent less than twelve days in the country up until then (the usual
criterion is to have lived in New Zealand for 1,350 days to be granted
citizenship). OpenAI CEO Sam Altman revealed in 2016 that he and Thiel
have a deal by which if a global collapse occurs they will board a private jet
and fly to Thiel's property.21
Thiel and Altman's preference for New Zealand is widely shared, since
New Zealand will be one of the most resilient countries in the case of a
global catastrophe. Its location deep in the southern hemisphere means it
will be one of the least affected by the fallout from a nuclear war, and its
isolation makes it well protected from pandemics. It is a doomsday safe
haven. This has led to it being recommended as a kind of national
Armageddon bunker in the libertarian manifesto The Sovereign Individual:
How to Survive and Thrive During the Collapse of the Welfare State, a book
that has been endorsed by Thiel and other billionaires such as Marc
Andreessen.
Then again, why buy a doomsday bunker on a small piece of land when
you could buy an entire country instead? That is exactly what the former
cryptocurrency mogul Sam Bankman-Fried was considering doing.
Bankman-Fried was head of the cryptocurrency company FTX before being
jailed for fraud. He and his brother Gabe (who led the philanthropic FTX
Foundation) discussed buying Nauru, the third-smallest state in the world,
located in Micronesia. Their plan was to 'purchase the sovereign nation of

Nauru in order to construct a "bunker/shelter"' that would be used for 'some
event where 50-99.99 per cent of people die [to] ensure that most EAs
survive'. (In this case 'EAs' refers to the Effective Altruism movement,
which Bankman-Fried was part of.)22
Self-preservation is a widespread instinct among the richest and has
spawned an entire industry of doomsday bunkers across the world.
Reinforced, luxury bunker-manors with pools, wine vaults, artificial
gardens for sunbathing in simulated sunlight, and underground hydroponic
farms, can be found from Texas to Czechia. One group of super-rich
preppers asked the media theorist and writer Douglas Rushkoff for advice
on how best to prepare for a world-ending tragedy of whatever stripe, which
they described as 'the event'. Some have purchased not just bunkers but
also their own security forces (in one case a dozen Navy SEALs) to defend
their mini-fortresses from mobs and raiders.
Their questions to Rushkoff were tellingly self-interested: 'How do I
maintain authority over my security force after the event?' The options they
had considered included replacing their guards with more loyal robots or
ensuring obedience with disciplinary collars (the kind that zap you if don't
follow orders). When Rushkoff suggested that they instead befriend their
employees and treat them well now to build a connection that might last
through a crisis, they rolled their eyes.23
This bunker mentality is a flawed strategy. It's unlikely that these bunkers
would stand the test of a true worst-case scenario. Even the Svalbard
Doomsday Vault was almost compromised by a single flood. Underground
farms might work in laboratory settings but are a different matter in reality.
They would need to function and avoid contamination for years while under
duress. All it would take is one rogue bug and the entire food supply could
be ruined. It's also unlikely to work because it does exactly the opposite of
what has allowed communities to persist and prosper through disasters of
the past and present.
To prepare for a societal breakdown, you are better off stockpiling
friends, favours, and skills rather than guns and canned beans. That's the
central message we have from the Palaeolithic and studies of past societal
collapses and modern disasters. Communities that respond the best tend to
have broad, strong social ties. They quickly cooperate when the wider
political structure falls apart, with neighbours and acquaintances providing

the role that the state once did, whether that be by sharing resources,
organizing medical aid, or protecting each other. The billionaires of today
are pursuing a strategy of investing in places rather than people. Not only is
that likely to backfire, it's also exactly the kind of thinking that is fuelling
collapse today.24
There are even some scenarios in which the poor, not the mega-rich, may
be the most resilient. Countries that are most reliant on global industrial
infrastructure will be most affected when it is suddenly stripped away.
Imagine a ravenous computer virus shuts down critical infrastructure and
we are left without functioning machinery, or the ability to create new
pesticides and fertilizers. Europe, the Americas, and parts of India and
China could experience losses of up to 75 per cent of their rice, corn, wheat,
and soybean crops. Africa, in contrast, would see drops of only around 5 per
cent for soybeans and 25 per cent for rice (although almost half of wheat
crops could be lost).25  Many African farmers and city-dwellers are also
already accustomed to living with unreliable utilities.26
Much will depend on how collapse unfolds. (In the case of a pandemic,
New Zealand would be the safer option.) It's difficult to see through this fog
of uncertainty which groups would fare best post-collapse. For now, being
poor in wealth but rich in friends is a better strategy than being a suspicious
billionaire under siege in a bunker. Not only that, but cultivating bonds of
solidarity and mutual aid rather than ruthless self-interest means that the
survivors are more likely to help recreate a world that is worth preserving.
This is perhaps the most important and least appreciated question about a
post-collapse world: whether it will be a world like today's - of patriarchy,
rich and poor, slaves and masters - or a world of civilization.
GOLIATH REBOOTED?
Ancient Greece looked very different from the rest of the Mediterranean
after the Late Bronze Age collapse. The Assyrian Empire continued to have
an empire, one that expanded and immiserated its subjects more with each
passing decade. Egypt continued to have pharaohs. Greece remained a land
without large cities or kings for several centuries. When Classical Greece
did emerge, their societies had little connection to the Mycenaean palaces

that came before them. Even their writing was entirely different. Linear A
and B were lost and the Greeks instead adopted and modified the
Phoenician alphabet. The collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms was
unusually deep. And the Greek polities that emerged afterwards were
unusually egalitarian.27
City-states such as Athens began to pop up from the ruins. While many
sought to restore old hierarchies, other communities remained egalitarian.
Greece became an ecosystem of hundreds of city-states in which much of
the organizing was done by citizens, rather than by religious leaders or
bureaucrats. They maintained a surprising amount of wealth equality (at
least for free men) and their economic growth and well-being far
outstripped that of their neighbours. Compared with the empires that
surrounded them, Greece was a hotbed of democracy and equality. Why did
post-collapse Greece look so different?
The severity of the collapse, Iron Age weapons, and the very geography
of Greece all played a role in its democratic recovery. The collapse was
exceptionally deep. Wealth was dramatically levelled. Essentially, everyone
in Greece became equally poor with few differences in power. The terrain
of Greece also tilted away from autocracy. It is a land of islands, and around
80 per cent of it is mountainous. In other words, there were plenty of exit
options. If you didn't like the edicts of a budding king, you could more
easily hop to another island or retreat to the mountains away from the grasp
of armies and tax collectors.
New iron weapons also played a role. They were far cheaper and easier to
make than bronze, meaning they became more widely dispersed.
Communities that could field the largest armies of iron spear- and shield-
wielding infantry were the ones that survived. Politically inclusive groups
were usually the ones that could mobilize more citizens for war and give
them a greater sense of camaraderie and solidarity. This was vital for
success in battle. Greeks began to use the phalanx formation: a tightly
packed rectangle of troops fighting shoulder to shoulder behind an
interlocked wall of shields. Such shared struggle also gave the troops a
greater sense of connection beyond the battlefield. Conquered slaves aside,
post-collapse Greece selected for democracy and equality.28
Greece is one example of how deep collapse can lead to a more
democratic recovery. The society that emerges from the ashes is freer, more

equal, and more prosperous than what came before. It is a far cry from the
militant raiders and despotic patriarchs we see in dystopian films like Mad
Max or The Road. It's not only movies that envisage a more autocratic post-
apocalyptic world. Some scholars have suggested that post-collapse
societies will revert to the historical average of predatory autocracies. The
current prevalence of modern democracies and republics is not
representative of how most of history has looked: it's an aberration. These
scholars argue that in the absence of other evidence, we should assume that
we'll end up looking more like a normal, pre-modern kingdom than a
Norwegian welfare state. This might make sense if collapse were a random
reset, but it's not.29
As we've seen in the case of Greece or the collapse of the first Goliaths
of the Americas, there are some factors that reliably lead to more
democratic recoveries. These include more wealth equality, more exit
options, fewer lootable resources, and either a rejection of previous
hierarchies or a cultural memory of inclusive practices. Less Goliath fuel, a
flat playing field, and a cultural distaste for domination all favour
democracy. All these should increase after a deep collapse. The more wealth
that is levelled, the flatter the playing field, and the more responsible great
powers are for the fall, the more Goliath structures will be blamed and
discarded. A deep collapse could provide fertile soil for democracy to take
root.
However, numerous modern factors could gain momentum, pushing us
towards autocracy. There would be cultural memories and technologies of
how to watch and control others. Earlier despots didn't have surveillance
equipment or centuries of development on how to bureaucratically track
and understand citizens. Parts of the world would still be likely to have an
abundance of lootable resources, including fuel and machinery. Then again,
the sheer abundance of leftover materials might work against a Goliath re-
emerging. As in the case of the Black Death, if there is enough population
loss then labour may become the limiting factor. This would give people far
greater bargaining power over any would-be despots.30
The biggest wildcard determining what kind of society emerges from the
ashes is culture. Whether it be in Zomia, the Mississippi, or the south-west
US, people passed down stories of evil wizards, overbearing monarchs, and
tyrannical trickster gods to warn of the dangers of vesting too much power

in leaders. Those were for comparatively less traumatic disasters. Imagine
what kinds of tales might be crafted in the wake of the floods and fires of a
4°C world or the sickly glow of mushroom clouds and irradiated rainfall.
Would we speak of mad machine-obsessed priests, myopic cults of an earth-
eating stock market, and delusional dictators with the power of gods and the
restraint of toddlers? It's easy to see why the survivors of a true cataclysm
would not look fondly on the Global Goliath of today and why they might
enshrine the myths and practices that would help them avoid its
resurrection.
As in Greece, the deeper the collapse, the greater likelihood of a
democratic recovery. This is, unfortunately, not a good news story, at least
not in the long term. Classical Greece was still covered by slave-owning
Goliaths, even if there were democratic practices between free adult men.
Eventually it was covered by larger, less democratic empires. North
America may have had stories and collective memories to avoid Goliaths,
but an indigenous empire would still probably have emerged. Despite the
initial conditions favouring democracy, history is always likely to repeat if
Goliath fuel remains. That's because the darker angels of our nature also
remain, and there will be a selection pressure for more militaristic societies
over the long run. We can't naïvely rely on collapse killing Goliath.
A KALEIDOSCOPE OF FUTURES
Collapse is not uniform. From a wide view the world system may have
collapsed, but once you zoom in, you'll notice different recovery processes
in different regions. Some regions will have better odds of recovering in a
politically inclusive manner or kickstarting a low-carbon industrial
revolution.
This would mimic the collapses of the past. We see a similar
kaleidoscope of outcomes during the Late Bronze Age collapse. The
Mycenaeans experienced a near-total collapse followed by a democratic and
cultural efflorescence after centuries. The survivors of the Hittite Empire
persisted in a few minor, rump states in northern Syria. In contrast, the
Assyrians and Egyptians kept their kings and centralized economies.31  The
Neo-Assyrians went on a warpath while the Phoenicians focused on trade

and cooperation. We would see a similar panoply of outcomes in a post-
collapse world, which could be populated by aggressive Australian pirates
or democratic sub-Saharan trading cities.
One of the few trends that seems to hold across regions is that the longer
current trends persist, the deeper the collapse will be. Latent risk, whether it
be antibacterial-resistant microbes or global heating, will continue to build.
The energy ratio of fossil fuels will continue to fall. Unless things change
radically, we'll continue to climb the rungless ladder. The one bright spot is
that the deeper the fall, the more likely it is that we'll rise again as
democratic equals. Yet waiting for a cataclysm to rebalance power is an
unnecessary, grotesque gamble. We don't need to roll the dice with
evolutionary suicide; we can stop this five-millennia-long trajectory and
slay Goliath.
OceanofPDF.com

23
Fiat Justitia, Ne Pereat Mundus
The Trinity Jury - From Darker Angels to Evolutionary Suicide - Justice
Lest the World Perish - Memory Over Myth
THE TRINITY JURY
In 1945, on the eve of the Trinity atomic bomb test, the scientists behind the
Manhattan Project began to place morbid bets. During the construction of
the bomb, the physicist Edward Teller had calculated that the fission chain-
reaction of the bomb they were about to detonate could potentially ignite
the atmosphere, extinguishing all life on earth. The probability was
incredibly low, but Teller could not rule out the possibility of incinerating
the entire biosphere.
The scientists were gambling over not just the end of the world, but
potentially the end of all life across the cosmos. Earth contains the only
observable signs of life in all the universe. This blue marble floating in the
vast ink of space may be the only refuge for the miracle we call life. The
bomb could have left the entirety of existence empty and silent.
It was a huge risk, and also an unnecessary one. The Americans knew
that the Nazis were no longer seriously pursuing the creation of their own
atomic weapon, and that even the design they had once tried to pursue
would never be successful. These were facts that the US government chose
not to pass on to the scientists dutifully creating the world's first atom bomb
at Los Alamos. The Trinity Test was no longer about preventing the Nazis
from creating a nuclear Third Reich.

I want you to imagine that the decision to detonate the bomb - to risk
igniting the atmosphere - had rested not with betting scientists or the
machinations of wartime generals or politicians but with a jury of randomly
selected US citizens fully briefed both on the impacts and risks of the bomb
and on the geopolitical and military situation. Now, ask yourself this: would
that jury - with their friends, sons, daughters, parents, husbands, and wives
waiting at home - have taken the same gamble?
What would be a similar jury's verdict on the other global risks we face
today? Would they decide to speed up the development of AI? Would they
be happy to continue to increase emissions or search for new sources of oil
despite the risk of catastrophic climate change? Would a citizens' jury
sitting in on the board meetings of 3M, DuPont, BP, and Shell have hidden
evidence of the global harm caused by their products, or run disinformation
campaigns?
The early evidence says they wouldn't: democracy is risk-averse. In
2020, President Emmanuel Macron of France approved a French Climate
Citizens' Convention. It was a response to the Yellow Vest protests in which
citizens protested against rising energy prices, inequality, and perceived
corruption. The Convention was designed to address all these concerns by
having a group of ordinary members of the French public determine climate
policy while informed with the latest science. Macron agreed to adopt all
the recommendations advanced by the assembly. They spent the next two
years learning and debating. At last, they agreed on a set of 148
recommendations: a progressive policy package to make all products sold
in France disclose their carbon content, impose a carbon tax on all imports
into the EU, and even make 'ecocide' (the destruction of entire ecosystems)
a criminal offence.
Macron then faltered and broke his word. Many of the key provisions
proposed by the citizens were watered down and weakened. In the end, less
than 40 per cent of the proposals were properly adopted and implemented,
and the most ambitious were scrapped. It seems unlikely that Macron
reneged on his deal because there were fundamental flaws in the citizens'
proposals (remember that the entire process was overseen by large groups
of experts). He opposed them because they were too ambitious.1
Imagine that Macron had asked the citizens' assembly whether France
should continue to have nuclear weapons and they had said no. It's difficult
to see him accepting their decision. When citizens are given the reins, they

tend not to want to risk the world or the future of their children. So much so
that leaders need to seize power back. Currently companies and countries
can privately profit from producing public risks. We need to put these actors
back under democratic control.2
The use of deliberative assemblies and juries is just one example of 'open
democracy': accountable, inclusive governance led by the masses with
ordinary citizens at its decision-making heart. Open democracy aims to
continuously improve and innovate how we make collective decisions. It's
about building more resilient societies, and also wiser, fairer ones. It is a
method built on an appreciation of our deep past and evolutionary
inclinations.
FROM DARKER ANGELS TO EVOLUTIONARY
SUICIDE
The biologist E. O. Wilson once identified the fundamental problem of
humanity as the fact that we have 'Palaeolithic emotions, medieval
institutions, and godlike technology'. There is some truth to that. Yet it's not
as simple as our outdated emotions meeting superpowered technology. The
psychology of most people is not the problem.
On the contrary, we can be immensely sociable, intelligent, altruistic,
wonderful at self-organizing, and quick to learn from each other. We see
that throughout the ages. For most of human history we lived in fluid
civilizations. These were webs of exchange, mutual aid, and reciprocity that
were full of mobile, egalitarian, social individuals with a strong aversion to
being dominated. Status competition lurked underneath these arrangements
but was kept in check through counter-dominance strategies and sheer
environmental circumstances. Collapse occurred only when environmental
shocks disconnected populations or severed them from the wider
civilization.
The fluid civilizations of the Palaeolithic allowed us to survive the ice
age and cover regions and continents with shared tools, instruments, and
culture. It's little wonder we make better decisions when we come together,
deliberate, and debate. That shared heritage is why communities regularly
persevere and even flourish through collapse, and why earthquakes and

hurricanes often end up providing tales about the triumph of the human
spirit, with even the injured quickly providing mutual aid, food, shelter, and
love to those in need. Those same better angels of our nature can explain
why we would trust a group of ordinary citizens not to detonate the Trinity
bomb.
Open democracy and inclusive institutions are essentially harnessing
these better angels of our Palaeolithic psychology. They are using the best
of us to make better decisions and closer communities: to harness our
collective intelligence and impulses to help each other. They are moving
closer to our past as equals in a web of sharing, constantly moving
communities: a fluid civilization. Our Palaeolithic emotions are not a curse.
The curse is the institutions and arrangements which bring out the worst in
us.
These institutions began to emerge 12,000 years ago, when the climate
warmed. People became increasingly dependent on lootable resources, such
as grain and fish, and the world got smaller. When weapons became
available, and if the landscape was caged, small groups began to seize
control of these new lootable resources. We began to slowly, hesitantly
adopt more primal forms of organization: dominance hierarchies. It was a
case of evolutionary backsliding: we began to give up the arrangements that
had made us uniquely human and instead more closely resemble our more
hierarchical chimpanzee and gorilla cousins.
As inequalities and hierarchies rose, so too did war. The threat of mass
violence caused many to reach for strong, aggressive leaders, an
authoritarian impulse that is buried deep in us. They became protection
rackets of sorts, and the state was born.
All it took was one or two societies turning into a Goliath to set off a
chain reaction. The authoritarian impulse was triggered in neighbours who
now had a model to emulate. These were not thoughtfully designed
institutions. Those who sought power were the least fit to wield it.
Frequently the most violent and overconfident were selected for and the
sheer concentration of power in masters, kings, pharaohs, and emperors led
to rulers who were far too often corrupt.
These Goliath racketeers behaved rather differently from most people:
they were more intent on growth, status, and aggression than the average
flesh-and-blood human. Goliaths competed, and elites fought over the
surplus of lootable resources within them. Dominance hierarchies

metastasized like a cancer: growing, spreading, and co-opting or conquering
the groups and civilizations around them.
Yet they were also self-terminating. They frequently contained the seeds
of their own demise: Goliath's Curse. The driving engine was that wealth
inequality tended to increase. That then spilled over into inequalities of
power, whether that be in autocracy (inequality in the control of decision-
making), theocracy (inequality in the control of information), or rule by the
military (inequality in the control of violence). Societies became more
extractive as time passed. The social landscape was increasingly tilted
towards the interests of the most powerful, be they plutocrats, priest-kings,
military dictators, or entrenched bureaucrats. The benefits that Goliaths
could provide began to dry up while the costs increased. Early on, this
frequently engendered a strong reaction from people with fresh memories
of egalitarianism. In weak Goliaths with few mechanisms of control, people
often easily rebelled or fled. This was the Primal Curse of Goliath and could
lead to completely abandoned cities or a boom-and-bust cycle among early
farmers and kingdoms.
Larger empires had a different curse. They could control their citizens
more effectively, but inequality and societal top-heaviness drove corruption,
elite factionalism, poor decision-making, overexpansion, environmental
degradation, and immiseration of the masses. The state was slowly
hollowed out to the stage where shocks - drought, floods, war, disease -
could split it apart. This diminishing return on extraction was the next
iteration of Goliath's Curse.
Eventually, far larger colonial empires that could cross the oceans
developed. They seem to have largely escaped the curse. Their
technological and economic growth was so rapid that even declines rarely
spiralled into collapse. Instead, the curse was the damage they inflicted on
other societies across the world. They constructed a global system of
extraction built on slavery, dispossession, genocide, collapse, and
shatterzones. It created a rimless wheel of global empire where resources
were extracted from a periphery which often experienced societal collapse,
while the core received resources and grew increasingly resilient. We see a
similar pattern in the world today. State failure is largely limited to states
that have a particularly harsh history of colonization, which left behind
broken, extractive institutions.

This Global Goliath now has a different curse. The rimless wheel of
empire now produces catastrophic risk which is capable of destroying the
entire world system. The production of catastrophic risk is largely limited to
a few powerful, secretive actors. These are the Agents of Doom: the fossil-
fuel industry, big tech, and military-industrial complexes. They are rackets
that both cooperate and compete with each other to produce global risk for
private profit and power. The Global Goliath has also incentivized the
creation of ever faster and more interconnected systems. Whether you are
worried about climate change, nuclear weapons, or overextended just-in-
time supply chains, the answer is the same. It is the Goliaths and Goliath
traps that began evolving millennia ago.
Throughout history, collapse has usually been a good thing for most
citizens. There could be costs, especially when it came to increased
violence. This was due less to collapse than to status seekers battling to
create a new state. The bloodiest and most disturbing processes throughout
history have been due to the birth and expansion of a Goliath, not its fall.
This was especially true of the creation of today's Global Goliath through
the marriage of colonization and capitalism.
We now live in a world system that is transforming into a Silicon Goliath.
We have entered the endgame. Either we kill Goliath or we potentially face
a final collapse that might succeed where the ice age failed and turn us from
Homo solus into the final footnote of our species' history.
To rephrase E. O. Wilson, the problem of humanity is that our Bronze
Age institutions suppress the best and bring out the worst of our
Palaeolithic psychology to produce humanity-killing technology. It's less
catchy, but more accurate. Or we can drop Wilson's formulation and just
say that the darker angels of our nature are flying us towards evolutionary
suicide.
JUSTICE LEST THE WORLD PERISH
There is an old Latin maxim Fiat justitia, et pereat mundus, which roughly
translates to 'Let justice be done, though the world perish'. It hints at what
many see as an underlying tension between justice and resilience.3

It's common to hear similar sentiments today. We often hear that
democracy must be sacrificed to cut emissions, unleash technology, or
prevent terrorism. That we need to sacrifice privacy on the altar of national
security. The we need to restrict freedom and democracy to make it out of
the twenty-first century alive.4
Yet all the evidence we do have suggests that more inclusive institutions
tend to make better, more future-focused decisions in the long run. We've
already come across evidence from fields ranging from computer science to
forecasting suggesting that bigger, more diverse groups that share
information reach better decisions.5  Similarly, one of the few studies to
look at what types of societies make the best long-term policies found that
democracies significantly outperformed autocracies.6  Giving in to the
impulse to embrace despotism is not wise. It is simply repeating a mistake
from thousands of years ago, on a global scale. It is a decision built on
following a darker angel of our nature rather than evidence. It is turning to
the authoritarian impulse when we should be turning towards each other.
We live in a remarkably lucky world. Preventing collapse and escaping
the endgame requires building a better one: lower carbon emissions and
fewer deaths from air pollution; fewer weapons and more money for
schools and hospitals; more involvement of regular citizens in governance;
less corruption; fewer plutocrats and more democracy. These are frequently
what populists from both the left and right are calling for. Supporters of
both Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders would agree on the basic idea that
politics and the economic system no longer represent or fairly support most
people and that democracy is fraying and needs to be resuscitated.
The challenges of populism, avoiding collapse, and building a better
world all have the same solution: the redistribution of power. We must use
technology to help us run open democracy at scale (with widespread use of
deliberative assemblies and juries) and keep inequality in check. Those who
are worried about the rise of populism need to start listening to the anger of
the people around them rather than vilifying them. They need to offer a path
that is more appealing than an authoritarian impulse fed by scapegoating
minorities, protestors, and immigrants. That is not one based on bland pleas
for hope or growth. It requires real, concrete change: introduce wealth taxes
and progressive taxation; crack down on corruption (including banning
legalized bribery like the revolving door between politics and industry); and

give people a genuine direct say in government and workplaces through
open democracy.
Such changes are eventually likely to be embraced and celebrated. When
people speak of 'making America great again' they are thinking of the
1950s, a time when the tax on the highest income bracket was over 90 per
cent, unionization was high, and wealth inequality was low. When people
think of the glory of Classical Greece, they are usually thinking of Athenian
democracy and its egalitarian culture. Now we have the opportunity to build
societies without the patriarchy and racism of the 1950s US, or the slavery
of Athens, and with far greater material comfort and well-being.
It is not a matter of trying to achieve justice even if it destroys the world.
It is fiat justitia, ne pereat mundus: let justice be done lest the world perish.
MEMORY OVER MYTH
Escaping Goliath's Curse will be a Herculean task. We need to reroute the
path of human history. Making it out of the endgame will require deep-
rooted and systemic changes.
Such reforms will clash with myths that have evolved over thousands of
years. The most entrenched is that subjugation is a necessity. We now live
in a world that would have been unthinkable to our ancestors: one filled
with bosses, managers, masters, and dictators. Each has some kind of
dominating power over those they control: bosses can fire their employees,
landlords can evict their tenants, dictators can jail or execute their citizens,
and gods can eternally punish and torture their creations. Many would claim
that we intrinsically need elites and hierarchies. That the rich and rulers
(and even domineering gods), despite the problems they create, are
necessary to any well-functioning large-scale society.
The problem is that the term 'elites' has always been a misnomer. What
we need is real elites: people who are exceptionally skilled at particular
tasks and jobs, be they plumbers, cleaners, caretakers, researchers, doctors,
or teachers. We want and need people to train the next generation, take care
of the most vulnerable, and use human knowledge to improve our freedom
and well-being, whether that be creating new antibiotics or helping forge
new forms of democracy.

We have little evidence that what we traditionally call elites - the richest
and most powerful throughout history - have the same proven skill as
athletes, cooks, artists, and writers. We have no reason to believe that the
pharaohs and kings of the past were particularly good decision-makers. On
the contrary, societies that overthrew their initial dominators remembered
them very differently: Native Americans recalled the rulers of Cahokia, the
old Puebloan societies, and others as evil wizards and gamblers, not great
leaders of decorated civilizations. Most of our history is viewed through the
lens of the 1 per cent. The Native Americans and the people of Zomia
glimpsed history through the eyes of wary survivors.
Today we have similarly little evidence that CEOs or investment bankers
are particularly skilful at their jobs. Companies may be successful, but it is
difficult to say whether they owe their success to the individual brilliance of
a leader or founder (usually the preferred option), the grit and skill of their
workers, or simply pure dumb luck. We are all fooled by randomness. Let a
random group of gamblers haggle long enough on the stock market and
eventually a billionaire will emerge. We'll attribute their success to their
personal philosophy, diet, or morning routine, but in reality it was just
fortuitous. It is far more difficult to disentangle individual skill from sheer
luck in finance or commerce than it is with a firefighter, an athlete, or a
chef.7
We rarely have good evidence that those in elite positions with enormous
salaries are giving an elite performance. (For instance, financial advisors'
stock picks appear to perform no better than random chance.8 ) In general,
the higher up the ladder of a corporation or a hierarchy someone ascends,
the less evidence there is of personal skill contributing to performance.
Statistician Nassim Nicholas Taleb calls this 'the inverse rule'.9
That inverse rule is built upon the 1 per cent view of history and the
countless myths of elite superiority: from the idea that kings have a divine
right to rule to the notion that the world's biggest companies are dependent
on the genius of one or two individuals rather than the tireless labour and
courage of underpaid workers in schools, hospitals, mines, and factories.
The algorithms and skyscrapers of today, like the pyramids and great walls
of yesteryear, are built on the sweat of tens of thousands of ordinary
labourers. The large text models of today are not founded on the intellect of
Sam Altman but on the work of thousands of academics who pioneered

machine learning, the countless workers who dig up and process the
materials, and the myriad underpaid and unpaid individuals who provide the
data and train the machines. Our greatest achievements are not because of
the 1 per cent; they are collective endeavours. As George Eliot once wrote,
'The growing good of the world is partly dependent on unhistoric acts ...
half owing to the number who lived faithfully a hidden life, and rest in
unvisited tombs.'10  It's time to drop the 1 per cent view and start paying
attention to the unmarked tombs and unknown heroes upon whose
shoulders we've built our world.
Another myth we'll need to overcome is that we can't reshape society
and upend dominance hierarchies. We live in a peculiar world in which
many believe that we can split atoms and even recreate intelligence on
silicon, yet it is impossible to do democracy at scale or resolve international
arms races. This bafflingly selective failure of imagination is not because of
evidence. We've controlled arms races before and have the technology and
know-how to have large-scale, intense democracy. It is instead just another
useful story of subjugation: we can hope for technological singularities but
not social emancipation. The truth is that we can change our social
structures and escape Goliath traps. And we'll need to. Reshaping the world
to avoid races (or rackets) for status, arms, and advantages is our great
challenge. It won't be easy, but it is possible. And it could determine
whether this is our finest century or our final century.
Dispelling these myths will be difficult. It's difficult to find a utopian
idea among the Greeks or Romans that did not involve a hierarchical world.
The thinkers of antiquity were far more capable of imagining the abolition
of marriage than war, patriarchy, or class domination. Similarly, today, the
feverish techno-dreams of billionaires involve reproducing human
intelligence on silicon, colonizing far-flung icy planets, and harvesting
stars, but tell us little of whether we have equality between the sexes. Our
world and our myths are the product of thousands of years of Goliath
evolution.
A central myth we'll need to unravel is the myth of progress. History is a
not a story of improvement from the stirring of civilization and agriculture
through to the rise of empires to the skyscrapers and satellites of the modern
world. Agriculture and sedentism took a wrecking ball to our physical and
mental health. The rise and fall of empires did result in bloodshed and
hardship, but it also often meant the fall and rise of our heights and

freedoms. Technology did not automatically improve the overall human
condition; the benefits were usually eaten up by a select elite class.
Technology can still be pivotal and beneficial: vaccines, plumbing,
anaesthetics, antibiotics, central heating, the printing press, and so much
more have helped to improve the standards of living of billions. Yet we
need to realize that shared progress in health and well-being came only
when technological developments were paired with collective struggle; that
to have the benefits of technology without the catastrophic risk of climate
change, nuclear weapons, killer robots, and novel entities, we'll also need to
struggle for democratic control of how technology is produced and used.
We'll need to fight to escape Goliath traps. And that fight will need to be
waged every day.
Without that fight, our Silicon Goliath is likely to take us on a path to
either an unfree world or a global collapse. A potential, final curse.
It won't be easy, but anything worth fighting for rarely is. Even if there
seems to be little hope, take comfort in defiance. It is worth doing the right
thing even if the odds are stacked against us.
The world is not a Greek tragedy.11  We can't rely on a deus ex machina
like AI solving our problems. Real progress and an escape from Goliath's
Curse will come only from the battle to rebalance power. We can write a
better story together. A story not about collapse or rise and fall. Rather, it
would be a story of redemption. A story about rebuilding civilization.
OceanofPDF.com

Epilogue: Slaying Goliath
Escaping the Endgame - Recreating Civilization - Becoming a David
ESCAPING THE ENDGAME
Collapse may seem inescapable. This is an illusion. Most of the challenges
we face are entirely solvable. If our world falls apart in the cold of a nuclear
winter or the unending blaze of climate change, it won't be because there
was nothing we could have done. There are many ways to reduce the risk of
global collapse, to defeat Goliath, and even actions that individuals can
take.
Staying Within Planetary Boundaries
Every large country now has a 'pathway to decarbonization': a detailed
road map made by large groups of experts detailing how to decarbonize
their society and reach net zero emissions. Most of these plans depend on a
few pillars: switching to renewable energy for electricity production,
electrifying transport, adopting aggressive energy efficiency measures, and
reducing any remaining emissions through reforestation and direct air
capture (machines which directly suck greenhouse gases out of the
atmosphere and sequester them).1  Reducing our consumption of meat and
dairy would also help cut emissions, as well as enormously reducing the
amount of suffering in the world.
One key way to slash emissions is to stop supporting fossil fuels.
Currently governments around the world reduce the price of fossil fuels

through measures such as tax breaks. More than that, the price of fossil
fuels doesn't include their costs to society, such as the roughly 5-10 million
deaths caused annually by fossil-fuel air pollution.2  These are costs that we
all pay. All of these are 'subsidies' on the price of fossil fuels. Currently
fossil fuels are subsidized by around $7 trillion per year, or around 7 per
cent of global GDP.3  Scrapping subsidies and properly pricing carbon
could both dramatically cut emissions and save lives. The money saved by
no longer handing out tax breaks for fossil fuels, as well as the revenue
from a carbon tax, could generate a stream of funding worth around 3 per
cent of global GDP. That is enough money, according to some estimates, to
eradicate extreme poverty, provide universal access to sanitation and clean
water, end hunger, and still have over $1 trillion to spare.4
Decarbonizing the world will be a momentous effort, but it won't
necessarily be an expensive one (unless you are a fossil-fuel company). The
IPCC in its latest review suggests that limiting global warming to 2°C will
mean global GDP losses by 2050 of 1.3-2.7 per cent, or 2.6-4.2 per cent to
restrict warming to 1.5°C.5  Understanding the world purely through GDP
misses many things, including less volatile energy prices and millions of
lives saved from air-pollution-related deaths. Once you factor these in,
decarbonization could well be a net economic benefit.6  (Although
quibbling over whether saving the world will be a net economic cost is
perhaps the height of stupidity.)
Climate change is just one of many planetary boundaries we face.
Staying within planetary boundaries will mean giving up the elite dream of
endless economic growth. There are many ways we can progress as a
society while remaining within planetary boundaries. These include
reducing the working week to three or four days, dropping GDP as an
economic target in favour of more holistic measures like the Genuine
Progress Indicator (GPI) - which factors in poverty, inequality, pollution,
and resource depletion - and scaling down destructive forms of production
such as fossil fuels, advertising, and factory farming.7  An even more
sweeping action is to ensure that the effects of products on the environment
and human health - whether it be cancer and lost fertility from PFAS, or
lost biodiversity - are reflected in their market price. This would be a
seismic shift in our economic system built on just one small common-sense

change: companies should have to pay for the economic and social damage
they do. It is simply making our economies more truthful and realistic. This
would not leave us in shared poverty. We can provide decent living
standards for 8.5 billion people using just 30 per cent of existing global
energy and resource use.8
Controlling AI
Controlling AI is just as doable as cutting emissions. We can - and should -
ban the development of killer robots and automated general cognition
(AGI). Technology bans may seem unrealistic, but there are hundreds of
examples of technologies throughout history that have been developed and
rescinded or intentionally never developed.9
There are leverage points in every part of the supply chain for building
advanced algorithms. One way to both create a fairer economic system and
indirectly slow AI is by paying workers properly along the entire supply
chain, from the miners in the Congo, to the factory workers in Taiwan and
China, through to the cleaners in San Francisco.
AI is dependent not just on cheap labour but also on stolen data. Giving
citizens control of their data and properly compensating them for it would
not only be the fair thing to do, but would also substantially slow the
development of AI by forcing AI companies to actually pay for the
resources they currently use for free. Rather than it being stolen through the
digital trawl-nets of OpenAI and others or having it silently (and often
unknowingly) taken as part of archaic user-service agreements that no one
reads, people could instead sell their data to companies who want it through
'data unions' that would negotiate a fair price (rather than every individual
having to bargain with Google or Apple).10
Three key ingredients for AI are computing power (in the form of
microchips, also frequently called 'compute'), energy, and coders. Compute
is concentrated in a few supply chains that flow primarily through Taiwan.
There are multiple ways that a coalition of countries could cooperate to
restrict and slow the supply of compute. One is to put a cap on the size of a
compute cluster, or how much can be used in a single model.11  Pricing

carbon to reflect the true cost of electricity or setting a cap on the maximum
energy usage of data centres or models would also act in a similar way to
slow AI. Whistleblower protections and stronger unions could also help
budding tech workers organize against companies and programs that lack
scruples.12
Once models are released, legislation could hold companies responsible
for the harms they cause (as the vetoed SB 1047 bill in California attempted
to do) and limit their use in dangerous domains, whether that be banning
facial-recognition algorithms or the incorporation of AI into the miliary.13
A World Without Nuclear Weapons
Dismantling nuclear weapons stockpiles is also eminently possible. The US
was typically dismantling 1,000 or more nuclear weapons every year during
the 1990s. With about 10,000 weapons in the world today, a global effort
could easily see stockpiles eliminated within a decade. Studies have shown
that many countries could plausibly rid themselves of nuclear weapons
within ninety days.14
That could be done through an international treaty, and indeed we already
have one: the 2017 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (which
binds countries to not use, test, possess, acquire, or develop nuclear
weapons), a treaty that no nuclear power has joined but seventy-three others
have.
A ban is needed because no level of nuclear weapons is safe. As a
minimum initial step, countries could reduce their stockpiles to a low
enough level that it would provide a 'deterrent' against war. That could be
around 300 low-yield weapons per country.15  Yet even a regional war
between Pakistan (170 weapons) and India (172 weapons) would still have
global impacts, dropping temperatures by 4°C.16  That is to say nothing of
the millions of lives lost and the knock-on effects. Weapons that can kill
millions indiscriminately will never be safe and any society that has them
can never call itself civilized. Our species can never truly be worthy of the
mantle 'sapiens' ('wise' in Latin) until this scourge is lifted from the planet.

The Problem Is Power
The natural rebuttal to each of these measures, such as banning AGI, killer
robots, and nuclear weapons, is the defence of political feasibility. It is
seemingly a golden rule of the politics of collapse: what is effective is
unfeasible and what is feasible won't be effective.
Political feasibility may seem like an immovable force, but it can change
rapidly. During the spread of Covid-19 governments enacted far-reaching
measures that previously seemed unthinkable. When countries do act
decisively, miraculous change is possible.17
For many it's somehow easier to imagine a nuclear winter or even an AGI
apocalypse than to imagine a world without abhorrent weapons of mass
destruction. It's easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of
Goliath. That is because we are still stuck in Goliath traps: status races,
arms races, and races to the bottom (where firms or states try to outcompete
each other by exploiting people and environments more intensely).
Decreasing nuclear stockpiles, slashing carbon emissions, and making our
societies more democratic are all completely feasible, and doing so in the
long term will mean escaping these traps and digging up the root causes of
existential risk. We'll need to do what few societies have successfully done:
kill Goliath.18
RECREATING CIVILIZATION
Today we have measures that can level each source of power, reduce
Goliath fuel, and tame the darker angels of our nature.
Democratizing Political Power
We need to introduce open democracy, with deliberative juries and
assemblies creating national policies for governments and providing
oversight of corporations. If decision-makers are randomly selected from
society, we will no longer be selecting for those who crave status and power

or who rank higher in the dark triad. The constant cycling through new
citizens to make decisions will also help ensure no one is in authority long
enough (or holds enough power) to be corrupted. But we don't just need to
rely on physical assemblies of randomly selected citizens as in ancient
Athens. New technologies allow for online platforms to aggregate the
opinions of enormous numbers of people when making critical decisions
about how we live.19  We're often told that open democracy is not
practically possible, but that has always been an argument for hoarding
political power.
This is just the tip of the iceberg. There are many other options, such as
banning the revolving door between regulators and industry. If we start to
properly fund experiments in democracy, and reward them like we reward
start-ups in tech, then who knows in what profound new ways we'll be able
to harness the wisdom of crowds.20
Democracy is not just for governments. If you believe that democracies
work because they result in better decision-making, and that all of us
deserve a say in collective endeavours, then there is no reason to accept
workplace autocracy. The problem throughout history has been not states
(some states have been, and many are, important providers of social
support, public services, and public goods) but concentrations of
unaccountable power. Corporations such as Exxon or the East India
Company have been just as destructive as empires, and firms today are less
accountable and less democratic than most states. Corporations could
similarly be democratized by reforming them into large-scale worker
cooperatives governed by workers alongside deliberative juries, and with an
overriding legal goal of providing social and environmental benefits, not
short-term returns to investors.
Make the World Equal Again
Levelling political power won't be enough. Even a deep democracy that
uses citizens' assemblies and juries, as well as digital technology to carry
out regular direct votes, will eventually be undermined if some people have
billions of dollars with which to rig any system we come up with. One
could argue that we have democracy and massive inequality in the world

today, and that the two are not in tension. It's a mistaken idea. What we
ordinarily call democracy - systems in which a subset of people (who are
aggressively propagandized by political marketers and billionaire-owned
media empires) vote every four to five years for a tiny number of (usually
rich) representatives who are funded and lobbied by corporations (for
whom they frequently work afterwards), who then enact policies which
usually better represent elite interests than popular opinion - is better
described as an oligarchy with democratic furnishings. It is far more
inclusive than most governments throughout history, but that is a low bar
compared to what is possible. Even this threadbare democracy is being
frayed by increasing wealth inequality. It is no coincidence that (with a
slight time lag) democracy started backsliding after inequality began rising
across the world in the 1970s. Today, the grinning face of many ailing
democracies is that of tech and property billionaires. Inequality in one form
of power or another will eventually spill into others: the rich buy elections,
overly powerful generals launch coups, and autocrats amass fortunes. The
original and most powerful inequality was found in wealth: lootable
resources provided a form of power that could be easily translated into
other forms of power and passed down through generations. Political
democracy will die without economic equality.
Wealth becoming more unequal may be close to an iron law throughout
history, but reversing it is surprisingly easy. The simplest way is through
taxation. The US had an income tax of above 90 per cent on the highest
earners from 1944 through to 1963 (the highest rate in the US is now 37 per
cent). It didn't lead to an economic bust. It actually helped to usher in an
economic golden age for the US. A highly progressive taxation system
should be combined with an even higher tax on wealth such as land and
stocks.
Other measures include placing a cap on wealth, $10 million for example
(a level that is well beyond what any individual needs), or capping the
income of the highest earners within companies at five times that of the
lowest-paid worker. While tax dodging and tax evasion may seem like the
inescapable consequence of such proposals, there are a raft of ways to
prevent this, including establishing a coalition of countries that set a
minimum tax rate on large multinational corporations and penalizing tax
havens that charge less.21

There is also an abundance of ways to reduce global inequality. One
option is a global minimum wage, which could be half the median wage of
a country to take account of local conditions. Another is a comprehensive
debt jubilee - in other words, writing off all debts - a policy that has been
surprisingly common (and successful) throughout history.22
Democratic Control of Information and the Military
One of the best ways to distribute the control of information is to break up
existing monopolies, specifically in big tech and the media. This could
mean creating new legislation as well as rigorously implementing existing
anti-trust tools, such as the Sherman Act and Clayton Act in the US, which
have already been used to block big mergers.
Another is to make power structures more transparent. Governments'
classification and secrecy practices, particularly for military projects, are
excessive, lack structure, and are often used to hide incompetence and
corruption rather than important state secrets.23  Corporate non-disclosure
agreements are little better, as we've seen with OpenAI and others cracking
down on safety-concerned whistleblowers. The foundation of any
democracy is a well-informed electorate, and thus transparency should be
the rule, not the exception. Secrecy should be permitted only if it has been
signed off by an independent arbiter or a citizens' jury. Another key step
will be empowering and protecting whistleblowers, whether it be in the
military or in big tech. That means providing stronger legal protection for
those who have the courage to report misconduct and repealing archaic laws
that allow governments and corporations to hunt, silence, and imprison
whistleblowers, such as the Espionage Act (1917) in the US.
Rebalancing power will inevitably require increased protest and activism
in the coming decades. Yet governments have made a concerted recent
effort to curtail the right to protest, such as through the UK's Police, Crime,
Sentencing, and Courts Act 2022, or the 323 different bills that have been
introduced in the US since 2017 that restrict the right to protest, and even
encourage violence against peaceful protesters.24  Finding ways to roll
these back and unshackle concerned citizens will be critical to levelling
power and holding the Agents of Doom to account.

Democratically Controlling Technology and
Production
We can also slow - or even halt - the production of dangerous new
technologies and weapons by placing them back under democratic control.
Monopolizable weapons and technologies under the control of the few have
been the norm for just the last 1 per cent of human history. This is not a call
to halt technological progress; it is a call to democratically control
technology to ensure it is progress. AI can be used to better spot cancers,
vaccines have prevented the suffering of billions, space exploration ignites
the enthusiasm and imagination of millions, and we'll need new
technologies to capture carbon from the atmosphere and stabilize melting
ice sheets. It is a question of better directing technological development and
production.
Researchers have already suggested ways in which companies and
countries could use experts to map out the most likely development
pathways of different technologies (such as AGI) and then use deliberative
juries or assemblies to decide whether to pursue them and what regulation
to put in place. This would help us democratically and pre-emptively
regulate technology, as opposed to the current losing strategy of rushing
haphazardly to make legislation after a new technology is released.25
We could use a similar democratic process to navigate difficult trade-offs
on the path ahead, such as whether we should use emergency options (these
might include negative emissions, short-term geoengineering, or
interventions to stabilize ice sheets) to avoid the worst effects of climate
change: examine the potential worst-case effects of both the warming we
are facing and the potential emergency solutions, and then let a group of
expert-informed citizens decide.26
This is not a complete blueprint for solving our problems. Trying to foist
a vision of utopia on the world has never ended well. Instead, we should
democratize the world, level power, reduce Goliath fuel, reduce existential
risk, and see what world blossoms from this new civilization.

BECOMING A DAVID
In the biblical tale, Goliath is slain by a single slingshot-toting future king
by the name of David. Defeating Goliaths, in reality, is not done alone.
Instead, it requires actions that leverage the people and communities around
us.
Don't Be a Dick
First, I propose a simple pledge to not be a dick. This is a pledge to not
work for, invest in, or support any firm, institute, or individual that
significantly contributes to global catastrophic risk. Don't work for an
Agent of Doom, whether it is an AGI lab, a fossil-fuel company, or an arms
manufacturer. The idea that you are going to change an Agent of Doom
from the inside is nonsense, and the excuse of 'if I don't do it someone else
will' is the sort of bullshit used by guards at concentration camps. Hold
yourself to a higher standard. Stopping arms races, status races, and races to
the bottom begins when each of us refuses to get trapped in them.
More than that, it is a pledge to not become a Goliath yourself. All of us
rank somewhere on the dark triad. All of us are capable of being corrupted
by power. All of us crave status to some degree. Don't let the darker angels
of your nature win. If you find yourself atop a hierarchy, democratize it and
distribute your power among your peers. Every year, try to make sure that
your actions leave the world a little freer than it otherwise would have been.
This same pledge can be adopted not just by individuals but also by
institutions. While Google did a poor job of fulfilling its credo of 'don't be
evil', all is not lost. Corporations can and should reorganize themselves to
be more internally democratic and minimize the pay discrepancies between
the CEO and interns (who should be paid). Firms can also use their money
and portfolios to fight against doomsday. Large institutional investors like
pension funds and sovereign wealth funds can and should pledge to use
their investments to minimize global catastrophic risk (not just moving their
investments away from fossil-fuel companies, big tech, and arms producers,
but moving them into sectors that help make the world more resilient).27

No institution should be financing our global descent, and no one should
support one which does.
Be a Democrat
Second, practise democracy. Democracy is not just a form of government; it
is a culture and a way of life. One that all of us need to recapture. Be a
democrat: don't just vote every few years, but join a union, join an activist
group (while there is no group fighting against all the sources of
catastrophic risk, there hopefully will be one soon), advocate for workplace
democracy, and discuss political matters in a productive way - whether it be
nuclear weapons or mass surveillance or climate collapse - with friends and
family members.
Vote Against the Apocalypse
Third is voting. You are first and foremost a citizen, not a consumer. While
democracy is more than voting, voting is a fundamental part of democratic
practice in the modern world. If you know about climate change, a nuclear
winter, and the other real risks to the survival of our species but base your
vote on who promises to cut your taxes, then you are culpable for our
current path towards self-destruction. It is a travesty that no election to date
has been decided by the candidates' positions on nuclear weapons and
climate change. There is no reason to contribute to that trend in the future.
Choose the party and candidate that offer genuine, practical ways to
empower citizens through deliberative juries and assemblies, not those who
use empty rhetoric about 'draining the swamp', 'protecting the nation', or
providing 'change we can believe in'. Choose those who have concrete
plans to adopt a high carbon price, to price environmental impacts in
general, to ban fossil-fuel subsidies, to join the 2017 Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, and to place a ban on the pursuit of AGI
and killer robots. If there are none, then contact your local representative
and lobby for it, or join a grassroots movement that is fighting for real
change.

Voting may seem inconsequential, but it can change things extremely
quickly. If everyone in Australia (or the US, or the UK) began switching off
their lights prudently and chose the lowest-carbon travel options, then it
would barely make a dent in national emissions. If they changed their vote
to those offering the strongest decarbonization plans, then suddenly
emissions could be on track to be eliminated within decades. You of course
only have one vote, but talking to family and friends can multiply your
impact. Debate and discussion are the lifeblood of democracy.
Don't Be Dominated
Fourth is to re-cultivate the counter-dominance intuitions that guided us
through the Palaeolithic. Oppose domination in all your relationships,
whether they be personal, family, or workplace. Whenever you come across
a hierarchy, whether it is based on wealth, gender, or age, ask whether it is
legitimate and whether it justifies domination. If it doesn't, then try to
overturn it.
One of the first and most pernicious stories justifying subjugation was
that of the saviour leader. High priests, god-kings, and budding rulers
claimed to predict the future by reading bones, ensure the harvest through
ritual sacrifice, and provide protection from unseen spirits and neighbouring
groups. Now, we have billionaires and oligarchs offering salvation by
building walls between us, or inventing a superintelligent AI god to solve
our problems, or building colonies on Mars as an escape plan. These have
always been - and still are - glorified parlour tricks to keep people
distracted while the bosses pick their pockets.
It is time to say 'enough'. It is time to realize the bright and terrifying
truth: no gods, kings, heroes, or masters are going to save us. Slaying
Goliath and avoiding evolutionary suicide is, like all great achievements,
going to be a collective action. It is on us. It is going to take the thankless,
unglamorous work of having difficult conversations with your friends,
giving up power, trusting your fellow citizens rather than a strongman
leader when you're scared, going into the streets even when you are
comfortable at home, and taking an ethical stand even if it might cost you
your job.

Each of those little acts is another stone flung at Goliath, and each crack
in its skull is a doorway to freedom. The stand will be worth it. A world free
of nuclear weapons, carbon emissions, killer robots, and the threat of
collapse, one full of genuine democracy and economic equality, is no
utopia. It is within reach.
Revolutions begin where myths end; Goliath ends when civilization
begins.
OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgements
A book is never a solo endeavour. I'm grateful to all those who helped bring
this one to fruition. While the manuscript has been improved by the
comments of this small army of scholars, friends, and editors, any mistakes
that remain are solely my own.
A special thanks to my editors Greg Clowes and Todd Portnowitz, as well
as my agent Chris Wellbelove, who all read through multiple versions of the
manuscript and provided hundreds of comments in response. Greg was a
particularly prolific, insightful, and challenging source of feedback. It is
immeasurably better due to their efforts. I'm grateful for the exceptional
copy-editing skills of Trevor Horwood, who did the hard work of trawling
through hundreds of pages to sharpen the prose and clarify the messages. I
would also like to thank Robert Drew and Anthony Hippisley for their
careful and meticulous proofreading of the final manuscript.
My eternal gratitude to my ever-reliable personal freelance graphic
designer David Kemp. He helped design over twenty of the figures in this
book, including all of the timelines. I'd also like to extend my warm thanks
to the other graphic designers who helped to redraw and finalize the figures.
This book wouldn't exist (at least not for many years) had it not been for
Richard Fisher and Tom Killingbeck. Tom, an editor at Penguin at the time,
unexpectedly reached out to me in October 2019 to ask if I would consider
writing a book. He walked me through the process of writing a proposal and
shepherded it through the approval process. Thanks for taking a gamble on
a young, little-known academic, Tom. That initial deal was based on an
article for the BBC that my editor Richard Fisher had commissioned me to
do. Since then, Richard has been a consistent source of advice in the world
of writing and also reviewed the entire book. Thank you, Richard.
I am an outsider to many of the topics covered in these pages. I have
luckily been able to rely on the deft advice of several native guides over

different disciplines, to whom I am deeply indebted. The first is the
historian of empire John Haldon. John read the manuscript in its entirety,
was one of the first to hear the full argument of the book, and has been a
continuous source of advice, including on how to have a healthy sense of
scepticism about collapse. Another is the archaeologist Eric Cline, who also
read the entire book and was my primary guide to the Late Bronze Age
collapse. A third is the polymath and historian Walter Scheidel, whose ideas
have left fingerprints across the pages you've read. Walter provided some
early words of encouragement about my theory of collapse in 2021, which
helped give me the confidence to stay the course with this sprawling
project. A fourth is Benoît Pelopidas, whom I'm lucky to have had as my
primary guide to all things relating to nuclear weapons, as a reviewer for all
of Part Three of the book, and as a friend. I owe a deep thanks to each of
them.
I also owe a thank you to all those who read through different parts of the
manuscript and provided useful comments and edits: Dan Lawrence,
Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias, Marilyn Masson, Douglas Fry, Lalitha Sundaram,
Nate Hagens, Gideon Futerman, Thomas Homer-Dixon, Makella (Makky
B) Brems, Scott Janzwood, Michael Lawrence, Jennifer Birch, Ajay
Gambhir, Jonathan Neale, Carla Zoe Cremer, Rachel Ainsworth, Cristina
Jauset Gonzalez, Elizabeth (Coups) Cooper, Georgiana Gilgallon, Haydn
Belfield, Marten Scheffer, Adrian Hindes, Tom Matthews, Megan Shipman,
Aaron Tang, Daniel Zimmer, and Constantin Arnscheidt. Over the years
many others have contributed to the research which underpins this book,
whether it be through written pieces or just illuminating discussion. These
include Tim Lenton, Xu Chi, Lara Mani, Tom Hobbes, and my other
colleagues past and present at the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk
(CSER), the Cascade Institute, the Notre Dame Institute for Advanced
Studies (now the Institute for Ethics and the Common Good, or the ECG),
and Notre Dame Environmental Humanities Initiative (EHUM). Thanks to
Oscar Rousham for helping to put together the first version of the MOROS
database, and to Tillman Hartley for helping to compose and refine the
latest versions.
Dan Hoyer, Guy Middleton, and Tim Kohler deserve a special thanks as
they all read through almost the entire manuscript and provided a series of
short essays in response. I'm indebted to them for their attention to detail
and the time they spent on improving this manuscript. Florian Jehn

provided particularly copious and insightful comments for the entire book.
His Substack 'Existential Crunch' is also an invaluable source of knowledge
on collapse and existential risk, one I would highly recommend to anyone
who wants further reading.
The award for most excruciatingly detailed and helpful comments
undoubtedly goes to Matthijs Maas. Matthijs left myriad comments on the
manuscript (including in the form of hours of voice notes), talked through
some of the biggest ideas (and even coined the term 'Primal Curse' for the
initial iteration of Goliath's Curse), and has developed the helpful habit of
consistently sending me relevant articles, chapters, and books over the
years. It's hard to imagine a better friend and colleague.
Two of my closest friends and colleagues, Mel Cowans and Nathaniel
Cooke, reviewed the entire book meticulously. They, along with Melissa
May, were ever reliable sources of support and advice throughout the years
and even housed me for portions of the writing. Alongside Olivia Liang and
Raph Gall (as well as Arthur Liang-Gall) they became my adopted UK
family. I'm also grateful to my Australian family, who have been pillars of
support over the years: Ellie, Kristy, Tammy, Mum, Swaran, and David (as
well as our furry family members Bo Bo, Bailey, and Bahni). Thanks to
Emily Arnold, who made the final months of finishing this manuscript far
brighter and far more fun than they should have been.
This book has been written across several years and many homes, and
I'm grateful for each one. These include CSER, the Meridian Office in
Cambridge, the Global Systemic Risk group at Princeton University (where
I undertook a sabbatical in summer 2022 thanks to the hospitality and
guidance of Miguel Centeno and Thayer Patterson), as well as the ECG and
EHUM at the University of Notre Dame. Notre Dame housed me for the
most intensive writing periods and I'm appreciative of the help and
(typically Midwestern) hospitality of Roy Scranton, Meghan O'Sullivan,
the ECG staff, and 2023-24 faculty fellows (especially my fellow deep
history enthusiast Marcus Kreuzer and fellow freedom fan Makella Brems).
This book wouldn't be possible without the brilliant ideas and tireless
work of others. In particular it is heavily indebted to the work of Peter
Turchin, especially through his research into structural demographic theory
and state formation using the Seshat database. Many of the later arguments
of moving beyond growth and the travesties of the global Goliath are

inspired by studies led by Jason Hickel. Much of the work on abandoned
experiments draws from the excellent scholarship of Justin Jennings.
Much of the spirit of this book, as well as the central concepts - such as
lootable resources and the art of not being governed - were inspired by the
work of James C. Scott. Tragically Jim passed away shortly before this
book was completed. I hope he would be pleased with how it has carried
forward his ideas.
The greatest thanks and the dedication of this book are reserved for my
brother. Not just because of the poetry of devoting a book called Goliath's
Curse to someone called David. David has been over the course of my life a
brother, mentor, inspiration, and even a best friend. He helped me through
the most difficult times while writing this manuscript, endured the
punishment of being the first reader for every draft, and was a patient
sounding-board for many of the ideas. This book wouldn't exist if it wasn't
for him. Thank you, brother.
OceanofPDF.com

Glossary
Authoritarian impulse
The psychological tendency for individuals to be more accepting and
supporting of authoritarian structures and leaders when faced with a
threat to their safety and security.
Caged land
Territory with few exit options. This is a form of Goliath fuel that tends to
lead towards the establishment of dominance hierarchies. Caged land can
include geography (such as Egypt, which is cordoned off by desert and
sea); a population tied to certain resources (such as a stream of salmon or
a field of wheat); or technological changes (such as the construction of
walls). All of these can - and do - interact and change over time.
Chaos
A social system in which everyone is trying relentlessly and violently to
dominate, but no one ever succeeds.
Civilization
A social structure characterized mainly by non-hierarchical, democratic
cooperation.
Collapse
The relatively rapid contraction and fragmentation of different power
systems. This results in large-scale losses in hierarchy, population density,
and energy capture.
(Cumulative) cultural evolution
Knowledge, practices, and technologies that are selected for, passed down
across generations, and accumulated over time.
Dark triad

Three antisocial personality traits: psychopathy (callousness, and a lack
of empathy and remorse), narcissism (an inflated sense of entitlement and
self-importance), and Machiavellianism (manipulating others for personal
gain).
Darker angels of our nature
A combination of psychological traits that have led to Goliaths: status
competition through domination; the dark triad (psychopathy, narcissism,
and Machiavellianism); embracing strong authority structures when
threatened (the authoritarian impulse); and becoming corrupted by power.
Death-Star Syndrome
Large, robust systems that are surprisingly fragile if hit in the right spot
with a sufficient amount of force.
Democracy
A spectrum of (more or less) equal and inclusive political practices.
Democracies can be hierarchical (ancient Athens for adult males) or non-
hierarchical (egalitarian foragers such as the Hadza).
Diminishing returns on extraction
As states and elites try to extract more from their citizens, resources, and
neighbours, this causes increased inequality, corruption, oligarchy (poor
decision-making), overstretch, popular immiseration, elite factionalism,
and a declining energy ratio. These different effects hollow out the state
until it falls apart or is broken apart by different shocks. The second
iteration of Goliath's Curse.
Dominance hierarchy
A social-ranking system in which one group or individual is placed above
others owing to their ability to impose penalties, including violence.
Empire
Essentially synonymous with a state. For ease, we should think of these
as particularly big states, or states that have conquered other states.
Endgame
A situation in which there is a significant risk of global catastrophic or
existential risk. In short, a time when Goliath is likely to self-terminate
permanently or be fundamentally reformed.

Evolutionary backsliding
The movement from egalitarian fluid civilizations into dominance
hierarchies (Goliaths) which more closely resemble the social structure of
gorillas and chimpanzees.
Evolutionary suicide
Short-term evolutionary pressures lock the population into a path of self-
destruction. Short-term adaptation leads to long-term extinction.
Existential risk
The likelihood of a deep, lasting, global collapse or human extinction.
Extractive institutions
Great concentrations of power leading to institutions (whether it be an
authoritarian government, an oppressive theocracy, or a bloated
bureaucracy controlled by the rich) in which elites extract more
resources, labour, and energy through unequal exchange.
Global catastrophic risk
The likelihood of an unprecedented loss of more than 10 per cent of
global population and disruption of the critical systems on which the
world depends.
Global decimation risk
The likelihood of an event or process that leads to a loss of around 10 per
cent of global population within a year.
Global Goliath
A collection of interconnected hierarchies across the entire world in
which some individuals dominate others to control energy and labour. In
our modern world this includes hierarchies such as the state, patriarchy,
rich and poor (based on a capitalist global economy), and myths about the
need for hierarchy.
Goliath
A collection of interconnected hierarchies in which some individuals
dominate others to control energy and labour.
Goliath evolution
The evolution of dominance hierarchies. Violence selects for Goliaths
that are better at warfare, and usually larger and more centralized.

Goliath fuel
Ecological and technological conditions that allow for the establishment
of a Goliath. These include lootable resources, monopolizable weapons,
and caged land.
Goliath traps
The destructive competitive dynamics that dominance hierarchies are
liable to fall into. The pursuit of short-term gain by status seekers leads to
everyone losing out in the long term. There are three main Goliath traps:
races for status, arms races, and races to the bottom.
Lootable resources
Resources that can easily be seen, stolen, and stored. A form of Goliath
fuel.
Monopolizable weapons
Weapons or tactics that can be concentrated (or even monopolized) and
give one group an advantage over their competitors.
Primal Curse
The first iteration of Goliath's Curse. This involves early Goliaths falling
apart owing to weak institutions meeting strong counter-dominance
intuitions, as well as rising inequality (and different shocks).
Rungless ladder
A metaphor for how more powerful Goliaths tend to have deeper and
more widespread collapses. For the modern world this heightened
severity of collapse is due to more powerful weapons, more deteriorated
environments, and a reliance on states and complex technological
systems.
Silicon Goliath
A Goliath that covers the entire world where the populace is controlled
through mass surveillance and dominance hierarchies, which are in turn
overwhelmingly dependent on advanced algorithmic systems. The main
forms of Goliath fuel for this form of Goliath are data (lootable resource),

killer robots and nuclear weapons (monopolizable weapons), and mass
surveillance systems (caged land).
Somalia-Denmark rule
The more predatory a state, the less harmful (or even the more beneficial)
its collapse; and the more inclusive and benevolent a state, the more
costly its collapse.
State(s)
A set of centralized institutions that impose rules on and extract resources
from a population in a territory. States can also provide public goods,
whether that be roads, bridges, or (in later cases) education and
healthcare.
Stories of subjugation
Myths, ideologies, and religions that justify the domination of the many
by the few.
Systemic risk
The potential for individual disruptions or failures to cascade into a
system-wide failure.
Tree of Doom
The causal chain from root causes through Goliaths and Goliath traps to
existential risk.
Unequal exchange
The unfair exchange of value between individuals or groups owing to
power imbalances.
OceanofPDF.com

List of Figures
Figure 1: An artistic depiction of Cahokia around 1050 CE
Figure 2: Fluid civilizations in Europe and North America
Figure 3: Human or horse?
Figure 4: 'The Neanderthal Businessman'
Figure 5: The determinants of risk
Figure 6: Examples of Palaeolithic proto-writing
Figure 7: Post-Holocene social trajectories in Eurasia and the Americas
Figure 8: From Goliath fuel to Goliaths
Figure 9: A cave art battle scene (5000-3500 BCE) found in Sefar,
southern Algeria
Figure 10: Forms of human society
Figure 11: The Mesopotamian post-Holocene social trajectory
Figure 12: The spread of the first farmers of Europe
Figure 13: Abandoned experiments across the world
Figure 14: A timeline of Çatalhöyük
Figure 15: Inequality and collapse in early Goliaths
Figure 16: A timeline of the first Goliaths of North America
Figure 17: Original states and independent food production centres
Figure 18: From societal resilience to vulnerability
Figure 19: A sketch of the Palette of Narmer
Figure 20: Violence in the Near East: 12,500 to 400 BCE
Figure 21: Victory Stele SB2 of Sargon of Akkad
Figure 22: A timeline of Early Bronze Age polities
Figure 23: A timeline of Late Bronze Age polities
Figure 24: A map of the Late Bronze Age collapse
Figure 25: Death spirals in the Bronze Age collapse
Figure 26: A timeline of the Lowland Maya collapse
Figure 27: The original scripts of the world

Figure 28: A timeline of key west African empires
Figure 29: A timeline of early imperial China (Xia to Jin)
Figure 30: A timeline of Rome
Figure 31: Diminishing returns on extraction
Figure 32: The maximum territorial extent of the largest empires
throughout history
Figure 33: A timeline of the Incan and Aztec empires
Figure 34: Statues of Atahualpa and Motecuhzoma at the Royal Palace,
Madrid
Figure 35: World population 10,000 BCE to 1700 CE
Figure 36: The spectrum of global catastrophe
Figure 37: Temperature change from 1000 to 2100 CE
Figure 38: Extreme heat, fragile states, and the production of global
catastrophe
Figure 39: Transgressing the planetary boundaries
Figure 40: Land use over the past 12,000 years
Figure 41: The Great Acceleration
Figure 42: Fat Tails
Figure 43: The endgame
Figure 44: The causal chain of global catastrophic risk
Figure 45: The Tree of Doom
Figure 46: From root causes to our modern endgame, or the Tree of Doom
Figure 47: Inequality in key empires across the twentieth century
Figure 48: Energy released by projectiles over time
Figure 49: Accelerating waves of innovation and economic growth across
human history
List of Tables
Table 1: Human epochs
Table 2: The lootability of different crops
Table 3: Worst-case population decline during collapse
Table 4: Diminishing returns on extraction

Table 5: Historical global decimation
Table 6: Apocalyptic probabilities
Table 7: The evolution of Goliath across history
OceanofPDF.com

Notes
INTRODUCTION: A PEOPLE'S HISTORY OF COLLAPSE
1. The forms of political power are an extension and refinement of
Michael Mann's sources of social power. See Mann, The Sources of
Social Power I: A History of Power from the Beginning to AD 1760,
2nd edn (Cambridge University Press, 2012). I've added in
'demographic power' and expanded 'ideological power' to
'information power', and 'military power' into 'violent power'. The
overall framework is elaborated on in Luke Kemp et al., 'Societal
Collapse as a Powershift' (forthcoming, 2025). A note about the
endnotes in this book. In general, I'll be aiming to both provide
scholarly references where necessary and supply broad overviews of
the archaeological case studies through more accessible, popular (yet
reliable) books and pieces. I've often opted for the latter since many
readers won't have the university affiliations or money to buy access
to expensive journal articles or academic books (which is a shame).
I've aimed to provide page numbers for references except when either
these are taken from an e-reader (in which case I've provided a
chapter), or it is a key point made repeatedly throughout the source.↩
2. My definition of collapse is a refinement of the many that have come
before. One of the first suggested was by the famed Cambridge
archaeologist Colin Renfrew in his 'Systems Collapse as Social
Transformation: Catastrophe and Anastrophe in Early State Societies',
in Transformations (Academic Press, 1979), 482-4,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-586050-5.50035-X. Renfrew
focuses on four general features of collapse: the collapse of the
centralized administrative state, the loss of an elite, the collapse of a
centralized economy, and a population decline and settlement shift. In
other words, he's referring to the large-scale fragmentation and

contraction of political, economic, information, and demographic
power networks. My definition is also an evolution of Tainter's
canonical definition of collapse as a rapid and enduring reduction in a
pre-established level of 'complexity' (a term later reused by Jared
Diamond). See Joseph A. Tainter, The Collapse of Complex Societies
(Cambridge University Press, 1990); Jared Diamond, Collapse: How
Societies Choose to Succeed or Fail (Penguin, 2011). As we'll see
later, the term 'complexity' refers mainly to hierarchy, centralization,
and inequality. 'Complexity' is a misnomer as both complexity
scientists and common sense usually see it as the diversity and
interconnectivity of parts. Hierarchy and centralization often act to
reduce diversity and reduce the interconnectivity of certain groups,
such as between peasants (or, as we see later, Rome preventing city-
states from communicating). Similarly, administration is an art of
simplification. The point is most eloquently expressed in James C.
Scott, Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the
Human Condition Have Failed (Yale University Press, 2008); Norman
Yoffee, The Evolution of Simplicity (University of Chicago Press,
2001). States and hierarchies simplify as much as they increase
complexity. Hence, their collapse can often increase certain kinds of
'complexity'. The diversity of political forms, economic relations,
languages, and cultural practices can often increase after a collapse.
While long-distance trade and communication are often reduced,
connectivity at a local and regional level can also increase during the
breakdown of a state. The only genuine commonalities across all case
studies are losses in hierarchy, energy capture, and population density.
What Tainter and others are really talking about here are centralized
power structures, hence the emphasis. The other aspects of more
diverse and stratified roles and goods are by and large a by-product of
the few trying to organize and control the labour and resources of the
many. Even the most basic definitions of societal complexity frame it
in this way. For instance, Brian Hayden, 'Social Complexity', The
Oxford Handbook of the Archaeology and Anthropology of Hunter-
Gatherers, ed. Vicki Cummings (Oxford University Press, 2014), 644,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199551224.013.047. There have
been numerous other definitions. Scholars in the field of existential
risk have defined collapse as the loss of the ability to create industrial

and post-industrial technologies, or the complete loss of agriculture
and the other clichéd trappings of civilization, such as writing and the
rule of law. See Will MacAskill, What We Owe the Future (Basic
Books, 2022); Toby Ord, The Precipice: Existential Risk and the
Future of Humanity (Hachette, 2020). The fathers of the popular
French collapsology movement, Pablo Servigne and Raphaël Stevens,
see it as a loss of the services provided by the state (How Everything
Can Collapse, Polity, 2020). In these views collapse is the sudden theft
of any virtues that the modern, globalized world offers. They are more
reminiscent of post-apocalyptic films like The Road and Mad Max and
not applicable to pre-modern cases, or even precise enough to be
useful. Perhaps the best recent attempt to define collapse comes from
the ecologists Garry Peterson and Graeme Cumming in 2017. They
frame collapse as a quick, enduring loss of a system's identity and a
large amount of 'socio-ecological capital' ('Unifying Research on
Social-Ecological Resilience and Collapse', Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 32, no. 9 (2017): 698-9). The problem is that identity is
difficult to define, and many cases of collapse see the recuperation and
expansion of ecosystems. The vast reforestation of central Mexico and
the Andes after the collapse of the Aztec and Incan empires are just
two examples. The definition presented here tries to cut to the heart of
collapse, focus on only the most common consequences, and avoid
arbitrary and value-laden terms like 'complexity'. It still has some
issues, most notably that 'rapid' and 'enduring' will always be
subjective terms. It's not a fatal flaw as even the best definitions of
complex phenomena rely on some expert judgement. As noted later,
we should see collapse as a spectrum, ranging from the shallow (less
severe, rapid, and enduring) to the deep (more severe, rapid, and
enduring). Thank you for reading this short essay of an endnote.↩
3. Timothy R. Pauketat, ed., Cahokia: Ancient America's Great City on
the Mississippi (Penguin, 2010), chap. 1.↩
4. The image is from Flickr and the original artist has the excellent name
of 'Thank You (25 Millions) views'. See
www.flickr.com/photos/prayitnophotography/32434956237/. The
image is published under the Creative Commons Licence. For further
information on the Creative Commons Licence, see
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/.↩

5. I'll be using the abbreviations of BCE (Before the Common Era) and CE
(Common Era), derived from the old Gregorian calendar of BC (before
the estimated birth of Christ) and AD (after the birth of Christ, or Anno
Domini, medieval Latin for 'in the year of Our Lord').↩
6. Pauketat, Cahokia, chap. 6. The burials occurred over the space of a
century, including numerous elite burials. This was likely one lineage
of rulers accompanied by retinues of sacrificial victims.↩
7. On Cahokia's collapse, see Larry V. Benson, Timothy R. Pauketat, and
Edward R. Cook, 'Cahokia's Boom and Bust in the Context of Climate
Change', American Antiquity 74, no. 3 (2009): 467-83,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S000273160004871X; Joseph A. Tainter,
'Cahokia: Urbanization, Metabolism, and Collapse', Frontiers in
Sustainable Cities 1 (2019): 11-14,
https://doi.org/10.3389/frsc.2019.00006. Interestingly, and
surprisingly, the initial emigration occurred while Cahokia was still at
its zenith in terms of construction and power.↩
8. This definition covers the most commonly accepted features of
statehood. See Walter Scheidel, 'Studying the State', in The Oxford
Handbook of the State in the Ancient Near East and Mediterranean,
ed. Peter Fibiger Bang and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press,
2013), 5-9,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195188318.013.0002. I have not
used the popular definition from Weber of the state as a legitimate
monopoly on lethal force. That's because it was always a bit of a silly
and circular definition. Most pre-modern states never had a monopoly
on the means of violence and who decides whether it is legitimate
other than the state itself. Relying on government records and writing
is a little mistaken given that rulers had a vested interest in making
themselves seem more powerful and their control over violence
legitimate.↩
9. Calculations were made using the Mortality of States (MOROS)
database.↩
10. Eric Cline, 1177 B.C.: The Year Civilization Collapsed (Princeton
University Press, 2015; 2nd revised and updated edn, 2021); Eric
Cline, '"Mind the Gap": The 1177 BCE Late Bronze Age Collapse and
Some Preliminary Thoughts on Its Immediate Aftermath', in How

Worlds Collapse: What History, Systems, and Complexity Can Teach
Us About Our Modern World and Fragile Future, ed. Miguel A.
Centeno et al. (Routledge, 2023), 98-107, provides a useful overview
of the Late Bronze Age collapse. For the estimates of 'peak empire',
see Walter Scheidel, 'The End of "Peak Empire": The Collapse of the
Roman, Han and Jin Empires', in the same volume, and 'The Scale of
Empire: Territory, Population, Distribution', in The Oxford World
History of Empire, vol. I: The Imperial Experience, ed. Peter Fibiger
Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press,
2021), 91-110,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199772360.003.0003.↩
11. Patrick Wyman, 'How Do You Know If You're Living Through the
Death of an Empire?', Mother Jones, 2020,
www.motherjones.com/media/2020/03/how-do-you-know-if-youre-
living-through-the-death-of-an-empire/.↩
12. Even the Vacant Quarter was eventually reoccupied by Native
Americans. See A. J. White et al., 'After Cahokia: Indigenous
Repopulation and Depopulation of the Horseshoe Lake Watershed AD
1400-1900', American Antiquity 85, no. 2 (2020): 263-78,
https://doi.org/10.1017/aaq.2019.103.↩
13. For an accessible timeline of nuclear near misses, see Future of Life
Institute, 'Accidental Nuclear War: A Timeline of Close Calls', Future
of Life Institute, 23 February 2016,
https://futureoflife.org/resource/nuclear-close-calls-a-timeline/. The
current carbon pulse is an order of magnitude faster than the release
during the Great Permian Dying, although it remains to be seen
whether we will reach the 6-8°C of temperature rise that it saw. For an
easy overview, see Mark Lynas, Our Final Warning: Six Degrees of
Climate Emergency (HarperCollins, 2020).↩
14. Ord, The Precipice; Michael Lawrence et al., 'Global Polycrisis: The
Causal Mechanisms of Crisis Entanglement', Global Sustainability 7
(2024): e6, https://doi.org/10.1017/sus.2024.1.↩
15. Tyler Ausin Harper, 'The 100-Year Extinction Panic is Back, Right on
Schedule', New York Times, 26 January 2024,
www.nytimes.com/2024/01/26/opinion/polycrisis-doom-extinction-
humanity.html.↩

16. Luke Kemp, 'Agents of Doom: Who Is Creating the Apocalypse and
Why', BBC Future, 2021, www.bbc.com/future/article/20211014-
agents-of-doom-who-is-hastening-the-apocalypse-and-why.↩
17. For prominent examples of this hazard-centric framing, see Ord, The
Precipice; MacAskill, What We Owe the Future; Martin J. Rees, Our
Final Century: Will Civilisation Survive the Twenty-First Century?
(Arrow, 2004).↩
18. Peter T. Leeson, 'Better Off Stateless: Somalia Before and After
Government Collapse', Journal of Comparative Economics 35, no. 4
(2007): 699-701, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2007.10.001; Benjamin
Powell, Ryan Ford, and Alex Nowrasteh, 'Somalia After State
Collapse: Chaos or Improvement?', Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization 67, nos 3-4 (2008): 657-70,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2008.04.008.↩
19. There is also the case of the 1975 Lebanese civil war. It was a tragic
event which led to the deaths of over 100,000 and the displacement of
at least a million people. Yet, the welfare of the survivors appears to
have improved post-collapse relative to their pre-civil-war condition.
Ersun N. Kurtuluş, 'Exploring the Paradoxical Consequences of State
Collapse: The Cases of Somalia 1991-2006 and Lebanon 1975-82',
Third World Quarterly 33, no. 7 (2012): 1285-1303,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2012.691831. Whether this is due to
remittances from abroad, improved governance, or other factors, is
debated. It is also not to say that this was a net benefit. The civil war
also led to the emergence of armed groups which persist through to
today, such as Hezbollah.↩
20. Walter Scheidel, Escape from Rome: The Failure of Empire and the
Road to Prosperity (Princeton University Press, 2019), 89.↩
21. See footnote 1 of Walter Scheidel, 'Slavery in the Roman Economy',
Princeton/Stanford Working Papers in Classics (Stanford University,
2010): 2, https://ssrn.com/abstract=1663556.↩
22. These massive relocations appear to have been done to enhance
political control: rebellious groups were moved to more fortified areas
while loyal ones were shifted to more hostile, peripheral terrains. In
Quechua the rulers were usually referred to as 'Inka', a term which is

still used today. However, I've opted to use the more commonly
known 'Inca' spelling to avoid confusion.↩
23. Owen Lattimore, 'The Frontier in History', in Studies in Frontier
History: Collected Papers 1929-58 (Oxford University Press, 1962),
476-81.↩
24. These kinds of periodizations, which celebrate empire and treat times
of decentralization as temporary intervals of chaos or nothingness, are
common throughout historiography. Even attempts by archaeologists
to push against common misconceptions and the language of imperial
periodization have failed and backfired. In 1978, the British
Egyptologist Kenneth Kitchen railed against using the term 'Third
Intermediate Period'. He stated that the period was not chaotic and that
we should use an alternative: the 'Post-Imperial Epoch'.
Unfortunately, he chose to call his book on the subject The Third
Intermediate Period in Egypt (1100-650 BCE). His poor choice of title
may have helped with sales, but simply added to the popularity of
imperial periodization.↩
25. Ellen Morris, '"Lo, Nobles Lament, the Poor Rejoice": State
Formation in the Wake of Social Flux', in After Collapse: The
Regeneration of Complex Societies, ed. Glenn M. Schwartz and John
Jackson Nichols (University of Arizona Press, 2006).↩
26. Ibid.↩
27. In academia, such groups, which are excluded or marginalized from
power structures, are usually referred to as 'the subaltern'. ↩
28. The 90-95 per cent estimate comes from Rebecca Storey and Glenn
Reed Storey, Rome and the Classic Maya: Comparing the Slow
Collapse of Civilizations (Routledge, 2017).↩
29. On the difficulties of distinguishing population dispersal from
depopulation, see Storey and Storey, Rome and the Classic Maya. For
the case of the Bronze Age collapse, see Luke Kemp and Eric Cline,
'Systemic Risk and Resilience: The Bronze Age Collapse and
Recovery', in Perspectives on Public Policy in Societal-Environmental
Crises, ed. Adam Izdebski, John Haldon, and Piotr Filipkowski
(Springer, 2022).↩

30. Most early languages, including Classical Greek and Latin, were a
scriptio continua, where there is no punctuation or spaces between
words or sentences, making it particularly difficult to parse without
extensive training. The slow abandonment of the scriptio continua was
one factor that favoured education and literacy becoming more
widespread in the pre-modern era. Some modern languages such as
Thai maintain the scriptio continua. ↩
31. Documentary evidence has several other biases. It favours the
temperate west. Paper in tropical climates tends to become dust in one
or two centuries, unless it is stored in protective conditions. And
western countries tend to be excavated by archaeologists more
frequently. See Peter Crooks and Timothy H. Parsons, 'Empires,
Bureaucracy and the Paradox of Power', in Empires and Bureaucracy
in World History, ed. Peter Crooks and Timothy Parsons (Cambridge
University Press, 2016), 3-28,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316694312.002. ↩
32. This is a necessarily crude simplification. However, the general rule of
elites being those with disproportionate power in a society holds true
across different definitions. The problem is that what forms of power
were most ascendant varied across societies. Some valued warriors,
some preferred traders, and others prioritized wisdom. For an
entertaining discussion and overview, see David Priestland, Merchant,
Soldier, Sage: A New History of Power (Penguin, 2013).↩
33. In 2023 global energy consumption was 183,230 terawatt hours (TWh
= 1 trillion watts per hour). For perspective, the average LED lightbulb
uses 10 watts per hour. Energy consumption has risen by more than an
order of magnitude (ten-fold) since 1800, when it was just 5,653 TWh.
For energy consumption, see Hannah Ritchie, 'Energy Production and
Consumption', Our World in Data, 2024,
https://ourworldindata.org/energy-production-consumption.↩
34. Estimates of long-term per capita energy capture come from Ian
Morris, The Measure of Civilization: How Social Development
Decides the Fate of Nations (Princeton University Press, 2013).↩
35. The FAO provides the estimate of two-thirds of global food energy
intake coming from three staples: FAO, 'Staple Foods: What Do
People Eat?' (Food and Agricultural Organization), accessed 30 May

2023, www.fao.org/3/u8480e/u8480e07.htm. The contribution of
wheat to global caloric intake was calculated by Bekele Shiferaw et al.,
'Crops That Feed the World 10. Past Successes and Future Challenges
to the Role Played by Wheat in Global Food Security', Food Security
5, no. 3 (2013): 291-317, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-013-0263-
y.↩
36. Urbanization figures come from Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser,
'Urbanization', Our World in Data, February 2024,
https://ourworldindata.org/urbanization.↩
37. Unsurprisingly, achieving this ambition in under 500 pages will mean
a sacrifice of depth for breadth.↩
CHAPTER 1: HOBBES'S DELUSION
1. Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Christopher Brooke (Penguin,
2017).↩
2. Frans De Waal, 'Part I: Morally Evolved: Primate Social Instincts,
Human Morality, and the Rise and Fall of "Veneer Theory"', in
Primates and Philosophers: How Morality Evolved, ed. Stephen
Macedo and Josiah Ober (Princeton University Press, 2016), 1-58.↩
3. For evidence on the Mahabharata and Dīgha Nikāya, see Upinder
Singh, Political Violence in Ancient India (Harvard University Press,
2017), 34, 60. A broader overview is provided in Monica L. Smith,
'The Fundamentals of the State', Annual Review of Anthropology 51,
no. 1 (2022): 496, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anthro-041320-
013018.↩
4. Charles Edward Merriam, 'Hobbes's Doctrine of the State of Nature',
Proceedings of the American Political Science Association 3 (1906):
152-3, https://doi.org/10.2307/3038543.↩
5. Lee Clarke, 'Panic: Myth or Reality?', Contexts 1, no. 3 (2002): 21-6,
https://doi.org/10.1525/ctx.2002.1.3.21.↩
6. John Drury, David Novelli, and Clifford Stott, 'Representing Crowd
Behaviour in Emergency Planning Guidance: "Mass Panic" or
Collective Resilience?', Resilience 1, no. 1 (2013): 18-37,
https://doi.org/10.1080/21693293.2013.765740. This survey of 448

UK citizens, including 120 sport events stewards, 115 police officers,
89 members of the public, 78 students, and 46 civilian safety
professionals, found that most had fears around mass panic and civil
disorder.↩
7. Technically, the Palaeolithic included multiple glacial (ice age) and
interglacial (significantly warmer) periods. However, these interglacial
periods were brief during the Palaeolithic and for the ease of the lay
reader I'll be sticking to the casual term of the 'ice age'.↩
8. Eleanor M. L. Scerri, 'The North African Middle Stone Age and Its
Place in Recent Human Evolution', Evolutionary Anthropology:
Issues, News, and Reviews 26, no. 3 (2017): 119-35,
https://doi.org/10.1002/evan.21527; Doron Shultziner et al., 'The
Causes and Scope of Political Egalitarianism During the Last Glacial:
A Multi-Disciplinary Perspective', Biology & Philosophy 25, no. 3
(2010): 319-46, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10539-010-9196-4.↩
9. The classic texts here are: Peter J. Richerson, Robert Boyd, and Robert
L. Bettinger, 'Was Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene But
Mandatory During the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis',
American Antiquity 66, no. 3 (2001): 387-411,
https://doi.org/10.2307/2694241; Robert Bettinger, Peter Richerson,
and Robert Boyd, 'Constraints on the Development of Agriculture',
Current Anthropology 50, no. 5 (2009): 627-31,
https://doi.org/10.1086/605359.↩
10. Smithsonian Institute, 'Pleistocene Volcano List', Smithsonian
Institute, 2024, https://volcano.si.edu/volcanolist_pleistocene.cfm.↩
11. Shultziner et al., 'The Causes and Scope of Political Egalitarianism
during the Last Glacial'.↩
12. Kim R. Hill et al., 'Co-Residence Patterns in Hunter-Gatherer
Societies Show Unique Human Social Structure', Science 331, no.
6022 (2011): 1286-9, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1199071.↩
13. While often called 'immediate return' hunter-gatherers, this is
something of a misnomer. They planned game hunts months in
advance and spent lifetimes cultivating relationships that they could
rely on during times of need.↩

14. A. B. Migliano et al., 'Characterization of Hunter-Gatherer Networks
and Implications for Cumulative Culture', Nature Human Behaviour 1
(2017): 0043, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-016-0043. Many groups
begin to refer to friends who become close enough as family, such as
brother, sister, and cousin. It's a tradition that many cultures continue
today. Anthropologists call it 'fictive kinship'.↩
15. R. I. M. Dunbar, 'Do Online Social Media Cut Through the
Constraints that Limit the Size of Offline Social Networks?', Royal
Society Open Science 3, no. 1 (2016): 1,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.150292; R. Bretherton and R. I. M.
Dunbar, 'Dunbar's Number Goes to Church: The Social Brain
Hypothesis as a Third Strand in the Study of Church Growth', Archive
for the Psychology of Religion 42, no. 1 (2020): 63,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0084672420906215.↩
16. Numerous studies of group size, as well as neocortex size relative to
group size, have found a far wider variety of numbers. See Patrik
Lindenfors, Andreas Wartel, and Johan Lind, '"Dunbar's Number"
Deconstructed', Biology Letters 17, no. 5 (2021): 20210158,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2021.0158.↩
17. Douglas W. Bird et al., 'Variability in the Organization and Size of
Hunter-Gatherer Groups: Foragers Do Not Live in Small-Scale
Societies', Journal of Human Evolution 131 (2019): 96-108,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2019.03.005.↩
18. The ostrich egg social network is discussed in Jennifer M. Miller and
Yiming V. Wang, 'Ostrich Eggshell Beads Reveal 50,000-Year-Old
Social Network in Africa', Nature 601, no. 7892 (2022): 234-9,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-04227-2. The obsidian network is
covered in Nick Blegen, 'The Earliest Long-Distance Obsidian
Transport: Evidence from the ∼200ka Middle Stone Age Sibilo School
Road Site, Baringo, Kenya', Journal of Human Evolution 103 (2017):
1-19, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2016.11.002.↩
19. These are hunter-gatherer groups who now reside in central Africa, but
previously had a larger range. See Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias et al.,
'Cultural Evolution of Central African Hunter-Gatherers Reflects a
Deep History of Interconnectivity', preprint, 26 October 2022,
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2205369/v1; Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias et

al., 'Deep History of Cultural and Linguistic Evolution among Central
African Hunter-Gatherers', Nature Human Behaviour 8 (2024): 1263-
75, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-01891-y.↩
20. Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias, 'Did Humanity Really All Arise in One
Place?', Sapiens, 2 January 2023.↩
21. See Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias, 'Societies of Perpetual Movement', Aeon,
5 March 2024, https://aeon.co/essays/the-hunter-gatherers-of-the-21st-
century-who-live-on-the-move.↩
22. The map of the Clovis Culture is adapted from Michael R. Waters,
Thomas W. Stafford, and David L. Carlson, 'The Age of Clovis -
13,050 to 12,750 Cal Yr B.P.', Science Advances 6, no. 43 (2020): fig.
1, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaz0455. The image of the
Aurignacian is adapted from Carolyn C. Szmidt, Laurent Brou, and
Luc Jaccottey, 'Direct Radiocarbon (AMS) Dating of Split-Based
Points from the (Proto)Aurignacian of Trou de La Mère Clochette,
Northeastern France. Implications for the Characterization of the
Aurignacian and the Timing of Technical Innovations in Europe',
Journal of Archaeological Science 37, no. 12 (2010): fig. 1,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2010.08.001.↩
23. J. Colette Berbesque et al., 'Hunter-Gatherers Have Less Famine Than
Agriculturalists', Biology Letters 10, no. 1 (2014): 20130853,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2013.0853.↩
24. Andrei Irimia et al., 'The Indigenous South American Tsimané Exhibit
Relatively Modest Decrease in Brain Volume With Age Despite High
Systemic Inflammation', Journals of Gerontology: Series A 76, no. 12
(2021): 2147-55, https://doi.org/10.1093/gerona/glab138.↩
25. H. Pontzer, B. M. Wood, and D. A. Raichlen, 'Hunter-Gatherers as
Models in Public Health: Hunter-Gatherer Health and Lifestyle',
Obesity Reviews 19 (2018): 24-35, https://doi.org/10.1111/obr.12785.
A wider review of the literature can be found in Herman Pontzer and
Brian M. Wood, 'Effects of Evolution, Ecology, and Economy on
Human Diet: Insights from Hunter-Gatherers and Other Small-Scale
Societies', Annual Review of Nutrition 41, no. 1 (2021): 363-85,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-nutr-111120-105520. Full details on
atherosclerosis and the Tsimané can be found in Hillard Kaplan et al.,
'Coronary Atherosclerosis in Indigenous South American Tsimané: A

Cross-Sectional Cohort Study', The Lancet 389, no. 10080 (2017):
1730-39, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30752-3. The diets
of our ancestors would of course have varied enormously, depending
on what environments they lived in. While there is the modern fad of
the 'paleo' diet, there would have been no single diet for the
Palaeolithic. Today, the Inuit subsist on a largely carnivorous diet of
fish, seal and caribou. In contrast, 70-95 per cent of the calories for
foragers in the Andes of South America from thousands of years ago
came from plants. Despite this diversity, they all have ample exercise,
social connections and varied diets with no highly processed foods.
↩
26. Their guts, not just their brains, also seem to be healthier. Studies of
the foraging Hadza in northern Tanzania have found that they have far
more diverse gut microbiomes (collections of bacteria, fungi and genes
found in the gut) than do people from Nepal, Italy, or California. The
average Hadza has 730 species of gut microbe while the average
Californian has just 277, many of which showed signs of chronic stress
and inflammation. See Hannah C. Wastyk et al., 'Gut-Microbiota-
Targeted Diets Modulate Human Immune Status', Cell 184, no. 16
(2021): 4137-53.e14, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2021.06.019;
Stephanie L. Schnorr et al., 'Gut Microbiome of the Hadza Hunter-
Gatherers', Nature Communications 5, no. 1 (2014): 3654,
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4654; Matthew M. Carter et al., 'Ultra-
Deep Sequencing of Hadza Hunter-Gatherers Recovers Vanishing Gut
Microbes', Cell 186, no. 14 (2023): 3111-24.e13,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.05.046. The Hadza microbiome also
contained numerous, previously undocumented microbes that appear
to have vanished from other populations. This is no insignificant
finding. Microbiome health affects not only gastrointestinal health, but
also mental health, with poor biomes linked to higher rates of anxiety
and depression. Notably, modern studies on mental and physical health
are awash with advice that simply reflects a hunter-gatherer lifestyle:
frequent exercise, copious social contact, diets low in processed foods,
lots of time outdoors in nature, and a regular sleep schedule of 7-8
hours.↩
27. For an overview, see Karl Widerquist and Grant S. McCall, Prehistoric
Myths in Modern Political Philosophy (Edinburgh University Press,

2018). For the Agta case study, see Mark Dyble et al., 'Engagement in
Agricultural Work Is Associated With Reduced Leisure Time Among
Agta Hunter-Gatherers', Nature Human Behaviour 3 (2019): 792-6,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-019-0614-6. The estimate of seventy-
seven hours is derived from US Bureau of Labor Statistics, 'American
Time Use Survey - 2023 Results',
www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/atus.pdf. They estimate that the average
American parent who travels to work spends forty hours working, as
well as around 2.4 hours per day on housework, and 1-2.3 hours per
day on childcare. I've added these together, alongside a conservative
estimate of one hour per weekday travelling to and from work.↩
28. There are far more nuanced definitions of violence that can incorporate
indirect effects. For a summary, see Siniša Malešević, The Rise of
Organised Brutality: A Historical Sociology of Violence (Cambridge
University Press, 2017), chap. 2. Since this is a book for a popular
audience, I've constrained the discussion to the most simple and
common-sense definition. ↩
29. Philip Thomson and John Halstead, 'How Violent Was the Pre-
Agricultural World?', SSRN Electronic Journal, 2023, 46-53,
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4466809.↩
30. Douglas P. Fry and Patrik Söderberg, 'Myths About Hunter-Gatherers
Redux: Nomadic Forager War and Peace', ed. Kirk Endicott, Journal
of Aggression, Conflict and Peace Research 6, no. 4 (2014): 259-60,
https://doi.org/10.1108/JACPR-06-2014-0127.↩
31. Widerquist and McCall, Prehistoric Myths in Modern Political
Philosophy.↩
32. Jonathan Haas and Matthew Piscitelli, 'The Prehistory of Warfare:
Misled by Ethnography', in War, Peace, and Human Nature, ed.
Douglas P. Fry (Oxford University Press, 2013), 168-90,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199858996.003.0010. On Jebel
Sahaba, see R. Brian Ferguson, 'Archaeology, Cultural Anthropology,
and the Origins and Intensifications of War', in The Archaeology of
Warfare: Prehistories of Raiding and Conquest, ed. Elizabeth Arkush
and Mark W. Allen (University Press of Florida, 2006), 482-3.↩
33. Thomson and Halstead, 'How Violent Was the Pre-Agricultural
World?' Thomson and Halstead do adjust their figures upwards to 3.2

per cent for the Palaeolithic and 9.7 per cent for the End-Palaeolithic.
Their adjustment is based on both some such deaths not leaving
skeletal traces and others possibly not being preserved. Hence, this
suggests that we could be undercounting, a problem they have tried to
correct for. However, they also note that the skeletal remains are a
small percentage of the overall population, meaning we could be
overcounting or undercounting substantially (p. 76). There is the far
larger issue that any adjustments rely on and reflect the pre-existing
biases of the authors. This is critical, given how sensitive and political
the issue of violence is. Despite the shortcomings, it is safer and more
reliable to rely on the unadjusted figures. Statistics for the modern
world come from Max Roser, 'Causes of Death Globally: What Do
People Die From?', Our World in Data, 2021,
https://ourworldindata.org/causes-of-death-treemap. One could say that
the Palaeolithic appears to be more peaceful than the modern world.
That wouldn't be warranted. The data is too sparse and Palaeolithic
deaths from suicide may have involved poison or other means that
didn't leave marks on bones.↩
34. For pessimistic estimates of prehistoric violence, see Steven Pinker,
The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined (Viking,
2011); Azar Gat, War in Human Civilization (Oxford University Press,
2008); Ian Morris, War! What Is It Good For? Conflict and the
Progress of Civilization from Primates to Robots (Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2014). A critique of Pinker's analysis of prehistoric warfare is
provided in R. Brian Ferguson, 'Pinker's List: Exaggerating
Prehistoric War Mortality', in War, Peace, and Human Nature, ed.
Douglas P. Fry (Oxford University Press, 2013), 112-31,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199858996.003.0007. There
have also been several detailed critiques of Pinker's contention that
war has been declining in the modern world. The political scientist
Bear Braumoeller has published a scathing statistical critique showing
that the rate of conflict increased in the two centuries prior to the Cold
War, and the rate of civil wars has increased thereafter. Full details can
be found in Bear F. Braumoeller, Only the Dead: The Persistence of
War in the Modern Age (Oxford University Press, 2019). See also
Tanisha M. Fazal, 'Dead Wrong? Battle Deaths, Military Medicine,
and Exaggerated Reports of War's Demise', International Security 39,

no. 1 (2014): 95-125. Last but not least, an entire cadre of scholars of
violence covering areas from Native America to Soviet Russia have
put forward an extensive critique of The Better Angels of Our Nature
in the appropriately titled Philip G. Dwyer and Mark S. Micale, eds.,
The Darker Angels of Our Nature: Refuting the Pinker Theory of
History & Violence (Bloomsbury Academic, 2021).↩
35. Haas and Piscitelli, 'The Prehistory of Warfare:', figs 10.2 and 10.3.
Credit to Jill Seagard, The Field Museum. Redrawn from Jean Clottes
and Jean Courtin, The Cave Beneath the Sea: Paleolithic Images at
Cosquer (Abrams, 1996).↩
36. José Maria Gómez et al., 'The Phylogenetic Roots of Human Lethal
Violence', Nature 538, no. 7624 (2016): 233-7,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature19758. Note that this is a limited study
and essentially just a best guess based on genetic correlations.↩
37. Kevin D. Hunt, Chimpanzee: Lessons from Our Sister Species
(Cambridge University Press, 2020), 233-8.↩
38. R. Brian Ferguson, Chimpanzees, War, and History: Are Men Born to
Kill? (Oxford University Press, 2023).↩
39. Dave Grossman, On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to
Kill in War and Society (Open Road Media, 2014): 23-6. For useful
and accessible overviews, see Randall Collins, Violence: A Micro-
Sociological Theory (Princeton University Press, 2009), chap. 2;
Rutger Bregman, Humankind: A Hopeful History (Bloomsbury, 2021),
chap. 4. While the initial work of S. L. A. Marshall (who estimated in
the Second World War that 25 per cent of soldiers never fired their
guns, but was found to have shoddy methods afterwards) has been
debunked, most of the subsequent work in the field of 'killology' has
reaffirmed the basic insight that soldiers are often deeply reluctant to
engage in violence.↩
40. Grossman, On Killing, 35.↩
41. For the most comprehensive and up-to-date overview of the literature
covering the Palaeolithic, read Tibor Rutar, 'The Prehistory of
Violence and War: Moving beyond the Hobbes-Rousseau Quagmire',
Journal of Peace Research, 18 October 2022, 002234332210901,
https://doi.org/10.1177/00223433221090112. In it, Rutar provides a

more detailed critique of the methods of different studies, an approach
that I don't have the space for here (and the average reader likely
doesn't have the appetite for). He comes to the same conclusion:
violence was low in the Palaeolithic, war was not likely to have
occurred, and violence follows an inverted U-pattern rising from
hunter-gatherers to the medieval ages before decreasing in the modern
world.↩
42. Douglas P. Fry and Patrik Söderberg, 'Lethal Aggression in Mobile
Forager Bands and Implications for the Origins of War', Science 341,
no. 6143 (2013): 270-73, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1235675. For
a useful overview of the wider literature, see Thomson and Halstead,
'How Violent Was the Pre-Agricultural World?', 31-3.↩
43. Clarke, 'Panic'.↩
44. For an overview of the relevant literature, see John Drury, David
Novelli, and Clifford Stott, 'Psychological Disaster Myths in the
Perception and Management of Mass Emergencies', Journal of
Applied Social Psychology 43, no. 11 (2013): 2259-70,
https://doi.org/10.1111/jasp.12176. Bregman, Humankind, and
Rebecca Solnit, A Paradise Built in Hell (Viking, 2009), provide
entertaining accounts of the best-known case studies.↩
45. Yes, people do occasionally respond poorly. There are cases of price-
gouging, panic-buying, and unruly behaviour during disasters. But the
reason that Australian shoppers fighting over toilet rolls during Covid-
19 became a newsworthy meme is because it is exceptional (as well as
admittedly funny). ↩
46. Variants of the myth of mass panic also prove to be wrong. The
conventional wisdom was once that pandemics ignited division,
hatred, and blaming of 'the other'. Yet this isn't true either, historically.
For instance, bouts of the Black Death in the late medieval and
Renaissance periods did not lead to violence against or persecution of
Jews, despite evidence linking its spread to Jewish traders who
transmitted the plague by breaking quarantine to trade infected goods.
In general, most outbursts of disease, from the Plague of Athens to
influenza in the modern world, have brought people together rather
than driving them apart. See Samuel K. Cohn, 'Pandemics: Waves of
Disease, Waves of Hate from the Plague of Athens to A.I.D.S.',

Historical Research 85, no. 230 (2012): 535-55,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2281.2012.00603.x.↩
47. For an overview, see Bas van Bavel et al., Disasters and History: The
Vulnerability and Resilience of Past Societies (Cambridge University
Press, 2020), https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108569743.↩
48. On food sharing in modern egalitarian hunter-gatherers, see James
Woodburn, 'Egalitarian Societies', Man 17, no. 3 (1982): 437-42,
https://doi.org/10.2307/2801707. Deer remains from 400,000-100,000
years ago suggest that butchering was initially done collectively. Over
time this evolved into a more systematic practice with a few skilled
individuals butchering and allocating the meat, as we see in modern
hunter-gatherers. See Mary C. Stiner, Ran Barkai, and Avi Gopher,
'Cooperative Hunting and Meat Sharing 400-200 Kya at Qesem Cave,
Israel', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106, no. 32
(2009): 13207-12, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0900564106. Others
have used mathematical and conceptual models to help explain how
food sharing between pair-bonded couples helped us spread into a
wider range of environments: Ingela Alger et al., 'The Evolution of
Early Hominin Food Production and Sharing', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 120, no. 25 (2023): e2218096120,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218096120. This also resulted in cultures
of extreme charity. Early European explorers were stunned by the
generosity of indigenous Americans, even during times of famine. See
David Graeber, Debt: The First 5,000 Years (Melville House, 2011),
100-101.↩
49. Graeber, Debt, 99.↩
50. For a fuller discussion, see Hélène Landemore, Democratic Reason:
Politics, Collective Intelligence, and the Rule of the Many (Princeton
University Press, 2017); Hélène Landemore, Open Democracy:
Reinventing Popular Rule for the Twenty-First Century (Princeton
University Press, 2020).↩
51. On the origins of parliamentary democracy, see John Keane, The
Shortest History of Democracy: 4,000 Years of Self-Government - A
Retelling for Our Times (The Experiment, 2022), 87-9. On examples
of early democracy across the world, read David Stasavage, The

Decline and Rise of Democracy: A Global History from Antiquity to
Today (Princeton University Press, 2021), chaps. 1 and 2.↩
52. Our ancestors would still have had a dizzying array of cultures. We see
that in foragers today. The Hiwi of Venezuela dance almost daily and
rarely divorce while the Ache of Paraguay rarely dance and divorce
frequently, and there are many differences in their humour, food,
beliefs, and language. Despite this variety in lifestyles, they all seemed
to keep a level playing field. One can have diversity while maintaining
a common democratic thread.↩
53. Walter Scheidel, The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of
Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century (Princeton
University Press, 2017).↩
54. Sarah Blaffer Hrdy, Mothers and Others: The Evolutionary Origins of
Mutual Understanding (Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
2011). For an accessible overview, see Camilla Power, 'Gender
Egalitarianism Made Us Human: Patriarchy Was Too Little, Too Late',
Open Democracy, 2018, www.opendemocracy.net/en/gender-
egalitarianism-made-us-human-patriarchy-was-too-little-too-late/. It's
also why our grandmothers so often help with childrearing and passing
on generations of accumulated wisdom.↩
55. Ethan G. Harrod, Christopher L. Coe, and Paula M. Niedenthal,
'Social Structure Predicts Eye Contact Tolerance in Nonhuman
Primates: Evidence from a Crowd-Sourcing Approach', Scientific
Reports 10, no. 1 (2020): 6971, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-
63884-x.↩
56. For the evolutionary case, see Power, 'Gender Egalitarianism Made Us
Human'. On settlement patterns and genetic diversity, consult M.
Dyble et al., 'Sex Equality Can Explain the Unique Social Structure of
Hunter-Gatherer Bands', Science 348, no. 6236 (2015): 796-8,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa5139.↩
57. On the division of labour, see Robert L. Kelly, The Lifeways of Hunter-
Gatherers: The Foraging Spectrum, 2nd edn (Cambridge University
Press, 2013), chap. 9. On the evidence for women hunting: Abigail
Anderson et al., 'The Myth of Man the Hunter: Women's Contribution
to the Hunt across Ethnographic Contexts', ed. Raven Garvey, PLOS
ONE 18, no. 6 (2023): e0287101,

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0287101; Randall Haas et al.,
'Female Hunters of the Early Americas', Science Advances 6, no. 45
(2020): eabd0310, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abd0310; Sarah Lacy
and Cara Ocobock, 'Woman the Hunter: The Archaeological
Evidence', American Anthropologist 126, no. 1 (2024): 19-31,
https://doi.org/10.1111/aman.13914. The evidence for women hunting
has been used to suggest that there was no division of labour between
the sexes. That is an overstated position which has been heavily
criticized for a lack of data (Vivek V. Venkataraman et al., 'Female
Foragers Sometimes Hunt, Yet Gendered Divisions of Labor Are Real:
A Comment on Anderson et al. (2023) The Myth of Man the Hunter',
Evolution and Human Behavior 45, no. 4 (2024),
S1090513824000497,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2024.04.014.)↩
58. Tatiana Zerjal et al., 'The Genetic Legacy of the Mongols', American
Journal of Human Genetics 72, no. 3 (2003): 717-21. Others have
found similar results for Chinese emperors: see Patricia Balaresque et
al., 'Y-Chromosome Descent Clusters and Male Differential
Reproductive Success: Young Lineage Expansions Dominate Asian
Pastoral Nomadic Populations', European Journal of Human Genetics
23, no. 10 (2015): 1413-22, https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2014.285.
One recent study suggests that the widely spread genes today may not
come from Chinggis Khan himself, but rather the Niru'un clan of the
Mongols. See Lan-Hai Wei et al., 'Whole-Sequence Analysis Indicates
that the Y Chromosome C2*-Star Cluster Traces Back to Ordinary
Mongols, Rather Than Genghis Khan', European Journal of Human
Genetics 26, no. 2 (2018): 230-37, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-
017-0012-3.↩
59. Walter Scheidel, 'Fitness and Power: The Contribution of Genetics to
the History of Differential Reproduction', Evolutionary Psychology
19, no. 4 (2021): 14747049211066599,
https://doi.org/10.1177/14747049211066599 provides a nuanced
overview of how conquest and status differences seem to have
impacted reproductive differences across history. His conclusion is that
often conquest resulted in the male lineage of the conquerors replacing
the genetic lineage of the vanquished, but this varies across cases.↩

60. Monika Karmin et al., 'A Recent Bottleneck of Y Chromosome
Diversity Coincides With a Global Change in Culture', Genome
Research 25, no. 4 (2015): 461-2,
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.186684.114.↩
61. Michael Westaway, David Lambert, and Monika Karmin, 'There Was a
Decline of Male Diversity When Humans Took to Agriculture', The
Conversation, 20 April 2015, https://theconversation.com/there-was-a-
decline-of-male-diversity-when-humans-took-to-agriculture-38725.↩
62. Barbara F. Walter, How Civil Wars Start: And How to Stop Them
(Crown, 2022).↩
63. Brian Gallagher, 'How Can We Discourage Mass Shootings?',
Nautilus, 15 May 2023, https://nautil.us/how-can-we-discourage-mass-
shootings-304104/. For an overview between the frustrated longing for
status and mass shooters, read Will Storr, The Status Game (William
Collins, 2021), chap. 8.↩
64. Jason Manning, Suicide: The Social Causes of Self-Destruction
(University of Virginia Press, 2020),
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctv103xf27.↩
65. Most of his kids did well for themselves, with two (Nelson and
William) becoming billionaires who tried and failed to corner the
world market in silver. ↩
66. Joey T. Cheng, Jessica L. Tracy, and Cameron D. Anderson, eds., The
Psychology of Social Status (Springer, 2016), 19.↩
67. Francesco Margoni, Renée Baillargeon, and Luca Surian, 'Infants
Distinguish Between Leaders and Bullies', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 115, no. 38 (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1801677115.↩
68. Justin Jennings, Finding Fairness: From Pleistocene Foragers to
Contemporary Capitalists (University Press of Florida, 2021), 3;
Christopher Boehm, Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism,
and Shame (Basic Books, 2012).↩
69. For an overview, see Tian Chen Zeng, Joey T. Cheng, and Joseph
Henrich, 'Dominance in Humans', Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 377, no. 1845 (2022): 20200451,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0451; Joey T. Cheng, 'Dominance,

Prestige, and the Role of Leveling in Human Social Hierarchy and
Equality', Current Opinion in Psychology 33 (2020): 238-44,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2019.10.004.↩
70. Cameron Anderson, John Angus D. Hildreth, and Laura Howland, 'Is
the Desire for Status a Fundamental Human Motive? A Review of the
Empirical Literature', Psychological Bulletin 141, no. 3 (2015): 574-
601, https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038781.↩
71. Christopher Boehm et al., 'Egalitarian Behavior and Reverse
Dominance Hierarchy [and Comments and Reply]', Current
Anthropology 34, no. 3 (1993): 227-54. Also see Boehm's personal
correspondence with Brian Klaas in Dr Brian Klaas, Corruptible: Who
Gets Power and How It Changes Us (John Murray, 2022), 29. There is
also evidence that testosterone tends to increase the desire for status,
but only in unstable hierarchies. See A. B. Losecaat Vermeer et al.,
'Exogenous Testosterone Increases Status-Seeking Motivation in Men
With Unstable Low Social Status', Psychoneuroendocrinology 113
(2020): 104552, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psyneuen.2019.104552.
Women still engage in status competition as well, especially with other
women. This trait can be especially intense in some female primates.
However, when it comes to dominance-based status-seeking in
humans, men are far more likely to do so. ↩
72. For the most recent definitions of the dark triad, read Stephane A. De
Brito et al., 'Psychopathy', Nature Reviews Disease Primers 7, no. 1
(2021): 1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-021-00282-1; Zlatan Krizan
and Anne D. Herlache, 'The Narcissism Spectrum Model: A Synthetic
View of Narcissistic Personality', Personality and Social Psychology
Review 22, no. 1 (2018): 6,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868316685018; David Sloan Wilson,
David Near, and Ralph R. Miller, 'Machiavellianism: A Synthesis of
the Evolutionary and Psychological Literatures', Psychological
Bulletin 119, no. 2 (1996): 285. On the link between the dark triad and
dominance-based status seeking, read Adam C. Davis and Tracy
Vaillancourt, 'Predicting Dominance and Prestige Status-Striving from
the Dark Tetrad: The Mediating Role of Indirect Aggression', Current
Psychology 42, no. 16 (2023): 13680-92,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12144-021-02492-y; Peter K. Jonason and

Virgil Zeigler-Hill, 'The Fundamental Social Motives that Characterize
Dark Personality Traits', Personality and Individual Differences 132
(2018): 98-107, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2018.05.031. Note that
I'm referring here to people's scores on the dark triad, not necessarily
full-blown personality disorders, such as narcissist personality disorder
(NPD).↩
73. Although chimps also engage in social behaviour such as grooming
babies to gain prestige, much like campaigning politicians kissing
babies for a photo.↩
74. Christopher R. von Rueden and Adrian V. Jaeggi, 'Men's Status and
Reproductive Success in 33 Nonindustrial Societies: Effects of
Subsistence, Marriage System, and Reproductive Strategy',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, no. 39 (2016):
10824-9, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1606800113; Dan P. McAdams,
'The Appeal of the Primal Leader: Human Evolution and Donald J.
Trump', Evolutionary Studies in Imaginative Culture 1, no. 2 (2017):
5, https://doi.org/10.26613/esic.1.2.45.↩
75. Cecilia Padilla-Iglesias et al., 'Population Interconnectivity Over the
Past 120,000 Years Explains Distribution and Diversity of Central
African Hunter-Gatherers', Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 119, no. 21 (2022): e2113936119,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2113936119.↩
76. Carina M. Schlebusch et al., 'Khoe-San Genomes Reveal Unique
Variation and Confirm the Deepest Population Divergence in Homo
sapiens', Molecular Biology and Evolution 37, no. 10 (2020): 2944-
54, https://doi.org/10.1093/molbev/msaa140.↩
CHAPTER 2: COLLAPSE FOR 99 PER CENT OF HUMAN HISTORY
1. The most common estimate is that by the beginning of the Common
Era three-quarters of the human population was held in just four
empires: the Roman Empire, the Kushan Empire, the Parthian Empire,
and the Han Dynasty of China. See Walter Scheidel, 'From Plains to
Chains: How the State Was Born', Financial Times, 5 October 2017,
www.ft.com/content/aa39bc10-a836-11e7-ab66-21cc87a2edde.
However, this is based on a fairly unreliable source: the 1978 Atlas of

World Population History. The estimates are largely based on old
guesswork, especially for non-state peoples. Today, light detection and
ranging (LIDAR) scans of non-state areas such as in the Amazonian
basin, regularly suggest larger population estimates than were once
assumed. For a full discussion, see David Wengrow, 'Beyond
Kingdoms and Empires', Aeon, 5 July 2024, https://aeon.co/essays/an-
archeological-revolution-transforms-our-image-of-human-
freedoms.↩
2. The 1-3 per cent figure is from Benjamin Vernot and Joshua M. Akey,
'Resurrecting Surviving Neandertal Lineages from Modern Human
Genomes', Science 343, no. 6174 (2014): 1017-21,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1245938.↩
3. It's worth stating a few caveats and clarifications here. Collapse is
something that affects people and power structures, namely Goliaths.
In contrast, extinction occurs in other biological life forms while
collapse does not. That doesn't change the basic fact that extinction of
a human population will result in a complete permanent collapse: a
destruction of all its power structures. Nonetheless, the more sceptical
reader can simply see this discussion as a precursor to collapse (like
the coverage of early fission-fusion cycles) if they prefer.↩
4. Benedict R. O'G. Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on
the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (Verso, 1990); Yuval Noah
Harari, Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind, trans. John Purcell and
Haim Watzman (Vintage, 2015). On the importance of storytelling, see
Daniel Smith et al., 'Cooperation and the Evolution of Hunter-
Gatherer Storytelling', Nature Communications 8, no. 1 (2017): 1,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-02036-8. Note that their study is
only for the Agta; however, there are powerful reasons to believe that
this holds true for other groups, especially given its evolutionary
advantages in promoting cooperation. While stories and symbols are
vital, we must also be careful not to overemphasize the power of
imagined communities. We are incredibly cooperative even without
them. Infants of 12-24 months can start cooperating, giving help to
adults (such as through pointing), and playing social games (and even
reversing their roles in those games), all before they can even speak.
See Michael Tomasello, Why We Cooperate (MIT Press, 2009).↩

5. Joseph Patrick Henrich, The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is
Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making
Us Smarter (Princeton University Press, 2016).↩
6. Andrea Bamberg Migliano and Lucio Vinicius, 'The Origins of Human
Cumulative Culture: From the Foraging Niche to Collective
Intelligence', Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 377, no. 1843 (2022): 5-6,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2020.0317.↩
7. The estimate for cumulative cultural learning beginning around
600,000 years ago was calculated in Jonathan Paige and Charles
Perreault, '3.3 Million Years of Stone Tool Complexity Suggests That
Cumulative Culture Began During the Middle Pleistocene',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121, no. 26 (2024):
e2319175121, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2319175121. On ochre, see
Rimtautas Dapschauskas et al., 'The Emergence of Habitual Ochre
Use in Africa and Its Significance for the Development of Ritual
Behavior During the Middle Stone Age', Journal of World Prehistory
35, nos 3-4 (2022): 233-319, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10963-022-
09170-2. The oldest forms of artwork could be patterns and sculptures
carved on rocks at South Africa's beaches: Charles Helm, 'Ancient
Humans May Have Made Patterns and Sculptures on Africa's
Beaches', The Conversation, 22 September 2019,
https://theconversation.com/ancient-humans-may-have-made-patterns-
and-sculptures-on-south-africas-beaches-123546. There is still some
dispute as to whether this is cumulative, but the evidence is pointing
that way.↩
8. For an overview of recent evidence, see Rebecca Wragg, Kindred:
Neanderthal Life, Love, Death and Art (Bloomsbury Sigma, 2020);
Emma Pomeroy et al., 'New Neanderthal Remains With the "Flower
Burial" at Shanidar Cave', Antiquity 94, no. 373 (2020): 11-26,
https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2019.207; Julia Galway-Witham, James
Cole, and Chris Stringer, 'Aspects of Human Physical and Behavioural
Evolution During the Last 1 Million Years', Journal of Quaternary
Science 34, no. 6 (2019): 355-78, https://doi.org/10.1002/jqs.3137.↩
9. D. L. Hoffmann et al., 'U-Th Dating of Carbonate Crusts Reveals
Neandertal Origin of Iberian Cave Art', Science 359, no. 6378 (2018):

912-15, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap7778; Adhi Agus
Oktaviana et al., 'Narrative Cave Art in Indonesia by 51,200 Years
Ago', Nature 631, no. 8022 (2024): 814-18,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07541-7.↩
10. The image is taken from the Neanderthal Museum in Mettmann,
Germany.↩
11. It left them vulnerable, with problems in finding genetically viable
mates and a predicament where small changes in fertility or the ratio of
births to deaths led to large population swings, a phenomenon called
'stochastic fluctuations'.↩
12. Krist Vaesen, Gerrit L. Dusseldorp, and Mark J. Brandt, 'An Emerging
Consensus in Palaeoanthropology: Demography Was the Main Factor
Responsible for the Disappearance of Neanderthals', Scientific Reports
11, no. 1 (2021): 4925, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-84410-7.
Experts included only those who had published on Neanderthal
extinction over the period 2014-20. The outcome is surprising since
demographic explanations are recent, with most relevant articles
having been published only five years or so before 2020.↩
13. Laurits Skov et al., 'Genetic Insights into the Social Organization of
Neanderthals', Nature 610, no. 7932 (2022): 519, 523-4,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-05283-y.↩
14. Calculated by the palaeoanthropologist April Nowell using data from
Erik Trinkaus, 'Neanderthal Mortality Patterns', Journal of
Archaeological Science 22, no. 1 (1995): 121-42,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0305-4403(95)80170-7. See Kristina
Killgrove, 'Did We Kill the Neanderthals? New Research May Finally
Answer an Age-Old Question', Live Science, 10 April 2024,
www.livescience.com/archaeology/did-we-kill-the-neanderthals-new-
research-may-finally-answer-an-age-old-question.↩
15. Ali R. Vahdati et al., 'Exploring Late Pleistocene Hominin Dispersals,
Coexistence and Extinction With Agent-Based Multi-Factor Models',
Quaternary Science Reviews 279 (2022): 107391,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2022.107391.↩
16. See Nicholas P. Simpson et al., 'A Framework for Complex Climate
Change Risk Assessment', One Earth 4, no. 4 (2021): 489-501,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.03.005; Luke Kemp et al.,
'Climate Endgame: Exploring Catastrophic Climate Change
Scenarios', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, no.
34 (2022): e2108146119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108146119.
This is also echoed in the way that the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC) uses risk in its Sixth Assessment Report. See
IPCC, 'The Concept of Risk in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report: A
Summary of Cross-Working Group Discussions' (IPCC, 2020),
www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2021/02/Risk-guidance-
FINAL_15Feb2021.pdf. The one difference is that the IPCC separates
risk and its three determinants (threat, exposure, and vulnerability)
from response risks.↩
17. Steven E. Churchill et al., 'Shanidar 3 Neandertal Rib Puncture Wound
and Paleolithic Weaponry', Journal of Human Evolution 57, no. 2
(2009): 163-78, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2009.05.010;
Christoph P. E. Zollikofer et al., 'Evidence for Interpersonal Violence
in the St. Césaire Neanderthal', Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 99, no. 9 (2002): 6444-8,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.082111899.↩
18. Katerina Harvati et al., 'Apidima Cave Fossils Provide Earliest
Evidence of Homo sapiens in Eurasia', Nature 571, no. 7766 (2019):
500-504, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1376-z.↩
19. Ryan J. Rabett, 'The Success of Failed Homo sapiens Dispersals out of
Africa and into Asia', Nature Ecology & Evolution 2, no. 2 (2018):
212-19, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-017-0436-8.↩
20. Andrew Bevan et al., 'Holocene Fluctuations in Human Population
Demonstrate Repeated Links to Food Production and Climate',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, no. 49 (2017),
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1709190114.↩
21. Martin A. J. Williams et al., 'Environmental Impact of the 73ka Toba
Super-Eruption in South Asia', Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
Palaeoecology 284, nos 3-4 (2009): 295-314,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.palaeo.2009.10.009.↩
22. Chris Clarkson et al., 'Human Occupation of Northern India Spans the
Toba Super-Eruption ~74,000 Years Ago', Nature Communications 11,
no. 1 (2020): 961, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14668-4;

Michael Haslam et al., 'The 74ka Toba Super-Eruption and Southern
Indian Hominins: Archaeology, Lithic Technology and Environments
at Jwalapuram Locality 3', Journal of Archaeological Science 37, no.
12 (2010): 3370-84, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2010.07.034.↩
23. Benjamin A. Black et al., 'Global Climate Disruption and Regional
Climate Shelters after the Toba Supereruption', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 29 (2021): e2013046118,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2013046118.↩
24. Felix Riede, Gerald Oetelaar, and Richard VanderHoek, 'From Crisis
to Collapse in Hunter-Gatherer Societies. A Comparative Investigation
of the Cultural Impacts of Three Large Volcanic Eruptions on Past
Hunter-Gatherers', in Crisis to Collapse: The Archaeology of Social
Breakdown, ed. Tim Cunningham and Jan Driessen (UCL Presses
Universitaires de Louvain, 2017). All of these examples are technically
during the Holocene, but since they occurred to hyper-egalitarian
foragers, they can provide some insight into how prehistoric hunter-
gatherers may have responded to volcanic disruptions.↩
25. For a lively discussion of the role of mobility in human evolution, read
Padilla-Iglesias, 'Societies of Perpetual Movement'.↩
26. Jennings, Finding Fairness, 46-7; Matt Grove, Eiluned Pearce, and R.
I. M. Dunbar, 'Fission-Fusion and the Evolution of Hominin Social
Systems', Journal of Human Evolution 62, no. 2 (2012): 191-200,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2011.10.012; Robert Foley and Clive
Gamble, 'The Ecology of Social Transitions in Human Evolution',
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
364, no. 1533 (2009): 3267-79,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0136.↩
27. Iain D. Couzin and Mark E. Laidre, 'Fission-Fusion Populations',
Current Biology 19, no. 15 (2009): R633-5,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2009.05.034. The two-thirds estimate
comes from analyses of human conversations, in which around two-
thirds is devoted to social topics (grouped under the term 'gossip').
See R. I. M. Dunbar, 'Gossip in Evolutionary Perspective', Review of
General Psychology 8, no. 2 (2004): 100-110,
https://doi.org/10.1037/1089-2680.8.2.100.↩

28. I. Crevecoeur et al., 'Late Stone Age Human Remains from Ishango
(Democratic Republic of Congo): New Insights on Late Pleistocene
Modern Human Diversity in Africa', Journal of Human Evolution 96
(2016): 35-57, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhevol.2016.04.003.↩
29. For an entertaining overview, see Padilla-Iglesias, 'Did Humanity
Really All Arise in One Place?'. Some even see these adaptations in
bipedalism and bigger brains enabling fission-fusion practices as two
of five major transitions in hominid evolution. See Foley and Gamble,
'The Ecology of Social Transitions in Human Evolution', 3276.↩
30. This extended beyond the buffalo hunt into organizing migrations,
preventing warriors from going on unauthorized raids, and overseeing
crowds at festivals. The composition of the police force was regularly
cycled between seasons. This was likely an effective accountability
mechanism: you'd have far less incentive to abuse your coercive
power if you knew you'd be on the receiving end next summer. See
David Wengrow and David Graeber, 'Farewell to the "Childhood of
Man": Ritual, Seasonality, and the Origins of Inequality', Journal of
the Royal Anthropological Institute 21, no. 3 (2015): 597-619,
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9655.12247.↩
31. On the Shoshone, see Robert H. Lowie, 'Some Aspects of Political
Organization Among the American Aborigines', Journal of the Royal
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 78, no. 1/2
(1948): 11, https://doi.org/10.2307/2844522. On the Wik-Mungkan,
see Donald F. Thomson, 'The Seasonal Factor in Human Culture
Illustrated from the Life of a Contemporary Nomadic Group',
Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 5, no. 2 (1939): 209-21,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0079497X00020545.↩
32. Marcel Mauss, Seasonal Variations of the Eskimo: A Study in Social
Morphology (Routledge, 2004). The anthropologist Marcel Mauss
called this behaviour a 'twofold morphology'.↩
33. Chris J. Stevens and Dorian Q. Fuller, 'Did Neolithic Farming Fail?
The Case for a Bronze Age Agricultural Revolution in the British
Isles', Antiquity 86, no. 333 (2012): 707-22,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003598X00047864; Bruce Bower, 'Herders,
Not Farmers, Built Stonehenge', Science News, 9 June 2012,
www.sciencenews.org/article/herders-not-farmers-built-stonehenge;

Caroline Lang et al., 'Gazelle Behaviour and Human Presence at Early
Neolithic Göbekli Tepe, South-East Anatolia', World Archaeology 45,
no. 3 (2013): 410-29,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00438243.2013.820648.↩
34. Rather than houses, these mammoth-bone structures seem to have been
celebrations of successful hunts and ancient trading hubs for the
exchange of amber, animal pelts, and marine shells. There are other
sites of grand burials. In Dolní Věstonice, in the south of the Czech
Republic, a triple burial dating back 27,000 years involved two males
with elaborate headdresses placed alongside a female on ochre-stained
soil. For summaries of the relevant literature, see Hayden, 'Social
Complexity'; Wengrow and Graeber, 'Farewell to the "Childhood of
Man"'.↩
35. Hayden, 'Social Complexity'; David Graeber and David Wengrow,
The Dawn of Everything: A New History of Humanity (Allen Lane,
2021).↩
36. Bennett Bacon et al., 'An Upper Palaeolithic Proto-Writing System
and Phenological Calendar', Cambridge Archaeological Journal 33,
no. 3 (2023): 1-19, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959774322000415.↩
37. Graeber and Wengrow, The Dawn of Everything, chap. 3.↩
38. Some cultures periodically shift their societies with the moon rather
than with the seasons. They do so not because they worship the moon,
but rather to align with menstruation. This is based on Chris Knight's
'sex-strike' theory of human origins, and Camilla Power's 'Female
Cosmetic Coalitions'. They propose that gender and political equality
was maintained through coalitions of women banding together with
males to prohibit and punish any philandering or domineering men.
They did so by doing monthly rituals where they would paint
themselves in red ochre to disguise women who were menstruating.
Menstruation is one of the few visible signs that women give for their
impending fertility. The ochre ritual was intended to scramble that
information and thwart the efforts of any man or group to monopolize
reproduction. See Chris Knight, Blood Relations: Menstruation and
the Origins of Culture (Yale University Press, 1991); Power, 'Gender
Egalitarianism Made Us Human'. Modelling and genetics suggest that
ice-age hunters did have some kinds of fission-fusion dynamics, but

these can take many forms, and there is no evidence that this involved
any changes in social structure.↩
39. Mauss, Seasonal Variations of the Eskimo, 33. Note that this is in
direct contradiction to Graeber and Wengrow's The Dawn of
Everything. In it, they claim that Mauss recorded that 40 per cent or
less of the variance in the seasonal structure of the Inuit was due to
environmental changes, even though that number appears nowhere in
Mauss's original text.↩
40. That's possibly why we see signs of seasonal cycles during the Upper
Palaeolithic near choke points of migrating herds.↩
41. Graeber and Wengrow, The Dawn of Everything; Wengrow and
Graeber, 'Farewell to the "Childhood of Man"'.↩
CHAPTER 3: FROM HUNTING AND GATHERING TO BEING
HUNTED AND GATHERED
1. For an overview of the Calusa, see Fernando Santos-Granero, Vital
Enemies: Slavery, Predation, and the Amerindian Political Economy of
Life (University of Texas Press, 2009), chap. 4.↩
2. For an accessible overview of the north-west coast foragers, see David
Wengrow and David Graeber, '"Many Seasons Ago": Slavery and Its
Rejection Among Foragers on the Pacific Coast of North America',
American Anthropologist 120, no. 2 (2018): 237-49,
https://doi.org/10.1111/aman.12969. Notably, Wengrow and Graeber
differ from other experts in seeing the origins of hierarchy across the
north-west coast peoples as being due to conscious political choice,
rather than to material circumstances. As we'll see, while this is a
liberating perspective, it's not convincing. For a summary of the
Calusa and the latest evidence on their watercourts, see Victor D.
Thompson et al., 'Ancient Engineering of Fish Capture and Storage in
Southwest Florida', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
117, no. 15 (2020): 8374-81,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921708117.↩
3. Brian Hayden, The Power of Ritual in Prehistory: Secret Societies and
Origins of Social Complexity (Cambridge University Press, 2018),
chap. 2; Wengrow and Graeber, '"Many Seasons Ago"'. This is also a

recurring theme in Flannery and Marcus's theory of how inequality
and states first arose (Kent V. Flannery and Joyce Marcus, The
Creation of Inequality: How Our Prehistoric Ancestors Set the Stage
for Monarchy, Slavery, and Empire (Harvard University Press,
2012)).↩
4. Manvir Singh and Luke Glowacki, 'Human Social Organization
During the Late Pleistocene: Beyond the Nomadic-Egalitarian Model',
Evolution and Human Behavior 43 (2022): 418-31,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2022.07.003. There may have
been many more whose traces are buried beneath the concrete and
roads of current agricultural societies.↩
5. For the classic overview of hunter-gatherer diversity, see Kelly, The
Lifeways of Hunter-Gatherers.↩
6. T. Douglas Price and Ofer Bar-Yosef, 'Traces of Inequality at the
Origins of Agriculture in the Ancient Near East', in Pathways to
Power, ed. T. Douglas Price and Gary M. Feinman (Springer, 2010),
147-68, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-6300-0_6; Heather
Pringle, 'The Ancient Roots of the 1%', Science 344, no. 6186 (2014):
823, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.344.6186.822. These signs of
inequality, as well as earlier examples during the Palaeolithic, do
appear to be temporary and ephemeral, as explored in Samuel Bowles
and Mattia Fochesato, 'The Origins of Enduring Economic Inequality',
Santa Fe Institute, 31 April 2024, https://sites.santafe.edu/~bowles/wp-
content/uploads/Text-JEL-31-Jan-sent-.pdf. There is an intense debate
on whether we can accurately measure and compare inequality across
societies. Many of the most common criticisms are summarized in
David Wengrow, 'The Mismeasure of Human History?', Stone Econ,
29 June 2024, www.stone-econ.org/news-and-blogs/the-mismeasure-
of-human-history. Many of these are also addressed in Timothy A.
Kohler and Michael Ernest Smith, eds., Ten Thousand Years of
Inequality: The Archaeology of Wealth Differences (University of
Arizona Press, 2018), chap. 1. The critics largely fall into the camp of
'post-processual' archaeologists who emphasize the subjectivity of
interpreting any historical artefacts. The processual camp, while noting
and accounting for cultural subjectivities, tries to find material,
scientific ways to account for these and still do comparative analysis.

Processualists are comfortable in trying to quantify inequalities, while
post-processual archaeologists tend to lament such attempts.
Throughout the book, I'll be firmly sitting in the processual camp and
using, where valid, quantified estimates of things like inequality. The
problem is that most of the critiques raised by post-processual
archaeologists were already known and being addressed by processual
experts (Earle et al., 'Processual Archaeology and the Radical Critique
[and Comments and Reply])'. Importantly, post-processual critics
rarely have any explicit methodology or effective way of trying to
compare cases. This tends to result in the far worse vices of wild
speculation and a total inability to answer questions about the bigger
patterns seen across history (The Dawn of Everything by Wengrow and
Graeber is the most well-known, entertaining, and bewildering
example).↩
7. For Figure 7, war is defined as large-scale, organized lethal violence
between different politically autonomous groups. Estimates for the
beginning of war are taken from Douglas P. Fry, Charles A. Keith, and
Patrik Söderberg, 'Social Complexity, Inequality and War Before
Farming: Congruence of Comparative Forager and Archaeological
Data', in Social Inequality Before Farming? Multidisciplinary
Approaches to the Study of Social Organization in Prehistoric and
Ethnographic Hunter-Gatherer-Fisher Societies, ed. L. Moreau
(McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, 2020), 314-15,
https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.60639; Claudio Cioffi-Revilla and
David Lai, 'War and Politics in Ancient China, 2700 B.C. to 722 B.C.:
Measurement and Comparative Analysis', Journal of Conflict
Resolution 39, no. 3 (1995): 467-94; Elizabeth Arkush and Tiffiny A.
Tung, 'Patterns of War in the Andes from the Archaic to the Late
Horizon: Insights from Settlement Patterns and Cranial Trauma',
Journal of Archaeological Research 21, no. 4 (2013): 307-69,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10814-013-9065-1; R. Brian Ferguson, 'The
Prehistory of War and Peace in Europe and the Near East', in War,
Peace, and Human Nature, ed. Douglas P. Fry (Oxford University
Press, 2013), 210-22,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199858996.003.0011; Kent V.
Flannery and Joyce Marcus, 'The Origin of War: New 14C Dates from
Ancient Mexico', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

100, no. 20 (2003): 11801-5,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1934526100. Estimates of state formation
are taken from MOROS.↩
8. Also known as the 'new stone age'. Note that this is an archaeological
or cultural period, while the Holocene is a geological one. Technically,
at least in Mesopotamia, the time before the first states is usually
divided into the Neolithic and the 'Chalcolithic' (a time marked by the
increased use of smelted copper). My simplification here is done for
clarity.↩
9. Peter J. Richerson, Robert Boyd, and Robert L. Bettinger, 'Was
Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene But Mandatory During
the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis', American Antiquity 66,
no. 3 (2001): 387-411, https://doi.org/10.2307/2694241. Some have
argued that we also saw hierarchical hunter-gatherers and Goliaths
during the Palaeolithic since some lootable resources were available.
There are a few signs that people harvested whale meat and shellfish
as early as 160,000-130,000 years ago. For an overview of the earliest
signs of lootable resources, see Singh and Glowacki, 'Human Social
Organization During the Late Pleistocene', 424-6. This is unlikely to
have resulted in hierarchical hunter-gatherers for a few reasons. First,
we have no signs of such communities. There are the seasonal burials
and monuments in Upper Palaeolithic Europe we have already dealt
with: these appear to be more outbursts of social activity rather than
any prolonged dominance hierarchy. Second, exit options were also
abundant, meaning if people felt threatened then they could easily
move to new food sources. Even if a Palaeolithic upstart had tried to
lay claim to a coastal source of shellfish, it would have been
exceedingly easy to move away. Third, military technology was
underdeveloped: there were no monopolizable weapons. Once we
think in terms of Goliath fuel it is abundantly clear why the
Palaeolithic was marked by nomadic-egalitarian foragers and not
hierarchical ones.↩
10. Eric Alden Smith and Brian F. Codding, 'Ecological Variation and
Institutionalized Inequality in Hunter-Gatherer Societies', Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no. 13 (2021): e2016134118,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2016134118. See also Singh and

Glowacki, 'Human Social Organization During the Late Pleistocene'.
This is the 'behavioural ecology' perspective on hunter-gatherer
variation which is dominant in the field. The key idea is that dense,
reliable resources tend to lead to more hierarchical social
arrangements. There are dissenters, including those who believe that a
reliance on salmon was not the main contributor to the hierarchical
structure of many of the north-west coast Native Americans; see
Kenneth E. Sassaman, 'Complex Hunter-Gatherers in Evolution and
History: A North American Perspective', Journal of Archaeological
Research 12, no. 3 (2004): 227-80,
https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JARE.0000040231.67149.a8; Graeber and
Wengrow, The Dawn of Everything; Wengrow and Graeber, '"Many
Seasons Ago"'. However, these other accounts which believe that
cultural changes are the more important driver suffer from one key
problem: they can't explain the wider patterns in the variation of
hierarchical hunter-gatherers, while the behavioural ecology view can.
Similarly, the behavioural ecology view can help explain why farming
societies ended up being brutally unequal and stratified in the long
term. The idea of grain as a lootable resource, and that some crops are
more lootable than others, was best explored by James C. Scott in a
series of influential books, including The Art of Not Being Governed:
An Anarchist History of Upland Southeast Asia (Yale University Press,
2009), esp. chap. 6, and Against the Grain: A Deep History of the
Earliest States (Yale University Press, 2017), esp. chap. 4.↩
11. James C. Scott, 'Response', Cambridge Archaeological Journal 29,
no. 4 (2019): 718, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959774319000441. More
speculatively, the flourishes of what could be inequality during the
Upper Palaeolithic could also be due to foragers capitalizing on choke
points of slightly lootable resources, since large surpluses of meat can
be salted or smoked and stored.↩
12. Monique Borgerhoff Mulder et al., 'Intergenerational Wealth
Transmission and the Dynamics of Inequality in Small-Scale
Societies', Science 326, no. 5953 (2009): 682-8,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1178336. Notably, hunter-gatherers do
have some degree of transmissible wealth, but it is comparatively
tiny.↩

13. The power framework here is a modified version of Mann's sources of
social power.↩
14. Lynn H. Gamble, The Chumash World at European Contact: Power,
Trade, and Feasting Among Complex Hunter-Gatherers (University of
California Press, 2011).↩
15. This is a recent overturning of the old idea that horses were directly
introduced by Europeans to North America. See William Timothy
Treal Taylor et al., 'Early Dispersal of Domestic Horses into the Great
Plains and Northern Rockies', Science 379, no. 6639 (2023): 1316-23,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adc9691.↩
16. Some have even called them the 'Comanche Empire'. Pekka
Hämäläinen, The Comanche Empire (Yale University Press, 2008).
This is part of a larger literature on 'kinetic' or 'horseback' empires.↩
17. Although most modern horses are derived from a later equine strain
originating around 2000 BCE; see Pablo Librado et al., 'The Origins
and Spread of Domestic Horses from the Western Eurasian Steppes',
Nature 598, no. 7882 (2021): 634-40, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-04018-9.↩
18. Sandra L. Vehrencamp, 'A Model for the Evolution of Despotic Versus
Egalitarian Societies', Animal Behaviour 31, no. 3 (1983): 667-82,
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0003-3472(83)80222-X.↩
19. This is a slight amendment to Robert Carneiro's original
'circumscription theory'. See Robert L. Carneiro, 'The
Circumscription Theory: Challenge and Response', American
Behavioral Scientist 31, no. 4 (1988): 497-511. Carneiro's original
theory has come under significant critique (Terry Stocker and Jianyi
Xi'ao, 'Early State Formation: A Complete Rejection of the
Circumscription Theory', Social Evolution & History 18, no. 2 (2019),
https://doi.org/10.30884/seh/2019.02.09; Julia Zinkina, Andrey
Korotayev, and Alexey Andreev, 'Circumscription Theory of the
Origins of the State: A Cross-Cultural Re-Analysis', Cliodynamics:
The Journal of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution 7, no. 2
(2017), https://doi.org/10.21237/C7CLIO7232817.) My theory of state
formation avoids most of the problems by seeing circumscription as
just one variable that edged a community towards hierarchy, alongside
lootable resources, and military technology. One important criticism is

that circumscription theory can't account for the fact that many early
autonomous communities were not conquest orientated. My theory
accounts for this by noting that just one warring polity would have
likely turned its neighbours more authoritarian (see the 'authoritarian
impulse') in Chapter 8.↩
20. Partly inspired by Eric Alden Smith, Jennifer E. Smith, and Brian F.
Codding, 'Toward an Evolutionary Ecology of (in)Equality',
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
378, no. 1883 (2023): fig. 1,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2022.0287.↩
21. It is what physicists call 'an attractor state': a state that the system will
tend to evolve towards given initial conditions. We can all make
choices, but they are bound and influenced by our past and current
material circumstances.↩
22. Rupert Neate, 'All Billionaires under 30 Have Inherited Their Wealth,
Research Finds', Guardians, 3 April 2024,
www.theguardian.com/business/2024/apr/03/all-billionaires-under-30-
have-inherited-their-wealth-research-finds.↩
23. A deep dive into violence and the Oaxaca Valley is provided by
Flannery and Marcus, The Creation of Inequality.↩
24. For Japan, see Hisashi Nakao et al., 'Violence in the Prehistoric Period
of Japan: The Spatio-Temporal Pattern of Skeletal Evidence for
Violence in the Jomon Period', Biology Letters 12, no. 3 (2016):
20160028, https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2016.0028; Tomomi Nakagawa
et al., 'Violence and Warfare in Prehistoric Japan', Letters on
Evolutionary Behavioral Science 8, no. 1 (2017): 8-11,
https://doi.org/10.5178/lebs.2017.55.↩
25. The data for conflict in Native north-eastern America can be found in
David H. Dye, 'Trends in Cooperation and Conflict in Native Eastern
North America', in War, Peace, and Human Nature, ed. Douglas P. Fry
(Oxford University Press, 2013), 132-50,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199858996.003.0008.↩
26. Ferguson, 'The Prehistory of War and Peace in Europe and the Near
East'. One could even think of this as a kind of evolutionary
backsliding.↩

27. Ibid.↩
28. The overarching argument on the archaeological sequence of violence
is in Douglas P. Fry, Charles A. Keith, and Patrik Söderberg, 'Social
Complexity, Inequality and War before Farming: Congruence of
Comparative Forager and Archaeological Data', in Social Inequality
Before Farming?, ed. Luc Moreau (McDonald Institute for
Archaeological Research, 2020),
https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.60639. For Figure 9, see R. Risch and
H. Meller, 'The Representation of Violence in the Rock Art of the
Sahara and the Spanish Levant', in Archéologie Européenne: Identités
et Migrations -Hommages au Professeur Jean-Paul Demoule
(Sidestone Press, 2017), 374.↩
29. Fry, Keith, and Söderberg, 'Social Complexity, Inequality and War
Before Farming', 305-10.↩
30. Christopher Knüsel and Martin J. Smith, eds., The Routledge
Handbook of the Bioarchaeology of Human Conflict (Taylor &
Francis, 2019).↩
31. Linda Fibiger et al., 'Conflict Violence, and Warfare Among Early
Farmers in Northwestern Europe', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 120, no. 4 (2023): e2209481119,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2209481119.↩
32. The ability to replace one victim with anyone else from the same
group is usually referred to as 'social substitutability'.↩
33. Malešević, The Rise of Organised Brutality.↩
34. The main proponents of the raiding-for-sex theory of war (a tale in
which women are only objects to be fought over) are Gat, War in
Human Civilization, and Pinker, The Better Angels of Our Nature.↩
35. Fry and Söderberg, 'Lethal Aggression in Mobile Forager Bands', 272;
Fry and Söderberg, 'Myths about Hunter-Gatherers Redux', table 1.↩
36. We should exercise some caution here, as there are weaknesses to the
evidence. The archaeological record contains only a small number of
skeletons relative to the number of people who lived and died in the
Palaeolithic. There are also some perplexing cases. For instance,
according to observations from first-contact Europeans (an admittedly
unreliable source), Australian Aboriginal people appear to have had

high rates of intergroup conflict. This is also reflected in cave art
suggestive of armed confrontations. Yet we see no evidence of group
violence in the archaeological record. See Christophe Darmangeat,
'Vanished Wars of Australia: The Archeological Invisibility of
Aboriginal Collective Conflicts', Journal of Archaeological Method
and Theory 26, no. 4 (2019): 1556-90, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-
019-09418-w.↩
37. Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient Societies, ed. Leslie A. White, 2nd edn
(Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2000). Morgan's work
was partly inspired by his time among the Haudenosaunee (previously
known as the Iroquois), an alliance of six Native American groups
across north-eastern America. He was adopted as part of the Hawk
Clan of the Seneca nation and given the name Tayadawahkugh,
meaning 'the one lying across'. While they saw him as a bridge
between them and their colonial oppressors, Morgan's ideas instead
dug a deeper cleft between them. They were now seen as the defunct
relics of humanity's immature past. In Morgan's schema, both
barbarism and savagery were split into the ascending categories of
'lower', 'middle', and 'upper', while civilization was divided into
'ancient', 'medieval', and 'modern'. Morgan was undoubtedly
influenced by evolutionary theory, but never actually referenced
evolution in any of his major works. Sir John Lubbock (1834-1913), a
contemporary and friend of Morgan, as well as a fellow pioneer of
social evolutionism, had a similar schema of savages, barbarians, and
the civilized. Unlike Morgan, he did draw a direct connection between
evolutionary theory and the progress of humanity. This was a
convenient misreading of evolutionary theory. In biological evolution,
the species best-adapted to its environment reproduces and lives on. In
social evolutionism, evolution has a purpose and a direction.↩
38. We lack detailed comparative studies of the energy capture of
egalitarian and hierarchical hunter-gatherers. Nonetheless, it seems
reasonable that the latter captured significantly more energy than the
former. Egalitarian hunter-gatherers live at a subsistence level and
capture little to no energy beyond what they need on a given day to
survive. By contrast, hierarchical hunter-gatherers capture enough
surplus energy to throw extravagant feasts, to decorate and bury elites
with luxury items often requiring hundreds of hours of labour and

longer-distance trade, and more frequently construct large-scale
monuments.↩
39. Brian Hayden, The Power of Feasts: From Prehistory to the Present
(Cambridge University Press, 2014), chap. 4. There are numerous
problems with the idea of chiefdoms, including when it's seen as an
evolutionary stepping stone towards the state. These critiques are
summarized in Norman Yoffee, 'Too Many Chiefs? (Or, Safe Texts for
the '90s)', in Archaeological Theory, ed. Norman Yoffee and Andrew
Sherratt (Cambridge University Press, 1993), 60-78,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511720277.007. Nonetheless, it's a
helpful term for the diverse space of centralized, hierarchical groups
which haven't quite reached statehood, but are also clearly not
leaderless. ↩
40. For a good summary of common criticisms of the stepladder approach
(although applied to the more advanced approach of 'band', 'tribe',
'chiefdom', 'state' of the 1960s), see Yoffee, 'Too Many Chiefs?'.↩
41. Tainter, The Collapse of Complex Societies, 4; Diamond, Collapse,
3.↩
42. Bruce G. Trigger, Understanding Early Civilizations: A Comparative
Study (Cambridge University Press, 2007), 46.↩
43. This definition of complexity largely dates back to the cultural
evolution literature of the 1950s and 1960s. It still remains the
predominant way of talking about complexity in archaeology. When
most archaeologists talk about 'complex societies' they are referring to
more unequal, centralized, and hierarchical ones. There are, of course,
exceptions. Tim Kohler provides a useful summary of how
archaeologists can approach the topic from the lens of complex
systems and reviews some relevant books and articles in Timothy A.
Kohler, 'Complex Systems and Archaeology', in Archaeological
Theory Today, ed. Ian Hodder (Polity Press, 2012), 93-123. ↩
44. For similar points on how states and administrations simplify their
citizens and landscapes, see Yoffee, The Evolution of Simplicity; Scott,
Seeing Like a State. For a general elaboration of this argument, see
Luke Kemp, 'Diminishing Returns on Extraction: How Inequality and
Extractive Hierarchy Create Fragility', in What History, Systems, and
Complexity Can Teach Us About Our Modern World and Fragile

Future, ed. Miguel A. Centeno, Thayer S. Patterson, and Peter W.
Callah (Routledge, 2023),
www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.4324/9781003331384-
5/diminishing-returns-extraction-luke-kemp?
context=ubx&refId=9e978dc6-db65-4abe-b79a-a6b38531c307. Some
archaeologists and anthropologists, such as Joseph Tainter, do use a
definition of complexity which speaks of the number of different
moving parts in a system (although this is still tied up with inequality,
centralization, and hierarchy). Even here they seem to be thinking only
about complexity in areas such as military, capital, and
bureaucracy.↩
45. In contrast, a non-hierarchical arrangement means that everyone is
unranked, or at least that there are no permanent, overarching positions
of authority. A merchant may have greater bartering skills than a
soldier, but neither has direct authority over the other. This is usually
referred to as 'heterarchy': see Carole L. Crumley, 'Heterarchy and the
Analysis of Complex Societies', Archaeological Papers of the
American Anthropological Association 6, no. 1 (1995): 3,
https://doi.org/10.1525/ap3a.1995.6.1.1. However, the term is a little
confusing.↩
46. David Wengrow, 'A History of True Civilisation Is Not One of
Monuments', Aeon, 2 October 2018, https://aeon.co/ideas/a-history-of-
true-civilisation-is-not-one-of-monuments. There was of course still
some coercion: counter-dominance strategies. But such lethal violence
was shared across the community, not commonly deployed, and rarely
needed to enforce rules. ↩
47. What Is Politics? 10.3 The Ingredients of Hierarchy: Graeber &
Wengrow's Dawn of Everything, Chapter 3, 2022,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=nsIxMzLjEfs.↩
48. There is a prolific literature on 'heterarchy', but this isn't easily
understood (or even very helpful) for a general audience. Similarly,
corporate vs despotic power in archaeology is both incredibly vague
and confusing to most people who associate 'corporate' with private
companies. A simple, back-to-basics approach is warranted here.↩
49. Paul Cartledge, 'Ancient Greeks Would Not Recognise Our
"Democracy" - They'd See an "Oligarchy"', The Conversation, 3 June

2016, https://theconversation.com/ancient-greeks-would-not-
recognise-our-democracy-theyd-see-an-oligarchy-60277; Martin
Gilens and Benjamin I. Page, 'Testing Theories of American Politics:
Elites, Interest Groups, and Average Citizens', Perspectives on Politics
12, no. 3 (2014): 564-81,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592714001595.↩
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 4: ABANDONED EXPERIMENTS I: FAILED FARMERS
1. Ferguson, 'The Prehistory of War and Peace in Europe and the Near
East'; Douglas P. Fry and Geneviève Souillac, 'Prehistoric Warfare', in
Oxford Bibliographies in Military History (2023),
https://doi.org/10.1093/obo/9780199791279-0224.↩
2. Fry and Souillac, 'Prehistoric Warfare'; Augusta McMahon, 'From
Sedentism to States, 10,000-3000 BCE', in A Companion to the Ancient
Near East, ed. Daniel C. Snell (Wiley, 2020), 27-43,
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119362500, chap. 2.↩
3. Oana Borcan, Ola Olsson, and Louis Putterman, 'Transition to
Agriculture and First State Presence: A Global Analysis', Explorations
in Economic History 82 (2021): 1,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2021.101404.↩
4. Unintentional domestication of crops dates back at least to 25,000
years ago as hunter-gatherers developed new tools and killed off large
mammals. In a lighter sense it began 780,000 years ago with the first
use of fire to shape landscapes, selecting for more fire-tolerant plants
(especially pyrophytes and pyrophiles) while killing off others. Robin
G. Allaby et al., 'Emerging Evidence of Plant Domestication as a
Landscape-Level Process', Trends in Ecology & Evolution 37, no. 3
(2022): 268-79, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2021.11.002; ↩
5. Amaia Arranz-Otaegui and Joe Roe, 'Revisiting the Concept of the
"Neolithic Founder Crops" in Southwest Asia', Vegetation History and
Archaeobotany 32, no. 5 (2023): 482, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00334-
023-00917-1.↩
6. Gary M. Feinman and Jill E. Neitzel, 'The Social Dynamics of Settling
Down', Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 69 (2023): 101468,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2022.101468.↩
7. Stephen Shennan, The First Farmers of Europe: An Evolutionary
Perspective (Cambridge University Press, 2018),
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108386029. The most recent evidence
suggests that around 3.6 per cent of the migrating farmers interbred
with the local hunter-gatherers: Joaquim Fort and Joaquim Pérez-

Losada, 'Interbreeding Between Farmers and Hunter-Gatherers Along
the Inland and Mediterranean Routes of Neolithic Spread in Europe',
Nature Communications 15, no. 1 (2024): 7032,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51335-4.↩
8. Some put it down to a combination of population growth,
technological innovation, and climate change: Gregory K. Dow and
Clyde G. Reed, 'The Origins of Sedentism: Climate, Population, and
Technology', Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 119
(2015): 56-71, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2015.07.007.↩
9. There are some important caveats: some regions strangely started
getting smaller before picking up agriculture, while others experienced
increases as they became lactose tolerant and more reliant on animal
products (what's known as the 'lactase growth hypothesis').
Nonetheless, the general picture between ancient foragers and post-ice-
age farmers is one of reducing height. The most recent and nuanced
study of 3,507 skeletons from 366 sites can be found in Jay T. Stock et
al., 'Long-Term Trends in Human Body Size Track Regional Variation
in Subsistence Transitions and Growth Acceleration Linked to
Dairying', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, no. 4
(2023): 1, 3-7, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2209482119. For a useful
overview of the literature, consult Amanda Mummert et al., 'Stature
and Robusticity during the Agricultural Transition: Evidence from the
Bioarchaeological Record', Economics & Human Biology 9, no. 3
(2011): 284-301, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ehb.2011.03.004. If you're
looking for a concrete number, then one of the most robust is that early
European farmers were 3.82cm shorter than expected (given their
genetics) relative to Palaeolithic hunter-gatherers. See Stephanie
Marciniak et al., 'An Integrative Skeletal and Paleogenomic Analysis
of Stature Variation Suggests Relatively Reduced Health for Early
European Farmers', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
119, no. 15 (2022): 1, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2106743119.↩
10. Theya Ivitsky Molleson, 'The People of Abu Hureyra', in Village on
the Euphrates: From Foraging to Farming at Abu Hureyra, ed. M. T.
Moore, G. C. Hillman, and A. J. Legge (Oxford University Press,
2000), 301-24. The earliest Neolithic villages display evidence of
substantial oral infections and ubiquitous enamel defects - Clark

Spencer Larsen et al., 'Bioarchaeology of Neolithic Çatalhöyük
Reveals Fundamental Transitions in Health, Mobility, and Lifestyle in
Early Farmers', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116,
no. 26 (2019): 12621, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1904345116. The
association between ill health and agriculture was not lost on our
ancestors. The meaning of the Greek root for the word parasite is
'beside the grain'.↩
11. Happiness is, in many ways, ensuring that your desires are met. You
can do so by either producing a lot or desiring little. Egalitarian hunter-
gatherers take the second path, wanting mainly friendship and leisure
time over the endless pursuit of more material luxuries. These
tendencies have earned egalitarian foragers the mantle of 'the original
affluent society'. See Marshall Sahlins, Stone Age Economics
(Routledge Classics, 2017), chap. 1.↩
12. On peasants rarely producing a surplus, see Scott, Against the Grain,
152, 270; A. V. Chayanov, The Theory of Peasant Economy
(University of Wisconsin Press, 1986). When a peasant family has
more working than non-working members they will also reduce their
activity once subsistence is reached. They aren't particularly interested
in producing surplus food. Richard B. Lee, Irven DeVore, and Wenner-
Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research, eds., Man the Hunter
(Aldine Transaction, 1968); Ronald M. Berndt and Catherine Berndt,
Man, Land and Myth in North Australia: The Gunwinggu People
(Michigan State University Press, 1970); Hayden, The Power of
Feasts.↩
13. For a review and nuanced discussion of the principle of least effort, see
B. G. Trigger, 'Monumental Architecture: A Thermodynamic
Explanation of Symbolic Behaviour', World Archaeology 22, no. 2
(1990): 122-4, https://doi.org/10.1080/00438243.1990.9980135. The
principle of least effort doesn't govern all human activities. Foragers
will still spend a fair bit of time acquiring foods that are renowned for
their flavour or prestige. But it's accurate as a rule of thumb when it
comes to the daily business of feeding a group.↩
14. For an overview, see Chris J. Stevens, Enrico R. Crema, and Shinya
Shoda, 'The Importance of Wild Resources as a Reflection of the
Resilience and Changing Nature of Early Agricultural Systems in East

Asia and Europe', Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 10 (2022): 10,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2022.1017909.↩
15. For the floodplain hypothesis, see Scott, Against the Grain, 63-7. For
a broader discussion, especially on the importance of wider
demography, see Shennan, The First Farmers of Europe.↩
16. At the individual level, modern analyses suggest that higher reliance
on farming correlates strongly with higher fertility. However, context
and culture matter significantly. See Abigail E. Page et al., 'Women's
Subsistence Strategies Predict Fertility Across Cultures, But Context
Matters', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121, no. 9
(2024): e2318181121, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2318181121.↩
17. Scott, Against the Grain, 47-56; Hayden, The Power of Feasts, chap.
5.↩
18. Hayden, The Power of Feasts, chap. 4.↩
19. Ibid., chap. 5; Brian Hayden and Suzanne Villeneuve, 'A Century of
Feasting Studies', Annual Review of Anthropology 40, no. 1 (2011):
433-49, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-anthro-081309-145740.
Feasting can also offer other benefits, including creating social
alliances: see Brian Hayden, 'The Proof Is in the Pudding: Feasting
and the Origins of Domestication', Current Anthropology 50, no. 5
(2009): 597-601, https://doi.org/10.1086/605110.↩
20. Trigger, 'Monumental Architecture'. ↩
21. Zuzana Hofmanová et al., 'Early Farmers from across Europe Directly
Descended from Neolithic Aegeans', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 113, no. 25 (2016): 6886-91,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1523951113.↩
22. Shennan, The First Farmers of Europe.↩
23. Detlef Gronenborn and Barbara Horejs, 'Expansion of Farming in
Western Eurasia, 9600 - 4000 Cal BC (Update Vers. 2023.1)', Zenodo
(2023), https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.10047818.↩
24. Stephen Shennan et al., 'Regional Population Collapse Followed
Initial Agriculture Booms in Mid-Holocene Europe', Nature
Communications 4, no. 1 (2013): 2486,
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms3486.↩

25. Shennan, The First Farmers of Europe.↩
26. Fibiger et al., 'Conflict, Violence, and Warfare Among Early Farmers
in Northwestern Europe', 8.↩
27. Shennan, The First Farmers of Europe; Bevan et al., 'Holocene
Fluctuations in Human Population'.↩
28. Shennan, The First Farmers of Europe.↩
29. Fibiger et al., 'Conflict, Violence, and Warfare Among Early Farmers
in Northwestern Europe'.↩
30. The Navajo term 'Anasazi', which means 'ancient enemy', was
previously used and understandably discarded.↩
31. Timothy A. Kohler, R. Kyle Bocinsky, and Darcy Bird, 'Fluctuat Nec
Mergitur', in How Worlds Collapse, ed. Miguel Centeno et al.
(Routledge, 2023), 159-60, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003331384-
11.↩
32. Ibid., 160. On the declining rate of violence, see Timothy A. Kohler et
al., 'The Better Angels of Their Nature: Declining Violence Through
Time Among Prehispanic Farmers of the Pueblo Southwest', American
Antiquity 79, no. 3 (2014): 444-64, https://doi.org/10.7183/0002-
7316.79.3.444.↩
33. Bevan et al., 'Holocene Fluctuations in Human Population'.↩
34. Scott, Against the Grain, 73, 124. Scott refers to this unprecedented
concentration of grain, animals, and humans, as 'Neolithic resettlement
camps'.↩
35. Ibid., chap. 3.↩
36. Kathleen DuVal, Native Nations: A Millennium in North America
(Random House, 2024), chap. 3; Scott, Against the Grain, chaps. 3 and
5. This is especially true for those that had yet to develop practices of
quarantine and containment (although there are references to
separating the sick from the healthy dating back to Leviticus in the
Bible).↩
37. Frederik Valeur Seersholm et al., 'Repeated Plague Infections Across
Six Generations of Neolithic Farmers', Nature 632, no. 8023 (2024):
114-21, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07651-2.↩

38. Scott, Against the Grain, 97. Most acute infections don't leave a trace
on bones, and ancient DNA studies are still relatively new.↩
39. Gregory Johnson, 'Organizational Structure and Scalar Stress', in
Theory and Explanation in Archaeology, ed. Colin Renfrew, Michael
Rowlands, and Barbara A. Segraves-Whallon (Academic Press, 1982),
389-421. On the super-linear scaling of some crimes, see Marcos
Oliveira, 'More Crime in Cities? On the Scaling Laws of Crime and
the Inadequacy of Per Capita Rankings - A Cross-Country Study',
Crime Science 10, no. 1 (2021): 27, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40163-
021-00155-8.↩
40. Dániel Kondor et al., 'Explaining Population Booms and Busts in Mid-
Holocene Europe', preprint, SocArXiv, 11 May 2022,
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/c32up.↩
CHAPTER 5: ABANDONED EXPERIMENTS II: VOTING WITH FEET
AND FIRE
1. Louis Wirth, 'Urbanism as a Way of Life', American Journal of
Sociology 44, no. 1 (1938): 1. This is usually known as the
sociological definition of a city and is widely used in archaeology
alongside the functional definitions which stress how the activities in a
settlement's centre impact the surrounding rural areas. There is no
clear quantitative definition for a city; however, under these definitions
many of the cases covered here would be cities, including Taosi,
Cahokia, Moundville, Tiwanaku, Monte Albán, and San Lorenzo.
Others, such as Jenne-Jeno, are more disputable. It's worth noting that
cities aren't always permanent, but that is a realm of scholarly
contestation which is beyond the scope of this book.↩
2. For an overview of the archaeology of Çatalhöyük, see Ian Hodder,
Çatalhöyük, the Leopard's Tale: Revealing the Mysteries of Turkey's
Ancient Town (Thames & Hudson, 2011); Ian Hodder, 'Çatalhöyük:
The Leopard Changes Its Spots. A Summary of Recent Work',
Anatolian Studies 64 (2014): 1-22,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0066154614000027; Justin Jennings, Killing
Civilization: A Reassessment of Early Urbanism and Its Consequences
(University of New Mexico Press, 2016), chap. 4. Note that there were

signs of interpersonal violence. More recent evidence suggests that the
population of the city could have been as low as 600-800: Ian Kuijt
and Arkadiusz Marciniak, 'How Many People Lived in the World's
Earliest Villages? Reconsidering Community Size and Population
Pressure at Neolithic Çatalhöyük', Journal of Anthropological
Archaeology 74 (2024): 101573,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2024.101573. If this is true, Çatalhöyük
suddenly looks much less exceptional. It is just another Neolithic
village, albeit one with a fascinating culture. Such a low population
would also undermine the idea that the abandonment of Çatalhöyük
was due to scalar stress, and lend more weight to the idea of this being
a slow, intentional move away from inequality.↩
3. Hodder, Çatalhöyük, the Leopard's Tale, 98.↩
4. Jennings, Killing Civilization, chap. 4; Samuel Bowles and Mattia
Fochesato, 'The Origins of Enduring Economic Inequality', Santa Fe
Institute, 31 January 2024, 29-33,
https://sites.santafe.edu/~bowles/wp-content/uploads/Text-JEL-31-Jan-
sent-.pdf.↩
5. Larsen et al., 'Bioarchaeology of Neolithic Çatalhöyük'.↩
6. Jennings, Killing Civilization, chap. 4; Lech Czerniak and Arkadiusz
Marciniak, 'Abandoning Çatalhöyük: Re-Shuffling, Re-Location and
Migration as the Means of Mitigating Social Unease in the Late
Neolithic', in 6000 BC, ed. Peter F. Biehl and Eva Rosenstock
(Cambridge University Press, 2022), 136-57,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781107337640.011.↩
7. Justin Jennings et al., 'Cities, Surplus, and the State: A Re-Evaluation',
Journal of Urban Archaeology, 2021, 19-21,
https://doi.org/10.1484/J.JUA.5.126592; Jennings, Killing Civilization,
chap. 7.↩
8. Jennings et al., 'Cities, Surplus, and the State', 19-21; Jennings,
Killing Civilization, chap. 7.↩
9. Jennings et al., 'Cities, Surplus, and the State', 20-21.↩
10. For an overview, see David Wengrow, 'The Origins of Civic Life - A
Global Perspective', Origini: Preistoria e Protostoria Delle Civiltà

Antiche - Prehistory and Protohistory of Ancient Civilizations 42, no.
2 (2018): 25-44.↩
11. He Nu, 'Taosi: An Archaeological Example of Urbanization as a
Political Center in Prehistoric China', Archaeological Research in Asia
14 (2018): 21, 26, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ara.2017.03.001.↩
12. Ibid., 24; He Nu, 'The Longshan Period Site of Taosi in Southern
Shanxi Province', in A Companion to Chinese Archaeology, ed. Anne
P. Underhill (Wiley, 2013), 269.↩
13. Jennings et al., 'Cities, Surplus, and the State', 22.↩
14. David Cheetham and Jeffrey P. Blomster, 'Materializing the San
Lorenzo Olmecs', in The Early Olmec and Mesoamerica, ed. Jeffrey P.
Blomster and David Cheetham (Cambridge University Press, 2017),
9-36, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316228098.002; Jennings et al.,
'Cities, Surplus, and the State', 21-3.↩
15. Some contend it may have allowed the use of forearms and even
paddles.↩
16. Linda M. Nicholas and Gary M. Feinman, 'The Foundation of Monte
Albán, Intensification, and Growth: Coactive Processes and Joint
Production', Frontiers in Political Science 4 (2022): 4-6,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2022.805047.↩
17. There was also a temporary disruption to its collective rule in 200 CE
as Monte Albán expanded. This was reversed within decades, for what
exact reason we do not know.↩
18. Gary M. Feinman and Linda M. Nicholas, 'After Monte Albán in the
Central Valleys of Oaxaca: A Reassessment', in Beyond Collapse:
Archaeological Perspectives on Resilience, Revitalization, and
Transformation in Complex Societies, ed. Ronald K. Faulseit (Southern
Illinois University Press, 2016), 59. For an accessible overview of the
Monte Albán site, see Jennings, Killing Civilization, chap. 9.↩
19. It may have been the seat of an empire, or just an oversized city. For an
overview of the debates about whether Teotihuacan was centralized or
decentralized, see Tom Froese, Carlos Gershenson, and Linda R.
Manzanilla, 'Can Government Be Self-Organized? A Mathematical
Model of the Collective Social Organization of Ancient Teotihuacan,

Central Mexico', PLOS ONE 9, no. 10 (2014): e109966,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0109966.↩
20. George L. Cowgill, Ancient Teotihuacan: Early Urbanism in Central
Mexico (Cambridge University Press, 2015); Kenn Hirth, David M.
Carballo, and Bárbara Arroyo, eds., Teotihuacan: The World Beyond
the City (Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection, 2020).
Smith et al. estimate the Gini coefficient of Teotihuacan to be 0.12
(Michael E. Smith et al., 'Quantitative Measures of Wealth Inequality
in Ancient Central Mexican Communities', Advances in
Archaeological Practice 2, no. 4 (2014): 311-23,
https://doi.org/10.7183/2326-3768.2.4.XX, 321). In contrast, the Gini
of Denmark is around 0.35.↩
21. For good overviews, see Guy Middleton, Understanding Collapse:
Ancient History and Modern Myths (Cambridge University Press,
2017), 222-43; Deborah L. Nichols and Ryan H. Collins, 'Episodes of
the Feathered Serpent: Aztec Imperialism and Collapse', in How
Worlds Collapse, ed. Miguel Centeno et al. (Routledge, 2023),
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003331384-12, 174-6. The elite revolt
theory is best advocated for by Linda R. Manzanilla, 'Cooperation and
Tensions in Multiethnic Corporate Societies Using Teotihuacan,
Central Mexico, as a Case Study', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 112, no. 30 (2015): 9210-15,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1419881112. On climate change, see
Jungjae Park, Roger Byrne, and Harald Böhnel, 'Late Holocene
Climate Change in Central Mexico and the Decline of Teotihuacan',
Annals of the American Association of Geographers 109, no. 1 (2019):
104-20, https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1488577.↩
22. For an overview, see Middleton, Understanding Collapse.↩
23. Justin Jennings and Timothy K. Earle, 'Urbanization, State Formation,
and Cooperation: A Reappraisal', Current Anthropology 57, no. 4
(2016): 474-93, https://doi.org/10.1086/687510.↩
24. John Wayne Janusek, Ancient Tiwanaku (Cambridge University Press,
2008), 191.↩
25. Kenny Sims, 'After State Collapse: How Tumilaca Communities
Developed in the Upper Moquegua Valley, Peru', in After Collapse:
The Regeneration of Complex Societies, ed. Glenn M. Schwartz and

John Jackson Nichols (University of Arizona Press, 2006), 114-37;
Nicola Sharratt, 'Collapse and Cohesion: Building Community in the
Aftermath of Tiwanaku State Breakdown', World Archaeology 48, no.
1 (2016): 144-63, https://doi.org/10.1080/00438243.2015.1110043;
Janusek, Ancient Tiwanaku. For decent overviews of recent
archaeology on collapse in the site, see Middleton, Understanding
Collapse, 276-98; Guy D. Middleton, 'Collapse Studies in
Archaeology from 2012 to 2023', Journal of Archaeological Research,
9 (2024): 33-5, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10814-024-09196-4.↩
26. See Jason Nesbitt's coverage of Tiwanaku in Kemp et al., 'Societal
Collapse as a Powershift'.↩
27. For an overview, see Middleton, Understanding Collapse, 276-98.
Pukura was built around a thirty-two-metre-high terraced platform that
was used for rituals. It was a publicly accessible monument. The first
signs of inequality emerge with some trying to restrict access to the
platform and control the production of obsidian, polychrome pottery,
and stone sculptures. The site was rapidly abandoned as people
returned to autonomous villages. See Jennings and Earle,
'Urbanization, State Formation, and Cooperation', 478; Janusek,
Ancient Tiwanaku, 88-95.↩
28. I've left Taosi and Çatalhöyük out of this graph, as they are far older
and extend the timeline too far.↩
29. There were differences: Çatalhöyük was not a city and its
abandonment took centuries, while Tiwanaku was a state that fell apart
in decades.↩
30. Pauketat, Cahokia, 131-4; DuVal, Native Nations, chap. 1. It also may
have helped decrease conflict. Like most later empires, the borders
around Cahokia's territory became hotter with conflict, while its own
territory was cooled with less violence. Some have even compared it to
the peace that the Roman Empire provided to conquered peoples: the
Pax Romana. However, the idea of Pax Cahokia is currently
disputed.↩
31. For an overview of the timeline of Cahokia and key contributors to its
collapse, see Benson, Pauketat, and Cook, 'Cahokia's Boom and Bust
in the Context of Climate Change'; Tainter, 'Cahokia'; DuVal, Native
Nations, chap. 2.↩

32. Note that, as covered earlier, 'Goliath' does not mean 'state'. Few
would argue that Cahokia, the Huhugam, the Puebloans, or the
multiple mound-based Mississippi mini-kingdom ever became fully
fledged states. That doesn't change the fact that they were becoming
unequal dominance hierarchies in which rules were imposed through
force.↩
33. Pauketat, Cahokia, chap. 10.↩
34. Moundville looks much like Cahokia but with some important
differences. The most noticeable is the absence of any sign of slavery,
coerced labour, or human sacrifice. ↩
35. Vernon James Knight Jr and Vincas P. Steponaitis, 'A New History of
Moundville', in Archaeology of the Moundville Chiefdom (University
of Alabama Press, 1998), 1-25.↩
36. For an overview, see DuVal, Native Nations, chaps. 1, 2.↩
37. In the final stages of the collapse the most populous areas were having
to hunt more and different kinds of animals, suggesting they were
running low on food.↩
38. On the collapse period, consult Rebecca M. Dean, 'Hunting
Intensification and the Hohokam "Collapse"', Journal of
Anthropological Archaeology 26, no. 1 (2007): 109-32,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2006.03.010; J. Brett Hill et al., 'The
"Collapse" of Cooperative Hohokam Irrigation in the Lower Salt River
Valley', Journal of the Southwest 57, no. 4 (2015): 609-74; DuVal,
Native Nations, chap. 2.↩
39. David J. Hally, 'The Settlement Patterns of Mississippian Chiefdoms
in Northern Georgia', in Settlement Pattern Studies in the Americas:
Fifty Years Since Virú, ed. Brian R. Billman and Gary M. Feinman
(Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, 1999), chap. 8; John H. Blitz,
'Mississippian Chiefdoms and the Fission-Fusion Process', American
Antiquity 64, no. 4 (1999): 577-92, https://doi.org/10.2307/2694206.
For the model of prestige and status being central to both individual
and group warfare in the Mississippian kingdoms, see Karl T. Steinen,
'Ambushes, Raids, and Palisades: Mississippian Warfare in the Interior
Southeast', Southeastern Archaeology 11, no. 2 (1992): 132-7. On a
lack of control mechanisms, see Jaeweon Shin et al., 'Scale and

Information-Processing Thresholds in Holocene Social Evolution',
Nature Communications 11, no. 1 (2020): 2394,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16035-9. Control mechanisms in
the original research are framed as 'information processing'
mechanisms, such as text, money, writing, and an administrative
hierarchy.↩
40. Hayden, The Power of Ritual in Prehistory; Hayden, The Power of
Feasts.↩
41. Benson, Pauketat, and Cook, 'Cahokia's Boom and Bust in the Context
of Climate Change'; David P. Pompeani et al., 'Severe Little Ice Age
Drought in the Midcontinental United States During the Mississippian
Abandonment of Cahokia', Scientific Reports 11, no. 1 (2021): 13829,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-92900-x. For an overview of
temperature change in the US south-west and the predominance of
cooler, more drought-prone conditions, see Andrew Gillreath-Brown,
R. Kyle Bocinsky, and Timothy A. Kohler, 'A Low-Frequency
Summer Temperature Reconstruction for the United States Southwest,
3000 BC-AD 2000', The Holocene 34, no. 4 (2024): 451-66,
https://doi.org/10.1177/09596836231219482.↩
42. Washington Matthews, 'Noqoìlpi, the Gambler: A Navajo Myth',
Journal of American Folklore 2, no. 5 (1889): 89,
https://doi.org/10.2307/533316. Much like modern investors he turned
gambling into enormous wealth. See also Stephen H. Lekson and
Catherine M. Cameron, 'The Abandonment of Chaco Canyon, the
Mesa Verde Migrations, and the Reorganization of the Pueblo World',
Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 14, no. 2 (1995): 184-202,
https://doi.org/10.1006/jaar.1995.1010. There are many well-known
problems with oral traditions, including their lack of precision in
chronology (e.g. a lack of precise dates), often wide variation in tales,
and problems with non-locals interpreting highly contextual stories.
Despite this, there is an emerging acknowledgement that oral traditions
can be as reliable and valuable as written texts if used wisely. For
some accessible discussions, see Stephen E. Nash, 'The
Underestimated Reliability of Oral Histories', The Atlantic, 22
September 2018, www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/09/dead-
sea-scrolls-oral-written-history/571039/; Scott, The Art of Not Being

Governed, chap. 6.5. Oral traditions are now regularly used across the
historical sciences. ↩
43. Joshua B. Nelson, Progressive Traditions: Identity in Cherokee
Literature and Culture (University of Oklahoma Press, 2014), 132-
3.↩
44. Lynn S. Teague, 'Prehistory and the Traditions of the O'Odham and
Hopi', KIVA 58, no. 4 (1993): 438-42,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00231940.1993.11758220.↩
45. For a summary of the egalitarian power-sharing arrangements post-
collapse, see DuVal, Native Nations, chap. 2.↩
46. I'm indebted to Tim Kohler for raising this hypothesis with me during
an initial round of reviews for this book.↩
47. Blitz, 'Mississippian Chiefdoms and the Fission-Fusion Process'.↩
48. Jennings et al., 'Cities, Surplus, and the State'; Jennings, Killing
Civilization; Jennings and Earle, 'Urbanization, State Formation, and
Cooperation'.↩
49. Christopher I. Beckwith, Empires of the Silk Road: A History of
Central Eurasia from the Bronze Age to the Present (Princeton
University Press, 2011).↩
50. Gary M. Feinman and Linda M. Nicholas, 'Framing Inequality in
Ancient Civilizations', in Poverty and Inequality in Early
Civilizations, ed. Richard Bussman and Tobias Helms (Verlag Dr.
Rudolf Habelt GmbH, 2020), 107-17, 113.↩
51. Dan Lawrence et al., 'Long-Term Trends in Settlement Persistence in
Southwest Asia: Implications for Sustainable Urbanism, Past, Present
and Future', Urban Studies 62, no. 3 (2023): 543-59,
https://doi.org/10.1177/00420980231161245. One caveat here is that
their measurement of centralization and hierarchy (what they call
'complexity') is time. That is, in general, settlements tend to become
more unequal, hierarchical, stratified, and war-like as centuries pass.
Compare Çatalhöyük to the Assyrian Empire. While imperfect, this is a
decent proxy, and one of the few we can use, given the available
evidence. It could also highlight an additional cause for declining
longevity: conquest. As the first Goliaths arose, they razed and sacked
many nearby settlements. For many that remained, the incentive to flee

from these targets must have been strong. We can then expect that,
over time, unequal settlements would start to become more long-
lasting while egalitarian ones would lose their longevity. While this is
the best evidence we have for now, we should stay sceptical. The
analysis is based on the sparse remains of ceramics, which can easily
overlook a hiatus in occupation of one or two centuries (personal
communication from Tim Kohler).↩
52. There is an interesting preliminary analysis of hundreds of sites
covering 20,000 years (using the GINI Database) which suggests that
inequality is slightly correlated with greater longevity. This correlation
increases over time as settlements get bigger. Larger settlements in
larger systems also tend to last longer. See Dan Lawrence et al., 'Two
Sides of Sustainability: Comparing Trends in Wealth Inequality and
Settlement Persistence in Preindustrial Societies', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (forthcoming). At first blush, this may
seem to be in tension with the argument. That's not the case. First, it
can't tell as much about the first Goliaths per se since it is covering a
far larger span of time, including after Goliaths become established
and spread. Second, the authors themselves highlight that this is not a
case of inequality leading to more persistent settlements over time.
Instead, to me, the most likely explanation here is that the long-lasting
settlements are the centres of larger systems of extraction (Goliaths).
As time goes on and Goliaths become more established, these
settlements become less likely to be abandoned. They eat and destroy
smaller, more egalitarian settlements (hence decreasing their
persistence) and become more embedded in the culture and landscape.
As we'll see in Part II, Goliaths both tend to be resurrected (meaning
big sites are rarely completely abandoned) and to spread at the expense
of other societies.↩
53. Stéphen Rostain et al., 'Two Thousand Years of Garden Urbanism in
the Upper Amazon', Science 383, no. 6679 (2024): 183-9,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.adi6317; Heiko Prümers et al., 'Lidar
Reveals Pre-Hispanic Low-Density Urbanism in the Bolivian
Amazon', Nature 606, no. 7913 (2022): 325-8,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04780-4.↩

CHAPTER 6: GOLIATH RISES
1. Pauline Wilson Wiessner, Akii Tumu, and Nitze Pupu, Historical
Vines: Enga Networks of Exchange, Ritual, and Warfare in Papua New
Guinea (Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998).↩
2. Adapted from Fuller et al., 'Convergent Evolution and Parallelism in
Plant Domestication Revealed by an Expanding Archaeological
Record', fig. 1. Note, this only includes archaeologically documented
cases, not biogeographically inferred. These don't change the
underlying conclusions. Eastern Tibet domesticated buckwheat and
yak. While it did eventually develop a state - the Tibetan Empire in
618 CE - this was after interaction with the Chinese. Hence it usually
isn't considered an original state. Amazonia cultivated peanuts and
manioc, neither of which are effective Goliath fuel. The western
Savannah had cowpea, fonio, and African rice. It is in the direct
vicinity of the western Sahel, and African rice was a staple of the
Ghana Empire. The eastern Savannah domesticated cattle and
sorghum. Notably, domesticated cattle did lead to hierarchical
pastoralist groups, and eventually confederations of raiders known as
the Ṣanhājah.↩
3. In most of the literature these are usually referred to as 'pristine states'.
I've used the term 'original' here instead since it is more intuitive and
avoids unnecessary positive connotations.↩
4. The original version of 'Circumscription Theory' proposed by
Carneiro emphasized that such conditions created a pressure for war.
However, this has been recently challenged. See Zinkina, Korotayev,
and Andreev, 'Circumscription Theory of the Origins of the State'.
Most initial states did not have neighbours to conquer. Instead, the
stronger version of this is that people simply had less ability to flee
from a centralized elite. See Scott, Against the Grain, 150-52.↩
5. People could and did still, of course, travel across and on rivers. The
point here is that both geography and population density generally
constrained (although never entirely prevented) movement.↩
6. Peter Turchin et al., 'Disentangling the Evolutionary Drivers of Social
Complexity: A Comprehensive Test of Hypotheses', Science Advances
8, no. 25 (2022): 7-8, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abn3517.↩

7. Domestication refers to a co-evolutionary process in which one species
shapes the fitness of another to gain more resources or services. For
plants, this meant a human-managed environment selected for plants,
especially specific cereals and grains. The domestication process did
not start with the Holocene. The use of fire to prepare food dates to
around 780,000 years ago, several hundred thousand years before
Homo sapiens. It is thought that around 25,000 years ago both the kill-
off of large mammals and new tools used for foraging changed both
the environment and which crops had a competitive advantage. Plant
domestication was not an intentional or rapid process, at least not to
begin with. The initial changes to cereals, such as larger, non-
shattering seeds, would have been largely imperceptible to the eyes of
early farmers; see M. D. Purugganan, 'What Is Domestication?',
Trends in Ecology & Evolution 37, no. 8 (2022): 663-71,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2022.04.006; Allaby et al., 'Genetic
Revelations of a New Paradigm of Plant Domestication as a Landscape
Level Process', 324-8; Zohar et al., 'Evidence for the Cooking of Fish
780,000 Years Ago at Gesher Benot Ya'aqov, Israel'.↩
8. Joram Mayshar, Omer Moav, and Luigi Pascali, 'The Origin of the
State: Land Productivity or Appropriability?', Journal of Political
Economy 130, no. 4 (2022): 1091, https://doi.org/10.1086/718372.↩
9. Thilo R. Huning and Fabian Wahl, 'You Reap What You Know:
Appropriability and the Origin of European States', European Journal
of Political Economy 79 (2023): 102432,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2023.102432.↩
10. Scott, Against the Grain, 128.↩
11. Timothy A. Kohler et al., 'Greater Post-Neolithic Wealth Disparities in
Eurasia Than in North America and Mesoamerica', Nature 551, no.
7682 (2017): 619-22, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature24646. The
domestication of animals appears to have been much more of a
revolution. It was speedy and most likely intentional. ↩
12. Jared Diamond, 'Evolution, Consequences and Future of Plant and
Animal Domestication', Nature 418, no. 6898 (2002): 700-707,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01019; Thomas Cucchi and Benjamin
Arbuckle, 'Animal Domestication: From Distant Past to Current
Development and Issues', Animal Frontiers 11, no. 3 (2021): 6,

https://doi.org/10.1093/af/vfab013. The extinction of megafauna -
such as the dire wolf, mammoth, and diprotodon (essentially a 3.5-
tonne, 1.8-metre-tall wombat) - driven by both climate change and, to
a lesser extent, human pressure, also influenced the spread of
domesticates.↩
13. Adapted from Scott, The Art of Not Being Governed, table 3. I've used
Scott's estimates for labour intensity, added in a subjective judgement
of visibility, and specified his estimates of storability (refining these to
month and year estimates, rather than low/medium/high
judgements).↩
14. It may have even been a pristine state, although this is disputed. See H.
J. M. Claessen, 'The Emergence of Pristine States', Social Evolution &
History 15, no. 1 (2016): 25.↩
15. C. Leipe et al., 'Discontinuous Spread of Millet Agriculture in Eastern
Asia and Prehistoric Population Dynamics', Science Advances 5, no. 9
(2019): 9, https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax6225.↩
16. Adam S. Green makes the strongest case for the egalitarian order of
the Indus in 'Killing the Priest-King: Addressing Egalitarianism in the
Indus Civilization', Journal of Archaeological Research 29, no. 2
(2021): 153-202, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10814-020-09147-9.↩
17. Peter Frankopan, The Earth Transformed: An Untold History (Alfred
A. Knopf, 2023), 93. ↩
18. Leo von Geusau, Akha Internal History: Marginalization and the
Ethnic Alliance System (Curzon, 2011), 134.↩
19. Scott, The Art of Not Being Governed. It's a perspective that isn't
without controversy. For critiques, see Victor Lieberman, 'A Zone of
Refuge in Southeast Asia? Reconceptualizing Interior Spaces', Journal
of Global History 5, no. 2 (2010): 333-46,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1740022810000112; Jean Michaud, 'Editorial
- Zomia and Beyond', Journal of Global History 5, no. 2 (2010): 187-
214, https://doi.org/10.1017/S1740022810000057. However, even
these critiques still usually praise the work and simply suggest that it is
more complex than Scott often proposes. For instance, people fled to
Zomia to escape not just states but also popular conflict. These are
important nuances to Scott's argument, not refutations. ↩

20. On the Great Dismal Swamp and maroonage in the antebellum, see
Sylviane A. Diouf, Slavery's Exiles (New York University Press,
2014). It's worth noting that some even grew lootable resources such
as rice. A key point here is that each source of Goliath fuel will push a
society towards a Goliath structure, but it doesn't automatically create
a Goliath. A group with lootable resources but many exit options, few
monopolizable weapons, and strong egalitarian ethics may never
develop a Goliath.↩
21. Angela M. Chira, Russell D. Gray, and Carlos A. Botero, 'Geography
Is Not Destiny: A Quantitative Test of Diamond's Axis of Orientation
Hypothesis', Evolutionary Human Sciences 6 (2024): e5,
https://doi.org/10.1017/ehs.2023.34.↩
22. Mayshar, Moav, and Pascali, 'The Origin of the State', 1097, 1138.↩
23. Scott, The Art of Not Being Governed, chap. 6.↩
24. This art of not being governed looks similar to the nomadic egalitarian
hunter-gatherers of today. This has led some to claim that most hunter-
gatherers, including the egalitarian Ju'/hoansi and central African
foragers, are simply like the peoples of Zomia: their egalitarian,
nomadic way of life is a way of avoiding state capture, rather than a
window onto life in the Palaeolithic. For instance, many have claimed
that central African hunter-gatherers live in hostile lands because they
were pushed there by Bantu farmers who forcibly took all the arable
land. This view is mistaken. Comparisons of genetic and
archaeological data against reconstructions of the climate show that
central African foragers have inhabited their current areas of residence
since 120,000 years ago. Their genes, instruments, and languages all
seem to have ancient origins rather than having been influenced by or
adopted from Bantu farmers. And, as covered earlier, many of the
nomadic-egalitarian foragers of Africa seem to have genetically
diverged from most of humanity over a hundred thousand years ago.
The people of Zomia are simply adopting an old way of life which
prevented rulers and inequalities from emerging within a society. It
just so happened to have the added benefit of preventing being
captured by rulers from outside of a society. This scepticism is best
expressed by James C. Scott in his review of Jared Diamond's The
World Until Yesterday (Scott, 'Crops, Towns, Government', London

Review of Books, 21 November 2013, www.lrb.co.uk/the-
paper/v35/n22/james-c.-scott/crops-towns-government). He finishes
his critique with the line 'We have virtually no credible evidence about
the world until yesterday and, until we do, the only defensible
intellectual position is to shut up.' While Scott may be my favourite
intellectual, he is simply, profoundly wrong on this one. For the
evidence on central African hunter-gatherers, see Padilla-Iglesias et al.,
'Population Interconnectivity over the Past 120,000 Years Explains
Distribution and Diversity of Central African Hunter-Gatherers';
Padilla-Iglesias et al., 'Cultural Evolution of Central African Hunter-
Gatherers Reflects a Deep History of Interconnectivity'. Essentially,
anything from Camilla Padilla-Iglesias on human origins is
excellent.↩
25. Echoed by the archaeologist Bruce Trigger in his Understanding Early
Civilizations. He analysed seven early societies (Egypt, Mesopotamia,
North China, the Maya, the Inka/Inca, the Aztecs, and the Yoruba in
Benin), noting the close similarities in basic social structure. The
evolution I'm talking about here is usually referred to as
'macrocultural evolution' or 'cultural macroevolution': that is, the
evolution of culture not just at a small scale, but at the largest level of
states and societies. This is usually driven by competition between
groups, or 'multi-level selection' (a process whereby natural selection
operates on the level not just of genes or individuals, but of groups at
the highest level). For a general discussion, see Russell D. Gray and
Joseph Watts, 'Cultural Macroevolution Matters', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 114, no. 30 (2017): 7846-52. To avoid
the jargon I'll be using 'Goliath evolution', or occasionally 'cultural
evolution', rather than cultural macroevolution.↩
26. What counted as a day trip depended on the land you had to traverse
and how you could move your troops through it. Roads and horses, or
ships upon easily navigable rivers helped; forests, marshes, swamps,
hills, and mountains hindered. A lack of technology or unwelcoming
terrain could all create further 'distance' between rulers and their
potential subjects. See Charles S. Spencer, 'Territorial Expansion and
Primary State Formation', Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 107, no. 16 (2010): 7119,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1002470107. I've excluded Spencer's

cases of the Moche in Peru and the Indus Valley. There is too much
debate over whether the Moche were formally a state, and too little
evidence that the Indus Valley Civilization was even hierarchical, let
alone a state. On the role of geography, see Mann, The Sources of
Social Power I, chap. 4; Scott, Against the Grain, chap. 1; Scott, The
Art of Not Being Governed, chap. 5.↩
27. On how cultural evolution operates at the level of intergroup
competition, see Henrich, The Secret of Our Success, chap. 10. The
strongest critique of the idea of larger populations driving cultural
evolution comes from K. Vaesen et al., 'Population Size Does Not
Explain Past Changes in Cultural Complexity', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 113, 16 (2016): E2241-7,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1520288113. Others have even suggested
that population size can inhibit cultural evolution (N. Fay et al.,
'Increasing Population Size Can Inhibit Cumulative Cultural
Evolution', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 14
(2019): 6726-31, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1811413116). Yet, that
is based on a single, small experiment just using the task of paper-
plane construction. ↩
28. Hopefully it's clear by now that these rarely came as one single
package and there were exceptions. As we've already covered, the Inca
had a large-scale empire but no writing. We're dealing with strong,
general trends here.↩
29. Christina Cheung et al., 'Diets, Social Roles, and Geographical Origins
of Sacrificial Victims at the Royal Cemetery at Yinxu, Shang China:
New Evidence from Stable Carbon, Nitrogen, and Sulfur Isotope
Analysis', Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 48 (2017): 28-9,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2017.05.006.↩
30. Michael Winkelman, 'Political and Demographic-Ecological
Determinants of Institutionalised Human Sacrifice', Anthropological
Forum 24, no. 1 (2014): 47,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00664677.2014.860888. Another factor is
political organization through alliances, although this is tricky since
many alliances are created through coercion.↩
31. Joseph Watts et al., 'Ritual Human Sacrifice Promoted and Sustained
the Evolution of Stratified Societies', Nature 532, no. 7598 (2016):

228-31, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature17159.↩
32. Peter Turchin, Ultrasociety: How 10,000 Years of War Made Humans
the Greatest Cooperators on Earth (Beresta Books, 2016).↩
33. David Graeber and Marshall Sahlins, On Kings (Hau Books, 2017),
181-2.↩
34. M. Fiskesjö, 'On the "Raw" and the "Cooked" Barbarians of Imperial
China', Inner Asia, 1, no. 2 (1999): 139-68,
https://doi.org/10.1163/146481799793648004; Emma Dench,
'Barbarian', in the Oxford Classical Dictionary, ed. Thomas
Wiedermann (Oxford University Press, 2022),
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.1051. For a
broader discussion, see Jennings, Killing Civilization. ↩
35. On the importance of ideological integration being used to create
lasting states and empires, see Jack A. Goldstone and John F. Haldon,
'Ancient States, Empires, and Exploitation: Problems and
Perspectives', in The Dynamics of Ancient Empires, ed. Ian Morris and
Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press, 2009), 10-15,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780195371581.003.0001. We don't know
what beliefs the Natufians adopted to justify their rising inequalities,
nor what the priests of Cahokia claimed to be.
Not everyone believed the stories. Across cultures we have regular
signs that slaves didn't think their masters were superior, peasants
didn't think highly of their lords, and citizens didn't believe their
emperor was actually a god. In the antebellum South one curse uttered
by slaves was 'I pray that death and disease shall be forever with them
and that their crops shall not multiply'. Nor were states all-powerful.
Early kings often went to great lengths to showcase their strength, yet
in reality they frequently had little impact on the day-to-day affairs of
most people. Their boasts were a sign more of weakness than strength.
In Southeast Asia, kingdoms and empires were often just seasonal.
During the heavy rains of the monsoon they had little influence beyond
the palace walls. Despite this, their influence, and their power over the
belief of their citizens, grew over generations and centuries. See James
C. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance (Yale University
Press, 1990), 34. The curse is recounted by the black novelist and
anthropologist Zora Neale Hurston.↩

36. Ian Morris et al., Foragers, Farmers, and Fossil Fuels: How Human
Values Evolve (Princeton University Press, 2015). For an overly
detailed exploration of how ideologies throughout history have
justified inequality, read Thomas Piketty, Capital and Ideology, trans.
Arthur Goldhammer (The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
2020).↩
37. Jonathan J. B. Mijs, 'The Paradox of Inequality: Income Inequality and
Belief in Meritocracy Go Hand in Hand', Socio-Economic Review 19,
no. 1 (2021): 7-35, https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwy051.↩
38. The transition from animism to monotheistic religion is covered in
Hervey C. Peoples, Pavel Duda, and Frank W. Marlowe, 'Hunter-
Gatherers and the Origins of Religion', Human Nature 27, no. 3
(2016): 261-82, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12110-016-9260-0. Granted,
this is an understudied area, but this is by far the best evidence we
have. For the analysis of big kings preceding big gods, see Harvey
Whitehouse et al., 'Testing the Big Gods Hypothesis With Global
Historical Data: A Review and "Retake"', Religion, Brain & Behavior
13, no. 2 (2023): 124-66,
https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599X.2022.2074085.↩
39. A similar point is made by Michael Mann in The Sources of Social
Power I, chap. 3.↩
40. A. E. J. Miller et al., 'Gender Differences in Strength and Muscle Fiber
Characteristics', European Journal of Applied Physiology and
Occupational Physiology 66, no. 3 (1993): 254-62,
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00235103. For an indication of what this
means, just look at the differences in world records for strength-based
sports. The male deadlift and bench-press world records are 501kg and
355kg. For females it is 325kg and 207.5kg. There are similar gaps for
Olympic weightlifting as well as javelin, shot-put, and a range of other
strength-based sports.↩
41. A similar point is made in Nancy Lindisfarne and Jonathan Neale, Why
Men? A Human History of Violence and Inequality (Hurst, 2023),
chap. 9. Initial physical differences could compound into large social
difference in societies where violence was key.↩
42. Valerie M. Hudson, Donna Lee Bowen, and Perpetua Lynne Nielsen,
The First Political Order: How Sex Shapes Governance and National

Security Worldwide (Columbia University Press, 2020), chap. 2. For a
similar account of the importance of patrilocality, but with less
emphasis on violence, see Anil Ananthaswamy and Kate Douglas,
'The Origins of the Patriarchy', New Scientist 238, no. 3174 (2018):
34-5, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0262-4079(18)30707-3.↩
43. Angela Saini, The Patriarchs: The Origins of Inequality (Beacon
Press, 2023), 112.↩
44. Eric Berkowitz, Sex and Punishment: Four Thousand Years of Judging
Desire (Westbourne Press, 2013), 19-21.↩
45. A similar case for the origins of patriarchy is made by Alice Evans, a
senior lecturer at King's College London and a leading expert on the
global history of patriarchy. She points to inheritable wealth (such as
land, domesticated animals, and grain), conquest by male-dominated
cultures, and religion as three key factors (among others) that drove
the emergence of patriarchy. See Alice Evans, 'Ten Thousand Years of
Patriarchy!', 3 June 2022, https://www.ggd.world/p/ten-thousand-
years-of-patriarchy-1.↩
46. Monika Karmin et al., 'A Recent Bottleneck of Y Chromosome
Diversity Coincides with a Global Change in Culture', Genome
Research 25, no. 4 (2015): 461-2,
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.186684.114.↩
47. Shin et al., 'Scale and Information-Processing Thresholds in Holocene
Social Evolution'.↩
48. Flannery and Marcus, The Creation of Inequality, chap. 10.↩
49. Timothy Earle, 'The Evolution of Chiefdoms', Current Anthropology
30, no. 1 (1989): 87, https://doi.org/10.1086/203717. Earle was
technically referring to 'chiefdoms'.↩
50. Shin et al., 'Scale and Information-Processing Thresholds in Holocene
Social Evolution'. This echoes the thesis of the Stanford historian and
archaeologist Ian Morris. In Why the West Rules - For Now he argues
that when states grew too large without the right measures they often
stagnated and collapsed, and he tracks imperial power over time (by
their energy capture, information processing (such as written
materials), urbanism, and military strength). Morris spotted a pattern:
states in both the east (China) and west (Europe and the Near East)

repeatedly hit a 'ceiling' to their power before collapsing. Morris also
suggests that Rome and the later Song Dynasty hit a 'hard ceiling' of
what was possible for an agrarian empire. See Ian Morris, Why the
West Rules - For Now: The Patterns of History and What They Reveal
About the Future (Profile Books, 2011). Goliath evolution and
Goliath's Curse provide one way of explaining this pattern.↩
CHAPTER 7: GOLIATH'S CURSE
1. We used a technique called 'survival analysis'. For more details, read
Marten Scheffer et al., 'The Vulnerability of Aging States: A Survival
Analysis Across Premodern Societies', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 120, no. 48 (2023),
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218834120. There are numerous caveats
to keep in mind. First, these terminations range from relatively
bloodless coups to deep collapses. Second, the numbers are based on
broadly accepted start and end dates in historical and archaeological
accounts. These are often disputed. For instance, did the Eastern
Roman Empire (the Byzantine) end in 1453 with the fall of its capital,
Constantinople, with the sack of Constantinople and partitioning of its
territories by crusaders in 1204, or with a large-scale loss of territory to
the Islamic caliphates during the seventh century? To help address this,
we used both upper and lower estimates for both the beginning and
end of a state. On the Crisis Database study, see Daniel Hoyer et al.,
'All Crises Are Unhappy in Their Own Way: The Role of Societal
Instability in Shaping the Past', preprint, SocArXiv, 15 February 2024,
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/rk4gd. One previous study of forty-two
empires found a different 'ageless' pattern of mortality: that is an
empire was as likely to collapse in its first year as its 100th. See S.
Arbesman, 'The Life-Spans of Empires', Historical Methods: A
Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History, 44, no. 3 (2011):
127-9, https://doi.org/10.1080/01615440.2011.577733. Notably, that
database is almost eight times smaller than the MOROS database and
covers far less time, although this ageless pattern of mortality is what
we see in businesses and the extinction of past species in the fossil
record. On companies, see M. I. G. Daepp et al., 'The Mortality of
Companies', Journal of the Royal Society Interface 12, no. 106 (2015),

https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.0120. The pattern in fossils was first
discovered by the biologist Leigh Van Valen and is usually attributed
to the 'Red Queen Effect': the constant race to adapt to a changing
environment and competition means that a species (or company) can
die as a result of one mistake. ↩
2. Marten Scheffer et al., 'Loss of Resilience Preceded Transformations
of Pre-Hispanic Pueblo Societies', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 118, no. 18 (2021): e2024397118,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2024397118; Sean S. Downey, W. Randall
Haas Jr, and Stephen J. Shennan, 'European Neolithic Societies
Showed Early Warning Signals of Population Collapse', Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 113, no. 35 (2016): 9751-6,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1602504113.↩
3. For an overview, see Scheidel, The Great Leveler. Scheidel covers a
series of collapses from different periods and regions: the Tang
Dynasty, the Western Roman Empire, the Lowland Maya, the Bronze
Age Mediterranean, Pre-Columbian Americas, the first post-imperial
period in ancient Egypt, and, most recently, Somalia. Analysts of
inequality disagree over the peaceful mechanisms of wealth
redistribution, but largely agree on the more sinister ones. See Pim de
Zwart, 'The Global History of Inequality', International Review of
Social History 64, no. 2 (2019): 309-23. Similarly, former World Bank
economist Branko Milanović referred to the 'malignant mechanisms'
of equalization, such as civil strife, war, and epidemics. See Milanović,
Global Inequality: A New Approach for the Age of Globalization
(Harvard University Press, 2016). For instance, the role of the two
world wars in reversing the wealth imbalances in the earlier twentieth
century is well documented; see Thomas Piketty, Capital in the
Twenty-First Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer (The Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press, 2017); Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel
Saez, 'Inequality in the Long Run', Science, 344, no. 6186 (2014):
838-43, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1251936. Others have more
recently contended that for natural disasters, such as pandemics,
levelling is not an automatic outcome. Many shocks since the medieval
period have exacerbated rather than alleviated wealth inequality. The
result depends on pre-existing institutions. If economic and political
power is skewed, then elites can capitalize on a shock to further their

advantages. See Bas van Bavel and Marten Scheffer, 'Historical
Effects of Shocks on Inequality: The Great Leveler Revisited',
Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 8, no. 1 (2021):
Article 76, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-021-00763-4. However, this
analysis is for more moderate external blows.↩
4. Stasavage, The Decline and Rise of Democracy, chap. 1; Kohler and
Smith, Ten Thousand Years of Inequality, chap. 11.↩
5. This is often known as the 'Matthew Principle', from Matthew 25:29:
'For to everyone who has will more be given, and he will have
abundance; but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken
away.'↩
6. Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century; Peter Turchin, End
Times: Elites, Counter-Elites, and the Path of Political Disintegration
(Penguin, 2023).↩
7. Branko Milanović, Peter H. Lindert, and Jeffrey G. Williamson, 'Pre-
Industrial Inequality', Economic Journal 121, no. 551 (2011): fig. 2,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2010.02403.x. For an accessible
summary, see Max Roser, 'How Unequal Were Pre-Industrial
Societies?', Our World in Data, 2 December 2013,
https://ourworldindata.org/how-unequal-were-pre-industrial-
societies.↩
8. Branko Milanović, 'How Rich Were the Rich? An Empirically Based
Taxonomy of Pre-Industrial Bases of Wealth', Explorations in
Economic History 93 (2024): 101592,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2024.101592. The estimate that the 1 per
cent had an even bigger share of wealth is my own. It's a robust trend
across countries today and historically that wealth inequality is larger
than income inequality. That is for the simple reason that wealth,
whether it be in land, gold, or stocks, tends to be more concentrated
than income. For modern billionaires such as Elon Musk and Jeff
Bezos, the majority of their riches come from what they own, not their
salaries.↩
9. In the institutional economics literature, this is usually referred to as a
difference between 'inclusive institutions' and 'exclusive institutions',
most notably used in Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson, Why
Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and Poverty (Profile

Books, 2013). However, this is usually reserved for formal structures
such as the rule of law, not the broader set of relations that organize
how a society runs. I've tried to refine the definition by specifying it as
the inequality in each form of power. There are clear metrics for
measuring some inequalities in power, such as for wealth (the Gini
coefficient, Palma ratio, and others) and decision-making (the V-Dem
index, although this notably doesn't include companies). For others,
such as the control of information and violence, there are fewer well-
refined measurements. Ideally, we would have measurements for each
of these. Developing them is outside the scope of this book and I'll be
analysing the cases in a broader manner looking at, for instance, how
privatized the military is and how autocratic or captured by private
interests the government is. Note that the underlying assumption here
is that large differences in power tend to result in more extraction
(unfair transfers of value) in the long run. It's a fairly safe assumption
when we look across the long arc of history: whether it be patriarchy,
wealth inequality in the earliest states, or large differences between
groups in military technology, the end result was usually an extractive
arrangement.↩
10. The exact outcome will depend on culture and particularities, of
course.↩
11. Alf Hornborg, 'Imperial Metabolism: Empire as a Process of
Ecologically Unequal Exchange', in The Oxford World History of
Empire, vol. I: The Imperial Experience, ed. Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A.
Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press, 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199772360.003.0014.↩
12. Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett, The Spirit Level: Why Equality Is
Better for Everyone (Penguin, 2010), and The Inner Level: How More
Equal Societies Reduce Stress, Restore Sanity and Improve Everyone's
Well-being (Allen Lane, 2018).↩
13. Turchin, End Times; Turchin, Ages of Discord: A Structural-
Demographic Analysis of American History (Beresta Books, 2016). We
technically don't know how much of a role popular immiseration
played in the case of these early Goliaths. However, we can see it in a
plethora of later collapses (see structural-demographic theory in
chapter 11 of this book). ↩

14. DuVal, Native Nations, chap. 2.↩
15. Daniel Hoyer et al., 'Navigating Polycrisis: Long-Run Socio-Cultural
Factors Shape Response to Changing Climate', Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 378, no. 1889
(2023): 11, https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2022.0402; Dániel Kondor et
al., 'Explaining Population Booms and Busts in Mid-Holocene
Europe', preprint, SocArXiv, 11 May 2022,
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/c32up; Bevan et al., 'Holocene
Fluctuations in Human Population'.↩
16. An initial analysis using the Crisis Database suggests that crises unfold
in a range of ways and there is no one paradigmatic pattern to crises
(Hoyer et al., 'All Crises Are Unhappy in Their Own Way').↩
17. Timothy M. Lenton, 'Climate Change and Tipping Points in Historical
Collapse', in How Worlds Collapse, ed. Miguel Centeno et al.
(Routledge, 2023), 261-81, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003331384-
17. ↩
18. This roughly echoes my colleague Tilman Hartley, who frames this as
a crisis being more likely to lead to breakdown or collapse when it
involves more 'scarcity' (growing vulnerabilities due to diminishing
returns, as we'll cover later), more shocks, and more closed
institutions. See Tilman Hartley, 'State Crisis Theory: A
Systematization of Institutional, Socio-Ecological, Demographic-
Structural, World-Systems, and Revolutions Research', preprint, 18
April 2023, https://doi.org/10.32388/G2GNJR.↩
19. It's tempting to see collapse as just a matter of bad luck. One review of
nineteen cases of collapse found, along with sixty-four different
explanations, that 44 per cent were bolts from the blue, such as a
changing climate or invaders. But growing vulnerability was just as
important as the threats which triggered a collapse. See Joseph A.
Tainter, 'How Scholars Explain Collapse', in How Worlds Collapse,
ed. Miguel Centeno et al. (Routledge, 2023), 32-3,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003331384-4/scholars-explain-collapse-
joseph-tainter.↩
20. See U. Büntgen et al., 'Cooling and Societal Change During the Late
Antique Little Ice Age from 536 to Around 660 AD', Nature
Geoscience 9 (2016): 231-6, https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2652; P. N.

Peregrine, 'Climate and Social Change at the Start of the Late Antique
Little Ice Age', The Holocene 30, no. 11 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683620941079.↩
21. Peregrine, 'Climate and Social Change at the Start of the Late Antique
Little Ice Age'.↩
22. Groups have significant differences in whether there are leaders, what
privileges and powers those leaders have, how much authority they
have and how widely shared that authority is. The difference could be
stark: leaderless polities like early Monte Albán or Teotihuacan had no
depictions of elites and numerous public buildings; whereas the Maya
had boastful leaders glorified on painted murals and rampant
inequality.↩
23. Peregrine, 'Social Resilience to Climate Change during the Late
Antique Little Ice Age'. There are a few caveats to be aware of. First,
the proxies for determining how much different regions cooled during
this time are uncertain. Second, measuring social change, let alone the
inclusivity of institutions, is always going to be a difficult and
imperfect exercise. P. N. Peregrine, 'Social Resilience to Climate-
Related Disasters in Ancient Societies: A Test of Two Hypotheses',
Weather, Climate, and Society 10, no. 1 (2018): 145-61,
https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-17-0052.1.↩
24. On social capital, see Robert D. Putnam, 'Social Capital: Measurement
and Consequences', Isuma: Canadian Journal of Policy Research 2
(Spring 2001): 41-51. Inclusive institutions in particular are what
Putnam would call 'bridging capital'.↩
25. D. K. Yoon, Jung Eun Kang, and Samuel D. Brody, 'A Measurement
of Community Disaster Resilience in Korea', Journal of
Environmental Planning and Management 59, no. 3 (2016): 436-60,
https://doi.org/10.1080/09640568.2015.1016142; Katherine Hore et
al., 'People's Participation in Disaster-Risk Reduction: Recentering
Power', Natural Hazards Review 21, no. 2 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)NH.1527-6996.0000353; D. O.
Kasdan, 'Considering Socio-Cultural Factors of Disaster Risk
Management', Disaster Prevention and Management 25, no. 4 (2016):
464-77, https://doi.org/10.1108/DPM-03-2016-0055; Ilan Kelman,
Jessica Mercer, and J. C. Gaillard, The Routledge Handbook of

Disaster Risk Reduction Including Climate Change Adaptation
(Routledge, 2017).↩
26. Hore et al., 'People's Participation in Disaster-Risk Reduction', 1.↩
27. There is also growing evidence that they promote more economic
growth. The main proponents of the theory that political inclusion
drives economic growth are Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson: see
Acemoglu and Robinson, Why Nations Fail; Acemoglu et al.,
'Democracy Does Cause Growth', Journal of Political Economy 127,
no. 1 (2019): 47-100, https://doi.org/10.1086/700936. A recent meta-
analysis of 2,000 different studies supports this basic idea, with the
caveat that the democracy-growth link varies across context: Marco
Colagrossi, Domenico Rossignoli, and Mario A. Maggioni, 'Does
Democracy Cause Growth? A Meta-Analysis (of 2000 Regressions)',
European Journal of Political Economy 61 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2019.101824.↩
28. On collective intelligence, see Lu Hong and Scott E. Page, 'Groups of
Diverse Problem Solvers Can Outperform Groups of High-Ability
Problem Solvers', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
101, no. 46 (2004): 16385-9,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0403723101, and 'Problem Solving by
Heterogeneous Agents' Journal of Economic Theory 97, no. 1 (2001):
123-63, https://doi.org/10.1006/jeth.2000.2709; Vicky Chuqiao Yang
and Anders Sandberg, 'Collective Intelligence as Infrastructure for
Reducing Broad Global Catastrophic Risks', Proceedings of the
Stanford Existential Risks Conference 2023: 194-206,
https://doi.org/10.25740/mf606ht6373. On prediction markets, consult
Arrow et al., 'The Promise of Prediction Markets', Science 320, no.
5878 (2008): 877-8, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1157679. For a
general overview of the wisdom of the crowds, see James Surowiecki,
The Wisdom of Crowds (Abacus, 2005); C. Simoiu et al., 'Studying the
"Wisdom of Crowds" at Scale', Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Human Computation and Crowdsourcing 7 (2019): 171-9,
https://doi.org/10.1609/hcomp.v7i1.5271.↩
29. On superforecasters, see Philip Tetlock and Dan Gardner,
Superforecasting (Random House, 2016). On the benefits of
deliberative democracy, consult John S. Dryzek et al., 'The Crisis of

Democracy and the Science of Deliberation', Science 363, no. 6432
(2019): 1144-6, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaw2694; Landemore,
Democratic Reason; Landemore, Open Democracy. On post-conflict
reconciliation, see E. Ugarriza and D. Caluwaerts, Democratic
Deliberation in Deeply Divided Societies: From Conflict to Common
Ground (Macmillan, 2014). For an overview of recent experiments in
deliberative democracy, read OECD, 'Innovative Citizen Participation
and New Democratic Institutions: Catching the Deliberative Wave',
www.oecd.org/en/publications/innovative-citizen-participation-and-
new-democratic-institutions_339306da-en.html. On horizon scanning,
see Luke Kemp, 'Foreseeing Extreme Technological Risk', in
Managing Extreme Technological Risk, ed. Catherine Rhodes (Centre
for the Study of Existential Risk, 2024).↩
30. A. Izdebski, L. Mordechai, and S. White, 'The Social Burden of
Resilience: A Historical Perspective', Human Ecology: An
Interdisciplinary Journal 46, no. 3 (2018): 291-303,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-018-0002-2.↩
CHAPTER 8: GANG WARFARE
1. We don't know who exactly Narmer was. He may have been the same
person as other early pharaohs, such as 'Menes' or 'King Scorpion'.
The sketch of the Palette of Narmer is available through Wikimedia
and uploaded by Maker166. See
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Narmer-Palette.jpg.
Available through Creative Commons License Version 4.0.↩
2. Pauketat, Cahokia, chap. 12.↩
3. Christian T. Miller and Jonathan Jones, 'Firestone and the Warlord:
The Untold Story of Firestone, Charles Taylor and the Tragedy of
Liberia', ProPublica, 18 November 2014,
www.propublica.org/article/firestone-and-the-warlord-intro.↩
4. Ferguson, 'The Prehistory of War and Peace in Europe and the Near
East', 223.↩
5. Katherine Hirschfeld, Gangster States (Macmillan, 2015), 3,
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137490292.↩

6. Christopher Blattman, Why We Fight: The Roots of War and the Paths
to Peace (Viking, 2022), chap. 9.↩
7. Raúl Sánchez de la Sierra, 'On the Origins of the State: Stationary
Bandits and Taxation in Eastern Congo', Journal of Political Economy
128, no. 1 (2020): 32, 34-7, https://doi.org/10.1086/703989.↩
8. Katherine Hirschfeld, 'Failing States as Epidemiologic Risk Zones:
Implications for Global Health Security', Health Security 15, no. 3
(2017): 291-2, https://doi.org/10.1089/hs.2016.0077.↩
9. Robert I. Rotberg, State Failure and State Weakness in a Time of
Terror (World Peace Foundation/Brookings Institution Press,
2003).↩
10. Pun intended. Hirschfeld, Gangster States.↩
11. Ferguson, 'The Prehistory of War and Peace in Europe and the Near
East', 223.↩
12. Hirschfeld, Gangster States.↩
13. Joerg Baten, Giacomo Benati, and Arkadiusz Sołtysiak, 'Violence
Trends in the Ancient Middle East between 12,000 and 400 BCE',
Nature Human Behaviour 7 (2023): 2064-73,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01700-y. Redesigned from Figure
2 in the article. Data points that were disconnected from trend lines
have been deleted and the two trend lines for Turkey have been
blended (a previous line was discarded owing to a small sample size of
nine). While sparse in parts, this is the best dataset we have access to.
Moreover, it supports a far wider body of evidence suggesting that
increased violence accompanies state creation and collapse.↩
14. Thanks to Tim Kohler for raising the idea of 'score-settling' based on
his previous work on violence in the Pueblo societies.↩
15. This is likely to be a historical high-point. Women's political
empowerment surged during the twentieth and twenty-first centuries
and during this time the US was undertaking the largest historical
integration of women into the military. See Joshua S. Goldstein, War
and Gender: How Gender Shapes the War System and Vice Versa
(Cambridge University Press, 2001), 10.↩

16. Hollie Nyseth Nzitatira, Jared F. Edgerton, and Laura C. Frizzell,
'Analyzing Participation in the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda', Journal of
Peace Research 60, no. 2 (2023): 291-306,
https://doi.org/10.1177/00223433221075211.↩
17. Marvin E. Wolfgang, Robert M. Figlio, and Thorsten Sellin,
Delinquency in a Birth Cohort (University of Chicago Press, 1987);
Nyseth Nzitatira, Edgerton, and Frizzell, 'Analyzing Participation in
the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda'.↩
18. Lizzie Wade, 'The Wari's Grisly End - the Fall of a South American
Empire', Science, 17 August 2016,
www.science.org/content/article/waris-grisly-end-fall-south-american-
empire; Arkush and Tung, 'Patterns of War in the Andes from the
Archaic to the Late Horizon'.↩
19. This sample covers four continents and two millennia, and includes
islands (the Rapa Nui), large state-systems (the Late Bronze Age
(LBA)), vast empires (the Western Roman Empire), and collections of
city-states (the Lowland Maya).↩
20. Kemp et al., 'Societal Collapse as a Powershift'. The Maya estimates
come from B. L. Turner, 'The Rise and Fall of Maya Population and
Agriculture, 1000 BC to Present: The Malthusian Perspective
Reconsidered', in Hunger in History: Food Shortage, Poverty, and
Deprivation, ed. L. Newman (Blackwell, 1990), 178-211; R. L.
Wilkinson, 'Yellow Fever: Ecology, Epidemiology, and Role in the
Collapse of the Classic Lowland Maya Civilization', Medical
Anthropology 16, no. 3 (1995): 269-94,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01459740.1994.9966118, 270-84. The Rapa
Nui estimate is compiled using the figures from Chapter 15.↩
21. On the reliability of state census data, see J. Haldon, 'Comparative
State Formation: The Later Roman Empire in the Wider World', in The
Oxford Handbook of Late Antiquity, ed. S. F. Johnson (Oxford
University Press, 2012), 1111-47; Pinker, The Better Angels of Our
Nature, 194; Matthew White, The Great Big Book of Horrible Things
(W. W. Norton, 2012).↩
22. Turchin, End Times, 223.↩

23. Kemp et al., 'Societal Collapse as a Powershift'. While these statistics
give a general picture, bear in mind that they are averages, and the
effects of a societal breakdown varied dramatically by region. During
the fall of Rome's empire, the city itself may have lost up to 95 per
cent of its people, yet many other areas had stable populations.↩
24. Flannery and Marcus, 'The Origin of War', 11803-5.↩
25. In Mesopotamia, the very creation of the universe was the result of an
act of violence. The god Marduk kills the chaotic, primordial sea
goddess Tiamat (often depicted as a sea dragon), allowing for the
creation of humankind (and in some versions resulting in Marduk
becoming the supreme god). An act of sacred violence tames the chaos
and creates order. It's a basic myth that reappears in numerous faiths
including the Hittite religion. It has obvious echoes of the Hobbesian
myth: there once was chaos and now there is peace due to the shadow
of an iron fist. Although tellingly, Tiamat was peaceful until Marduk
declared war.↩
26. Steven Garfinkel, 'Violence and State Power in Early Mesopotamia',
in The Cambridge World History of Violence, ed. Garrett G. Fagan et
al. (Cambridge, 2020), 219-37,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316341247.012, 219-21; Davide Nadali et
al., 'Representations of Violence in Ancient Mesopotamia and Syria',
ibid., 629-53, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316341247.033, 633-4.↩
27. The most disputed is the case of Tiwanaku. Although even here the
prolific creation of serrated and barbed arrows (which are poor for
hunting but ideal for penetrating flesh and causing an infection)
suggests that warfare, or at least coercion, also played a role. See D.
Hu, 'War or Peace? Assessing the Rise of the Tiwanaku State through
Projectile Point Analysis', Lithics 37 (2017): 83-5.↩
28. On the specific case studies, see Flannery and Marcus, The Creation of
Inequality, chap. 17.↩
29. Charles Tilly, 'Reflections on the History of European State-Making',
in The Formation of National States in Western Europe, ed. Charles
Tilly (Princeton University Press, 1975), 3-83, 42.↩
30. L. E. Cederman et al., 'War Did Make States: Revisiting the Bellicist
Paradigm in Early Modern Europe', International Organization 77, no.

2 (2023): 324-62, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818322000352,
324.↩
31. Turchin et al., 'Disentangling the Evolutionary Drivers of Social
Complexity'; Thomas E. Currie et al., 'Duration of Agriculture and
Distance from the Steppe Predict the Evolution of Large-Scale Human
Societies in Afro-Eurasia', Humanities and Social Sciences
Communications 7, no. 1 (2020): 34, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-
020-0516-2; Turchin, Ultrasociety. Note that initially some military
technologies, particularly iron weapons, resulted in greater wealth
equality. In the case of iron, it was simply because it was more widely
available. Yet eventually a small elite was still able to monopolize
these and use them as the foundation for new Goliaths.↩
32. For a useful summary of statistics and sources, read Yuval Noah
Harari, Nexus: A Brief History of Information Networks from the Stone
Age to AI (Vintage, 2024), chap. 11.↩
33. Scott, Against the Grain, 179. In On Kings, 5, the anthropologists
David Graeber and Marshall Sahlins claim that these 'stranger-kings'
were the dominant and even original form of polity, although they also
claim that these were mainly indigenous inventions and provide
surprisingly little evidence to support this. For the original theory of
stranger-kings, see Marshall Sahlins, 'The Stranger-King, or,
Elementary Forms of the Politics of Life', Indonesia and the Malay
World 36, no. 105 (2008): 177-99,
https://doi.org/10.1080/13639810802267918.↩
34. Adam Hochschild, Bury the Chains: The British Struggle to Abolish
Slavery (Pan, 2012), 2.↩
35. Seth Richardson, 'Mesopotamian Slavery', in The Palgrave Handbook
of Global Slavery Throughout History, ed. Damian A. Pargas and
Juliane Schiel (Springer International, 2023), 17-39,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-13260-5_2; J. N. Reid, 'Slavery in
Early Mesopotamia from Late Uruk Until the Fall of Babylon in the
Longue Durée' (2014), https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:a693cd93-
092e-4118-ae02-
b9775bc2285e/files/md69d238573b3389b44745f39cc219dac.↩
36. Scott, Against the Grain; Scott, 'Response', 719.↩

37. Saini, The Patriarchs, 112.↩
38. Robert D. Drennan, 'Pathways from Farmers to States around the
Globe', Cambridge Archaeological Journal 29, no. 4 (2019): 699-702,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959774319000374.↩
39. This is often framed as the 'cooperative' account of state formation.
The most influential work here is Richard E. Blanton and Lane F.
Fargher, 'Collective Action in the Evolution of Pre-Modern States',
Social Evolution & History 8, no. 2 (2009): 133-66. The authors
significantly overstate their case by claiming that this shows that many
states were cooperative endeavours. Providing collective goods
(including the presence of things like a bureaucracy) is an
extraordinarily low bar for considering a state to be created for
collective purposes. Especially when these primarily tended to benefit
elites. The roads of Rome were built by legionaries for legionaries.
They were (at least initially) mainly a conduit for information and
shuttling troops, not trade and public transport. ↩
40. We should think of this as 'coordinated action' rather than 'collective
action', as it is usually called. It's only when this is paired with clear
signs of more inclusive, democratic governance that we can talk of
more collective action.↩
41. Archaeologists of South and Mesoamerica have often been the biggest
proponents of the collective action account of state formation. A lack
of Goliath fuel can help explain why early states in the Americas often
had more coordinated action and rebellion.↩
42. For an overview of some more inclusive polities which provided
public goods but eventually drifted towards oligarchy, see Richard E.
Blanton et al., 'Moral Collapse and State Failure: A View From the
Past', Frontiers in Political Science 2 (2020),
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpos.2020.568704. Thanks to Dan Hoyer for
the 'rapacious pirate-kings' term.↩
43. The phenomenon of there being more democracy when states had less
information about their subjects is well articulated in Stasavage, The
Decline and Rise of Democracy, chap. 1. Similarly, Richard E. Blanton
et al., 'The Fiscal Economy of Good Government', Current
Anthropology 62, no. 1 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1086/713286, find
that the provision of public goods and greater coordination of labour

('good government') is usually correlated with (and probably caused
by) more reliance on the income of subjects/citizens.↩
44. Jacob G. Hariri, 'The Autocratic Legacy of Early Statehood',
American Political Science Review 106, no. 3 (2012): 471-94, 471,
489.↩
45. That is the hidden benefit of the dominance hierarchy: it's not only
those at the top who benefit, but those on the lower rungs still have
others they can lord it over: such as women in Rome owning slaves or
the city dwellers of China being fed by rural peasants.↩
46. Even the very long-lasting egalitarian settlements we came across
earlier - such as Jenne-Jeno - would usually either grow extractive or
be conquered by a neighbour.↩
47. Bauer et al., 'Can War Foster Cooperation?', Journal of Economic
Perspectives 30, no. 3 (2016): 249-74,
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.3.249, 270-72.↩
48. Julian E. Barnes, 'A Nation Challenged: Proud Spirits; As Demand
Soars, Flag Makers Help Bolster Nation's Morale', New York Times,
23 September 2001, www.nytimes.com/2001/09/23/business/nation-
challenged-proud-spirits-demand-soars-flag-makers-help-bolster-
nation-s.html.↩
49. J. C. Jackson et al., 'Ecological and Cultural Factors Underlying the
Global Distribution of Prejudice', PLOS ONE 14, no. 9 (2019):
e0221953, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0221953. Note that
this isn't one study per se: it examines fifty US states, forty-seven pre-
industrial historical societies, and twenty-five modern countries. ↩
50. Y. Mu, S. Han, and M. J. Gelfand, 'The Role of Gamma Interbrain
Synchrony in Social Coordination When Humans Face Territorial
Threats', Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12, no. 10
(2017): 1614-23, https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsx093.↩
51. Malešević, The Rise of Organised Brutality, chap. 2.↩
52. Cameron Easley, 'U.S. Conservatives Are Uniquely Inclined Toward
Right-Wing Authoritarianism Compared to Western Peers', Morning
Consult, 28 June 2021, https://pro.morningconsult.com/trend-
setters/global-right-wing-authoritarian-test.↩

53. The seminal works here are Bob Altemeyer, Right-Wing
Authoritarianism (University of Manitoba Press, 1981), and Karen
Stenner, The Authoritarian Dynamic (Cambridge University Press,
2005). Stenner stresses that these are latent traits that are activated
only by certain conditions, such as external threats. In general, the
literature here refers to 'right-wing authoritarianism', but there are
growing studies on left-wing authoritarianism.↩
54. Danny Osborne et al., 'The Psychological Causes and Societal
Consequences of Authoritarianism', Nature Reviews Psychology 2
(2023): 220-32, https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159-023-00161-4, is the
most authoritative and up-to-date review of the authoritarianism
literature, including on its genetic basis.↩
55. Hannah S. Ferguson et al., 'Context-Specific Effects of Facial
Dominance and Trustworthiness on Hypothetical Leadership
Decisions', PLOS ONE 14, no. 7 (2019): e0214261,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214261; Daniel E. Re et al.,
'Facial Cues to Perceived Height Influence Leadership Choices in
Simulated War and Peace Contexts', Evolutionary Psychology 11, no.
1 (2013): 147470491301100,
https://doi.org/10.1177/147470491301100109.↩
56. For a broader discussion of how violent groups build these 'micro-
solidarities', see Malešević, The Rise of Organised Brutality, chap.
2.↩
57. Ferguson, 'The Prehistory of War and Peace in Europe and the Near
East', 224-5.↩
58. For a similar point, see Turchin, Ultrasociety, chap. 8. Turchin also
highlights how the Germans went from being egalitarian to borrowing
state-style hierarchies from the Romans, although he attributes the
spread of dominance hierarchies more to their innate success in battle
than to an authoritarian impulse. There might be something to this,
although military historians are split on what is the ideal level of
decentralization in a fighting force. ↩
59. Kent A. Kiehl and Morris B. Hoffman, 'The Criminal Psychopath:
History, Neuroscience, Treatment, and Economics', Jurimetrics 51
(Summer 2011): 355-97,
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24944437/.↩

60. On the base rate of 1 per cent, see James E. Freeman, Freya Samson,
and Gavan R. Palk, 'Identifying the Presence of Psychopathy in the
Community', APS Forensic Psychology National Conference, 2011-
08-04 to 2011-08-06 (unpublished), https://eprints.qut.edu.au/37263/.
On the current level among CEOs, see Simon Croom, Katarina
Fritzon, and Nathan Brooks, 'Personality Differences and Buyer-
Supplier Relationships: Psychopathy in Executives, Gender
Differences and Implications for Future Research', Journal of
Purchasing and Supply Management 27, no. 4 (2021): 100721,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2021.100721. P. Babiak, C. S.
Neumann, and R. D. Hare, 'Corporate Psychopathy: Talking the Walk',
Behavioral Sciences & the Law 28, no. 2 (2010): 174-93,
https://doi.org/10.1002/bsl.925, 183, find a prevalence rate of 3.9 per
cent among high-profile corporate professionals. Karen Landay, Peter
Harms, and Marcus Credé, 'Shall We Serve the Dark Lords? A Meta-
Analytic Review of Psychopathy and Leadership', Journal of Applied
Psychology 104 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1037/apl0000357, suggest
that this could be lower, finding a positive but weak relationship
between psychopathy and leadership positions in a meta-analysis of
ninety-two existing studies. An accessible overview of some of the
literature can be found in Gardner Selby, '1 in 100 People Are
Sociopaths', Politifact, 30 March 2018,
www.politifact.com/factchecks/2018/mar/30/michael-mccaul/michael-
mccaul-says-1-100-people-sociopath/. These figures are ultimately
best guesses. Désiré G. C. Palmen, Emile W. Kolthoff, and Jan J. L.
Derksen, 'The Need for Domination in Psychopathic Leadership: A
Clarification for the Estimated High Prevalence of Psychopathic
Leaders', Aggression and Violent Behavior 61 (November-December
2021): 101650, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avb.2021.101650, suggest that
the connection is largely due to a psychopathic need to dominate,
which is best achieved through leadership positions. One of the
problems across the literature is that psychopathy - like all the dark
triad - is on a spectrum.↩
61. B. N. Persson and S. O. Lilienfeld, 'Social Status as One Key Indicator
of Successful Psychopathy: An Initial Empirical Investigation',
Personality and Individual Differences 141 (2019): 209-17,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2019.01.020. ↩

62. Thomson and Halstead, 'How Violent Was the Pre-Agricultural
World?', 107.↩
63. Those high on the dark triad also tend to score significantly higher on
'social dominance orientation': a measurement of how much one
craves power over others.↩
64. Jeremy Hogeveen, Michael Inzlicht, and Sukhvinder Obhi, 'Power
Changes How the Brain Responds to Others', Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 143, no. 2 (2014): 755-62,
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033477.↩
65. For an overview, see T. O. Tobore, 'On Power and Its Corrupting
Effects: The Effects of Power on Human Behavior and the Limits of
Accountability Systems', Communicative & Integrative Biology 16,
no. 1 (2023): 2246793,
https://doi.org/10.1080/19420889.2023.2246793.↩
66. Klaas, Corruptible, 102.↩
67. This also holds true for scholars who claim that states and hierarchies
were a way to deal with 'scalar stress'. Even if that were the case, it
does little to explain the inequality and authoritarian arrangements. ↩
68. Others call these Goliath traps 'multipolar traps': situations in which
competition forces self-interested, rational agents to resort to actions
which are to their short-term benefit but to the long-term detriment of
the group. ↩
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 9: BROKEN BRONZE
1. Nadali et al., 'Representations of Violence in Ancient Mesopotamia
and Syria', 636.↩
2. Known as the Stele of the Vultures. See ibid., 634.↩
3. There are other problems with territorial estimates. Often the land was
not arable, the areas exaggerated by written sources to flatter rulers,
and many of the borders were often porous and constantly raided. They
are still ultimately the best estimates we have. For a full discussion of
the problems with territorial estimates, see Scheidel, 'The Scale of
Empire: Territory, Population, Distribution'; Peter Fibiger Bang,
'Empire - A World History: Anatomy and Concept, Theory and
Synthesis', in The Oxford World History of Empire vol. I: The Imperial
Experience, ed. Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel
(Oxford University Press, 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199772360.003.0002.↩
4. This was described by Michael Mann as the move from 'despotic
power' to 'infrastructural power'. See Mann, The Sources of Social
Power I. This doesn't mean that intimidation was phased out in favour
of administration. Rather administration was relied on more but was
still always underpinned by the threat of violence.↩
5. John Darwin, After Tamerlane: The Rise and Fall of Global Empires,
1400-2000 (Penguin, 2008).↩
6. Similarly, the historian Niall Ferguson once quipped 'much of what we
call history consists of the deeds of 50 to 70 empires'. See Niall
Ferguson, 'Empires with Expiration Dates', Foreign Policy 156
(2009): 46.↩
7. Michael W. Doyle, Empires (Cornell University Press, 1986), 19; Rein
Taagepera, 'Size and Duration of Empires Growth-Decline Curves,
3000 to 600 B.C.', Social Science Research 7, no. 2 (June 1978): 181,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0049-089X(78)90010-8. Definitions vary but
usually focus on the control of 'sovereignty'. Taagepera focuses on
'large sovereign political entities' while Doyle looks at 'political
societies', which are never clearly defined. See also Darwin's

definition of imperialism (p. 416) as 'the attempt to impose one state's
predominance over other societies by assimilating them to its political
and cultural and economic system'. Although his definition of empire
differs slightly as 'systems of influence or rule in which ethnic,
cultural or ecological boundaries were overlapped or ignored'. I've
opted for the simpler and broader 'political groups' over the use of
sovereign polity, societies, or systems. The basic idea of a core
exploiting a periphery is also central to the idea of a 'galactic polity'
(Graeber and Sahlins, On Kings, 9.), as well as a world-system
(Immanuel Maurice Wallerstein, World-Systems Analysis: An
Introduction (Duke University Press, 2004). For a useful overview of
this idea of core-periphery relationships in world-systems theory, read
Christopher Chase-Dunn and Dmytro Khutkyy, 'The Evolution of
Geopolitics and Imperialism in Interpolity Systems', in The Oxford
World History of Empire vol. I: The Imperial Experience, ed. Peter
Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University
Press, 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199772360.003.0004.↩
8. David Harvey, The New Imperialism (Oxford University Press, 2005),
1; Darwin, After Tamerlane. The idea of empire simply being one
group trying to control another can be found in Bang, 'Empire - A
World History'.↩
9. Some call this process 'internal colonization': a nonsensical idea since
every empire begins by conquering its neighbours.↩
10. For some of these definitional debates, see Krishan Kumar, Empires: A
Historical and Political Sociology (Polity Press, 2021), chaps. 1 and 4.
There are a few potential exceptions, such as more democratic
confederations. ↩
11. John F. Haldon, 'The Political Economy of Empire: "Imperial Capital"
and the Formation of Central and Regional Elites', in The Oxford
World History of Empire vol. I: The Imperial Experience, ed. Peter
Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University
Press, 2021), https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199772360.003.0006,
179.↩
12. Territory estimates come from Taagepera, 'Size and Duration of
Empires: Growth-Decline Curves, 3000 to 600 B.C.', 187.↩

13. Harvey Weiss, ed., Megadrought and Collapse: From Early
Agriculture to Angkor (Oxford University Press, 2017). This
megadrought (known as the 4.2ka Megadrought, since it happened
around 4.2 thousand years ago) marks the beginning of the current
geologic age known as the 'Meghalayan Age'.↩
14. Dan Lawrence, Alessio Palmisano, and Michelle W. de Gruchy,
'Collapse and Continuity: A Multi-Proxy Reconstruction of Settlement
Organization and Population Trajectories in the Northern Fertile
Crescent during the 4.2kya Rapid Climate Change Event', PLOS ONE
16, no. 1 (2021): e0244871,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0244871.↩
15. Z. B. Ön et al., 'A Bayesian Test for the 4.2 ka BP Abrupt Climatic
Change Event in Southeast Europe and Southwest Asia Using
Structural Time Series Analysis of Paleoclimate Data', Climatic
Change 165, nos 1-2 (March 2021): 7, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
021-03010-6.↩
16. Lisa Cooper, 'The Demise and Regeneration of Bronze Age Urban
Centres in the Euphrates Valley of Syria', in After Collapse: The
Regeneration of Complex Societies, ed. Glenn M. Schwartz and John
Jackson Nichols (University of Arizona Press, 2006).↩
17. Morris, '"Lo, Nobles Lament"; Ellen Morris, 'Ancient Egyptian
Exceptionalism: Fragility, Flexibility and the Art of Not Collapsing', in
The Evolution of Fragility: Setting the Terms, ed. Norman Yoffee
(Cambridge University Press, 2019).↩
18. Norman Yoffee and George L. Cowgill, eds., The Collapse of Ancient
States and Civilizations (University of Arizona Press, 1991).↩
19. Alena Giesche et al., 'Recurring Summer and Winter Droughts from
4.2-3.97 Thousand Years Ago in North India', Communications Earth
& Environment 4, no. 1 (2023): 103, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-
023-00763-z. This shift from cities and trade to self-reliant villages
was not a completely easy one. In Harappa, one of the largest
settlements of the Indus Valley, there are signs of heightened violence
and more infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and leprosy among
those who remained. For an overview, see Cameron A. Petrie,
'Diversity, Variability, Adaptation and "Fragility" in the Indus

Civilization', in The Evolution of Fragility: Setting the Terms, ed.
Norman Yoffee (Cambridge University Press, 2019), chap. 7, 123.↩
20. Larry Neal, 'Introduction', in The Cambridge History of Capitalism,
ed. Larry Neal and Jeffrey G. Williamson (Cambridge University
Press, 2014), 2, https://doi.org/10.1017/CHO9781139095099.001;
Branko Milanović, Capitalism, Alone: The Future of the System That
Rules the World (The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
2021).↩
21. Michael Jursa, 'Babylonia in the First Millennium BCE - Economic
Growth in Times of Empire', in The Cambridge History of Capitalism,
ed. Larry Neal and Jeffrey G. Williamson (Cambridge University
Press, 2014), 28-33,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CHO9781139095099.002.↩
22. Karl Moore and David Lewis, 'The First Multinationals: Assyria circa
2000 BC', MIR: Management International Review 38, no. 2 (1998):
95-107, www.researchgate.net/publication/233925545; Sophie
Hardach, 'The Secret Letters of History's First-Known
Businesswomen', BBC News, 14 January 2021,
www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20210111-the-secret-letters-of-historys-
first-businesswomen.↩
23. Even Babylonian temples and palaces were dependent on the market:
selling up to half of their agricultural income for silver.↩
24. Cline, '"Mind the Gap"', 101.↩
25. Carol Bell, 'The Merchants of Ugarit: Oligarchs of the Late Bronze
Age Trade in Metals?', in Eastern Mediterranean Metallurgy and
Metalwork in the Second Millennium BC: A Conference in Honour of
James D. Muhly; Nicosia, 10th-11th October 2009 (Oxbow Books,
2012), 180-87.↩
26. For the most compelling case for the centrality of wood, see Roland
Ennos, The Wood Age: How One Material Shaped the Whole of
Human History (William Collins, 2021).↩
27. Eric H. Cline and Diane Cline, 'Text Messages, Tablets, and Social
Networks: The "Small World" of the Amarna Letters', in There and
Back Again - the Crossroads II: Proceedings of an International
Conference Held in Prague, September 15-18, 2014, ed. Jana

Mynářová et al. (Charles University [Prague], Faculty of Arts, 2015),
17-44.↩
28. These gifts were transported by merchants, traders, and sailors who no
doubt also exchanged staple goods such as grain. The banal practice of
haggling and trading was below rulers, who instead relied on the more
regal tradition of gift-giving. We see this pattern of commercial trade
occurring under the cover of gift-giving across the world. Trobriand
Islander chiefs in the South Pacific would come together to exchange
shell armbands and necklaces, while the crew who transported them
busied themselves trading practical staples with the locals.↩
29. Cline, 1177, 2nd edn, 75.↩
30. Pertev Basri and Dan Lawrence, 'Wealth Inequality in the Ancient
Near East: A Preliminary Assessment Using Gini Coefficients and
Household Size', Cambridge Archaeological Journal 30, no. 4 (2020):
701, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959774320000177. Kohler and Smith,
Ten Thousand Years of Inequality, chap. 1, and Christian E. Peterson
and Robert D. Drennan, 'Letting the Gini out of the Bottle', in Ten
Thousand Years of Inequality: The Archaeology of Wealth Differences,
ed. Timothy A. Kohler and Michael Ernest Smith (University of
Arizona Press, 2018), 39-66, discuss and address the problems with
measuring inequality using household sizes.↩
31. As the Oxford archaeologist Josephine Quinn observed, 'The whole
Bronze Age system produces a lot of discontent' (quoted in Annalee
Newitz, 'The Elites Were Living High. Then Came the Fall', New York
Times, 5 November 2020). On the height of pharaohs, see Michael E.
Habicht et al., 'Body Height of Mummified Pharaohs Supports
Historical Suggestions of Sibling Marriages', American Journal of
Physical Anthropology 157, no. 3 (2015): 519-25,
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.22728. For evidence on the Mycenaeans,
as well as height and inequality more broadly, see Carles Boix and
Frances Rosenbluth, 'Bones of Contention: The Political Economy of
Height Inequality', American Political Science Review 108, no. 1
(2014): 1-22, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055413000555.↩
32. Cline, 1177, 2nd edn, 155-8.↩
33. David Kaniewski and Elise Van Campo, '3.2 Ka BP Megadrought and
the Late Bronze Age Collapse', in Megadrought and Collapse, ed.

Harvey Weiss (Oxford University Press, 2017),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199329199.003.0005.↩
34. For an overview of the evidence, see Cline, 1177, 2nd edn.↩
35. Martin Finné et al., 'Late Bronze Age Climate Change and the
Destruction of the Mycenaean Palace of Nestor at Pylos', PLOS ONE
12, no. 12 (2017): e0189447,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0189447.↩
36. Amos Nur and Eric H. Cline, 'Poseidon's Horses: Plate Tectonics and
Earthquake Storms in the Late Bronze Age Aegean and Eastern
Mediterranean', Journal of Archaeological Science 27, no. 1 (2000):
43-63, https://doi.org/10.1006/jasc.1999.0431.↩
37. Ibid. It can be difficult to distinguish an earthquake from another force
that destroyed a city, whether it be a revolt or invasion. Archaeologists
tended to rely on telltale signs, such as skeletons pinned under fallen
walls and pillars knocked askew. See Cline, '"Mind the Gap"', 100.↩
38. Kemp and Cline, 'Systemic Risk and Resilience in the Bronze Age',
214.↩
39. A. Bernard Knapp, Migration Myths and the End of the Bronze Age in
the Eastern Mediterranean (Cambridge University Press, 2021). Guy
D. Middleton, 'Should I Stay or Should I Go? Mycenaeans, Migration,
and Mobility in the Late Bronze Age and Early Iron Age Eastern
Mediterranean', Journal of Greek Archaeology 3 (2018): 115-45,
https://doi.org/10.32028/jga.v3i.525, provides a useful overview of the
problems with the Sea Peoples narrative and puts forward a more
realistic interpretation of this as simply a case of adaptive mobility.↩
40. For an overview, see Cline, 1177, 2nd edn. Sometimes this even took
the form of linguistic resistance. Ugarit, a multilingual, metropolitan
trading hub, adopted a local vernacular language and its own
alphabetic cuneiform script. This was seemingly a rejection of the
Hittite Empire, which it had come under the control of. See Philip J.
Boyes, 'Negotiating Imperialism and Resistance in Late Bronze Age
Ugarit: The Rise of Alphabetic Cuneiform', Cambridge
Archaeological Journal 29, no. 2 (2019): 185-99,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0959774318000471.↩

41. Inspired by a figure from Austin Crouch, 'Egypt and the Bronze Age
Collapse', Culture Frontier, 2023, www.culturefrontier.com/bronze-
age-collapse/. The original has been significantly revised and
expanded, including the addition of estimated territorial extracts of
different empires and regions.↩
42. Cline, 1177, 2nd edn, chap. 6.↩
43. These are similar to 'synchronous failures': Thomas Homer-Dixon et
al., 'Synchronous Failure: The Emerging Causal Architecture of
Global Crisis', Ecology and Society 20, no. 3 (2015): art6,
https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-07681-200306. Catalytic failures means
that the different crises, rather than simply being synchronized,
directly catalyse each other. The Late Bronze Age collapse had
both.↩
44. This term was originally coined by my colleague Lauren Holt in a
paper I co-authored with her and several others: S. J. Beard et al.,
'Assessing Climate Change's Contribution to Global Catastrophic
Risk', Futures 127 (March 2021): 2,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102673.↩
45. Kemp and Cline, 'Systemic Risk and Resilience in the Bronze Age',
214-17. Inspired by Figure 1.↩
46. Igor Linkov et al., 'Are Civilizations Destined to Collapse? Lessons
from the Mediterranean Bronze Age', Global Environmental Change
84 (2024): 102792,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2023.102792.↩
47. Eric Cline, After 1177 B.C.: The Survival of Civilizations (Princeton
University Press, 2024), 15-18.↩
48. Basri and Lawrence, 'Wealth Inequality in the Ancient Near East',
701. Kohler and Smith, Ten Thousand Years of Inequality, chap. 1.↩
49. Petra M. Creamer, 'Inequalities in Wealth Distribution Within Imperial
Assyrian Graves', Antiquity 98, no. 400 (2024): 920-35. There are a
few problems with measurements using grave goods. In particular,
they are performative and can change over time with culture. Creamer
discusses and addresses these potential problems on pages 5-6.↩
50. Guy D. Middleton, 'Mycenaean Collapse(s) c. 1200 BC', in Collapse
and Transformation: The Late Bronze Age to Early Iron Age in the

Aegean, ed. G. D. Middleton (Oxbow Books, 2020), 12, 18.↩
51. On the 'escape' from Mycenaean Greece see Erika Weiberg and Martin
Finné, 'Resilience and Persistence of Ancient Societies in the Face of
Climate Change: A Case Study from Late Bronze Age Peloponnese',
World Archaeology 50, no. 4 (2018): 595,
https://doi.org/10.1080/00438243.2018.1515035. Also, Joseph Maran,
'The Crisis Years? Reflections on Signs of Instability in the Last
Decades of the Mycenaean Palaces', Scienze Dell'Antichità 15 (2009):
241-62. Maybe the rural populations were more exposed to bandits
and robbers in Dark Age Greece, but for now that is difficult to see.↩
52. Raphael Greenberg, 'What Collapsed in 1177?', Journal of Eastern
Mediterranean Archaeology and Heritage Studies 10, no. 2 (2022):
193, https://doi.org/10.5325/jeasmedarcherstu.10.2.0191.↩
53. Claudia Glatz, The Making of Empire in Bronze Age Anatolia: Hittite
Sovereign Practice, Resistance, and Negotiation (Cambridge
University Press, 2020), 299,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108867436.↩
54. Poet or poets? There is a continued scholarly disagreement as to
whether Homer was a single, historical figure or a composite of
multiple authors.↩
55. Although, funnily enough, Homer was largely glorifying the Late
Bronze Age in his myths.↩
56. Ian Morris, 'The Collapse and Regeneration of Complex Society in
Greece, 1500-500 BCE', in After Collapse: The Regeneration of
Complex Societies, ed. Glenn M. Schwartz and John Jackson Nichols
(University of Arizona Press, 2006), 72-85. We can't say that the
collapse directly led to Athenian democracy (the two were centuries
apart), but it seems exceedingly unlikely that the latter would have
occurred without the former.↩
57. V. Gordon Childe, The Prehistory of European Society (Spokesman,
2009). For a more complete discussion on the relationship between
technological change and production during dark ages, see Chris
Harman, A People's History of the World: From the Stone Age to the
New Millenium (Verso, 2017).↩

58. As archaeologist William Dever has observed, speaking of Canaan in
the wake of the Bronze Age collapse, 'Perhaps the most important
conclusion to be drawn about the "Dark Age"... is that it was nothing
of the sort.' See W. G. Dever, 'The Late Bronze - Early Iron I Horizon
in Syria-Palestine: Egyptians, Canaanites, "Sea Peoples," and Proto-
Israelites', in The Crisis Years: The 12th Century B.C., ed. W. A. Ward
and M. S. Joukowsky (Kendall/Hunt, 1992); Cline, 1177, 2nd edn.↩
CHAPTER 10: SHATTERED OBSIDIAN
1. Marcello A. Canuto et al., 'Ancient Lowland Maya Complexity as
Revealed by Airborne Laser Scanning of Northern Guatemala',
Science 361, no. 6409 (2018): 1,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau0137.↩
2. Luke Auld-Thomas et al., 'Running out of Empty Space:
Environmental Lidar and the Crowded Ancient Landscape of
Campeche, Mexico', Antiquity 98, no. 401 (2024): 1340-58,
https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2024.148.↩
3. Joyce Marcus, 'Political Fluctuations in Mesoamerica', National
Geographic Research and Exploration 8, no. 4 (1992): 406-9.↩
4. 'Gone with the wind' comes from Michael D. Coe, The Maya (Thames
& Hudson, 2005), 162. On the Cancuén case study, see Arthur A.
Demarest et al., 'Economy, Exchange, and Power: New Evidence from
the Late Classic Maya Port City of Cancuen', Ancient Mesoamerica
25, no. 1 (2014): 210, https://doi.org/10.1017/S0956536114000121.
For an overview of the collapse across the different cities and
kingdoms, see Arthur Andrew Demarest, Prudence M. Rice, and Don
S. Rice, The Terminal Classic in the Maya Lowlands: Collapse,
Transition, and Transformation (University Press of Colorado, 2005).
Storey and Storey, Rome and the Classic Maya, chaps. 4, 5, and 6,
provide a view of the collapse across the Maya as a conjoined
system.↩
5. Tobias Braun et al., 'Decline in Seasonal Predictability Potentially
Destabilized Classic Maya Societies', Communications Earth &
Environment 4, no. 1 (2023): 82, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-023-
00717-5, provide the most recent evidence on declining predictability.

Shanti Morell-Hart, Lydie Dussol, and Scott L. Fedick, 'Agriculture in
the Ancient Maya Lowlands (Part 1): Paleoethnobotanical Residues
and New Perspectives on Plant Management', Journal of
Archaeological Research 31, no. 4 (2023): 593-5, cover the
surprisingly diverse and resilient nature of Mayan food production. For
nuanced accounts on the impact of drought and its interactions with the
political drivers of collapse, see Peter M. J. Douglas et al., 'Impacts of
Climate Change on the Collapse of Lowland Maya Civilization',
Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 44, no. 1 (2016): 613-
45, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-060115-012512; B. L.
Turner and Jeremy A. Sabloff, 'Classic Period Collapse of the Central
Maya Lowlands: Insights about Human-Environment Relationships
for Sustainability', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
109, no. 35 (2012): 13908-14,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1210106109. Arthur A. Demarest, 'The
Classic Maya Collapse, Water, and Economic Change in Mesoamerica:
Critique and Alternatives from the "Wet Zone"', in The Great Maya
Droughts in Cultural Context, ed. G. Iannone (University Press of
Colorado, 2014), 177-206, outlines how the Peten collapse appeared
to have preceded the drought. For a nuanced overview of the
archaeology of the collapse period, and particularly the drought
hypothesis, see Middleton, 'Collapse Studies in Archaeology from
2012 to 2023', 30-33.↩
6. For a summary, see Douglas et al., 'Impacts of Climate Change on the
Collapse of Lowland Maya Civilization', 636.↩
7. Petrie, 'Diversity, Variability, Adaptation and "Fragility" in the Indus
Civilization'.↩
8. John Haldon et al., 'SDG 13 - How Societies Succeeded or Failed to
Respond to Environmental Disruption', in Before the UN Sustainable
Development Goals: A Historical Companion, ed. M. Gutmann
(Oxford Scholarship Online, 2022), 385-424,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780192848758.003.0014; Joseph A.
Tainter, 'Archaeology of Overshoot and Collapse', Annual Review of
Anthropology 35, no. 1 (2006): 59-74,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.anthro.35.081705.123136; Guy D.
Middleton, 'Nothing Lasts Forever: Environmental Discourses on the

Collapse of Past Societies', Journal of Archaeological Research 20,
no. 3 (2012): 257-307, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10814-011-9054-1;
John Haldon et al., 'Demystifying Collapse: Climate, Environment,
and Social Agency in Pre-Modern Societies', Millennium 17, no. 1
(2020): 1-33, https://doi.org/10.1515/mill-2020-0002.↩
9. Tainter, 'Archaeology of Overshoot and Collapse'.↩
10. K. W. Butzer, 'Collapse, Environment, and Society', Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 109, no. 10 (2012): 3632-9,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1114845109, 3634-6.↩
11. Thanks to Marilyn Masson for this point and for her invaluable
comments and assistance with this chapter.↩
12. Urszula Strawinska-Zanko et al., 'Capital in the First Century: The
Evolution of Inequality in Ancient Maya Society', in Mathematical
Modeling of Social Relationships, ed. Urszula Strawinska-Zanko and
Larry S. Liebovitch (Springer International, 2018), 161-92,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76765-9_9.↩
13. Amy E. Thompson, Gary M. Feinman, and Keith M. Prufer,
'Assessing Classic Maya Multi-Scalar Household Inequality in
Southern Belize', ed. Jacob Freeman, PLOS ONE 16, no. 3 (2021):
e0248169, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0248169.↩
14. Turner and Sabloff, 'Classic Period Collapse of the Central Maya
Lowlands'.↩
15. David M. Pendergast, 'Stability through Change: Lamanai, Belize,
from the Ninth to the Seventeenth Century', in Late Lowland Maya
Civilization: Classic to Postclassic, ed. Jeremy A. Sabloff and E.
Wyllys Andrew (SAR Press, 1986), 223-49.↩
16. For a full review of the population and political recovery of the Maya,
see Marilyn A. Masson et al., 'Postclassic Maya Population Recovery
and Rural Resilience in the Aftermath of Collapse in Northern
Yucatan', Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 76 (2024): 101610,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaa.2024.101610. As with the Late Bronze
Age, the collapse and recovery varied substantially depending on the
region.↩
17. Douglas J. Kennett et al., 'Drought-Induced Civil Conflict Among the
Ancient Maya', Nature Communications 13, no. 1 (2022): 3911,

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-31522-x.↩
18. Some have claimed that this was partly a rejection of autocracy in
favour of more democratic arrangements. See Diane Z. Chase and
Arlen F. Chase, 'Framing the Maya Collapse: Continuity,
Discontinuity, Method, and Practice in the Classic to Postclassic
Southern Maya Lowlands', in After Collapse: The Regeneration of
Complex Societies, ed. Glenn M. Schwartz and John Jackson Nichols
(University of Arizona Press, 2006), 168-88. That is perhaps an
overstatement, given that the new rulers carried on many of the
symbols and practices of the southern Lowland holy lords. On
continuity of practices in the postclassic period, see Marilyn A.
Masson, 'Postclassic and Contact-Period Maya Rulership', in Faces of
Rulership in the Maya Region, ed. Patricia A. McAnany (Harvard
University Press, 2025).↩
19. Marilyn A. Masson, 'The "Othering" of Maya Political Economies',
Archaeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association
32, no. 1 (2021): 109-27, https://doi.org/10.1111/apaa.12147.↩
20. The two potential exceptions are the Indus Valley script and the
Rongorongo script of the Rapa Nui, although whether these are
original scripts is highly contested.↩
21. Stephen Houston, John Baines, and Jerrold Cooper, 'Last Writing:
Script Obsolescence in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Mesoamerica',
Comparative Studies in Society and History 45, no. 3 (2003): 432,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0010417503000227.↩
22. Ibid. For Figure 27, the icons for Shang Oracle Bones and
Mesopotamian Cuneiform are stylized replicas and hence may not be
perfect characters. The icons for Olmec Hieroglyphs come from
Wikimedia by the author Madman2001. See
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:San_Andreas_Cylinder_Seal
_Print_l.svg. Published under the Creative Commons License Version
4.0. The icons for Egyptian Hieroglyphs come from Wikimedia by
Riccardo.mebere. See
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hieroglyph_brain.org.
Published under the Creative Commons License Version 4.0.↩
23. James T. Hooker, Linear B: An Introduction (Bristol Classical Press,
1980); Houston, Baines, and Cooper, 'Last Writing'.↩

24. Another example of trade bottlenecks acting as a source of lootable
resources, much like the Nabataeans mentioned in Chapter 3. Karl W.
Butzer, 'Rise and Fall of Axum, Ethiopia: A Geo-Archaeological
Interpretation', American Antiquity 46, no. 3 (1981): 471-95,
https://doi.org/10.2307/280596, 489-92.↩
25. Ibid.↩
26. Ibid.; Gianfrancesco Lusini, 'The Decline and Collapse of the
Kingdom of Aksum (6th-7th CE): An Environmental Disaster or the
End of a Political Process?', in The End of Empires, ed. Michael
Gehler, Robert Rollinger, and Philipp Strobl (Wiesbaden: Springer
Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2022), 321-36, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
658-36876-0_15. The pastoralists on its borders for whom it had
previously exacted tribute also turned on it.↩
27. On army size, see David C. Conrad, Empires of Medieval West Africa:
Ghana, Mali, and Songhay, rev. edn (Chelsea House, 2010), 71. On
the lack of clarity regarding the break-up of the Ghana Empire, see
Nikolas Gestrich, 'The Empire of Ghana' (Oxford Research
Encyclopedias, 2019),
https://doi.org/10.1093/ACREFORE/9780190277734.013.396.↩
28. Madina Ly-Tall, 'The Decline of the Mali Empire', in General History
of Africa IV: Africa from the Twelfth to the Sixteenth Century, ed. D. T.
Niane (UNESCO/Heinemann, 1984), 172-86, 173-4.↩
29. Margaret Shinnie, Ancient African Kingdoms (Edward Arnold, 1968),
85.↩
30. Ibiang Oden Ewa, 'Pre-Colonial West Africa: The Fall of Songhai
Empire Revisited', Journal of the Historical Society of Nigeria 26
(2017): 1-24, 20, www.jstor.org/stable/48562076.↩
31. Ibid. For a more entertaining overview of the rise and fall of Ghana,
Mali, and Songhai, read Paul Cooper, Fall of Civilizations: Stories of
Greatness and Decline (Duckworth, 2024), chap. 11.↩
32. Tobias Hagmann and Markus V. Hoehne, 'Failures of the State Failure
Debate: Evidence from the Somali Territories', Journal of
International Development 21, no. 1 (2009): 53,
https://doi.org/10.1002/jid.1482.↩

33. Some even suggest that we should not think of cases like the Lowland
Maya or the Late Bronze Age as singular collapses. Rather they are
just a sequence of different state failures and disasters detonating over
centuries. The failure of each city - such as Tikal and Ugarit - and
state had its own unique background and trajectory. That case is made
most forcefully by the archaeologist Guy Middleton: see Guy
Middleton, 'Do Civilisations Collapse?', Aeon, 16 November 2017,
https://aeon.co/essays/what-the-idea-of-civilisational-collapse-says-
about-history. Cases like the Lowland Maya and the Late Bronze Age
can, of course, be both. There were chains of numerous catastrophes
and state failures over time, but they were also connected. Many of the
Mayan city-states were destroyed by competitors and neighbours, but
they were also reacting to a shared challenge of drought. The same
applies to the Late Bronze Age. The fall of the Ugarit trading hub had
ramifications for the greater Mediterranean. We even see this in
African cases. The rise of Portuguese shipping undermined the gold
trade of the Songhai, just as wars between the Byzantines and Persians,
or the expansion of the caliphate, bled the Aksumite Empire dry. For
the Maya and Late Bronze Age, the impacts cascaded and amplified to
bring down the broader economic and cultural system. There's no
reason to ignore the connections or presume that the wider systems
collapse was just a coincidence.↩
CHAPTER 11: THE RISE AND FALL OF THE CHINESE GOLIATH
1. This time of decentralization (770 to 481 BCE) became known as the
Spring and Autumn period.↩
2. In 771 BCE Quanrong pastoralists (a Tibeto-Burman group) destroyed
the Zhou capital of Haojing (near present-day Xi'an) and killed King
You. The Zhou moved to a capital in the east, creating the Eastern
Zhou Dynasty (the earlier reign became known as the Western Zhou).
Unfortunately for the Zhou, the loss of their capital undermined their
power and their feudal lords began to act more and more
independently, negotiating their own alliances and declaring war on
each other.↩

3. This wasn't just a Qin tactic: the Athenian Empire carried out similar
mass executions, as have others.↩
4. Victoria Tin-bor Hui, 'Genocide, Extermination and Mass Killing in
Chinese History', in The Cambridge World History of Genocide, vol. I:
Genocide in the Ancient, Medieval and Premodern Worlds, ed. Ben
Kiernan, T. M. Lemos, and Tristan S. Taylor (Cambridge University
Press, 2023), 289-93, https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108655989.017.↩
5. Fernanda Pirie, The Rule of Laws: A 4,000-Year Quest to Order the
World (Profile Books, 2021). Both legalism and Confucianism were
direct reactions to the disorder of their times. Shang Yang (390-338
BCE) and Han Fei (280-233 BCE), the two most prominent philosophers
of legalism, advocated a stringent, punishment-based version of law
coupled with a strong government and rigid bureaucracy. It was a
strategy aimed at restoring imperial control - a strategy that some
credit as a strong influence on the centralized approach of modern
China today. It was a philosophy that took a dim view of humans, one
that looked remarkably similar to the Hobbesian worldview.
Confucianism, in contrast, emphasized the obligations of rulers
towards the ruled and opposed codified law. Confucius (551-479 BCE)
sought to lay a blueprint for the reestablishment of political order.↩
6. Mark Edward Lewis et al., 'The First East Asian Empires: Qin and
Han', in The Oxford World History of Empire, vol. I: The Imperial
Experience, ed. Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel
(Oxford University Press, 2021), 218-20,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780197532768.003.0008. He took on the
title of 'Huang Di'. It was a pivotal linguistic shift. Previous leaders
had called themselves wang, loosely translating to 'king'. 'Di' referred
to mythical, heroic sages who first created 'civilization', and had
previously been used to designate high gods under the Shang. The
emperor also began the Feng and Shen rituals in which he would
ascend Mount Tai to converse with the gods and become immortal. He
had philosophers craft a new cosmic cycle based on the old calendar,
which justified his claim to the throne.↩
7. Ibid., 220-23. The most commonly cited reason for the wall is
protection from invaders, but Owen Lattimore suggests that keeping
wayward peasants in the grip of the Qin was another major motivation.

See Owen Lattimore, 'The Frontier in History', in his Studies in
Frontier History: Collected Papers, 1929-58 (Oxford University
Press, 1962), 476-81.↩
8. Lewis et al., 'The First East Asian Empires', 223.↩
9. This process of amassing elite treasures was interrupted briefly by the
Wang Mang rebellion (9-23 CE). The revolt appears to have been
triggered by flooding of the Yellow River, with the ensuing famine and
disaster undermining the emperor's already fraying rule. While
typically remembered in Chinese history as a villain, Wang Mang was
a Confucian social reformer who abolished slavery and redistributed
the land more equally. His forward-looking actions made him enemies.
Soon he was overthrown and killed during rebellions fostered by
disgruntled elites. Tristram R. Kidder et al., 'New Perspectives on the
Collapse and Regeneration of the Han Dynasty', in Beyond Collapse:
Archaeological Perspectives on Resilience, Revitalization, and
Transformation in Complex Societies, ed. Ronald K. Faulseit (Southern
Illinois University Press, 2016), 70-88.↩
10. Scheidel, The Great Leveler, chap. 2; Scheidel, 'The End of "Peak
Empire"'.↩
11. The general history in this chapter relies on Lewis et al., 'The First
East Asian Empires', in The Oxford World History of Empire, vol. II:
The History of Empires, ed. Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and
Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press, 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780197532768.001.0001. This particular
rendition of the collapse of the Han and Jin is best expressed in
Scheidel, 'The End of "Peak Empire"'.↩
12. The period between the Tang and the Song is one without unified
empire. It is typically called the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms
Period. It ended in 979 CE when the Song defeated their competitors
and re-established a coherent empire.↩
13. The notable exceptions being the Warring States period and the end of
the Tang Dynasty, which resulted in the battles of the Five Dynasties
and Ten Kingdoms Period.↩
14. Yuhua Wang, The Rise and Fall of Imperial China: The Social Origins
of State Development (Princeton University Press, 2022), chaps. 3 and

5; Yuhua Wang, 'The Curse of Long-Ruling Autocrats', 18 January
2023, https://press.princeton.edu/ideas/the-curse-of-long-ruling-
autocrats.↩
15. The marauders constantly threatened and harassed China's northern
frontiers, leading to the Han even paying them tribute in an attempt to
avoid confrontation. ↩
16. Wang, The Rise and Fall of Imperial China. ↩
17. Georg Orlandi et al., 'Structural-Demographic Analysis of the Qing
Dynasty (1644-1912) Collapse in China', PLOS ONE 18, no. 8
(2023): e0289748, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0289748.↩
18. Wang, The Rise and Fall of Imperial China, chap. 2; Chaochao Gao et
al., 'Volcanic Climate Impacts Can Act as Ultimate and Proximate
Causes of Chinese Dynastic Collapse', Communications Earth &
Environment 2, no. 1 (2021): 234, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-021-
00284-7. For some wise warnings about mistaking climate correlation
for causation, see Dagomar Degroot et al., 'Towards a Rigorous
Understanding of Societal Responses to Climate Change', Nature 591,
no. 7851 (2021): 539-50, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-021-03190-
2; Dagomar Degroot et al., 'The History of Climate and Society: A
Review of the Influence of Climate Change on the Human Past',
Environmental Research Letters 17, no. 10 (2022): 103001,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac8faa.↩
19. Hoyer et al., 'Navigating Polycrisis'.↩
20. It's not as clear in cases discussed earlier, including the systems
collapses of the Late Bronze Age and the Lowland Maya, owing to less
writing and documentation being available, but there is little reason to
suspect it was missing.↩
21. In this account, there is a limited number of elite positions and
competition becomes a problem once they are all filled. Like a game of
musical chairs (or better put, musical thrones), those left without a seat
become frustrated elite aspirants willing to upend the status quo to
achieve power. While important, there are some nuances and minor
problems with this theory. First, many of the apparent frustrated elites
come from highly privileged backgrounds (see the examples of Donald
Trump and Tucker Carlson below and many of the instigators of

rebellion throughout Chinese history). They are usually outraged that
they can't transfer one form of power into another (such as from
billionaire to politician) or because they have been publicly humiliated
or denied status (such as the failed bureaucrats of China, or, again,
Trump and Carlson). Second, elite positions are not always clearly
limited in number. There is no limit on how many people can be
wealthy in any society. This was more of a problem in pre-modern
states and in certain domains (such as government). Third, many elite
aspirants clearly have an insatiable hunger for status. Trump is a
billionaire, has his name plastered across skyscrapers, and is perhaps
the best-known person in the world. Yet, he still ferociously competes
for power. Clearly, achieving high office once was not enough for him.
For the most ambitious, status is an infinite resource and getting to sit
in one seat in the game of musical thrones will never be enough.
Rather than a case of elite overproduction creating 'counter-elites', it is
better to see this as status competition heating up as the number of
players increases, the number of elite positions becomes saturated, and
the size of the prize swells.↩
22. This process of growing elite competition is part of 'structural-
demographic theory'. The theory was originally pioneered by the
demographer Jack Goldstone. Goldstone helped establish the 'Political
Instability Task Force' of the US, which used structural-models
focused on elite competition to predict which states would fail next.
For an overview, see Peter Turchin, War and Peace and War: The Rise
and Fall of Empires (Penguin, 2007); Turchin, End Times; Peter
Turchin and Sergey A. Nefedov, Secular Cycles (Princeton University
Press, 2009). Peter Turchin, the biggest developer of structural-
demographic theory, is now warning that the US is entering a phase of
heightened elite competition and crisis: Peter Turchin, 'Political
Instability May Be a Contributor in the Coming Decade', Nature 463,
no. 7281 (2010): 608, https://doi.org/10.1038/463608a. ↩
23. On the encounter with Jon Stewart acting as a turning point for
Carlson, see Devin Gordon, 'What Happened to Jon Stewart?', The
Atlantic, 21 April 2022,
www.theatlantic.com/culture/archive/2022/04/the-problem-with-jon-
stewart-tucker-carlson/629608/. The calculation on Trump being a
millionaire at age eight comes from Ross Buettner, Susan Craig, and

David Barstow, '11 Takeaways From The Times's Investigation Into
Trump's Wealth', New York Times, 2 October 2018,
www.nytimes.com/2018/10/02/us/politics/donald-trump-wealth-fred-
trump.html.↩
24. Notably, even competition for bureaucratic positions in China and
elsewhere was usually among rich or upper-middle-class families.
Those who failed to translate their riches into other forms of power or
more status rebelled.↩
25. Butzer, 'Collapse, Environment, and Society', 3638. There is the
historiographical problem that later regimes often had a good reason to
brand their predecessors as corrupt. That way, their coup or rebellion
was justified. That said, both the recurrence, the genuine evidence of
tax dodging and growing fortunes of public officials, and the modern
relationship between corruption and inequality, should all give us
confidence that this is a real phenomenon.↩
26. Laura Policardo and Edgar J. Sánchez Carrera, 'Corruption Causes
Inequality, or Is It the Other Way Around? An Empirical Investigation
for a Panel of Countries', Economic Analysis and Policy 59 (2018):
92-102, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eap.2018.05.001; Jong-Sung You and
Sanjeev Khagram, 'A Comparative Study of Inequality and
Corruption', American Sociological Review 70, no. 1 (2005): 136-57,
https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240507000107.↩
27. Scheidel, The Great Leveler, 134.↩
28. From a version of the Crisis Database provided by Dan Hoyer in
August 2024.↩
29. There are, of course, exceptions. The Yuan Dynasty, a regime of
Mongol invaders, adopted many of the structures of previous Chinese
dynasties, but kept much of the previous intelligentsia excluded from
critical positions.↩
30. John Haldon et al., 'Lessons from the Past, Policies for the Future:
Resilience and Sustainability in Past Crises', Environment Systems and
Decisions 40, no. 2 (2020): 295, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10669-020-
09778-9.↩
31. Naturally there is some nuance here. It took three centuries after the
collapse of the Han for there to be reunification under the Sui/Tang.↩

32. There are some caveats here. More complex weapons cannot be easily
replicated. As we'll see in later chapters, groups such as the Inuit lost
technologies such as kayak making. However, this only tends to occur
with smaller, isolated groups.↩
33. Analabha Basu, Neeta Sarkar-Roy, and Partha P. Majumder, 'Genomic
Reconstruction of the History of Extant Populations of India Reveals
Five Distinct Ancestral Components and a Complex Structure',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113, no. 6 (2016):
1594-9, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1513197113.↩
34. Catherine E. Bolten and Richard 'Drew' Marcantonio, 'Usurious
Strangers and "a Better Tomorrow": Agricultural Loans, Education,
and the "Poverty Trap" in Rural Sierra Leone', Economic
Anthropology 10, no. 1 (2023): 77 and 87,
https://doi.org/10.1002/sea2.12256.↩
35. Bennet Bronson, 'Patterns of Political Regeneration in Southeast and
East Asia', in After Collapse: The Regeneration of Complex Societies,
ed. Glenn M. Schwartz and John Jackson Nichols (University of
Arizona Press, 2006), 144. See also Scheidel, Escape from Rome,
chap. 9.↩
36. Ibid., chap. 8. For some nuance and criticisms, see Peter Turchin, 'The
Great Escape: A Review Essay on Escape from Rome: The Failure of
Empire and the Road to Prosperity by Walter Scheidel', Cliodynamics:
The Journal of Quantitative History and Cultural Evolution 11, no. 2
(2021): 78-81, https://doi.org/10.21237/C7clio11251633.↩
CHAPTER 12: THE FALL OF ROME
1. For population, see Morris, The Measure of Civilization, 147-8, table
4.1, and 155-6, table 4.2. For territorial extent, see Rein Taagepera,
'Size and Duration of Empires: Growth-Decline Curves, 600 B.C. to
600 A.D.', Social Science History 3, no. 3 (1979): 115-38,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S014555320002294X. The EU is closer to 4.2
million. Bear in mind that such territorial estimates are problematic.
Often an empire would claim ownership of a territory even if their
control was tenuous and only really consisted of a garrison.
Nonetheless, Rome's was remarkably large. For summaries of the

general history of Rome that I draw upon, see Scheidel, Escape from
Rome; Bang, 'The Roman Empire'; Walter Scheidel, 'Ancient
Mediterranean City-State Empires: Athens, Carthage, Early Rome', in
The Oxford World History of Empire, vol. II: The History of Empires,
ed. Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford
University Press, 2021), 137-58,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780197532768.003.0005. Rome was also
remarkably large in population. While estimates are difficult, at its
peak the Roman Empire may have governed between a quarter and a
third of the world's population. No other empire has ruled over a larger
fraction of humanity (the British Empire only ever encompassed
around a fifth of global population).↩
2. According to one viral meme in 2023, most men apparently still muse
about Rome several times a week. 'The Roman Empire: Why Men Just
Can't Stop Thinking about It', Guardian, 19 September 2023,
www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2023/sep/19/the-roman-empire-
why-men-just-cant-stop-thinking-about-it. I confess to being in this
category, although hopefully with a better reason than most.↩
3. A king ordered them to be killed and, like Sargon and Moses, they
were saved by being set in a basket upon a river. They floated down
the Tiber until the two were suckled by a female wolf and then adopted
by a shepherd. Rome was built upon the site.↩
4. Jeremy Armstrong, War and Society in Early Rome: From Warlords to
Generals (Cambridge University Press, 2016). ↩
5. Rome began as a kingdom in 753 BCE, before the nobles overthrew the
last king (with the memorable name of King Lucius Tarquinius
Superbus).↩
6. Scheidel, Escape from Rome, 98-104. Young, land-owning male
citizens had to serve in the military for six to seven years (usually
while they were young, aggressive, and had yet to inherit family
farms), and more during times of crisis.↩
7. Grain estimates are based on Paul Erdkamp, 'Annona (Grain)', in
Oxford Classical Dictionary, ed. Thomas Wiedermann (Oxford
University Press, 2022), 9,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.8000. I've taken
the common estimate of 30 million modii of subsidized grain imports

into Rome and converted it into metric tonnes by assuming each
modius is around seven kilograms (the most widely accepted
conversion).↩
8. For those outside the city, participation was limited to those rich
enough to easily travel to Rome regularly.↩
9. For a summary of Rome's inequality, see Scheidel, The Great Leveler,
chap. 2.↩
10. On corruption, see Scheidel, The Great Leveler, 39, 42. The rapacious
governor is cited in Bang, 'The Roman Empire', 241.↩
11. On silver mine yields, see J. C. Edmondson, 'Mining in the Later
Roman Empire and Beyond: Continuity or Disruption?', Journal of
Roman Studies 79 (1989): 85, https://doi.org/10.2307/301182.↩
12. Joseph A. Tainter, 'Collapse and Sustainability: Rome, the Maya, and
the Modern World', Archaeological Papers of the American
Anthropological Association 24, no. 1 (2014): 204,
https://doi.org/10.1111/apaa.12038.↩
13. Scheidel, 'The End of "Peak Empire"', 113.↩
14. On the effects of the Byzantine invasion (and a contrarian take on the
fall of Rome) see Edward Jay Watts, The Eternal Decline and Fall of
Rome: The History of a Dangerous Idea (Oxford University Press,
2021). The most forceful case for the impact of climate and disease is
made by Kyle Harper in The Fate of Rome: Climate, Disease, and the
End of an Empire (Princeton University Press, 2017). This has been
significantly challenged, most notably by John Haldon et al., 'Plagues,
Climate Change, and the End of an Empire: A Response to Kyle
Harper's The Fate of Rome (1): Climate', History Compass 16, no. 12
(2018): e12508, https://doi.org/10.1111/hic3.12508. The effect of the
Plague of Justinian (the first recorded outbreak of bubonic plague in
Europe, which began in 541 CE during that emperor's reign) in
particular has been called into question, since multiple lines of
evidence such as burials and coin deposits don't show the usual telltale
signs of a deadly epidemic: Lee Mordechai et al., 'The Justinianic
Plague: An Inconsequential Pandemic?', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 116, no. 51 (2019): 25546-54,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1903797116.↩

15. Kemp et al., 'Societal Collapse as a Powershift'.↩
16. Walter Scheidel, What Was the Roman Republic Really Like?,
Humanities West 2014 Roman Republic Program,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4Stzxi-m4s. Land area estimates are
taken from Taagepera, 'Size and Duration of Empires: Growth-Decline
Curves, 600 B.C. to 600 A.D.', 125. Scheidel gives the example of a
city with the population of Palo Alto and size of Santa Clara County
overtaking the contiguous US. Palo Alto is also around 60,000 people
while Santa Clara county is approximately three times the size of
Rome (3,344 km2). The US (9,372,610 km2) is approximately half the
size of the Roman Empire at its height. Hence, if anything the
comparison slightly underestimates the scale of Rome's expansion.↩
17. Ayşe Zarakol, Before the West: The Rise and Fall of Eastern World
Orders (Cambridge University Press, 2022). For a further discussion
of the importance of expansion and the myth of civilization to empire,
see Bang, 'Empire - A World History'; Kumar, Empires, chap. 2.↩
18. Paul M. Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic
Change and Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000 (Vintage Books,
1989); Paul Kennedy, 'Survival of Empires', in Survival: The Survival
of the Human Race, ed. Emily Shuckburgh (Cambridge University
Press, 2008).↩
19. Crooks and Parsons, 'Empires, Bureaucracy and the Paradox of
Power'.↩
20. Covered primarily in Chapter 7. For summaries of the evidence, see
Wilkinson and Pickett, The Spirit Level; Wilkinson and Pickett, The
Inner Level.↩
21. Covered primarily in Chapter 11. For key recent pieces, see Policardo
and Carrera, 'Corruption Causes Inequality'; You and Khagram, 'A
Comparative Study of Inequality and Corruption'.↩
22. Covered primarily in Chapters 7 and 11. For summaries, see Turchin,
End Times; Turchin and Nefedov, Secular Cycles; Hoyer et al.,
'Navigating Polycrisis'.↩
23. See Chapter 7 as well as Kemp, 'Diminishing Returns on
Extraction'.↩
24. Haldon et al., 'SDG 13'.↩

25. This is particularly evident in Scott A. J. Johnson, Why Did Ancient
Civilizations Fail? (Routledge, 2017); Diamond, Collapse. Technically
Scott is an archaeologist and Diamond is more of an anthropologist,
but they are both writing in the field of deep history.↩
26. For a full summary and further evidence, see Kemp, 'Diminishing
Returns on Extraction'.↩
27. Thomas Homer-Dixon, The Upside of Down: Catastrophe, Creativity,
and the Renewal of Civilization (Island PR, 2008); Scheidel, 'The End
of "Peak Empire"'.↩
28. Scheidel, Escape from Rome, 174.↩
29. Scheidel, 'The End of "Peak Empire"', 112. Remarkably, Rome and
the Han Dynasty of China collapsed in a similar way. They even fell at
roughly the same time. Both had reigns that were punctuated by
periods of crisis and disorder. Rome was beset by the Third Century
Crisis and the Han by the Wang Mang rebellion. The Han fell apart
just fifteen years before Rome's crisis period, and the Jin fell just a few
decades before Rome capitulated. One leading theory is that the
Antonine Plague originated in China and spread to Rome via the Silk
Roads (or originated in central Asia before spreading to China and
Rome). Like Rome, the Han also had to contend with external
invaders. Rome and the Han were also beset by a changing climate.
Crises during the third century CE for both Rome and the Han occurred
during a time of cooling across the northern hemisphere. See Harper,
The Fate of Rome; Kyle Harper and Michael McCormick,
'Reconstructing the Roman Climate', in The Science of Roman
History, ed. Walter Scheidel (Princeton University Press, 2018), 11-
52, https://doi.org/10.23943/9781400889730-006. Compare Haldon et
al., 'Plagues, Climate Change, and the End of an Empire'.↩
30. This can be seen as a blending of different theories of collapse.
Turchin, Hoyer, and Goldstone all stress the role of popular
immiseration and elite conflict in their structural-demographic theory.
Diamond highlighted the role of climate change, loss of trading
partners, war, environmental degradation, and poor responses in his
five-part explanation. Joseph Tainter suggested that collapse was due
to 'diminishing returns on complexity': societies become more
complex to address new problems but face diminishing returns which

eventually overwhelm them. This is usually due to popular discontent
(from being overworked and overtaxed) and loss of revenue (due to the
sheer complexity of regulatory and social systems). Daron Acemoglu
and James Robinson point towards extractive institutions as being the
key driver for why some states 'succeed' and others 'fail' in economic
development. Diminishing returns on extraction knits these all together
and provides additional clear pathways from inequality to collapse
based on evidence. That includes growing studies on the weakness of
oligarchy in decision-making through the empirical work on the link
between corruption and inequality. Each of these theories has its
weaknesses. Structural-demographic theory struggles to explain the
role of other factors beyond elite factionalism and popular
immiseration. Diamond's framework is largely dependent on external
shocks and lacks a clear rationale for why some societies respond
poorly to catastrophe. Tainter's theory is elegant but fundamentally
flawed by the fact that complexity is far too ambiguous (scholars have
measured this as the number of monuments built, trees felled, the
energy ratio, or the size of an army, and, as covered earlier, complexity
is usually just used as a euphemism for inequality and hierarchy) and
it's not at all clear why a society needs to increase 'complexity'
(whatever that is) to resolve oncoming problems, or how exactly this
leads to collapse. For a full critique, see Kemp, 'Diminishing Returns
on Extraction'. Bringing these all together into a single explanation
links ancient and modern case studies, addresses the shortcomings of
the individual theory, and links them to a wider explanation of how
and why societies, states, and empires developed over time. It also has
overlap with the frameworks provided by Hartley, 'State Crisis
Theory', and Butzer, 'Collapse, Environment, and Society'. I agree
with their more nuanced frameworks, which suggest that crises can
lead to reform, entrenchment, or full-blown collapse. Collapse is not
the only possible outcome. For brevity and clarity I'm focusing purely
on collapse in this section.↩
31. Kemp et al., 'Societal Collapse as a Powershift'.↩
32. As we'll see later, the key crisis aspect of structural-demographic
theory sees elite competition as a battle over limited high-status
positions. In other words, elite competition is status competition.↩

33. The age of the Byzantine Empire would be around 1,058-1,145 years.
This depends on when exactly you choose to date the formation and
end of the empire. Constantinople was conquered by the Ottomans in
1453, but the last outpost of the empire valiantly fought on until 1479.
Personally, I'd opt for the loss of the capital as the marker for state
termination. The empire had lost its sovereignty and independence
even if a few troops continued to hold out. This would put its age at
1,145 years. Notably, there was a minor collapse in 1204 when the
crusaders of the Fourth Crusade sacked Constantinople and partitioned
the empire. It was recaptured in 1261 and limped on for another two
centuries. Even if we take this lower bound of 1204, the empire still
lasted for an impressive 874 years. The quote of an empire that would
not die comes from John F. Haldon, The Empire That Would Not Die:
The Paradox of Eastern Roman Survival, 640-740 (Harvard
University Press, 2016).↩
34. Ibid.↩
35. Robert Perry Stephan, 'House Size and Economic Growth: Regional
Trajectories in the Roman World', unpublished PhD dissertation,
Stanford University, 2013.↩
36. Wyman, 'How Do You Know If You're Living Through the Death of
an Empire?'↩
37. Lawrence et al., 'Long-Term Trends in Settlement Persistence in
Southwest Asia'.↩
38. Nikola Koepke, 'The Biological Standard of Living in Europe from the
Late Iron Age to the Little Ice Age', in The Oxford Handbook of
Economics and Human Biology, ed. J. Kolmos and I. Kelly (Oxford
University Press, 2016), 78-81,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199389292.013.34; Nikola
Koepke and Joerg Baten, 'The Biological Standard of Living in
Europe During the Last Two Millennia', European Review of
Economic History 9, no. 1 (2005): 76-7,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1361491604001388; Irene Barbiera and
Gianpiero Dalla-Zuanna, 'Population Dynamics in Italy in the Middle
Ages: New Insights from Archaeological Findings', Population and
Development Review 35, no. 2 (2009): 375,
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2009.00283.x; Monica

Giannecchini and Jacopo Moggi-Cecchi, 'Stature in Archeological
Samples from Central Italy: Methodological Issues and Diachronic
Changes', American Journal of Physical Anthropology 135, no. 3
(2008): 290, https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.20742.↩
39. Boix and Rosenbluth, 'Bones of Contention', fig. 1.↩
40. Koepke, 'The Biological Standard of Living in Europe from the Late
Iron Age to the Little Ice Age', 86-8, 88-90.↩
41. For useful summaries, see Joan Ballester et al., 'Effect of the Great
Recession on Regional Mortality Trends in Europe', Nature
Communications 10, no. 1 (2019): 679,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-08539-w; Lynne Peeples, 'How
the Next Recession Could Save Lives', Nature 565, no. 7740 (2019):
412-15, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-00210-0.↩
42. On the influence of the Roman model on modern emergency powers,
see Marc de Wilde, 'Just Trust Us: A Short History of Emergency
Powers and Constitutional Change', Comparative Legal History 3, no.
1 (2015): 110-30, https://doi.org/10.1080/2049677X.2015.1041728;
Daniel D. Slate, 'Crisis Government's Legitimacy Paradox:
Foreseeability and Unobservable Success', in Intersections,
Reinforcements, Cascades: Proceedings of the 2023 Stanford
Existential Risks Conference, The Stanford Existential Risks Initiative,
2023, https://doi.org/10.25740/ZJ321VJ7513; Luke Kemp, 'The
"Stomp Reflex": When Governments Abuse Emergency Powers', BBC
Future, 28 April 2021, www.bbc.com/future/article/20210427-the-
stomp-reflex-when-governments-abuse-emergency-powers.↩
43. Scheidel, What Was the Roman Republic Really Like?↩
44. Although it wasn't invented by the Romans; it dates back to at least the
Assyrians of the Bronze Age.↩
45. The loved ones of the crucified often mistakenly gave them water,
prolonging their suffering.↩
46. Although eventually it was resettled. It is now a suburb of Tunis, the
capital of Tunisia.↩
47. States are, as Shakespeare once said, 'jealous in honour, sudden and
quick in quarrel, seeking the bubble reputation even in the cannon's
mouth'. There is an abundant and growing literature on war and

competition between states as a struggle for status. Seminal works
include Jonathan Renshon, Fighting for Status: Hierarchy and Conflict
in World Politics (Princeton University Press, 2017); William C.
Wohlforth, 'Unipolarity, Status Competition, and Great Power War', in
International Relations Theory and the Consequences of Unipolarity,
ed. G. John Ikenberry, Michael Mastanduno, and William C. Wohlforth
(Cambridge University Press, 2011), 33-66,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511996337.002. States are usually
seen as being most likely to resort to war when their actual capabilities
outstrip their reputation or as a way to gain face after being subjugated
to humiliating events, such as the wartime reparations imposed on
Germany after the First World War under the Treaty of Versailles. It is
usually produced by either a leader, or leaders, seeking status
themselves through their countries' actions, or domestic groups using
national status as a tool to shift foreign policy. For a critical stocktake
of the literature on status and outstanding problems and questions, see
Paul K. MacDonald and Joseph M. Parent, 'The Status of Status in
World Politics', World Politics 73, no. 2 (2021): 358-91,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043887120000301; Allan Dafoe, Jonathan
Renshon, and Paul Huth, 'Reputation and Status as Motives for War',
Annual Review of Political Science 17, no. 1 (2014): 371-93,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-071112-213421. ↩
CHAPTER 13: FEAR THE RISE
1. Many archaeologists are aware of the problems with these terms and
are trying to combat them. ↩
2. Scheidel, Escape from Rome, 453.↩
3. There were a few exceptions, such as Roman concrete, but most of the
developments we associate with the Roman Empire came earlier, often
from the peoples they conquered.↩
4. Marie D. Jackson et al., 'Phillipsite and Al-Tobermorite Mineral
Cements Produced through Low-Temperature Water-Rock Reactions
in Roman Marine Concrete', American Mineralogist 102, no. 7 (2017):
1435-50, https://doi.org/10.2138/am-2017-5993CCBY.↩

5. W. H. R. Rivers, The Disappearance of Useful Arts (Forgotten Books,
2017); Joseph Henrich, The Secret of Our Success, chap. 12.↩
6. Henrich, The Secret of Our Success, chap. 12.↩
7. On Greek Fire, see John Haldon, '"Greek Fire" Revisited: Recent and
Current Research', in Byzantine Style, Religion, and Civilization: In
Honour of Sir Steven Runciman, ed. Steven Runciman and Elizabeth
Jeffreys (Cambridge University Press, 2006).↩
8. I use welfare and standards of living interchangeably here. This is
gauged by real income (income accounting for inflation), as this is the
way it is usually measured in the economic history literature. Thanks
to Eric Cline for noticing how this echoes the Egyptian saying of 'life,
prosperity, and happiness'.↩
9. Bas van Leeuwen, Jieli Li, and Reinhard Pirngruber, 'The Standard of
Living in Ancient Societies: A Comparison between the Han Empire,
the Roman Empire, and Babylonia', 2013,
https://pure.knaw.nl/ws/files/5691366/CGEHWP45_vanleeuwenetal_9
.pdf. Notably, this paper has not been published in peer-review
literature, although the authors are each well-published economic
historians with expertise in most of the relevant case studies. More
importantly, the broader point is supported by calculations (drawing
from a range of sources) in Daron Acemoglu and Simon Johnson,
Power and Progress: Our Thousand-Year Struggle over Technology
and Prosperity (PublicAffairs, 2023).↩
10. On the height of pharaohs, see Habicht et al., 'Body Height of
Mummified Pharaohs'. For evidence on Native Americans and the
Mycenaeans, as well as height and inequality more broadly, see Boix
and Rosenbluth, 'Bones of Contention'.↩
11. For the estimates of agricultural productivity during 1000-1300 CE, see
Acemoglu and Johnson, Power and Progress. There was, of course,
some variation. Being a farmer in Rome almost certainly was an
improvement on being a farmer in Uruk, one of the earliest cities in
Mesopotamia. Yet many of those improvements came on the back of
conquest, appropriation, and widespread slavery. In any case, these
differences were not enormous. For the best estimate of human height
over the long run (in the UK), see Gregori Galofré-Vilà, Andrew
Hinde, and Aravinda Meera Guntupalli, 'Heights Across the Last 2,000

Years in England', in Research in Economic History, ed. Christopher
Hanes and Susan Wolcott, vol. XXXIV (Emerald Publishing Limited,
2018), 67-98, https://doi.org/10.1108/S0363-326820180000034003.
The general idea is supported by a range of other estimates
summarized in Boix and Rosenbluth, 'Bones of Contention', and
others.↩
12. Tomasz Frackowiak et al., 'Subjective Happiness Among Polish and
Hadza People', Frontiers in Psychology 11 (2020): 1173,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01173; Robert William Martin and
Andrew J. Cooper, 'Subjective Well-Being in a Remote Culture: The
Himba', Personality and Individual Differences 115 (2017): 19-22,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2016.10.021. It's worth noting that
people in modern industrialized countries are taller and happier than
those living in the Roman Empire, hence there should be an even
bigger difference in happiness between nomadic egalitarian foragers
and those living during the peak of historical empires.↩
13. See preceding references in this chapter, as well as chapters 1 and 4.
The evidence that average human height is only just reaching
Palaeolithic levels (for men, at least) is strong. While there are only a
few studies comparing egalitarian hunter-gatherer happiness to that of
industrialized countries, they do produce the common result that the
hunter-gatherer societies are mentally better off. Today, OECD
countries account for around 17 per cent of global population. A fairer
comparison of average global happiness would be a factory worker in
China or a peasant farmer in sub-Saharan Africa against an egalitarian
forager. The difference in happiness is likely to be far more
striking.↩
14. For an overview, see Acemoglu and Johnson, Power and Progress.↩
15. Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, 336.↩
16. Scheidel, The Great Leveler, 448.↩
17. It may have been as much as 60 per cent in places such as Greece and
the British Isles.↩
18. On height after the Black Death, see Galofré-Vilà, Hinde, and
Guntupalli, 'Heights Across the Last 2,000 Years in England'; Emily J.
Brennan and Sharon N. DeWitte, 'Sexual Stature Difference

Fluctuations in Pre- and Post-Black Death London as an Indicator of
Living Standards', American Journal of Human Biology 34, no. 10
(2022): e23783, https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.23783. Interestingly,
women seem to benefit less in terms of height, and in some cases
average heights even decrease. This is likely to have been because
better nutrition meant that women reached puberty earlier and stopped
growing. Sharon N. DeWitte, 'Mortality Risk and Survival in the
Aftermath of the Medieval Black Death', ed. Andrew Noymer, PLOS
ONE 9, no. 5 (2014): e96513,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0096513, found lower mortality
rates in the wake of the Black Death. On wages, see Fernand Braudel,
Capitalism and Material Life: 1400-1800 (Fontana/Collins, 1979),
chap. 3. As the historian of epidemics Samuel Cohn Jr remarked, the
Black Death did not result in the 'decline, or collapse of civilizations,
at least in Europe, but instilled remarkable resilience'. Samuel K.
Cohn, 'The Black Death: Collapse, Resilience, and Transformation', in
How Worlds Collapse, ed. Miguel Centeno et al. (Routledge, 2023),
191, https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003331384-13.↩
19. For an overview, see Scheidel, The Great Leveler, chap. 10. On the
demise of feudalism and wider institutional impacts, see Remi Jedwab,
Noel D. Johnson, and Mark Koyama, 'The Economic Impact of the
Black Death', Journal of Economic Literature 60, no. 1 (2022): 132-
78, https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.20201639; David D. Haddock and
Lynne Kiesling, 'The Black Death and Property Rights', Journal of
Legal Studies 31, no. S2 (2002): S545-87,
https://doi.org/10.1086/345566. On the economic benefits of the
plague (or, the 'plague bonus'), see James Belich, The World the
Plague Made: The Black Death and the Rise of Europe (Princeton
University Press, 2022).↩
20. Van Bavel and Scheffer, 'Historical Effects of Shocks on
Inequality'.↩
21. Leticia Arroyo Abad, Elwyn Davies, and Jan Luiten van Zanden,
'Between Conquest and Independence: Real Wages and Demographic
Change in Spanish America, 1530-1820', Explorations in Economic
History 49, no. 2 (2012): 149-66,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2011.12.001. A broader analysis of why

power and not just technology matters for real wages can be found in
Acemoglu and Johnson, Power and Progress. Inclusive institutions
and how power is distributed can also help explain why societies fared
differently when facing the plague. Both medieval England (1348-50)
and Egypt under the rule of the Mamluk Sultanate (1347-9) were
struck by the Black Death. Both suffered in a similar way. Mamluk
Egypt lost around a third of its population, which was then followed by
a flooding of the Nile, grain shortages, famine, and conflict. The
Mamluks completely mismanaged the crisis: they gave little aid to the
commoners and instead spent lavishly on new construction projects.
Rural areas suffered large loss of life, lowering the tax revenue of the
empire, and it underspent on its irrigation infrastructure, worsening the
lot of the farmers. This mismanagement and recurring bouts of the
plague for the next century both contributed to its fall in 1517. In
contrast, we've already seen that England in the decades that followed
had a large-scale improvement in the health, wages, and well-being of
the population, especially peasants. The difference in outcomes results
from a difference in how both elites and commoners responded. And
part of that difference was due to inclusive institutions: England
already had a parliament, while the Mamluks had a supreme sultan
who ruled through generals and provincial governors.↩
22. While many others had access to gunpowder and iron (including China
and the Mughal Empire in India), Europeans more aggressively refined
and developed their arsenals, as well as the military tactics to use
them. See Philip T. Hoffman, Why Did Europe Conquer the World?
(Princeton University Press, 2015).↩
23. Scheidel, Escape from Rome; Hoffman, Why Did Europe Conquer the
World? New financial institutions essentially helped to extend the
monetary supply and fuel the military-industrial complex. One pivotal
development was the creation of the Bank of England, in 1694. It was
not constructed to drive economic growth and stability, but rather to
assist a war against the French (the War of the League of Augsburg). It
issued mutual shares with a guaranteed 8 per cent return and within a
year had raised £1.5 million for the war effort. Within a decade Britain
had defeated the French. See Tim Di Muzio and Matt Dow, 'Uneven
and Combined Confusion: On the Geopolitical Origins of Capitalism
and the Rise of the West', Cambridge Review of International Affairs

30, no. 1 (2017): 14-18,
https://doi.org/10.1080/09557571.2016.1256949; Tim Di Muzio,
Carbon Capitalism: Energy, Social Reproduction and World Order
(Rowman & Littlefield International, 2015); Haldon, 'The Political
Economy of Empire: "Imperial Capital" and the Formation of Central
and Regional Elites', 201-2.↩
24. Larry Neal and Jeffrey G. Williamson, eds., The Cambridge History of
Capitalism (Cambridge University Press, 2014),
https://doi.org/10.1017/CHO9781139095099.↩
25. As with the Bronze Age, rarer items from more distant lands usually
meant more status.↩
26. Belich, The World the Plague Made. Book production collapsed with
the plague, when far too many of the already scarce class of writers
and scholars died. This encouraged the development and uptake of the
1440 Gutenberg printing press. By 1500, Western Europe had
produced 20 million books.↩
27. Another key was fossil fuels. Around the same time, deforestation
made timber in England scarce, sending its price skyrocketing and
encouraging a move towards alternative energy sources such as coal.
See Di Muzio, Carbon Capitalism. Others argue that it was not
deforestation that drove the push towards coal, but rather active
attempts by elites to undermine labour power (Andreas Malm, Fossil
Capital: The Rise of Steam-Power and the Roots of Global Warming
(Verso, 2016).)↩
28. Jason Hickel, Less Is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World
(Windmill Books, 2021), 49. The 'peasants are too rich' quote comes
from Christopher Dyer, 'A Redistribution of Incomes in England',
Past and Present 39, no. 1 (1968): 11-33,
https://doi.org/10.1093/past/39.1.11. Malm, Fossil Capital.↩
29. Haldon, 'The Political Economy of Empire', 184.↩
30. Rein Taagepera, 'Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large
Polities: Context for Russia', International Studies Quarterly 41, no. 3
(1997): 485-7, https://doi.org/10.1111/0020-8833.00053.↩
31. Based on data from Scheidel, 'The Scale of Empire'. I've taken the
largest empire of every 500 years for the past 2,500 years, as well as

the first empire to approach 1 million km2 (the Akkadian Empire). I've
made one slight change by opting for the Roman Empire over the
Macedonian Empire, mainly because the latter was so short-lived.↩
32. Daniel Headrick, 'A Double-Edged Sword: Communications and
Imperial Control in British India', Historical Social Research /
Historische Sozialforschung 35, no. 1 (2010): 53,
https://doi.org/10.12759/HSR.35.2010.1.51-65.↩
33. Mohini Lal Majumdar, Early History and Growth of Postal System in
India (RDDHI-India, 1995), 252.↩
34. Mortality estimates for the invasion of the Americas were taken from
Alexander Koch et al., 'Earth System Impacts of the European Arrival
and Great Dying in the Americas after 1492', Quaternary Science
Reviews 207 (2019): 13-36,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2018.12.004. Estimates for the
Black Death are from White, The Great Big Book of Horrible Things.
These were then cross-referenced with global population estimates
from Our World in Data, 'Population, 10,000 BCE to 2021', Our World
in Data, 2022, https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/population?
yScale=log. Luke Muelhauser also provides a useful dataset which
compares different high-mortality events with global population
estimates:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/14I49e43PphzocDcZghYm6ek
QZcJ3JeuicJ9ZafTa7GA/edit?gid=447443392#gid=447443392.
However, his estimates of the Mongol conquests under Chinggis Khan
are outdated and too high (reaching almost 10 per cent under his
calculations). Using more reliable data suggests that the Mongol
Empire was closer to killing around 2 per cent of global population
(around 10-14 million people, rather than 37-40 million). For a
discussion of the problems with the initial estimates of Mongol
casualties, and suggestions for more plausible numbers, see Michael
Mann, 'Have Wars and Violence Declined?', Theory and Society 47,
no. 1 (2018): 43-5, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-018-9305-y.↩
35. On global decimation threats, see Kemp et al., 'Climate Endgame'.↩
36. Johan Elverskog, 'Zünghar (Dzungar) Khanate', in The Encyclopedia
of Empire, ed. Nigel Dalziel and John M. MacKenzie (Wiley, 2016),
1-6, https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118455074.wbeoe065.↩

37. Frankopan, The Earth Transformed, 383.↩
38. Malešević, The Rise of Organised Brutality. Chains of command also
help to diffuse responsibility across numerous individuals, giving
every person an easier way to rationalize immoral actions, such as 'If I
don't do it, someone else will'.↩
39. Gary Uzonyi, 'State Failure, Genocide and Politicide Reconsidered',
British Journal of Politics and International Relations 25, no. 1
(2023): 83-101, https://doi.org/10.1177/13691481211044654.↩
CHAPTER 14: COLONIZATION AND COLLAPSE
1. Not to be confused with the other Francisco Hernández de Córdoba,
who founded Nicaragua.↩
2. The Columbian Exchange may have also introduced syphilis into
Europe from the Americas, although this is a matter of ongoing debate.
Others believe that syphilis had already been in Europe for a long
period of time. See Marylynn Salmon, 'Manuscripts and Art Support
Archaeological Evidence that Syphilis Was in Europe Long Before
Explorers Could Have Brought It Home from the Americas', The
Conversation, 13 July 2022, https://theconversation.com/manuscripts-
and-art-support-archaeological-evidence-that-syphilis-was-in-europe-
long-before-explorers-could-have-brought-it-home-from-the-americas-
182114.↩
3. On the Aztecs, see Guido Alfani and Alfonso Carballo, 'Income and
Inequality in the Aztec Empire on the Eve of the Spanish Conquest',
Nature Human Behaviour 7 (2023): 1265-74,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01636-3.↩
4. Michael E. Smith and Maëlle Sergheraert, 'The Aztec Empire', in The
Oxford World History of Empire, vol. II: The History of Empires, ed.
Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford
University Press, 2021), 276-88,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780197532768.003.0024. On taxation,
see Michael E. Smith, 'The Aztecs Paid Taxes, Not Tribute', Mexicon
36, no. 1 (2014): 19-22,
www.academia.edu/6578625/_The_Aztecs_Paid_Taxes_Not_Tribute_
2014_. For an overview of how advanced Mesoamerican society was,

see Charles C. Mann, 1491: New Revelations of the Americas before
Columbus (Vintage, 2006). Smith and Sergheraert, 'The Aztec
Empire', provide an overview of the empire.↩
5. Mann, 1491, 124.↩
6. Matthew Restall, When Montezuma Met Cortés: The True Story of the
Meeting That Changed History (ECCO, 2018).↩
7. On Motecuhzoma's hesitation and the paralysis of the Aztecs, see
Smith and Sergheraert, 'The Aztec Empire', 289-90.↩
8. Ross Hassig, Mexico and the Spanish Conquest (University of
Oklahoma Press, 2006); Nichols and Collins, 'Episodes of the
Feathered Serpent', 177-9. For good general summaries of the 'New
Conquest History' literature which emphasize indigenous autonomy
and rebellion, see Camilla Townsend, Fifth Sun: A New History of the
Aztecs (Oxford University Press, 2019); Matthew Restall, Seven Myths
of the Spanish Conquest (Oxford University Press, 2021).↩
9. Pizarro was a second cousin, once removed, of Cortés.↩
10. This might seem an unlikely statistic, but it is corroborated by multiple
sources. Bear in mind that we are talking about a dozen or more relay
runners, while the horses weren't being relayed and were not at full
gallop since they were on mountainous and often very winding
roads.↩
11. Chris Given-Wilson, 'Bureaucracy Without Alphabetic Writing:
Governing the Inca Empire, c.1438-1532', in Empires and
Bureaucracy in World History: From Late Antiquity to the Twentieth
Century, ed. Peter Crooks and Timothy H. Parsons (Cambridge
University Press, 2016), 22,
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316694312.005.↩
12. The Incan Empire was an absolute, authoritarian monarchy with the
ruling Sapa Incans claiming direct divine lineage. Each local polity
had a landscape deity known as a huaca. All local inhabitants believed
they had some ancestral link to the huaca, and a local leader, known as
a kuraka, claimed direct and privileged lineage to this deity. These kin-
line relationships, known as ayllus, extended up to the Incan supreme
ruler. This divine web of relations justified the mita taxes
(contributions of labour) that the ruling Inca exacted from their

territories. However, such a nested hierarchy was new for many
peoples and often fragile.↩
13. The population data is from Koch et al., 'Earth System Impacts of the
European Arrival and Great Dying in the Americas after 1492'. For a
useful overview of the Incan economy and society, see Gordon Francis
McEwan, The Incas: New Perspectives (ABC-CLIO, 2006).↩
14. That resistance continued even after the death of Atahualpa.
Atahualpa's brother organized a rebellion against the Spaniards and
almost succeeded in annihilating them. Despite heavy losses, the
Spanish prevailed, pushing the Incan rebels out of the Andes. The
Incan renegades moved inland to the edge of the Amazon and
established a new hidden capital: Vilcabamba. From there they fought
a thirty-six-year guerilla war against the Spanish. For an overview of
the fall of the Incan Empire, see Kim MacQuarrie, The Last Days of
the Incas (Simon & Schuster, 2008).↩
15. Nichols and Collins, 'Episodes of the Feathered Serpent', 184. See
also Laura E. Matthew and Michel R. Oudijk, eds., Indian
Conquistadors: Indigenous Allies in the Conquest of Mesoamerica
(University of Oklahoma Press, 2007).↩
16. Camilla Townsend, 'Burying the White Gods: New Perspectives on the
Conquest of Mexico', American Historical Review 108, no. 3 (2003),
https://doi.org/10.1086/ahr/108.3.659.↩
17. Robert J. DiNapoli et al., 'Approximate Bayesian Computation of
Radiocarbon and Paleoenvironmental Record Shows Population
Resilience on Rapa Nui (Easter Island)', Nature Communications 12,
no. 1 (June 2021): 3939, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-24252-z;
Carl Lipo, Robert J. DiNapoli, and Terry Hunt, 'Claims and Evidence
in the Population History of Rapa Nui (Easter Island)', in The
Prehistory of Rapa Nui (Easter Island): Towards an Integrative
Interdisciplinary Framework, ed. Valenti Rull and Christopher
Stephenson (Springer, 2022), 565-85; Terry L. Hunt and Carl P. Lipo,
The Statues That Walked: Unraveling the Mystery of Easter Island
(Free Press, 2011).↩
18. The latest evidence suggests that the deforestation came from humans,
not introduced rats gnawing at palm tree seeds. See Andreas Mieth and
Hans-Rudolf Bork, 'Humans, Climate or Introduced Rats - Which Is

to Blame for the Woodland Destruction on Prehistoric Rapa Nui
(Easter Island)?', Journal of Archaeological Science 37, no. 2 (2010):
417, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2009.10.006.↩
19. Carl P. Lipo et al., 'Weapons of War? Rapa Nui Mata'a Morphometric
Analyses', Antiquity 90, no. 349 (2016): 172-87,
https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2015.189. The ecocide narrative largely
rests on high estimates of a population of around 17,000 prior to
European contact. The most recent evidence thoroughly debunks this.
Numerous different methods, including shortwave infrared (SWIR)
satellite scanning, have shown that the rock garden agriculture used by
the Rapa Nui could never have supported such numbers. Instead, the
island would have had a maximum population of around 3-4,000.
That's also the rough number reported by the Europeans who first
contacted the island. See Dylan S. Davis et al., 'Island-Wide
Characterization of Agricultural Production Challenges the
Demographic Collapse Hypothesis for Rapa Nui (Easter Island)',
Science Advances 10, no. 25 (2024): eado1459,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.ado1459; DiNapoli et al., 'Approximate
Bayesian Computation of Radiocarbon and Paleoenvironmental
Record Shows Population Resilience on Rapa Nui (Easter Island)'. For
the most recent DNA analysis which upends the ecocide theory, see J.
Víctor Moreno-Mayar et al., 'Ancient Rapanui Genomes Reveal
Resilience and Pre-European Contact With the Americas', Nature 633,
no. 8029 (2024): 389-97, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07881-
4.↩
20. Nichols and Collins, 'Episodes of the Feathered Serpent', 185. I've
discounted one outdated, outlier estimate of 22 per cent. There are
some suggestions that the particular severity of the introduction of Old
World diseases into the Americas could be due to some kind of genetic
vulnerability, including lower genetic diversity among indigenous
groups. Increased diversity tends to lead to resistance to disease, while
the Americas tended to have lower diversity since only a small
outgroup migrated across the Bering Land Bridge into the Americas.
However, this remains speculative. See I. King Jordan, 'The
Columbian Exchange as a Source of Adaptive Introgression in Human
Populations', Biology Direct 11, no. 1 (2016): 6,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13062-016-0121-x. On Australia, see Peter

Dowling, Fatal Contact: How Epidemics Nearly Wiped Out Australia's
First Peoples (Monash University Publishing, 2021). For Hawaii, Roy
Porter, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of
Humanity (W. W. Norton, 1999), 466.↩
21. Nichols and Collins, 'Episodes of the Feathered Serpent', 179-84.↩
22. On Tasmania, the population of 7,000 was nearly wiped out by disease,
mass killings, and the frequent kidnapping of women and children. The
remaining 220 survivors were shipped away from their homeland to
Flinders Island. The overcrowded and poorly ventilated conditions
made outbreaks of sickness even worse. The mission was closed when
only forty-six remained. It is what many historians consider to be an
early case of genocide. Henry Reynolds, An Indelible Stain? The
Question of Genocide in Australia's History (Viking, 2001), 1;
Dowling, Fatal Contact.↩
23. Robbie Ethridge, 'The Rise and Fall of Mississippian Ancient Towns
and Cities, 1000-1700', in Oxford Research Encyclopedia of American
History (Oxford University Press, 2018), 15-16,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.013.349; Ben
Raffield, 'Broken Worlds: Towards an Archaeology of the Shatter
Zone', Journal of Archaeological Method and Theory 28, no. 3 (2021):
871-910, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10816-021-09520-y.↩
24. Ethridge, 'The Rise and Fall of Mississippian Ancient Towns and
Cities, 1000-1700', 14-15.↩
25. The Haudenosaunee were more complicated. They lost thousands due
to introduced epidemics and used captured peoples to replace them -
quite literally. During a ritual ceremony known as the requickening,
they would have the captive adopt the persona and position of a
deceased member.↩
26. Robbie Franklin Ethridge, 'Introduction', in Mapping the
Mississippian Shatter Zone: The Colonial Indian Slave Trade and
Regional Instability in the American South, ed. Sheri Marie Shuck-
Hall (University of Nebraska Press, 2009), 8, 14, 30; Matthew H.
Jennings, 'Violence in a Shattered World', ibid., 280.↩
27. Jennings, 'Violence in a Shattered World', 284.↩

28. Ethridge, 'Introduction', 39; Jennings, 'Violence in a Shattered World',
281-6.↩
29. Ronald Robinson, 'Non-European Foundations of European
Imperialism: Sketch for a Theory of Collaboration', Studies in the
Theory of Imperialism 120 (1972); Ronald Robinson, 'The Excentric
Idea of Imperialism, With or Without Empire', in Imperialism, ed.
Peter H. Cain and Mark Harrison (Routledge, 2023), 334-58,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003101529.↩
30. Nichols and Collins, 'Episodes of the Feathered Serpent', 184-5;
James Lockhart, The Nahuas After the Conquest: A Social and
Cultural History of the Indians of Central Mexico, Sixteenth Through
Eighteenth Centuries (Stanford University Press, 1993).↩
31. Henry Kamen, Spain's Road to Empire: The Making of a World Power,
1492-1763 (Penguin, 2003).↩
32. Those that were not colonized often took on the shape of the
colonizers regardless. Japan first encountered Portugal in 1543.
Thereafter Japan started to look increasingly like a European colonial
empire. It adopted their tactics and even their way of defending
colonization. For instance, when Japan invaded Taiwan in 1874, it did
so under a justification of bringing civilization to a savage, backward
indigenous population. It established a powerful colonial empire that
was influenced by Europeans. It's a process that scholars call 'imperial
mimesis': one empire replicating the features of another successful
one. It is, once again, an example of Goliath evolution. It was far safer
to become a colonizer than risk being colonized. Robert Tierney,
'Japanese Imperialism', in The Encyclopedia of Postcolonial Studies,
ed. Sangeeta Ray and Henry Schwarz (Wiley, 2016), 1-7,
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119076506.wbeps184. Robert Eskildsen,
'Of Civilization and Savages: The Mimetic Imperialism of Japan's
1874 Expedition to Taiwan', American Historical Review 107, no. 2
(2002), https://doi.org/10.1086/ahr/107.2.388, explores how Japan
used a 'civilizing' narrative inspired by the European empires to justify
its colonies, including its military expedition to Taiwan. Graeber and
Sahlins have instead referred to this as 'galactic mimesis', based on
their renaming of empires as 'galactic polities'. See Graeber and
Sahlins, On Kings, 13.↩

33. Angus Maddison, Contours of the World Economy, 1-2030 AD (Oxford
University Press, 2007), table A.1, table A.5. Dylan Sullivan and Jason
Hickel, 'Capitalism and Extreme Poverty: A Global Analysis of Real
Wages, Human Height, and Mortality Since the Long 16th Century',
World Development 161 (2023): 12,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2022.106026. The figure of 50
million is based on India's death rate in the 1880s. However, this rate
was already high. When compared to mortality in sixteenth- and
seventeenth-century England, the estimated excess deaths under
British rule triples to 165 million.↩
34. Scott, Against the Grain, 113-15.↩
35. At the individual level, a greater degree of involvement with farming
is strongly associated with higher fertility, but there is a lot of variation
across cultures. For instance, stronger dependence on market labour
seems to reduce fertility. See Page et al., 'Women's Subsistence
Strategies Predict Fertility across Cultures, but Context Matters'. Some
studies (H. Jabran Zahid, Erick Robinson, and Robert L. Kelly,
'Agriculture, Population Growth, and Statistical Analysis of the
Radiocarbon Record', Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 113, no. 4 (2016): 931-5,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1517650112) have found that modern
North American hunter-gatherers have population growth rates that
surpass early European farmers. Yet even if their fertility and growth
rates were higher, their long-term population size was still constrained
by the environment. This explains why population growth rates from
the archaeological record are usually orders of magnitude lower than
those observed in modern hunter-gatherers. For a discussion, see
Miikka Tallavaara and Erlend Kirkeng Jørgensen, 'Why Are
Population Growth Rate Estimates of Past and Present Hunter-
Gatherers So Different?', Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences 376, no. 1816 (2021): 20190708,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0708.↩
36. The estimates of hunter-gatherer densities come from David Pimentel
and Marcia Pimentel, Food, Energy, and Society, 3rd edn (CRC Press,
2008), 45-6. I've then translated these from hectares into square
kilometres.↩

37. Carlo Martuscelli, 'The Populist Right Wants You to Make More
Babies. The Question Is How', Politico, 11 September 2023,
www.politico.eu/article/eu-populist-right-want-you-make-more-
babies-viktor-orban/. Any slowing of population growth is also usually
met with dismay by the powerful. It's a sentiment perhaps best
expressed by Elon Musk's hyperbolic (as well as wrong and self-
serving) opinion that 'population collapse due to low birth rates is a
much bigger risk to civilization than global warming'.↩
38. Frank Götmark and Malte Andersson, 'Human Fertility in Relation to
Education, Economy, Religion, Contraception, and Family Planning
Programs', BMC Public Health 20, no. 1 (2020): 265,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-020-8331-7. Naturally we need to be
careful here as there are multiple confounding factors (although this
study does try to control for these by examining five of the most
powerful factors: education, religiosity, economic strength (GDP and
GDP per capita), the prevalence of contraceptives, and family
planning).↩
39. Geography played an additional, crucial role. Geographical barriers
such as mountains and swamps, which tended to block the spread of
Goliaths and favour the art of not being governed, also tended to block
the transmission of culture and disease (Chira, Gray, and Botero,
'Geography Is Not Destiny'). Note that the analysis here is largely for
cultural transmission, not disease, although the two are certainly going
to overlap; both are primarily transmitted by humans, after all.
Notably, the study did not find support for Jared Diamond's hypothesis
that the axis of continents would significantly help or hinder the spread
of culture and disease. Geography also helped with the spread of
disease between Goliaths. For instance, the Black Death that ravaged
medieval Europe (1346-53) came from Kyrgyzstan, on the border of
China, and travelled down the Silk Road; its spread across Europe
correlates with traders moving down navigable rivers. See Maria A.
Spyrou et al., 'The Source of the Black Death in Fourteenth-Century
Central Eurasia', Nature 606, no. 7915 (2022): 718-24,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04800-3. See also Ricci P. H. Yue,
Harry F. Lee, and Connor Y. H. Wu, 'Trade Routes and Plague
Transmission in Pre-Industrial Europe', Scientific Reports 7, no. 1
(2017): 12973, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-13481-2, and

'Navigable Rivers Facilitated the Spread and Recurrence of Plague in
Pre-Industrial Europe', Scientific Reports 6, no. 1 (2016): 34867,
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep34867.↩
40. The plague also played a role, with the Mongols particularly hard hit
owing to their situation at the junction of China and Europe.↩
41. The Chin and other examples are recounted in Scott, The Art of Not
Being Governed, chap. 6.↩
42. They are what the anthropologist David Graeber would have called
'shit jobs'. These are not to be confused with 'bullshit jobs' like
investment banking, which are socially pointless and even harmful but
often well reimbursed. David Graeber, Bullshit Jobs (Simon &
Schuster, 2018).↩
43. The four ingredients discussed in this section are a combination of
ideas from the three great thinkers referenced above: James C. Scott,
Jared Diamond, and David Graeber. Scott points to fertility as the key
advantage agriculturalists had over foragers. Diamond provides a
compelling case for disease and military technology as being key to
the triumph of the West. Graeber's idea of shit and bullshit jobs, while
never applied to this topic, provides a conceptual backbone.↩
44. For a summary, see Mark Koyama and Jared Rubin, How the World
Became Rich: The Historical Origins of Economic Growth (Polity
Press, 2022), chap. 7.↩
45. David Stasavage, 'Was Weber Right? The Role of Urban Autonomy in
Europe's Rise', American Political Science Review 108, no. 2 (2014):
337-54; Koyama and Rubin, How the World Became Rich, chap. 7.↩
46. A similar point is raised in the framework of Hartley, 'State Crisis
Theory'. In short, conditions which improve 'sufficiency', such as
positive technological change, economic development, and more open
institutions can help ensure crisis doesn't escalate into collapse.↩
47. David Eltis and Lawrence C. Jennings, 'Trade Between Western Africa
and the Atlantic World in the Pre-Colonial Era', American Historical
Review 93, no. 4 (1988): 944, https://doi.org/10.2307/1863530. On the
link between slave demand and malaria, see Elena Esposito, 'The Side
Effects of Immunity: Malaria and African Slavery in the United
States', American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 14, no. 3

(2022): 290, 325-6, https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20190372. Particular
African ethnicities who appeared to be more malaria-resistant also
fetched higher prices in the Louisiana slave market.↩
48. Hochschild, Bury the Chains, 67.↩
49. Sullivan and Hickel, 'Capitalism and Extreme Poverty'. On life
expectancy, see E. A. Wrigley and Roger Schofield, The Population
History of England, 1541-1871: A Reconstruction (Cambridge
University Press, 1989). On heights, see Galofré-Vilà, Hinde, and
Guntupalli, 'Heights Across the Last 2,000 Years in England', fig.
5.↩
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 15: COLLAPSE IN THE MODERN WORLD
1. The 84 per cent estimate comes from Hoffman, Why Did Europe
Conquer the World?, 2. The US also had Cuba as a territory until
1902.↩
2. The Portuguese held on longest to their official colonial empire, which
ended in 1999 when it handed Macau back to the People's Republic of
China (making Portugal the first and last maritime colonial
empire).↩
3. Daniel Immerwahr, 'A New History of World War II', The Atlantic, 4
April 2022, www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/05/world-
war-ii-empire-colonialism/629371/; Richard Overy, Blood and Ruins:
The Last Imperial War, 1931-1945 (Viking, 2022); Daniel Immerwahr,
'How the US Has Hidden Its Empire', Guardian, 15 February 2019,
www.theguardian.com/news/2019/feb/15/the-us-hidden-empire-
overseas-territories-united-states-guam-puerto-rico-american-samoa;
Daniel Immerwahr, How to Hide an Empire: A History of the Greater
United States (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2019).↩
4. Although the White House had been trying to assist France and the UK
through finance. It had also already imposed an oil embargo on the
Japanese.↩
5. Sharanya Deepak, 'A "Forgotten Holocaust" Is Missing from Indian
Food Stories', Gastro Obscura, 17 September 2020,
www.atlasobscura.com/articles/indian-food-writing; Michael Safi,
'Churchill's Policies Contributed to 1943 Bengal Famine - Study',
Guardian, 29 March 2019,
www.theguardian.com/world/2019/mar/29/winston-churchill-policies-
contributed-to-1943-bengal-famine-study.↩
6. John Darwin, Decolonization: A History of Failure, Library of
Congress, 13 July 2011, www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y7bRx5fEJbU,
provides an eloquent overview of the process of decolonization and
why the disorderly process could even be considered 'a failure'. Stuart
Ward, 'Decolonization and Neocolonialism', in The Oxford World
History of Empire, vol. II: The History of Empires, ed. Peter Fibiger
Bang, C. A. Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press,

2021), 1161-86,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780197532768.003.0042, provides
another useful summary.↩
7. Mohammed Hussein and Mohammed Haddad, 'Infographic: US
Military Presence around the World', Al Jazeera, 9 October 2021,
www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/9/10/infographic-us-military-presence-
around-the-world-interactive. Figures come from the SIPRI Military
Expenditure Database (1949-2023), www.sipri.org/databases/milex.
Note that when making the defence spending comparison on a
purchasing power parity basis (i.e. in real terms for each country), the
US defence budget is only about as large as the next two countries
(China and Russia) combined. In contrast to the 750 US military bases,
China has only one such base overseas: a naval base in Djibouti.↩
8. Sidita Kushi and Monica Duffy Toft, 'Introducing the Military
Intervention Project: A New Dataset on US Military Interventions,
1776-2019', Journal of Conflict Resolution 67, no. 4 (2023): 752,
https://doi.org/10.1177/00220027221117546.↩
9. John Hall, 'The End of Empires', in The Oxford World History of
Empire, vol. I: The Imperial Experience, ed. Peter Fibiger Bang, C. A.
Bayly, and Walter Scheidel (Oxford University Press, 2021),
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780199772360.003.0017.↩
10. The quotes come from Ron Suskind, 'Without a Doubt', New York
Times, 17 October 2004. I unfortunately had to spend far too much
time observing how the US shapes the world. My PhD thesis focused
on how to manage US participation in international environmental
treaties. While US participation tends to be critical to the success of
international treaties, it also has the unfortunate habit of rarely
ratifying (legally joining) them. During my PhD I repeatedly warned
of the dangers of watering down the Paris Climate Agreement to
encourage the US to join it. Alas, I was unsuccessful, and the US got
its way in the end. Despite the Paris Agreement being weakened, the
US still withdrew from it under President Trump in 2020, and is set to
do so again at the time of writing. We now have an international
climate agreement that is universal and useless. See Luke Kemp, 'A
Systems Critique of the 2015 Paris Agreement on Climate', in
Pathways to a Sustainable Economy, ed. Moazzem Hossain, Robert

Hales, and Tapan Sarker (Springer International, 2018), 25-41,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67702-6_3; Luke Kemp, 'Better
Out Than In', Nature Climate Change 7, no. 7 (2017): 458-60,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3309; Luke Kemp, 'US-Proofing the
Paris Climate Agreement', Climate Policy 17, no. 1 (2017): 86-101,
https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2016.1176007.↩
11. The Catalans instead have been folded into Spain (owing to previous
imperial conquest), the Scots into the UK (owing to previous imperial
conquest), while the Kurds are dispersed across Turkey, Iraq, and Syria
(owing to the victors of the First World War breaking their promise to
establish a Kurdish state). Strangely, many will still reflexively hate
any attempt by these nations to secede. Kumar, Empires, chap. 4
makes the point about nations and states often not overlapping.↩
12. There is a copious literature on this, usually under the banner of
'dependency theory' or 'world-systems theory'. The essential idea is
that we now operate under a single economic system which has a
'core' composed of former colonial empires and their closest allies.
This exploits a 'periphery' of formerly conquered and dominated
countries, primarily in Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asia.
Countries can move between the core and periphery, usually first by
becoming a 'semi-periphery' country. Prominent examples of such
mobility include China and Singapore. The classical text on world-
systems theory is Wallerstein, World-Systems Analysis. For an
accessible overview of how debt and unfair trade have led to
underdevelopment in poorer countries, see Jason Hickel, The Divide: A
Brief Guide to Global Inequality and Its Solutions (Heinemann,
2017).↩
13. Jason Hickel et al., 'Imperialist Appropriation in the World Economy:
Drain from the Global South through Unequal Exchange, 1990-2015',
Global Environmental Change 73 (2022): 102467,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2022.102467.↩
14. Jason Hickel, Morena Hanbury Lemos, and Felix Barbour, 'Unequal
Exchange of Labour in the World Economy', Nature Communications
15, no. 1 (2024): 6298, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-49687-y.
Note that I'm using 'unequal exchange' a little differently from how it
is commonly defined in the ecological economics literature. That's

because unequal exchange is such a broad term it better captures all
forms of exchange that are done on an unequal power basis, including
tribute and tax. I'm terming the transfer of resources from low-income
to high-income countries due to structural economic differences - such
as debt, wage differences, and trade agreements - unequal trade rather
than unequal exchange. That is because trade is the primary conduit for
the extraction of resources, not tax or tribute.↩
15. For a broader discussion of determinants of economic growth across
different countries, see Koyama and Rubin, How the World Became
Rich. They highlight the key factors as geography, demography,
culture, institutions, and colonization. As we'll cover later, the
importance of colonialism leaving more exclusive economic
institutions in some countries has also been highlighted in the Nobel
Prize-winning work of Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson: see
especially Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson,
'The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical
Investigation', American Economic Review 91, no. 5 (2001): 1369-
401; Acemoglu and Robinson, Why Nations Fail.↩
16. The potential sole exception here is North Korea. However, even
North Korea still has many of the key ingredients of capitalism: private
markets, private companies, wage labour, and a goal of economic
growth. While private property is technically banned, it still often
occurs in practice and the government still permits (with oversight) the
transfer and inheritance of property. North Korea is more capitalist
than most think.↩
17. Katharina Pistor, The Code of Capital: How the Law Creates Wealth
and Inequality (Princeton University Press, 2020), chapter 1.
Milanović, Capitalism, Alone, makes the compelling case that all
countries are now capitalist. There are different flavours of capitalism,
such as authoritarian and liberal, but they all have the same basic
economic structure. On surveillance capitalism, see Shoshana Zuboff,
The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at
the New Frontier of Power (PublicAffairs, 2019).↩
18. And the Grand Duchy of Hesse: a tiny country in central Germany
ruled by a duke.↩
19. Although it was essentially pre-empting Prussia taking it by force.↩

20. Tanisha M. Fazal, 'State Death in the International System',
International Organization 58, no. 2 (2004): 311-44,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818304582048; Tanisha M. Fazal, State
Death: The Politics and Geography of Conquest, Occupation, and
Annexation (Princeton University Press, 2007).↩
21. Brandon Valeriano and John Van Benthuysen, 'When States Die:
Geographic and Territorial Pathways to State Death', Third World
Quarterly 33, no. 7 (2012): 1165-89,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2012.691826.↩
22. Matthias Maass, 'The International States Systems Since 1648 and
Small States' "Systemic Resilience"', International Studies Review 10,
no. 2 (2009): 31-51, https://doi.org/10.1163/2667078X-01002002.↩
23. That respect for borders has birthed an entire literature on just how
brutal and despotic a regime needs to be before another country is
morally justified to undertake a military intervention (known as the
'responsibility to protect', or R2P).↩
24. Despite this, some states have ended and lost their sovereignty since
the end of the Second World War. Some of these were through vicious
civil wars, such as the break-up of Yugoslavia. Others were far more
benign and temporary, such as when Syria combined with Egypt in
1958 to form the short-lived United Arab Republic.↩
25. For an overview, see Robert I. Rotberg, 'Failed States, Collapsed
States, Weak States: Causes and Indicators', in State Failure and State
Weakness in a Time of Terror, ed. Robert I. Rotberg (World Peace
Foundation, 2003), chap. 1, 25.↩
26. Daniel Lambach, Eva Johais, and Markus Bayer, 'Conceptualising
State Collapse: An Institutionalist Approach', Third World Quarterly
36, no. 7 (2015): 1299-1315,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2015.1038338.↩
27. Jan C. Jansen and Jürgen Osterhammel, Decolonization: A Short
History, trans. Jeremiah Riemer (Princeton University Press, 2017),
177. One counter here is that 'there have been numerous failures
before colonization, so it can't be the key cause in the modern world'.
One of the key points of this book is that not only does collapse
change over time, it also depends on how the wider system is

structured. We can't fully understand the Late Bronze Age collapse
without looking at the interconnections between different cities and
empires; similarly we can't fully contemplate modern state failure
without looking at the history of colonization. Note that the
implication here is not that the borders are the only problem: clearly
there are numerous African and Middle Eastern countries with borders
drawn up by European powers that are not weak or failed states.
However, such borders and the history they represent are often a major
problem.↩
28. Rollin F. Tusalem, 'The Colonial Foundations of State Fragility and
Failure', Polity 48, no. 4 (2016): 445-95,
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41279-016-0006-4.↩
29. Robert Fisk, The Great War for Civilization: The Conquest of the
Middle East (Fourth Estate, 2006), xxv. Thanks to Nathaniel Cooke for
suggesting this quote.↩
30. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 'The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development' and Why Nations Fail.↩
31. Hudson, Bowen, and Nielsen, The First Political Order,
'Introduction'.↩
32. The idea of state failure and collapse became prominent after 9/11. US
policymakers blamed Afghanistan for allowing Al-Qaeda operations
within its borders. The underlying fear was that weak, fragile, or failed
states would be a breeding ground for instability and terrorism. As the
2002 US National Security Strategy declared, 'America is now
threatened less by conquering states than by failing ones.' There is now
a veritable industry of indices that measure state fragility and failure,
including by the Brookings Institution and the World Bank. For an
overview of the indices, including their similarities, differences, and
problems, see Ines A. Ferreira, 'Measuring State Fragility: A Review
of the Theoretical Groundings of Existing Approaches', Third World
Quarterly 38, no. 6 (2017): 1291-1309,
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2016.1257907.↩
33. Each of these has some obvious rebuttals. Plenty of fragile states seem
to suffer from too many resources rather than too few. Syria had a
population density of 124 people per sq. km prior to its civil war, while
Italy today has almost double that with 200. Countries such as

Australia and the US have lootable resources like coal and oil but are
far richer and more stable than similarly endowed Venezuela. For
useful critiques of the different hypotheses for why states fail, see
Jonathan Di John, 'Conceptualising the Causes and Consequences of
Failed States: A Critical Review of the Literature', Crisis States
Research Centre paper, 2008, https://gsdrc.org/document-
library/conceptualising-the-causes-and-consequences-of-failed-states-
a-critical-review-of-the-literature/; Jonathan Di John, 'The Concept,
Causes and Consequences of Failed States: A Critical Review of the
Literature and Agenda for Research with Specific Reference to Sub-
Saharan Africa', European Journal of Development Research 22, no. 1
(2010): 10-30, https://doi.org/10.1057/ejdr.2009.44.↩
34. World Bank, 'GDP (Current US$) - Russian Federation', 2023,
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?
locations=RU.↩
35. Our World in Data, 'Population, 10,000 BCE to 2021'. Published under
the Creative Commons License Version 4.0.↩
36. Justin McCurry, 'Story of Cities #24: How Hiroshima Rose from the
Ashes of Nuclear Destruction', Guardian, 18 April 2016,
www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/18/story-of-cities-hiroshima-
japan-nuclear-destruction.↩
37. For definitions, see Brian Walker, David Salt, and Walter Reid,
Resilience Thinking: Sustaining Ecosystems and People in a Changing
World (Island Press, 2012); C. S. Holling, 'Resilience and Stability of
Ecological Systems', Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 4, no.
1 (1973): 1-23, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.es.04.110173.000245;
Graeme S. Cumming and Garry D. Peterson, 'Unifying Research on
Social-Ecological Resilience and Collapse', Trends in Ecology &
Evolution 32, no. 9 (2017): 695-713,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2017.06.014; Carl Folke et al., 'Social-
Ecological Resilience and Biosphere-Based Sustainability Science',
Ecology and Society 21, no. 3 (2016), https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-
08748-210341. They all tend to converge around this rough
formulation. Academics often summarize resilience as 'three Rs':
robustness to shocks (such as disease), recovery from damage, and
resistance to fundamental change. The three Rs comes from R. Quentin

Grafton et al., 'Realizing Resilience for Decision-Making', Nature
Sustainability 2, no. 10 (2019): 907-13,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0376-1.↩
38. Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder
(Random House, 2014).↩
39. Philip Riris et al., 'Frequent Disturbances Enhanced the Resilience of
Past Human Populations', Nature 629, no. 8013 (2024): 837-42,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07354-8. This is technically a
meta-analysis of sixteen studies rather than a single study.↩
40. For instance, the Yandruwandha people of Australia eat a plant called
nardoo that is partially indigestible and mildly toxic. Despite this,
nardoo is a central part of the Yandruwandha diet because over time,
and through trial and error, they have refined a way of cooking it that
reduces the thiaminase concentration (involving grinding and leaching
the flour, cooking it, and then eating it with mussel shells). If you
aren't taught these traditions, they are difficult to develop suddenly,
even in life-or-death situations.↩
41. Henrich, The Secret of Our Success, chap. 3.↩
42. Yitzchak Jaffe, Ari Caramanica, and Max D. Price, 'Towards an
Antifragility Framework in Past Human-Environment Dynamics',
Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 10, no. 1 (2023):
915, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-023-02413-3.↩
43. Others suggest that bigger populations allowed for more innovations
and cultural evolution, although this is highly disputed.↩
44. Taagepera, 'Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities'. For
a fuller analysis and discussion, see Scheidel, 'The Scale of
Empire'.↩
45. There was some selection for more fast-growing grains but no new
source of lootable resources.↩
46. This was part of a host of other governance measures. In China, the
problem of elite competition was partly outmanoeuvred by relying on
eunuchs. The working assumption was that the castrated would not
seize power or seduce the women of the emperor's harem. That often
backfired, with scheming eunuchs even playing a role in the overthrow
of the Han Dynasty. Others tried depending on slaves instead. Both the

Mughal Empire of India and the Ottoman Empire filled their militaries
and bureaucracies with slave soldiers. Slaves were seen as despised
outsiders who were not fully human. This was because they'd faced
'social death', having been ripped from their homes and lineage. Since
slaves were both widely disliked and isolated, they were seen to be less
of a threat, and less likely to jostle for the throne. Empires tried many
different types of governance structures, but the most successful, like
China's reliance on big bureaucracy and coins, tended to be selected
for and emulated by competitors and later regimes. See Orlando
Patterson, Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study: With a
New Preface (Harvard University Press, 2018).↩
47. Cline, After 1177, 2nd edn; Kemp and Cline, 'Systemic Risk and
Resilience in the Bronze Age'.↩
48. Statistics on literacy, height, and infant mortality all come from Our
World in Data.↩
49. See Technology Eats History: Techno Metabolism and Time in the
Anthropocene, Institute of the Humanities and Global Culture, 2022,
www.youtube.com/watch?v=57yQRnfiemw.↩
50. Tim Hatton, 'Air Pollution in Victorian-Era Britain - Its Effects on
Health Now Revealed', The Conversation, 14 November 2017,
https://theconversation.com/air-pollution-in-victorian-era-britain-its-
effects-on-health-now-revealed-87208.↩
51. Sullivan and Hickel, 'Capitalism and Extreme Poverty'; Simon
Szreter, 'Economic Growth, Disruption, Deprivation, Disease, and
Death: On the Importance of the Politics of Public Health for
Development', Population and Development Review 23, no. 4 (1997):
693, https://doi.org/10.2307/2137377.↩
52. Munira Z. Gunja, Evan D. Gumas, and Reginald D. Williams II, 'U.S.
Health Care from a Global Perspective, 2022: Accelerating Spending,
Worsening Outcomes', Commonwealth Fund, 31 January 2023,
www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issue-briefs/2023/jan/us-
health-care-global-perspective-2022.↩
53. Frackowiak et al., 'Subjective Happiness Among Polish and Hadza
People'; Martin and Cooper, 'Subjective Well-Being in a Remote
Culture: The Himba'.↩

54. Carol R. Ember, 'Hunter-Gatherers (Foragers)', Human Relations Area
Files (Yale), 1 June 2020, https://hraf.yale.edu/ehc/summaries/hunter-
gatherers.↩
55. This is to say nothing about their cost in souls and suffering. Many
modern atrocities dwarf historical collapses in their human toll.↩
56. It was originally a project commissioned by the CIA called 'The State
Failure Task Force'. Academic contributors included Jack Goldstone, a
prominent theorist of collapse and revolutions, and the forefather of
structural-demographic theory.↩
57. Naomi Klein, The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism
(Picador, 2008).↩
58. Tom Mueller, Crisis of Conscience: Whistleblowing in an Age of
Fraud (Riverhead Books, 2019).↩
59. There is some emerging empirical evidence that this is the case. See
Kemp et al., '12,000 Years of Accelerating Social System Death'
(forthcoming, 2025). This is based on a workshop held at the Santa Fe
Institute in December 2024.↩
CHAPTER 16: MORS EX MACHINA
1. This vignette is based roughly on the details provided in Pete Pattison,
'"Like Slave and Master": DRC Miners Toil for 30p an Hour to Fuel
Electric Cars', Guardian, 8 November 2021,
www.theguardian.com/global-development/2021/nov/08/cobalt-drc-
miners-toil-for-30p-an-hour-to-fuel-electric-cars.↩
2. Roy Maconachie, '"We Miners Die a Lot." Appalling Conditions and
Poverty Wages: The Lives of Cobalt Miners in the DRC', The
Conversation, 30 January 2024, https://theconversation.com/we-
miners-die-a-lot-appalling-conditions-and-poverty-wages-the-lives-of-
cobalt-miners-in-the-drc-220986.↩
3. Frank Swain, 'The Forgotten Mine That Built the Atomic Bomb', BBC
News, 4 August 2020, www.bbc.com/future/article/20200803-the-
forgotten-mine-that-built-the-atomic-bomb. Technically, the Trinity
and Fat Man bombs were plutonium bombs made from reprocessed
uranium, although both also included pure uranium in the tamper.↩

4. Joseph Kahn, 'China's Coal Miners Risk Danger for a Better Wage',
New York Times, 28 January 2003,
www.nytimes.com/2003/01/28/world/china-s-coal-miners-risk-danger-
for-a-better-wage.html.↩
5. For the typical hazard list approach, see Rees, Our Final Century;
Nick Bostrom and Milan M. Ćirković, eds., Global Catastrophic Risks
(Oxford University Press, 2012); Ord, The Precipice; MacAskill, What
We Owe the Future. This means there is little study even on how risks
such as nuclear weapons and climate change intersect, even if there are
obvious connections. See Sterre van Buuren, Thomas Fraise, and
Benoît Pelopidas, 'Armes Nucléaires et Environnement:', Raison
Présente 230, no. 2 (2024): 97-104,
https://doi.org/10.3917/rpre.230.0097.↩
6. Technically, such a collapse could occur even at or below the level of a
decimation threat, owing to the vulnerability of the Global Goliath
today (see Chapter 18 in particular). I've restricted the present analysis
to above the decimation level both for simplicity and analytical
clarity.↩
7. This is a slightly modified definition of global catastrophic risk from
Kemp et al., 'Climate Endgame', table 1. This diverges from the
typical definitions of global catastrophic risk, which are usually
unhelpfully broad and loose, such as 'serious damage to human
wellbeing on a global scale' (Bostrom and Ćirković, Global
Catastrophic Risks, 1). Such a definition leaves it unclear whether air
pollution or even cigarettes are a global catastrophic risk. Similarly, I
diverge from the usual definitions of existential risk as 'a loss of
humanity's potential' (Nick Bostrom, 'Existential Risk Prevention as
Global Priority', Global Policy 4, no. 1 (2013): 15-31,
https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12002; Nick Bostrom, 'Existential
Risks: Analyzing Human Extinction Scenarios and Related Hazards',
Journal of Evolution and Technology 9 (2002),
https://nickbostrom.com/existential/risks.pdf; Ord, The Precipice).
'Potential' is either left frustratingly vague or specified to mean a
techno-utopian future in which humans have maximum control over
nature, that is, a spacefaring society which harvests stars. Hence,
staying on earth for the next billion years in a borderline utopia, but

failing to take to space, would be an existential threat in this definition.
It's a little silly and not analytically useful. For a full discussion and
critique of the usual definitions, see Carla Zoe Cremer and Luke
Kemp, 'Democratising Risk: In Search of a Methodology to Study
Existential Risk', SSRN Electronic Journal, 2021, 3-13,
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3995225. The definition I use here is a
practical and descriptive one. When people speak of and study
existential risk they are referring to the loss of the existence of either
our global society or our species, that is, a lasting global societal
collapse or human extinction.↩
8. There is the obvious exception of natural hazards such as asteroids and
volcanic eruptions. However, the risk of these also depends on
vulnerabilities, as we'll see in Chapter 18.↩
9. Estimates of the number of deaths range from 110,000 to 210,000:
Alex Wellerstein, 'Counting the Dead at Hiroshima and Nagasaki',
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 4 August 2020,
https://thebulletin.org/2020/08/counting-the-dead-at-hiroshima-and-
nagasaki/.↩
10. Zia Mian and Benoît Pelopidas, 'Producing Collapse: Nuclear
Weapons as Preparation to End Civilization', in How Worlds Collapse,
ed. Miguel Centeno et al. (Routledge, 2023), 25-36,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003331384-21.↩
11. Wallerstein, 'Nukemap'. The scenario imagines the use of a Topol SS-
25 missile (a fairly standard Russian ICBM) in the middle of
downtown New York, with an airburst.↩
12. Alex Wallerstein et al., 'Plan A', Science and Global Security Centre,
2019, https://sgs.princeton.edu/the-lab/plan-a.↩
13. Lili Xia et al., 'Global Food Insecurity and Famine from Reduced
Crop, Marine Fishery and Livestock Production Due to Climate
Disruption from Nuclear War Soot Injection', Nature Food 3, no. 8
(2022): table 1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43016-022-00573-0.↩
14. It might also be better, since that prediction of 5 billion is based on
some pessimistic assumptions, especially the modelling assumption
that there would be no trade in the wake of a nuclear cataclysm. Yet, as

we'll see, there are even more reasons to expect that this is an
underestimate.↩
15. Jessica Moersdorf et al., 'The Fragile State of Industrial Agriculture:
Estimating Crop Yield Reductions in a Global Catastrophic
Infrastructure Loss Scenario', Global Challenges 8, no. 1 (2024):
2300206, https://doi.org/10.1002/gch2.202300206; Christopher
Cooper and Benjamin K. Sovacool, 'Not Your Father's Y2K:
Preparing the North American Power Grid for the Perfect Solar
Storm', Electricity Journal 24, no. 4 (2011): 47-61,
https://doi.org.10.1016/j.tej.2011.04.005. I came across the idea of
Border Gateway Protocol preventing a recovery of the internet while
participating in the 2024 Global Catastrophic Risk Horizon Scan.↩
16. Florian Ulrich Jehn, 'Anthropocene Under Dark Skies: The
Compounding Effects of Nuclear Winter and Overstepped Planetary
Boundaries', in Intersections, Reinforcements, Cascades: Proceedings
of the 2023 Stanford Existential Risks Conference (Stanford Existential
Risks Initiative, 2024), https://doi.org/10.25740/ZB109MZ2513.↩
17. On the statistical debunking of the long peace, see Braumoeller, Only
the Dead; Aaron Clauset, 'Trends and Fluctuations in the Severity of
Interstate Wars', Science Advances 4, no. 2 (2018): eaao3580,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aao3580; Pasquale Cirillo and Nassim
Nicholas Taleb, 'On the Statistical Properties and Tail Risk of Violent
Conflicts', Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications 452
(2016): 29-45, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2016.01.050.↩
18. The number of civil wars has also shown little connection to nuclear
weapons and is now at its highest point in the past three decades. See
Bastian Herre, Lucas Rodés-Guirao, and Max Roser, 'War and Peace',
Our World in Data, 2024, https://ourworldindata.org/war-and-
peace.↩
19. Pavel Aksenov, 'Stanislav Petrov: The Man Who May Have Saved the
World', BBC News, 26 September 2013, www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-
europe-24280831.↩
20. Richard Ned Lebow and Benoît Pelopidas, 'Facing Nuclear War: Luck,
Learning, and the Cuban Missile Crisis', in The Oxford Handbook of
History and International Relations, ed. Mlada Bukovansky et al.

(Oxford University Press, 2023), 705-20,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198873457.013.47.↩
21. Personal communication. This is expanded on in Pelopidas, Betting
Blind. Note that practices over the past three to five decades are still
classified even if older ones have been revealed. Luck is a matter of
disobedience, technical failures, and random decisions: all factors that
lie outside the control apparatus of the military.↩
22. Julian E. Barnes and David E. Sanger, 'U.S. Considers Expanded
Nuclear Arsenal, a Reversal of Decades of Cuts', New York Times, 7
June 2024, www.nytimes.com/2024/06/07/us/politics/us-nuclear-
russia-china.html.↩
23. Kai Kupferschmidt, 'How Canadian Researchers Reconstituted an
Extinct Poxvirus for $100,000 Using Mail-Order DNA', Science, 6
July 2017, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aan7069.↩
24. As noted by Martin Rees in Our Final Century.↩
25. World Health Organization, 'Emerging Technologies and Dual-Use
Concerns: A Horizon Scan for Global Public Health', World Health
Organization horizon scan, 2021,
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/346862.↩
26. There is no definitive answer to how likely a global catastrophic
bioterror attack is. My perspective is largely derived from hearing
discussions between biosecurity and bioengineering experts while
facilitating horizon scans on both bioengineering and dual-use research
of concern, as well as in-depth discussions with colleagues who work
on biosecurity (such as Lalitha Sundaram, Freya Jephcott, and Tom
Hobson) and on existential terrorism (Mel Cowans).↩
27. For a useful summary of different estimates, see Piers Millett and
Andrew Snyder-Beattie, 'Existential Risk and Cost-Effective
Biosecurity', Health Security, 15, no. 4 (2017): 375,
https://doi.org/10.1089/hs.2017.0028.↩
28. Jansen et al., 'Biological Warfare, Bioterrorism, and Biocrime',
Clinical Microbiology and Infection, 20, no. 6 (2014): 494-5,
https://doi.org/10.1111/1469-0691.12699. The authors conclude that
given the low (but not negligible) probability strengthening public

health generally may be wise, especially as they will benefit both
bioterror response and general health.↩
29. Kemp, 'Agents of Doom'. Many of these points have been gathered
from expert discussions while running horizon scans on
bioengineering, biosecurity and dual-use research of concern (Kemp et
al., 'Bioengineering Horizon Scan 2020'; Kemp et al., '80 Questions
for UK Biological Security', PLOS ONE 16, no. 1 (2021): e0241190,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0241190); World Health
Organization, 'Emerging Technologies and Dual-Use Concerns'.↩
30. Centre for AI Safety, 'Statement on AI Risk: AI Experts and Public
Figures Express Their Concern About AI Risk', 2023,
www.safe.ai/statement-on-ai-risk.↩
31. Melissa Heikkilä, 'A Short History of AI, and What It Is (and Isn't)',
MIT Technology Review, 16 July 2024,
www.technologyreview.com/2024/07/16/1095001/a-short-history-of-
ai-and-what-it-is-and-isnt/.↩
32. For one collection of 71 different definitions, see Shane Legg and
Marcus Hutter, 'A Collection of Definitions of Intelligence',
SocArXiv, 25 June 2007: 1-8,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.0706.3639. Perhaps the most common
textbook definition is any machine system capable of functioning
'appropriately and with foresight in its environment' (Nils J. Nilsson,
The Quest for Artificial Intelligence (Cambridge University Press,
2009), 13.↩
33. The computer science researcher Kate Crawford once remarked that
'AI is neither artificial nor intelligent' (Crawford, Atlas of AI (Yale
University Press, 2022)). That might be overstating the case a little, but
she is pointing out a genuine problem, namely that AI as a term can
easily obscure all the materials that go into building an algorithm as
well as the real constraints on their performance.↩
34. The idea of automated cognition is based on personal communications
with Carla Zoe Cremer.↩
35. This is also probably where the idea of the 'Butlerian Jihad' - a
successful crusade against thinking machines - in Frank Herbert's
novel Dune comes from.↩

36. Irving John Good, 'Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent
Machine', in Advances in Computers, 6 (1966), 31-88,
https://dio.org.10.1016.50065-2458(08)60418.0.↩
37. There is, of course, a wider set of potential AI risks, including the slow
and gradual disempowerment of humanity.↩
38. Nick Bostrom, Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies (Oxford
University Press, 2016).↩
39. For an overview of the different surveys, and other forecasting
attempts, see Max Roser, 'AI Timelines: What Do Experts in Artificial
Intelligence Expect for the Future?', Our World in Data, 7 February
2023, https://ourworldindata.org/ai-timelines. Note that similar surveys
turn up similar results. A 2019 survey inquired when AI systems will
be able to complete 90 per cent of the economically relevant tasks that
humans are currently paid to do: 81 per cent said it would happen
within a century, while 1.4 per cent responded that it would never
occur. A 2018 survey asked when AI systems could complete 99 per
cent of the tasks humans are paid to do with equal or superior
competence: 75 per cent said it would happen within the next 100
years, while 22 per cent said it would take longer than 2160. The
superforecasters' estimate is from Ezra Karger et al., 'Forecasting
Existential Risks: Evidence from a Long-Run Forecasting
Tournament', Forecasting Research Institute, 2023. Domain experts in
this study put the risk of an AI-induced extinction a little higher, at
around 3 per cent.↩
40. Philip E. Tetlock, Expert Political Judgment: How Good Is It? How
Can We Know? (Princeton University Press, 2006).↩
41. Most of these surveys were also funded by Open Philanthropy, an
outfit that is deeply worried about AI and that may have a motivation
to fund work that exaggerates its threat. This led one researcher to
refer to these surveys as a 'well-funded panic campaign': Michael
Nolan, 'Weighing the Prophecies of AI Doom', IEEE Spectrum, 25
January 2024, https://spectrum.ieee.org/ai-existential-risk-survey.↩
42. Vaclav Smil, Growth: From Microorganisms to Megacities (MIT
Press, 2020).↩

43. Pablo Villalobos et al., 'Will We Run Out of Data? Limits of LLM
Scaling Based on Human-Generated Data', SocArXiv, 26 October
2022, https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.04325. The authors are on
the more optimistic side that innovations such as synthetic data and
efficiency improvements will be able to overcome data limits, although
they too note the uncertainty.↩
44. Gartner, Inc., 'Gartner Predicts Power Shortages Will Restrict 40% of
AI Data Centers By 2027', 12 November 2024,
www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2024-11-12-gartner-
predicts-power-shortages-will-restrict-40-percent-of-ai-data-centers-
by-2027.↩
45. Allison Morrow, 'AI Is Hitting a Wall Just as the Hype Around It
Reaches the Stratosphere', CNN, 19 November 2024,
https://edition.cnn.com/2024/11/19/business/ai-chatgpt-nvidia-
nightcap/index.html. Perhaps the largest study on whether scaling can
continue is Jaime Sevilla et al., 'Can AI Scaling Continue Through
2030?' (Epoch AI, 2024), https://epoch.ai/blog/can-ai-scaling-
continue-through-2030. They are optimistic that chip manufacturing,
latency, data, and energy constraints can be overcome, at least until
2030. Although this is an uncertain and underexplored area, especially
for longer timeframes.↩
46. There are other issues. Large language models (LLMs) are really large
text models. Language is about conveying meaning: if I wish you well,
I'm often trying to convey that I genuinely hope you have a positive
experience. If Chat GPT wishes you well, it gives you a statistically
reasonable response based on its understanding of grammar and
vocabulary. It's not trying to elicit any particular reaction in you. The
point on large text models comes from Ted Chiang (personal
communication).↩
47. For the case against current large text models having emergent
properties, see Rylan Schaeffer, Brando Miranda, and Sanmi Koyejo,
'Are Emergent Abilities of Large Language Models a Mirage?',
SocArXiv, 22 May 2023, https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.15004; Sheng Lu
et al., 'Are Emergent Abilities in Large Language Models Just In-
Context Learning?', SocArXiv, 15 July 2024,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.01809. For an overview of how experts

disagree on what cognitive abilities current deep-learning algorithms
are displaying, see Carla Zoe Cremer, 'Deep Limitations? Examining
Expert Disagreement Over Deep Learning', Progress in Artificial
Intelligence 10, no. 4 (2021): 449-64, https://doi.org/10.1007/s13748-
021-00239-1.↩
48. Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb (Simon & Schuster,
1986).↩
49. Niamh Rowe, '"It's Destroyed Me Completely": Kenyan Moderators
Decry Toll of Training of AI Models', Guardian, 2 August 2023,
www.theguardian.com/technology/2023/aug/02/ai-chatbot-training-
human-toll-content-moderator-meta-openai.↩
50. James Muldoon, Mark Graham, and Callum Cant, Feeding the
Machine: The Hidden Human Labour Powering AI (Canongate, 2024);
Ian Tucker, 'James Muldoon, Mark Graham and Callum Cant: "AI
Feeds Off the Work of Human Beings"', Guardian, 6 July 2024,
www.theguardian.com/technology/article/2024/jul/06/james-muldoon-
mark-graham-callum-cant-ai-artificial-intelligence-human-work-
exploitation-fairwork-feeding-machine.↩
51. In some cases, as with social media, one could argue that we are giving
away our data in exchange for free access to services. That's a
deceptive argument since most people aren't aware of how their data is
used and have few other options or alternatives but to accept long and
dry data-privacy terms (you could say that they have few exit options).
One study calculated that it would take the average US citizen seventy-
six full-time workdays to read the terms and conditions of privacy
policies they agree to every year. Moreover, some initiatives, such as
large language models, do rely on just direct data theft from sites
across the internet, such as Reddit. OpenAI isn't offering a service in
exchange for data; it's collecting data without permission to offer a
commercialized algorithm.↩
52. On the case for compensating people for the production of data, and
how this could be practically introduced in the near-term, read Imand
Arrieta-Ibarra et al., 'Should We Treat Data as Labor? Moving Beyond
"Free"', in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 108 (2018), 38-42.↩
53. For an overview of some of the issues, see Miles Brundage et al., 'The
Malicious Use of Artificial Intelligence: Forecasting, Prevention, and

Mitigation', SocArXiv, 20 February 2018,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1802.07228.↩
54. For the proposal, see Adam Lowther and Curtis McGiffin, 'America
Needs a Dead Hand More Than Ever', War on the Rocks, 28 March
2024, https://warontherocks.com/2024/03/america-needs-a-dead-hand-
more-than-ever/. For sensible warning of why this is a terrible idea,
read Zachary Kallenborn, 'Giving an AI Control of Nuclear Weapons:
What Could Possibly Go Wrong?', Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 1
February 2022, https://thebulletin.org/2022/02/giving-an-ai-control-of-
nuclear-weapons-what-could-possibly-go-wrong/.↩
55. Martin Robbins, 'Has a Rampaging AI Algorithm Really Killed
Thousands in Pakistan?', Guardian, 18 February 2024,
www.theguardian.com/science/the-lay-scientist/2016/feb/18/has-a-
rampaging-ai-algorithm-really-killed-thousands-in-pakistan.↩
56. Bethan McKernan and Harry Davies, '"The Machine Did It Coldly":
Israel Used AI to Identify 37,000 Hamas Targets', Guardian, 3 April
2024, www.theguardian.com/world/2024/apr/03/israel-gaza-ai-
database-hamas-airstrikes.↩
57. Nick Robins-Early, 'AI's "Oppenheimer Moment": Autonomous
Weapons Enter the Battlefield', Guardian, 14 July 2024,
www.theguardian.com/technology/article/2024/jul/14/ais-
oppenheimer-moment-autonomous-weapons-enter-the-battlefield.↩
58. Erica Chenoweth and Maria J. Stephan, Why Civil Resistance Works:
The Strategic Logic of Nonviolent Conflict (Columbia University
Press, 2011). This has been dubbed the 3.5 per cent rule, since
movements that involve around 3.5 per cent of the population tend to
succeed in achieving their goals. However, there are exceptions: a non-
violent movement in Bahrain involved around 6 per cent of the
population at its peak and still failed. It's also a historical trend that
can't be easily projected into the future. For caveats and cautions, read
Erica Chenoweth, 'Questions, Answers, and Some Cautionary Updates
Regarding the 3.5% Rule', Carr Center Discussion Paper (Carr Center
for Human Rights Policy, Harvard Kennedy School, 2020),
www.hks.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/2024-
05/Erica%20Chenoweth_2020-005.pdf.↩
59. Unless it's hacked or the algorithm glitches, of course.↩

60. Some of this will not occur over the short term. Clearly, drones are not
going to mass-replace soldiers and artillery in the next five years.↩
61. Guillaume Pitron, The Dark Cloud: How the Digital World Is Costing
the Earth (Scribe, 2023).↩
62. Malina McLennan, 'The Digital Drill: How Big Oil Is Using AI to
Speed Up Fossil Fuel Extraction', Global Witness, 21 September 2023,
www.globalwitness.org/en/blog/digital-drill-how-big-oil-using-ai-
speed-fossil-fuel-extraction/.↩
63. Dan Welsby et al., 'Unextractable Fossil Fuels in a 1.5 °C World',
Nature 597, no. 7875 (2021): 230-34, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-
021-03821-8.↩
CHAPTER 17: GAIA VS GOLIATH
1. Matt McGrath, 'Pollution: "Forever Chemicals" in Rainwater Exceed
Safe Levels', BBC News, 2 August 2022,
www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-62391069.↩
2. Linn Persson et al., 'Outside the Safe Operating Space of the Planetary
Boundary for Novel Entities', Environmental Science & Technology
56, no. 3 (2022): 1510-21, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.1c04158.
Environmental Protection Agency, 'Health Effects Support Document
for Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA)', May 2016,
www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2016-05/documents/pfoa_hesd_final-
plain.pdf.↩
3. Alison L. Ling, 'Estimated Scale of Costs to Remove PFAS from the
Environment at Current Emission Rates', Science of the Total
Environment 918(2024): 170647,
https://doi.org.10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.170647.↩
4. DDT was responsible for the near extinction of apex predators such as
- the symbol of America - the bald-headed eagle. Rachel Carson's
1962 book Silent Spring, which is often considered to be the beginning
of the modern environmental movement, was also written in response
to DDT. It took decades to discover the full extent of the harms this
chemical caused.↩

5. Ian T. Cousins et al., 'Outside the Safe Operating Space of a New
Planetary Boundary for Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS)',
Environmental Science & Technology 56, no. 16 (2022): 11172-9,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c02765; Persson et al., 'Outside the
Safe Operating Space of the Planetary Boundary for Novel
Entities'.↩
6. It was commonly assumed that the earth has experienced five mass
extinction events, but recent analysis suggests that it was actually four.
See Jun-xuan Fan et al., 'A High-Resolution Summary of Cambrian to
Early Triassic Marine Invertebrate Biodiversity', Science 367, no.
6475 (2020): 272-7, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax4953.↩
7. For an overview of mass-extinction events, species-lost estimates, and
hypotheses, see D. Barnosky et al., 'Has the Earth's Sixth Mass
Extinction Already Arrived?', Nature 471, no. 7336 (2011): table 1,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09678; Peter Brannen, Ends of the
World: Volcanic Apocalypses, Lethal Oceans and Our Quest to
Understand Earth's Past Mass Extinctions (Oneworld, 2017), makes a
stronger case for the role of climate change in each mass extinction
event.↩
8. Peter J. Richerson, Robert Boyd, and Robert L. Bettinger, 'Was
Agriculture Impossible During the Pleistocene But Mandatory During
the Holocene? A Climate Change Hypothesis', American Antiquity 66,
no. 3 (2001): 387-411, https://doi.org/10.2307/2694241.↩
9. Ibid.; Chi Xu et al., 'Future of the Human Climate Niche',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, no. 21 (2020):
11350-55, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1910114117.↩
10. For an overview, see Peter Frankopan, The Earth Transformed: An
Untold History (Alfred A. Knopf, 2023), chap. 9.↩
11. Neil Pederson et al., 'Pluvials, Droughts, the Mongol Empire, and
Modern Mongolia', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
111, no. 12 (2014): 4375-9,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1318677111.↩
12. Ulf Büntgen and Nicola Di Cosmo, 'Climatic and Environmental
Aspects of the Mongol Withdrawal from Hungary in 1242 CE',

Scientific Reports 6, no. 1 (2016): 25606,
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep25606.↩
13. Kevin D. Burke et al., 'Pliocene and Eocene Provide Best Analogs for
Near-Future Climates', Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 115, no. 52 (2018): 13288-93,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1809600115. Interestingly, the
Palaeocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) saw a temperature
rise of 4-8°C but no mass extinction event, although there was an
enormous shift in biodiversity. For now, we don't know why.↩
14. M. Willeit et al., 'Mid-Pleistocene Transition in Glacial Cycles
Explained by Declining CO2 and Regolith Removal', Science
Advances 5, no. 4 (2019): eaav7337,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aav7337.↩
15. Redesigned from Steve Percy et al., 'Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment: Business Synthesis Report', Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment, 2005, fig. 5,
www.researchgate.net/publication/259545257_Millennium_Ecosystem
_Assessment_Business_Synthesis_Report. This figure now roughly
represents the range and spread of different representative
concentration pathways from the sixth Assessment Report of the
IPCC.↩
16. Florian U. Jehn et al., 'Betting on the Best Case: Higher End Warming
Is Underrepresented in Research', Environmental Research Letters 16,
no. 8 (2021): 084036, https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac13ef;
Florian U. Jehn et al., 'Focus of the IPCC Assessment Reports Has
Shifted to Lower Temperatures', Earth's Future 10, no. 5 (2022):
e2022EF002876, https://doi.org/10.1029/2022EF002876.↩
17. Peiran R. Liu and Adrian E. Raftery, 'Country-Based Rate of
Emissions Reductions Should Increase by 80% Beyond Nationally
Determined Contributions to Meet the 2 °C Target', Communications
Earth & Environment 2, no. 1 (2021): 29,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-021-00097-8. Most other estimates
tend to converge around this interval. The latest figure from the UN
Environment Programme is that existing policies will see the world
warm by up to 3.1°C: United Nations Environment Programme et al.,
Emissions Gap Report 2024: No More Hot Air ... Please! With a

Massive Gap between Rhetoric and Reality, Countries Draft New
Climate Commitments (United Nations Environment Programme,
2024), https://doi.org/10.59117/20.500.11822/46404. Estimates that
focus on either short- or long-term pledges tend to be more optimistic.
Climate Action Tracker suggests that existing pledges and targets will
limit warming to 2.1°C while existing policies put us on track for 2.5-
2.9°C (Climate Action Tracker, 'Temperatures', 2024,
https://climateactiontracker.org/global/temperatures/). Similarly, a
recent large-scale analysis of climate pledges and policies found that
long-term pledges might limit warming to below 2°C, while existing
actions would see the planet warm well above 2°C (Dirk-Jan van de
Ven et al., 'A Multimodel Analysis of Post-Glasgow Climate Targets
and Feasibility Challenges', Nature Climate Change 13, no. 6 (2023):
570-78, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-023-01661-0). Existing
actions are a far more reliable measurement than unenforceable,
aspirational pledges, especially since delaying climate action is the
single biggest factor that increases the costs of reducing emissions
(Luke Kemp and Frank Jotzo, 'Delaying Climate Action Would Be
Costly for Australia and the World', WWF-Australia National Office,
2015,
www.academia.edu/23059430/Delaying_Climate_Action_Would_be_
Costly_for_Australia_and_the_World). In other words, the longer
actions remain insufficient the less likely we are to achieve ambitious
long-term political promises. Moreover, all the issues of uncertainty
mentioned later in this section apply to such forecasts.↩
18. Our 'best estimates' here are from the Sixth Assessment Report of
Working Group I of the IPCC. On the 18 per cent estimate, see Kemp
et al., 'Climate Endgame'.↩
19. James E. Hansen et al., 'Global Warming in the Pipeline', Oxford
Open Climate Change 3, no. 1 (2023): kgad008,
https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfclm/kgad008. These higher estimates rely
on us currently underestimating how much cooling is being provided
by aerosols (these are particles which, like clouds, reflect sunlight
away from the earth) emitted by ships and how sensitive the earth
system is. As we'll cover later, these emissions are not a deliberate
attempt to cool the planet. They are just an unintentional side-effect of

the ships' operation. However, in the future some may well try to inject
aerosols into the atmosphere deliberately to cool the planet.↩
20. Tapio Schneider, Colleen M. Kaul, and Kyle G. Pressel, 'Possible
Climate Transitions from Breakup of Stratocumulus Decks under
Greenhouse Warming', Nature Geoscience 12, no. 3 (2019): 163-7,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-019-0310-1.↩
21. Franziska Gaupp et al., 'Changing Risks of Simultaneous Global
Breadbasket Failure', Nature Climate Change 10, no. 1 (2020): 54-7,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0600-z.↩
22. Ibid.; Constantin Arnscheidt, Luke Kemp, and Tim Lenton, 'Climate
Economic Methods Do Not Capture Worst-Case Risk', submitted to
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2024; Asjad Naqvi,
Franziska Gaupp, and Stefan Hochrainer-Stigler, 'The Risk and
Consequences of Multiple Breadbasket Failures: An Integrated Copula
and Multilayer Agent-Based Modeling Approach', OR Spectrum 42,
no. 3 (2020): 727-54, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00291-020-00574-0.↩
23. Timothy M. Lenton et al., 'Quantifying the Human Cost of Global
Warming', Nature Sustainability 6, no. 10 (2023): 1237-47,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-023-01132-6.↩
24. Kemp et al., 'Climate Endgame'.↩
25. Ibid.↩
26. Athar Parvaiz, 'India, Pakistan Cross-Border Water Treaty Needs
Climate Change Revision', Nature India, 16 September 2021,
www.nature.com/articles/d44151-021-00036-8.↩
27. There is general agreement across studies that climate change can
increase conflict, especially in specific circumstances such as weak
governance and pre-existing ethnic tension. See Marshall Burke,
Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel, 'Climate and Conflict',
Annual Review of Economics 7, no. 1 (2015): 577-617,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080614-115430; Katharine
J. Mach et al., 'Climate as a Risk Factor for Armed Conflict', Nature
571, no. 7764 (2019): 193-7, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-
1300-6; Guy J. Abel et al., 'Climate, Conflict and Forced Migration',
Global Environmental Change 54 (2019): 239-49,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.12.003. In general, the

relationship is complicated and climate is not the strongest factor in
predicting conflict. However, all these studies are, of course, just
looking at recent decades. We don't know how climate change will
influence conflict at 3°C of warming. It's reasonable to assume that, as
impacts become more severe, climate change will become a stronger
driver of combat.↩
28. Previously, 35°C was used as the critical wet-bulb temperature. New
empirical evidence suggests that this was an overly optimistic
assumption about the human tolerance for heat stress. For a full
discussion and justification, see Daniel J. Vecellio, Matthew Huber,
and W. Larry Kenney, 'Why Not 35°C? Reasons for Reductions in
Limits of Human Thermal Tolerance and Their Implications',
Temperature 11, no. 4 (2024): 1-3,
https://doi.org/10.1080/23328940.2024.2399952.↩
29. Daniel J. Vecellio et al., 'Greatly Enhanced Risk to Humans as a
Consequence of Empirically Determined Lower Moist Heat Stress
Tolerance', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120, no.
42 (2023): 3, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305427120.↩
30. For a full discussion, see Steven C. Sherwood and Emma E. Ramsay,
'Closer Limits to Human Tolerance of Global Heat', Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 120, no. 43 (2023): 2,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2316003120.↩
31. Julius Garbe et al., 'The Hysteresis of the Antarctic Ice Sheet', Nature
585, no. 7826 (2020): 538-44, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-
2727-5.↩
32. David I. Armstrong McKay et al., 'Exceeding 1.5°C Global Warming
Could Trigger Multiple Climate Tipping Points', Science 377, no. 6611
(2022): eabn7950, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abn7950.↩
33. Myles R. Allen and David J. Frame, 'Call Off the Quest', Science 318,
no. 5850 (2007): 582-3, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1149988.
Jorgen Randers and Ulrich Goluke, 'An Earth System Model Shows
Self-Sustained Thawing of Permafrost Even If All Man-Made GHG
Emissions Stop in 2020', Scientific Reports 10, no. 1 (2020): 18456,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-75481-z; Mika Rantanen et al.,
'The Arctic Has Warmed Nearly Four Times Faster than the Globe

since 1979', Communications Earth & Environment 3, no. 1 (2022):
168, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-022-00498-3.↩
34. Peter Ditlevsen and Susanne Ditlevsen, 'Warning of a Forthcoming
Collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation', Nature
Communications 14, no. 1 (2023): 4254,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39810-w.↩
35. René M. van Westen, Michael Kliphuis, and Henk A. Dijkstra,
'Physics-Based Early Warning Signal Shows That AMOC Is on
Tipping Course', Science Advances 10, no. 6 (2024): eadk1189,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adk1189.↩
36. OECD, 'Managing Climate Risks, Facing up to Losses and Damages:
Understanding, Reducing and Managing Risks', OECD report,
November 2021, https://doi.org/10.1787/55ea1cc9-en.↩
37. Jonathan Watts, '"We Don't Know Where the Tipping Point Is":
Climate Expert on Potential Collapse of Atlantic Circulation',
Guardian, 23 October 2024,
www.theguardian.com/environment/2024/oct/23/we-dont-know-
where-the-tipping-point-is-climate-expert-on-potential-collapse-of-
atlantic-circulation.↩
38. Katherine Richardson et al., 'Earth Beyond Six of Nine Planetary
Boundaries', Science Advances 9, no. 37 (2023): eadh2458,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458.↩
39. Ibid.↩
40. Also called the background rate, i.e. the normal rate of turnover of
species without either human impacts or the influence of a mass
extinction event.↩
41. Jurriaan M. de Vos et al., 'Estimating the Normal Background Rate of
Species Extinction', Conservation Biology 29, no. 2 (2015): 452-62,
https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12380; Francisco Sánchez-Bayo and Kris
A. G. Wyckhuys, 'Worldwide Decline of the Entomofauna: A Review
of Its Drivers', Biological Conservation 232 (2019): 8-27,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.01.020; International Institute for
Sustainability, 'Living Planet Report 2022 - Building a Nature-
Positive Society', www.iis-rio.org/en/publications/living-planet-report-
2022-building-a-nature-positive-society/.↩

42. Haijun Song et al., 'Thresholds of Temperature Change for Mass
Extinctions', Nature Communications 12, no. 1 (2021): 4694,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25019-2.↩
43. Daniel H. Rothman, 'Thresholds of Catastrophe in the Earth System',
Science Advances 3, no. 9 (2017): e1700906,
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700906; Daniel H. Rothman,
'Characteristic Disruptions of an Excitable Carbon Cycle',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, no. 30 (2019):
14813-22, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1905164116.↩
44. S. Solter-Hunt, 'Potential Perturbation of the Ionosphere by
Megaconstellations and Corresponding Artificial Re-Entry Plasma
Dust', SocArXiv, 6 December 2023, https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09329;
Daniel M. Murphy et al., 'Metals from Spacecraft Reentry in
Stratospheric Aerosol Particles', Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 120, no. 43 (2023): e2313374120,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313374120.↩
45. I'm indebted to Mike Lawrence for raising this interesting point.↩
46. In March 2024 the international Subcommission on Quaternary
Stratigraphy (SQS) voted against formally adopting the Anthropocene
as an official geological epoch with 1952 as the start date. The entire
process was mired in controversy and two members of the twelve-
member subcommission refused to vote. They didn't want to
legitimize what they saw as a fundamentally flawed process. One
potential reason it was rejected was framing the Anthropocene as a
single event, rather than as an accelerating process. In any case,
ignoring the enormous impacts of humanity on the earth system is
silly, and the Anthropocene will continue to be used regardless of the
edicts of a few geologists. See Alexandra Witze, 'Geologists Reject the
Anthropocene as Earth's New Epoch - after 15 Years of Debate',
Nature 627, no. 8003 (2024): 249-50, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-
024-00675-8. For a strong critique of the decision, read Simon Turner
et al., 'What the Anthropocene's Critics Overlook - and Why It Really
Should Be a New Geological Epoch', The Conversation, 12 March
2024, https://theconversation.com/what-the-anthropocenes-critics-
overlook-and-why-it-really-should-be-a-new-geological-epoch-
225493.↩

47. More precisely, 82 per cent of the 711 regions assessed by 255
archaeologists in the HYDE project had been modified by hunter-
gatherers by 10,000 years ago: Lucas Stephens et al., 'Archaeological
Assessment Reveals Earth's Early Transformation through Land Use',
Science 365, no. 6456 (2019): 897-902,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax1192; Erle Ellis, 'The Deep
Anthropocene', Aeon, 1 October 2020,
https://aeon.co/essays/revolutionary-archaeology-reveals-the-deepest-
possible-anthropocene.↩
48. Will Steffen et al., 'The Trajectory of the Anthropocene: The Great
Acceleration', The Anthropocene Review 2, no. 1 (2015): 81-98,
https://doi.org/10.1177/2053019614564785.↩
49. The idea of the Anthropocene as a process beginning with fire is
inspired by Scott, Against the Grain, chap. 1.↩
50. The figure comes from Hannah Ritchie and Max Roser, 'Land Use
Over the Long Term', Our World in Data, May 2024,
https://ourworldindata.org/land-use. Published under the Creative
Commons License Version 4.0.↩
51. Thomas Wiedmann et al., 'Scientists' Warning on Affluence', Nature
Communications 11, no. 1 (2020): 3107,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-16941-y; Ashfaq Khalfan et al.,
'Climate Equality: A Planet for the 99%', Oxfam International, 2023,
https://doi.org/10.21201/2023.000001.↩
52. UNEP, 'Global Resources Outlook 2024: Bend the Trend - Pathways
to a Liveable Planet as Resource Use Spikes', United Nations
Environment Programme, 2024, www.unep.org/resources/Global-
Resource-Outlook-2024.↩
53. Peipei Tian et al., 'Keeping the Global Consumption within the
Planetary Boundaries', Nature 635 (2024),
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08154-w.↩
54. UNEP, 'Global Resources Outlook 2024'.↩
55. Peter Christensen, Kenneth Gillingham, and William Nordhaus,
'Uncertainty in Forecasts of Long-Run Economic Growth',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, no. 21 (2018):
5409-14, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1713628115.↩

56. Jefim Vogel and Jason Hickel, 'Is Green Growth Happening? An
Empirical Analysis of Achieved versus Paris-Compliant CO2-GDP
Decoupling in High-Income Countries', The Lancet Planetary Health
7, no. 9 (2023): 759, https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(23)00174-2.
Systematic reviews of the evidence of decoupling have also concluded
that decoupling would need to be far more rapid and sustained than
anything seen thus far. See Helmut Haberl et al., 'A Systematic
Review of the Evidence on Decoupling of GDP, Resource Use and
GHG Emissions, Part II: Synthesizing the Insights', Environmental
Research Letters 15, no. 6 (2020): 065003,
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab842a.↩
57. On the required rate of emissions reductions, see United Nations
Environment Programme et al., Emissions Gap Report 2024. The
estimate of reductions due to Covid-19 comes from Zhu Liu et al.,
'Global Patterns of Daily CO2 Emissions Reductions in the First Year
of COVID-19', Nature Geoscience 15, no. 8 (2022): 615,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-022-00965-8.↩
58. For useful overviews of the problems of perpetual growth and how to
move beyond it (frequently called 'post-growth'), see Hickel, Less Is
More; Jason Hickel et al., 'Urgent Need for Post-Growth Climate
Mitigation Scenarios', Nature Energy 6, no. 8 (2021): 766-8,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-021-00884-9.↩
59. Wiedmann et al., 'Scientists' Warning on Affluence'; UNEP, 'Global
Resources Outlook 2024'; Khalfan et al., 'Climate Equality'.↩
CHAPTER 18: THE DEATH-STAR SYNDROME
1. Smil, Growth.↩
2. Amanda Glassman, Charles Kenny, and George Yang, 'The COVID-19
Vaccine Rollout Was the Fastest in Global History, But Low-Income
Countries Were Left Behind', Center for Global Development Working
Paper, 2022, https://www.cgdev.org/publication/covid-19-vaccine-
development-and-rollout-historical-perspective.↩
3. Reuters, 'Suez Canal Blockage Could Cost $6 Billion to $10 Billion in
Lost Trade - Allianz', 26 March 2021,

www.reuters.com/article/business/suez-canal-blockage-could-cost-6-
billion-to-10-billion-in-lost-trade-allianz-idUSKBN2BI25Y/.↩
4. Yrjö Kaukiainen, 'Growth, Diversification and Globalization: Main
Trends in International Shipping since 1850', in International
Merchant Shipping in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries, ed.
Lewis R. Fischer and Even Lange (Liverpool University Press, 2008),
1-56.↩
5. Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, Diana Beltekian, and Max Roser, 'Trade and
Globalization', Our World in Data, April 2024,
https://ourworldindata.org/trade-and-globalization.↩
6. Daron Acemoglu, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi,
'Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks', American
Economic Review 105, no. 2 (2015): 564-608,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20130456.↩
7. M. Scheffer et al., 'Anticipating Critical Transitions', Science 338, no.
6105 (2012): 345, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1225244. They note
that 'the same prerequisites that allow recovery from local damage
may set a system up for large-scale collapse'.↩
8. Luckily, flash-crashes are also usually marked by speedy rebounds, but
it's not a pattern we should rely on.↩
9. BBC, 'Thailand Floods Disrupt Production and Supply Chains', BBC
News, 13 October 2011, www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-15285149.
The impacts cited here are summarized in IPCC, Climate Change 2022
- Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability: Working Group II
Contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge University Press, 2023), fig.
Cross-Chapter Box INTEREG.1,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325844.↩
10. 'Global GDP over the Long Run', Our World in Data, 16 May 2024,
https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/global-gdp-over-the-long-run.↩
11. Steffen et al., 'The Trajectory of the Anthropocene'. The upper graph
comes from Our World in Data, 'Global GDP over the Long Run', 16
May 2024, https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/global-gdp-over-the-
long-run. The lower graph is from Hannah Ritchie, 'Global Primary
Energy Consumption by Source', Our World in Data, January 2024,

https://ourworldindata.org/energy-production-consumption. Both are
published under the Creative Commons License Version 4.0.↩
12. Monica Caparas et al., 'Increasing Risks of Crop Failure and Water
Scarcity in Global Breadbaskets by 2030', Environmental Research
Letters 16, no. 10 (2021): 3, https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/ac22c1. In other words, around 43 per cent of the calories
consumed today come from just 2.5 per cent of countries (albeit four
larger countries, such as the US).↩
13. Hope Shand, Kathy Jo Wetter, and Kavya Chowdhry, 'Food Barons
2022: Crisis Profiteering, Digitalization and Shifting Power', ETC
Group, 2022, www.etcgroup.org/files/files/food-barons-2022-
full_sectors-final_16_sept.pdf.↩
14. Liam Keenan, Timothy Monteath, and Dariusz Wójcik, 'Hungry for
Power: Financialization and the Concentration of Corporate Control in
the Global Food System', Geoforum 147 (2023): 103909,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2023.103909.↩
15. Open Markets Institute, 'Monopoly by the Numbers', Open Markets
Institute, 2024, www.openmarketsinstitute.org/learn/monopoly-by-the-
numbers.↩
16. For just a small selection of articles highlighting the importance of
diversity to resilience, see Reinette Biggs et al., 'Toward Principles for
Enhancing the Resilience of Ecosystem Services', Annual Review of
Environment and Resources 37, no. 1 (2012): 421-48,
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-051211-123836; Brian Walker
et al., 'Response Diversity as a Sustainability Strategy', Nature
Sustainability 6, no. 6 (2023): 621-9, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-
022-01048-7; Grafton et al., 'Realizing Resilience for Decision-
Making'. ↩
17. Gregory S. Cooper, Simon Willcock, and John A. Dearing, 'Regime
Shifts Occur Disproportionately Faster in Larger Ecosystems', Nature
Communications 11, no. 1 (2020): 1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
020-15029-x.↩
18. Ord, The Precipice.↩
19. Lara Mani, Asaf Tzachor, and Paul Cole, 'Global Catastrophic Risk
from Lower Magnitude Volcanic Eruptions', Nature Communications

12, no. 1 (2021): 4756, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-25021-8;
Michael Cassidy and Lara Mani, 'Huge Volcanic Eruptions: Time to
Prepare', Nature 608, no. 7923 (2022): 469-71,
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-02177-x.↩
20. Mani, Tzachor, and Cole, 'Global Catastrophic Risk from Lower
Magnitude Volcanic Eruptions'; Cassidy and Mani, 'Huge Volcanic
Eruptions'. The one in five figure was calculated on the latest ice
record dating of volcanic eruptions in M. Sigl et al., 'Volcanic
Stratospheric Sulfur Injections and Aerosol Optical Depth during the
Holocene (Past 11,500 Years) from a Bipolar Ice-Core Array', Earth
System Science Data 14(2022): 3167-96, https://doi.org.10.5194/essd-
14-3167-2022.↩
21. Kemp et al., 'Climate Endgame', table 1.↩
22. Homer-Dixon et al., 'Synchronous Failure'; Dirk Helbing, 'Globally
Networked Risks and How to Respond', Nature 497, no. 7447 (2013):
51-9, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12047.↩
23. Qi Zhang et al., 'Assessing the Extent and Persistence of Major Crisis
Events in the Crude Oil Market and Economy: Evidence from the Past
30 Years', Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 11, no. 1
(2024): 903, https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-024-03364-z; Homer-
Dixon et al., 'Synchronous Failure'.↩
24. Lawrence et al., 'Global Polycrisis', 2.↩
25. Greater speed, size, concentration, and connectedness may also make
collapse more severe. When systems become bafflingly complicated
and quick-moving, accidents, including catastrophic ones, can become
commonplace and perhaps even unavoidable. It is an idea that
sociologists call 'normal accidents'. ↩
26. Alexander F. Siegenfeld and Yaneer Bar-Yam, 'An Introduction to
Complex Systems Science and Its Applications', Complexity 2020, no.
1 (2020): 9, https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/6105872.↩
CHAPTER 19: THE RUNGLESS LADDER
1. On disease, see Pasquale Cirillo and Nassim Nicholas Taleb, 'Tail Risk
of Contagious Diseases', Nature Physics 16, no. 6 (2020): 606-13,

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-020-0921-x. For violence, see
Christoph Trinn and Lennard Naumann, 'Guns and Lightning: Power
Law Distributions in Intrastate Conflict Intensity Dynamics', Conflict
Management and Peace Science 40, no. 4 (2023): 373-97,
https://doi.org/10.1177/07388942221092126; Michael Spagat, Neil F.
Johnson, and Stijn van Weezel, 'Fundamental Patterns and Predictions
of Event Size Distributions in Modern Wars and Terrorist Campaigns',
PLOS ONE 13, no. 10 (2018): e0204639,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0204639; Juan Camilo Bohorquez
et al., 'Common Ecology Quantifies Human Insurgency', Nature 462,
no. 7275 (2009): 911-14, https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08631; Sergio
Picoli et al., 'Power-Law Relaxation in Human Violent Conflicts',
European Physical Journal B 90, no. 8 (2017): 156,
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjb/e2017-80127-3. Some have even used this
distribution to estimate casualties for conflicts with a lack of data. See
Jeffrey A. Friedman, 'Using Power Laws to Estimate Conflict Size',
Journal of Conflict Resolution 59, no. 7 (2015): 1216-41,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0022002714530430.↩
2. One could try to translate the loss of life into a monetary outcome. If
you value your life highly enough then the expected value of playing
Russian roulette is far worse. This doesn't negate the underlying point
of this thought experiment: tail risk matters immensely.↩
3. A metaphor inspired by Cirillo and Taleb: Pasquale Cirillo and Nassim
Nicholas Taleb, 'What Are the Chances of a Third World War?',
Significance 13, no. 2 (2016),
www.academia.edu/35897110/What_are_the_chances_of_a_third_wor
ld_war.↩
4. Cirillo and Taleb, 'Tail Risk of Contagious Diseases'.↩
5. Jesse L. Reynolds, 'Solar Geoengineering to Reduce Climate Change:
A Review of Governance Proposals', Proceedings of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 475, no. 2229
(2019): 20190255, https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2019.0255.↩
6. International Maritime Organisation, 'IMO2020 Fuel Oil Sulphur
Limit - Cleaner Air, Healthier Planet', 28 January 2021,
www.imo.org/en/MediaCentre/PressBriefings/pages/02-IMO-

2020.aspx. Ironically, a single regulation by the IMO may have done
more to affect the climate than the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement.↩
7. Kemp et al., 'Climate Endgame'; Aaron Tang and Luke Kemp, 'A Fate
Worse Than Warming? Stratospheric Aerosol Injection and
Catastrophic Risk', Frontiers in Climate 3, no. 720312 (2021),
https://doi.org/doi: 10.3389/fclim.2021.720312.↩
8. Tang and Kemp, 'A Fate Worse Than Warming?'↩
9. Andy Parker and Peter J. Irvine, 'The Risk of Termination Shock from
Solar Geoengineering', Earth's Future 6, no. 3 (2018): 459,
https://doi.org/10.1002/2017EF000735.↩
10. Garbe et al., 'The Hysteresis of the Antarctic Ice Sheet', 538. For
instance, under different future warming scenarios the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet wouldn't reach its current levels unless we cooled the earth
to 1°C below pre-industrial levels (or, around 2.1°C below current
long-term average temperatures).↩
11. Note that confusingly cyclones in the Atlantic and east Pacific are
usually called 'hurricanes' while cyclones in the west Pacific are
normally labelled 'typhoons'.↩
12. Jack Miller et al., 'The Feasibility and Governance of Cyclone
Interventions', Climate Risk Management 41 (2023): 100535,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2023.100535.↩
13. Michael Cassidy, Anders Sandberg, and Lara Mani, 'The Ethics of
Volcano Geoengineering', Earth's Future 11, no. 10 (2023):
e2023EF003714, https://doi.org/10.1029/2023EF003714.↩
14. Ellen Glover, 'What Are Robot Bees?', Built In, 6 February 2025,
https://builtin.com/robotics/robot-bees.↩
15. Some have taken to calling this Gaia 2.0: actively managing planetary
boundaries. Timothy M. Lenton and Bruno Latour, 'Gaia 2.0', Science
361, no. 6407 (2018): 1066-8,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aau0427.↩
16. Far-UVC refers to electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths
between 200 and 230nm. One of the main advocates has been MIT
biologist Kevin Esvelt, e.g. Michael Le Page, 'Pandemic Terrorism
Risk Is Being Overlooked, Warns Leading Geneticist', New Scientist,

14 November 2022, www.newscientist.com/article/2345737-
pandemic-terrorism-risk-is-being-overlooked-warns-leading-
geneticist/. For an overview of the technology, see Ernest R. Blatchley
et al., 'Far UV-C Radiation: An Emerging Tool for Pandemic Control',
Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology 53, no. 6
(2023): 733-53, https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2022.2084315.↩
17. A similar point is made in David Manheim, 'The Fragile World
Hypothesis: Complexity, Fragility, and Systemic Existential Risk',
Futures 122 (2020): 102570,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2020.102570.↩
18. Blanton et al., 'Moral Collapse and State Failure'.↩
19. John M. Gowdy, Ultrasocial: The Evolution of Human Nature and the
Quest for a Sustainable Future (Cambridge University Press,
2021).↩
20. Parker and Irvine, 'The Risk of Termination Shock from Solar
Geoengineering'.↩
21. Juan Camilo Castillo et al., 'Market Design to Accelerate COVID-19
Vaccine Supply', Science 371, no. 6534 (2021): 1107-9,
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abg0889.↩
22. Estimates include 0.46, 1.88, 4-6, and 20.3 per cent. See David
Moriña et al., 'Probability Estimation of a Carrington-like
Geomagnetic Storm', Scientific Reports 9, no. 1 (2019): 2393,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-38918-8; Pete Riley and Jeffrey J.
Love, 'Extreme Geomagnetic Storms: Probabilistic Forecasts and
Their Uncertainties', Space Weather 15, no. 1 (2017): 53-64,
https://doi.org/10.1002/2016SW001470; Ryuho Kataoka, 'Probability
of Occurrence of Extreme Magnetic Storms', Space Weather 11, no. 5
(2013): 214-18, https://doi.org/10.1002/swe.20044.↩
23. Anthony M. Barrett, Seth D. Baum, and Kelly Hostetler, 'Analyzing
and Reducing the Risks of Inadvertent Nuclear War Between the
United States and Russia', Science & Global Security 21, no. 2 (2013):
106-33, https://doi.org/10.1080/08929882.2013.798984.↩
24. Over the sixty-six years prior to 2013; see Carl Lundgren, 'What Are
the Odds? Assessing the Probability of a Nuclear War',

Nonproliferation Review 20, no. 2 (2013): 361-74,
https://doi.org/10.1080/10736700.2013.799828.↩
25. Graham Allison, 'Putin's Doomsday Threat', Foreign Affairs, 5 April
2022, www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/ukraine/2022-04-05/putins-
doomsday-threat.↩
26. Peter J. Scoblic and David R. Mandel, 'Opinion: How to Assess the
Risk of Nuclear War Without Freaking Out', CNN, 28 June 2022,
www.cnn.com/2022/06/28/opinions/nuclear-war-likelihood-
probability-russia-us-scoblic-mandel/index.html. This was for a
nuclear strike before 5 August 2022. This question and timeframe lie
more within the domain of a superforecaster: it's within twelve months
for a tightly bound question.↩
27. Based on a statistical study of the frequency of pandemics since 1600:
Marco Marani et al., 'Intensity and Frequency of Extreme Novel
Epidemics', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, no.
35 (2021): e2105482118, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2105482118.↩
28. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 'Oil-Climate Index',
2015, https://oci.carnegieendowment.org/#total-emissions.↩
29. Charles A. S. Hall, Jessica G. Lambert, and Stephen B. Balogh, 'EROI
of Different Fuels and the Implications for Society', Energy Policy 64
(2014): 151, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2013.05.049.↩
30. Victor Court and Florian Fizaine, 'Long-Term Estimates of the
Energy-Return-on-Investment (EROI) of Coal, Oil, and Gas Global
Productions', Ecological Economics 138 (2017): 145-59,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.03.015.↩
31. Paul E. Brockway et al., 'Estimation of Global Final-Stage Energy-
Return-on-Investment for Fossil Fuels With Comparison to Renewable
Energy Sources', Nature Energy 4, no. 7 (2019): 612-21,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41560-019-0425-z.↩
32. Louis Delannoy et al., 'Peak Oil and the Low-Carbon Energy
Transition: A Net-Energy Perspective', Applied Energy 304 (2021):
117843, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2021.117843.↩
33. Court and Fizaine, 'Long-Term Estimates of the Energy-Return-on-
Investment (EROI) of Coal, Oil, and Gas Global Productions'.↩

34. M. Diesendorf and T. Wiedmann, 'Implications of Trends in Energy
Return on Energy Invested (EROI) for Transitioning to Renewable
Electricity', Ecological Economics 176 (2020): 106726,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2020.106726.↩
35. Brockway et al., 'Estimation of Global Final-Stage Energy-Return-on-
Investment for Fossil Fuels with Comparison to Renewable Energy
Sources'.↩
36. The term 'energy blind' comes from Nate Hagens. Nate hosts the
podcast The Great Simplification, which I would highly
recommend.↩
OceanofPDF.com

CHAPTER 20: THE ROOTS OF OUR ENDGAME
1. Rebecca Solnit, 'Big Oil Coined "Carbon Footprints" to Blame Us for
Their Greed. Keep Them on the Hook', Guardian, 23 August 2021,
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/aug/23/big-oil-coined-
carbon-footprints-to-blame-us-for-their-greed-keep-them-on-the-
hook.↩
2. Geoffrey Supran and Naomi Oreskes, 'Rhetoric and Frame Analysis of
ExxonMobil's Climate Change Communications', One Earth 4, no. 5
(2021): 696-719, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.04.014. It is
also an old strategy. In 1971 an iconic anti-littering advertisement
which came to be known as 'the crying Indian' was released. It showed
a Native American clearing trash that had been discarded by cars
passing by. He gently wipes a tear from his eye as in the background a
narrator reads, 'People start pollution, and people can stop it.' The
campaign was organized by Keep America Beautiful, a body that was
funded and founded in 1953 by Coca-Cola and Pepsi.↩
3. A slightly more nuanced version of this is used to explain existential
risk in Kristian Rönn, The Darwinian Trap: The Hidden Evolutionary
Forces That Explain Our World (and Threaten Our Future) (Crown,
2024). In it, existential risk is cast as a Darwinian problem where our
evolved characteristics lead to 'Darwinian Traps'. I'll show later in this
chapter why this game-theoretic explanation doesn't fully make
sense.↩
4. Carbon Majors, 'The Carbon Majors Database: Launch Report', April
2024,
https://carbonmajors.org/site/data/000/027/Carbon_Majors_Launch_R
eport.pdf.↩
5. The discovery of the greenhouse effect is commonly misattributed to
the Irish physicist John Tyndall. See Megan Darby, 'Meet the Woman
Who First Identified the Greenhouse Effect', Climate Home News, 2
September 2016, www.climatechangenews.com/2016/09/02/the-
woman-who-identified-the-greenhouse-effect-years-before-
tyndall/.↩
6. Kemp, 'Agents of Doom'.↩

7. Johannes Friedrich et al., 'This Interactive Chart Shows Changes in the
World's Top 10 Emitters', World Resources Institute, 2 March 2023,
www.wri.org/insights/interactive-chart-shows-changes-worlds-top-10-
emitters.↩
8. Hans Kristensen, Matt Korda, and Eliana Johns, 'Nuclear Notebook:
Nuclear Arsenals of the World', Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
(2025), https://thebulletin.org/nuclear-notebook/.↩
9. Alejandra Muñoz, Susi Snyder, and Cor Oudes, 'Untenable
Investments: Nuclear Weapon Producers and Their Financiers' (ICAN,
PAX, 2024), 4. See www.dontbankonthebomb.com/untenable-
investments/.↩
10. McKenna Fitzgerald, Aaron Boddy, and Seth Baum, '2020 Survey of
Artificial General Intelligence Projects for Ethics, Risk, and Policy',
Global Catastrophic Risks Institute, 2020,
https://gcrinstitute.org/papers/055_agi-2020.pdf.↩
11. Christophe Bonneuil, Pierre-Louis Choquet, and Benjamin Franta,
'Early Warnings and Emerging Accountability: Total's Responses to
Global Warming, 1971-2021', Global Environmental Change 71
(2021): 102386, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102386.↩
12. Naomi Oreskes and Erik M. Conway, Merchants of Doubt: How a
Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco
Smoke to Global Warming (Bloomsbury, 2010).↩
13. Bonneuil, Choquet, and Franta, 'Early Warnings and Emerging
Accountability'.↩
14. Nadia Gaber, Lisa Bero, and Tracey J. Woodruff, 'The Devil They
Knew: Chemical Documents Analysis of Industry Influence on PFAS
Science', Annals of Global Health 89, no. 1 (2023): 8-10,
https://doi.org/10.5334/aogh.4013.↩
15. Ibid., 8-10.↩
16. Kristensen, Korda, and Johns, 'Nuclear Notebook'; Snyder and Oudes,
'Untenable Investments'.↩
17. Elisabeth Eaves, 'Why Is America Getting a New $100 Billion Nuclear
Weapon?', Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 8 February 2021,

https://thebulletin.org/2021/02/why-is-america-getting-a-new-100-
billion-nuclear-weapon/.↩
18. Corporate Europe Observatory, 'Stop the Revolving Door: Fossil Fuel
Policy Influencers', 2021, https://corporateeurope.org/en/stop-
revolving-door.↩
19. Clive Hamilton, Scorcher: The Dirty Politics of Climate Change
(Black Inc. Books, 2007).↩
20. Jeffrey Bien and Vinay Prasad, 'Future Jobs of FDA's Haematology-
Oncology Reviewers', BMJ, 27 September 2016, i5055,
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i5055.↩
21. Summarized and linked in Kemp, 'Agents of Doom'.↩
22. Stop AGI, 'Quotes from AI Leaders', 2024,
https://pauseai.info/xrisk/.↩
23. Nick Robins-Early, 'OpenAI and Google DeepMind Workers Warn of
AI Industry Risks in Open Letter', Guardian, 4 June 2024,
www.theguardian.com/technology/article/2024/jun/04/openai-google-
ai-risks-letter. The NDAs meant that employees couldn't even mention
the existence of non-disparagement agreements. ↩
24. Garrison Lovely, 'With Newsom's Veto, Big Tech Beats Democracy',
Jacobin, 30 September 2024, https://jacobin.com/2024/09/gavin-
newsom-ai-tech-bill-sb-1047. On the very same day that Newsome
vetoed the bill, he announced a new board of AI advisors. One of them
was Fei-Fei Li 'the Godmother of AI', who has a billion-dollar AI
start-up and publicly opposed the bill.↩
25. Jack S. Levy, 'Military Power, Alliances, and Technology: An Analysis
of Some Structural Determinants of International War Among the
Great Powers', unpublished PhD dissertation, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1976; Neil C. Renic, 'Superweapons and the
Myth of Technological Peace', European Journal of International
Relations 29, no. 1 (2023): 129-52,
https://doi.org/10.1177/13540661221136764.↩
26. Sam Altman, 'Who Will Control the Future of AI?', Washington Post,
25 July 2024, www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2024/07/25/sam-
altman-ai-democracy-authoritarianism-future/.↩

27. Sam Altman, 'Planning for AGI and Beyond', OpenAI, 24 February
2023, https://openai.com/blog/planning-for-agi-and-beyond.↩
28. Will Knight, 'What Really Made Geoffrey Hinton Into an AI Doomer',
Wired, 8 May 2023, www.wired.com/story/geoffrey-hinton-ai-chatgpt-
dangers/.↩
29. There is admittedly a huge number of definitions of rationality and no
single consensus definition. However, this definition captures the key
assumption that goes into game theory.↩
30. Garrett Hardin, 'The Tragedy of the Commons', Science 162, no. 3859
(1968): 1243-8, https://doi.org/10.1126/science.162.3859.1243.↩
31. For a good overview of the results of game-theoretic lab experiments,
see Colin F. Camerer and Teck-Hua Ho, 'Behavioral Game Theory
Experiments and Modeling', in Handbook of Game Theory With
Economic Applications, vol. 4 (Elsevier, 2015), 517-73,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53766-9.00010-0.↩
32. Brett M. Frischmann, Alain Marciano, and Giovanni Battista Ramello,
'Retrospectives: Tragedy of the Commons After 50 Years', Journal of
Economic Perspectives 33, no. 4 (2019): 211-28,
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.4.211.↩
33. Ibid.↩
34. Douglas P. Fry et al., 'Societies within Peace Systems Avoid War and
Build Positive Intergroup Relationships', Humanities and Social
Sciences Communications 8, no. 1 (2021): 1-9,
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-020-00692-8.↩
35. David Runciman, The Handover: How We Gave Control of Our Lives
to Corporations, States and AIs (Liveright, 2023).↩
36. It was originally used for the legal territories of Rome (status imperii,
or status ecclesiasticus for the papal states). It seems to have drifted
since then from describing the legal standing of a territory to a
territory's independence and self-governance.↩
37. The current Official Development Assistance aim is for rich countries
to provide 0.7 per cent of their Gross National Income (GNI) as aid.
The US has not agreed to the targets and in 2023 the US provided just
0.24 per cent of its GNI as aid.↩

38. Ironically, Machiavelli appears to have been intentionally giving bad
advice. The book was originally intended for the Medici family, who
killed Machiavelli's father. Machiavelli himself was a staunch
republican, and The Prince diverges dramatically from his other work,
such as The Discourses. There is a strong case to be made that
Machiavelli was attempting to give the Medicis bad advice so they
would anger the populace and start a rebellion. See Mary G. Dietz,
'Trapping the Prince: Machiavelli and the Politics of Deception',
American Political Science Review 80, no. 3 (1986): 777-99,
https://doi.org/10.2307/1960538.↩
39. There is now ample evidence that states fall prey to some of the same
cognitive biases that individuals possess. For instance, people are far
more likely to stay in an 'opt-out' organ donation scheme (they are
automatically part of the agreement unless they explicitly object) than
to opt into one. States show a similar pattern when it comes to human-
rights treaties, favouring opt-in protocols at similar rates (Jean
Galbraith, 'Treaty Options: Towards a Behavioral Understanding of
Treaty Design', Virginia Journal of International Law 55, no. 2
(2013): 309-64). For an overview of the biases of states, see Veronika
Fikfak, Daniel Peat, and Eva van der Zee, 'Bias in International Law',
German Law Journal 23, no. 3 (2022): 281-97,
https://doi.org/10.1017/glj.2022.23.↩
40. Paul Deutchman and Jessica Sullivan, 'The Dark Triad and Framing
Effects Predict Selfish Behavior in a One-Shot Prisoner's Dilemma',
PLOS ONE 13, no. 9 (2018): e0203891,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0203891; Marta Malesza, 'The
Effects of the Dark Triad Traits in Prisoner's Dilemma Game', Current
Psychology 39, no. 3 (2020): 1055-62, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12144-
018-9823-9.↩
41. Pieter D. Wezeman et al., 'Trends in International Arms Transfers,
2023', Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, 2024,
www.sipri.org/publications/2024/sipri-fact-sheets/trends-international-
arms-transfers-2023.↩
42. Others call this a 'multipolar trap' or 'Moloch trap'. Some have also
pointed towards 'Darwinian traps': that existential risk and collective
action problems are problems of game theory and human nature

(which, as covered, isn't the case). Other scholars have suggested that
the current world is facing a set of fourteen 'Anthropocene traps', such
as an over-pursuit of growth and short-termism (all fourteen traps fall
into one of the three categories of Goliath trap I've outlined). The
Goliath-traps framework suggested here is an improvement on these
previous suggestions. It ties the trap dynamic back to specific, well-
documented human behavioural patterns and can help explain why
game theory seems to work in some contexts (and with some
individuals) but not others. See Peter Søgaard Jørgensen et al.,
'Evolution of the Polycrisis: Anthropocene Traps that Challenge
Global Sustainability', Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences 379, no. 1893 (2024): 20220261,
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2022.0261; Rönn, The Darwinian Trap;
Scott Alexander, 'Meditations on Moloch', Slate Star Codex (blog), 30
July 2014, https://slatestarcodex.com/2014/07/30/meditations-on-
moloch/.↩
43. As you might have spotted, this is a play on the mythical Norse Tree of
Life, 'Yggdrasil'. Feel free to call this 'Yggdrakill', the tree of
death.↩
CHAPTER 21: THE FATES OF GOLIATH
1. All these numbers refer to irrecoverable collapse or a collapse leading
to an extinction-level event. The figures quoted are from David
Wallace-Wells, 'Jared Diamond: There's a 49 Percent Chance the
World As We Know It Will End by 2050', New York Magazine, 10
May 2019, https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2019/05/jared-diamond-
on-his-new-book-upheaval.html; Rees, Our Final Century; Bostrom,
'Existential Risks'; Anders Sandberg and Nick Bostrom, 'Global
Catastrophic Risks Survey', FHI Technical Report #2008-1, Future of
Humanity Institute, Oxford University, 2008,
www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/reports/2008-1.pdf; Ord, The Precipice.↩
2. As superforecasting pioneer Philip Tetlock said, 'There is no evidence
that geo-political or economic forecasters can predict anything ten
years out.' Tetlock and Gardner, Superforecasting, 243. On this, and a

broader set of problems with forecasting, see Kemp, 'Foreseeing
Extreme Technological Risk'. It's always possible to point to a few
potential exceptions, even when it comes to predicting social crisis.
One example is Peter Turchin, the pioneer of structural-demographic
theory, who declared in a letter to Nature in 2010 that the 2020s would
be a period of heightened political violence and instability in the US
(Turchin, 'Political Instability May Be a Contributor in the Coming
Decade'). He's right so far. Despite this success, it doesn't mean we
can reliably forecast the long-term future. His wasn't a clear,
quantitative forecast, and we'd need multiple examples to know that
Turchin is consistently accurate, especially since much of the violence
in the early 2020s was a reaction to the pandemic and lockdowns,
something Turchin didn't foresee. Generally speaking, however, we
have no effective way to make detailed bets about future events
beyond a year or two into the future. Turchin, to his credit, has made a
more precise forecast of whether his theory is right: we should expect
more than 100 political instability events (such as riots) in the period
2020-25 and fatalities of more than 5 per million citizens (Peter
Turchin, 'A Quantitative Prediction for Political Violence in the
2020s', 21 January 2017, https://peterturchin.com/quantitative-
prediction-political-violence-2020s/). Whether his bet proves to be
right remains unknown.↩
3. Kemp, 'Foreseeing Extreme Technological Risk'. We also currently
have no evidence that superforecasters work for very low-probability,
high-impact events, like 9/11 or the Russian Revolution.↩
4. Elaine Scarry, Thermonuclear Monarchy: Choosing Between
Democracy and Doom (W. W. Norton, 2014).↩
5. David Frye, Walls: A History of Civilization in Blood and Brick
(Scribner, 2018), 165.↩
6. For a useful summary, see Scheidel, The Great Leveler, chaps. 4 and
5.↩
7. Gabriel Zucman, 'Global Wealth Inequality', Annual Review of
Economics 11, no. 1 (2019): 109-38, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
economics-080218-025852. Zucman's initial figures only extend to
2016, hence I've updated these to 2022 using data from the World
Inequality Database. See https://wid.world/world/. The figure comes

from the World Inequality Database, 'Top 10% National Income Share,
2025',
https://wid.world/world#£sptinc_p9op100_z/US;FR;DE;CN;GB/last/e
u/k/p/yearly/s/false/24.981500000000004/80/curve/false/country.
Published under the Creative Commons License Version 4.0.↩
8. For a full and accessible structural-demographic analysis of the US,
see Peter Turchin, End Times: Elites, Counter-Elites, and the Path of
Political Disintegration (Penguin, 2023).↩
9. The original data is from Vaclav Smil, 'War and Energy',
Encyclopedia of Energy 6, no. 3 (2004): 63-71,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-12-176480-X/00016-4. I've added in a
rough date for each weapon and exchanged his example of a Boeing
767 (used in the 9/11 terrorist attacks) for the first nuclear bomb used
in combat (Little Boy) and the largest hydrogen bomb ever tested (the
Tsar Bomba). I've also dropped the bow and arrow from the data. Its
origins are so ancient that including it makes the graph far more
difficult to read.↩
10. Office of Naval Research, 'Directed Energy Weapons: Ultra-Short
Pulse Laser and Atmospheric Characterization', 2024,
www.onr.navy.mil/organization/departments/code-35/division-
353/directed-energy-weapons-uspl-and-atmospheric-characterization;
Defense Adapted Research Projects Agency (DARPA), 'ACK:
Adapting Cross-Domain Kill-Webs', 2024,
www.darpa.mil/program/adapting-cross-domain-kill-webs.↩
11. Maria Nordström, 'AI under Great Uncertainty: Implications and
Decision Strategies for Public Policy', AI & Society 37, no. 4 (2022):
1712, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00146-021-01263-4.↩
12. This is the central tenet of Paul Romer's Nobel Prize-winning
endogenous growth theory. See Paul M. Romer, 'Endogenous
Technological Change', Journal of Political Economy 98, no. 5, Part 2
(1990): S71-102, www.jstor.org/stable/2937632.↩
13. Deborah Strumsky, José Lobo, and Joseph A. Tainter, 'Complexity and
the Productivity of Innovation', Systems Research and Behavioral
Science 27, no. 5 (2010): 496-509,
https://doi.org/10.1002/sres.1057.↩

14. Nicholas Bloom et al., 'Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?', American
Economic Review 110, no. 4 (2020): 1104-44,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20180338.↩
15. Elias Dinopoulos and Constantinos Syropoulos, 'Rent Protection as a
Barrier to Innovation and Growth', Economic Theory 32, no. 2 (2007):
309-32, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00199-006-0124-4.↩
16. Suzanne Goldenberg, 'Oil Company Records from 1960s Reveal
Patents to Reduce CO2 Emissions in Cars', Guardian, 20 May 2016,
www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/20/oil-company-records-
exxon-co2-emission-reduction-patents.↩
17. MacAskill, What We Owe the Future.↩
18. Steven J. Hoffman et al., 'International Treaties Have Mostly Failed to
Produce Their Intended Effects', Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 119, no. 32 (2022): e2122854119,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122854119; Marina Nord et al.,
'Democracy Winning and Losing at the Ballot: Democracy Report
2024', University of Gothenburg, V-Dem Institute, 2024, 6-7, www.v-
dem.net/publications/democracy-reports/.↩
19. Geoffrey West, Scale: The Universal Laws of Life and Death in
Organisms, Cities and Companies (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2017),
563-7. Figure 49 is adapted from Martin Hilbert, 'Digital Technology
and Social Change: The Digital Transformation of Society from a
Historical Perspective', Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 22, no. 2
(2020): fig. 1, https://doi.org/10.31887/DCNS.2020.22.2/mhilbert. It is
technically a schematic of Schumpeterian waves of economic
development. The figures aren't exact, but are correct in terms of
orders of magnitude.↩
20. West, Scale, 563-7.↩
21. Hannah Ritchie, 'How Much Plastic Waste Ends Up in the Ocean?',
Our World in Data, 5 October 2023, https://ourworldindata.org/how-
much-plastic-waste-ends-up-in-the-ocean.↩
22. Vaclav Smil, How the World Really Works: A Scientist's Guide to Our
Past, Present, and Future (Viking, 2022).↩
23. While it's commonly claimed that 70 per cent of internet traffic is
routed through the US, hard figures are difficult to come by. The best

analysis I could find was Tim Stronge, 'Does 70% of the World's
Internet Traffic Flow Through Virginia?', Telegeography, 30 May
2019, https://blog.telegeography.com/does-70-of-the-worlds-internet-
traffic-flow-through-virginia.↩
24. Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism.↩
25. Kemp, 'Agents of Doom'.↩
26. Annie Jacobsen, The Pentagon's Brain: An Uncensored History of
DARPA, America's Top Secret Military Research Agency (Little,
Brown, 2015).↩
27. On this and other examples, see Kemp, 'The Stomp Reflex'.↩
28. Two good analyses of this long-term growth in administration and
information processing can be found in Mann, The Sources of Social
Power I, and Morris, Why the West Rules - For Now.↩
29. See Kemp, 'Agents of Doom'.↩
30. Nick Bostrom, 'The Vulnerable World Hypothesis', Global Policy 10,
no. 4 (2019): 455-76, https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12718.↩
31. There is an old idea of 'Amara's Law' in foresight which suggests that
we tend to overestimate the short-term effects of technology and
underestimate its long-term effects. While not an iron law, it is a useful
heuristic in this case.↩
32. Nick Bostrom calls this 'turnkey totalitarianism': all it takes is one
dictator to turn the system into a far more oppressive apparatus
(Bostrom, 'The Vulnerable World Hypothesis', 470).↩
CHAPTER 22: AFTER THE FALL
1. Robert H. Gray, 'The Fermi Paradox Is Neither Fermi's Nor a
Paradox', Astrobiology 15, no. 3 (2015): 195-9,
https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2014.1247.↩
2. Anders Sandberg, Eric Drexler, and Toby Ord, 'Dissolving the Fermi
Paradox', SocArXiv, 6 June 2018, 1,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1806.02404.↩

3. Katie Mack, The End of Everything (Astrophysically Speaking) (Simon
& Schuster Audio, 2020), provides a summary of the main theories
including the Big Rip (dark energy causing the universe to expand
until even the tiniest particles are pulled apart), the Big Crunch
(essentially a reversal of the Big Bang), Heat Death (expansion until
the universe becomes a cold, bland vacuum where nothing happens
any more), and Vacuum Decay (which is well beyond my pay-grade to
explain in a single sentence).↩
4. Andrew E. Snyder-Beattie, Toby Ord, and Michael B. Bonsall, 'An
Upper Bound for the Background Rate of Human Extinction',
Scientific Reports 9, no. 1 (2019): 1, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
019-47540-7.↩
5. Rosalind P. Murray-McIntosh et al., 'Testing Migration Patterns and
Estimating Founding Population Size in Polynesia by Using Human
mtDNA Sequences', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
95, no. 15 (1998): 9047, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.15.9047; Jody
Hey, 'On the Number of New World Founders: A Population Genetic
Portrait of the Peopling of the Americas', ed. Andy G. Clark, PLoS
Biology 3, no. 6 (2005): 0965,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.0030193; Heng Li and Richard
Durbin, 'Inference of Human Population History from Individual
Whole-Genome Sequences', Nature 475, no. 7357 (2011): 494,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10231.↩
6. Cameron M. Smith, 'Estimation of a Genetically Viable Population for
Multigenerational Interstellar Voyaging: Review and Data for Project
Hyperion', Acta Astronautica 97 (2014): 16-29,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2013.12.013. Other studies have
turned up numbers that fall within this range. For instance, F. Marin
and C. Beluffi, 'Computing the Minimal Crew for a Multi-
Generational Space Travel Towards Proxima Centauri b', SocArXiv,
11 June 2018, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.1806.03856, suggest a
strangely precise minimum viable population of ninety-eight.↩
7. Luisa Rodriguez, 'Civilization Re-Emerging After a Catastrophic
Collapse', EA Forum, 24 December 2020,
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/GsjmufaebreiaivF7/what-is-
the-likelihood-that-civilizational-collapse-would. While simple and

compelling, there are good reasons to be sceptical of this. Namely that
it's a 10-20-hour exploration and was published on a blog. ↩
8. We rarely completely exterminate a virus or disease as we did with
smallpox. Instead, it usually becomes endemic and widespread
throughout the population, making it far less lethal and more easily
controlled through vaccinations. That is what has happened with
influenza and Covid-19.↩
9. Persson et al., 'Outside the Safe Operating Space of the Planetary
Boundary for Novel Entities'.↩
10. Hagai Levine et al., 'Temporal Trends in Sperm Count: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Regression Analysis', Human Reproduction Update
23, no. 6 (2017): 646-59, https://doi.org/10.1093/humupd/dmx022.↩
11. Damian Carrington, 'Arctic Stronghold of World's Seeds Flooded after
Permafrost Melts', Guardian, 19 May 2017,
www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/may/19/arctic-stronghold-
of-worlds-seeds-flooded-after-permafrost-melts.↩
12. David Denkenberger and Joshua M. Pearce, Feeding Everyone No
Matter What: Managing Food Security After Global Catastrophe
(Academic Press, 2014); Juan B. García Martínez, Jeffray Behr, and
David C. Denkenberger, 'Food Without Agriculture: Food from CO2,
Biomass and Hydrocarbons to Secure Humanity's Food Supply
Against Global Catastrophe', Trends in Food Science & Technology
150 (2024): 104609, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2024.104609.↩
13. Jillian Scudder, 'The Sun Won't Die for 5 Billion Years, So Why Do
Humans Have Only 1 Billion Years Left on Earth?', The Conversation,
12 February 2015, https://theconversation.com/the-sun-wont-die-for-5-
billion-years-so-why-do-humans-have-only-1-billion-years-left-on-
earth-37379.↩
14. Karim Jebari, Civilization Re-Emerging After a Catastrophic Collapse,
2019, www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zhx5ieX-HPY; Michael Aird,
'Civilization Re-Emerging After a Catastrophic Collapse', EA Forum,
27 June 2020,
https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/Z8A5qGFbjdehRrkf3/civiliza
tion-re-emerging-after-a-catastrophic-collaps; Lewis Dartnell, The

Knowledge: How to Rebuild Our World from Scratch (Penguin,
2014).↩
15. Lewis Dartnell, 'Out of the Ashes', Aeon, 13 April 2015,
https://aeon.co/essays/could-we-reboot-a-modern-civilisation-without-
fossil-fuels.↩
16. I've calculated the number of years of fossil-fuel supply left using data
from Our World in Data, 'Years of Fossil Fuel Reserves Left, 2020',
Our World in Data, 2024, https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/years-of-
fossil-fuel-reserves-left. I've then subtracted five years to produce the
final figures. Estimates of total recoverable reserves come from
Hannah Ritchie and Pablo Rosado, 'Fossil Fuels', Our World in Data,
2024, https://ourworldindata.org/fossil-fuels.↩
17. This often reveals more about the techno-utopian values of those who
study existential risk than the preferences of future people. See Cremer
and Kemp, 'Democratising Risk'.↩
18. Max Popp, Hauke Schmidt, and Jochem Marotzke, 'Transition to a
Moist Greenhouse with CO2 and Solar Forcing', Nature
Communications 7, no. 1 (2016): 10627,
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10627. For overarching summaries,
see Kemp, 'Ecological Breakdown and Human Extinction', chap. 7 in
The Era of Global Risk, ed. S. J. Beard et al. (Open Book Publishers,
2023), 157-8; Lynas, Our Final Warning, chap. 6.↩
19. For informative and evocative overviews, see Peter D. Ward, Under a
Green Sky: Global Warming, the Mass Extinctions of the Past, and
What They Can Tell Us About Our Future (HarperCollins, 2008);
Lynas, Our Final Warning, chap. 6.↩
20. Gregory A. Brennecka et al., 'Rapid Expansion of Oceanic Anoxia
Immediately Before the End-Permian Mass Extinction', Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 43 (2011): 17631-4,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1106039108; Jitao Chen et al., 'Marine
Anoxia Linked to Abrupt Global Warming During Earth's Penultimate
Icehouse', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119, no.
19 (2022): e2115231119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2115231119.↩
21. Mark O'Connell, 'Why Silicon Valley Billionaires Are Prepping for
the Apocalypse in New Zealand', Guardian, 15 February 2018,

www.theguardian.com/news/2018/feb/15/why-silicon-valley-
billionaires-are-prepping-for-the-apocalypse-in-new-zealand.↩
22. Maya Yang, 'Bankman-Fried Planned to Buy Nauru and Build
Apocalypse Bunker - Lawsuit', Guardian, 21 July 2023,
www.theguardian.com/business/2023/jul/21/sam-bankman-fried-
nauru-bunker-ftx. Effective Altruism is a movement that seeks to
maximize the impact of charitable donations and careers through hard-
nosed mathematics.↩
23. Douglas Rushkoff, Survival of the Richest: Escape Fantasies of the
Tech Billionaires (W. W. Norton, 2022).↩
24. Chris Begley, The Next Apocalypse: The Art and Science of Survival
(Basic Books, 2021).↩
25. Moersdorf et al., 'The Fragile State of Industrial Agriculture', 1, 7.↩
26. They might even benefit. The wealth of banks, living largely as digital
numbers in an account rather than as the hard reality of gold and silver,
would disappear alongside the power system. African nations would
suddenly have an extra $163 billion they wouldn't need to repay in
debt.↩
27. Technically, Phoenician is an 'abjad', a system of writing in which
only the consonants are represented. The Greeks modified it by adding
symbols for the vowels, thus making it a complete alphabet.↩
28. Josiah Ober, The Rise and Fall of Classical Greece (Princeton
University Press, 2015).↩
29. Haydn Belfield, 'Collapse, Recovery, and Existential Risk', in How
Worlds Collapse, ed. Miguel Centeno et al. (Routledge, 2023), 61.↩
30. There is an old cliché that crisis creates more draconian government.
The Bolshevik Revolution begat the Gulag of the Soviet Union. Mao's
communist revolution led to the mass deaths of the Great Leap
Forward. Yet these are completely different from a global collapse.
Indeed, none were collapses. Each one relied on highly centralized,
bureaucratic, and effective power hierarchies. And we've encountered
examples that went the other way: Somalia, post-Mycenaean Greece,
and Egypt during the post-imperial epochs. ↩

31. Cline, After 1177, 216. Kemp and Cline, 'Systemic Risk and
Resilience in the Bronze Age', 221.↩
CHAPTER 23: FIAT JUSTITIA, NE PEREAT
MUNDUS
1. Macron complained that 'you can't say that just because 150 citizens
wrote something, it's the Bible or the Koran'. Well, nor is the
legislation produced by less than a thousand of France's richest and
most powerful in the National Assembly.↩
2. Several others and I have suggested different ways of using open
democracy to mitigate catastrophic risk. See Kemp et al., 'Climate
Endgame'; C. Z. Cremer and J. Whittlestone, 'Canaries in Technology
Mines: Warning Signs of Transformative Progress in AI', Apollo -
University of Cambridge Repository, 24 September 2020,
https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.57790; Cremer and Kemp,
'Democratising Risk'.↩
3. The best-known usage was as the motto of the Holy Roman Emperor
Ferdinand I (r. 1556-64). Immanuel Kant later used it as a retort to his
utilitarian critics, although his translation was 'Let justice reign even if
all the rascals in the world should perish from it.'↩
4. Bostrom, 'The Vulnerable World Hypothesis'.↩
5. See Chapter 7 for a summary.↩
6. Roman Krznaric, The Good Ancestor: A Radical Prescription for
Long-Term Thinking (Experiment, 2020).↩
7. Nassim Nicholas Taleb, Fooled by Randomness, 2nd edn (Random
House, 2016).↩
8. Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2013).↩
9. Taleb, Fooled by Randomness.↩
10. George Eliot, Middlemarch. Thanks to Itzxul Moreno for introducing
me to this beautiful quote.↩

11. While tragedy is typically invoked to describe history as well as
nuclear arms races, it is rarely an apt framing and hides political
responsibility. For a full discussion in the realm of nuclear weapons,
see Benoît Pelopidas and Neil C. Renic, 'The Tragedy Trap: On the
Tragicized Politics of Nuclear Weapons and Armed Drones and the
Making of Unaccountability', Ethics & International Affairs 38, no. 2
(Summer 2024): 209-31,
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0892679424000145.↩
EPILOGUE: SLAYING GOLIATH
1. IDDRI, 'Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project', 2024,
www.iddri.org/en/project/deep-decarbonization-pathways-project.↩
2. Karn Vohra et al., 'Global Mortality from Outdoor Fine Particle
Pollution Generated by Fossil Fuel Combustion: Results from GEOS-
Chem', Environmental Research 195 (2021): 110754,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2021.110754.↩
3. Simon Black et al., 'IMF Fossil Fuel Subsidies Data: 2023 Update',
IMF Working Paper, 2023,
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2023/08/22/IMF-Fossil-Fuel-
Subsidies-Data-2023-Update-537281.↩
4. A trillion equals one thousand billion. UNESCO estimates that
providing sanitation and safe drinking water to all low- and middle-
income countries would cost around US $114 billion. The International
Institute for Sustainable Development calculated that ending hunger
would cost an additional US $11 billion per year between 2016 and
2030 (for a total of $176 billion). The development economist Jeffrey
Sachs has calculated that ending extreme poverty would cost around
$175 billion. Together this is around $465 billion. Even if these are
underestimates and it costs three times as much, the revenue from
fossil-fuel subsidies would still cover it, with over half a trillion to
spare. See Jeffrey Sachs, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities
for Our Time, new edn (Penguin, 2015); David Laborde and Livia
Bizikova, 'Ending Hunger: What Would It Cost?', International
Institute for Sustainable Development and the International Food

Policy Research Institute, 2016, 3,
www.iisd.org/system/files/publications/ending-hunger-what-would-it-
cost.pdf; UNESCO, 'Valuing Water Supply, Sanitation Services', UN
World Water Development Report, 2021,
www.unesco.org/reports/wwdr/2021/en/valuing-water-supply-
sanitation-services.↩
5. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 'Working Group III
Technical Summary', in Climate Change 2022 - Mitigation of Climate
Change (Cambridge University Press, 2023), 51-148,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157926.002. ↩
6. One calculation for the US suggests that the health costs of coal are
0.8-5.6 times more than the value it adds to the economy. See
Nicholas Z. Muller, Robert Mendelsohn, and William Nordhaus,
'Environmental Accounting for Pollution in the United States
Economy', American Economic Review 101, no. 5 (2011): 1649-75,
https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.5.1649. That's just the health costs, and
those would be far higher in many other countries. For a wider
discussion of health co-benefits, read Kemp, 'Ecological Breakdown
and Human Extinction', 162-5.↩
7. For a fuller exploration of potential options, see Jason Hickel et al.,
'Degrowth Can Work - Here's How Science Can Help', Nature 612,
no. 7940 (2022): 400-403, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-04412-
x.↩
8. Jason Hickel and Dylan Sullivan, 'How Much Growth Is Required to
Achieve Good Lives for All? Insights from Needs-Based Analysis',
World Development Perspectives 35 (2024): 100612,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wdp.2024.100612.↩
9. Matthijs M. Maas, 'Paths Untaken: The History, Epistemology and
Strategy of Technological Restraint, and Lessons for AI',
Verfassungsblog, 9 August 2022, https://verfassungsblog.de/paths-
untaken/.↩
10. Arrieta-Ibarra et al., 'Should We Treat Data as Labor? Moving beyond
"Free"'.↩
11. Girish Sastry et al., 'Computing Power and the Governance of
Artificial Intelligence', SocArXiv, 13 February 2024,

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.08797.↩
12. On company activism, see Haydn Belfield, 'Activism by the AI
Community: Analysing Recent Achievements and Future Prospects',
SocArXiv, 17 January 2020,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2001.06528.↩
13. This list of interventions is based on advice from Matthijs Maas.↩
14. Moritz Kütt and Zia Mian, 'Setting the Deadline for Nuclear Weapon
Removal from Host States under the Treaty on the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons', Journal for Peace and Nuclear Disarmament 5, no.
1 (2022): 148-61, https://doi.org/10.1080/25751654.2022.2046405.↩
15. Tytti Erästö, 'Revisiting "Minimal Nuclear Deterrence": Laying the
Ground for Multilateral Nuclear Disarmament', Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), 2022, 5,
www.sipri.org/sites/default/files/2022-
06/sipriinsight2206_minimal_nuclear_deterrence_1.pdf. This figure of
300 is the lowest number covered in this review of minimal nuclear
deterrence estimates.↩
16. Jonas Jägermeyr et al., 'A Regional Nuclear Conflict Would
Compromise Global Food Security', Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 117, no. 13 (2020): 7071,
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1919049117.↩
17. For instance, in 1939 the US produced 2,141 planes. In 1944, three
years after entering the Second World War, it was producing almost
100,000 per year and had completely transformed its economy and
society, including conscripting over 10 million men and introducing a
rationing system.↩
18. See Benoît Pelopidas and Sanne Cornelia J. Verschuren, 'Writing IR
after COVID-19: Reassessing Political Possibilities, Good Faith, and
Policy-Relevant Scholarship on Climate Change Mitigation and
Nuclear Disarmament', Global Studies Quarterly 3, no. 1 (2023):
ksad006, https://doi.org/10.1093/isagsq/ksad006.↩
19. Both Open Democracy by Hélène Landemore and Plurality by E. Glen
Weyl and Audrey Tang outline multiple ways in which old forms of
governance and new technology can be combined to create bigger,
more inclusive democracies than ever seen before. See Hélène

Landemore, Open Democracy: Reinventing Popular Rule for the
Twenty-First Century (Princeton University Press, 2020); E. Glen
Weyl and Audrey Tang, Plurality: The Future of Collaborative
Technology and Democracy (RadicalxChange, 2024).↩
20. For an overview, see Bokyong Shin et al., 'A Systematic Analysis of
Digital Tools for Citizen Participation', Government Information
Quarterly 41, no. 3 (2024): 101954,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2024.101954. Notably, most existing tools
are owned by big tech. That won't be a sustainable situation if we want
genuine democracy.↩
21. Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman, The Triumph of Injustice: How
the Rich Dodge Taxes and How to Make Them Pay (W. W. Norton,
2019).↩
22. For a full suite of options, see Hickel, The Divide, chap. 8.↩
23. Matthew Connelly, The Declassification Engine: What History
Reveals About America's Top Secrets (Pantheon Books, 2023).↩
24. International Center for Not-for-Profit Law, 'US Protest Law Tracker',
2024, www.icnl.org/usprotestlawtracker/.↩
25. Cremer and Whittlestone, 'Canaries in Technology Mines'.↩
26. A similar proposal is covered (with more depth) in Kemp et al.,
'Climate Endgame', 2, 3, and 7.↩
27. Colleagues and I have referred to this as a financial oath of
Maimonides (originally the traditional oath for physicians and
pharmacists that is more expansive in its requirements, opening with
'The eternal providence has appointed me to watch over the life and
health of thy creatures'). For further details of how and why
institutional investors should use their portfolios to reduce catastrophic
risk, read Luke Kemp et al., 'Financing Our Final Hour', in An
Anthology of Global Risk', ed. S. J. Beard and T. Hobson (Open Book
Publishers, 2024), 682, https://doi.org/10.11647/obp.0360.23.↩
OceanofPDF.com

Index
The page references in this index correspond to the print edition from which
this ebook was created, and clicking on them will take you to the location in
the ebook where the equivalent print page would begin. To find a specific
word or phrase from the index, please use the search feature of your ebook
reader.
Page references in italics indicate images.
Achaemenid Empire 161, 237, 241, 255, 294
Admonitions of Ipuwer 12-13
Afghanistan 121, 154, 179, 180, 185, 288, 289, 290, 310, 345
Africa 10-11, 24-6, 34, 37, 43, 44, 46, 51-4, 58, 61, 95, 116, 117, 124, 125,
152, 175, 191, 201-7, 203, 217, 220-21, 223, 232, 233, 237-41, 246,
257, 266-7, 278, 282-3, 285, 291, 292, 297, 311, 321, 341, 363, 375,
383, 410, 418. See also individual nation name
Agents of Doom (companies and institutions who disproportionately
contribute to the apocalypse) 370-33, 378, 381, 382, 384, 386, 387, 405,
427-8, 441
agriculture: abandoned experiments in 76, 77-90, 78, 86-7, 111, 427;
adoption of/agricultural revolution 2, 24, 26-9, 40, 41, 45, 61-5, 64, 69-
90, 78, 86-7, 91, 94, 101, 102, 108-22, 127, 131-2, 134-5, 140-22, 146,
176, 187, 192, 195, 213, 220, 237, 249; climate change and 23, 81, 88-9,
95, 101, 108, 140, 192, 194, 195-9, 293, 329, 337, 411-12, 427; crops
see crops; domesticated animals and see domestication; energy use and 4,
16, 195, 196; equality of the sexes and 40; Europe, arrival in 68, 77, 83-
90, 86-7, 122, 127, 131, 134, 135, 139, 140, 192, 195, 213, 236, 253,
368; factory farming 298, 435; failure of traditional 411-12; hunter-
gatherers and 26, 28-30, 63-4, 73, 433; living standards and 249; male

genetic diversity and 41; productivity 165, 233-5, 250; Rapa Nui and
267; Roman Empire and 14, 225, 228, 232, 235, 240, 246, 249; sedentism
and 64, 64, 72, 77-8, 78, 433; shifting agriculture ('swidden' farming)
80, 122, 132; states, transition from agriculture to 77-9, 78, 109, 112-19,
114-15; status competition and adoption of 81-3, 112-19, 114-15;
underground 417; war and 66, 68-9, 85-6; zoonotic infections/density-
dependent disease and 89
Agta 25, 28, 47
Akkad 113, 172, 178, 255
Akkadian Empire 130, 172, 172, 174, 176, 177, 178, 203, 255, 362
Aksumite Empire 201-2, 204, 205-7, 233
algorithms 9, 145, 306, 315, 317-26, 337, 345, 348-9, 371, 378-9, 384,
402, 403, 405, 432, 436-39, 454
alpha male 38-9, 43, 58
alphabets 189-90, 244, 419
Altman, Sam 8, 245, 304n, 317, 320, 378, 380, 416, 432
Amazon (online retailer) 286, 351, 379, 393
Amazon rainforest 28, 111, 352
Amodei, Dario 317, 378-9
Andes 100, 101, 113, 114, 116, 123, 156, 219
Ani-Kutani 107, 108, 122-3
animism 128, 170, 276
Ankhtifi 12-14
Anthropic 317, 373, 378-9
Anthropocene 327, 341-5, 342
'art of not being governed' 120-21, 221, 450
artificial intelligence (AI) 8-9, 303, 304, 306-308, 317-26, 338, 345, 356,
362, 366, 373, 378-81, 386, 387, 388, 396-8, 400-406, 416, 424, 433,
436-7, 440-41, 444
artwork, ancient 26, 31, 31, 48, 57, 69-71, 70, 98, 99, 150, 160, 202
Assyrian Empire 6, 127, 130, 136, 175, 178-80, 182, 184, 186-90, 217,
241, 285, 348, 418, 421
asteroid strike 23, 414-15
Atahualpa, emperor 264, 270-71, 271, 280
Athens, ancient 37, 75, 136, 163, 189, 248, 419, 421, 430, 438, 452
Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) 337-8, 359
Augustus, emperor 226, 228, 274

Aurignacian Culture 26, 27, 27
Australia 36, 55, 62, 76, 127, 175, 246, 267-8, 274, 275, 277, 279, 282,
290, 292, 308, 360, 376-80, 401, 410, 422, 444; Aboriginal peoples 62,
73, 80, 266
Austro-Hungarian Empire 282-3
authoritarianism 55, 162, 165, 205, 380, 453; authoritarian impulse 149,
165-70, 221, 275, 386, 387, 402, 426, 429-30, 451, 452
autocracy 11, 110, 135, 137, 163, 189, 196, 235, 275, 286, 290, 307-8, 363,
392, 393, 403, 404, 419-20, 427, 429, 439-40
Aztec Empire 99, 103, 123-4, 129, 159, 257, 260, 260-66, 268, 270-73,
276, 280, 362
Babylonian Empire 6, 178, 180, 184, 248
barbarians/barbarism 72, 119, 127, 183, 240, 244, 248, 276, 394-5
barley 84, 94, 113, 115, 116, 117, 240
Barre, Mohamed Siad 10, 11, 363
biodiversity 145, 340, 344, 360-61, 435
bioengineering 8, 316, 320, 377
biotechnology 297, 315, 373, 377
Black Death 90, 244, 250-52, 253, 256, 257, 268, 277-9, 307, 314, 348,
355, 420
blessing, collapse as a 1, 10-12, 171, 185, 186-90, 223, 240-41, 250-52,
418-21
Boehm, Christopher 38, 42
Bonaparte, Napoleon 42, 223
brain 28, 32, 39, 48, 164-5, 168-9, 247, 258
Britain 3, 7, 37, 52, 83, 84, 86-7, 88, 161, 175, 223, 229, 239-41, 279, 344,
352; British Empire 135, 175, 229, 241, 253, 255, 255-8, 266, 271, 273,
275, 276, 279, 280, 282-6, 287, 289, 290, 321, 344
British Petroleum (BP) 370, 372, 374, 376, 424
bronze 66, 67, 113, 160, 161, 163, 179-84, 191, 208, 226, 275-6, 293-4,
399, 404, 406, 419
Bronze Age 5, 6, 17, 71, 155, 155, 157, 176-81, 189, 196-7, 207, 217, 233,
240, 268, 428; collapses 171, 176-8, 177, 181-90, 182, 184, 186, 217,
237, 240, 244, 248, 294, 329, 418, 421, 448; Early Bronze Age 155, 155,
171, 175-8, 177; Late Bronze Age 6, 17, 171, 175, 180, 181-2, 182, 184-

90, 184, 186, 193, 205, 206, 217, 231, 232, 237, 240, 241, 244, 248, 278,
294, 329, 348, 386, 418, 421, 448; Middle Bronze Age 155, 155
bureaucracy 1, 4, 14, 73-4, 109, 124-6, 131-2, 137, 153, 159, 173-5, 210,
211, 213, 214, 216-22, 226, 228, 233, 235, 238, 256, 286, 294, 362-3,
385, 402, 419, 420, 453
burials 2, 11, 14, 30, 36, 42, 48, 50, 56-8, 62, 63, 69, 82-3, 85, 96, 104-
106, 125, 140, 224, 250
Byzantine Empire 4, 110, 156, 202, 218, 225, 228, 228, 237-8, 247
caged land 66-7, 67, 113, 134-5, 169, 219, 387, 391, 426, 451, 453, 454
Cahokia 2-5, 3, 7, 8, 92, 102-11, 106, 118, 123-6, 133, 136-8, 140, 143,
146, 150, 158, 162, 191, 218-19, 231, 248, 280, 294, 368, 414, 431
calendars 57, 58, 191-3, 197, 261
calories 15, 79, 80-81, 85, 108, 116, 195, 296, 351, 391, 412
Calusa 60-62, 63, 65, 66, 72, 73, 105, 109, 118, 123, 128, 132, 175, 265
Cambodia 119, 245, 285
Canaan 150, 154, 166, 178, 182-6, 184, 189
canine teeth 39, 56
canoes 60, 61, 67, 247
capitalism 171, 253-6, 255, 279, 286-7, 298-9, 406, 428, 453; colonial
capitalism 244, 253-6, 255; origins of 178-81, 296, 297; surveillance
capitalism 401-2
carbon dioxide (CO2) 305, 331, 337-40, 339, 345, 359-61, 370, 372, 377,
394, 400, 415, 421, 424, 429, 438, 441, 445; carbon tax/price 424-36,
444; decarbonization 434-5, 441, 444
Carthage 189, 226, 243
Castle Bravo test (1954) 308, 375
Çatalhöyük 93, 94-7, 95, 102, 110, 138
catastrophic risk, global 304-7, 307, 326, 345, 354, 368, 368, 371-2, 372,
377-8, 387, 388, 394, 400, 404, 427-8, 433, 442, 443, 453, 453; causal
chain of 371-2, 372, 387, 453
cave art 31, 31, 31n, 48, 51-2, 57-8, 57, 69-71, 70, 202
census 122, 158-9, 231, 294
CEOs 8, 41, 73, 144, 166-7, 322, 377-8, 380, 396, 402, 416, 431, 443
cereals 62-7, 78, 113-14, 116, 167, 238, 332
Chaco Canyon 85, 107
chaos 12, 22, 24, 34, 75, 75, 96, 127, 414, 451

ChatGPT 320, 325
Cheyenne 55-7, 58
Chichén Itzá 196-8
Chile 62, 263, 267, 285
chimpanzees 5, 32, 39, 43, 46-8, 67, 74, 426, 452
China 4, 5, 6, 11, 22, 28, 37, 64, 69, 81, 83, 96, 113-14, 115, 116, 119-20,
124-9, 151, 158, 160, 163, 166, 174, 207, 208-22, 209, 230, 232-3, 236-
7, 253, 257, 274-5, 283-4, 287, 292, 293, 294, 304, 305, 311, 313, 325,
340, 345, 363, 373, 378, 391-2, 393, 401-403, 418, 436. See also
individual dynasty and ruler name
Chinggis (Genghis) Khan 40-41, 155, 229-30, 329
Christianity 22, 124, 128, 229, 238, 252
cities 4, 6, 8, 14, 16, 34, 113, 239, 240, 246, 247, 254, 261, 287, 308, 309,
311, 329, 383, 406, 409-10, 418, 422, 427; abandoned 91-111, 92-3,
101, 106, 427; ancient/first 2, 8, 77, 79, 81-2, 91-111, 92-3, 101, 106,
113, 118, 119, 123, 134, 140, 141, 146, 157, 159-63, 172-3, 176, 178-
86, 188, 189, 191, 192, 194, 196-8, 201, 203-207; city-states 17, 161-2,
175, 178, 192, 197, 203, 206, 224, 226, 231, 232, 261, 263, 277-8, 419;
pyramid 2, 91, 102-7, 106, 113, 118, 141, 191, 192, 194, 196
citizens' assemblies 378, 405, 424-6
civilization: colonialism and 266, 382; defined/term 4-5, 72-3, 127-8, 451;
fluid 24-9, 27, 33, 35, 51, 52, 54, 56, 59-60, 74, 90, 383, 405, 425, 426,
452; Goliath and 5; Hobbes and 75, 127; recreating 438-45
climate change 8-10, 16, 50, 52-3, 54, 58, 62-3, 77, 81, 88, 95, 101, 106,
109-10, 140-43, 146, 176, 185, 192, 195-6, 201, 202, 213, 228, 233,
235, 236, 238, 292-3, 306-308, 310, 314, 324, 327-42, 330, 334-5, 339,
344, 356-61, 364-6, 368, 370-5, 377, 378, 382, 388, 396-7, 411-15,
424, 426, 428, 433-5, 442-4
Cline, Eric 185, 448; 1177 BC: The Year Civilization Collapsed 17
Clovis Culture 26, 27, 27
coal 195, 254, 296, 305, 325, 350, 351, 357, 362-7, 368, 374, 376, 391,
413-14
cognitive revolution 48, 55
coinage 124, 202, 226-8, 237
colonialism 121, 243, 244-81, 255, 257, 260, 282-94, 297, 299, 308, 322,
342, 344, 404, 406, 427
coltan 152-3

Columbus, Christopher/Columbian Exchange 252, 254, 261, 355
complexity 39, 48, 72-4, 367
computer: age 399; viruses 8, 348, 418
concrete, Roman 246-8
Constantinople 3, 218, 238
cooperation 26, 29, 33-4, 39, 44, 46-7, 74, 164-6, 175-6, 215-16, 254,
270, 272, 307, 360, 371, 385-6, 417, 422, 427-8, 436, 451
Córdoba, Francisco Hernández de 259-63
corn 2, 13, 60-1, 64, 97, 98, 102, 103, 117, 118, 137, 194, 240, 261, 270,
337, 351, 418
corporations 179, 371, 383-5, 391, 431, 438-41, 443
Cortés, Hernán 123, 253, 259-60, 262-5, 280-81
Covid-19 35, 89, 313-17, 336, 344, 346-8, 364, 365, 402-403, 437
crops 61, 73, 78, 80, 81, 85, 89, 121, 178, 181-2, 194, 195, 219, 220, 235,
240, 250, 255, 265, 266, 272, 293, 329, 332, 337, 342, 351, 352, 418;
domesticated 72, 82, 102, 113, 116, 121, 251, 341, 342, 343; lootability
113, 114, 116-18, 117, 121-3, 167; 'three sisters' (beans, squash, and
maize) 85, 103, 104
crucifixion 4, 242-3
culture 4-5, 7-8, 17, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 33, 35, 39, 44, 47-8, 51-3, 55, 59,
73-4, 121, 124-5, 164, 233, 261, 292, 420-21, 451
cuneiform writing 14, 77, 125, 179, 199, 200
currencies 7, 124, 195, 198, 210, 227-8, 416
cyclones 360, 361
dark ages 12, 171, 188-90, 199, 218, 219, 240, 244, 245, 246
darker angels of our nature 149, 169-70, 384, 386-7, 387, 406, 421, 423,
428, 438, 442, 452; dark triad (psychopathy, narcissism, and
Machiavellianism) 42-4, 167-70, 384, 385-6, 387, 438, 442, 451, 452
data, digital 286-7, 315, 320-23, 326, 346, 348, 362, 386, 396, 400-405,
432, 436, 454; data unions 436
David, King of Israel 5, 38, 442; becoming a David 442-4
de Soto, Hernando 265, 269
Death-Star Syndrome 347, 368, 452
debt 82, 162, 179, 221, 234, 235, 285, 286, 307, 394
decimation, global 244, 256-8, 259, 306, 307, 453

decision-making 1, 15, 36-8, 40, 65, 73, 74, 108, 136, 137, 138, 143-6,
189, 232-6, 326, 384, 390, 392, 406, 423-7, 429, 431, 438-9, 452
democracy 4, 36-8, 44, 68, 73-6, 75, 102, 108, 135-8, 142-8, 165-6, 186-
90, 219, 225-6, 235, 283-4, 297, 373-8, 380, 391-3, 401, 402, 404-9,
419-28, 429-32, 438-5, 452
Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) 54, 152-3, 157, 163, 272, 285, 289-
90, 303-5, 321, 436
deus ex machina (a god from the machine) 308, 397, 399, 433
Diamond, Jared: Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Survive 16, 72,
260, 289
disaster risk 50-51, 142-4
disease 8, 16, 28, 50-51, 79, 89-90, 105, 140-42, 146, 159, 164, 185, 198,
206, 211, 222, 394-5, 410, 411, 427; pandemics 8, 9, 23, 35, 89, 120,
134, 159, 165, 276, 308, 313-15, 326, 336, 344, 346-8, 359, 362, 364,
365, 377, 387, 402-403, 416, 418, 437. See also individual disease name
disinformation 374-5, 381, 424
displaced people 11, 14, 81, 157-8, 239, 253, 268, 277, 310, 336
division of labour 38, 40
domestication: animals 62-6, 72, 81, 82, 113, 116-17, 121, 162, 250, 341,
342; crops 72, 82, 102, 113, 116, 121, 250, 341-3
dominance 5, 6, 15, 16, 36, 38-9, 59, 68, 73, 119, 121, 127-9, 131, 139,
430, 453, 454; aversion to 43, 44, 109, 127, 127, 173-4, 231, 237, 243,
280, 383, 420, 425; counter-dominance strategies 38-40, 43, 53, 74, 97,
109, 119, 139, 146, 167, 168-9, 210, 236, 266, 425, 444-5, 453;
dominance hierarchies 5, 40-44, 60-76, 64, 67, 70, 75, 109-14, 119-23,
125-32, 136-7, 161, 166, 170, 172-3, 220, 243, 259, 275, 383-6, 406,
426, 432, 453-4
doomsday: bunkers 416-17; dating 389-90; 'prepper' 12, 44, 416-17
drones 9, 304, 306, 319, 323-6, 398, 402, 403
drought 12, 35, 54, 88, 100, 101, 105-106, 109, 133, 134, 139-43, 146,
157, 167, 176-80, 181-200, 206, 208, 213, 222, 231-5, 235-9, 307, 329,
359, 410, 427
dual use research of concern 314, 315
DuPont 374-5, 424
earthquakes 23, 34, 143, 182-3, 185, 186, 233, 236, 291, 293, 425
ecocide 196, 266, 424

economy: collapse of 1, 65, 120, 187, 236, 239-42, 276, 299, 347, 348,
353, 364, 394, 440; GDP see GDP; growth of 234, 250, 273, 284, 286,
331, 343-5, 347-51, 350, 354, 366, 368, 371, 397-9, 400, 419, 427, 435;
power of 65-6, 129, 215, 395
Ecuador 111, 114, 116, 118, 263, 285
Effective Altruism 417
egalitarianism 136, 146, 187, 206, 269, 275, 419, 425, 430; origins of 21,
24-26, 34-44, 47, 48, 56, 61-2, 65, 68-72, 74, 82, 94, 96, 100, 108, 110,
111, 119, 120, 126, 132, 136, 162-4, 167, 176, 276, 298, 427, 452
Egypt 4-7, 11-14, 16, 35, 78, 81, 112, 116, 119, 122-3, 128, 136, 151-3,
160, 166, 173, 176-82, 177, 182, 185, 186, 188, 199, 200, 202, 205, 219,
223, 225, 238, 245, 248-9, 259, 273, 284, 294-5, 332, 391, 418, 421-2,
451; First Dynasty 16, 45, 113, 115, 154-5, 177; Middle Kingdom 177;
New Egyptian Kingdom 178, 216; Old Egyptian Kingdom 12-14, 113,
176, 177, 182. See also individual ruler name
electricity 15, 256, 292, 304, 310, 314, 325, 340, 357, 362-4, 365, 398, 400,
413, 434, 436; electric telegraph 256, 294; electric vehicles 304, 398
elites: competition between 138-40, 142, 145, 208, 210-16, 222, 234-8,
236, 257, 259, 261-9, 270-73, 271, 280, 284, 340, 394, 427; cultural
upbringing and education of 287; flight of 208, 217-18, 416-18; imperial
overreach and 230-35; indigenous elites as allies of European empire
259-66, 270-73, 271, 284; Roman 15, 224-31; superiority, myths of
431-3; term 15, 431; wealth pump and 138-9
empire 4; colonialism and see colonialism; defined 176, 452; cycles of 211-
13; end of 282-6; evolution of Goliath across history and 403-4; global
decimation and 257-8; happiness and 249; inequality in across the
twentieth century 393; legacies of 241-3; maximum size of 255, 293-4;
origins of 149-70; rimless wheel 173, 175, 280, 322, 427; state and 174-
6. See also individual empire name
enclosure 254, 279
endgame 301-445, 368, 387; escaping 434-45; roots of 370-88, 388
energy: capture 4, 6, 15-16, 45, 46, 53, 71-2, 85, 99, 137, 145, 195-9, 202,
234, 235, 236, 254, 272-3, 277, 284, 296-7, 299, 319, 326, 331, 336,
343, 350, 361-2, 366-7, 391, 400, 412, 434, 435, 451, 453; energy ratio
195-8, 202, 234-5, 236, 366-7, 413, 414, 422, 452; renewable 345, 350,
367, 374, 413, 434

England 21, 27, 41, 64, 74, 136, 140, 175, 200, 246, 248, 251-4, 266, 270,
277-9, 283, 286, 289, 296, 383
environmental degradation 105, 146, 194-5, 202, 234, 290, 427
equality/inequality 2, 8, 33, 36, 43, 44, 58, 61, 94, 118-19; abandoned
Goliath experiments and 94-7, 98-102, 101, 104, 106, 110, 111; Bronze
Age Goliaths and 181-2, 184, 185, 186-9; collapses resulting in greater
equality 1, 10-12, 171, 185, 186-90, 223, 241-2, 251-2, 418-23;
corruption and 218, 234, 235; diminishing returns on extraction and 231-
2, 236, 452; distribution of power and 136-8; dominance and see
dominance; egalitarianism and see egalitarianism; elite competition and
214-15, 235; extraction and 138-42; fragility and 138-43, 141, 146;
Goliath fuel and 63-7; Goliath's Curse 146, 236, 426-7; health,
economic inequality and 249-51; Holocene, rise of wealth inequality
during 63-8, 71, 76-7, 83-6, 88, 90, 94-102, 101, 104, 108, 110, 111,
116; hunter-gatherers and 63-6; inequality in key empires across the
twentieth century 393; lootable resources and 134-6, 164; Lowland Maya
and 196-8, 207, 235; modern global politics and 392-4, 439-40; 1 per
cent, richest 12-15, 62, 136, 242, 261, 343, 347, 392, 431-2; reversing
inequality 406, 440; Roman Empire and 225-8, 234-5, 237, 239; of the
sexes 40, 433; stories to justify inequalities 128-9; systems for justifying
inequality 220; Tree of Doom and 387; unequal exchange 133, 136-9,
154, 174-5, 234, 286, 299, 400, 453
Eurasia 64, 64, 116, 121, 130, 205; aborted goliaths in 91-7, 92-3
European Union (EU) 26, 223, 231, 285-6, 349, 372, 376, 378, 424
evolution 31, 34-43, 47-8, 55, 166, 170, 315; backsliding, evolutionary 71-
6, 75, 426, 452; convergent 124-7, 131; cultural 47, 74, 127, 292, 451;
evolutionary inclinations 23-4, 425; evolutionary suicide 389, 394-7,
395, 406, 422, 423-8, 445, 452; Goliath and 123-32, 164, 242-3, 276,
293-5, 342, 363, 394-7, 395, 404, 433, 453; losers of 131-2
existential risk 306-7, 307, 311, 368, 390, 394, 407, 438, 442, 448, 452,
454
exit options 66-7, 113, 117-18, 121, 123, 135, 146, 154, 163, 219, 220,
405, 419, 420, 451
exposure, disaster risk and 50-51, 51, 142, 146, 164, 307
extinction 9; de-extinction 361; human 46-53, 49, 59-60, 268, 269, 303,
306-8, 307, 317, 318-19, 328-9, 359, 368, 378-80, 389, 390, 409-15,

452; mass extinction events 8, 328-9, 336, 338, 339, 359, 366, 415; non-
human species 298, 311, 338-9, 351
extraction 4, 11, 153-6, 162-6, 169, 173, 175, 187-8, 195-7, 216, 250-51,
276-8, 289, 290, 299, 306, 319, 322, 340, 344, 349, 386, 392, 393, 394,
396; diminishing returns on 223, 231-7, 234-5, 236, 278, 299, 319, 367,
394, 398, 404, 427, 452; fragility and 133, 138-43, 141, 146; global
system of 286; institutions, extractive 133, 136-9, 140, 143-4, 146, 196,
232-3, 236, 236, 277-8, 290, 427, 428, 452; Silicon Goliath and 400-
401; societies became more extractive over time 140, 277, 405, 427;
triggers collapse 139-43, 141
extraterrestrial life 408-9
Exxon 370-71, 372, 374, 397-8, 439
eyes, cooperative 39-40
facial recognition 325, 402-3, 406, 437
factories 254-5, 279, 297, 310, 412, 432, 436
fat-tailed distribution 355-7, 356, 368
feasting, communal 56, 61-3, 65, 81-3, 94, 96, 97, 105, 123, 135, 137-8,
170, 178, 275, 281, 344, 382
Fermi Paradox 408-9
fertility, human 274, 276, 294, 327, 411, 435
Fiat justitia, et pereat mundus ('Let justice be done, though the world
perish') 429-30
First World War (1914-18) 9, 159, 161, 282, 289-90, 297, 373, 391-2
fission-fusion cycles 53, 54-7, 72, 90, 109, 131, 132, 138-9, 158, 177, 192,
205, 207, 233
flooding 56, 57, 58, 81, 96, 139, 143, 208, 213, 216, 222, 232, 233, 236,
349, 359, 411, 417, 421, 427
Fontaneda, Hernando de Escalante 60-1, 123
fossil fuels 10, 15, 16, 216, 278, 296-9, 306, 325, 345, 353, 354, 358, 360,
366-7, 370-77, 381, 385, 391, 396, 397-8, 400, 404, 413-14, 422, 427,
428, 434-5, 442-3
France 7, 21, 26, 31, 31, 56, 57, 142, 160, 161, 189, 201, 218, 223, 251,
252, 266, 269, 274, 280, 283-4, 289, 308, 393, 424
gain-of-function research 314-15
game theory 381-5

Gao 203-4, 205
Garcia, Aleixo 263, 264, 265
Gaza 165, 288, 323, 324
GDP (Gross Domestic Product) 249, 273-4, 290, 328, 345, 350, 364, 394-
5, 395, 400, 435
gender 40, 129-31, 155, 290, 433
genetics 25, 31-3, 41, 44, 46, 49-55, 83, 89-90, 130, 165, 220, 267, 304,
314, 361, 410, 411
Genuine Progress Indicator (GPI) 435
geography 66-7, 116, 117, 120, 121, 219, 221, 238, 253, 277, 404-5, 419,
451
geomagnetic storms 359, 364-5
Germany 53, 84, 85, 150, 282-4, 288, 373, 393
Germanic tribes, Roman Empire and 156, 166, 223, 226, 228, 229, 230,
233, 240, 266, 275
Ghana 280, 285; Ghana Empire 117-18, 202-3, 203
gift-giving 26, 34, 108, 180
Global Goliath 76, 258, 280-81, 293, 298, 306, 308, 322, 330, 341-3, 349,
351, 353, 355, 357, 368, 368, 390-91, 393-4, 398-400, 403, 404, 404-9,
421, 427-8, 449, 453
globalization 15-16, 17, 26, 175, 298, 363, 400
glyphic writing 99, 125, 191-3, 197-9, 200
Göbleki Tepe, Turkey 56
gold 61, 104-5, 126, 152-3, 163, 174, 180, 181, 185, 187, 201, 203, 204,
225, 227, 253, 255, 267, 272, 277, 280-81, 344
Goliaths: abandoned experiments 77-111, 78, 86-7, 92-3, 95, 101, 106;
climate change and see climate; collapse of first 133-46, 141; Curse 132,
133-46, 141, 222, 231, 236, 237, 243, 278, 282, 299, 394, 397, 403, 404,
427, 430, 433, 449, 452, 453; defined 5, 139; earth/environment (Gaia) vs
327-45; empire and see colonialism and empire; escaping 112, 119-23;
evolution of 112, 123-7, 408; fuel 60, 63-8, 64, 67, 112, 113, 116-19,
121, 123, 131, 132, 134, 135, 163, 167, 169, 219-21, 231, 293, 294, 325,
329, 387, 388, 401, 405, 406, 420, 421, 438, 441, 451, 453, 454; gender
and 40, 129-31, 155, 290, 433; geography and see geography; Global see
Global Goliath; killing/slaying 405-6, 434-45; origins of 5, 63-8, 64,
66-7, 112-32, 114-15, 117; Primal Curse 146-7, 231, 236, 299, 404,
427, 449, 453; rebirth of, organizing to prevent 108-9; resurrected 218-

22, 418-23; Silicon see Silicon Goliath; traps 170, 296, 297, 388, 396,
398, 406, 428, 432, 433, 438; violence and see violence
Google 8, 286-7, 317, 325, 351, 373, 379, 396, 401-2, 436, 443
grains 2, 6, 11, 15, 64, 65-6, 77, 79, 83-5, 88-9, 109, 116, 121, 138, 162,
178, 180-82, 185, 198, 206, 219-23, 225, 227, 228, 239-40, 248, 251,
274, 294, 391, 401, 404, 426
Great Acceleration 349-51, 350, 399
Great Dismal Swamp 121, 123
Great Permian Dying (around 252 million years ago) 8, 331
Greece, ancient 6, 7, 16, 35-7, 77, 84, 85, 113, 127, 173, 178-90, 192, 199,
200, 206, 224, 241, 244, 247-8, 253, 354, 418-21, 430, 432-3;
Mycenaeans 6, 178, 181, 188, 219, 232, 249, 344, 418-21
greenhouse gases 305, 332, 349, 350, 358-9, 372, 376-7, 398, 415, 434
H5N1 virus 313
Hadza 43-4, 60, 249, 452
Halafians 69, 154
Haldon, John 237, 447-8
Han Dynasty 4, 6, 161, 209, 210-11, 214, 216-17, 222, 223, 231, 235-6,
241, 248-9, 255, 257, 266, 294
happiness 248-50, 295, 297-8
harems 2, 39-41, 43, 68, 74, 131
Hart, Frank/Hart's Mystery 408-9
Hassabis, Demis 8, 317, 378, 396
Haudenosaunee (Iroquois) 108, 269
height 79, 181, 240-42, 249-51, 279, 295, 296, 298, 433
hierarchy: Bronze Age Collapse and 176, 179; civilization and 4; collapse,
key dimension of 12, 15, 16; complexity and 73; cultural evolution and
47; darker angels of our nature and 168-70; democracy and 74-5, 75,
108, 443; dominance hierarchies see dominance; extinction and 45;
egalitarianism to dominance hierarchies, transition from 60-132;
foragers/hunter-gatherers and 60-76, 78, 82, 85, 90, 105, 109, 343, 364;
fragility and 141; gender and 129-30; Goliath and 5; Hobbes see Hobbes,
Thomas; longevity and 111; oligarchy and 235; origins of 63-8, 64, 67;
settlement hierarchy 175; stories of subjugation and 127-9; Tree of
Doom and 387; violence and 151-2, 160, 161, 168, 258, 383, 426
Hinton, Geoffrey 317, 318, 380

Hiroshima, atomic bombing of (1945) 292, 305, 308
Hittite Empire 178, 182, 183, 184, 186-8, 294, 348
Hobbes, Thomas 21-4, 29, 33, 34, 44, 75, 127, 129, 156, 384, 385
Holocene 23, 24, 31, 62-9, 64, 71, 76-7, 78, 81-3, 167, 169, 291, 299, 329,
338, 341, 386, 411
Homo sapiens (wise man) 43, 46, 50, 52, 306, 409
Homo solus (solo man) 45-6, 428
horse 57, 63-4, 66, 71, 116, 122, 173, 212, 221, 233, 256, 260, 262, 263,
265, 275, 294, 314, 329, 404
hospitality 35, 74
housing 57, 60-62, 82, 85, 94, 96, 98, 100, 103, 110, 137, 187, 196, 239,
245, 348
Huhugam 92, 103-8, 106, 118, 139, 218, 219
hunter-gatherers 5, 15, 35, 37, 97, 102; animism and 128-9; diet 79;
egalitarianism and 21, 24-26, 34-44, 47, 48, 56, 62-3, 66, 69-73, 75, 84,
96, 98, 102, 110, 112, 113, 121; energy capture 16, 296; extinction and
45-51; fluid civilizations 21, 24-9, 27, 90; fragility and 292; happiness of
249-50; height and health of 26, 27, 28-9, 79, 249; hierarchy and 60-76,
79-83, 85, 90, 105, 113, 174-5, 343, 364; isolation and connectivity,
cycles of 52-4; 'principle of least effort' 80, 82-3, 343; social structures,
shifting 55-60, 57; status competition and 40-44; storytelling 47;
violence and 29-34, 38, 39, 42, 51, 61-3, 68-71, 73-6, 84-5; working
hours 28
hyperconnectivity 347-8
ice ages 15, 23-6, 30, 35, 36, 43-4, 46, 52-4, 57-8, 59, 62-3, 65, 69, 74,
79, 106, 109, 113, 118, 145, 237, 238, 281, 296, 329, 337, 338, 415, 425,
428; Late Antique Little Ice Age 142, 237, 238; Little Ice Age 106, 106,
109, 118, 329
ice sheets 336, 359, 361, 441
imagined communities 46
Incan Empire 5, 8, 11, 125, 128, 137, 219, 257, 260, 261, 263-7, 270-73,
271, 280
incomes 100, 136, 165, 238, 248, 253, 261, 279, 343, 344, 345, 393, 402,
430, 440; wages 80, 135, 241, 251-2, 273, 279, 286, 296, 321, 394
India 28, 35, 52, 53, 115, 119, 127, 132, 135, 175, 199, 220, 256, 271, 273-
4, 276, 276, 277, 282-4, 309, 333, 391, 418, 437

indigenous allies 259-66, 270-73, 271, 284
Indus Valley Civilization 115, 118-19, 176, 177, 178, 195, 199, 246, 247
industrialization 9, 15, 72, 249, 279, 286, 296, 297, 367, 412-15
infant mortality 10, 295, 297, 346
inflation 139-40, 277
information power 1, 38, 65, 106, 129, 131, 136, 143-5, 215, 286-7, 322,
323, 400, 402, 427, 429, 440-41
innovation 16, 72, 124, 161, 173, 206, 209-11, 231, 245, 246, 248, 252,
275, 276-7, 293, 297, 306, 319, 345, 377, 397-400, 399, 425
insect populations 339-40
institutions 3, 4, 8, 16, 130, 133, 140, 143, 145, 216, 231, 232, 236, 241,
251, 258, 272, 285, 286, 299, 307, 316, 340, 351, 361, 363, 364, 371,
373, 377, 405, 425-7, 429, 443, 453, 454; extractive see extraction
intelligence 8, 9, 46-7, 51, 65, 144, 292, 316-22, 363, 378, 394, 396, 400-
402, 408, 425, 426, 432-3, 444
interconnectedness 17, 51, 73, 170, 176, 178-80, 185, 197, 206, 231, 247,
269, 307, 339, 347-9, 362, 394-5, 428, 453
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 144, 330, 331, 334-5,
372, 415, 435
internet 8, 295, 310, 346, 351, 352, 362, 400, 401
Inuit 53, 56, 58, 247, 292
inverse rule 431-2
Ireland 41, 52, 84, 89, 140, 145, 290, 352
Iron Age 155, 187-9, 230, 294, 399, 419
Islam 96, 128, 230, 237, 238, 242
Israel 5, 62, 130, 165, 182-3, 189, 288, 323, 324, 375-8, 385, 391
Japan 68, 113, 115, 118, 122, 164, 212, 274, 283-4, 292, 305, 313, 316,
349, 373
Jehn, Florian 311, 448
Jenne-Jeno 92, 95-7, 101, 102, 109, 110, 142, 163
Jin Dynasty 209, 211, 212, 235
Ju/'hoansi 34-6, 38, 43, 80
Kassite Empire 178, 180, 182, 184
Khoisan 43, 44, 60, 71, 72, 74, 383

Lakota 55-7, 58
land use 101, 342, 343, 395
latent risk 355, 357, 359, 361, 368, 368, 387, 411, 422
Latin 4, 7, 8, 46, 189, 190, 200-201, 224, 229, 250, 285, 297, 308, 384,
429, 437
Lavender system 323
least effort, principle of 80, 82-3, 343
Liberia 150-51
Libya 150, 157, 304, 324
life expectancy 240-41, 251, 273, 279, 295, 297, 346, 354-5
Linear B script 181, 200
literacy 11, 15, 28, 221, 229, 295
lobbying 135, 138, 216, 343, 374-9, 381, 385, 398, 416, 444
local apocalypses 259, 266-8, 270
lootable resources 63, 64-71, 67, 82-3, 106, 109, 113-14, 116-19, 121-5,
129, 130-32, 133, 134-6, 153-5, 161-4, 169, 201, 219-22, 236, 255,
274, 294, 329, 343, 351, 386, 387, 391, 404, 405, 420, 426-7, 440, 449,
453; crops 113, 116-18, 117, 121-3, 169; inequality grows with 134-6
Machiavelli, Niccolò/Machiavellianism 42-3, 166-8, 384-5, 451, 452
maize 15, 85, 88, 97, 113, 114, 116, 117, 123, 137, 261, 332, 344
Mali Empire 203-5, 203, 217
Malta, 'Temple Period' 176, 177
Manhattan Project 305, 309, 374, 423
Maya 8, 14, 17, 82, 99, 103, 111, 124, 125, 133, 205-208, 213, 231-3, 235,
239, 241, 245, 259-61, 260, 278; Classic Lowland Maya 14, 17, 133,
157, 158, 191-201, 193, 205-7, 241
Mediterranean 4, 6, 17, 52, 83, 175, 176, 178, 183, 184, 206, 224, 228, 236,
240, 248, 418
meritocracy, myth of 128
Mesoamerica 2, 64, 78, 85, 97-9, 102-6, 106, 113, 114, 116, 118, 121, 123,
124, 127, 160, 219, 260, 276
Mesopotamia 6, 14-15, 37, 62, 69, 77, 78, 78, 81, 113-14, 119, 124, 125,
129, 130, 150, 154, 155, 160-2, 172, 176, 178, 195, 199, 200, 216, 219,
223, 239, 294, 341
Meta 286-7, 379, 401-2
Mexico 34, 66, 68, 97, 98-9, 104, 192, 198, 251-2, 259, 261, 265, 268

Microsoft 245, 373, 401
migration 14, 33, 46, 52, 54-5, 71, 98, 100, 120, 130, 160, 183, 196, 206,
218, 246, 272, 402, 410, 416
military 10, 55, 65-6, 73, 121, 129, 138, 151, 161, 165, 166, 169, 174, 178,
183, 187, 212, 261, 264, 274-6, 278, 284-5, 290, 295, 307, 309, 316,
368, 371, 376, 385, 390, 394-5, 398, 407, 421, 427-8; AI and 322-6,
373, 421-6; democratic control of 440-41; military-industrial complex
10, 278, 371, 373, 427-8; Roman 224-30, 235, 238, 243, 256; Somalia-
Denmark rule 362-3
Milton, John 23; Paradise Lost 352-3
mining 232-3, 276, 304-5, 377
Minoans 6, 178-9, 199
Mississippi River 1-3, 5, 8, 107, 108, 110, 118, 131, 248, 265, 269, 279,
280, 420
Mitanni 178, 180, 184
mobility 13, 25, 26, 29, 34-6, 40, 44, 54-5, 59, 61-3, 68, 69, 72, 88, 120-
23, 134-5, 159, 183, 224, 269, 310, 330, 419, 425
Moche 101, 125
Mongol Empire 151, 212, 230, 255, 257, 275, 329-30
monopolies 41, 43, 66, 117, 151, 154, 155, 179, 201, 206, 253, 277, 278,
351, 440-41; monopolizable weapons see weapons
Monte Albán 92, 98-9, 101, 103, 110, 113, 114, 124-5, 133, 137-8, 140,
142, 155, 160, 162-3, 191, 344
Mortality of States (MOROS) dataset 16, 133, 237
Motecuhzoma II, emperor 262, 265, 270-71, 271, 280
mound-based societies 1-2, 91, 92, 96-8, 111, 118, 131, 138-9, 269;
Moundville, Alabama 92, 102-9, 106, 118
Mughal Empire 271, 273, 276
Musk, Elon 215, 392-3
Mycenaeans 6, 178, 181, 188, 219, 232, 249, 344, 418-21
Narmer, King of Egypt 149-55, 149, 160, 166, 168, 171, 173, 174, 362,
402; Palette of King Narmer 149, 149, 154, 160, 171
National Institutes of Health (NIH), US 297, 377
National Security Agency (NSA) 323, 401
Native Americans 3, 8, 61, 63-6, 67, 72, 78, 81-2, 102, 105-8, 120, 122,
123, 132-3, 219, 248, 249, 266, 269-70, 275, 431

Natufians 62-4, 67, 69, 77
Neanderthals 46, 48-52, 49, 59-60, 410
Neo-Assyrian Empire 155, 160, 187, 217, 294-5, 422
Neolithic period 63, 70, 71, 73, 79, 81, 84-5, 89, 154, 155
New Guinea 112-13, 115, 116
9/11 terrorist attacks, US 34, 164, 166, 310, 402
non-disclosure agreements 379, 441
non-state societies/peoples 15, 28, 29, 45, 110, 120, 127, 157, 269, 275,
277, 383
Norse 16-17, 35, 139
North America 2, 8, 26, 27, 37, 45, 52, 55, 64, 66, 68, 85, 88, 91, 139, 141,
175, 219, 265, 266, 291, 292, 421; failure of first Goliaths of 97-102,
101, 118; forgotten pyramid cities 91, 102-6, 106
novel entities 328, 338, 339, 340, 341, 345, 351, 397, 399-401, 411, 433
nuclear weapons 8, 9, 10, 16, 174, 276, 288, 292, 306-13, 317, 319, 322,
323, 324, 325, 326, 331, 333-5, 334-5, 341, 345, 350, 354, 356-7, 359,
361-2, 365, 368, 368, 370-82, 387, 388, 390-96, 398, 401, 403, 404,
409, 411-14, 416, 423-4, 428, 433, 434, 448, 454; world without 437-8,
445
obsidian 26, 64, 69, 98, 154, 191, 259, 260, 261-2, 403
ocean: acidification 311, 339, 359-60, 415; anoxic 415
oil 41, 180, 195, 247, 325, 350, 353, 357, 358, 366-7, 371, 374, 376, 391,
398, 413, 414, 415, 424
oligarchy 41, 75, 99, 145, 146, 163, 225, 228, 232, 233, 235, 236, 236, 242,
261, 265, 287, 299, 439, 444, 452
Olmecs 97, 125-6, 199, 200
1 per cent, wealthiest 12-15, 62, 136, 242, 261, 343, 347, 392, 431-2
OpenAI 8, 245, 317, 320, 321, 373, 379, 386, 416, 436
organized crime 149, 151-4
Orthodox Christianity 201, 238, 263
Ottoman Empire 146, 218, 229, 230, 238, 257, 282, 283, 287
ozone layer 311, 339, 340, 374, 415
Pakistan 118, 160, 309, 323, 333, 437
Palaeolithic era 23-6, 24, 28, 30-38, 40, 43-4, 45, 50, 51-3, 56-9, 57, 68,
71, 74, 167, 243, 250, 295, 310, 383, 417, 425, 426, 428, 444

Palestine 62, 206, 238, 283, 347
panic, myth of mass 21, 23, 34-5, 166
Parthian Empire 226
Patriot Act, US 166, 402
Pech Merle 31, 31, 31n
Perimetr system ('the dead hand') 322-3, 391
Persian Empire 161, 202, 218, 241
Peru 8, 101, 114, 263, 267
Petrarch 244
Petrov, Stanislav 312, 326
PFAS (poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances) ('forever chemicals') 327-8,
341, 374-5, 381, 385, 397, 399, 435
Phoenicians 189, 205, 206, 294, 295, 419, 422
Pizarro, Francisco 253, 263, 264, 265, 280
plague 23, 89-90, 216, 228, 235, 237, 251, 253, 254, 260-61, 269, 291,
314, 316. See also Black Death
planetary boundary 328, 338-40, 339, 343-5, 355, 368, 368, 382, 387, 388,
398, 415, 434-5
plastic 303, 328, 341, 350, 350, 374-5, 400
politics: political feasibility 437-9; political power 36, 38, 65, 105, 129,
135, 215, 438-9
pollution 240-41, 327-8, 342, 344, 358, 368, 429, 434-5
polycrisis 9, 353
polygyny 131, 204
popular immiseration 138, 214-15, 234, 394, 452
population numbers 1; decline/collapse in 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 46, 49-53, 84-6, 88-
91, 100, 134-6, 140, 157-9, 158, 197, 228, 229, 239, 251, 257, 266-8,
276, 290, 292, 310, 352, 363, 410-12, 414, 420, 453; density 4, 15-16,
59, 80, 91, 116-19, 219, 221, 274, 412, 451; growth of 2, 52, 79-81, 84,
88-9, 96, 97, 103, 105, 109, 111, 112, 116, 117, 122, 126, 153, 169, 220,
223, 268, 273, 274, 290-94, 291, 349, 391, 394, 395; minimum viable
population 410-11
populism 215, 394, 429-30
Portugal 112, 201, 204, 252, 253, 263, 266, 283, 289, 345
pottery 72, 77, 78, 101, 142, 183, 187, 189, 246
poverty 10, 254, 273, 286, 332, 345, 435

power, four different forms of 1-4 see also decision-making; information;
resources and violence
prestige 41-3, 61, 98, 112, 135, 196, 243
priests 1, 2, 4, 65, 102, 105-8, 137, 171, 198, 218, 250, 421, 444
primates 32, 38, 40, 43, 47, 67
PRISM program 401, 402
productivity 43, 85, 111, 112, 161, 233, 234, 246, 274, 277, 320, 329, 397,
398, 443
progress 345, 367; collapse and 244, 245-9, 396-7; narrative/myth 60, 71-
6, 75, 127, 244, 245-50, 295-7, 345, 397-8, 433-5
psychopathy 42-3, 166-8, 170, 384-5, 451, 452
Puebloan people, Ancestral 85-6, 88, 90, 102-7, 106, 118, 131, 134, 140,
141, 143, 162, 192, 236, 431
Putin, Vladimir 165, 243, 290-91, 313
Qin Dynasty 174, 209-12, 209, 217, 219, 221, 230, 258, 274, 284, 407
Qing Dynasty 211-14, 217, 220, 257-8
Ramesses II, pharaoh 7, 178
Rapa Nui 16, 158, 267-8
razones 152, 153, 215-16
reciprocity 26, 44, 74, 162, 270, 383, 425
religion 13, 103, 105-7, 125, 126, 128-32, 139, 160, 162, 174, 177-82,
193, 197, 210, 214, 238, 274, 419, 454. See also individual religion name
resources, control of 1, 12, 42, 174-5, 243, 247, 326, 329, 343, 347, 351,
385-6, 392, 400-401; lootable resources see lootable resources
response (determinant of risk) 50-51, 142, 143, 307
revolving door problem 376-7, 381, 430, 438
rice 1, 15, 22, 28, 64, 95-6, 113, 115, 116-18, 117, 119, 122-3, 220-21,
240, 284, 342, 351, 418
roads 96, 111, 125, 162, 169, 170, 173-4, 241, 245, 263, 280
robotics 9, 308, 318, 320, 324-5, 361, 381, 387, 388, 392, 401-403, 404,
405, 417, 433, 436, 437, 444, 445, 454
Roman Empire 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 14, 15, 35, 61, 73, 110, 133, 156, 158-9, 158,
161, 166, 175, 199, 201, 214, 217, 218, 222, 223-43, 225, 244-9, 253,
255, 256, 264, 266, 285, 294, 329, 346, 432; army 224-30, 235, 238,
243, 248, 256; Crisis of the Third Eastern Roman Empire (Byzantine

Empire) 4, 8, 110, 156, 217, 218, 225, 228-31, 237-8, 247; diminishing
returns on extraction and 231-7, 236; falls of Rome 3-4, 6, 7, 8, 35, 137,
142, 158, 163, 223-31, 225, 232, 233-5, 236, 237, 238, 238, 244, 245,
246, 249, 250, 252-3, 256, 261, 266, 276, 293, 340; imperial overstretch
229-31; origins of 223-5; positive aspects of collapses and 223, 241-2;
Roman climatic optimum 329; shrinking houses and fractured trade
during 223, 239; slave revolts 227; translatio imperii and 241-2; Western
Roman Empire 7, 14, 133, 156, 161, 175, 201, 215, 217, 218, 223, 225,
228, 235, 244-6
Rome 3-8, 11, 12, 35, 122, 124, 135, 137, 142, 158, 163, 166, 175, 214,
223-43, 244, 252, 256-3, 278, 280, 344
Royal Palace of Madrid 270-71, 271, 280-81
rungless ladder 354, 367-9, 368, 422, 454
Russia 56, 218, 243, 251, 257, 284, 287, 288, 299, 308, 309, 311-13, 322,
324, 332, 336, 355-6, 365, 372, 373, 384, 389-91, 401; Revolution
(1917) 218
sacrifice, ritual human 2, 4, 14, 60, 82, 99, 102, 103, 105, 110, 125-7, 137,
177, 208, 261-2, 344, 444
Sahara Desert 47, 95, 113, 202-204, 325, 329
Sahel 114-15, 116, 117-18
salmon 57, 61, 63-5, 116, 201, 219-20, 316, 451
San Lorenzo 92, 97-8, 101, 101, 103-4, 109, 110, 125, 138, 140, 146
Sapa Inca 11, 271
Sargon 171-4, 172, 176, 178, 203, 204, 206, 231, 255, 363, 402
Sassanian Empire 195, 226, 266
satellites 267, 312, 340, 402
Saudi Arabia 136, 385, 391
SB 1047 379, 436-7
Scheidel, Walter 235, 253, 448
Scott, James C. 116, 120
scripts, loss of 198-201, 200, 207, 248
'Sea Peoples' 183
seasonal cycles 45, 55-9
Second World War (1939-45) 165, 282-3, 285, 288, 316, 341, 373, 391-3,
393

secrecy 60, 105, 107, 246, 247, 313, 371, 375-6, 378, 379, 398, 405, 416,
427, 428, 440-41; secret societies 105, 107
sedentism 64, 64, 72, 77, 78, 78, 433
self-termination 369, 394, 406, 407, 427, 452
Seshat Global History Databank 16, 131, 133, 161, 214
sex 33, 56, 69, 130-31, 150, 321
Shang Dynasty 125, 199, 208, 209, 209, 219, 255, 344
sharing 33, 34-7, 43, 51, 74, 75, 108, 144, 167, 297, 401, 418, 426
shatterzone 259, 269-70, 272, 276-7, 279, 404, 427
Shell 325, 374, 376, 391, 424
Shelley, Percy: 'Ozymandias' 6-7
Shinkolobwe mine, Belgian Congo 304-305
Shoshone 55, 57, 58
shoulder joint 38
Sierra Leone 151, 154, 220, 221
silicon 322, 351, 353, 389, 400-401, 413, 432, 433
Silicon Goliath 389, 400-404, 406, 407, 428, 433, 454
silver 180, 185, 225, 227, 235, 255, 267, 272, 277, 280-81, 304, 344
Siwani 105, 139
SKYNET 323, 324
slavery 2, 4, 5, 8, 11, 12, 15, 16, 30, 61, 63, 64, 66, 71, 85, 105, 120, 121,
123, 124, 125-7, 136, 150, 157, 162, 163, 171, 174, 189, 202, 204, 219-
20; Athens, ancient and 136, 163, 189, 248, 418-21, 430;
empire/colonization and 225-8, 230, 234-5, 242, 243, 250-51, 255, 257,
259, 267, 269-72, 275, 276, 278-9, 289, 294; system of extraction built
on 289, 427
smallpox 89, 183, 198, 260, 263, 264, 267, 269, 275, 295, 314, 315, 406
social contract 21-2, 151, 315
societal collapse; defined 1; fall of great power structures and 16; future
global 8-10, 306, 307, 394, 407, 409, 417; Goliaths and see Goliaths; as
historical tragedy 12-14; rarity of 4, 298, 299. See also individual society
name
soil: erosion 201-2, 232, 233, 267; fertility 220-21
solar geoengineering 357-60, 364-5, 441
Somalia 1, 10-12, 205, 289, 290, 363-4, 454
Somalia-Denmark rule 354, 362-3, 454
Song Dynasty 161, 211, 212, 253

Songhai Empire 203, 203, 204, 205, 266
South Africa 34, 292, 311, 375
South America 64, 66, 77, 100, 121, 125, 283, 291, 292, 333
Soviet Union 153, 154, 285, 288, 290-91, 299, 311, 312, 322
Spain 7, 21, 27, 37, 48, 57, 60, 85, 102, 189, 252; Empire 88, 105, 123, 124,
129, 159, 191, 193, 197-201, 230, 252, 253, 255, 256-66, 271, 271, 272,
276, 277, 280-81, 283, 289
stalker complex 401, 402
standards of living 138, 248-9, 433
states: capitalism and see capitalism; city-states see city-states; collapsed
see individual state name; company-states 253; darker angels of our
nature and 384-5; defined 4, 454; empire and, line between 174-6, 452;
establishment of first 2, 45, 63, 64-9, 64, 71-3, 77-9, 78, 102, 105, 109-
19, 114-15, 123-8, 129-33, 149-70, 149, 406, 426; failed state 1, 10-11,
17, 193, 205, 236, 258, 289, 290, 295, 298-9, 333, 404, 427; fragility and
133-4, 139, 140, 141, 141, 143, 194-8, 231-3, 236, 289, 291-5, 291,
334, 334-5, 362-4; Goliath and 5, 63-8, 64; Hobbesian worldview and
see Hobbes, Thomas; killing a modern 287-91; lifespan, average 4, 133-
4; macro-states 113; nation-states 16, 282, 285; non-state peoples see
non-state societies/peoples; political states 16, 329; Somalia-Denmark
rule and 362-3, 454; state death 287-8; violence and creation of 149-70,
149, 155, 158
state of nature 21-3, 75, 385
status competition 61, 65, 67-8, 70, 73, 81-3, 100, 105, 119, 130, 132, 137,
139, 153, 166-73, 205, 207, 212-15, 453; defined 40-44;
empire/colonization and 230, 232, 236-7, 239-40, 245-6, 263-4, 266,
272, 280, 281; gender and 129-31; modern world and 285, 343-4, 368,
382-88, 387, 396, 398, 425, 426, 428, 432, 438, 442-3, 452
steles, Mesopotamian 160, 171, 172
Steppe (modern Mongolia) 41, 130, 161, 211, 212, 221, 230, 275
stock market 348-50, 421
stone tools 25, 48, 62, 96, 399
storytelling 2, 12, 35, 39, 47, 107, 119, 122, 131, 174, 220, 420-21;
lamentation literature 12-13; stories of subjugation 122, 127-9, 137, 444,
454
stratospheric aerosol injection 339, 357-8, 360, 361
sugar 214, 253, 257, 269, 272, 276, 278, 279, 280, 303, 341, 344

sulphur 357, 358, 415
Sumeria 128, 162, 172, 192
superforecasters 144, 319, 365, 390
surveillance 166, 286-7, 325, 326, 363, 391, 396, 401-405, 404, 407, 420,
443, 454; surveillance capitalism 286, 401-2
Svalbard Global Seed Vault ('Doomsday Vault') 411, 417
Swords of Damocles 354, 357
Syria 62, 158, 176-8, 181, 186, 238, 242, 283, 421
system collapse 186, 205-7
systemic risk 353, 354, 368-9, 368, 370, 387, 449, 454
Tang Dynasty 158-9, 211-13, 215, 217, 221, 217
Taosi 93, 96-7, 102, 217
task-based leadership 42, 58
taxes 7, 14, 22, 37, 116, 118, 123, 131, 135, 138, 146, 152-3, 175, 179-80,
187, 195, 205, 210, 212, 216, 218, 226-33, 240, 253, 255, 261, 271-4,
277-8, 284-5, 289, 351, 377, 386, 392, 424, 430, 434-5, 443; collectors
64, 116, 187, 211, 227, 419; income tax 440; tax havens 392, 440
Taylor, Charles 150-52
technical recovery 412-14
technology 8, 9, 10, 16: Bronze Age collapse and 189-90; democracy and
441-2; empires require new 256, 259, 262, 266, 275, 276, 278; forgetting
after collapse 244, 245-8, Goliath evolution and 292-5; progress and
245-50, 297; techno-fixes, problem with 354, 360-64; threats from
present and future 303-26, 348-50, 357, 360-64, 378-81, 396-400. See
also individual technology name
Teotihuacan 81, 99-100, 101, 125-7, 133, 138-9, 162-3, 236, 261
Tepe Gawra 76-7, 91
termination shock 359, 364
Tetzcoco 261, 263
threat (determinant of disaster risk) 50-51, 65, 136, 140, 142, 146, 164-6,
172, 174, 221, 231, 299, 306-308
Tibet 132, 221, 284
Tikal 191-3, 194, 198
tipping points 134, 141, 336-9, 359
Tiwanaku 81, 92, 101-101, 101, 109, 110, 113, 114, 125-6, 133, 138, 140,
146, 159, 163, 217, 231, 273, 414

Tlaxcalans 261, 262, 265
torture 69, 85, 197-8, 258, 298, 321, 430
trade networks 5, 11, 16, 26, 29, 33, 43, 59, 64-5, 69, 71, 74, 79, 95, 100,
103, 106, 112, 116, 123; empire/colonization and 137, 154, 157, 159,
161-2, 174-6, 178, 179-82, 184-5, 186, 191, 196-7, 201-207, 207, 212,
216, 223, 232, 235, 236, 239-40, 252, 255, 257, 269-70, 275, 278-9,
399, 422; modern world and 285-8, 294, 347-50, 374, 385-8, 396, 422
tragedy of the commons 382-3
translatio imperii (handing down or, often, brutal grabbing of authority
from one empire to another) 241-2, 271
Tree of Doom 370, 386-8, 387, 454
Trinity Test (1945) 304, 308, 423-7
Troy 179, 182, 184
Trump, Donald 165, 215, 343, 393, 429
Turkey 56, 78, 83-5, 86, 94, 116, 124, 130, 155, 178, 179, 181-2, 283, 295
Ugarit 180, 181, 183, 184, 185, 186, 189, 294, 348
Ukraine 27, 57, 243, 288, 311, 313, 324, 365, 375
Umayyad Caliphate 202, 255
unions, trade 297, 392, 430, 436, 443
Ur 125, 161
uranium 276, 305, 351, 357
Uruk 77, 113, 115, 119, 124, 154, 161, 171, 273, 280, 355
USA 2, 4, 8, 11, 28, 32, 34, 36, 55, 76, 78, 88, 102, 104-6, 116, 120, 123,
138, 150, 156, 164-8, 174, 215, 229-30, 239, 241, 249, 265, 269, 272,
278, 282-8, 297-303, 305, 308-13, 322-3, 327, 332, 345, 348-9, 351,
358, 363, 365-7, 372-9, 385, 390-94, 393, 397, 400, 401-3, 420, 424,
430, 440-42; AI and 322-5, 373, 379, 423, 437;
Venice 27, 163, 277-8
Vietnam War (1955-75) 32-3, 119, 285
violence: agriculture, advent of and 84-5, 88, 94, 98; dark triad and 167,
168, 170; decimations, global and 256-8, 257; empires and 174-5;
evolutionary backsliding and 72-6, 75; first Goliaths/states and 129, 151-
6, 155, 160, 163, 164-6, 279-80, 386, 426; gendered phenomenon 155-
6; Goliath definition and 5, 128; Hobbesian worldview and 22, 23, 29-
30; hunter-gatherers and 29-34, 38-9, 51, 61-2, 63; in the Near East

(12,500 to 400 BCE) 155; power and 1, 4, 65, 106, 287, 427; progress
narrative and 73-4; risk distribution 355-7; war and see war
viruses 8, 313-16, 347-8, 356, 366; Covid-19 see Covid-19
volcanoes 24, 52-3, 352, 360-61
vulnerability (disaster risk determinant) 49, 50-51, 51, 52, 88, 141-3, 141,
146, 306-307, 340, 346-9, 352
WannaCry ransomware attack 347-8
war: civil war 10, 12, 21, 41, 139, 151, 158, 159, 204, 210, 211, 213, 227-
8, 232, 234, 235, 236, 264, 267, 270, 295, 298, 384; decolonization and
283-4; Hobbes and 21-3, 29, 156; of the few against the many 154-6,
155; origins of 33, 60, 61, 63, 64, 68-71, 70, 77, 78, 83-5, 102, 105, 108,
110, 111, 116, 125, 129-30, 140, 146, 152; Palaeolithic period and 30-
34; Roman Empire and 11, 223-5, 227-8, 229, 246; state formation,
drives 162-4, 166; status and 243; warlords 149-53, 149, 160, 168, 205,
211, 363
Wari Empire 101, 113, 114, 125, 156-7, 219
weapons: arms races 325-6, 370, 380-84, 386, 387, 395, 396, 407, 432,
436, 442, 453; autonomous 10, 304, 306, 308, 319, 323-8, 345, 378, 380,
387, 388, 398, 399, 401, 404-406, 433, 438, 437, 444, 445, 454;
biological 315-16, 373, 376, 396;directed-energy (DEWs) 395; hand-
held 113, 160, 293-4; monopolizable 66, 67, 67, 113, 131, 134, 169, 203,
208, 219, 222, 293-4, 325, 387, 390-91, 401, 404, 441, 453, 454; nuclear
see nuclear weapons; projectile 26, 38-9, 66, 69, 395, 395
welfare, public 10-11, 145, 153, 161, 162, 245, 248-50, 276, 297, 345;
welfare state 16, 290, 362-3, 392, 416, 420
Westo 269, 270, 272
wheat 1, 15, 64, 67, 78, 84, 94, 113, 115, 116-17, 117, 138, 220, 240, 332,
337, 351, 418, 451
whistleblowers 379, 436, 441
Wilson, E. O. 425, 428
writing 5, 12, 14-15, 57-8, 57, 72, 78, 99-100, 119, 123-4, 131, 160, 161,
191-3, 197-201, 200, 207-11, 211, 218-22, 245, 247-9, 273, 293, 419,
440
Xia Dynasty 113, 115, 208, 209, 280
Xianbei 166, 212

Xiongnu 166, 212, 266
Yamnaya 41, 130
Yuan Dynasty 120, 211, 221
Yucatán 104, 259, 260, 342; collapse in 191-3, 193, 196, 204-5, 236
Zapotec 68, 99, 160, 199
Zhou Dynasty 22, 208-209, 209, 215, 219, 220
Zomia 119-23, 219, 269, 420, 431
Züngharian Empire 257
OceanofPDF.com

THIS IS JUST THE BEGINNING
Find us online and join the conversation
TWITTER / X
twitter.com/penguinukbooks
FACEBOOK
facebook.com/penguinbooks
INSTAGRAM
instagram.com/penguinukbooks
YOUTUBE
youtube.com/penguinbooks
PINTEREST
pinterest.com/penguinukbooks
LINKEDIN
linkedin.com/company/penguin-random-house-uk
TIKTOK
tiktok.com/@penguinukbooks
For the latest books, recommendations, author interviews and more
Sign up to the Penguin Newsletter
Find out more about the author and discover
your next read at Penguin.co.uk
OceanofPDF.com

PENGUIN BOOKS
UK | USA | Canada | Ireland | Australia
New Zealand | India | South Africa
Penguin Books is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies whose addresses can be
found at global.penguinrandomhouse.com.
www.penguin.co.uk
First published by Viking in 2025
Copyright © Luke Kemp, 2025
The moral right of the author has been asserted
Cover image: A Fallen Statue at Tanis in the Eastern Delta of the Nile © MyLoupe/UIG via Getty
Images
ISBN: 978-1-405-97475-2
Penguin Random House values and supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages
diverse voices, promotes freedom of expression and supports a vibrant culture. Thank you for
purchasing an authorized edition of this book and for respecting intellectual property laws by not
reproducing, scanning or distributing any part of it by any means without permission. You are
supporting authors and enabling Penguin Random House to continue to publish books for everyone.
No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner for the purpose of training artificial
intelligence technologies or systems. In accordance with Article 4(3) of the DSM Directive 2019/790,
Penguin Random House expressly reserves this work from the text and data mining exception.
The authorized representative in the EEA is Penguin Random House Ireland, Morrison Chambers, 32
Nassau Street, Dublin D02 YH68
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
All correspondence to:
Penguin Books
Penguin Random House
One Embassy Gardens, 8 Viaduct Gardens, London SW11 7BW
OceanofPDF.com

Footnote
16: Mors ex Machina
fn1 The miner is unlikely to possess wealth, but their annual income of
$1,460 (assuming a daily wage of $4) is a millionth of Sam
Altman's estimated wealth of $1.5 billion.
OceanofPDF.com

