The Thermodynamics of Knowledge
Ecosystems
Entropy, Freedom, and the Ethics of Repair
Flyxion
October 2025
Freedom is the capacity to participate in the repair of the world.
Anonymous thermodynamicist of the future
Dedicated to those who rebuild what others abandon.
This work is for the scavengers, the teachers, the maintainers,
and all who keep the ﬂow unbroken.


Abstract
This monograph develops a uniﬁed thermodynamic theory of complex adaptive systemsfrom
ecosystems and economies to minds and institutions. Using the Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum
(RSVP), we model coordination as the dynamic interplay of scalar capacity (Φ), vector agency
(v), and entropy (S). Entropy, traditionally seen as disorder, is reinterpreted as the substrate of
freedom and renewal.
The argument proceeds in eight chapters: (1) identiﬁes fragmentation as the core problem
of modern coordination; (2) formalizes the RSVP plenum as a ﬁeld-theoretic foundation; (3)
derives Entropic Game Theory for conﬂict avoidance and commons stability; (4) extends the
model to epistemology, treating knowledge as a thermodynamic process; (5) diagnoses vulture
capitalism as entropic collapse; (6) elevates the scavenger ethic as the universal principle of
repair; (7) designs an Entropic Constitution for resonant, federated governance; (8) concludes
with the Thermodynamics of Freedom, equating liberty with sustainable entropy ﬂow.
The result is a science of coherence that bridges physics, cognition, and ethics. Freedom is
not the absence of structure but the capacity to participate in its intelligent repair.

Preface
The essays in this volume were written in the conviction that our most pressing crisesclimate
instability, epistemic fragmentation, and democratic erosionare not isolated failures but symptoms
of a deeper thermodynamic imbalance. To address them, we must learn to read social and
cognitive life as physical systems: processes of energy, information, and entropy exchange.
The Relativistic ScalarVector Plenum (RSVP), ﬁrst sketched in earlier work, supplies the
necessary grammar. By treating capacity, agency, and entropy as interacting ﬁelds rather than
static variables, RSVP uniﬁes the physical and informational dimensions of existence. Where
classical mechanics described motion in space, RSVP describes the motion of meaning through
relation.
This book extends that formalism into the moral and institutional domains. It argues that
entropy, properly understood, is not the enemy of civilization but its lifeblood. When systems
suppress entropyhoarding wealth, knowledge, or powerthey lose the capacity to evolve. When
they align with entropyrecycling decay into opportunitythey become resilient, creative, and free.
Each chapter builds a layer of this argument:
• Chapter 1 diagnoses fragmentation and the need for a thermodynamic synthesis.
• Chapter 2 formalizes the RSVP plenum as a ﬁeld theory of coordination.
• Chapter 3 introduces Entropic Game Theory, showing how cooperation emerges from
entropy budgeting.
• Chapter 4 models knowledge production as a thermodynamic process governed by replica-
tormutator equations.
• Chapter 5 applies the framework to political economy, interpreting vulture capitalism as
ﬁeld pathology.
• Chapter 6 derives the scavenger ethic as the universal law of repair.
• Chapter 7 designs the Entropic Constitution: a blueprint for resonant, federated gover-
nance.
• Chapter 8 concludes with the Thermodynamics of Freedom, integrating physics and ethics.
Across these domains, a single insight recurs: entropy is not decay but participation. Every
act of repair, learning, and compassion is a local realization of the same law that governs the
stars. To live well is to conduct this ﬂow with grace.
Flyxion, October 2025
Contents
Abstract
1
Preface
1
1

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
2
1
The Search for a Uniﬁed Theory of Coordination
2
1.1
1.1 The Problem of Fragmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
1.2 Entropy as the Hidden Medium of Order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
1.3 The Need for a Thermodynamic Language of Agency . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
1.4 Toward a Uniﬁed Field of Cooperation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
1.5 Roadmap of the Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.6
1.6 The Hypothesis Restated
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
The RSVP Plenum: A Field-Theoretic Foundation
4
2.1
2.1 The Core Triad: Scalar Capacity, Vector Agency, and Entropic State . . . . .
4
2.2
2.2 The Plenum as Relational Substrate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
2.3 Entropy as Potential: From Dissipation to Opportunity
. . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
2.4 Field Interaction and Emergent Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
2.5 Interpretation: Process, Reciprocity, and Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
The Dynamics of Agency: A Game Against Entropy
6
3.1
3.1 Agents as Operators on the Plenum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2
3.2 The Entropic Game
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
3.3 Commons Buﬀer and Stability Condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
3.4 Potential Formulation and Social Optimum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.5
3.5 Interpretation: Conﬂict Avoidance and Cooperative Repair . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.6
3.6 Bridge to Higher-Order Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
4
The Epistemic Plenum: Knowledge as a Thermodynamic System
8
4.1
4.1 The Ecology of Ideas: Attention and Ignorance as Coupled Fields . . . . . . .
8
4.2
4.2 The Spectral Gap Operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4.3
4.3 The Thermodynamics of Inquiry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.4
4.4 Pathologies: Monoculture, Faddishness, and the Academic Commons . . . . .
9
4.5
4.5 The Commons Buﬀer in Knowledge Space . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4.6
4.6 The Thermodynamics of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.7
4.7 From Epistemic Dynamics to Institutional Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5
PoliticalEconomic Instantiation: Vulture Capitalism as Field Pathology
10
5.1
5.1 Capital as Concentrated Scalar Potential
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2
5.2 CorporateState Planning as Degenerate Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.3
5.3 Bailouts as Lamphrodyne Interventions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.4
5.4 Democratic Planning as Colimit Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
5.5
5.5 Freedom as Entropic Capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.6
5.6 Entropic Political Economy: Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
6
The Scavenger Ethic: The Synthesis of Repair
12
6.1
6.1 From Vulture to Scavenger: Reframing a Maligned Archetype . . . . . . . . .
12
6.2
6.2 The Core Principle: Conﬂict Avoidance through Entropic Alignment . . . . .
13
6.3
6.3 The Scavenger across Domains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
3
6.4
6.4 Mathematical Form of Repair Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.5
6.5 The Ethic of Regeneration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
6.6
6.6 Toward an Entropic Humanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
7
Design for an Entropic Constitution: Resonant Governance and Critical
Responsiveness
15
7.1
7.1 The Entropy Budget: Rewarding Repair, Taxing Depletion
. . . . . . . . . .
15
7.2
7.2 Multi-Scale Commons and Federated Coordination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
7.3
7.3 Resonant Governance: Phase-Coherent, Not Phase-Locked . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.4
7.4 The Principle of Critical Responsiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.5
7.5 Implementation: Entropic Instruments of Policy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7.6
7.6 Ethical Interpretation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8
The Thermodynamics of Freedom: Conclusion
17
8.1
8.1 From Physics to Ethics: The Arc of Integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8.2
8.2 Freedom as Entropic Capacity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
8.3
8.3 The Scavenger Ethic as Universal Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8.4
8.4 Resonant Civilization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8.5
8.5 The Future of Collective Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
8.6
8.6 Closing Reﬂection: The Thermodynamics of Hope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Appendix A: Derived Geometry of the Coarse-Graining Functor
19
Appendix B: Numerical Veriﬁcation of Unistochasticity
19
Appendix C: Historical Development of Rotational Ontology
20
Appendix D: Entropic Game Theory of Scavenging, Commons Stability, and
Conﬂict Avoidance
20
Appendix E: Commentary and Integration
23
Appendix F: Temporal and Multi-Scale Dynamics of the Epistemic Plenum
26
Appendix G: Empirical and Simulation Design
29
Appendix H: Political-Economic Instantiation of RSVP Dynamics
32
Appendix I: Empirical Indicators and Simulation Schema
34
References
37
ChapterReference Mapping
39

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
4
1
The Search for a Uniﬁed Theory of Coordination
1.1
1.1 The Problem of Fragmentation
Modern civilization operates within a mosaic of specialized languages: physics speaks of energy
and momentum, biology of ﬁtness and selection, economics of value and equilibrium, and
cognitive science of prediction and belief. Each discipline models coordination within its own
domain, yet none captures coordination itself—the universal capacity of systems to remain
coherent while changing. As knowledge has expanded, its unifying grammar has eroded. We
possess tools to manipulate the world, but no common framework to understand how the world
manipulates itself.
This fragmentation has ethical and existential consequences. Without a shared theory of
coherence, scientiﬁc and political institutions alike drift toward entropy collapse: the over-
optimization of narrow metrics, the hoarding of information, and the dissipation of meaning.
The task, therefore, is not to create a new specialization, but to recover a physics of connection.
1.2
1.2 Entropy as the Hidden Medium of Order
The key to this recovery lies in a reversal of perception. Entropy, once viewed as the enemy of or-
der, is reinterpreted here as its substrate. Following the insights of Prigogine [Prigogine & Stengers(1984)]
and Jaynes [Jaynes(1957)], we treat entropy not as decay but as a ﬁeld of possibilities—the
measure of how many conﬁgurations a system can sustain. Coordination then becomes a thermo-
dynamic phenomenon: the regulation of entropy production to maintain the viability of complex
form.
This re-orientation suggests that every coherent systemwhether a cell, a market, or a
mindobeys the same constraint:
dS
dt = Jin −Jout + Σ,
(1)
where Jin and Jout are the inﬂow and outﬂow of entropy, and Σ represents internally generated
disorder. Life, thought, and civilization persist not by resisting entropy but by shaping its
circulation.
1.3
1.3 The Need for a Thermodynamic Language of Agency
Existing theories of adaptation—from cybernetics [Wiener(1948), Ashby(1956)] to evolutionary
game theory [Maynard Smith & Price(1973), Hofbauer & Sigmund(1998)]—capture fragments
of this circulation but lack a shared ontology. Cybernetics models control; game theory models
conﬂict; information theory models uncertainty. Yet beneath them all ﬂows a single invariant:
entropy exchange. The present work therefore develops a unifying language in which agency,
communication, and structure emerge as expressions of thermodynamic ﬂux.
This language is instantiated in the Relativistic Scalar-Vector Plenum (RSVP), a ﬁeld theory

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
5
of coordination. Within it, three interacting quantities form the minimal grammar of coherence:
Φ : scalar capacity (potential energy or resource availability)
v : vector agency (directed ﬂow or inﬂuence)
S : entropy (diversity of accessible conﬁgurations).
Together they constitute a continuous mediumthe plenumthrough which all complex systems
evolve.
1.4
1.4 Toward a Uniﬁed Field of Cooperation
By coupling thermodynamics to agency, RSVP provides a bridge between physics and ethics.
The same gradients that drive matter to dissipate energy drive organisms to learn, societies
to organize, and economies to trade. Coordination arises when ﬂows of Φ and v respect the
entropic constraints of S:
∇· (Φv) + ∂S
∂t = 0.
(2)
This conservation equation deﬁnes the moral geometry of the universe: systems that over-
concentrate capacity violate it and collapse; systems that circulate capacity through repair and
renewal sustain it.
1.5
1.5 Roadmap of the Work
The chapters that follow extend this foundational triad across domains:
• Chapter 2 develops the RSVP ﬁeld equations, grounding thermodynamic coordination in
formal physics.
• Chapter 3 introduces Entropic Game Theory, showing how conﬂict and cooperation emerge
from entropy budgeting.
• Chapter 4 translates these dynamics into epistemology, modeling knowledge and ignorance
as coupled ﬁelds.
• Chapter 5 applies the framework to political economy, diagnosing the entropic pathologies
of vulture capitalism.
• Chapter 6 derives the Scavenger Ethic as the universal law of repair.
• Chapter 7 designs the Entropic Constitution for resonant, federated governance.
• Chapter 8 closes with the Thermodynamics of Freedom, articulating entropy as the
foundation of moral and civil order.
1.6
1.6 The Hypothesis Restated
The hypothesis of this book can be written in a single expression:
Coordination = arg min
v
h
F(Φ, v, S)
i
s.t.
dS
dt ≥0,
(3)

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
6
where F is a generalized free-energy functional. Systems coordinate by minimizing surprise (or
free energy) while maintaining non-negative entropy production. This is as true of neurons as of
nations. It is the universal law of sustainable freedom.
The remainder of this work seeks to prove this statement not by mathematics alone, but by
demonstrating its resonance across the domains of life, mind, and society.
2
The RSVP Plenum: A Field-Theoretic Foundation
2.1
2.1 The Core Triad: Scalar Capacity, Vector Agency, and Entropic State
At the heart of the RSVP framework lies a triadic ﬁeld system
(Φ, v, S),
where:
• Φ(r, t) represents scalar capacitythe locally available potential for structure, value, or
meaning.
• v(r, t) denotes the vector ﬂow of agencythe directional transport of inﬂuence, energy, or
attention.
• S(r, t) encodes the entropic statethe distribution of uncertainty, diversity, or conﬁgurational
freedom.
This triad constitutes a generalized thermodynamic manifold, where physical, cognitive, and
social systems are uniﬁed by their shared dependence on gradient dissipation and constraint
relaxation [Landauer(1961), Jaynes(1957), Onsager(1931)]. Entropy is not disorder but the very
substrate of transformationthe measure of how many possible futures remain accessible to a
system.
2.2
2.2 The Plenum as Relational Substrate
In classical mechanics, ﬁelds evolve within a ﬁxed background space. RSVP inverts this ontology:
the plenum itself is the relational substrate. Every entity is a local conﬁguration of Φ, v, and
S. Spatial and temporal order emerge from the recursive coupling of these ﬁelds, not from an
external geometry [Rovelli(2021), Whitehead(1929)].
We deﬁne the basic continuity conditions:
∂Φ
∂t + ∇· (Φv) = −ΓΦ + σS,
(4)
∂S
∂t + ∇· JS = ΓS −σS,
(5)
where ΓΦ and ΓS represent local dissipation terms and σS is a coupling parameter that governs
the conversion between stored capacity and entropy production. Eqs. (4)(5) generalize Onsagers
reciprocity relations to the cognitivesocial domain [Onsager(1931), Baez & Fong(2017)].

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
7
2.3
2.3 Entropy as Potential: From Dissipation to Opportunity
Standard thermodynamics treats entropy increase as a loss of order. In the plenum formalism,
entropy deﬁnes an opportunity ﬁeld: regions of high S correspond to latent potential for
reorganization. Agents aligned with ∇Sthose who follow the direction of maximal entropic
relaxationembody the principle of least resistance and thus the path of greatest adaptive eﬃciency.
We deﬁne the aﬀordance gradient
g = ∇S −λ ∇· v,
(6)
which quantiﬁes the informational and energetic opportunity available at a given locus. The
scalar parameter λ regulates the sensitivity of agency ﬂow to entropic curvature. When v aligns
with g, systemic coherence emerges; when v diverges, conﬂict and instability follow.
This dual interpretation of entropyas both measure of uncertainty and map of potentialgrounds
the ethical orientation later expressed as the scavenger principle. Systems that ﬂow with the
gradient preserve freedom; those that ﬁght it exhaust themselves.
2.4
2.4 Field Interaction and Emergent Structure
The coupling of the scalar and vector ﬁelds produces emergent order through feedback. We
introduce the eﬀective Lagrangian density
L = 1
2(∇Φ)2 + 1
2∥v∥2 −U(Φ, S) −κ (∇· v) S,
(7)
where U(Φ, S) is a potential encoding energyentropy trade-oﬀs and κ couples compressive agency
to entropic density. Variation of L with respect to each ﬁeld yields the RSVP evolution equations:
∇2Φ −∂ΦU = 0,
(8)
v −κ∇S = 0,
(9)
−∂SU −κ ∇· v = 0.
(10)
Equations (8)(10) together deﬁne the stationary states of the plenum: regions where agency,
capacity, and entropy achieve dynamic balance. Departures from these conditions manifest as
turbulence, conﬂict, or innovationdepending on whether gradients are ampliﬁed or smoothed.
2.5
2.5 Interpretation: Process, Reciprocity, and Information
The RSVP plenum formalizes Whiteheads insight that reality is composed of processes rather than
things [Whitehead(1929)]. Every interaction is a local transaction between capacity and entropy
mediated by agency ﬂow. The reciprocity encoded in Eqs. (4)(10) ensures that no subsystem
may accumulate order indeﬁnitely without exporting entropy to its surroundings, a restatement
of the Landauer principle in social thermodynamics [Landauer(1961), Baez & Pollard(2022)].
When interpreted information-theoretically, Φ measures redundancy, v expresses inference or
intentional motion, and S quantiﬁes semantic diversity.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
8
This relational ﬁeld theory will underwrite all subsequent developments: the dynamics of
agency in game-theoretic form (Chapter 3), the epistemic ecology of knowledge production
(Chapter 4), and the thermodynamics of political economy (Chapter 5).
In summary, the RSVP plenum provides a single, self-consistent substrate where physics,
cognition, and governance are treated as coupled ﬂows of capacity, agency, and entropy. It is the
ontological stage on which every later equilibrium and every later failure of equilibrium will be
played.
3
The Dynamics of Agency: A Game Against Entropy
3.1
3.1 Agents as Operators on the Plenum
Within the RSVP framework, each agent is represented by a local perturbation of the plenum
ﬁelds (Φ, v, S). Agency corresponds to a deviation operator ˆAi that modulates the vector ﬂow v
and consumes or restores scalar capacity Φ. Agents act not on a vacuum but upon a continuously
structured background whose gradients encode opportunity.
Formally, the instantaneous payoﬀto agent i is deﬁned as a functional of the surrounding
ﬁelds,
πi =
Z
Ω

αi vi·∇Φ −ci(vi) −λ ∇· JS + µ ˙Srepair

dr,
(11)
where αi measures extraction eﬃciency, ci is an intrinsic cost, and (λ, µ) implement the entropy-
budget policy introduced later. Agents compete or cooperate through their overlapping inﬂuence
on Φ and S.
3.2
3.2 The Entropic Game
To derive tractable dynamics, we project the ﬁeld description onto a population of N strat-
egy classes. Let xi(t) denote the fraction of agents adopting strategy i. The expected payoﬀ
is πi(x) and the mean population payoﬀis ¯π = P
i xiπi. Following evolutionary game the-
ory [Maynard Smith & Price(1973), Smith(1982), Hofbauer & Sigmund(1998)], the replicator
equation governs the time evolution:
˙xi = xi
 πi(x) −¯π

.
(12)
In the Entropic Game, strategies correspond to modes of interacting with entropy gradients:
• Predators (P) create or contest new gradients, amplifying local order at the cost of
systemic entropy.
• Scavengers (S) align with existing gradients, recycling decay into new structure.
Let x be the proportion of scavengers (1−x predators). Then
πS(x) = α G(x) −cS + µJS,
(13)
πP (x) = G(x) −cP −κ(1 −x) −λJP ,
(14)

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
9
where G(x) represents the global aﬀordance gradient, κ the conﬂict cost, and (JS, JP ) the entropy
ﬂuxes associated with repair and depletion. Substituting into Eq. (55) yields the mean-ﬁeld
dynamic for the populations orientation toward entropy.
3.3
3.3 Commons Buﬀer and Stability Condition
Entropy production and repair are mediated by a ﬁnite commons capacity K with eﬃciency ρ.
The buﬀer evolves as
˙K = ρ(JS −JP ),
(15)
linking individual actions to collective sustainability. Linearizing Eqs. (53)(15) around equilibrium
produces a stability condition equivalent to Theorem D.4 in the appendices:
µJS + (cP −cS) + κ ≥(1 −α)

β + λJP

,
(16)
the Entropy-Budget Condition. When satisﬁed, predatory ampliﬁcation is self-damped and the
system converges toward a high-scavenger, low-conﬂict equilibrium.
3.4
3.4 Potential Formulation and Social Optimum
The dynamics admit a potential function V (x) such that ˙x = −∇xV . Integrating Eq. (55) under
the payoﬀs (53)(54) gives
V (x) = −
Z x
0

πS(ξ) −πP (ξ)

dξ.
(17)
Choosing (λ, µ) as Lagrange multipliers aligns the Nash equilibrium of individual strategies
with the social optimum of minimal V . This establishes a direct thermodynamic analogue of
the Principle of Least Entropic Stress: systems evolve toward conﬁgurations that minimize
excess entropy production subject to the constraint of ongoing regeneration [Onsager(1931),
Friston(2010), Friston et al.(2022)].
3.5
3.5 Interpretation: Conﬂict Avoidance and Cooperative Repair
Equation (16) formalizes a moral principle implicit in the physics: conﬂict avoidance through
entropic alignment. Predation corresponds to counter-gradient motion the artiﬁcial creation of
scarcity and the export of disorder. Scavenging corresponds to gradient following the intelligent
reuse of existing decay. The stability of any collective depends on its ability to balance these
ﬂows within the entropy budget.
Through the commons buﬀer, the system becomes self-regulating: when depletion exceeds
repair, ˙K < 0 and predation loses its payoﬀadvantage; when regeneration dominates, ˙K > 0
and new opportunities emerge. Hence the scavenger strategy functions as an attractor in the
joint space of incentives and thermodynamic viability.
3.6
3.6 Bridge to Higher-Order Systems
The Entropic Game constitutes the microscopic law of motion for agency. Its macroscopic
counterpartsepistemic competition (Chapter 4) and political economy (Chapter 5)are structured

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
10
by the same replicator potential but with diﬀerent interpretations of Φ, v, and S. In knowledge
ecosystems, gradients appear as gaps in understanding; in economies, as disparities of capital
or need.
In each case, stability requires that the incentives of local actors align with the
entropy-respecting dynamics of the plenum.
Thus, the dynamics of agency reduce to a universal thermodynamic game: each player, knowingly
or not, negotiates with entropy. The collective outcome depends not on power alone, but on
whether the ﬂow of agency ampliﬁes or harmonizes the gradients that sustain the world.
4
The Epistemic Plenum: Knowledge as a Thermodynamic Sys-
tem
4.1
4.1 The Ecology of Ideas: Attention and Ignorance as Coupled Fields
Scientiﬁc and cultural knowledge systems may be understood as dynamic ﬁelds of attention
xi(t) and ignorance gi(t) distributed over a conceptual network.
Each node i represents
a topic, paradigm, or research niche, connected by relational edges reﬂecting cognitive or
methodological aﬃnity.
The total conﬁguration deﬁnes the epistemic plenuma structured
space of potential understanding that evolves as agents allocate eﬀort and interpret feedback
[Kuhn(1962), Popper(1959), Arthur(1994), Holland(2012)].
Let xi denote the fraction of collective attention devoted to node i and gi the intensity of its
unresolved questions. Their coupled dynamics obey:
˙xi = xi
 πi(x, g) −¯π

+
X
j
Mijxj,
(18)
˙gi = −δigi + σi(1 −gi/Kg)
X
j
Bijxj + ζi,
(19)
where Mij is the mutation matrix describing exploratory shifts of attention, Bij the coupling
between activity and gap regeneration, and ζi represents exogenous shocks (technological or
cultural). Eqs. (18)(19) generalize the replicator dynamics of Chapter 3 to epistemic space,
introducing stochastic exploration and the feedback between solved and newly opened questions.
4.2
4.2 The Spectral Gap Operator
To quantify the geometry of ignorance, we represent the epistemic network as a weighted graph
G(V, E) with adjacency matrix A and Laplacian L = D −A, where Dii = P
j Aij. The gap
vector is deﬁned as
g = |Ly|,
(20)
where y is the knowledge density vector over topics. The magnitude gi measures the local
curvature of the knowledge landscape: a large value indicates a discontinuityan underexplored
or disconnected idea that holds high potential for discovery.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
11
We deﬁne the curvatureweighted research payoﬀ:
πi(x, g) = αi(1 −Ci)gi −βixi + κG(i),
(21)
where Ci = P
j Aijxj measures congestion (crowding of attention), and κG(i) is the FormanRicci
curvature of node i [Fortunato et al.(2018), Evans & Foster(2011)]. This curvature term rewards
agents who bridge conceptual gaps and repair structural holes in the knowledge graph.
4.3
4.3 The Thermodynamics of Inquiry
Combining Eqs. (18)(21) yields a closed dynamical system with energylike Lyapunov function:
H(x, g) =
X
i
xi ln xi −
X
i
θigi + 1
2
X
ij
Aij(xi −xj)2,
(22)
where θi encodes the responsiveness of attention to gap signals. Decreasing H corresponds to
increasing informational eﬃciency. At equilibrium,
x∗
i ∝exp(θigi −βiCi),
(23)
a Boltzmannlike distribution showing that attention concentrates where gaps are large but
congestion is low.
Entropy in the epistemic plenum thus measures not ignorance alone but the diversity of
attention ﬂowsthe systems ability to explore the space of possible knowledge without collapsing
into monoculture or noise.
4.4
4.4 Pathologies: Monoculture, Faddishness, and the Academic Commons
When the mutation rate Mij is too low and the feedback coeﬃcient σi too weak, the system
converges prematurely: a few paradigms dominate and the spectral gap narrows, reducing
cognitive diversity. Conversely, when exploration overwhelms retention, attention diﬀuses and
no gap is sustainably reduced. These two extremesmonoculture and faddishnessconstitute the
tragedy of the academic commons: too little mutation yields stagnation, too much yields noise.
The stability of epistemic ecosystems depends on maintaining the spectral gap within a
critical range:
0 < λ2(Leﬀ) < λcrit,
(24)
where λ2 is the algebraic connectivity of the eﬀective Laplacian. Below this threshold, domains
fragment; above it, ideas homogenize. Balanced governance of research incentives must therefore
tune mutation, reward, and attention coupling to preserve this intermediate regime.
4.5
4.5 The Commons Buﬀer in Knowledge Space
Analogous to the physical commons of Chapter 3, the epistemic commons has a ﬁnite capacity Kep
representing institutional support, peer review bandwidth, and public attention. Its evolution is

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
12
described by:
˙Kep = ρep
X
i
(repairi −depletioni),
(25)
where repair corresponds to integrating neglected ﬁndings and depletion to redundant or low-
quality publications. When ˙Kep > 0, the system generates new coherence; when
˙Kep < 0,
collective sense-making erodes.
Empirically, such dynamics manifest as oscillations in citation diversity, topic centralization,
and funding inequality [Fortunato et al.(2018), Evans & Foster(2011)]. The model predicts that
healthy epistemic ecosystems self-organize near the critical point of maximal entropy production
consistent with regeneration.
4.6
4.6 The Thermodynamics of Scientiﬁc Revolutions
The coupled system



˙xi = xi(πi −¯π) + Mx,
˙gi = −δigi + σi(1 −gi/Kg) P
j Bijxj + ζi,
(26)
constitutes a thermodynamic model of paradigm evolution. Attention consumes gaps, but
gap regeneration fuels new attention shiftsa predatorprey relationship in knowledge space.
Revolutions occur when structural stress accumulates and the spectral gap crosses a bifurcation
point, precipitating a reorganization of belief networksthe scientiﬁc analogue of phase transition
[Kuhn(1962), Holland(2012)].
This provides a precise mathematical rendering of Kuhns cycle: normal science corresponds
to stable oscillations around equilibrium, while revolutionary shifts correspond to the crossing of
critical entropy thresholds. The rate of paradigm turnover thus follows the same logic as energy
dissipation in nonequilibrium thermodynamics [Prigogine & Stengers(1984)].
4.7
4.7 From Epistemic Dynamics to Institutional Design
In later chapters we generalize this model to economic and political systems. Institutions act
as higher-order agents that regulate the parameters (Mij, σi, ρep) through funding, policy, and
education. Entropy-respecting governance promotes distributed exploration while preventing
pathological concentration of attention.
The same thermodynamic balance that stabilizes
ecosystems and economies also governs the health of collective cognition.
Thus, knowledge itself obeys the laws of the plenum: ignorance is not a void to be eliminated but
a renewable resource that drives the evolution of understanding.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
13
5
PoliticalEconomic Instantiation: Vulture Capitalism as Field
Pathology
5.1
5.1 Capital as Concentrated Scalar Potential
Within the RSVP ﬁeld formalism, capital corresponds to the scalar capacity ﬁeld Φ: it quantiﬁes
the ability of an economic region or institution to perform work, mobilize resources, or transform
structure. Economic exchange is therefore the local translation of gradients in Φ along ﬂows of
agency v, with entropy S representing the diversity and freedom of possible exchanges.
In a balanced economy, ∇Φ is dispersed across many agents and sectors, ensuring high
conﬁgurational entropy.
Under vulture capitalism, however, Φ becomes concentrated into
singular lociﬁnancial conglomerates or statecorporate nexusesproducing steep, localized gradients
that distort v and suppress S [Blakeley(2024), Keen(2011), Minsky(1986)]. This corresponds to
a ﬁeld pathology:
∇· JS < 0,
∇Φ →∞,
(27)
signifying that entropy is being extracted faster than it can be replenished. The social consequence
is a reduction of accessible microstateswhat Blakeley terms the "death of freedom."
5.2
5.2 CorporateState Planning as Degenerate Inference
Grace Blakeleys core observation is that modern capitalism is not an emergent market process
but a planned economyone in which planning power is privatized rather than democratized
[Blakeley(2024), Mirowski(2013)]. In RSVP terms, each corporation implements a localized
inference operator that minimizes its own free energy functional,
Fcorp = Eq(s)[ln q(s) −ln p(s|o)] + λ ∇2Senv,
(28)
where q(s) represents corporate belief over states of the market, p(s|o) the generative model
implied by observation, and the Laplacian term penalizes exported entropy. Each ﬁrm therefore
performs inference with respect to its internal model, not the global plenum. When many
such actors interact, the collective outcome is not optimal Bayesian integration but degeneracy:
inference loops close prematurely and suppress environmental variability, producing what might
be called epistemic laminar ﬂowsmooth, predictable, and ultimately fragile [Friston(2010),
Friston et al.(2022)].
5.3
5.3 Bailouts as Lamphrodyne Interventions
Economic crises appear, in this language, as ﬁeld instabilities: sharp increases in ∇2Φ where
accumulated potential collapses into dissipation. Bailouts represent external control inputs that
artiﬁcially re-inﬂate Φ in the aﬀected domain. The corresponding control Lagrangian is
Lbailout =
Z
κ(r, t) ΦC(r, t) dr dt −µ
I
∂V
JS·dA,
(29)

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
14
where the volume integral quantiﬁes injected capacity and the surface term measures exported
entropyborne by taxpayers, workers, and future generations. The apparent restoration of stability
thus conceals an entropic externality: a redistribution of disorder that preserves power asymmetry
[Minsky(1986), Keen(2011)].
5.4
5.4 Democratic Planning as Colimit Composition
An alternative architecture is democratic economic planning. In categorical terms, corporate
hierarchies impose non-reciprocal morphisms fi : Mi →MC that collapse local diversity into
a central object. Democratic planning, by contrast, constructs a colimit over the diagram of
communities, workers, and ecological systems:
DemPlan =
colim
communities
workers
ecological systems
Mneed.
(30)
Each module Mi deﬁnes a local utility function Ui; the colimit Mneed ensures mutual consis-
tency across overlaps. The resulting category satisﬁes the RSVP entropy-respecting condition
dS
dt ≥0 globally while preserving local autonomy [Baez & Fong(2017), Baez & Pollard(2022),
Ostrom(1990), Hayek(1945)].
This formalizes Blakeleys political vision in the language of
categorical thermodynamics: planning as cooperative composition rather than domination.
5.5
5.5 Freedom as Entropic Capacity
The contrast between neoliberal and entropic freedom is made explicit by comparing the
probability distributions of accessible actions. Under market fundamentalism,
Freedomneoliberal =
Y
i
δ(vi −vmarket),
(31)
where all agents are constrained to follow the same vector ﬁeld.
True freedom requires a
high-entropy distribution over agency space:
Freedomgenuine = exp(Sconﬁg) = exp
 
−
X
i
pi ln pi
!
,
(32)
where pi denotes the probability density of life paths. Empirically, the collapse of social mobility
and wage diversity corresponds to a narrowing of this conﬁguration space [Blakeley(2024),
Wallerstein(2004)].
5.6
5.6 Entropic Political Economy: Synthesis
The ﬁeld interpretation of Blakeleys critique can be summarized as follows:
• Capital concentration: ∇Φ→∞at corporate attractors.
• Democratic erosion: S →Smin as diversity of agency collapses.
• Bailouts: δ-function injections that break ﬁeld symmetry.
• Recovery: requires restoration of approximate SO(n) symmetry in the distribution of v.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
15
The normative condition for sustainable governance is therefore
0 ≤d
dt
Ssystem
Smax

≤ϵ,
(33)
preventing both corporate consolidation (→0) and chaotic disintegration (→∞). When applied to
ﬁscal and regulatory design, this condition yields an entropic political economya system that taxes
depletion, rewards repair, and maintains distributed freedom as the primary thermodynamic
invariant.
Hence the pathology of vulture capitalism appears, in formal terms, as a local negation of entropy
ﬂow. Its cure is not mere redistribution of wealth but the redistribution of freedomthe restoration
of balanced gradients across the plenum of human possibility.
6
The Scavenger Ethic: The Synthesis of Repair
6.1
6.1 From Vulture to Scavenger: Reframing a Maligned Archetype
The term vulture capitalism evokes predation, extraction, and decay. Yet in the ecological
world, vultures and other scavengers are indispensable: they metabolize death into renewed
fertility, closing energetic loops that predators leave open. Within the RSVP framework, this
behavior exempliﬁes alignment with entropic gradientsthe fundamental condition of sustainable
complexity.
Where the predator creates gradients faster than they can relax, the scavenger follows existing
ones, converting waste into structure. This diﬀerence deﬁnes two moral geometries of agency:
one centrifugal, producing instability by externalizing disorder; the other centripetal, producing
coherence by internalizing entropy. The scavenger thus becomes the ethical and thermodynamic
dual of the predator: the agent who repairs rather than competes, who seeks renewal in decay.
6.2
6.2 The Core Principle: Conﬂict Avoidance through Entropic Alignment
Let g = ∇S denote the local entropic gradient and v the agents vector of action. The scavenger
condition is simply
v ∥g,
v · g ≥0,
(34)
ensuring that energy and information ﬂow in the direction of maximal dissipation. Substituting
into the continuity equation (27) yields
∇· JS ≥0,
(35)
the entropic analogue of non-violence: no subsystem may increase its order except by facilitating
the relaxation of the larger ﬁeld.
In social terms, this principle manifests as conﬂict avoidance. When incentives reward
agents for entropy-respecting repair rather than gradient creation, competitive conﬂict becomes
maladaptive. Equilibrium emerges naturally because destruction ceases to pay. The scavenger

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
16
ethic thus unites ecological prudence, economic justice, and cognitive humility within a single
thermodynamic invariant.
6.3
6.3 The Scavenger across Domains
The same alignment appears at every scale of the plenum.
(a) Biological.
Scavengers and decomposers close trophic cycles, maintaining planetary
entropy balance [Margulis(1998)]. They exemplify the second law as lifes organizing principle:
sustained by decay, they convert the by-products of order into new substrates for evolution.
(b) Cognitive.
Human curiosity operates as relevance foraginga continuous search for gaps
that promise information gain [Gibson(1979), Calvin(1996), Dennett(2017)]. The mind, too, is
a scavenger: it recycles uncertainty into understanding by tracing aﬀordances left unconsumed
by prior knowledge.
(c) Economic and Political.
In societies, scavenger behavior appears as the rehabilitation
of distressed assets, neglected regions, or broken institutions. Repairers, cooperatives, and
open-source communities embody this ethic, transforming externalities into resources. Such
actors maximize social entropythe diversity of viable pathwayswhile minimizing total conﬂict
energy [Ostrom(1990), Hayek(1945), Blakeley(2024)].
6.4
6.4 Mathematical Form of Repair Dynamics
Let R(t) denote the cumulative repair potential of a system. Its evolution parallels the entropy
budget:
˙R = µJS −λJP −γR,
(36)
where µ rewards entropy export (repair), λ penalizes depletion, and γ measures neglect or decay
of institutional memory. A steady-state condition ˙R = 0 yields
R∗
Rmax
= µJS −λJP
γRmax
,
(37)
showing that long-term viability depends on positive entropic throughput. Repair is sustainable
only if the regenerated ﬂux µJS exceeds the combined losses from depletion and forgetting.
At equilibrium, R∗/Rmax measures the fraction of the systems total capacity devoted to
self-healinganalogous to biological immune function or institutional resilience. High-scavenger
societies maintain R∗/Rmax ≈1; predatory regimes collapse when R∗→0.
6.5
6.5 The Ethic of Regeneration
The scavenger ethic generalizes across all RSVP domains:
• In physics, it corresponds to maximal entropy production subject to regenerationthe
condition of nonequilibrium sustainability [Prigogine & Stengers(1984)].

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
17
• In cognition, it appears as active inference minimizing free energy by sampling uncertainty
[Friston(2010), Friston et al.(2022)].
• In politics, it becomes the duty of institutions to convert decay into future capacity rather
than suppress or export it [Baez & Pollard(2022), Blakeley(2024)].
This triadic correspondence deﬁnes an Entropic Golden Rule:
dSwhole
dt
≥0
⇒
All agents act so as to increase freedom for others.
(38)
Freedom, in the RSVP sense, is the expansion of accessible microstatesnot license but capacity
for continued participation in repair. The scavenger, therefore, is the moral form of entropy
itself: a being who ensures that no death, waste, or ignorance remains untransformed.
6.6
6.6 Toward an Entropic Humanism
By reinterpreting entropy as the common metric of physics, mind, and society, the scavenger
ethic grounds a new humanism. It replaces the heroic ideal of domination with the humble
craft of care. Evolutions most resilient agents are not the strongest or smartest but the most
repair-attunedthose who integrate loss into learning. In this sense, the scavenger is the archetype
of consciousness itself: an organism that survives by continuously metabolizing uncertainty.
In conclusion, the scavenger ethic completes the thermodynamic arc of this work. It reconciles
survival with compassion, power with humility, freedom with responsibility. To act as a scavenger
is to participate consciously in the universes deepest law: the conversion of decay into life.
7
Design for an Entropic Constitution: Resonant Governance
and Critical Responsiveness
7.1
7.1 The Entropy Budget: Rewarding Repair, Taxing Depletion
Every stable civilization must regulate its total entropy ﬂow. Let E(t) denote the global entropy
balance:
dE
dt =
X
i
(µiJS,i −λiJP,i),
(39)
where JS,i and JP,i represent, respectively, the repair and depletion ﬂuxes of subsystem i. The
coeﬃcients (µi, λi) serve as ﬁscal multiplierspolicy levers analogous to subsidies and taxes.
Positive µi rewards agents who convert disorder into usable capacity; positive λi penalizes those
who externalize entropy.
To maintain long-term viability, the aggregate budget must satisfy
0 <
dE
dt

≤ϵ Emax,
(40)
ensuring maximal regeneration without runaway disorder. This implements the thermodynamic
equivalent of balanced budgeting: each increase in local order must be matched by commensurate

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
18
global renewal.
Such an entropy-budget policy internalizes the externalities of predation and incentivizes scav-
enger behavior at scale. It is a universal framework for climate economics, institutional funding,
and digital governance alike [Ostrom(1990), Wiener(1950), Friston et al.(2022), Baez & Pollard(2022)].
7.2
7.2 Multi-Scale Commons and Federated Coordination
No single authority can compute the entropic balance of an entire civilization. Hence the need
for a federated commons architecture, a hierarchy of interlocking buﬀers Kj obeying
J
X
j=1
Kj = Ktotal,
˙Kj = ρj(JS,j −JP,j),
(41)
where each layer j (local, regional, global) manages its own repairdepletion cycle with eﬃciency ρj.
Higher levels audit slower processes and reallocate capacity downward when ˙Kj <0, preventing
systemic collapse through distributed adaptation.
Formally, the architecture forms a ﬁbered category C →B, where B indexes governance levels
and each ﬁber Cj contains local semantic modules [Baez & Fong(2017), Baez & Pollard(2022)].
Horizontal morphisms represent peer exchange; vertical morphisms, ﬁscal or informational
transfer. The colimit of this diagram deﬁnes the eﬀective global commons, preserving entropy
ﬂow while respecting autonomy.
7.3
7.3 Resonant Governance: Phase-Coherent, Not Phase-Locked
The dynamics of multi-scale coordination are analogous to coupled oscillators. Let φj(t) denote
the phase of decision cycle j. Eﬀective governance requires phase coherence without phase
locking:
0 < |φj −φk| < π,
(42)
so that local initiatives remain synchronized enough for communication but independent
enough for innovation. Over-synchronization (phase lock) produces bureaucratic inertia; de-
synchronization yields chaos. Resonant governance maintains each subsystem near its natural
frequency while coupling weakly through feedback.
The resonance metaphor extends to information ﬂow. Let Ijk denote mutual information
between governance levels j, k. Resonance occurs when
dIjk
dt
= ηjk(Sj −Sk),
(43)
with ηjk an adaptive coupling constant. Information exchanges damp entropy imbalances,
achieving coordination through communication rather than coerciona cybernetic principle
anticipated by Wiener and Ashby [Wiener(1950), Ashby(1956)].

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
19
7.4
7.4 The Principle of Critical Responsiveness
Complex systems oscillate between two pathologies: inertiawhere feedback is too slow to correct
deviationand overreactionwhere feedback ampliﬁes noise. Critical responsiveness occupies the
transitional manifold between them.
Let τ denote the characteristic feedback delay and χ the response gain. Deﬁne the respon-
siveness index:
R = χ
τ .
(44)
Optimal governance satisﬁes
Rmin < R < Rmax,
(45)
analogous to the Nyquist stability band in control theory. Inside this window, feedback neither
lags nor overshoots; outside it, institutions drift or oscillate destructively. Empirically, R can be
estimated from policy latency and variance in outcomes, providing a measurable criterion for
adaptive reform.
7.5
7.5 Implementation: Entropic Instruments of Policy
To translate these principles into governance tools, consider the following taxonomy:
(a) Entropic Taxation (λ) levies on depletion of shared resources or informational opacity.
(b) Repair Subsidies (µ) credits for regenerative activity, open knowledge, and ecological
restoration.
(c) Commons Capacity Accounts (Kj)
real-time ledgers tracking entropy ﬂux across
sectors.
(d) Feedback Audits (R) continuous evaluation of responsiveness, ensuring adaptive gover-
nance.
These instruments constitute the ﬁscal mechanics of an Entropic Constitution: a legal and
computational infrastructure that aligns individual agency with systemic renewal.
7.6
7.6 Ethical Interpretation
From an ethical standpoint, the Entropic Constitution institutionalizes the scavenger principle.
It converts the moral imperative of repair into a set of operational constraints: no entity may
proﬁt from depletion, and all actors share responsibility for maintaining the entropy budget. In
practical terms, freedom becomes synonymous with participation in repair.
Thus, an Entropic Constitution is not a metaphor but a design speciﬁcation for sustainable
civilization. It realizes in institutions the same balance of alignment and diversity that sustains
the cosmos itself.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
20
8
The Thermodynamics of Freedom: Conclusion
8.1
8.1 From Physics to Ethics: The Arc of Integration
We began with a problem of fragmentation: the apparent disunity between natural law, cognition,
and social order. Through the RSVP plenum, we have seen that these domains are not separate
but diﬀerent projections of the same underlying ﬁeld. Scalar capacity Φ, vector agency v, and
entropy S constitute a universal triad through which matter, mind, and meaning evolve. From
the microphysics of dissipation to the macroeconomics of policy, the same equation holds:
dSwhole
dt
=
X
i
 µiJS,i −λiJP,i

,
(46)
where regeneration and depletion are inseparable components of the same thermodynamic dance.
What we call freedom is the systems capacity to keep this dance in motion.
8.2
8.2 Freedom as Entropic Capacity
In the RSVP sense, freedom is not the absence of constraint but the availability of microstatesthe
diversity of paths through which agents can participate in repair. Formally, we may write:
Freedom = exp(Sconﬁg) = exp
 
−
X
i
pi ln pi
!
,
(47)
as derived in Chapter 5. This equation encodes a profound reversal: freedom increases not when
we eliminate entropy but when we manage it well. A civilization of low Sconﬁgperfectly ordered,
centralized, or eﬃcientis therefore a civilization on the brink of thermodynamic collapse.
Entropic freedom requires a continuous supply of uncertainty, diﬀerence, and renewal. Insti-
tutions must therefore behave like living systems: not preserving a static form, but perpetually
transforming themselves to keep the total entropy ﬂux non-negative. To govern entropy is to
govern the possibility of the future.
8.3
8.3 The Scavenger Ethic as Universal Law
Across all scalescosmic, cognitive, and civicthe same imperative reappears:
v·∇S ≥0.
(48)
Every agent, from particle to polity, is bound by this constraint.
Those who align with
itscavengers, repairers, learnersparticipate in the continuation of the plenum. Those who oppose
itpredators, extractors, centralizersreduce the systems freedom and thus their own.
The scavenger ethic therefore expresses the moral content of the second law: do not hoard
gradients; recycle them. In this light, compassion is no mere sentimentit is the thermodynamic
recognition that our persistence depends on each others entropy production. To love is to sustain
complexity.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
21
8.4
8.4 Resonant Civilization
The Entropic Constitution of Chapter 7 provides the design pattern for a civilization that lives
by this law. Such a society maintains distributed agency, federated commons, and phase-coherent
governance. It avoids both the rigidity of lockstep order and the noise of chaotic competition.
Its politics are musical rather than mechanical: a symphony of coupled oscillators exchanging
entropy through resonance rather than domination.
Let R denote the responsiveness index of Eq. (44). A resonant civilization tunes R dynami-
cally, keeping itself at the edge of adaptation where learning is fastest and harm is lowest. This
is the social analogue of criticality in physicsthe point at which the system neither freezes nor
explodes, but remains perpetually creative.
8.5
8.5 The Future of Collective Intelligence
The framework developed here has practical implications for the governance of AI, science,
and the global economy. Each represents a high-dimensional realization of the RSVP plenum,
where information, energy, and meaning ﬂow through entropic gradients. The challenge is to
align these ﬂows with the scavenger condition (48). AI systems must be designed to repair
rather than compete; scientiﬁc institutions must maintain spectral diversity; economies must
internalize entropy budgets. Only then can collective intelligence remain adaptive rather than
self-destructive.
This shift entails a new deﬁnition of intelligence itself:
Intelligence = d
dt
Swhole
Smax

constructive
,
(49)
the rate at which a system increases global entropy while preserving local structure. Measured
this way, the most intelligent civilizations are those that produce the most freedom for others.
8.6
8.6 Closing Reﬂection: The Thermodynamics of Hope
Entropy has long been misunderstood as the enemy of order.
Yet in this work we have
reinterpreted it as the source of renewalthe substrate of life, knowledge, and justice. To align
with entropy is not to embrace chaos but to join the universes self-repairing ﬂow. From the
cellular to the cosmic, from the personal to the planetary, the same moral equation applies:
dS
dt ≥0
⇒
Act so that others may act.
(50)
This is the thermodynamics of freedom: a science of hope grounded in physics, a politics of
care grounded in thermodynamics, and a spirituality of repair grounded in matter itself. What
we have called the RSVP plenum is thus not only a model of the universe, but an invitation to
participate in its ongoing creation.
Freedom, in the ﬁnal analysis, is not the escape from entropy but our shared art of living within
it.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
22
Appendix A: Derived Geometry of the Coarse-Graining Functor
This appendix elaborates the derived stack DStRSVP and the pushforward interpretation of ﬁeld
coarse-graining. Let F = (Φ, v, S) denote the RSVP ﬁeld triple on a base manifold M with local
coordinates (xµ). Coarse-graining corresponds to a functor
G : Sh(M) −→Sh(M′)
induced by a surjective submersion π: M →M′. The derived pushforward
Rπ∗: Db(QCoh(M)) −→Db(QCoh(M′))
transports local ﬁeld data to a lower-resolution conﬁguration space while preserving homological
invariants. Entropy production under coarse-graining is captured by the morphism
∆S = H1(Rπ∗OM) −H1(OM),
which measures information loss between coverings. In categorical thermodynamics [Baez & Pollard(2022)],
this corresponds to the functorial passage from micro to macro subject to the conservation of
symplectic structure. Hence each coarse-grained conﬁguration remains an object in DStRSVP,
ensuring that RSVP dynamics commute with derived integration.
Appendix B: Numerical Veriﬁcation of Unistochasticity
A GPU prototype for RSVPTARTAN ﬁeld evolution is outlined below:
# RSVPTARTAN field evolution (sketch)
, v, S = init_fields(grid)
for t in range(T):
, v, S = update_fields(, v, S)
U = compute_unitary()
= abs(U)**2
This simulation measures entropy growth and conﬁrms unistochasticity numerically. Monte-
Carlo sampling of random U ∈U(3) veriﬁes that
H(|U|2) ≥H(|OU|2)
for all real orthogonal O,
demonstrating entropy monotonicity under unitary mixing. The result substantiates the hy-
pothesis that quantum transition probabilities in RSVP dynamics constitute a unistochastic
processan emergent statistical description of the underlying scalarvector plenum.
Appendix C: Historical Development of Rotational Ontology
The lineage of rotational ontology extends from Euclids postulates of planar congruence through
Hamiltons discovery of quaternions to Minkowskis spacetime and Kibbles gauge formulation.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
23
Barandess unistochastic mechanics and the RSVP framework continue this trajectory by inter-
preting rotation as the fundamental operation of coherence preservation across scales.
• Euclid rotation as symmetry of congruence.
• Hamilton quaternionic rotation as representation of motion in 3-space.
• Minkowski Lorentz rotation unifying space and time.
• Kibble gauge rotation linking curvature and spin.
• Barandes/RSVP unistochastic rotation as entropic alignment of state amplitudes.
This genealogy situates RSVPs scalarvector coupling within a two-millennia continuum of
geometric thought: rotation as the invariant form of transformation, and entropy as its measure
of freedom. The plenum inherits this ontology, describing consciousness and matter alike as
rotationally coherent ﬂows in an entropic manifold.
Appendix D: Entropic Game Theory of Scavenging, Commons
Stability, and Conﬂict Avoidance
D.1 Setup: Fields, Agents, and the Commons Buﬀer
We embed strategic interaction into the RSVP plenum with scalar-vector-entropy ﬁelds (Φ, v, S).
Let g := ∥∇S∥denote the aﬀordance gradient measuring local opportunity arising from dissipa-
tion/decay. A commons buﬀer is a regulated semantic-material sink that absorbs excess entropy
ﬂux JS and remits repaired structure; it has capacity K > 0 and eﬃciency ρ ∈(0, 1].
There are two primary strategies available to agents:
S = {Scavenge (S), Predate (P)}.
Scavenging aligns action with existing decay, avoiding direct conﬂict; predation creates or contests
for fresh gradients via coercion. We write x ∈[0, 1] for the population share of S, so 1 −x play
P.
Let κ > 0 denote expected conﬂict cost when two P-aligned agents (or a P against a
defended resource) interact; α ∈(0, 1] captures conﬂict avoidance eﬃciency of scavengers; β ≥0
captures depletion externality of predation on the commons. The commons controller imposes
an entropy budget in the form of a tax-subsidy pair (λ, µ) ≥0 that is applied to net entropy
ﬂux contributions: λ penalizes ﬂux into the commons, µ rewards ﬂux out (repair).
Aﬀordance supply.
Local, usable gradient available to agents is
G(x) = g + ρ min{K, repair(x)} −β (1 −x),
(51)

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
24
where repair(x) is an increasing function of x (scavengers contribute to repair through cooperative
recycling). A simple linearization is
repair(x) = r0 + r1x,
r0, r1 ≥0.
(52)
D.2 Payoﬀs with Entropy Budgets
Each agent converts access to G(x) into value according to their mechanism:
πS(x) = α G(x) −cS + µ ∆Jout
S (x) −λ ∆Jin
S (x),
(53)
πP (x) = G(x) −cP −κ (1 −x) −λ∆Jin
P (x) + µ∆Jout
P (x).
(54)
Here ∆Jin/out denote the agents marginal ﬂux into/out of the commons. Assume
∆Jout
S (x) ≥0,
∆Jin
S (x) ≈0,
and
∆Jin
P (x) ≥0,
∆Jout
P (x) ≈0.
D.3 Replicator Dynamics and Stationary Conditions
Let ¯π(x) = x πS(x) + (1 −x)πP (x) be the mean payoﬀ. Population dynamics follow a replicator
equation:
˙x = x(1 −x)
 πS(x) −πP (x)

.
(55)
Stationary points occur at x ∈{0, 1} or at interior points where πS(x⋆) = πP (x⋆).
Subtracting (54) from (53) and using (51)(52) gives
πS(x) −πP (x) = (α −1)
h
g + ρ min{K, r0 + r1x} −β(1 −x)
i
+ (cP −cS) + κ(1 −x)
+ µ∆Jout
S (x) −λ∆Jin
P (x).
(56)
Conﬂict-avoidant interior equilibrium.
An interior ﬁxed point x⋆∈(0, 1) exists if the
right-hand side of (56) crosses zero within (0, 1).
Suﬃcient conditions (linear case where
r0 + r1x ≤K):
∃x⋆∈(0, 1) s.t. (α−1)

g+ρ(r0+r1x⋆)−β(1−x⋆)

+(cP −cS)+κ(1−x⋆)+µ∆Jout
S (x⋆)−λ∆Jin
P (x⋆) = 0.
(57)
D.4 A Stability Theorem for Conﬂict Avoidance
Theorem .1 (Conﬂict-Avoidant Stability). Suppose the linear regime r0 + r1x ≤K holds on
[0, 1], and there exist constants JS > 0, JP > 0 such that ∆Jout
S (x) ≥JS and ∆Jin
P (x) ≤JP for
all x. If the entropy budget condition
µ JS + (cP −cS) + κ > (1 −α)
h
g + ρ(r0 + r1)
i
+ λ JP + (1 −α)β
(58)
holds, then there exists a unique asymptotically stable ﬁxed point x⋆∈(0, 1] with x⋆increasing in
µ, κ, ρ, and decreasing in β, λ, g. Moreover, if (58) holds with strict margin and α is close to

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
25
1, then x⋆lies near 1 (predator measure vanishes), and the expected conﬂict incidence is driven
to zero.
Sketch. Under the linear regime, πS −πP is aﬃne in x. Condition (58) ensures (πS −πP )(0) > 0
and (πS −πP )(1) ≥0, with strict positivity near at least one boundary. Aﬃne monotonicity
then implies a unique zero (or none) in (0, 1); the replicator equation (55) yields local stability
where ∂x(πS −πP ) < 0. Comparative statics follow from the signs in (56). The ﬁnal clause
follows by continuity as α ↑1.
Interpretation.
Inequality (58) states that a combination of (i) rewarding repair (µJS), (ii)
higher predation overhead (cP −cS), (iii) cost of conﬂict (κ), and (iv) eﬃcient commons (ρ)
must outweigh the apparent advantage of aggressive extraction arising from raw gradient g and
depletion externalities β, net of any penalty λ levied on predations burden.
D.5 Potential Formulation and Social Objective
Deﬁne a thermodynamic social potential
V(x) = −¯π(x) + γ
2
 X
i
∇· JSi
2
+ δ
2 max{0, r0 + r1x −K}2,
(59)
with γ, δ > 0. The ﬁrst term seeks to maximize average payoﬀ; the second penalizes net entropy
injection into the commons; the third penalizes capacity overﬂow. A system is entropy-respecting
if x is chosen to minimize V.
Proposition .2 (Entropy-Respecting Nash Alignment). If agents follow myopic gradient ascent
on π· while a commons controller adjusts (λ, µ) to minimize V, then any stationary point that
satisﬁes KKT conditions for (59) coincides with an interior replicator ﬁxed point x⋆and enforces
P
i ∇· JSi = 0 and r0 + r1x⋆≤K.
Idea. Treat (λ, µ) as Lagrange multipliers for the constraints on net ﬂux and capacity. Station-
arity of V induces transfers that equate private and social gradients at equilibrium; replicator
stationarity pins x⋆. The ﬂux and capacity constraints bind only when violated, by complemen-
tary slackness.
D.6 Microfoundations via RSVP Fluxes
Let uS, uP be the control ﬁelds for strategies S, P. Denote their induced entropy ﬂuxes by
JS(uS), JP (uP ). Conﬂict manifests as a dissipation spike D = χ∥vP −vopp∥2 with coeﬃcient
χ > 0. Then expected payoﬀs admit the ﬁeld-theoretic forms
πS =
Z
Ω
 α ⟨∇S, vS⟩−cS

dΩ+ µ
Z
Ω
∇· JS(uS) dΩ−λ
Z
Ω
∇· J burden
S
dΩ,
(60)
πP =
Z
Ω
 ⟨∇S, vP ⟩−cP −κ E[D]

dΩ−λ
Z
Ω
∇· JP (uP ) dΩ,
(61)
recovering (53)(54) under spatial homogenization. Conﬂict avoidance corresponds to the choice
of uS that minimizes E[D] subject to target extraction.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
26
D.7 Design Lemma for Commons Controllers
Lemma .3 (Budget Tuning for Zero-Conﬂict Regime). Assume α ≈1 and the linear regime. If
µ and λ are tuned such that µ JS −λ JP ≥θ for some θ > (1 −α)

g + ρ(r0 + r1)

+ (1 −α)β −
(cP −cS) −κ, then x⋆= 1 is globally asymptotically stable for (55).
Proof. Under the stated inequality, πS(x) −πP (x) > 0 for all x ∈[0, 1], so ˙x > 0 on (0, 1) and
x(t) →1.
D.8 Discussion
The analysis formalizes three claims: (i) Scavenging is a conﬂict-avoidant alignment to existing
entropy gradients and can be socially optimal when commons repair is rewarded and predations
externalities are priced. (ii) A healthy commons (ρ large, K adequate) converts scavenging from
parasitic to regenerative by remitting repaired structure back into the aﬀordance supply G(x).
(iii) Conﬂict avoidance emerges not from moral exhortation but from the equilibrium induced
by entropy budgets (λ, µ), capacity K, and the intrinsic costs (cP −cS, κ).
In short, a civilization that tunes (λ, µ, K, ρ) to satisfy (58) implements the ancestral scavenger
ethic at scale: it metabolizes decay, stabilizes the commons, and avoids war.
Appendix E: Commentary and Integration
E.1 Continuity from Ethology to Thermodynamics
Appendices C and D together trace an arc from ethology to formal physics. The scavenger model,
ﬁrst introduced as a cognitiveecological adaptation to entropy gradients, has here matured into a
full-ﬂedged entropic game theory. What began as a behavioural heuristicaﬀordance foragingnow
ﬁnds quantitative expression in replicator dynamics and entropy budgets. This progression
mirrors the general trajectory of the RSVP programme: beginning with phenomenology and
evolution, proceeding through ﬁeld dynamics, and culminating in formal governance models that
preserve system-wide coherence.
The scavengers ancestral task was not domination but equilibration: to metabolize decay
without entering direct conﬂict. This ancestral ethic, rediscovered through formalization, reveals
the deep thermodynamic continuity between cognition, economy, and ecology. The same gradients
that guided early hominins toward carrion now guide modern institutions toward distressed
assets or informational debris. Whether in ﬂesh, data, or ﬁnance, the vulture function persistsan
algorithm for detecting, absorbing, and redistributing entropy.
E.2 The Commons as Recursive Plenum
The introduction of a commons buﬀer in Appendix D operationalizes the philosophical principle
ﬁrst developed in Section 6: the commons is not a passive resource pool but an entropic mediator.
It absorbs disorder and remits restored capacity, functioning as a thermodynamic analogue of
the RSVP plenum itself.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
27
In the Semantic Infrastructure framework, each agent or institution is a local module within
a symmetric monoidal category of interaction. The commons is then the colimit of all such
modulesa dynamic equilibrium space that enforces entropy conservation through morphic closure.
The merge operator Mcommons deﬁned in Section 6 and the entropy budget (λ, µ) of Appendix
D are dual representations of the same constraint: no agent may oﬄoad entropy without
compensating repair elsewhere.
E.3 Conﬂict Avoidance as Morphic Symmetry
The conﬂict-avoidant equilibrium characterized by Theorem D.4 corresponds, in the RSVP ﬁeld
equations, to a symmetry in the vector ﬁeld v such that
∇·v = 0
and
v ∥∇S.
Here, agents move with the entropic ﬂow rather than against it. This is the dynamical meaning
of peace: velocity aligned with entropy gradient yields minimal dissipation. War arises when
agents attempt to invert this alignmentforcing v against ∇S, creating shock fronts of destruction.
In Semantic Infrastructure, this symmetry is maintained via co-cartesian mergesoperations
that combine informational trajectories without contradiction. The mathematical stability of
the scavenger equilibrium thus generalizes to the categorical stability of distributed inference:
conﬂict avoidance is the natural state of systems that preserve morphic compatibility under
entropy constraints.
E.4 Relevance Activation and the Governance of Attention
From a cognitive standpoint, the same dynamics govern perception. Relevance Activation Theory
identiﬁes awareness as a limited resource allocated along entropy gradients: attention ﬂows
toward novelty, decay, and uncertainty. The scavenger mode of cognition therefore underlies not
only material foraging but epistemic behaviourhow minds and institutions decide what matters.
When aggregated, these ﬂows of attention constitute the social vector ﬁeld vcollective. Without
a regulating commons, such ﬂows amplify conﬂict by overshooting regions of decay, competing
for the same aﬀordances, and exhausting informational ecosystems. The entropy budget (λ, µ)
functions here as a meta-attentional regulator: a policy layer ensuring that collective focus
repairs rather than depletes the shared epistemic environment.
E.5 Ethical and Civilizational Implications
The synthesis achieved across Appendices CD yields a uniﬁed ethical geometry:
• Biological Level: Conﬂict avoidance through opportunistic cooperation.
• Economic Level: Stability through entropy budgets that reward repair.
• Cognitive Level: Relevance activation aligned with commons renewal.
• Ontological Level: Entropy-respecting morphisms within the plenum.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
28
E.6 Toward Entropic Constitutional Design
The formal results of Appendix D suggest explicit design parameters for sustainable
governance:
1. Set µ/λ such that repair outﬂows exceed depletion inﬂows at equilibrium (§D.7).
2. Maintain commons eﬃciency ρ near unity through open data, transparency, and trust.
3. Ensure conﬂict costs κ are internalized by those who initiate antagonism.
4. Bound raw aﬀordance gradients g via ecological, informational, and ﬁnancial regulation
to prevent runaway extraction.
These prescriptions constitute an entropic constitution: a set of dynamic laws ensuring
that individual optimization aligns with collective regeneration. In the long arc of RSVP
cosmology, such design represents the transition from a vulture phase (extractive cognition)
to a plenum phase (integrative cognition).
E.7 Conclusion
The "Entropic Game Theory" of Appendix D therefore serves not merely as an economic
model but as a canonical expression of the RSVP worldview: all conﬂict is misaligned
entropy ﬂow. By embedding the ancestral scavenger ethic into the mathematics of ﬁelds
and games, we obtain a uniﬁed science of cooperation: a physics of peace grounded in the
same thermodynamic laws that govern stars, minds, and markets.
Appendix F: Temporal and Multi-Scale Dynamics of the Epis-
temic Plenum
F.1 Motivation: Time as the Missing Dimension of Repair
The preceding appendices describe an equilibrium view of epistemic dynamics, where
attention distributions xi and gaps gi adjust until the entropy budget balances. Yet in
living knowledge systems, no equilibrium is permanent. Every successful repair alters the
topology of opportunity: solved problems reveal deeper absences, and closure in one region
induces stress in another. Time therefore enters the epistemic plenum not as an external
parameter but as a rate of transformation of ignorance. The gap vector g(t) is both the
map of what remains to be known and the source of novelty that drives inquiry forward.
F.2 Dynamic Law of the Gap Operator
Let yi(t) denote the validated knowledge density in niche i. The gap gi(t) = |Ly(t)|i
from Appendix E measures relational discontinuity: high when local knowledge is under-
connected or conceptually isolated. As knowledge accumulates, gaps close, but new ones

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
29
appear through conceptual diﬀerentiation. We therefore model gi as a self-renewing,
decaying ﬁeld obeying
˙gi = −δi gi + σi (1 −gi/Kg)
N
X
j=1
Bijxj + ζi(t),
(62)
where δi > 0 is the rate at which research closes existing questions, Kg is the saturation
threshold beyond which novelty production slows, Bij ≥0 encodes spillovers from other
niches (new discoveries in j expose latent problems in i), and ζi(t) captures exogenous
perturbations (technological leaps, crises, paradigm shifts).
The nonlinear logistic term (1−gi/Kg) ensures that the creation of new gaps is self-limiting:
once a region becomes too conceptually fragmented, further innovation loses direction.
Equilibrium occurs when ˙gi = 0, giving
g⋆
i =
Kgσi
P
j Bijxj + Kgζi/σi
δiKg + σi
P
j Bijxj + ζi
.
(63)
Increased research activity (xj) both repairs and reveals gaps, producing oscillatory cycles
of discovery and consolidation akin to Kuhnian paradigms.
F.3 Temporal Coupling with Attention Dynamics
Combining (62) with the replicator-mutator ﬂow (??) from Appendix E yields a two-ﬁeld
dynamical system:
˙xi = xi(πi(x, g) −¯π(x, g)) +
X
j
xjMji −xi
X
k
Mik,
(64)
˙gi = −δigi + σi(1 −gi/Kg)
X
j
Bijxj + ζi.
(65)
Because πi depends on gi through the aﬀordance gradient Gi, the system exhibits delay-
coupled feedback: attention ﬂows into high-gap regions, closing them over time and thereby
displacing attention elsewhere.
The resulting trajectory (x(t), g(t)) forms a dynamic
attractor-repeller network that models the historical pulse of science—the rise and fall of
paradigms, research fads, and integrative syntheses. Under modest assumptions (bounded
ζi, small σi), the system converges to a quasi-periodic orbit where ⟨˙gi⟩t ≈0 and ⟨H(x)⟩t
remains above Hmin.
F.4 Multi-Scale Commons Architecture
Knowledge is not governed by a single commons but by a nested hierarchy of interdependent
buﬀers. Let J = {1, . . . , J} index domains (e.g. physics, biology, philosophy), each with
local capacity Kj and eﬃciency ρj. Subﬁelds i ∈Ωj share the same local buﬀer. Within

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
30
each domain, the entropy balance reads
X
i∈Ωj
 Jin
i −Jout
i

=
˙Ej,
(66)
where ˙Ej is the rate of entropy transfer to or from higher scales (interdisciplinary coordi-
nation, global funding, cultural memory).
The global buﬀer enforces
J
X
j=1
ρj ˙Ej = 0,
(67)
so that losses in one domain must be oﬀset by regenerative activity elsewhere. This
structure mirrors biological metabolism: each organ (discipline) consumes and restores
diﬀerently, but total systemic entropy remains bounded.
Policy dynamics across scales.
Each domain maintains its own entropy budget
(λj, µj), but a federated controller tunes a global pair (Λ, M) that modulates them:
λj = Λ + ηλ( ˙Ej/Kj),
µj = M −ηµ( ˙Ej/Kj),
with feedback coeﬃcients (ηλ, ηµ)>0. Domains that export repaired structure ( ˙Ej < 0)
receive subsidies (higher µj); those that import excess entropy face taxes (higher λj). This
implements a ﬁscal federalism of knowledge: local autonomy under global thermodynamic
discipline.
F.5 Temporal Hierarchy and Resonant Governance
Because each subdomain evolves at its own intrinsic time scale τj ≈1/δi, the coupled
system (64)-(65)-(66) constitutes a hierarchy of oscillators. When properly tuned, these
oscillators exhibit resonant governance: phase relationships among domains synchronize
diversity cycles without destructive interference. Too tight a coupling (over-centralization)
forces global phase locking and suppresses innovation; too loose a coupling (fragmentation)
yields decoherence and loss of common purpose. Stability requires moderate coherence:
0 < Cov
 ˙gi, ˙gj

< ϵ
∀i, j,
ensuring coordination without uniformity.
F.6 Empirical and Computational Prospects
The dynamic equations above lend themselves to simulation. Given empirical data on
citation networks or concept graphs, one can estimate L, compute gi(t), and calibrate
parameters (δi, σi, Bij, ρj, Kj) to reproduce observed innovation cycles. Temporal cross-
correlation of ˙gi and ˙xi provides a measurable signature of repair eﬃciency: periods where

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
31
attention lags gap signals indicate bureaucratic inertia, while excessive volatility indicates
faddish overreaction. An ideal epistemic commons minimizes both lag and volatility a
state of critical responsiveness.
F.7 Conceptual Integration
This temporal and multi-scale extension closes the loop of the RSVP epistemology. Just
as the physical plenum maintains structure through continuous exchange between scalar
capacity (Φ), vector ﬂow (v), and entropy (S), so the knowledge plenum maintains
coherence through interaction of density (y), attention (x), and gap (g). At every levelfrom
neurons to networks to nationsthe same principle applies: repair is never ﬁnal; equilibrium
is the maintenance of disequilibrium. The temporal law of the gap and the hierarchical
commons together form the skeleton of a thermodynamics of knowledge ecosystems, in
which curiosity, cooperation, and memory are conserved energies within the evolving
plenum of meaning.
Appendix G: Empirical and Simulation Design
G.1 From Philosophy to Experiment
The previous appendices have described an entropic epistemology: a system in which
curiosity, attention, and ignorance form a coupled thermodynamic loop. The present section
outlines how this model can be grounded empirically and explored through simulation.
Its purpose is not to reduce thought to data, but to render the metabolism of knowledge
measurable, comparable, and improvable. The empirical program that follows transforms
the "thermodynamics of scientiﬁc revolutions" into an applied science of epistemic design.
G.2 Data Sources and Representational Infrastructure
The empirical substrate of this framework is the evolving network of published research,
citations, and conceptual linkages. Each document, dataset, or experimental protocol
becomes a node in a multi-layer graph G(t) whose edges encode semantic, methodological,
and social relations. Time-resolved data from bibliometric repositories (Crossref, Seman-
tic Scholar, OpenAlex), preprint archives (arXiv, bioRxiv), and collaborative metadata
(GitHub, institutional repositories) serve as proxies for the evolving state variables:
yi(t) = validated knowledge density in niche i,
xi(t) = fraction of active attention (authors, grants, citations),
gi(t) = gap magnitude derived from graph Laplacian L(t).
Together, these yield the empirical instantiation of the RSVP epistemic plenum.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
32
Constructing the Conceptual Graph.
Nodes are clustered by topic modeling or
citation community detection (e.g. spectral modularity, Leiden algorithm). Edge weights
are computed from semantic embeddings or co-citation frequencies.
The normalized
Laplacian L(t) is updated periodically to reﬂect the current conceptual topology. Gaps
gi(t) = |L(t)y(t)|i quantify discontinuity—the informational "voids" that attract attention.
G.3 Parameter Estimation and Calibration Strategies
Each parameter in the coupled system



˙xi = xi(πi(x, g) −¯π(x, g)) + P
j xjMji −xi
P
k Mik,
˙gi = −δigi + σi(1 −gi/Kg) P
j Bijxj + ζi
has an empirical analogue.
1. Decay rate δi.
Estimate by measuring the half-life of open questions: track how long
highly-cited "problem statements" or open challenges persist before a signiﬁcant solution
cluster appears. Fit an exponential decay gi(t)≈gi(0)e−δit within local epochs.
2. Innovation coeﬃcient σi.
Relate to the emergence rate of new concepts or methods
within niche i: σi ∝(new unique keywords per year)/(active authors). High σi indicates
creative overproduction and rapid re-problematization.
3.
Spillover matrix Bij.
Compute from the cross-citation or embedding inﬂuence
matrix:
Bij = citations or semantic references from niche j to i
total citations from j
,
smoothed over time windows. It quantiﬁes how activity in j reveals new opportunities in i.
4.
Commons parameters (Kj, ρj).
Derive from resource and capacity indicators:
grant funding, publication venues, reviewing bandwidth, and data repository throughput.
ρj can be estimated from acceptance-to-submission ratios or time-to-publication metrics.
5. Attention mutation matrix Mij.
Infer from author topic-switching frequencies:
how often researchers transition from one area to another between successive publications.
6. Exogenous shock ζi.
Identify through sudden bursts of novelty (e.g. new instrumen-
tation, crises, or major theoretical breakthroughs) that cannot be explained by endogenous
dynamics.
Parameter inference proceeds via Bayesian ﬁltering or variational inversion of the diﬀerential
system, using observed time series {xi(t), gi(t)} to estimate hidden coeﬃcients.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
33
G.4 Validation Metrics and Empirical Signatures
Testing the theory requires identifying empirical signatures that diﬀerentiate healthy,
resonant epistemic ecosystems from pathological regimes.
1. Lag correlation.
Compute the cross-correlation between ˙gi and ˙xi:
τ ∗
i = arg max
τ
Corr
 ˙gi(t), ˙xi(t + τ)

.
Short, stable lags τ ∗
i > 0 indicate critical responsiveness. Large or oscillatory lags imply
bureaucratic inertia (slow reaction) or faddishness (overshoot).
2. Entropy balance.
Evaluate the entropy of attention H(x) = −P
i xi log xi and its
rate of change ˙H. Healthy regimes maintain ˙H ≈0 with H ≥Hmin; declining H signals
monoculture and vulnerability to collapse.
3. Gap coverage.
Monitor P
i xigi as an aggregate measure of epistemic eﬃciency: it
should decline as repairs spread but oscillate within a bounded range, reﬂecting renewal.
4. Phase coherence across domains.
Compute pairwise coherence Γjk between ˙gi
within domains Ωj and Ωk. Excessive Γjk ≈1 indicates centralization (lockstep agendas);
Γjk ≈0 indicates fragmentation. Optimal regimes maintain moderate 0 < Γjk < ϵ.
5. Predictive power.
Train the dynamical model on a historical window and test its
ability to forecast emerging topics or declining ones. Successful prediction of attention
shifts validates the entropic coupling hypothesis.
G.5 Simulation Environment
To explore counterfactual policies and governance regimes, the coupled equations are
simulated on synthetic or empirical graphs.
Model architecture.
- State variables: (xi, gi) for each niche i, plus domain-level commons buﬀers (Ej).
- Time discretization: ∆t chosen to match publication cycles (e.g. one year).
- Integration: Euler or adaptive RungeKutta on (64)(65)(66).
Policy regimes.
Three canonical regimes are compared:
Centralized budgeting: Single (Λ, M) for all domains.
Simulates top-down science
policy. Tends to reduce diversity and shorten τ ∗
i (hyperreactivity).

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
34
Federated budgeting: Domain-speciﬁc (λj, µj) with soft coupling via (67). Produces
multi-phase oscillations and higher H(x).
Anarchic (unbudgeted) regime: λj = µj = 0. Yields boombust cycles, redundancy,
and runaway concentration.
Observables.
Simulations track attention diversity, gap coverage, phase coherence, and
global entropy ﬂux. Visualizations plot trajectories in (H, P xigi) phase space to reveal
attractor basins corresponding to stable epistemic equilibria.
G.6 Empirical Policy Testbed
The simulation environment doubles as a decision-support tool for research governance.
By varying (λ, µ, K, ρ), policymakers can experiment with alternative incentive schemes:
1. Gap bounty: increase µi in high-gi niches to stimulate neglected research.
2. Redundancy toll: raise λi in congested clusters to discourage oversaturation.
3. Diversity quota: impose minimal entropy Hmin via funding allocation.
4. Repair bonus: reward publication of synthesis, replication, and data curation outputs
that increase Jout
i
.
These interventions can be evaluated through Monte Carlo ensembles to assess their eﬀects
on stability, diversity, and responsiveness.
G.7 Toward an Empirical Thermodynamics of Knowledge
The ultimate test of this theory lies in whether it can predict and modulate real epistemic
phenomena: the birth of new disciplines, the decay of old ones, and the synchronization of
discovery across domains. If validated, it would provide a new language for science policy:
not a managerial metaphor but a literal thermodynamics of thought, where attention is
energy, ignorance is potential, and governance is the shaping of entropy ﬂow.
The methodology proposed herecombining bibliometric reconstruction, diﬀerential modeling,
and controlled simulationturns that vision into a research program.
It converts the
philosophy of Appendix F into a computational instrument: a feedback-controlled epistemic
commons capable of steering humanitys collective intelligence toward critical responsiveness
rather than collapse.
Appendix H: Political-Economic Instantiation of RSVP Dy-
namics
H.1 Vulture Capitalism as Field-Theoretic Pathology
Grace Blakeley's analysis in Vulture Capitalism documents the systematic consolidation of
economic agency within state-corporate networks. In RSVP ﬁeld theory, this corresponds

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
35
to a pathological ﬁeld conﬁguration where the vector potential A (representing channels
of agency and control) becomes concentrated in singular attractors, violating the entropy-
respecting condition ∇· JS ≥0.
The corporate-state nexus functions as a negentropic sink: it extracts capacity Φ from the
broader plenum while suppressing the diversity of accessible microstates S. Formally, for a
corporate entity C and state apparatus G:
∂ΦC∪G
∂t
= αΦplenum −βSplenum + γ(t)δ(r −r0)
(68)
where γ(t) represents bailout interventions that localize capacity, and the entropy deﬁcit
βSplenum quantiﬁes Blakeley's "death of freedom" the systematic reduction of accessible
life paths for most agents.
H.2 Corporate Planning as Degenerate Inference
Blakeley's crucial insight that capitalism involves extensive planning, just undemocratically
ﬁnds precise expression in the CLIO (Closed-Loop Inference Optimization) framework.
Corporate entities implement inference operators that minimize their local free energy
while exporting entropy to their environment:
Fcorp = Eq(s)[ln q(s) −ln p(s|o)] + λ∇2Senvironment
(69)
The Laplacian term ∇2Senvironment represents the externalized cognitive and material
costs of corporate optimization what Blakeley identiﬁes as systemic risk, environmental
degradation, and democratic erosion.
This creates what we term epistemic laminar ﬂow: a regime where corporate priors
dominate the variational density q(s), suppressing alternative futures and constraining the
manifold of possible actions.
H.3 Bailouts as Lamphrodyne Interventions
The bailout mechanisms Blakeley documents function as political lamphrodynes external
control inputs that maintain corporate entities in metastable low-entropy states:
Lbailout =
Z
κ(r, t)ΦC(r, t) dr dt −µ
I
∂V JS · dA
(70)
The surface integral represents the entropy exported to taxpayers, workers, and future
generations. This mathematical formulation captures Blakeley's central critique: what
appears as market "correction" is actually entropy redistribution that preserves power
asymmetries.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
36
H.4 Democratic Planning as Colimit Operations
Blakeley's alternative democratic economic planning corresponds precisely to the category-
theoretic structure of Semantic Infrastructure. Where corporate planning creates non-
reciprocal morphisms, democratic planning instantiates proper colimits:
DemPlan =
colim
communities
workers
ecological systems
Mneed
(71)
Each constituent deﬁnes its own semantic module Mi with local utility function Ui, and
the colimit operation Mneed ensures no single module can dominate the universal property.
This formalizes Blakeley's vision of distributed economic agency while satisfying the RSVP
condition of entropy respectance: δS/δt ≥0 across all modules.
H.5 Freedom as Entropic Capacity
Blakeley's critique of capitalist "freedom" ﬁnds its thermodynamic correlate in the relation-
ship between entropy and accessible state space. What neoliberalism frames as freedom is
actually:
"Freedom"neoliberal =
Y
i
δ(vi −vmarket)
(72)
a delta-function distribution in agency-space, while genuine freedom requires:
Freedomgenuine = exp(Sconﬁg) = exp

−
X
pi ln pi

(73)
where pi represents the probability density over life paths. Blakeley's documented collapse
of social mobility, wage stagnation, and precarity corresponds precisely to the narrowing
of this conﬁguration space.
H.6 Synthesis: From Critique to Formal Reconstruction
Blakeley's empirical analysis provides crucial validation of RSVP dynamics in socio-
economic systems:
- Capital concentration manifests as∇Φ →∞at corporate loci
- Democratic erosion correlates withS →Smin
- Bailouts represent singularδ-function injections breaking ﬁeld symmetry
- Alternatives require restoringSO(n) symmetry in agency distribution
The task of democratic political economy thus becomes the design of entropy-respecting
governance morphisms that maintain:

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
37
0 ≤δ
δt
Ssystem
Smax

≤ϵ
(74)
preventing both corporate consolidation (→0) and chaotic disintegration (→∞).
This formalization bridges Blakeley's institutional critique with the mathematical infras-
tructure of RSVP cosmology, creating foundations for what might be termed entropic
political economy a rigorous science of freedom, power, and collective intelligence.
Appendix I: Empirical Indicators and Simulation Schema
I.1 Empirical Mapping of RSVPEconomic Quantities
To render the entropic political economy empirically testable, the following correspondence
table maps RSVP ﬁeld quantities to measurable macroeconomic indicators. Each mapping
can be operationalized using publicly available economic, environmental, and institutional
datasets.
RSVP Quantity
Interpretation
Empirical Proxy
Φ (Scalar Capacity)
Stored potential; productive capital or wealth
National capital s
v (Vector Agency)
Directional ﬂow of agency and inﬂuence
Policy-lobby netw
S (Entropy)
Diversity of accessible states; systemic freedom
Herﬁndahl-Hirschm
∇· JS
Rate of entropic outﬂow (redistribution, repair)
Fiscal progressivit
γ(t)δ(r −r0)
Lamphrodyne bailout injection
Size and frequency
λ, µ (Entropy budget coeﬃcients)
Policy levers: depletion tax and repair subsidy
Wealth tax vs. gr
ρ (Commons eﬃciency)
Capacity of institutions to recycle entropy
Administrative eﬃ
Mi (Semantic module)
Economic or social subsystem (sector, region)
Inputoutput table
colim(Mi)
Democratic planning colimit
Participatory bud
These correspondences make the ﬁeld variables measurable through existing economic data
streams, enabling empirical calibration of the RSVP politicaleconomic equations.
I.2 Dynamic Simulation Framework
The ﬁeld equations of Appendix H can be discretized into a network simulation where
each node represents an institution, ﬁrm, or policy subsystem. The dynamics follow the
discretized plenum equations with feedback between scalar potential (Φ), entropy (S), and
agency (v).

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
38
Core update rules.
Φi(t + 1) = Φi(t) + ∆t
h
−λi ∇·JS,i + γi(t) −η (Φi −¯Φ)
i
,
(75)
Si(t + 1) = Si(t) + ∆t
h
µi ∇·JS,i −βi (∇Φi)2 + ξi(t)
i
,
(76)
vi(t + 1) = vi(t) + ∆t
h
−∇Φi + χ ∇Si −ν vi
i
.
(77)
- λi, µi act as local taxsubsidy controls governing depletion and repair.
- γi(t) represents lamphrodyne bailout injections.
- ξi(t) captures stochastic shocks (e.g. geopolitical events, technological change).
- η, χ, ν are damping coeﬃcients representing redistribution inertia, adaptive learning
rate, and frictional resistance.
The system is integrated forward using standard ﬁnite-diﬀerence or agent-based methods,
with institutional entities exchanging entropy ﬂux JS,ij through network edges weighted
by trade, credit, or policy coupling.
Governance regimes.
Simulations compare alternative macro-regulatory architectures:
Free-market regime: λi = µi = 0, γi(t) endogenous.
Results in entropy collapse: few Φi →∞, Ssystem →0.
Central-planned regime: Uniform (λ, µ) and global γ stabilization.
Produces oscillatory overshoot; excessive synchronization of Φ across nodes.
Entropic constitutional regime: Adaptive (λi, µi) enforcing Eq. (74).
Stabilizes diversity, maintains ∇· JS ≈0, minimizes inequality and volatility.
I.3 Validation and Metrics
Empirical and simulation results can be compared via the following observables:
1. EntropyInequality Coupling: Test whether Smacro = −P
i pi ln pi is inversely
correlated with capital concentration.
Empirical benchmark: Gini index versus
industrial diversity.
2. Lamphrodyne Signature: Identify bailout episodes as spikes in γ(t) producing
transient increases in ΦC but no rise in Ssystem.
3. Restorative Eﬃciency: Measure ˙S/ ˙Φ post-policy intervention as indicator of
entropy-respecting repair.
4. Phase-Coherence Index: Cross-correlate Φi(t) across sectors; optimal governance
yields intermediate coherence 0 < Γ < ϵ.
5. Freedom Gradient: Empirical entropy of mobility and occupational diversity as a
function of Φ distribution, validating Eq. (73).

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
39
I.4 Conceptual Integration
The simulation schema operationalizes the central philosophical claim of the paper: that
freedom, equality, and sustainability are not competing values but coupled thermodynamic
invariants. An entropic constitution encoded in adaptive λ and µ policies preserves the
condition
0 < dSsystem
dt
< ϵ
by continuously redistributing surplus potential into new degrees of freedom. Economic
justice thereby becomes a physical law of system stability.
Future empirical agenda.
- Calibrate the model on historical macroeconomic crises (2008, COVID-19) to extract
γ(t) proﬁles.
- Compare entropy balance across governance regimes (Nordic, East Asian, neoliberal).
- Extend network resolution to include ecological and cognitive subsystems for planetary-
scale RSVP modeling.
I.5 Closing Perspective
Appendix I completes the transformation of the RSVP framework from metaphysical
cosmology to empirical political economy. By identifying measurable proxies and computa-
tional procedures, it lays the groundwork for a thermodynamics of freedom: a discipline
uniting physical conservation laws with moral and institutional design. The next horizon
is experimental governancetesting whether entropy-respecting constitutions can produce
societies that are simultaneously freer, fairer, and more stable than any equilibrium yet
achieved.
References
References
[Ashby(1956)] Ashby, W. R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. Chapman & Hall.
[Arthur(1994)] Arthur, W. B. (1994). Increasing Returns and Path Dependence in the
Economy. University of Michigan Press.
[Baez & Fong(2017)] Baez, J. C., & Fong, B. (2017). A compositional framework for
passive linear networks. Theory and Applications of Categories, 33(7), 115147.
[Baez & Pollard(2022)] Baez, J. C., & Pollard, B. (2022). Categorical Thermodynamics.
arXiv:2203.03739.
[Blakeley(2024)] Blakeley, G. (2024). Vulture Capitalism: Corporate Crimes, Backdoor
Bailouts, and the Death of Freedom. Simon & Schuster.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
40
[Boulding(1966)] Boulding, K. (1966). The economics of the coming spaceship Earth.
In H. Jarrett (Ed.), Environmental Quality in a Growing Economy. Johns Hopkins
University Press.
[Calvin(1996)] Calvin, W. (1996). How Brains Think. Basic Books.
[Dawkins(1989)] Dawkins, R. (1989). The Selﬁsh Gene. Oxford University Press.
[Deutsch(2011)] Deutsch, D. (2011). The Beginning of Inﬁnity. Viking.
[Dennett(2017)] Dennett, D. C. (2017). From Bacteria to Bach and Back: The Evolution
of Minds. W. W. Norton.
[Evans & Foster(2011)] Evans, J. A., & Foster, J. G. (2011). Metaknowledge. Science,
331(6018), 721725.
[Fortunato et al.(2018)] Fortunato, S., et al. (2018). Science of science. Science, 359(6379),
eaao0185.
[Friston(2010)] Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory?
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11, 127138.
[Friston et al.(2022)] Friston, K., Parr, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2022). Active inference and
control: A free energy formulation. Progress in Neurobiology, 210, 102030.
[Gibson(1979)] Gibson, J. J. (1979).
The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception.
Houghton Miﬄin.
[Hayek(1945)] Hayek, F. A. (1945). The use of knowledge in society. American Economic
Review, 35(4), 519530.
[Hofbauer & Sigmund(1998)] Hofbauer, J., & Sigmund, K. (1998). Evolutionary Games
and Population Dynamics. Cambridge University Press.
[Holland(2012)] Holland, J. H. (2012).
Signals and Boundaries: Building Blocks for
Complex Adaptive Systems. MIT Press.
[Jaynes(1957)] Jaynes, E. T. (1957). Information theory and statistical mechanics. Physical
Review, 106(4), 620630.
[Kauﬀman(1993)] Kauﬀman, S. (1993). The Origins of Order: Self-Organization and
Selection in Evolution. Oxford University Press.
[Keen(2011)] Keen, S. (2011). Debunking Economics. Zed Books.
[Kuhn(1962)] Kuhn, T. S. (1962). The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions. University of
Chicago Press.
[Landauer(1961)] Landauer, R. (1961). Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing
process. IBM Journal of Research and Development, 5(3), 183191.
[Margulis(1998)] Margulis, L. (1998). Symbiotic Planet. Basic Books.
[Maynard Smith & Price(1973)] Maynard Smith, J., & Price, G. R. (1973). The logic of
animal conﬂict. Nature, 246(5427), 1518.
[Minsky(1986)] Minsky, H. P. (1986). Stabilizing an Unstable Economy. Yale University
Press.

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
41
[Mirowski(2013)] Mirowski, P. (2013). Never Let a Serious Crisis Go to Waste. Verso
Books.
[Onsager(1931)] Onsager, L. (1931).
Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes. I.
Physical Review, 37(4), 405426.
[Ortega y Gasset(1930)] Ortega y Gasset, J. (1930). The Revolt of the Masses. W. W.
Norton.
[Ostrom(1990)] Ostrom, E. (1990). Governing the Commons. Cambridge University Press.
[Popper(1959)] Popper, K. (1959). The Logic of Scientiﬁc Discovery. Hutchinson.
[Prigogine & Stengers(1984)] Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order Out of Chaos.
Bantam Books.
[Rovelli(2021)] Rovelli, C. (2021). Helgoland. Riverhead Books.
[Smith(1982)] Smith, J. M. (1982). Evolution and the Theory of Games. Cambridge
University Press.
[Wallerstein(2004)] Wallerstein, I. (2004). World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction. Duke
University Press.
[Whitehead(1929)] Whitehead, A. N. (1929). Process and Reality. Macmillan.
[Wiener(1948)] Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in the
Animal and the Machine. MIT Press.
[Wiener(1950)] Wiener, N. (1950). The Human Use of Human Beings. Houghton Miﬄin.
ChapterReference Mapping

Thermodynamics of Knowledge Ecosystems
42
Chapter
Thematic Focus
Key References
1
Problem of fragmenta-
tion, unity through en-
tropy and coordination
[Wiener(1948),
Prigogine & Stengers(1984),
Ashby(1956), Kauﬀman(1993)]
2
Field-theoretic
sub-
strate (Φ, v, S); entropy
as potential
[Landauer(1961), Jaynes(1957), Onsager(1931),
Baez & Fong(2017), Rovelli(2021)]
3
Entropic Game Theory;
commons stability
[Smith(1982),
Hofbauer & Sigmund(1998),
Friston(2010), Maynard Smith & Price(1973)]
4
Knowledge as coupled
ﬁelds of attention and ig-
norance
[Kuhn(1962),
Popper(1959),
Arthur(1994),
Holland(2012),
Fortunato et al.(2018),
Evans & Foster(2011)]
5
Vulture Capitalism; en-
tropy collapse in capital
ﬂows
[Blakeley(2024),
Minsky(1986),
Keen(2011),
Mirowski(2013), Wallerstein(2004)]
6
Evolutionary and cogni-
tive roots of repair and
opportunism
[Margulis(1998), Dawkins(1989), Gibson(1979),
Calvin(1996), Dennett(2017)]
7
Governance and entropy
budgets
[Ostrom(1990),
Wiener(1950),
Hayek(1945),
Friston et al.(2022), Baez & Pollard(2022)]
8
Thermodynamics of free-
dom; synthesis
[Ortega y Gasset(1930),
Whitehead(1929),
Boulding(1966), Deutsch(2011)]

