Vol.:(0123456789)
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10701-025-00843-4
RESEARCH
A Participatory Universe in the Realist Mode: On 
the Separation of Observational and Agentive Perspectives 
in Classical and Quantum Mechanics
Jenann Ismael1
Received: 18 December 2024 / Accepted: 9 April 2025 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2025
Abstract
In most day-to-day physics, one is modelling other systems and it is possible to 
maintain a provisional separation of subject and object, or of investigator and system 
being investigated. Ultimately, though, we are part of the universe. The fact that we 
act in the domain that we are representing can make it impossible to stabilize certain 
facts or features of the world as objects of knowledge. I'll suggest that this casts 
light on the sense in which the universe is participatory and use differences in the 
way that the effects propagate to distinguish the classical and quantum worlds.  
Keywords  Quantum mechanics · Participatory realism · Measurement · 
Observation · Interference · John Wheeler · QBism · Subject/object distinction · 
Classical/quantum mechanics
Even a casual look at foundational discussions in quantum mechanics will reveal 
an intense focus on measurement. Measurements are the basic points of epistemic 
contact between an observer and a quantum system. It is fair to ask why in quantum 
mechanics the interaction between an observer and the system under study suddenly 
become important. What is it about quantum mechanics that pushes those interac-
tions into the foreground?
'The observer' was always part of physics simply because physics is about the 
world and observers are part of the world, but we developed ways of dealing with it 
in classical physics that worked well for a long time. When we are dealing with open 
subsystems—particles, complex systems—we keep ourselves out of the systems that 
we are studying. We put an imaginary frame around the system, defining its bounda-
ries, treat ourselves as exogenous, so we are never part of the subject matter. Even 
 *	 Jenann Ismael 
	
jismael1@jhu.edu
1	
William H. Miller III Department of Philosophy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 
USA

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 2 of 15
when we are dealing with the universe, we imaginatively take ourselves out of the 
universe picturing it as though we were looking at it from the outside. All of this is 
a convenient and mostly harmless fiction in classical settings, but it pushes out of 
view a phenomenon that I'm going to call 'Interference'.1 Interference in the sense 
that I'm interested in is present in both classical and quantum settings, but I'm going 
to suggest that seeing how it plays out in these two different contexts gives us a new 
way of understanding the differences between the two theories.
I'll introduce Interference and give some examples, distinguishing it from dis-
turbance and ignorance. The suggestion is going to be that interference is unavoid-
able in any setting in which a system is representing the domain in which it is situ-
ated and makes it impossible to stabilize certain features of the world as objects of 
knowledge. How interference propagates depends on the way the domain is con-
nected (specifically, on the probabilistic relationships among events in the field over 
which probabilities are defined). In the classical setting, interference is channeled 
and focused into the future. In quantum mechanics, interference is endemic.
I'll argue that this is one clear way of understanding the sense in which the uni-
verse is participatory and explore ways of understanding it in a realist mode.
In most day-to-day physics, one is modelling other systems: pulleys, pendula, 
gases. We maintain a provisional separation of subject and object, or of investiga-
tor and system being investigated. Ultimately, however, we are part of the universe. 
We act in the domain that we are representing and that can create problems that can 
make it impossible to stabilize certain facts or features of the world as objects of 
knowledge. The notion of stability that is in question here is that the fact or feature 
of the world to which probability is assigned is independent of the act of assigning 
it a given probability, or that any probabilistic dependence can be screened off by 
facts or features that are independent of the act of assigning a given probability. The 
people that have unavoidably encountered the problem are people that are trying to 
program an artificial general intelligence. They want to program a system with a 
bunch of general knowledge and the ability to model the world, and they are coming 
up against the fact that some of what happens is stuff that the computer does and that 
creates a kind of interference. Let me give you a little simple example. Suppose you 
want to program a computer to serve as our grand overarching database for the uni-
verse: a repository of information about everything. We begin programming it with 
as much factual information as we can about the world. We begin with the laws of 
physics and all of the scientific knowledge we've amassed. We add the facts of his-
tory, what we know about the monkeys of Costa Rica and the vast reaches of space.
The goal is to be able to put any question of physical fact to it and the answer will 
appear in the output channel. It is not, however, hard to find a question that it can't 
answer truthfully. Ask it 'is the answer to this question that's about to be displayed 
in the output channel 'no'?'. If you think this through you will see that any answer 
that it gives will be false. If it answers 'yes', clearly it is wrong, since that misde-
scribes what it wrote. And if it answers 'no', it is wrong as well.
1  Not to be confused with quantum interference, which refers to the specifically quantum effect observed 
in measurements on systems in superpositions.

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 3 of 15 
   35 
This might seem like an anomaly. These kinds of problems are familiar to phi-
losophers and certainly to computer scientists. The problem is that what the com-
puter does in giving the answer interacts with what the answer says by rendering it 
false. The first reaction is to try to suppress it or keep these questions from arising. 
This is more subtle to accomplish than you think, since there's nothing wrong with 
the question that is being asked. It's a question about a perfectly mundane matter of 
physical fact that any other computer could answer truthfully (and that this computer 
could answer truthfully at another time). Another is to acknowledge the difficulty 
and try quarantine it. Again, this is more difficult than you think. It's a node in a 
highly connected network and there is no way in general of isolating its effects. The 
word 'no' appearing on my screen at t is going to affect the truth values of other 
propositions: Other computers in the room are going to record my answer, a person 
who walks in the room will see it, someone will take a picture, the electricity on the 
screen, the lint in the air... all of these things will be affected and will effect other 
things. The affects are going ripple through the network of truths.
From the point of view of knowledge, one wants to get as close to minimizing any 
disturbances that the computer's own activity has on the truth values of sentences 
in the field that it is representing. The reason that the problem arises is that by say-
ing things, the computer is doing things. That creates interference between what it 
says and what it does. Logical paradox is a form of negative interference. What the 
computer says conflicts semantically with what it does. There's nothing mysterious 
here. What is happening is that the computer can't stabilize the fact that the answer 
is meant to describe (the word that appears on the screen) independently of giving 
the answer, and the thing is set up so that no matter which answer it gives, what it 
does in giving it conflicts with what it says.
Negative interference can arise in less direct ways. A boy tries to guess his 
Christmas present. Every day from June to December he approaches with a new 
guess. Unbeknownst to him, his mother is waiting until Christmas Eve to make the 
purchase and is determined to surprise him.2 Poll predictions prompt responses that 
counter the predicted events: predictions prompt people to change their votes to 
make strategic choices given where other votes are falling that reconfigure the whole 
field.
Interference is different from ignorance and disturbance. In the case of ignorance, 
there is a fact well-defined independently of our knowledge; we simply don't know 
it.3 In the case of disturbance, there is some fact to be known, (whether your kids 
2  This is an example of causal interference. The prediction will cause its own defeat. Interference arises 
when the event being represented can't be detached from the act of representing it. In the self-reference 
case, the link is semantic, in this case here, it is causal. In both cases, one is encountering the shadows 
of one's own actions. Interference can be positive as well. If we ask the computer whether the word 'yes' 
(or for that matter simply what words will appear) in the output channel in response to this question, we 
get the positive form of semantic interference. It doesn't matter what answer the computer gives; the 
answer will be true. The causal version of positive interference is a self-fulfilling prophecy. A man's inse-
curity about keeping his commitment-shy lover drives her away. A favorable prediction by an influential 
analyst drives stock prices higher.
3  I'm using fact generically to mean an event, a property of an object at a time, a physical quantity taking 
a value. I'm assuming an ontology of events for convenience; these points will carry over to any ontol-
ogy.

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 4 of 15
were asleep, was perfectly well-defined independently of whether you look) but the 
measurement fails because you change their state in the course of trying to ascertain 
it and what you observe is the transformed state).
In the case of interference, the fact to be known is connected to our knowledge of 
it in a way that makes it impossible to stabilize independently. There isn't a fact, that 
is to say, there to be known; there isn't a fact there anyways, or already.4
It is easy to see what is going on with the boy and the Christmas present. The 
fact to be known is connected to his questioning in a way that makes it impossible to 
stabilize independently.
In this kind of situation—where the fact being represented is connected to the 
representation of it—the epistemic attitude doesn't work. The logic of knowledge 
presupposes that the object of knowledge is there to be known, or there already, or 
there anyways.
As long as one's own activity is connected in the domain one is representing, 
some of what one encounters will be the ripples produced by one's own activity. 
And one can't treat those features of the landscape as potential objects of knowledge.
1  Interference in a Classical World or in a Setting in Which the Laws 
Are Effectively Classical
Examples of interference in a classical world, or in a setting in which the laws are 
effectively classical, aren't hard to find.5 The example of the boy and the present 
was artificially arranged, but interference arises naturally in all kinds of places and 
I pointed to cases where it is genuinely problematic: predictions of a Republican 
victory prompt Democratic turnout, stock predictions or economic forecasts are 
used to make strategic choices that reconfigure the very things they are trying to 
predict. They are endogenous to the system, an explicit part of the dynamics. Any 
case where predictions become public and affect the course of events being pre-
dicted. For the purposes of knowledge, one wants to get as close to minimizing any 
disturbances that one's own activity has on the field that it is representing. That is 
possible in many settings in classical physics because interference is controlled and 
disciplined. Everyday perceptual interactions are unaffected. These exchanges have 
the logic of measurement. I interact with an object; my state after the interaction is 
correlated with the state of the object before the interaction. This allows us to stabi-
lize the spatial environment as an object of knowledge. That will, in its turn stabilize 
the past since the spatial environment contains systems whose present states contain 
information about the past: fossils, footprints, written chronicles...Indeed, you can 
think of these as measurements of the past: the states of these objects is correlated 
with the past states of objects or events in past for reasons that get made explicit by 
4  The most basic kind of dependence is that the fact to be known just is the knowing; but there will be 
derivative connections to other events because of the way that knowledge is connected in the network.
5  The settings we are interested in here are where quantum effects are suppressed and the probabilistic 
relations among the events in question are those predicted by the classical laws.

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 5 of 15 
   35 
the foundations of thermodynamics. So, the external environment and the past are 
all 'there to be known'.
Things are different when we look at the future. Present knowledge guides action, 
making it impossible for an embodied agent to stabilize her own future indepen-
dently of her current representations. Anything you predict, you can act to forestall, 
avoid, or deter. The agential attitude is the enemy of the epistemic attitude. From 
the point of view of knowledge, we want to minimize the disturbance that our own 
activity has on the domain we are representing. From the point of agency, we want 
to use knowledge to guide action, making knowledge as active and efficacious as 
possible. Trying to stabilize your own future as an object of knowledge is like chas-
ing your shadow, or like the child trying to guess his Christmas present. In exactly 
that way, our own futures are not for us, there to be known.
The kind of instability I'm pointing to isn't mysterious. It doesn't threaten objec-
tivity or realism; it doesn't even have to do with truth. The objective facts are the 
objective facts. What is true is what is true. It is just that our own knowledge (and 
knowledge gathering activity) is connected in the world in a way that keeps us from 
treating the totality of what there is—Being as such—as a pure object of epistemic 
attention. This is what it is to exist, to be part of the world. It is because your rep-
resentational activity is part of the world that you can't detach it and treat the world 
as a fixed object of representation, well defined independently of what you say and 
think about it.
2  Interference in Quantum Mechanics
In a classical world, we can take an epistemic attitude to the spatial environment and 
the past. But any attempt to stabilize belief about the future will encounter inter-
ference. What we see when we turn our attention to quantum mechanics, is that 
in a quantum world interference is endemic. The theory itself tells us that quan-
tum 'measurements'—i.e., attempts to find things out about the quantum world, 
those intensively analyzed interactions that bridge the effectively classical world 
of observers and measuring instruments on the one hand and quantum systems on 
the other—don't have the logic of measurement in the specific sense that we cannot 
stabilize the properties of quantum systems independently of our attempt to know 
them.
Quantum mechanics is (in the first instance) a formal apparatus that we can use 
to calculate probabilities of results of interactions—traditionally called 'measure-
ments'—with a quantum mechanical system [1, 2]. It represents the state of an iso-
lated system by a vector in Hilbert space. Standard textbook formulations present 
two rules: (I) Schrodinger evolution describes the evolution of the state of the sys-
tems when not interacting with it; (II) Born's Rule predicts (probabilities of) results 
of measurements.
There are well-known difficulties with this textbook formulation. 'Measurement' 
is too vague a term to serve appropriately in a fundamental law of physics. It is 
meant to refer to the familiar laboratory interactions that are the basic points of con-
tact between an experimenter and a quantum system: the experimenter puts down an 

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 6 of 15
instrument that correlates some physical quantity pertaining to a quantum system 
with an observable feature of the instrument (e.g., a pointer on a dial) and reads the 
value of the quantity off the result. To have a well-formulated theory, we need an 
explicit characterization of the class of interactions that count as measurements. But 
when we try to replace it with an explicit physical characterization, an inconsistency 
emerges.
Schematically, measurements are understood as interactions between a macro-
scopic device and a system of interest, in which a pointer observable pertaining to 
the apparatus is appropriately correlated with the value quantity being measured. 
These interactions are themselves physical processes and  we ought to be able to 
bring them under Schrodinger evolution. When we try to bring measurements under 
Schrodinger evolution, however, an inconsistency emerges. The inconsistency 
derives from the fact that according to quantum mechanics, if S1 and S2 are possible 
states of a system, then any linear combination of S1 and S2 is also a possible state. 
We call these linear combinations superpositions. If we take our schema of a meas-
urement, which says that a measurement process correlates premeasurement values 
of S1 and S2 with values of the pointer observable Z (measuring a system in S1 
takes Z into Z1, and measuring a system in S2 takes Z into Z2, where Z1 and Z2 are 
values of Z), and it follows from the linearity of the Schrodinger equation that when 
we carry out a measurement on a system in a superposition of S1 and S2, the result 
should be a superposition of different values of Z1 and Z2.
What we actually observe, and what Born's Rule predicts, is a definite result on 
every occasion (Z1 or Z2), with the distribution of Z1 and Z2 given by the square 
modulus of the wave function.
This is, of course the Measurement Problem [2, 3]. The problem (ignored for 
years because it doesn't threaten the purely operational understanding of quantum 
mechanics that had taken hold in much of physics, but central in foundational dis-
cussions) puts measurement interactions in the spotlight. There has been an intense 
focus on what is happening physically in these interactions. And the logic that we 
bring instinctively to our attempts to understand them is one that is appropriate if 
there is no interference. So, for example, we assume that unmeasured quantities have 
definite values. We assume that if we perform a measurement and obtain a result, 
the result reveals what was there before. We assume that if we can predict with cer-
tainty that the result of a measurement would be x, we could infer that the quantity 
has that value independently of the measurement. We assume, that is to say, that 
the property that we observe is one that was there already (before measurement), or 
there anyways (independently of the measurement).
A survey of the last 50 years of foundational discussion would show an enormous 
amount of progress on many fronts. There was decoherence, no-go results, and pro-
liferation of interpretations of the theory. These have constituted progress in under-
standing both the possibilities for physically interpreting the formalism as it stands 
and modifying it in ways that preserve its empirical success. These developments 
have pushed us away from those assumptions in several ways.
The no-go theorems most explicitly by showing us that the logic of quantum 
mechanics doesn't support any of these inferences by showing us that if we assume 
them, we get predictions that disagree with quantum mechanics. The formalism 

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 7 of 15 
   35 
resists any kind of completion or filling in (or reconstruction that reproduces its pre-
dictions) while treating the results of quantum 'measurements' as revealing some-
thing that was 'there already' or 'there anyway'.
An early landmark in the history of no-go theorems is the Kochen Specker theo-
rem [4] (building on an earlier theorem by Gleason [5]) which shows that there is no 
way of reproducing the predictions of quantum mechanics if one assumes that all hid-
den variables corresponding to quantum-mechanical observables have definite values 
at any given time, and that the values of those variables are intrinsic and independ-
ent of the device used to measure them.The latter assumption is called 'contextual-
ity' and the theorems are often presented as showing that no non-contextual hidden 
variable theory that reproduces the predictions of quantum mechanics is possible for 
Hilbert space dimension of greater than two.6 Bell's Theorem [6] shows that there 
is no way of reproducing quantum predictions for pairs of particles in an entangled 
state on the assumption that they reveal pre-existing values (in this case, values that 
were fixed at the source).7 Since the particles can be space-like related when meas-
ured, Bell's theorem rules out local hidden variable theories. A more recent result 
from Matthew F. Pusey, Jonathan Barrett, and Terry Rudolph [6] rules out prepara-
tion independent hidden variable theories, i.e., those in which quantum states that are 
prepared independently have independent hidden variable descriptions.
The central lesson of these theorems, is that Schrodinger evolution does not allow 
us to produce Born statistics if we maintain that these interactions are revealing 
antecedently existing categorical properties of measured systems.8
Taking decoherence seriously as a physical process that occurs during paradig-
matic examples of 'measurement' means explicitly denying that the results reveal 
values that were there anyways or there already. As do other interpretations that 
either modify the dynamics or relax aspects of the there-already or there-anyway-
ness to accommodate Born statistics.9
I have been arguing that this isn't entirely novel. We saw it in classical mechanics 
as well. We cannot stabilize (properties of) quantum systems as objects of knowl-
edge in the same way and for the same reason that the child can't stabilize the 
Christmas present as an object of knowledge. There simply is not something 'there 
6  Gleason's theorem makes use of the full algebra of observables, KS uses a specific finite set of triples. 
Gleason's theorem shows that there is no probability measure over the rays of a Hilbert space that only 
takes the values 0 and 1 (as long as the dimension of that space exceeds 2). The Kochen-Specker theo-
rem constructs a specific finite subset of rays on which no such probability measure can be defined.
7  Assuming the choice of parameter is free and there is no retrocausality.
8  Without contextuality, superdeterminism or cosmic conspiracy.
9  Maudlin [2] makes the point that 'interpretation' isn't the right word: some of these are better consid-
ered alternative theories, but I follow the customary usage for convenience. I'll put aside theories that 
supplement the ontology (e.g., Bohmian Mechanics) or alter the dynamics (eg., Bohmian Mechanics, 
Spontaneous collapse theories). The point here is not to survey of interpretations, but to illustrate that the 
dynamics of 'measurement' in the bare, unaltered formalism involves interference in ways that become 
explicit in interpretations that do neither. For that reason, I look at Everettian quantum mechanics, rela-
tional quantum mechanics and retrocausal interpretations. Superdeterministic theories don't deny the 
aspects of the logic of measurement that I have highlighted here (that measurement results accurately 
reveal pre-existing values: values that were, as I put it, there anyways and already), but rather the idea 
that experimenters have freedom in choice of measurement.

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 8 of 15
to be known' (for us) independently of what we might try to find out about it; inde-
pendently of the 'questions we put' to nature in the form measurement interactions. 
Quantum mechanics reveals the stability of the world is only apparent. The struc-
tures that are needed to stabilize the world as something that is there to be known 
(indeed, the structures that are needed to stabilize ourselves as knowers; the struc-
tures that are needed to stabilize a conception of ourselves as I's and the world as an 
it) are present only in an effective and emergent way.
That doesn't mean that there is no world, only that the microscopic world isn't 
'there to be known' for us in a manner analogous to that in which the future isn't 
there to be known for us in a classical world.
Seeing quantum mechanics through the lenses of interference gives us a way of 
seeing the difference between classical and quantum mechanics that demystifies 
some of the weirdness of quantum mechanics. The phenomenon of interference 
is incontestable. Any system that acts in the domain it is representing is going to 
encounter it. It arises in a classical setting as well as a quantum one.
The difference between quantum and classical mechanics is not that there is inter-
ference in one case and not the other, but in how pervasive it is. The focus is on 
interference and foregrounds the fact that the conditions that allow knowledge in the 
traditional sense—the stabilization of the world as a potential object of knowledge, 
the separation of subject (knower) and world (object of knowledge))—are quite spe-
cial. They are not generic and not guaranteed.
This paper is titled 'a participatory universe in the realist mode', because I see 
what I am saying as aligned with John Wheeler's idea of observer-participancy [7, 
8], but incorporating it into a straightforwardly ontological account of material pro-
cesses and interactions. Wheeler introduced the idea of observer-participancy to 
describe what he called 'elementary quantum phenomena', and his basic insight that 
observer-participancy (hyphenated as a single word) is the basic phenomenon. It is 
the general case. The ability to separate observation from participation—to stabilize 
the world as something that can be seen and known (and with it, observers, in the 
sense of emergent structures that interact with their environment in ways that obey 
the logic of observation) —is the special case.
We often see the kind of diagram in which agents are modelled as separate from 
the environment, coupled to it by two channels: perception and action.

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 9 of 15 
   35 
And of course the actual situation demands that we put the agent in the world.
The agent is acting in the environment it is representing, and some of what it 
sees will be the ripples produced by its own actions. What the agent can stabilize as 
an object of knowledge, and take a purely epistemic attitude towards, will depend 
on how its actions are connected in the world. The difference between the quantum 
and classical world is not that the classical world is not participatory. It is that in 
a classical world interference is focused and channeled into the future; the spatial 
environment and the past are uninfected by interference. In the quantum world, it is 
pervasive.
What should one's attitude be in cases where interference is present? That of the 
participant, not the observer. We know both attitudes because we live the position of 
the participant in our daily lives. The logic of these interactions is not the logic of 
measurement, but the logic of choice. Think about what a choice is: a choice pro-
duces an action that interferes with what happens. I make my choices strategically 
exploiting the interference. So for example, I want a crop in the fall, I plant seeds 
in spring. I want protection when the rain comes, I fix my roof. If I don't want my 
pasta overcooked, I don't leave it in too long. The mistake that the boy makes in his 
questioning of his mother is that he treats it as a game of knowledge. In that capacity 
his failure is guaranteed. If he treats it as a game of strategy, he can use it to get what 
he wants.
Our attitude towards the quantum world has to be something like our attitude to 
the future in a classical setting.
3  Quantum Measurements Should be Reconceived as the Results 
of Quantum Choices
If you think about the logic of measurement, measurements are characterized by 
the absence of interference. There's a suite of counterfactuals that are supposed to 
capture the idea that the results of measurement interactions reveal facts, or prop-
erties, that are there anyway or there already. So, for example, we assume that the 
values observed obtain even if no measurement is performed and even if a different 
measurement is performed. We assume that unmeasured quantities have values (if 

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 10 of 15
we obtain a result, that result would have obtained even if we didn't perform the 
measurement) and that if we could measure A and could measure B, then the values 
we get for A and B are compatible.
The logic of choice; we don't expect any of the things that are connected to our 
choices to be there already or anyway. We expect what happens to be tied to what we 
choose so that it doesn't happen whether or not we make the choice. We don't expect 
the results of one choice to be compatible with those of another. None of that suite 
of problematic counterfactuals hold in cases of choice.
Ordinarily we would understand all of this in causal terms and against the back-
ground of a certain conception of time. We imagine that we live in a universe that 
is unfolding in time, that causal relations run from past to future and that is why 
we regard the past as fixed and the future as open, and why we take an epistemic 
attitude towards the past and a strategic one towards the future. Then we bring those 
ideas about time and causation into a quantum setting; and it doesn't work. We don't 
know how to impose those ideas on the phenomena that we are seeing. But we want 
to keep those ideas out of here. Our everyday ideas about causation and time grew 
up in a classical setting, where they are natural as expressions of facts about how 
interference propagates in a classical world. If we look at the physics itself, the facts 
about how interference propagates are explained by deeper physics that makes no 
mention of causation and rejects that understanding of time. So, the explanatory 
direction goes from facts about the way interference propagates in a classical set-
ting to the ideas about time and causation that build those into a kind of metaphysi-
cal picture that frames our everyday way of thinking. The actual metaphysics of a 
classical physics since Einstein doesn't support that picture. A relativistic universe 
is a four-dimensional manifold of events with no global conception of time. There 
is no unfolding and the laws don't incorporate any intrinsic direction of determina-
tion. The reason that interference propagates asymmetrically into the future has to 
do with thermodynamics. So, suspend your everyday ideas of time and causation 
into the background, and try to understand things simply in terms of how interfer-
ence propagates. It's convenient to get yourself into that way of thinking by imagin-
ing virtual worlds where you get to set the rules that say how things are connected, 
and place an agent whose actions activate nodes in a network. How the activation 
propagates is determined by how the network is connected and that in its turn will 
determine what the agent can treat as there to be known and what it regards strategi-
cally in making its choices.
To recap, we characterize the difference between the knowledge situation (a 
situation in which the epistemic attitude is appropriate) and the choice situation (a 
situation in which the agential attitude is appropriate). In the first case, it is cor-
rect to assume that the events in question or the facts about which we are inquir-
ing (in this case, the values of physical quantities) are what they are independently 
of our epistemic activity (in the case, carrying out measurements). The process of 
inquiry is designed to reveal them. In the second, it is not correct to assume that the 
events or facts in question are what they are independently of the inquirer's activity. 
When the events in question depend on the inquirer's activity, she is in a position to 
use her activity strategically to swing events in a preferred direction. What agency 
amounts to in the quantum case is the recognition that what we call 'measurement' 

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 11 of 15 
   35 
interactions are not knowledge situations but choice situations. The values of 'meas-
ured' observables in 'measurement' interactions are probabilistically dependent on 
the inquirer's choices (of what 'measurements' to undertake) in a manner that is 
characteristic of the choice situation in a classical setting.
4  Twenty Questions
John Wheeler [7, 8] was also someone that made the suggestion that quantum meas-
urements should be reconceived as choices and he emphasized the participatory 
character of our interactions with the quantum world. Recall Wheeler's analogy of 
the game of twenty questions, which he used to illustrate the difference between 
the classical and quantum world. In the ordinary version, one person (the contest-
ant) is left outside of the room while the others (the players) agree on an object. 
The contestant is allowed back in and puts questions to players that they have to 
answer truthfully. The contestant wins if he guesses the object in twenty questions. 
In Wheeler's version of the game, the players (unbeknownst to the contestant) don't 
agree on an object in advance. Whoever is asked a question by the contestant gets to 
choose any answer that is compatible with all of the answers that went before. The 
last player gets to decide whether the game is won or lost. The difference between 
the two games is that in the first game, the questions have an epistemic character; 
the answers that one gets reflect some antecedently agreed object. In the second, 
the object is being sculpted jointly by the questioner and the responses of the play-
ers. Wheeler says: "The world, we once believed, exists out there independent of 
any act of observation. ... [just as] I, entering, thought the room contained a defi-
nite word. In actuality the word was developed step by step through the questions 
I raised, as the information about the electron into being by the experiment that the 
experimenter chooses to make: that is, ...Had I asked different questions or the same 
questions in a different order I would have ended up with a different word as the 
experimenter would have ended with a different story for the doings of the electron."
It is, of course, really hard to figure out what Wheeler actually thinks. From the 
perspective of quantum foundations, most of the people that take inspiration from 
him have gone in the direction of QBism [9]. They have seen their view as a radical 
departure from classical conceptions of physics. Their view is defined in opposi-
tion to realist views that treat the quantum state as describing an objective world. 
According to QBists, the wave function is a user's manual for an agent; a tool that 
can be used to guide expectations of future experience on the basis of past.
That is certainly one route that one can go, but I don't think that the features of 
quantum mechanics that I have been pointing to need to push in that direction. I 
don't think this is about realism. It is about knowledge. It tells us that the quantum 
world isn't 'there already' or 'there anyways' for embedded observers, not because 
there is no world or no objective world, but because there is no observation in the 
classical sense. Every interaction is participatory. Even in a classical world, we 
are participants, and we can't treat the world as a whole as there already or there 
anyway, simply because it includes us. In that most basic sense, some of what hap-
pens doesn't happen unless we do it. That basic self-referential kind of interference 

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 12 of 15
affects other parts of the landscape as well, but because of the way that interference 
is channeled in a classical world, there are large parts of the world that we can stabi-
lize independently of our own activity and treat as objects of knowledge. Perceptual 
interactions with the spatial environment have the logic of measurement. Because 
the spatial environment contains information about the past, both of those we can 
treat as the fixed background against which our actions occur; and interference runs 
into the future.
Quantum mechanics tells us that our world—insofar as it is quantum—is more 
pervasively participatory than we thought. It tells us that our interactions with the 
quantum world have the character of the boy's attempt to guess his Christmas pre-
sent. It tells us that we should approach our interactions with the quantum world in 
the way the boy (if he understood what was going on) should approach guessing 
about his Christmas present, or in the way that a savvy player in Wheeler's version 
of Twenty Questions should approach his play: viz. strategically, not with a (purely) 
epistemic attitude.
To see that this can all be accommodated in an objective ontology, consider the 
Everettian setting. It is the simplest and the most straightforward and most uncom-
promisingly objective ontology.
There's a discussion in the Evans/Strawson tradition in analytic philosophy that 
has roots in Kant that talks about how the mind stabilizes a conception of self and 
world out of the flux of experience [10, 11].10 The account is a conceptual one; it 
talks about constancies in experience and in these accounts the self becomes sta-
bilized as a subject, or knower, at the same time that the world becomes stabilized 
as an object. Experience is conceived as a relation between subject and object, and 
interpreted as a view of a world from the perspective of a body moving through it. 
Marr's simple theory of perception is sometimes used as a template, where the idea 
is that you start with visual experience and the mind factorizes changes in experi-
ence into changes in the world and changes in one's position in it [12]; the computa-
tion is one that minimizes change along both dimensions imposing order on what 
would otherwise be a bloomin' buzzin' confusion. This is an epistemological (or 
broadly cognitive psychological) story; a story about how experience becomes artic-
ulated. The raw material for that story is experience and the world gets discerned in 
experience.
In the context of any physical theory, that story must be paired with an ontologi-
cal one that starts with whatever the theory treats as basic and shows how subjects 
arise and experience gets recovered in a world of the kind that it describes. In Ever-
ettian quantum mechanics [13, 14], the wave function is the basic object, decoher-
ence provides a physical mechanism for suppression of quantum interference that 
tells us how a branching structure of internally classical-looking worlds arises. It is 
in the context of these classical worlds (the histories that form the branching struc-
ture) that observers arise and the world becomes stabilized as a potential object of 
knowledge (as something 'there to be known', independently of attempts to know it). 
10  Husserl's theory of intentionality [17] is also, of course, a rich account of this process. Thank you to 
an anonymous reviewer for the suggestion.

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 13 of 15 
   35 
So, the account of how the classical world emerges from the quantum one is (effec-
tively) an account of how a space is opened for information-consuming agents that 
accumulate knowledge and use it to guide behavior.
Quantum mechanics tells us how those conditions arise by telling us how the 
classical regime (and hence the site of knowers and an objective world) is stabilized 
out of the quantum one. It also tells us why attempts by classically situated knowers 
to stabilize quantum systems as objects of knowledge fail. They fail because quan-
tum 'measurements' are not measurements; they don't have the logic of measure-
ment, because they lack the 'there already/there anyway'-ness.
These two pieces fit together nicely. You get an understanding of how a concep-
tion of self and world is stabilized out of experience and an understanding of how 
a classical world that supports the emergence of information consuming systems 
arises from the fundamental ontology. There is a worry that has plagued participa-
tory accounts about the role of observers (if observers bring the properties of elec-
trons into being, what brings them into being?). I think here the worry is less severe 
in an Everrettian setting: observers emerge as inhabitants of the universe as deco-
herence stabilizes classical world-histories. They arise only as emergent structures 
(and they interact with the world at the level of emergent structure that permits the 
separation of self from world).
It is not an accident that accounts of quantum mechanics that treat measurement 
in a quantum way (i.e., bring it under the quantum dynamics) treat it implicitly as 
having the logic of choice.
We see the same thing in relational quantum mechanics: another example of an 
objective ontology. In Everettian quantum mechanics, the wave function is the basic 
reality. In relational quantum mechanics [15], it is not a material thing, but a math-
ematical device that encodes past interactions between two systems and lets us pre-
dict the results of future interactions. What is ultimately real in relational quantum 
mechanics are relational facts (observable A has value v on system S with respect to 
system S*). In relational quantum mechanics, when I choose to 'measure A rather 
than B' on a system S (where A and B are incompatible observables) I am choosing 
to actualize an A eigenvalue rather than a B one on S, relative to me.If I choose one 
coupling, I forego others. These couplings are constitutive of reality so there is no 
sense in which they reveal something that is there anyway, or there already. What we 
are doing in the interactions that we call measurements is tapping into a quantum 
substructure in a way that moves needles around on measurement devices. Interac-
tions must be understood as productive and creative rather than purely revelatory.
The retrocausal interpretation [16] is nothing more than a recognition of what 
the formalism is telling us about how interference spreads. What Price saw was that 
arguments for non-local causal influence elicitly impose time asymmetric assump-
tions that don't come from the formalism. If one holds the relativistic causal struc-
ture fixed and looks at the formalism without time symmetric assumptions, the result 
is not non-locality but retrocausal influence. In this context, causation is interpreted 
interventionistically; A is causally related to B just in case interventions on A affect 
the probability of B. Analysis of a Bell experiment without imposing time asym-
metric assumptions, finds that the choice of measurement settings on the two sides 
interfere with the state at the source.

	
Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 
   35  
Page 14 of 15
Again, here we see the more familiar containment and forward channeling of 
interference arising from decoherence and the past hypothesis. We see the classical 
world emerging from the quantum world through quantum mechanisms, and with it 
the appropriateness of the assumptions that frame everyday ideas.
If one looks at quantum mechanics through these lenses, it makes one aware that 
the conditions that need to be in place for articulation of subject and object and the 
stabilization of the world as a potential object of known are not generic, and are only 
satisfied in an effective, emergent way. You see the dissolution of those structures 
at deeper levels. Quantum mechanics reveals a substructure to everyday reality that 
belies the impression of stability, the illusion of separateness from the world. There 
is a breakdown of the self as I and world as it, or self as subject and world as object, 
or self as knower and world as thing that is there to be known. I think Wheeler 
had that part right. All of the structure that supports those distinctions disappears 
at the fundamental level and emerges with decoherence. We start with the engaged 
perspective mid-way up the physical hierarchy of an information-gathering and uti-
lizing agent, and as we go deep, releasing scaffolding, we undo the structure that 
makes knowledge—gathering and utilization possible.
I'll stop at the edge of the cliff here. This is the edge that I think quantum mechan-
ics occupies. You go one way, you end up in the dizzying free fall of QBism, you go 
the other, you end up on the solid ground of interpretations that try to erase superposi-
tions and suppress interference. The edge both separates and connects these two sides.
5  Conclusion
A quick recap: Interference arises naturally and inevitably for a system that is part 
of the domain that it is representing. It becomes interesting in a connected domain, 
where it will propagate along channels determined by the connections. Aspects of 
the world that are tied to our own actions can't be stabilized as objects of knowledge. 
In the classical setting, interference effects are channeled into the future. In quantum 
mechanics interference is endemic.
This approach embraces Wheelerian insights, but without the radical epistemi-
cism of QBism. The deep insight of Wheeler was the breakdown of the epistemic/
ontic distinction. In a more general philosophical vein, it makes us aware of the 
ultimate inseparability of subject and object, self and world, representation and 
represented. It is a form of perspectivism that emphasizes the practical side of per-
spective. It starts from the recognition that every system is a nexus in the causal 
web of the world, and how it is situated in that web will determine where the logic 
of inquiry applies and where the logic of choice. The deepest lesson of quantum 
mechanics may be that 'measurements' are not measurements; they are choices.
Acknowledgements  I have benefitted enormously, over many years, from discussions with Carlo Rov-
elli.  I'm also grateful to Chris Fuchs, to audiences at Berkeley and the University of Pittsburgh, and 
to David Wallace for the question in a different talk that prompted this paper.
Author Contribution  This is sole authored work.

Foundations of Physics           (2025) 55:35 	
Page 15 of 15 
   35 
Data Availability  No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content 
of this article and no received no external funding over the course of its preparation.
References
	 1.	 Ismael, J.: Quantum Mechanics. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2021 Edition). 
https://​plato.​stanf​ord.​edu/​archi​ves/​fall2​021/​entri​es/​qm/
	 2.	 Maudlin, T.: Philosophy of Physics: Quantum Theory. Princeton University Press, Princeton 
(2019)
	 3.	 Bell, J.S.: Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Theory. Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge (1987)
	 4.	 Kochen, S., Specker, E.P.: The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. J. Math. 
Mech. 17(1), 59-87 (1967)
	 5.	 Gleason, A.M.: Measures on the closed subspaces of a Hilbert space. Indiana Univ. Math. J. 
6(4), 885-893 (1957)
	 6.	 Pusey, M.F., Barrett, J., Rudolph, T.: On the reality of the quantum state. Nat. Phys. 8(6), 475-
478 (2012)
	 7.	 Wheeler, J.A.: Information, physics, quantum: the search for links. In: Wheeler, J.A. (ed.), Pro-
ceedings III International Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, pp. 354-358 
(1989)
	 8.	 Wheeler, J.A., Zurek, W.: Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton University Press, 
Princeton (1983)
	 9.	 Fuchs, C.: QBism, Where Next?. https://​arxiv.​org/​abs/​2303.​01446
	10.	 Evans, G.: Things without the mind. In: Philosophical Subjects. Clarendon Press, Oxford (1980)
	11.	 Strawson, G.: The Bounds of Sense. Methuen, London (1966)
	12.	 Marr, D.: Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation and Processing 
of Visual Information. MIT Press, Cambridge
	13.	 Everett, H.: 'Relative State' formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 454-462 
(1957)
	14.	 Everett, H.: On the reality of the quantum state. Nat. Phys. 8, 475-478 (2012)
	15.	 Rovelli, C.: Relational quantum mechanics. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 35, 1637-1678 (1996)
	16.	 Price, L.H.: Does time-symmetry imply retrocausality? How the quantum world says "Maybe"? 
Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod. Phys. 43, 75 (2012)
	17.	 Husserl, E.: Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy. 
Translated by F. Kersten. Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague (1982)
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under 
a publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted 
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and 
applicable law.

