How to Combine Chance and Determinism: Thinking about the Future in an Everett Universe*
Author(s): Jenann Ismael
Reviewed work(s):
Source: Philosophy of Science, Vol. 70, No. 4 (October 2003), pp. 776-790
Published by: The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Philosophy of Science Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/378864 .
Accessed: 11/06/2012 10:58
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
The University of Chicago Press and Philosophy of Science Association are collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Philosophy of Science.
http://www.jstor.org

How to Combine Chance and
Determinism: Thinking about the Future
in an Everett Universe*
Jenann Ismaelyz
I propose, in the context of Everett interpretations of quantum mechanics, a way of under-
standing how there can be genuine uncertainty about the future notwithstanding that the
universe is governed by known, deterministic dynamical laws, and notwithstanding that
there is no ignorance about initial conditions, nor anything in the universe whose evolution
is not itself governed by the known dynamical laws. The proposal allows us to draw some
lessons about the relationship between chance and determinism, and to dispel one source of
the tendency among Everettians to introduce consciousness as a primitive element into
physical description.
1. Introduction. How can deterministic dynamical laws, together with
complete knowledge of the past, leave room for chancy events? If the uni-
verse unfolds in accord with known deterministic physical laws, and you
have complete knowledge of your own past, how can there be future events
that can be assigned only a probabilistic outcome. This is a problem that
advocates of Everett (or Many Worlds) Interpretations of quantum
mechanics face in a very stark form: and it is at least partly behind the
tendency to import primitive non-physical homunculi into that setting. If
the dynamics of the physical universe is completely and correctly described
by Schrodinger's equation, it is almost irresistible to think that Born's rule
*Received October 2002; revised May 2003.
yTo contact the author write to Department of Philosophy, SS213, University of Arizona,
Tuscon, AZ 85719; e-mail: jtismael@u.arizona.edu.
zI am very grateful to two anonymous reviewers, and also to Richard Healey, Bas van
Fraassen, and David Lewis, who made the paper much better than it is in many close worlds.
I would also like to thank Michel Bitbol and an audience at the Centre de Recherches en
Episte´mologie Applique´e in Paris for their patience and a very helpful discussion.
776
Philosophy of Science, 70 (October 2003) pp. 776-790. 0031-8248/2003/7004-0007$10.00
Copyright 2003 by the Philosophy of Science Association. All rights reserved.

must apply to the path of some non-physical what-not—me or my
consciousness—traveling an undetermined path through the branching
landscape.
The general question can be separated from the context, and it is only
one of the cluster of related problems involved in providing an interpre-
tation for probability in an Everett universe, but it arises in an especially
pointed form in that setting. I will recommend an answer that doesn't
depend on adding anything non-physical to the universe (that is to say,
anything whose evolution isn't completely and correctly described by
Schrodinger's Equation), draw some lessons for the relationship between
dynamical determinism and predictability, and close by relating the
discussion to the broader metaphysical tendency to think of oneself as a
transcendent being: a pure, primitive locus of mental life, distinct from
brain and body.
2. Introducing the Setting and Separating the Issues. Think of a history
as a sequence of results of measurements, or observations, each with N
possible outcomes, ordered by time, and think of an Everett Universe as an
inﬁnite branching set of histories, represented by a tree-like structure with
nodes standing for measurements, and one branch entering, and N
branches leaving, each node, in which every possible sequence of results
is realized.1 Providing an interpretation for probability, conceived as a
measure over the space of histories, in this setting requires at least the
following three things:
1. Finding a canonical method for extracting, from the universal psi-
function, an evolving tree-like universe, and doing so in a manner
that doesn't make use of a preferred basis,
2. Showing how chance can arise in a deterministic context,
3. Defending Born's Rule as the quantitative method for calculating
probabilities.
The problems are related but separable; I adopt the strategy of treating
them separately. Progress on 3 has been greatest. 1 is still a matter of
heated dispute; there are a number of proposals in the literature.2 I will be
addressing 2 speciﬁcally, with some brief words at the end about 1.
The problem arises because if the universe evolves, as a whole, in
accordance with Schrodinger's equation, it evolves deterministically, and if
it evolves deterministically, there don't exist any genuinely chancy events.
Simon Saunders put the problem nicely:
1. This isn't the only way to think of an Everett Universe (see section 9).
2. For an overview, see, Lockwood 1996; also, Saunders 1995, 1993, and Zurek 1992.
777
chance and determinism

it seems that the concept of probability can only apply to a situation
given that only one, say, x, out of a range of alternative possibilities y,
z, . . . is true, or is realized, or actually occurs, so as to exclude all the
others; [but this is] precisely what Everett denies. (Saunders 1996, 374)
Solving it means ﬁnding something in an Everett universe for the Born
probabilities to attach to, something for me to be wondering about when,
for instance, I'm wondering whether I will ﬁnd Schrodinger's cat dead or
alive, or in general, what the result of a measurement on a quantum system
in a superposition of the measured observable will be.
3. A Preliminary Attempt. Consider the little bit of history stretching from
the moment just before to the one immediately after a result is obtained in a
spin measurement on an electron.3 Consider, that is to say, what happens, in
an Everett Universe, between the moment I feed a particle into a Stern-
Gerlach apparatus and that at which a spot appears (or, if you like, is
observed) on the photographic plate at the other end. We know that the
universe branches, and we know that results distribute themselves across
branches in such a way that the probability that an unconstrained choice
from the post-measurement worlds will yield one or another outcome
corresponds to the Born probability of that outcome obtained from the
state of the electron before measurement.4 Finding something for the Born
probabilities to represent means ﬁnding something in this stretch of history
that we can think of as a 'picking' event, something to whose outcome the
Born probabilities can be thought of as assigning expectation values. The
diﬃculty is that, since all results are equally realized, i.e., since all occur at
some world, the universe itself doesn't make any choices.
If we could single out one or another branch in the c-function, or the
world described by one or another branch—e.g., the one that is actual, or
the one that is experienced—we could interpret the Born probabilities as
the probability of obtaining a given result in that branch. The diﬃculty is
that each branch is actual relative to itself, each is experienced by its own
inhabitants, and they are related symmetrically to the pre-measurement set-
up. There is nothing I could say, from my standpoint before measurement,
3. I distinguish the 'measurement' from its 'outcome,' thinking of the former as everything
leading up to, but not including, the moment a result is obtained (remaining vague, for
familiar reasons, about when exactly that is: e.g., the moment a dot appears on the
photographic plate? the moment a conscious observer looks at the plate? the moment she
acquires a belief about its position?)
4. There are diﬀerent ways of doing this, but the diﬀerences don't matter for our purposes.
We can have a single world for every result with various primitive objective chances of
getting picked, or we can have a continuous set of equally probable worlds, under a standard
measure, with as many of each type as are needed to get the probabilities right.
778
jenann ismael

to pin my Born probabilities on one of these rather than another; there is
nothing that I can use to get a descriptive handle on this one, as opposed to
that.5
Ask yourself what you are wondering about before measurement when
you wonder what the outcome will be. It is tempting to answer is that you
are wondering what sort of result you will experience, i.e., which of the
post-measurement branches of the universe you (not any of your externally
indistinguishable counterparts, but you) will ﬁnd yourself in, and so many
have supposed that what is needed to solve the problem of probability are
criteria of personal identity that will allow you to identify one of the
branches as yours, so that the Born probabilities can be interpreted as
pertaining to events in your world.6
The problem with this, from a physical point of view, is that it gives away
the game. It reconciles the determinacy of physical evolution with the need
for chancy events only by adding non-physical facts to the universe, where
by 'non-physical facts,' I mean facts that don't supervene on the physics of
the situation. For if facts about personal identity are to do the work for
which they are being evoked, they cannot supervene on physical ones
because, by hypothesis, the post-measurement me bears all the same
physical relations to the pre-measurement me as my non-me counterparts.
If there is something that unites me with my later stages, something I can
use before the measurement is made, to identify the event to whose outcome
Born probabilities attach, it can't be something physical. The suggestion
that we add to the Everett picture, a humunculus, or an individual
consciousness, traveling a unique path through the branches, making
chancy choices at every juncture, and that we interpret the Born
probability of an up-result in a spin measurement as the probability that
it (i.e., the humunculus) will choose an up branch when it gets there, isn't
very satisfying as physics.7 Let's see if we can do better.
4. A Second Pass. Perhaps I needn't single out a unique trajectory as
mine—i.e., perhaps I needn't be able to say beforehand which one of the
5. Save the results themselves, and that is no help, for two reasons; ﬁrst, there is not in
general (at least on some versions of the Many Worlds view, e.g. Lockwood and Deutsch) a
unique world at which a given result is obtained, and second, it makes no sense to attach a
non-zero probability to any but one result in a world picked out de dicto by outcome. What
is needed a way of picking out a world, that allows me to wonder de re of it, what re-
sult will be obtained there. It should be noted that Deutsch's views have changed substan-
tially in recent years. Many thanks to an anonymous reviewer for prompting this mention.
6. For arguments that nothing else will do, see Loewer 1996.
7. Would each of us, and our various counterparts, have our own humunculi? And would
the activities of our respective humunculi have to be coordinated so that we follow diﬀerent
paths?
779
chance and determinism

post-measurement observers is me—to make out the suggestion that the
Born probability of an E-result gives the probability that E is what I will
see. Perhaps it is enough if I can locate the parts of my history (i.e.,
individual observation events) in the Everettian universe, as they occur,
without appealing to any special, non-physical relation that unites them with
one another. Here's how to make this out: think of the Born probabilities as
giving the probability that the next event in a pre-measurement history of a
speciﬁed kind is a spin-up-result-observing event. In collapse interpre-
tations, the Born probability of an event is the probability that it is actual. In
an Everett Universe, the assimilation of 'actual' to 'here' is complete; the
Born probability of an up-result in my spin measurement above is the
probability of obtaining an up-result here, where 'here' picks out a location
in one of the post-measurement branches in the universe, and picks out a
diﬀerent one in the mouths of each of my post-measurement successors. The
Born probabilities tell each how typical her situation is among folks that
share her pre-measurement history; they tell her how surprised she should
be, given that history, to be seeing what she is seeing.
If this works, it means there is no need for non-supervenient facts about
personal identity, it means there is something in the universe (something
already there, something there before we add supernatural facts constitu-
tive of personal identity, or non-supervenient relations between person
stages) on which to pin the Born probabilities. Each post-measurement
successor of an experimenter uses Born's Rule to compute the probability
of the event at her world; the one at w1 uses it to compute the probability
of a spin-up result at w1, the one at w2 uses it to compute the probability of
a spin-up result at w2, the one at w3009 uses it to compute the probability of
a spin-up result at w3009, . . . . The results themselves diﬀer from world to
world, but, since their probabilities only depend on pre-measurement
history, they all get the same distribution.
5. Complications. Here is why the matter is so confusing. Worlds don't
have names, and the events in question, the ones to which the post-
measurement successors attach their respective Born probabilities, can't be
identiﬁed descriptively from a pre-measurement perspective.8 This means
that there has to be an implicitly indexical element in talk of individual
measurement results, which isn't by itself a problem, except that, because
of the symmetric relations measurement results bear to pre-measurement
history, they can't be identiﬁed even indexically from a pre-measurement
perspective. Indexical reference works by producing linguistic tokens
whose objects are particulars that bear the tokens a certain contextual
8. In a way that leaves their outcomes open, i.e., in a way that permits the assignment of a
non-zero probability to more than one result.
780
jenann ismael

relation.9 The problem with referring indexically to measurement results is
they bear all the same contextual relations (spatial, temporal, causal) to the
events that make up the pre-measurement history, and that means that we
can't make identifying reference to them until after they have occurred, i.e.,
until we occupy a context that bears them diﬀerent relations.
That is a peculiarity, but it is a linguistic peculiarity, and the way to see
that it is a linguistic peculiarity—i.e., that it underscores the insuﬃciency
of the linguistic resources at my disposal before measurement to refer to
the events to which Born probabilities attach, without showing that there
are none such—is that if worlds had names, or came in diﬀerent ﬂavors (so
that 'the chocolate world' or 'the grape world' were identifying descrip-
tions) there would be no problem about interpreting the Born probabilities.
I could use Born's rule to compute the probability of getting one or another
result at any world I care to know about.
So, to review; every measurement outcome event at any world, has a
ﬁxed probability, given by Born's rule, of coming out this way or that, and
the variously situated post-measurement observers of results use Born's
rule to compute the probabilities pertaining the events they are, respec-
tively, observing. The probabilities tell each of them how surprised they
should be, given their pre-measurement histories (the pre-measurement
histories they share), to be seeing what they are respectively seeing. The
need for indexicals in identifying the relevant events, and the impossibility
of identifying them from a pre-measurement perspective, makes for
linguistic awkwardness, but doesn't have the ontological consequence
(viz., that there is nothing for the Born probabilities to attach to) that would
undermine the Everett picture. We needn't add anything to an Everett
universe to say what the Born probabilities apply to; we just have to give
names to parts that are already there.
6. Indexicals and World-Locality. A few words about indexicals; the
truth conditions of statements containing indexicals can always be
expressed in a suﬃciently rich non-indexical vocabulary,10 but that
doesn't mean I cannot use indexicals to refer to things that I don't have
the vocabulary to pick out in non-indexical terms. I don't need to have a
name or description that applies to a thing to refer to it indexically; I only
have to be contextually related to it in the right way.11 That is the beauty of
10. Which is not to say that they have the same sense, or that they express the same
proposition.
9. Complexities are needed to deal with all cases, but the characterization is general.
11. I don't, for example, have to have a name or description that applies to my location to
refer to it using 'here'; I only have to be, when I produce the token, at it. I don't have to have
781
chance and determinism

indexicals, but it is also what gives indexical talk a local character; it
means that, if we don't have the linguistic resources to refer to the things in
question without indexicals, we can only talk about them from certain
locations in the spatial or temporal landscape. That, I am suggesting, is
what is behind the diﬃculties in interpreting probabilities in the Everett
universe; because of the symmetries of such a universe, we cannot make
identifying reference to the events to which Born probabilities pertain from
a pre-measurement perspective.
7. Global Determinism and Local Chanciness. Let's return to the
problem of how a deterministically evolving world can contain chancy
events. How do we reconcile the determinism of global evolution with the
local chanciness of measurement results? To say the universe evolves
deterministically is to say that its global state is uniquely determined by the
preceding one. A moment's reﬂection, however, should convince you that
it doesn't follow therefrom that the state of any given branch is uniquely
determined by its history. So long as there are distinguishable branches
with the same initial segments, i.e., so long as there are dissimilar down-
stream descendents of one and the same pre-measurement world, there
must be events that are not determined by their histories, namely those that
diﬀerentiate the branches from one another.12
The same will be true in any universe with symmetries of the right sort.
Consider a system consisting of a spherically symmetric particle that
decays at a pre-ordained moment sending indiscernible particles oﬀin
opposing directions. The process might well be deterministic in the sense
that the laws prescribe when the thing will decay and the direction in
which particles will be emitted, but the path of neither particle will be
determined by its prehistory. Measurement results in an Everett universe
are chancy in the same way as the post-split path of a particle is chancy;
nothing in the pre-measurement history of either particle will tell me where
it is located after emission. If the particles don't have names, and we don't
allow hacceities into our description, conditionalizing on the presplit
history of a particle will not tell me its location. And just so, if I forget
the outcome of a measurement I carried out yesterday, nothing in the
universe right up until I observed the result will tell me what it was. I can
use Born's rule to calculate how likely it is to have been one thing rather
12. Notice the connection with the diﬃculty encountered above; the only way we could be
in a position, before measurement, to descriptively identify worlds at which diﬀerent results
are obtained, would be if there were something that distinguished them before the fact. But
this is precisely what is ruled out by their common ancestry.
a name or description that applies to the present moment to refer to it using 'now'; I only
have to be, when I produce the token, in it.
782
jenann ismael

than another, but no knowledge of the state of the universe beforehand will
tell me more. And this, notwithstanding the fact that the state of the
universe as a whole is completely determined by the preceding.13
Notice that there is also a kind of epistemological symmetry in the Ever-
ett universe that is, in its way, satisfying. On a classical view, if we think of
our histories as sets of events, we lose information as we trace them back
in time, because records accumulate in the forward direction.14 In an
Everett universe, we lose information in both directions, because our view
of the universe as we move forward is increasingly parochial. We get more
and more epistemologically isolated, because the information that comes in
through the senses concerns only parts of the universe with which we are
in causal communication (i.e. our particular branch), and that is an increas-
ingly small portion of the whole. We lose information in the horizontal
direction, that is to say, as it accumulates along the vertical.
8. Indeterminism and Unpredictability. Whenever you have a system
with the right kinds of symmetries, you will have distinct parts (i.e., par-
ticles located in diﬀerent parts of space, and which may or may not diﬀer
intrinsically) with identical histories. You will have distinct parts with the
same pre-t history, and whatever distinguishes the parts after t (whether
these are intrinsic diﬀerences, diﬀerences in spatial location15) will not be
predictable from historic facts. You can predict the global state from global
history (complete knowledge of any time-slice of global history will
suﬃce), but you cannot predict the state of every part of the system
from global history. Observers in an Everett system are interested in pre-
dicting the state of a part of the system on the basis of information about its
global states at a given time; the structure of the Everett Universe is such
that, once an observation has taken place, branches are causally isolated
from one another in a way that makes information about what occurs in
one branch unavailable to others. The evolution of each branch will be
indeterministic, in this sense: states after measurements will not in general
be predictable on the basis of historic information. The probabilities are
epistemic, unpredictability arises not because of indeterministic dynamical
evolution, but because the information that one would need in order to use
the dynamical laws to predict the result of a measurement in a given
branch—viz., information about its outcomes in other branches—is
13. This raises a hornet's nest of really hard questions concerning the notion of primitive
hacceity that eventually have to be faced up to, but which we only note here.
14. It doesn't matter whether you think of this as a metaphysically contingent fact, or you
think the forward direction just is the direction in which records accumulate.
15. In classical physics, distinct particles are always distinguished at least by spatial location.
783
chance and determinism

unavailable. It arises, that is to say, not because of the way information is
spread back to front, but because of the way it is spread side to side.
Measurement results are unpredictable in an Everett Universe because they
are not determined by the global dynamical laws from the information
contained in their own back light cone.
9. Literal Branching or Metaphorical? There are two ways of thinking
of the Everett universe; one according to which worlds have common
histories and branching is a physical process that occurs when measure-
ments are carried out,16 and another according to which the universe con-
sists of non-overlapping worlds with similar pasts, but no events in
common. On the latter way of thinking, branching is a metaphorical
way of describing divergence in the post-measurement intrinsic nature of
spatio-temporally unrelated worlds. I have been speaking in the ﬁrst way
because the problem of probabilities arises in its most pointed form in that
setting, but it is useful to compare the two. On the second way of thinking,
every measurement has a unique outcome, which means that it suﬃces, for
the purposes of ﬁnding somewhere to pin my Born probabilities, that I can
identify the measurement I'm interested in.17 And there is a great deal less
intuitive diﬃculty with that (never mind that there are indiscernible
measurements at other worlds) than there is with identifying individual
results in a genuinely branching universe: I just feed my electron into my
apparatus and say ''I wonder what the outcome of this measurement will
be.''
The reason it is easier to get worked up about the problem in a
genuinely branching universe is that measurement events in that setting
don't (in general) have unique outcomes: a single one has a diﬀerent result
at each post-measurement branch of the universe, and because each is
symmetrically related to the event itself, if there is more than one, there is
no way before branching of singling out any, that we may wonder of it,
what its outcome will be. I can stand in front of my Stern-Gerlach
apparatus, after having fed my electron in, and wonder de dicto whether
there will be a spin-up result, but I cannot wonder de re, of a particular
outcome, whether it will be spin-up, because I have no independent means
at my disposal, from that perspective, of picking it out. It is only by looking
back, after the fact, from a location in the universe that bears asymmetric
relations to the various results (all equally real, all reﬂexively actual) that I
16. Never mind, again, the diﬃcult question of what precisely measurements are, or when
precisely they can be said to have occurred.
17. Indeed, to identify any of the events in my own world, if each event in my world is
uniquely (spatiotemporally) related to every other, and none bears spatiotemporal relations
to events at other worlds.
784
jenann ismael

can single out those to which a particular set of Born probabilities attach. It
is only looking back that I can be surprised by the way things turned out in
my branch, because it is only from my post-measurement position that I
bear the outcomes of my branch the kinds of asymmetric relations that
allow me to make identifying reference to them.
There are two lessons concerning physics:
I. that probabilities in an Everett Universe have an implicit and inelim-
inable indexical component;18 this is not a surprise, but it is often
supposed that the index has to be a self, or a mind, or something that's
not already included in the description of the Everett Universe, and I
have argued that that is not necessary, and
II. that there is a kind of internal indeterminism that arises in the context
of deterministically evolving systems with symmetries of the right
sort. There is a local symmetry breaking that goes on in an Everett
universe every time a measurement is carried out that gives rise to
subsystems with identical histories and distinguishable futures.
There are alternative treatments and they should be noted. I mentioned
earlier that Finkelstein's quantum mechanical version of Bernoulli's
Theorem establishes a link between Born probabilities and relative
frequencies, and if we are willing to refrain from speaking of single-case
probability in the Everett universe, we can interpret Born probabilities as
limits of relative frequencies in the universe as a whole. Metaphysically the
resulting picture is van Fraassen's modal frequency interpretation with the
modalities realized physically in disconnected branches of the universe.
Alternatively, we can follow Lockwood and Deutsch, allow that there is a
plurality of branches in which every physically possible outcome of a
measurement is realized, and interpret the Born probability of a given
18. It wouldn't be quite right to describe them as de se, because that makes it sound like
they are questions about selves, or minds, and hence that if there were no observers in an
Everett universe, there would be nothing for the Born probabilities to attach to. It is true that
the questions to which I've suggested the probabilities provide answers can only be raised
from within the Everett universe, and it's also true that, if there were no observers in the
Everett universe, there would be no one to raise the questions to which they provide answers
(God, looking on from above, has answers to all of his questions, and there are none he can't
raise), but that doesn't make the questions about observers. It is also true, after all, that if
there were no minds around, there would be no one to raise questions about the feeding
habits of sea mollusks, but there is no interesting sense in which questions about the feeding
habits of mollusks are questions about observers. It is essential to understanding why no
humunculi are needed that the questions to which the Born probabilities provide answers are
not essentially questions about what I will see after the measurement is carried out, but
questions about what things look like from perspectives that can't be identiﬁed descriptively
before measurement.
785
chance and determinism

outcome as the measure of the set of world-histories extending forward in
time from the initial world-time-point in which the outcome in question is
realized.19
We don't get, in either case, single-case probabilities, we don't get
genuine uncertainty, and we don't get to the heart of the intuition that when
I'm standing there feeding my particle into my measuring device, or getting
ready to open Schrodinger's box, there is genuine suspense, something that
I'm waiting to ﬁnd out something I'm ignorant of, my complete knowledge
of how the future of the universe will unfold notwithstanding. It is this
powerful intuition that leads one to start talking about consciousnesses,
homunculi, or irreducible hacceities; it is this intuition that makes one want
to say things like; ''look, there is something I'm wondering about, and that
I'm using Born's probability to calculate the chance of. It's not any fact
about relative frequencies of this or that sort; I know all about those. What
I'm wondering is whether I will see a dead or live cat when Schrodinger's
box is opened, and no amount of objective knowledge is going to alleviate
my wondering. There are facts about what happens to me that are simply left
out of the description of the Schrodinger-evolving physical world, and they
are the subject matter of the Born probabilities.'' My suggestion acknowl-
edges the intuition, and, unlike the alternatives, it gets us genuine uncer-
tainty in a deterministic context, and it does so without recognizing non-
physical facts.
10. Wondering About the Future. There is another reason for addressing
the intuition; it is at least partly behind the persistent appeal of certain
recurrent philosophical views of the self. Consider the sequence of events
between the birth and death of an observer in an Everett Universe. From
the situated perspective of any temporal part of his life, it is determinate
what lies in his past, since there is a unique trajectory tracing it back to his
birth, but indeterminate what lies in his future. This is not because there is
any indeterminacy about the future state of the world, but because ''my'' in
his mouth, fails to pick out a unique future trajectory; his ''I''-thoughts fail
to bear the asymmetric relations to the future that they would need to in
order to get their referential hooks into any one.
Not only does the view seem to me coherent from a third person
perspective, I can also make psychological sense, from the inside, of living
in a world like that. I can imagine being one of the experimenters in such a
world preparing for a measurement, and then ﬁnding myself after the fact,
looking at its result at one or another of the post-measurement branches of
the world. And when I perform this imaginative feat, I ﬁnd that it is not
19. A model can be supplied by Giere 1976.
786
jenann ismael

diﬀerent, in any way I can discern, from what it is actually like in the
ordinary world when I perform a measurement with a chancy result and
await the outcome. But how can that be? The Everett universe contains no
humunculi, no transcendent subjects travelling one or another branch
through the universe, no indivisible selves extending into the future for
the ''I''s of the measurers to refer to, just observers that bear discriminating
causal and informational relations to certain past events. Each of them can
speak cogently of ''my past'' because there is a discriminating causal
pathway that leads from his present I-thoughts to past I-thoughts that
doesn't cut across personal boundaries, but there is no object (no body, no
humculus, no transcendent I) to which the various acts of situated self-
reference belong. There are just the acts, and the discriminating, backward-
looking causal relations that at once provide information about, and allow
each to make identifying reference to, the causal history of their own states
(the memories, beliefs, desires, and attitudes that are the inheritance of the
past), but nothing either in those states or in the big, wide world around
them that provides them with a referential grip on a particular future I-
thoughts.
If we do not live in an Everettian universe, and if there is not too much
amnesia, ﬁssion, or delusional memory in our world,20 there are discrim-
inating causal relations to future as well as past experiences, so the
problem of ontological indeterminateness does not arise. But since
information only propagates from the past to the future along those links,
psychologically and epistemologically, our position is indistinguishable
from that of the occupants of the Everett universe. When I use ''I'' to, e.g.,
make plans for the future, fear my death, anticipate pleasure, I use the ﬁrst
person pronoun in the same way that they do. And it is almost impossible
not to conceive of those plans, fears, anticipations as centering on a
transcendent object, for the same reason it is hard to resist the idea that the
only thing the Everettians could be wondering about, and using Born's rule
to calculate, is the post-measurement location of their irreducible me-ness.
''My future self,'' in my mouth, refers to I-know-not-who in the sense
that I can't produce an individuating conception or produce criteria of
identity. I entrust my beliefs, hopes, wishes, desires, to whomever will
inherit them, and I address that person in the ﬁrst person when I form plans
and projects. There are some things I can derive about that person from my
knowledge of causal laws (e.g., that she will have the same scars, that there
will be a continuous path from my spatiotemporal location to hers, and so
on). But no connection to a body, or continuity in content or qualitative
character of psychological states plays any role in identiﬁcation, and none
20. We can resolve the odd case by appeal to non-psychological criteria.
787
chance and determinism

is constitutive of identity over time. For I can imagine waking up tomor-
row in the body of my sister, or Napolean, or a cockroach, and I can ima-
gine that my thoughts and experiences begin to leap around as wildly as
you please, without contradicting myself in ascribing them to me. It is the
external, causal relations among my past and future states that make them
states of the same self.
This sort of Lockean position I have been sketching is a staple of the
literature on personal identity, and it has been developed into a quite psy-
chologically convincing portrait of thought about one's future self,21
faithful to the phenomenology of ﬁrst person thought.22 If it is correct, I
am suggesting that it contains an implicit diagnosis of the tendency to
think of oneself as a transcendent thing, in the grammatical illusion
fostered by the abuse of notation that allows ''I'' to function like a
singular term.23 There is no mystery about how ''I'' can be used to identify
and reidentify a psychological continuant without application of criteria of
identity; all that is required is reﬂexive identiﬁcation of the thought in
which a token of ''I'' occurs, coupled with the discriminating, causal rela-
tions that places those thoughts with others in a connected stream. But add
such a term to a psychological context in which information only pro-
pagates from past to future, permit the ordinarily harmless abuse of
notation, and it is almost psychologically irresistible to think that when
one is wondering about one's future, one must be wondering about a
special sort of object, a pure locus of mental life, whose past is known, but
whose future is open, unconstrained in any way by the ineluctable goings
on in the physical domain. It is the same illusion that encourages
the importation of homunculi into an Everett Universe; we get the idea
that there has to be something over and above the various acts of situated
self-reference that unites them and gives them a common subject matter,
some single thing that all of our thoughts and wonderings phrased in the
ﬁrst-person to be thoughts and wonderings about, some thing in the
Everett universe whose future the observers there are uncertain about.
This isn't the end of the story; the transcendent picture is too deeply
rooted to be traced to any one source. I believe that thinking oneself into an
Everett Universe is one way to loosen its grip on the imagination, and we
21. See, in particular, Velleman 1987.
22. If, that is, one lacks-like Hume-any direct intuition of a self distinct from the parade of
thoughts, experiences, and acts of situated self-reference that make up one's mental life.
23. The abuse is two-fold; ﬁrst, the expression itself is not a singular term, but a function
from contexts to extensions. Like other indexicals, it can function like a singular term only
relative to a ﬁxed context. Second, unlike other indexicals, the extension of ''I'' isn't an
object, since the parts of psychological continuants aren't related by an equivalence relation.
That is what is brought out so dramatically by the possibility of ﬁssion.
788
jenann ismael

should add it to the repertoire. Quite independently, I hope, I have shown
how to get real, single-case probabilities and Born-style uncertainty in a
deterministic setting, without adding anything non-physical to the universe.
11. The Preferred Basis Problem. The need to break the objective sym-
metry between diﬀerent ways of decomposing the universal psi-function to
extract an evolving tree-like universe (1, in the catalogue with which I
began), is another source of the tendency to add consciousness to the
Everett Universe, so I want to pause to say something about how this
might be done if one adopts the recommended treatment of 2. I think the
right strategy is to hold that there is no more an objectively preferred basis
than there is an objectively preferred moment that orders the parts of time
in a succession of incompatible McTaggartian A-series,' a moment whose
preferrability, that is to say, is itself is non-perspectival in the speciﬁc sense
that it is invariant under transformations between temporal perspectives, or
perhaps, any more than there is an objectively preferred position on your
family tree that determines the status of all others (who is mother, who is
father, who is cousin, and so on), a position whose preferrability is invariant
under transformations between positions.
The way to defend a consistent and thoroughgoing relationalism is not
to argue that there is no preferred way of decomposing the psi-function,
but to make the preferrability perspectival. One lets the situation of a
system, characterizable in invariant terms, but indiscernible from the in-
side24 supply a suppressed parameter that (in a manner appropriately
generalized from the spatial and temporal case) deﬁnes its perspective. It
is an open question what might serve as the relevant parameter, but so long
as there is something in the invariant quantum state of situated systems that
can play this role, there is enough structure already in an Everett universe
to renounce the demand for a distinguished basis. One holds that for the
quantity Q deﬁned by the informational states of a situated system (e.g., a
human brain, a measuring instrument), there is a basis whose preference is
determined by, and relativized to, Q, on precise analogy with the spatial
and temporal cases, but denies that there is any objective preference. This
locates the search for a preferred basis where it belongs (in the way Q is
situated in Hilbert space, in relation to other observables), and preserves
the symmetry of bases on the level of invariant description. It does demand
a generalization of the notion of a perspective beyond its ordinary
application, but it is one strikes me as entirely appropriate.
24. By deﬁnition, as it were, of 'situation', which refers to the external relations between an
informational state and the objects and events in the objective order, in virtue of which the
states carries the information that it does.
789
chance and determinism

Simon Saunders has been, if I understand him, an advocate of this kind
of view. It is much closer to the spirit of Everett's original paper than the
form it took in De Witt's hands.25 Supplemented with the proposed
treatment of 2, it provides a way of making use of structure that is already
in the physics to account for subjective features of experience and
combatting the tendency to introduce non-physical whatnots.
references
Giere, Ronald (1976), ''A Laplacean Formal Semantics for Single-Case Propensities'',
Journal of Philosophical Logic 5: 321-354.
Lockwood, Michael (1996), '''Many Minds' Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics'', Brit-
ish Journal for the Philosophy of Science 47: 159-188.
Loewer, Barry (1996) ''Comment on Lockwood'', British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 47: 229-32.
Saunders, Simon (1993), ''Decoherence, Relative States, and Evolutionary Adaptation''
Foundations of Physics 23: 1553-1585.
———(1995), ''Time, Quantum Mechanics, and Decoherence'', Synthese 102: 235-266.
———(1996a), ''Time, Quantum Mechanics, and Tense'', Synthese 107: 19-53.
———(1996b), ''Comment on Lockwood'', British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
47: 241-248.
Velleman, David (1987), ''Self to Self'', in Varieties of Practical Reason, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Zurek, Wojciech H. (1992), ''Quantum, Classical and Decoherence'', Los Alamos preprint.
25. Saunders 1996b, 1993. Saunders has also discussed the analogy with time in Saunders
1996a.
790
jenann ismael

