1 23
Synthese
An International Journal for
Epistemology, Methodology and
Philosophy of Science
 
ISSN 0039-7857
 
Synthese
DOI 10.1007/s11229-016-1201-2
Quantum holism: nonseparability as
common ground
Jenann Ismael & Jonathan Schaffer

1 23
Your article is protected by copyright and all
rights are held exclusively by Springer Science
+Business Media Dordrecht. This e-offprint
is for personal use only and shall not be self-
archived in electronic repositories. If you wish
to self-archive your article, please use the
accepted manuscript version for posting on
your own website. You may further deposit
the accepted manuscript version in any
repository, provided it is only made publicly
available 12 months after official publication
or later and provided acknowledgement is
given to the original source of publication
and a link is inserted to the published article
on Springer's website. The link must be
accompanied by the following text: "The final
publication is available at link.springer.com".

Synthese
DOI 10.1007/s11229-016-1201-2
S.I. THE METAPHYSICS OF ENTANGLEMENT
Quantum holism: nonseparability as common ground
Jenann Ismael1 · Jonathan Schaffer2
Received: 8 February 2016 / Accepted: 18 August 2016
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2016
Abstract Quantum mechanics seems to portray nature as nonseparable, in the sense
that it allows spatiotemporally separated entities to have states that cannot be fully
speciﬁed without reference to each other. This is often said to implicate some form of
"holism." We aim to clarify what this means, and why this seems plausible. Our core
idea is that the best explanation for nonseparability is a "common ground" explanation
(modeled after common cause explanations), which casts nonseparable entities in a
holistic light, as scattered reﬂections of a more uniﬁed underlying reality.
Keywords Entanglement · Non-separability · Grounding · Common ground ·
Holism · Monism
[T]hat which we conceive as existing ("actual") should somehow be localized
in time and space. That is, the real in one part of space, A, should (in theory)
somehow "exist" independently of that which is thought of as real in another
part of space, B. If a physical system stretches over parts of space A and B, then
what is present in B should somehow have an existence independent of what is
present in A. (Einstein to Max Born; quoted in Howard 1997, p. 121)
A human being is a part of the whole called by us "Universe", a part limited in
time and space. He experiences himself, his thoughts and feeling as something
separated from the rest—a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness. This
B Jonathan Schaffer
Jonathan.schaffer@rutgers.edu
Jenann Ismael
jtismael@email.arizona.edu
1
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA
2
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
delusion is a kind of prison for us,. . . (Einstein to Robert Marcus; quoted in
Sullivan 1972, p. 20)
1 Introduction
Quantum mechanics seems to portray nature as nonseparable. Roughly speaking, this
means that quantum mechanics seems to allow two entities—call them Alice and
Bob—to be in separate places, while being in states that cannot be fully speciﬁed
without reference to each other. Alice herself thus seems incomplete (and likewise
Bob), not an independent building block of reality, but perhaps at best a fragment of
the more complete composite Alice+Bob system (and ultimately a fragment of the
whole interconnected universe).
We propose to articulate a natural explanatory strategy for quantum nonsep-
arability via common ground. Common ground explanations are modeled after
common cause explanations. In a common cause explanation one ﬁnds a correla-
tion among events and infers the existence of a common cause. In a common ground
explanation one ﬁnds a connection between entities and infers the existence of a
common metaphysical ground, thereby viewing nonseparable entities (such as Alice
and Bob) in a holistic light, as scattered reﬂections of a more uniﬁed underlying
reality.
Quantum mechanics is often said to implicate some form of "holism." What are
we adding? We aim to make the inferential principles involved more explicit, through
our conception of common ground explanation. And we aim to make the holistic
conclusion more contentful, by exhibiting speciﬁc conceptions of what such a common
ground might be. In short, we aim to clarify both the rationale for and the meaning of
"quantum holism." We do not mean to say that an interpretation of quantum mechanics
must provide a holistic common ground explanation for nonseparability, but only to
say that interpretations that do so gain a respect of plausibility thereby. In this way we
hope to understand one of the many interpretive pressures that quantum mechanics
generates.
Discussions about the interpretation of quantum mechanics often focus on the
debate between "Everett," "Bohm," "GRW," and other rival versions of the mechan-
ics, each which is coupled with its own interpretive options. Where do we come
down? Our discussion crosscuts the usual taxonomy. For the nonseparability we
are concerned with is found in almost all of these rival versions of the mechan-
ics (arising for deep mathematical reasons, and receiving empirical conﬁrmation).
Rather we think that there is pressure towards certain sorts of interpretive options,
namely those that provide the kind of common ground explanation ﬁtting for
nonseparability.
Overview: In Sect. 2 we characterize and motivate common ground explanations.
In Sect. 3 we review the case of quantum nonseparability, and in Sect. 4 we con-
sider the prospects for and implications of a common ground explanation of quantum
nonseparability.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
2 Common ground explanation
We begin by articulating our notion of a common ground explanation. We describe
common cause explanation and common ground explanation in its image, and ulti-
mately seek to characterize and motivate a general rational inference principle, running
from correlations and connections to the existence of a common causal or metaphysical
source.
2.1 Common cause explanation
In accord with a rational principle of default reasoning, one should infer causation from
statistical correlation. If distinct events e1 and e2 are correlated, while one should not
infer that e1 causes e2, one should—rationally speaking, and all else equal—infer that
either e1 causes e2, or e2 causes e1, or e1 and e2 are joint effects of a common cause d:
Causal Inference: If distinct events e1 and e2 are statistically correlated, then
either (i) e1 causes e2, or (ii) e2 causes e1, or (iii) e1 and e2 are joint effects of
some common cause d.1
For instance, given that smoking and lung cancer are correlated, it is rational to infer
that either smoking causes lung cancer, or that lung cancer causes smoking, or that the
two are joint effects of some common factor such as a gene predisposing its bearers
to both. Otherwise the correlation is left as an inexplicable mystery.
Causal Inference is especially useful in cases in which some of the disjuncts of its
consequent can be ruled out. In the historically medically important case of smoking
and lung cancer, given the assumption that causes precede their effects, one can rule out
the prospect that lung cancer causes smoking. The absence of any known gene or other
common cause (or mechanism for such a common cause to operate) speaks against the
prospect of a common cause. And—most tellingly—the identiﬁcation of carcinogens
in cigarette smoke and the discovery of the mechanisms by which they operate strongly
favor the option of smoking causing lung cancer.2 It is Causal Inference that alerts the
rational inquirer to the likely presence of some causal connection involving smoking
and lung cancer, which decades of medical research went into detailing.
Or consider Reichenbach's hypothetical case of two lamps in a room going out at
exactly the same moment. In such a case, a very natural and plausible explanatory
thought is that there is a common cause. Thus Reichenbach (1956, p. 157; c.f. Hofer-
Szabó et al. 1999; Arntzenius 2010) writes:
1 Causal Inference is intended as a rational principle of default reasoning (likewise for all subsequent
principles marked 'Inference'), akin to the principle: "If a is a bird then a can ﬂy." Such principles need
not be perfect, and may only hold "all else equal." Rational principles of default reasoning are an important
topic in their own right (Koons 2013), but they are not our topic. For present purposes all that matters is
that Causal Inference, and our subsequent principles marked 'Inference' are good principles of scientiﬁc
inference. Whether that is a matter of rationality, or merely pragmatic, or something else entirely, is a side
issue.
2 For a detailed discussion of these mechanisms, see the Surgeon General's report issued by the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (2010).
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
In our daily life we often employ [common cause] inferences of this kind. Sup-
pose both lamps in a room go out suddenly. We regard it as improbable that by
chance both bulbs burned out at the same time, and look for a burned-out fuse
or some other interruption of the common power supply.
Or—to borrow another example from Reichenbach—imagine that two geysers repeat-
edly erupt at the same time. A very natural explanatory thought is that these eruptions
have a common cause, and that the two geysers might actually share a single subter-
ranean source. On this basis, Reichenbach (1956, p. 157) concludes: "If an improbable
coincidence has occurred, there must exist a common cause." Understanding this
'must' in terms of rational default reasoning yields:
Reichenbach's Inference: If distinct events e1 and e2 are correlated and simul-
taneous, then e1 and e2 are joint effects of some common cause d.
Reichenbach's Inference follows from Causal Inference on the assumption that causes
must precede their effects (or at least that causes cannot be simultaneous with their
effects). For if distinct events e1 and e2 are correlated then Causal Inference yields
three options, and if e1 and e2 are simultaneous then—assuming that simultaneous
events cannot be causally related—one can rule out the ﬁrst two options.3 But Causal
Inference is more general. Where distinct events e1 and e2 are correlated, one might
be able to rule out the prospect that e1 causes e2 or that e2 causes e1 (leaving only the
common cause hypothesis standing) for reasons other than temporal reasons. Also one
may still use Causal Inference in contexts in which simultaneous causation is being
considered.
AnimportantfeatureofCausalInference(alsofoundwithReichenbach'sInference)
is that it allows one to go from two observed events (e1 and e2), to the prospect of an
inferred third event (d) as their common cause. In so doing it underwrites as rational
a speciﬁc sort of inference to the best explanation for the presence of potentially
unobserved structure, namely a common cause inferred to explain the correlation.
We should emphasize that Causal Inference is a good but perhaps imperfect maxim.
The correlation involved may in the end be pure coincidence (though repeated obser-
vation of correlations of this type may make one ever more conﬁdent that the matter
is not coincidental). There may be other ways in which correlations can be sustained.
For instance, Sober (1988) considers the correlation between the price of bread in
Britain and the water levels in Venice (both having been rising), and suggests that the
correlation occurs because structurally similar laws of evolution happen to prevail in
both domains. Most relevantly for present purposes, quantum nonseparability seems
to involve a kind of correlation for which Causal Inference fails (Van Fraassen 1980,
p. 29). (We agree, but are in the process of detailing a more general principle which
does extend to the quantum domain.)
But what is relevant at this stage of the discussion is simply that Causal Inference
is a good maxim. Its exceptions are few and its power is vast. If one ﬁnds that distinct
3 AsHofer-Szabóetal.(1999,p.378;c.f.Arntzenius2010)write:"Reichenbach'sCommonCausePrinciple
is the claim that if there is a correlation between two events A and B and a direct causal connection between
the correlated events is excluded then there exists a common cause of the correlation..."
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
events e1 and e2 are correlated but that neither causes the other (like the two lamps
that go out at the same time), then one should—all else equal—rationally infer the
presence of a common cause. A theory that attributes a common cause in such cases
gains a respect of plausibility thereby.
2.2 Common ground explanation
Just as common cause explanations allow one to go from two statistically correlated
events to the prospect of an inferred common cause, so there is an analogous form of
explanation—common ground explanation—which allow one to go from two modally
connected entities to the prospect of an inferred common metaphysical ground. Com-
mon ground explanation has much the same structure, and enjoys much the same
motivation, as common cause explanation.
2.2.1 Grounding
We distinguish the fundamental from the derivative. In doing so we follow the tradition
of thinking that all sorts of things exist, from particles to pebbles to planets, but that
some are more fundamental than others. Moreover, the less fundamental entities are in
some sense grounded in (or derivative from) the more fundamental entities. Grounding
is thus a metaphysical relation characterizing the connection from the more to the less
fundamental entities.
The notion of grounding we have in mind is a notion akin to "metaphysical causa-
tion" (Schaffer 2016, 2012, p. 122; c.f. Sider 2011, p. 145; Fine 2012, p. 40). Crudely
speaking, just as one can think of causation as driving the world through time from
the earlier to the later, so one can think of grounding as driving the world through
levels from the deeper to the shallower. For instance, consider some chemicals that
comprise a cat. The chemicals and the cat all exist, but the chemicals are each more
fundamental than the cat (in general the chemical level is more fundamental than the
biological level), and moreover the chemicals are each connected to the cat in the
distinctive way that the more fundamental is connected to the less fundamental. In
short, each chemical partly grounds the cat.
Just as causal relations back causal explanations, so grounding relations back meta-
physical explanations. If one wanted to know why there was a cat afoot, one sort of
perfectly good explanation would cite one or more causes of the cat's presence (e.g.
because we brought the cat home yesterday). But another sort of perfectly good expla-
nation would cite one or more grounds of the cat's presence (e.g. because there are
these chemicals arranged in these ways). Causation and grounding are both asymmet-
ric dependency relations with the distinctive power to back explanations.
2.2.2 Common ground explanation
Just as there are common cause explanations, so there are common ground expla-
nations. These arise when a single more fundamental entity gives rise to multiple
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
correlated less fundamental entities. For instance, consider two things with a common
part, such as two circles A and B with a lens of overlap:
Assuming that parts ground wholes, A and B have a common partial ground in their
common parts. It is thus not so surprising that A and B exhibit modal connections. For
instance, if A had been shaded then B would have been partially shaded too:
A
B
(Contrast this with the case of two non-overlapping circles which presumably can be
colored independently.)
For another example, consider again the various chemicals c1-cn that comprise the
cat, and that also serve as the members of the set {c1, . . . , cn}.4 It is plausible to think
that the cat and the set have n-many partial common grounds in the chemicals. It is
thus not so surprising that the cat and the set exhibit modal connections. For instance,
if none of the members of the set existed then the cat would not exist either. (Contrast
this with the case of the cat and the set {Socrates} which presumably are independent.)
For one last example, consider some true proposition p, in relation to the proposi-
tions ∼∼p and p ∨q. It is plausible to think that the truth of ∼∼p and of p ∨q
is partially grounded in the truth of p. It is thus not so surprising that the truth values
of ∼∼p and of p ∨q exhibit modal connections. For instance, if ∼∼p were true
then p ∨q would also be true. (Contrast this with the case of two atomic propositions
which are independent in truth value.)
Just as there are natural and familiar inferences to common causes as the best
explanations of statistical correlations, so there are natural and familiar inferences to
common grounds as the best explanations of modal connections. Consider the fact
that Jenann has a friend who lives in Chapel Hill, is a philosophy professor, and has a
black belt in tae-kwon-do, and the fact that Jonathan has a friend who lives in Chapel
Hill, is a philosophy professor, and has a black belt in tae-kwon-do. Suppose moreover
that these facts about Jenann and about Jonathan are modally connected. For instance,
if Jenann's friend were to leave Chapel Hill for a lucrative career directing vampire
movies, then Jonathan's friend would leave Chapel Hill for a lucrative career directing
vampire movies. A very natural thought is that Jenann and Jonathan probably have
a common friend. Facts about this friend serve as a common partial ground for the
respective facts about Jenann and Jonathan.
In these cases of inferences to a common ground, one starts with some collection
of entities for which there may at ﬁrst be no recognized connections (the matter may
still be open—for instance, Jenann and Jonathan may not yet know if they have a
common friend or not). One then uses modal constraints on mutual variation to reveal
4 We follow Fine (1994, p. 271) in holding that nonempty sets are dependent on their members.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
that some of these entities are not entirely distinct existences, but in fact involve some
underlying shared portion of reality (the common friend).
Just as common cause inferences play a crucial role in science, so common ground
inferences play a crucial—and perhaps even more fundamental—role in science.
The search for "the basic building blocks of nature" is a search for the fundamental
substructure that grounds all else, and whose combinations correspond to what is meta-
physically possible for a given collection of fundamental individuals displaying a ﬁxed
range of quantities and standing in a ﬁxed range of relations.5 The epistemic setting in
which theorizing about the fundamental structure of the world occurs is not unlike the
setting in which Jenann and Jonathan try to ﬁgure out if they have a common friend.
Or, to use an example made famous by David Lewis, physicists are in many respects
like detectives investigating a spate of crimes. The detectives might have a glove from
one crime scene, a footprint from another, and a knife from a third. They need to
ﬁgure out whether these clues lead to a single culprit or many, and what the culprit
or culprits are like. The kinds of clues they look for are not just similarities between
their criminals (such as the same shoe size, and the same brand of cigarettes), but
covariation of their state dependent properties. If the perpetrator of crime number one,
for example shows up randomly in various places around the country, but wherever
he or she is, the perpetrator of crime number two never shows up simultaneously in a
different place, then that is a clue that they may be one and the same. Physicists face
the same kind of inferential task in interpreting the results of various measurements.
They need to ﬁgure out whether various clues lead to a single fundamental entity or
many, and what the fundamental entity or entities are like.
For a historical example of a common ground explanation in the sciences, thermo-
dynamics posits a nomic correlation between the pressure, temperature, and volume
displayed by an ideal gas (as codiﬁed in the Boyle-Charles Law) at a given time. Why
are these quantities correlated? The common ground explanation—as detailed by the
kinetic theory of gasses—is that these quantities are the joint manifestations of a single
underlying phenomenon, namely that of molecular motion.
2.2.3 Grounding inferences
We thus suggest a defeasible inferential principle structurally analogous to Causal
Inference:
Grounding Inference: If non-identical entities a and b are modally connected,
then either (i) a grounds b, or (ii) b grounds a, or (iii) a and b are joint results
of some common ground c.
5 On this combinatorial way of thinking, basic objects are treated as independently varying elements. Their
quantities are treated as dimensions along which they vary internally, and their relations are treated as
degrees of freedom in the conﬁgurations they can assume. This yields a space of ways a world can be built,
from a given collection of individuals displaying a ﬁxed range of quantities and standing in a ﬁxed range
of relations. To yield a full notion of metaphysical possibility the approach then needs to be generalized
to allow for variation in the individuals, quantities, and relations found in a world. What is metaphysically
impossible, in this sense, is what is not constructively possible. Independent variation of objects with a
common ground turns out to be metaphysically impossible for the same reason that independent variation
of the facts about Jenann's friend and about Jonathan's friend is metaphysically impossible.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
The cat and the set of chemicals are non-identical but modally connected, and so it is
rational to infer that either the cat grounds the set, the set grounds the cat, or (as is most
plausible in this case) that the two are the joint outcroppings of some common ground,
namely the chemicals. Otherwise the correlation is left as an inexplicable mystery.
We should explain how Causal Inference and Grounding Inference ﬁt together in the
case where they both apply, namely the case of non-identical events. Causal Inference
is only operative when the events in play are distinct (since causation can only relate
distinct events). Yet it was never veryclear exactlywhat 'distinct' means inthis context.
We suggest a metaphysical reading of the notion as saying that the two entities are nei-
ther identical nor connected by grounding (neither grounds the other, nor do they have
a common ground). Metaphysically, distinct entities are wholly separable portions
of reality, with no common roots.6 Grounding Inference can then be seen as related
to Hume's (1978, pp. 86-87) ban on necessary connections between distinct exis-
tences. Thus consider the following very weak—and not very controversial—reading
of Hume's claim, which holds merely that it is default rational to reject necessary
connections between distinct existences:
Hume's Inference: If entities a and b are necessarily connected, then a and b are
not distinct existences.
Hume's Inference follow from Grounding Inference on the reading of 'distinct' as
neither identical nor connected by grounding (in any of the three ways Grounding
Inference allows). For if entities a and b are necessarily connected then Grounding
Inference yields four options: either a and b are identical or they are grounding con-
nected in one of three ways. On every option one can conclude that a and b are not
distinct existences in the relevant sense.
An important feature of Grounding Inference (also found with Hume's Inference)
is that it allows one to go from two observed entities (a and b), to the prospect of an
inferred third entity (c) as their common ground. In so doing it underwrites as rational
a speciﬁc sort of inference to the best explanation for the presence of potentially
unobserved structure, namely a common ground as the explanation for the modal
connection. (We are recommending this inference in the quantum domain.)
We should clarify that Grounding Inference is a good but perhaps imperfect maxim.
For all we have said, the modal connection involved may ultimately be brute. We have
not argued that this is impossible.7 But what is relevant at this stage of the discussion
6 Wilson (2010, p. 601) suggests that two notions of distinctness have been conﬂated in the literature:
nonidentity, and the capacity for either entity to exist without the other. We are suggesting a third sense
of the notion, in grounding-theoretic terms. Our notion of distinctness may not be so far from what Hume
himself (1978, p. 634) had in mind:
Whatever is distinct, is distinguishable; and whatever is distinguishable, is separable by the thought
or imagination. All perceptions are distinct. They are, therefore, distinguishable and separable, and
may be conceiv'd as separately existent, and may exist separately, without any contradiction or
absurdity.
7 We allow that brute necessary connections are intelligible in a setting in which we have already formed
clear and distinct ideas of objects a and b. For then we can conceive of absolute constraints on their
covariation by imaginatively imposing a brute metaphysical restriction on their covariation on top of these
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
is simply that Grounding Inference is a good maxim. If one ﬁnds that non-identical
entities a and b are modally connected but such that neither grounds the other, then one
should—all else equal—rationally infer the presence of a common ground. A theory
that attributes a common ground to such entities gains a respect of plausibility thereby.
Grounding Inference simply says that all else being equal, in the kind of epistemic
setting in which we have no direct access to the grounding substructure of a collection
of objects, a theory that explains constraints on their modal covariation by reference to
a common ground is better than one that regards it as a brute modal connection between
distinct existences. If one looks at any theory that gives a non-trivial account of what
the fundamental entities are (i.e., if it says that not everything is fundamental), some
constraints on mutual variation of non-fundamental entities in the world will turn out to
be emergent from grounding substructure. Grounding Inference expresses a preference
for theories that trace modal connections to common grounds over ones that don't.
We think of Grounding Inference as deepening and cohering well with Hume's
Inference. It is because necessary connections suggest a grounding connection that
positing brute necessary connections without any metaphysical explanation seems
mysterious, in many ways analogous to positing brute correlations between events
without any causal explanation. We likewise think of Grounding Inference as a nat-
ural analogue to Causal Inference, and as logically independent from but deepening
and cohering well with principles of causal reasoning. Overall we take the combina-
tion of Causal Inference, Reichenbach's Inference, Grounding Inference, and Hume's
Inference to form a plausible and elegant package of rational principles.
2.3 Common source explanation
Common cause explanation and common ground explanation clearly have much in
common. We speculate that both may be understood as species of a common genus,
namely that of common source (or organic) explanation. The differentiae of common
source explanation are the more speciﬁc generative relations, namely causation and
grounding. Common source explanation is a uniﬁed way of explaining an otherwise
mysteriousmodalconnection.Whenthereisamodalconnection,itisgenerallyrational
(all else equal) to infer a common source that generates the connected outcomes,
whether the source generates the connected outcomes via causation or grounding.
Indeed in the speciﬁc case where the entities a and b are non-identical events, and
the statistical correlations involved are not merely coincidental but modally robust,
one can combine Causal Inference and Grounding Inference to reach:
Source Inference: If non-identical events a and b are modally connected, then
either (1) a and b are grounding-connected (/non-distinct), in that either (i) a
grounds b, or (ii) b grounds a, or (iii) a and b are joint results of some common
Footnote 7 continued
preconceived objects. We leave open, however, whether it is possible to form clear and distinct ideas of
objects that we cannot discriminate by their observable effects or otherwise preconceive, as is standard with
the posits of physics. For a general discussion of the role of modality in an empiricist setting, see Ismael
(manuscript-a).
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
ground c; or (2) a and b are (distinct but) causally connected, in that either (i)
a causes b, or (ii) b causes a, or (iii) a and b are joint effects of some common
cause c.
The unity of common source explanation is exhibited through the existence of uniﬁed
inferential principles such as Source Inference.8
Source Inference is a useful principle of default reasoning for when one ﬁnds non-
identical modally connected events, but does not yet know if they should count as
distinct or not. This is indeed the characteristic predicament of the physicist, whose
connection to unobservable beables is always mediated by measurement and other
manifestations, and who is seeking to ﬁnd underlying unities behind connected phe-
nomena. Given Source Inference one can use the absence of a causal connection to
infer the presence of a grounding connection, and possibly even the presence of a
common ground c. (We apply this idea to quantum nonseparability, in order to exhibit
the interpretive pressure towards holism via a common ground explanation.)
In speaking of Source Inference—and our other principles—as useful principles
of default reasoning we make a fairly minimal and somewhat vague claim. We do
not claim that things must be as our inferential principles say it is default rational
to think, and we do not say anything about the degree to which it is default rational
to think in these ways, or how easily these defaults may be overridden. Rather we
leave these matters open. We leave these matters open in part because we ﬁnd it
hard to decide these matters in a principled way, and in part so that we can try to
understand certain disagreements over the best interpretation of quantum mechanics
in terms of an underlying dispute over the strength of the interpretive pressure toward
common source explanation. Part of the point of identifying interpretive pressures is
to understand how one might resist them.
3 Quantum nonseparability
Where we are: We think that there is a natural and plausible general style of common
source explanation, which includes both common cause and common ground expla-
nations as species, and which includes our principle Source Inference (Sect. 2). Where
we are going: Quantum mechanics seems to portray nature as nonseparable, positing
non-identical but modally connected events. Quantum mechanics is thus a setting in
which Source Inference provides rational guidance.
3.1 From entanglement to nonseparability
Textbook non-relativistic quantum mechanics has a fairly standard formulation, which
provides amathematicallypreciseand—tothebest of current knowledge—empirically
8 There is a difﬁcult background issue lurking, concerning when a given notion (such as our notion of
"common source explanation") should be regarded as generally uniﬁed, or perhaps uniﬁed just by analogy,
or perhaps uniﬁed purely nominally. We think that common source explanation is generally uniﬁed, but
strictly speaking we only require the claim that Source Inference is a default rational explanatory approach.
For more on the systematic analogy between causation and grounding, see Schaffer (2016).
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
accurate algorithm for calculating the probabilities of observables. The quantum for-
malism includes rules for assigning quantum states to simple and complex systems,
rules for evolving quantum states through time (Schrödinger's Equation), and rules
for assigning probabilities to observables on the basis of the quantum state (Born's
Rule).
What the formalism means is subject to ongoing debate, and indeed several "inter-
pretations" of quantum mechanics would revise the rules for evolving quantum states
through time (for instance, Everettians would work with Schrödinger's Equation just
as given, Bohmians would add a Guidance Equation, and GRW fans would replace
Schrödinger's equation with a probabilistic equation that can undergo collapse). These
revisions in turn give rise to further interpretive options. We are mainly focused on
the synchronic rules for assigning quantum states to simple and complex systems, and
what we have to say is for the most part neutral on the accompanying dynamics, so
we will use 'quantum mechanics' to refer to the quantum formalism, leaving matters
of interpretation (and potential revisions to the dynamics) open to the extent possible.
3.1.1 Entanglement
The quantum formalism includes rules for assigning quantum states not just to simple
systems but also to complex systems such as a pair of particles, an object system and
a measuring apparatus, or an observer and her physical environment. These quan-
tum states are what then get fed into the dynamics (Schrödinger's Equation, or some
descendant), and what then get used to derive probabilities of observables (Born's
Rule). The quantum state-spaces for complex systems allow for entangled states,
which are states for the whole that cannot be reduced to states for the multiple com-
ponents.9 The components of a system in an entangled state behave in ways that are
individually unpredictable, but jointly constrained so that it is possible to forecast with
certainty how one component will behave, given information about the measurements
carried out on the other(s).
The type of coordinated randomness borne by the spatially separated components of
a system in an entangled state is not just a straightforward mathematical consequence
of the quantum formalism, but moreover is itself an empirically veriﬁed phenom-
enon (Aspect et al. 1982). The difﬁculties only arise in trying to arrive at a physical
understanding of how entangled components manage to exhibit such coordinated ran-
domness.
Because the EPR (Einstein et al. 1935) thought experiment is so familiar, we use it to
illustrate entanglement. In Bohm's (1951) version of EPR, two x-spin 1/2 particles—
Alice and Bob—are prepared together in a joint state in which the total x-spin of the
system is 0. Written in the basis of x-spin, the state of the system is:
Singlet : |⟩Alice,Bob = 1/√2[(|↑⟩Alice + |↓⟩Bob) −(|↓⟩Alice + |↑⟩Bob)]
9 The mathematical objects that represent the reduced states of the multiple components do not in general
uniquely determine the state of a whole system in an entangled state, but are instead compatible with
multiple states of the whole.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
In words, Singlet is an equally weighted superposition of (i) Alice being x-spin up
but Bob x-spin down, and (ii) Bob being x-spin up but Alice x-spin down.10
Alice and Bob are then ﬁred off to arbitrarily distant measuring apparatuses set
up, after they are ﬁred off, to measure spin in the x-direction. By Born's Rule the
pre-measurement probability distribution over possible outcomes is:
Pr(Alice measures out at x-spin up) = .5
Pr(Alice measures out at x-spin down) = .5
Pr(Bob measures out at x-spin up) = .5
Pr(Bob measures out at x-spin down) = .5
The joint state of Singlet, however, yields a probability 1 that the total x-spin of
the system is zero, so if Alice measures x-spin up, the formalism predicts that Bob
measures x-spin down (likewise if Alice measures x-spin down, the formalism predicts
thatBobmeasures x-spinup).Sothejointprobabilitydistributionsarenotasonewould
expect from thinking of Alice and Bob as independent (which would be .25 for each
option below) but are rather:
Pr(Alice measures out at x-spin up & Bob measures out at x-spin up) = 0
Pr(Alice measures out at x-spin up & Bob measures out at x-spin down) = .5
Pr(Alice measures out at x-spin down & Bob measures out at x-spin up) = .5
Pr(Alice measures out at x-spin down & Bob measures out at x-spin down) = 0
The difﬁculty is to understand how Alice and Bob engage in this coordinated random-
ness. How do they "know" not to both measure out at spin-up, and not to both measure
out at spin-down?
3.1.2 Incompleteness and nonlocality
It is now standard to distinguish three related physical principles that might be thought
to lie behind the phenomenon of quantum entanglement: incompleteness, nonlocality,
and nonseparability. For present purposes we are going to assume that nonseparabil-
ity is the correct principle (Sect. 3.1.3). But we pause to explain why we consider
this a plausible assumption, by explaining why incompleteness and nonlocality seem
implausible.
Incompleteness—which Einstein, Podolsky & Rosen took to be the moral of their
thought experiment—makes two main claims, the ﬁrst of which is:
10 Singlet is what one predicts if an excited hydrogen molecule with x-spin 0 decays into a pair of hydrogen
atoms. By conservation of angular momentum the total x-spin of the pair of atoms must be 0. (Also, by
conservation of momentum, the two atoms must head in opposite directions.) Such entangled (or non-
factorizable) states are mathematically permitted in quantum mechanics, since not every vector in the
Hilbert space can be written as the tensor product of arbitrary basis vectors. Indeed there is reason to think
that entangled states are generic in quantum mechanics, and that any plurality of particles whatsoever will
be in an entangled state.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
Incompleteness1: The components of entangled systems have deﬁnite intrin-
sic states all along, which are merely not fully encoded in their quantum state
description.
By Incompleteness1, Alice and Bob have deﬁnite and opposing x-spins the whole
time, which are merely not stated in Singlet. These are "hidden variables." The second
main claim of incompleteness is:
Incompleteness2: If the intrinsic state of a component of an entangled system
were described completely, such a complete description would screen off infor-
mation provided by measurements on the other components, at which point the
"entanglement" would be eliminable.
By Incompleteness2, a complete description of either Alice's or Bob's intrinsic state
would erase their coordination. So the idea is that the seeming coordinated randomness
of the components of entangled system is just an artifact of—and perhaps even a sign
of—their underdescription in terms of their quantum states.
Incompleteness is implausible because both of the two main claims of incomplete-
ness have run up against powerful "no-go" theorems. Incompleteness1 runs up against
the theorems of Gleason (1957) and Kochen and Specker (1967), which show that a
hidden variable theory cannot consistently assign values to all quantum observables
at all times. So the ﬁrst main claim of incompleteness appears to be ruled out on
mathematical grounds.11
Incompleteness2 runs up against Bell's (1964) Theorem, which shows that no
hidden variable theory can match the statistical predictions of quantum mechanics,
without positing some sort of superluminal signaling or some form of non-local inﬂu-
ence. Bell (1981) shows that one can derive certain inequalities from just the premises
of locality (understood in terms of a "screening-off" condition), and of the indepen-
dence of the state of the whole system on the type of measurement to be performed.
These inequalities are violated by the quantum statistics, and this violation has since
been empirically conﬁrmed (Aspect et al. 1982).
So the second main claim of incompleteness appears to be ruled out on empirical
grounds. There is no way of ﬁlling in the intrinsic state of the components at the
source in a way that would screen off the information provided by results on the
other component (assuming no prior knowledge of which measurement would be
performed). Though it might be natural to imagine that Alice and Bob were each
born (from the excited hydrogen molecule with x-spin 0 that decayed into them both)
11 There is an escape clause: strictly speaking the Kochen-Specker Theorem only applies to noncontextual
hidden variable theories, where a noncontextual theory is one on which the value of a given observable
is independent of which other observables happen to be measured along with it, or the disposition of the
device used to measure it. One might still adopt a contextual hidden variable theory. But noncontextuality is
a deep principle in quantum mechanics, connected to the standard principles of individuation for quantum
observables. So while denying noncontextuality is a formal possibility, the option has found few defenders,
and there is little in the way of a clear positive proposal for a contextual hidden variable theory. See Shimony
(1984) and Cabello (1997) for some further discussion.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
with deﬁnite and opposing x-spin values, such a picture conﬂicts with the empirically
conﬁrmed quantum statistics.12
In the wake of these theorems, it is widely accepted that a hidden variable approach
must accept nonlocality, in the sense of some sort of superluminal inﬂuence, as per:
Nonlocality: The measure result on some component(s) of an entangled sys-
tem causes the other component(s) (no matter how far distant) to go into the
coordinated state.
So for instance if Alice measures out at x-spin up, Nonlocality has it that this causes
Bob (no matter how far away he is from Alice) to come into the state of being x-spin
down. Bell (1964, p. 199) himself concluded that a hidden variables approach must
posit instantaneous causation:
In a theory in which parameters are added to quantum mechanics to determine the
results of individual measurements, without changing the statistical predictions,
there must be a mechanism whereby the setting of one measuring device can
inﬂuence the reading of another instrument, however remote. Moreover, the
signal involved must propagate instantaneously, so that a theory could not be
Lorentz invariant.
But there is also an option of positing backwards causation, on which the later mea-
surement outcome causes the prior states of Alice and Bob.13 The details of a nonlocal
causal story need not concern us here.
It is implausible to posit instantaneous causation because such inﬂuences would
need to propagate in a preferred reference frame, which looks to violate the spirit
if not the letter of relativity. Though we are working within nonrelativistic quantum
mechanics, presumably one should want an interpretation that is not essentially tied
to the limitations of a given framework.14 It is also implausible to posit backwards
causation, if only because there is no prior or independent evidence for such fanciful
behavior in nature.
There is a deeper implausibility to both incompleteness and nonlocality: both are
ways of denying that the quantum state provides a complete description of systems,
differing only in whether the additional "hidden variables" posited operate locally
or not. But the quantum states of systems are all that is needed for the formalism,
and for all of the empirical success that quantum mechanics enjoys. So—while we
make no pretense of having "ruled out" nonlocality—there is underlying pressure
(from parsimony) to treat the quantum state description as complete if possible, since
nothing else seems needed empirically.
12 For a useful overview of Bell's Theorem and surrounding issues, see Shimony (2009).
13 In this vein, Cramer (1986) develops a "transactional" interpretation on which the measurement outcome
sends a backwards propagating absorber wave ("the conﬁrmation wave"), which interacts with a forward
propagating emission wave ("the offer wave") at the start of the experiment, to form a standing wave
between the start of the experiment and the site of measurement. For further discussion of the transactional
interpretation see Wharton (2010), Kastner (2013), and Wharton and Price (2013).
14 See Maudlin (2002) for a detailed discussion of the interaction between quantum nonlocality and rela-
tivity.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
3.1.3 Nonseparability
As a working assumption, we adopt the view—which we take to be the dominant view
nowadays—that what lies behind quantum entanglement is neither incompleteness
nor nonlocality, but instead nonseparability. Nonseparability says that the coordinated
randomness of entangled systems corresponds to a failure of mereological superve-
nience.15 The whole system has an intrinsic state that fails to supervene on the intrinsic
states of its proper parts plus their spatial relations. Focusing on pairs of objects for
simplicity:
Nonseparability: Entities a and b are nonseparable if and only if ﬁxing the
intrinsic state of a, the intrinsic state of b, and the spatial relations between a
and b fails to ﬁx the intrinsic state of a + b.
So the idea behind nonseparability is that the composite Alice+Bob system hosts
further information (given in Singlet) than can be found in Alice or in Bob individually
(or in their spatial relations). One may glimpse something holistic in this idea: the
whole system seems to be "more than the sum of its parts."16
With nonseparability one gives up on the idea of a hidden variable approach alto-
gether, and accepts the quantum state as saying all there is to say about the relevant
matters. For instance, all there is to say about the pre-measurement x-spins of Alice
and Bob is what Singlet says. There is something very plausible about this approach,
at least vis-à-vis interpreting the quantum formalism: one tries to take the ingredients
at face value as fully describing reality.
So we take it as given that quantum mechanics portrays nature as nonseparable. We
do not take incompleteness or nonlocality to be ruled out but simply cannot discuss
these options further here. We are primarily interested in what nonseparability would
suggest for a physical understanding of the theory. Given that all there is to say about
the pre-measurement x-spins of Alice and Bob is what Singlet says, how can one
explain what Alice does and what Bob does? (Even the most ardent denier about
nonseparability should be interested in that question, if only to understand what she
would reject.)
15 Caveat: the term 'nonseparable' gets used in many different ways in the literature. See Healey (2008)
for an excellent guide. Our non-relativistic usage corresponds to Healey's (2008, Sect. 6) notion of "spatial
separability."
16 In this vein d'Espagnat (1979, p. 181) concludes: "Most particles or aggregates of particles that are
ordinarily regarded as separate objects have interacted at some time in the past with other objects. The
violation of separability seems to imply that in some sense all these objects con-stitute an indivisible
whole." Likewise Maudlin (1998, p. 56) says: "The physical state of a complex whole cannot always be
reduced to those of its parts, or to those of its parts together with their spatiotemporal relations... The result
of the most intensive scientiﬁc investigations in history is a theory that contains an ineliminable holism."
And to add just one more of the many examples which could be given, Gisin and Aspect (2014, p. 43; in a
section entitled "Quantum Holism") write: "Roughly speaking, the strange theory of quantum physics tells
us that it is possible and even commonplace for two widely separated objects in space to form in reality a
single entity! And that's entanglement. If we then prod one of the two parts, both will quiver."
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
3.2 From nonseparability to modal connection
Quantum mechanics seems to portray nature as nonseparable (Sect. 3.1). We now
add: nonseparability yields modally connected non-identical events, in a manner that
invites the application of Source Inference (Sect. 2.3). Suppose that Alice measures
in at x-spin up. Then the modally connected non-identical events are Alice-up, which
is the event of Alice's measuring x-spin up, and Bob-down, which is the event of
Bob's measuring x-spin down. (Had Alice measured in at x-spin down the relevant
events would be Alice-down and Bob-up—understood in the obvious ways—and all
our crucial points would still apply.)
Given Singlet, Alice-up and Bob-down are connected events. Indeed given Singlet
these events are perfectly correlated. Given that Alice and Bob were in Singlet and
that Alice-up occurred, it is certain that Bob-down occurred as well. Moreover—and
crucially for our purposes—Alice-up and Bob-down are modally connected. Indeed
given Singlet neither can occur without the other. Given that Alice and Bob are in
Singlet, the following conditionals hold: If Alice-up occurs, then Bob-down occurs;
and also if Alice-down occurs, then Bob-up occurs. Thus we have:
Quantum Connection: In a nonseparable quantum system, non-identical events
a and b are modally connected.17
What explains Quantum Connection? Alice and Bob are in some ways like distant
lamps, where the one showing "up" is immediately and robustly correlated with the
other showing "down," and moreover where this connection extends counterfactually.
What explains this modal connection? Is it just a brutely mysterious modal link, or
can it somehow be explained by a common source?
3.3 Who cares?
We are operating with the state descriptions given by the formalism of standard nonrel-
ativistic quantum mechanics. But we have been operating so far without a developed
interpretation of the formalism (as is only ﬁtting, since we are looking for interpretive
pressures coming out of the formalism). And this formalism itself is clearly provi-
sional, and should presumably give way to relativistic quantum ﬁeld theories, which
themselves will likely be succeeded by a theory of quantum gravity whose structure
is not currently known. So, putting these together, we are discussing aspects of a
formalism that is both uninterpreted and provisional. What is the interest in that?
We think that this exercise is interesting in at least two ways. First of all, we think
that the core phenomena of entanglement—what Schrödinger (1935, p. 555) called
"not one but rather the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics"—is likely to persist
in successor frameworks. As d'Espagnat (1973, p. 734) comments: "[W]e may safely
17 In what follows we move back and forth between object talk (Alice and Bob) and event talk (Alice-up
and Bob-down). Our underlying view is that the events are not distinct precisely because the objects they
involve are not distinct. Just as the event of Jenann's friend riding a horse is not distinct from the event of
Jonathan's friend riding a horse if there is a single common friend, so the event of Alice-up is not distinct
form the event of Bob-down if Alice and Bob themselves spring from a common ground.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
say that non-separability is now one of the most certain general concepts in physics."
Indeed, though the interpretive problems are transformed somewhat in the context
of quantum ﬁeld theories, entanglement—and the associated theoretical options of
noncontextuality, nonlocality, or nonseparability—looks to remain in place.18
Secondly, this sort of interpretive exercise can still serve as a useful guide both in
interpreting the formalism we have and arriving at a successor. Whether or not entan-
glement persists in physical theorizing, we proceed in the spirit of trying to identify
the interpretive pressures it creates. Perhaps all one can do at this stage of physical
knowledge is to issue something in the spirit of "prolegomena to any future philoso-
phy of physics." These prolegomena may include the identiﬁcation of which aspects
of current physics create which interpretive pressures. We think that entanglement—
understood via Nonseparability, in ways that lead to Quantum Connection—creates
interpretive pressure to identify a common source.
4 Nonseparability as common ground
Where we are: We think that there is a natural and plausible general style of common
source explanation, which includes both common cause and common ground explana-
tions as species, and which comes together in our default reasoning principle Source
Inference (Sect. 2.3):
Source Inference: If non-identical events a and b are modally connected, then
either (1) a and b are grounding-connected (/non-distinct), in that either (i) a
grounds b, or (ii) b grounds a, or (iii) a and b are joint results of some common
ground c; or (2) a and b are causally connected, in that either (i) a causes b, or
(ii) b causes a, or (iii) a and b are joint effects of some common cause c.
Quantum mechanics—due to nonseparability—allows the events of Alice-up and Bob-
down to be modally connected (Sect. 3.2):
Quantum Connection: In a nonseparable quantum system, non-identical events
a and b are modally connected.
It remains to connect these claims. We think that quantum mechanics—given
Nonseparability—creates interpretive pressure towards a common ground explana-
tion, on which the events of Alice-up and Bob-down are joint results of some common
ground c (as per option 1.iii in Source Inference).
4.1 Causal connection
Virtually everyone who encounters quantum nonseparability yearns at ﬁrst to give
a causal explanation, and in particular yearns to identify a common cause. Why a
common cause? It seems wrong to say that Alice-up causes Bob-down, and wrong to
say that Bob-down causes Alice-up. First of all, these events occur simultaneously at
18 We expect replacement theories to preserve the core mathematical structure and empirical successes of
the theories they replace, and entanglement looks to have both features. See Ruetsche (2013) for a deeper,
albeit more equivocal, assessment of quantum ﬁeld theories.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
arbitrary distances, so if one assumes either that causes must precede their effects (or
at least cannot be simultaneous with them) or that causes must operate locally (no
"action at a distance"), then one rules out either causing the other. Secondly, causation
is generally considered to be an asymmetric relation, yet the relation between Alice-up
and Bob-down seems perfectly symmetric. It would seem arbitrary to position one as
cause and the other as effect.
Indeed there might seem to be a perfectly natural common cause story to tell. There
is the event Origin in which Alice and Bob were jointly prepared (e.g. the decay of an
excited hydrogen molecule with x-spin 0 into a pair of hydrogen atoms), which begs
to be considered the common cause of their correlation. Perhaps in Origin Alice and
Bob were already jointed loaded (via "hidden variables") with the information about
the x-spin values they would subsequently manifest. (Picture a playing card face down
which is then torn in half, and the halves sent out to arbitrary distances. Whatever one
turns over on the one half will match whatever one turns over on the other half. But
there is no mystery here. Indeed this is a case of common cause explanation in full
glory. The two halves match because they were previously torn from a single card.)
But—as explained in Sect. 3.1.2—one of the shocking features of quantum mechan-
ics is that no common cause story can be told that locates the common cause in
Origin—or anywhere in the intersection of the back light cone of particles in an entan-
gled state—while yielding the statistical predictions of quantum mechanics. This is
what Bell's Theorem (Bell 1964) shows. The perfectly natural common cause story is
inconsistent with the empirically well-conﬁrmed quantum statistics.19
4.2 Grounding connection
There is more than one way to provide a common source explanation. One can regard
Alice-up and Bob-down as distinct events, in which case the common source expla-
nation would presumably be a common cause explanation. But one is not forced to
regard these events as distinct events, in the relevant sense of the notion on which dis-
tinctness involves a lack of grounding connection (Sect. 2.2). It is not always obvious
what grounds what, and so not always obvious what is distinct from what. So perhaps
a common ground explanation of quantum nonseparability can be offered, on which
Alice-up and Bob-down turn out to emerge from a common portion of reality?
4.2.1 A holistic common ground
Any ground-based account of the modal connection involved in entanglement should
presumably be a common ground story on which the component events emerge from
a common ground (as opposed to a story on which one component event grounds the
other), for reasons analogous to the reasons that a causal story would presumably be a
19 As noted in Sect. 3.1.2, there is still the option of a nonlocal retrocausal common cause story, but we are
operating under the working assumption that this is not a preferred option. That said we do acknowledge
that the retrocausal approach has at the very least an aspect of plausibility, precisely for providing a sort
of common source explanation for the correlated randomness of entangled systems. So we see Source
Inference as helping to account for some of the plausibility that the retrocausal account can boast.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
common cause story. First, the events occur simultaneously at arbitrary distances, so
having one ground the other would require "simultaneous grounding at a distance."
Secondly, grounding is generally considered an asymmetric relation, and it would
seem arbitrary to position one event as ground and the other as grounded.
But a common ground story can be told without running afoul of Bell's Theorem. We
know from Bell's Theorem that one must either give up the premise of locality (under-
stood in terms of a "screening-off" condition), or the premise of the independence of
the state of the whole system on the type of measurement to be performed. Like most
we would give up locality. The point of a common ground story is to give up locality
without positing any hidden variables, and without positing any causal connection
(as per Nonlocality).20 Thus we take the quantum state description of the composite
Alice+Bob system to be a complete description, but add the idea that the composite
Alice+Bob system is more fundamental than—and in that sense a common ground
of—its Alice component and its Bob component. Alice and Bob are derivative aspects
(or fragments) abstracted from a more fundamental whole. The nonlocal connection
between Alice and Bob arises from their spatially spread-out common ground.
On this sort of common ground approach the way that Singlet explains the coor-
dinated random behavior of Alice and Bob is straightforward. Singlet is a property
of the whole Alice+Bob system. This property of the whole system can explain the
behavior of its components (Alice as well as Bob) because the whole system grounds
the components.
It may be useful to pause here and explain what difference the direction of grounding
makes, to the prospects for explaining the behavior of entangled systems. Suppose—
contrary to our recommendation—that one regards the whole Alice+Bob system as
groundedinAliceandBob(partsgroundingwholes).Thenoneshouldtaketheintrinsic
features of the whole Alice+Bob system as explained by the intrinsic features of Alice
and the features of Bob, and any fundamental relations between the two. But the whole
Alice+Bob system, as described by the quantum state Singlet, seems to have "a life
of its own" in having an intrinsic feature—namely, the way in which Alice's random
behavior and Bob's random behavior are coordinated—which is inexplicable from
the quantum state of Alice, the quantum state of Bob, and at least whatever spatial
relations they stand in. From this perspective the coordinated randomness of Alice and
Bob is mysterious.21
But suppose that instead—as we recommend—one regards Alice and Bob as
grounded in the whole Alice+Bob system (wholes grounding parts). Then instead
of going up from the quantum state of Alice and the quantum state of Bob to Singlet,
one is going down from Singlet to the quantum state of Alice and the quantum state of
Bob. From this perspective the coordinated randomness of Alice and Bob at last has
an explanation, in terms of the more fundamental state of the whole. It is by reversing
20 Our thanks to Ned Hall for helping us clarify these issues.
21 One alternative is to add fundamental entanglement relations to the ontology (Teller 1986; see Morganti
2009, pp. 276-280; Calosi 2014, pp. 922-926) for speciﬁc application of this idea to the inference under
discussion in the main text). On this alternative approach the coordinated randomness found in Alice's and
Bob's behaviors is to be explained by positing a new fundamental relation alongside their spatial relations.
See Sect. 4.3 for further discussion.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
the order of grounding (wholes grounding parts) that one allows for a reversal of the
order of explanation, to the only order that actually works.
Elements of such a common ground story may be found in various sources. For
instance, consider Lange's (2002, p. 292; cf. Gisin 2005, p. 5) interpretive proposal
that there is just the single entangled Alice+Bob system and a single scattered event of
disentanglement: "Rather than separate effects occurring on the two wings [of the EPR
experiment], there is a single effect, an event occurring at the left measuring device and
in a region on the right wing." One may treat Lange's proposal as a correct description
of the more fundamental story (involving just the single Alice+Bob system), while
dropping the eliminative aspect of the proposal so as to allow that Alice and Bob (and
the associated events) exist derivatively, as fragments of the whole. Likewise consider
Penrose's (2004, p. 578) claim—from a chapter entitled "The entangled quantum
world"—that "a system of more than one particle must nevertheless be treated as a
single holistic unit." In this same vein Schaffer (2010a, p. 54) concludes: "Entangled
systems are fundamental wholes."
Where we have arrived: given Source Inference and Quantum Connection, there
is interpretive pressure to regard the separated components of entangled systems
as grounded in the whole integrated entangled system, and thus to regard quantum
mechanics as a theory that portrays entangled wholes as more fundamental than their
parts.22
4.2.2 The whole cosmos as fundamental
If quantum mechanics portrays entangled wholes as more fundamental than their parts,
what (if anything) does quantum mechanics portray as most fundamental of all? There
is a natural line of thought which takes us to the conclusion that quantum mechanics
portrays the whole material cosmos as most fundamental of all. For there are two
separate lines of thought that lead to the conclusion that the whole material cosmos
forms one vast entangled system. First, entangled states are mathematically generic
(measure1ofallwave-functionsareentangled),andsoifthereisawave-functionofthe
whole material cosmos it is almost certainly entangled. Secondly, given that everything
interacts at the Big Bang one predicts initial entanglement, and given that everything
then evolves by Schrödinger's equation such entanglement is always preserved. In
fact Schrödinger evolution tends to spread entanglements, so that even without initial
entanglement, "eventually every particle in the universe must become entangled with
every other..." (Penrose 2004, p. 591).
What exactly might such a view of fundamental reality look like? One option arises
from consideration of Wallace and Timpson's (2010) spacetime state realism. Wallace
and Timpson (2010, p. 709) offer an ontology for quantum mechanics in terms of the
whole universe divided into subsystems, and density operators assigned to the whole
system as well as to each and every subsystem. So for Wallace & Timpson the whole
22 The idea of the whole being prior to its parts is reminiscent of the classical monistic idea in metaphysics.
In this vein Proclus (1987, p. 79) writes: "[T]he monad is everywhere prior to the plurality... In the case
of bodies, the whole that precedes the parts is the whole that embraces all separate beings in the cosmos."
See Schaffer (2010a), Appendix, (2010b) for more historical discussion.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
material cosmos and each and every subsystem are equally included in the fundamental
ontology.
But the Wallace & Timpson picture can and should be trimmed down. As Wallace
& Timpson note, due to entanglements one cannot recover the density operator for
a whole system from the density operators for any partial subsystems, and so it is
necessary to assign a density operator to the whole universe. But there is no need to
assign any further density operators to any subsystems. In fact, given a density operator
assigned to the whole universe, the density operators for every single partial subsystem
are in fact uniquely determined, and mathematically recoverable by the partial trace
operation.23 Assigning density operators to anything beyond the whole universe is not
only unnecessary, but it also makes for massive redundancy in the fundamental, and
blocks free recombination among the elements of the fundamental ontology to boot.
So a streamlined version of Wallace & Timpson's spacetime state realism assigns a
fundamental density operator only to the whole universe, and regards the quantum
state of any subsystem whatsoever (such as Alice, Bob, or the Alice+Bob system) as
derivative from this common source.
So, as one way of providing a fundamental ontology for quantum mechanics con-
sistent with our idea of common ground explanation, we offer:
Spacetime State Realism Streamlined: The fundamental ontology is that of the
whole spacetime bearing a density operator.
From the whole spacetime one can recover the many derivative subsystems, and from
the density operator assigned to the whole spacetime, plus the many derivative sub-
systems, one can then recover the density operator for any and all of these fragmentary
subsystems by the partial trace operation.
We do not mean to suggest that Spacetime State Realism Streamlined is the only
acceptable fundamental ontology for quantum mechanics, or even to suggest that it is
the only fundamental ontology for quantum mechanics that enjoys the plausibility of
providing a common ground explanation for the coordinated randomness found in the
components of entangled systems. We only mean to provide one precise illustration
of a fundamental ontology that provides the kind of common ground explanation we
recommend (we are about to provide a second such illustration).
4.2.3 The wave function as fundamental
Spacetime State Realism Streamlined is not the only fundamental ontology that pro-
vides the kind of common ground explanation we recommend. A second very different
way of telling a common ground story leaves manifest three-dimensional space behind
entirely, so as to treat the "fundamental image" of Alice and Bob as co-mingled in
a more fundamental space. In this vein Albert (1996) proposes wave function real-
23 More precisely, the partial trace operation allows one to recover the density operator for any partial
subsystem A from the whole system AB by tracing out B. Wallace and Timpson (2010, p. 710) are right
that we need a decomposition of the universe into parts like A and like B to make sense of this, but it does
not follow that we need to assign any density operator to A or to B in the fundamental ontology. Once we
have a universe replete with parts, the only fundamental density operator needed is the universal one. (We
thank David Wallace for discussion of these points.)
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
ism, on which the fundamental action in quantum mechanics plays out in a massively
high-dimensional conﬁguration space, in which Alice and Bob are not even to be
found.24
For the wave function realist, assuming that there is even such a thing as familiar
three-dimensional space, it is to be treated as a derivative (or emergent) structure, and
not a fundamental aspect of reality. Likewise assuming that there are even such things
as Alice and Bob, they are to be treated as derivative entities. As North (2013, p. 198;
c.f. Ney 2013, p. 180) writes:
A grounding relation captures the way that the wave function's space is fun-
damental and ultimately responsible for ordinary space, while at the same time
allowing for the reality of ordinary space. This is an explanatory relation that
captures the way in which one thing depends on or holds in virtue of another,
without implying that the dependent thing does not exist.
Loewer (1996, p. 180) in fact suggests wave function realism as reconciling entan-
glement with Humean principles: "We can think of the manifest world—the world of
macroscopic objects and their motions—as shadows cast by the quantum state and the
world particle as they evolve in conﬁguration space." We are pointing out that it is
built into this picture that these many shadows are cast by a common source.
In a related vein, Ismael (manuscript-b) suggests that quantum entanglement (and
also complementarity) "intimate a fundamentally non-spatiotemporal ordering to
reality." She proposes that manifest three-dimensional space be viewed as a "low-
dimensional projection of a higher dimensional reality" (such as the wave function
realist's image of reality), culminating in "the idea of a universe in which what we see
in different parts of space are not really distinct existences." She concludes:
Where common sense sees distinct existences interacting in a four-dimensional
space-time, one begins to see redundant glimpses of a higher dimensional
structure refracted and reﬂected to provide multiple representations in a lower-
dimensional space.
For Ismael, the essential inference is from many modally connected events in manifest
space to some sort of underlying unity being "refracted and reﬂected," inferred via an
organic (/common ground) explanation.
24 For a system of n particles, the associated conﬁguration space has 3n dimensions. Imagine that one
has a system of two particles in a three-dimensional space, where one is only interested in positions at
times. Then one needs to specify, for each time, six pieces of information: the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of
particle1, and the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of particle2. One can equally specify six pieces of information
in terms of a point in six-dimensional space, where the location of the point in the ﬁrst three dimensions
represents the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of particle1, and the location of the point in the second three
dimensions represents the x-, y-, and z-coordinates of particle2. So explained, conﬁguration space might
seem like a (perhaps perverse) way of mathematically representing the action in manifest space. But in
quantum mechanics, conﬁguration space has a life of its own. The wave function is a complex amplitude
ﬁeld living in conﬁguration space. Schrödinger's equation describes the temporal evolution of the wave
function. To the extent that Schrödinger's equation gives the dynamics, there is then a "face value" reading
of the dynamics as describing the temporal evolution of a ﬁeld in conﬁguration space. There is thus a "leave
your preconceptions at the door" way of thinking about quantum mechanics—which the wave function
realist adopts—on which the fundamental action is in conﬁguration space.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
Wave function realism itself comes in many forms, and is neutral between the usual
"Everett," "Bohm," and "GRW" classiﬁcations. As Albert makes clear, one can couple
a wave-function-only ontology with different dynamical laws, so as to reach the wave
function realist image of the Everett or the GRW interpretations. And one can also
add a world-particle to the ontology so as to reach the wave function realist image of
Bohm's interpretation. Our recommendation of a holistic common ground explanation
is likewise neutral between these many forms of wave function realism.
So, as a second way of providing a fundamental ontology for quantum mechanics
consistent with our idea of common ground explanation, we offer:
Wave Function Realism: The fundamental ontology is that of the wave function
in conﬁguration space (and perhaps the world-particle as well).
The shape of the wave (and perhaps the place of the world-particle) allow one to
explain the coordinated behavior of Alice and Bob from a common source.
That said, it may be questioned whether Wave Function Realism actually provides
the sort of common ground explanation we are seeking.25 For, even though the coor-
dinated behavior of Alice and Bob is being treated as arising from a common source,
that source still seems to have multiple independent degrees of freedom. For what
happens with Alice will be grounded in how the wave spreads along three particular
dimensions of the 3n-dimensional conﬁguration space, and what happens with Bob
will be grounded in how the wave spreads along three other distinct dimensions of
this massively high-dimensional space. But the spread of the wave along Alice's three
dimensions looks metaphysically distinct from the spread of the wave along Bob's
three dimensions, just as motion along the x-dimension in ordinary three dimensional
space looks distinct motion along the y-dimension.
We offer two replies, the ﬁrst of which is that the spread of the wave along Alice's
three dimensions is not metaphysically distinct from the spread of the wave's along
Bob's three dimensions, and the analogy with three dimensional motion is misleading,
because in conﬁguration space these are not independent degrees of freedom after all.
There is a global constraint on the shape of the wave function, which is that its squared
amplitudes must sum, so that the squared amplitudes can be normalized to yield a
probability distribution. (Nothing else allows the wave function to play its calculational
role with respect to the probabilities of observables. Since the amplitudes are squared
to produce probabilities, a wave function whose shape violated this constraint would
produce mathematical impossibilities.)
Our second reply is that, in a wave which is actually entangled with respect to its
Alicey and Bobby aspects, the spread of the wave along the associated dimensions
is also not independent. It is true that there are other waves—those unentangled with
respect to the relevant aspects—for which this second point does not hold. But it still
holds for the particular wave under discussion.
It might then be rejoined that both of our two points about the wave (the global
constraint that its squared amplitudes must sum, and the factual constraint that its
Alicey and Bobby aspects are entangled) represent merely contingent happenstance.
25 We thank Ned Hall for raising this line of questioning.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
On this rejoinder the wave still has multiple modally independent degrees of freedom,
once both of these "contingencies" are allowed to vary. We are skeptical of treating
both of these matters as contingencies, but need not pursue the point further, insofar
as our purpose here is merely to exhibit a second fundamental ontology for quantum
mechanics consistent with our idea of common ground explanation. For that, Wave
Function Realism plus the follow-up claim that either of our two points above the
wave are real constraints rather than mere contingencies well serve. So augmented,
Wave Function Realism does provide a common ground explanation in terms of the
shape of the wave (and perhaps the position of the world particle as well), in which the
ground for Alice and for Bob are truly co-mingled and not even separable as degrees
of freedom.
4.3 The rationale for, and the content of, quantum holism (and a relational
alternative)
Quantum mechanics is often said to implicate some form of "holism," but both the
rationale for, and the content of, "quantum holism" is often highly unclear. We aim to
clarify both matters as follows:
Quantum Holism, Rationale: There is interpretive pressure from Source Infer-
ence and Quantum Connection to regard the components of entangled quantum
systems as joint manifestations of a common ground.
Quantum Holism, Content: Spacetime State Realism Streamlined and Wave
Function Realism provide examples of holistic views of quantum mechanics,
which treat the components of entangled quantum systems as joint manifesta-
tions of a common ground.
Putting this together: quantum mechanics creates interpretive pressure (via Source
Inference and Quantum Connection) for treating the components of entangled quantum
systems as joint manifestations of a common ground (as exhibited by Spacetime State
Realism Streamlined and Wave Function Realism).
It may be worth contrasting our common ground approach with an alternative
explanation of quantum nonseparability that is sometimes proposed (and sometimes
even dubbed "holistic": Teller 1986; c.f. Healey 1991; Morganti 2009; Calosi 2014) on
which one continues to treat Alice and Bob as distinct entities, but posits an additional
fundamental entanglement relation alongside the spatiotemporal relations. On this
picture the fundamental ontology might include particles like Alice and Bob, their
intrinsic properties, and spatiotemporal relations like being a mile apart, but also
adds in entanglement relations like being anti-correlated in x-spin. This proposal does
not posit a fundamental whole, but rather posits a new fundamental relation among
fundamental parts.
We do not seek to rule out this alternative, or to co-opt it as holistic. Indeed we
regard this as a plausible alternative to the sort of quantum holism we recommend.
(Those set on avoiding holism may settle for this.) We only want to explain why the
kind of interpretive pressure we are concerned with favors a common ground approach
over the posit of a new fundamental entanglement relation.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
The situation with respect to interpreting quantum mechanics, with entanglement
understood via nonseparability, is that we have two modally connected but causally
disconnected events. We argue that it is rational to infer a common ground to explain
the modal connection (Sect. 2). One could posit a new fundamental relation instead,
but rationally speaking such a move is ad hoc, and sits poorly with Hume's Inference
(Sect. 2.2.3). Positing a new relation is ad hoc insofar as there is no independent
empirical evidence for any such relations elsewhere in nature (in this respect the
posit is as implausible as positing nonlocal causality: Sect. 3.2). And positing such
a new relation sits poorly with Hume's Inference from modal connections to a lack
of distinctness (or a brute necessity), since if one could freely posit new fundamental
relations, then there would be no call to ever infer a failure of distinctness (or a brute
necessity).
Consider our examples of inference to a common ground. When Jenann's friend
and Jonathan's friend turn out to have correlated features, one could in principle posit
a brute relation of "being döppelgangers" that keeps two people correlated, but in
fact it is more plausible to suppose that there is a common friend. Or when pressure,
temperature, and volume turn out highly correlated, one could in picture posit a brute
correlating relation, but in fact it is much more plausible to infer underlying molecules
in motion. Or consider our guiding analogy with inference to a common cause. In the
case of causal inference, when the two lights go out at the same time, one could in
principle posit a brute "columinescence" relation, but in fact it is far more plausible to
suppose that there is a common cause (e.g. a burned out fuse). We are extending this
natural reasoning.
(Our quantum holism interacts with Source Inference in a further interesting way: it
rules that no manifest events whatsoever are distinct. This rules out any causal relations
at all in the manifest realm, and so seems to cripple Causal Inference in a worrisome
way: when the two lamps darken at exactly the same moment, the plausible inference
to a common cause such as a burned-out fuse seems blocked by the ruling that the
darkenings are indistinct. Have we lost something? Arguably not: arguably there is
no fundamental causation, but rather merely a derivative and approximate relation
between derivative events that are only approximately distinct. What is owed here is a
more detailed story concerning how Causal Inference can still be a useful guide—and
what it is still a useful guide to—in a world that comes fundamentally as an integrated
unity.)26
4.4 Einstein revisited
We used Einstein's EPR case to illustrate entanglement (Sect. 3.1.1), and mentioned
that Einstein took the case to support incompleteness (Sect. 3.1.2), before the various
"no-go" theorems came to light. We conclude by considering why Einstein resisted a
26 One option would be to treat causal connections pragmatically, as strategic pathways to bringing about
ends for creatures that can only intervene on the world at the macroscopic level. The approximate, emergent
separability of the world at the macroscopic level would then be enough to support Causal Inference as a
good principle for such creatures. See Ismael (2013) for further exploration of this view.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
holistic picture, for we think that Einstein put his ﬁnger on a main source of discomfort
(though we also think that it is not a major discomfort).
What common ground explanations of quantum entanglement reject is the idea
that separation in manifest three-dimensional space entails metaphysical separation.
Of the many things that Bohr says in reply to EPR, the following passage—which
is Einstein's (1949, p. 681) report of Bohr's view—seems to us to get things exactly
right:
If the partial systems A and B form a total system which is described by its -
function, AB, there is no reason why any mutually independent existence (state
of reality) should be ascribed to the partial systems A and B viewed separately,
not even if the partial systems are spatially separated from each other at the
particular time under consideration.
That is, the partial systems A and B are not metaphysically distinct, insofar as both
are the joint manifestations of a common ground AB (whose complete description is
given by AB). A and B are mere fragments of the integrated whole AB.
By way of reply, Einstein (1949, p. 682) offers the following principle: "The real
states of spatially separated objects are independent of each other." That is:
Einstein's Inference: If non-identical entities a and b are spatially separated, then
a and b are distinct existences.
Einstein's Inference, if plausible, would seem to offer some countervailing pressure
against a common ground explanation for quantum nonseparability. For Einstein's
Inference recommends the conclusion that Alice-up and Bob-down are distinct exis-
tences and thereby not grounding-connected. They are independent portions of reality.
But is Einstein's Inference so plausible?27
We side with Bohr on the matter: we do not ﬁnd Einstein's Inference compelling.
We do not see any empirical grounds for requiring such a connection between spatial
separation and metaphysical grounding (indeed we are currently looking at empirical
grounds pointing in the opposite direction). And we certainly do not see any conceptual
grounds for treating spatial separation and metaphysical grounding as so connected.28
Einstein himself (quoted in Howard 1997, p. 121) offers a sort of transcendental
argument, based on the idea that without separability "physics in the sense familiar to
us would not be possible" since we would not have closed systems and so no way to
establish "empirically testable laws." We can allow that this may have been a plausible
27 Maudlin (2014, pp. 11-12) says: "Einstein offers two possible ways to reject the conclusion of his
argument: accept telepathy or reject the claim that systems spatially separated from one another even have
'independent real situations'. Unfortunately, Einstein never discusses this second option in detail." Maudlin
also says that it is obscure what this second option would be, or how it would impact Einstein's argument.
We are attempting to clarify exactly this. (Maudlin then supposes that the theory might posit no local beables
whatsoever; we are suggesting that the theory may posit no local fundamental beables but may still posit
local derivative beables, and thereby make sense of laboratory experiments.)
28 Indeed Einstein's Inference clashes with many historical philosophical ideas, ranging from Aristotle's
idea that the heart and the lungs are both grounded in the common organism, to the classical monistic idea
that all separate parts of the cosmos are grounded in the encompassing whole. We are not saying that these
ideas are correct, but only that they are coherent and not obviously false.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
rationale at the time. But one of the crucial things that has since emerged—especially
through the work of Zeh and Zurek on decoherence—is that nonseparable quantum
systems nevertheless typically approximate separable closed classical systems very
closely at the scale at which we interact with them. Such approximate separability
seems to us fully sufﬁcient for the possibility of physics.
But rather than downplaying Einstein's Inference further, we think it may be more
interesting to conclude by noting that the issues play out in different ways given the
two examples we have provided of holistic views, namely Spacetime State Realism
Streamlined and Wave Function Realism. Given Spacetime State Realism Streamlined,
what is fundamental is the whole material cosmos. Alice and Bob are spatially sepa-
rated but not distinct existences, precisely because they are grounded in the whole. So
the friend of this view should (for better or worse) reject Einstein's Inference outright.
But matters are subtler for the friend of Wave Function Realism. For once one
distinguishes between manifest three-dimensional space and some more fundamental
space (such as conﬁguration space) from which manifest space is said to emerge,
Einstein's Inference becomes ambiguous between the following two principles:
Einstein's Inference, Manifest: If non-identical entities a and b are separated in
manifest 3-dimensional space, then a and b are distinct existences.
Einstein's Inference, Fundamental: If non-identical entities a and b are separated
in the fundamental space, then a and b are distinct existences.
Einstein's Inference, Manifest is implausible in a setting in which manifest 3-
dimensional space is treated as a merely derivative emergent realm. It is only
separability in a fundamental realm that might plausibly be connected with meta-
physical distinctness.
An elegant feature of Wave Function Realism is that the more plausible Einstein's
Inference, Fundamental may still be upheld. For instance, for the wave function realist,
the fundamental image of Alice and Bob (and Alice-up and Bob-down) are not sep-
arated in the fundamental space. Indeed none of the derivative denizens of manifest
3-dimensional space are separated in the fundamental space. Though this option of
course requires abandoning anything like:
Manifest Principle: The fundamental space is manifest 3-dimensional space.29
We don't ﬁnd this principle compelling either, but for present purposes are only noting
that the friend of Spacetime State Realism Streamlined can uphold Manifest Principle
but not Einstein's Inference, while the friend of Wave Function Realism can uphold
Einstein's Inference, Fundamental but not Manifest Principle. So it is not clear that
there is a single form of discomfort that covers quantum holism in its various forms.
Rather we suspect that any discomfort comes from a background atomistic picture of
29 For a defense of something more sophisticated but in the vicinity of Manifest Principle, based on the idea
that a physics which would explain the manifest world needs at least a foothold of "primitive ontology"
in manifest space, see Allori (2013). Though for a development of the alternative picture, based on the
idea that the fundamental space plays an individuative role vis-à-vis the fundamental entities, see Ismael
(manuscript-b).
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
fundamental entities as little independent bits living in familiar 3-dimensional space.
We are saying that quantum mechanics pushes against this picture.
By way of an overall summary, we have attempted to extend the notion of a common
cause explanation to that of a common ground explanation, and generalize these to
the notion of a common source explanation. We have suggested that an interpretation
of quantum mechanics that permits a common source explanation of nonseparability
gains some plausibility thereby, and offered two examples of such interpretations. We
have not attempted to choose between these interpretations, or even to argue that any
of these interpretations is overall plausible, but only to discern an aspect of plausibility
they share. In this way we hope to have shed some light on both the rationale for and
the meaning of "quantum holism."30
References
Albert, D. (1996). Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. T. Cushing, A. Stock, & S. Goldstein (Eds.),
Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (pp. 277-284). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Allori, V. (2013). Primitive ontology and the structure of fundamental physical theories. In A. Ney & D.
Albert (Eds.), The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 58-75).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Arntzenius, F. (2010). Reichenbach's common cause principle. In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy:
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/physics-Rpcc. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
Aspect, A., Dalibard, J., & Roger, G. (1982). Experimental tests of bell's inequalities using time-varying
analyzers. Physical Review Letters, 49, 1804-1807.
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox. Physics, 1, 195-200.
Bell, J. S. (1981). Bertlmann's socks and the nature of reality. Le Journal de Physique Colloques, 42-C2,
41-61.
Bohm, D. (1951). Quantum theory. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Cabello, A. (1997). A proof with 18 vectors of the Bell-Kochen-Specker theorem. In M. Ferrero & A.
van der Merwe (Eds.), New developments on fundamental problems in quantum physics (pp. 59-62).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Calosi, C. (2014). Quantum mechanics and priority monism. Synthese, 191, 915-928.
Cramer, J. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Review of Modern Physics, 58,
647-688.
d'Espagnat, B. (1973). Quantum logic and non-separability. In J. Mehra (Ed.), The physicist's conception
of nature (pp. 714-735). Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
d'Espagnat, B. (1979). The quantum theory and reality. Scientiﬁc American, 241, 158-181.
Einstein, A. (1949). Remarks to the essays appearing in this collective volume. In P. A. Schilpp (Ed.), Albert
Einstein: Philosopher-scientist (pp. 663-688). Evanston, IL: Open Court Press.
Einstein, A., Podolosky, B., & Rosen, N. (1935). Can quantum-mechanical descriptions of physical reality
be considered complete? Physical Review, 47, 777-780.
Fine, K. (1994). Essence and modality. Philosophical Perspectives, 8, 1-16.
Fine, K. (2012). Guide to ground. In F. Correia & B. Schnieder (Eds.), Metaphysical grounding: Under-
standing the structure of reality (pp. 37-80). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gisin, N. (2005). Can relativity be considered complete? From Newtonian nonlocality to quantum nonlo-
cality and beyond. arXiv:quant-ph/0512168.
Gisin, N., & Aspect, A. (2014). Quantum chance: Nonlocality, teleportation, and other quantum marvels.
Berlin: Springer.
30 Thanks to Heather Demarest, David Glick, Ned Hall, Richard Healey, Michael Townsen Hicks, Carla
Merino-Rajme, George Musser, David Wallace, the participants at the White Stallion Ranch Metaphysics
Workshop, and two anonymous Synthese referees.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
Gleason, A. (1957). Measures on the closed subspaces of a hilbert space. Journal of Mathematics and
Mechanics, 6, 885-893.
Healey, R. (1991). Holism and nonseparability. Journal of Philosophy, 88, 393-421.
Healey, R. (2008). Holism and nonseparability in physics. In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy: http://
plato.stanford.edu/entries/physics-holism. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
Hofer-Szabó, G., Rédei, M., & Szabó, L. (1999). On Reichenbach's common cause principle and Reichen-
bach's notion of common cause. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 50, 377-399.
Howard, D. (1997). Space-time and separability: Problems of identity and individuation in fundamental
physics. In R. Cohen, M. Horne, & J. Stachel (Eds.), Potentiality, entanglement, and passion-at-
a-distance: Quantum mechanical studies for Abner Shimony (Vol. Two, pp. 113-141). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Hume, D. (1978). In P. H. Nidditch (Ed.), A treatise of human nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ismael, J. (2013). Causation, free will, and naturalism. In D. Ross, J. Ladyman, & H. Kincaid (Eds.),
Scientiﬁc metaphysics (pp. 208-236). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ismael, J. manuscript-a. Simplicity as a guide to metaphysics.
Ismael, J. manuscript-b. What entanglement might be telling us.
Kastner, R. (2013). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics: The realm of possibility. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kochen, S., & Specker, E. (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics. Journal of
Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59-87.
Koons, R. (2013). Defeasible reasoning. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/reasoning-defeasible. Retrieved November 26, 2013.
Lange, M. (2002). An introduction to the philosophy of physics: Locality, ﬁelds, energy, and mass. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Loewer, B. (1996). Humean supervenience. Philosophical Topics, 24, 101-127.
Maudlin, T. (1998). Part and whole in quantum mechanics. In E. Castellani (Ed.), Interpreting bodies:
Classical and quantum objects in modern physics (pp. 46-60). Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Maudlin, T. (2002). Quantum non-locality and relativity: Metaphysical intimations of modern physics (2nd
ed.). Chichester: Blackwell.
Maudlin, T. (2014). What bell did. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical, 47, 1-24.
Morganti, M. (2009). Ontological priority, fundamentality, and monism. Dialectica, 63, 271-288.
Ney, A. (2013). Ontological reduction and the wave function ontology. In A. Ney & D. Albert (Eds.),
The wave function: Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 168-183). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
North, J. (2013). The structure of a quantum world. In A. Ney & D. Albert (Eds.), The wave function:
Essays on the metaphysics of quantum mechanics (pp. 184-202). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Penrose, R. (2004). The road to reality: A complete guide to the laws of the universe. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf.
Proclus (1987). Commentary on Plato's Parmenides (G. R. Morrow & J. M. Dillon, Trans). Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1956). The direction of time. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ruetsche, L. (2013). Interpreting quantum theories. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schaffer, J. (2010a). Monism: The priority of the whole. Philosophical Review, 119, 31-76.
Schaffer, J. (2010b). The internal relatedness of all things. Mind, 119, 341-376.
Schaffer, J. (2012). Grounding, transitivity, and contrastivity. In F. Correia & B. Schnieder (Eds.), Meta-
physical grounding: Understanding the structure of reality (pp. 122-138). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schaffer, J. (2016). Grounding in the image of causation. Philosophical Studies, 173, 49-100.
Schrödinger, E. (1935). Discussion of probability relations between separated systems. Proceedings of the
Cambridge Philosophical Society, 31, 555-563.
Shimony, A. (1984). Contextual hidden variables theories and Bell's inequalities. British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science, 35, 25-45.
Shimony, A. (2009). Bell's Theorem. In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/bell-theorem. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
Sider, T. (2011). Writing the book of the world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sober, E. (1988). The principle of the common cause. In J. Fetzer (Ed.), Probability and causality: Essays
in honor of Wesley C. Salmon (pp. 211-229). Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
123
Author's personal copy

Synthese
Sullivan, W. (1972). The Einstein Papers: Part III. The New York Times 121.41703, March 29.
Teller, P. (1986). Relational holism and quantum mechanics. British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
37, 71-81.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2010. How tobacco smoke causes disease: The biology and
behavioral basis for smoking-attributable disease: A report of the surgeon general. US Government
Printing Ofﬁce.
Van Fraassen, B. (1980). The scientiﬁc image. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wallace, D., & Timpson, C. (2010). Quantum mechanics on spacetime I: Spacetime state realism. British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 61, 697-727.
Wharton, K. (2010). A novel interpretation of the Klein-Gordon equation. Foundations of Physics, 40,
313-332.
Wharton, K., & Price, H. (2013). Dispelling the quantum spooks: A clue that Einstein missed?
arXiv:13077.7744
Wilson, J. (2010). What is Hume's dictum, and why believe it? Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
80, 595-637.
123
Author's personal copy

