
How to Believe in 
Becoming 
Jenann Ismael 
University of Arizona 

Lee on temporal experience 
!   "A scientific theory, to be successful, must explain to us 
the observations that we make of nature.  Yet the most 
elemental observation we make is that nature is 
organized by time.  If science must tell a story that 
encompasses and explains everything we observe in 
nature, shouldn't that include our experience of the 
world as a flow of moments? " 

!   The Heraclitian conception: The universe is 
undergoing an absolute and irreversible process of 
coming into Being. 
!   The Parmenidean conception;  The universe consists of 
a fixed four-dimensional block of events 

Time as Experienced 
!   Asymmetry; the past is different from the future.  
!   Flow: at any given moment, there seems to be flux, 
movement, or change.  
!   Passage; when we look back over our histories, time 
seems to be 'passing us by'; in the sense that what was 
once future is now past.  
!   the fixity of the past and openness of the future 

Carnap 
!   "That this experience cannot be grasped by science 
seemed to [Einstein] a matter of painful but inevitable 
resignation. I [Carnap] remarked that all that occurs 
objectively can be described in science; on the one 
hand the temporal sequence of events described in 
physics; and, on the other hand, the peculiarities of 
man's experiences with respect to time, including his 
different attitude towards past, present, and future, can 
be described and (in principle) explained in 
psychology." 


The content of temporal 
experience 
 

Perspective  
!   Within a physical framework the manifest image of 
history is the viewed from the perspective of the 
embedded embodied participant.    
!   Can we give an explicit characterization of 'the human 
perspective on time'?  
!   And is there is a transformation that takes a static image 
of a four-dimensional manifold into an evolving image 
of a universe in the process of Becoming?  

The temporally Embedded Momentary 
Perspective (TEMP) 
!  
This is a representation of time relativized to a particular 
moment in a psychological history: a snapshot of time, taken 
from the here and now.  
!  
The representational content of perceptual experience has a 
small but finite temporal breadth  
!  
Perceptual experience is embedded in a psychological 
context with memory that has much longer scope  
!  
There are different kinds of memory: e.g., episodic memory 
(records of past experiences), and autobiographical memory 
(a more or less coherent narrative of one's personal past).   

Looking forward 
!   We don't just represent the past.  
!   We also represent the future.  
!   This is true even at the level of perception.   
!   And much more obviously at the level of thought  

In sum 
!   One's view of at any moment is a representation of 
history as a whole, with past and future portrayed in 
different epistemic castes.  

The Temporally Evolving Point 
of View (TEvPoV)  
!   This  is the progression of views over a life as a whole  
!   It is obtained by stringing together temporally 
embedded points of view (TEMPs) in an order defined 
by their frame-defining temporal parameter 
!   The content of the TEvPOV represents the view of 
time from an evolving frame.  
!   NB:  it is not just the externally observable events of 
your life, but the perspectives themselves that we 
represent.  

how to build a system whose 
representational states have this structure  
 
!  
start with a system that is receiving perceptual input from 
the environment,  
!  
add a temporal dimension to its representational states,  
!  
allow memory to work recursively on those states, first 
storing them as snapshots of passing experiences and then 
organizing them into an explicit autobiographical history.  
!  
Take a temporal cross section of the resulting stream and 
you have the contents of the TEMP.  
!  
Take the whole stream of representations and you have 
TEVPoV.  

Adding Decision 
!  
A cognitive system with the capacity for decision-governed 
behavior is not just a passive consumer of information, but a 
producer.  
!  
Decisions, judgments, choices have the status of mental 
performatives.  
!  
The effects of decision, conditioned on the contents of 
memory, propagate into the future 
!  
Beliefs about the past, by contrast, are FAPP indifferent to 
choice (conditionalizing past events on present choices, 
given the body of information contained in memory will not 
(FAPP) alter their probability).  

The flow of information 
!  
There is a directed flow of information in through perceptual channels where 
it is combined with memory and used to fuel a decision procedure whose 
output one gets information about in the next cycle of perception. Our sense 
of where the connections lie in nature and the direction in which they run is a 
product of this flow. 
!  
Start with a field of events that are the field over which belief is defined 
!  
Actual history is given by a fixed truth valuation over this field.   
!  
Belief (credence/opinion) is represented by an evolving probability 
distribution over the field.    
!  
The flow of information refers to the way that the probability distribution 
evolves in response to input from perception and decision   

Letting the cycle run 
!  
This generates structure at the phenomenological level in 
two ways.  
!   The brain gloms onto regularities and patterns that appear 
over time, and stabilizes distinctions that depend on those 
patterns.  
!   Representations of past experiences accumulate in memory, 
reflective processes take those representations as objects and a 
much more interesting hierarchy of beliefs begins to emerge.  
!  
The accumulation of memories involves explicit 
representations of how history as a whole appeared to us 
from differing perspectives over the course of our lives  

Notable features 
!   The content of any perceptual state spans a finite 
interval of time 
!   There is an almost profligate reification of structure 
along the temporal dimension of your world-line 
!   There is a direction to the internal flow of information 
over the field of belief 

The Heraclitian properties of 
temporal experience 
!  
Flow:  the fact that the content of experience at any instant 
spans a finite interval means that the world as perceived at 
any moment as moving, changing, constantly in flux.  
!  
Passage:  The fact that the TEvPoV is evolving, means that 
your perspective on time is changing over the course of your 
history in a way that is readily represented in your 
autobiographical history 
!  
Openness: You cannot stabilize your beliefs about the future 
until you've stabilized your choices. And you cannot stabilize 
your choices until you've made them. This means that you 
cannot view the future as already in place, there to be 
discovered before the choice is made. 

The content of temporal experience 
and the absolute structure of time 
 
!   In temporal experience, events are ordered (and 
reordered over time) by their practical and epistemic 
relations to the viewer at different points in her life. 
!   Viewed sub specie aeternitatus, the events of history 
ordered only by their intrinsic relations to one another.   
!   Passage, flow, and openness emerge as artifacts of 
changes in perspective relative to the fixed background 
of absolute time.  

From Heraclitian time to 
Parmenidean time and back 
!   We can transform between these two perspectives in 
the way we can transform between a frame-dependent 
and frame-independent representation of space.  
!   The generator of the TEVPoV is more complex, e.g.,  
!  
it is an iterated procedure, rather than a static mapping, 
and  
!  
Iterating the procedure allows structure to build up 
around changes in perspective in a manner that generates 
a complex hierarchy inside the frame 
!   But it plays the same formal role  

Competing visions or two 
sides of the same coin? 
!   George Ellis: the history of Being is "ongoing 
irreversible development of time itself."  
!   John Norton:  "The passage of time is a real, objective 
fact that obtains in the world independently of us. ... it 
has all the marks of an objective process whose 
existence is independent of the existence of we 
humans."   

Passage is an illusion 
!   Thomas Gold: "We ought to eliminate this flow idea 
from the real picture, but before we can eliminate it we 
ought to understand how it arises. We should 
understand that there can be a self-consistent set of 
rules that would give a beast this kind of phony picture 
of time."  

No real conflict 
!   Physics moves towards an increasingly Absolute 
conception of reality.   
!   It is a product of the logic of that progression that a lot 
of the structure that has the most immediate epistemic 
and practical import for us ends up being perspectival.  
!   "Perspectival" means implicitly relational, not unreal.  


Closing the circle 
 
!  
There are two "dimensions" in the logic of the relationship 
between the manifest and scientific image.   
!  
The vertical dimension: transforming a fine-grained 
macroscopic model into a coarse-grained image 
!  
The horizontal dimension: transforming a vision of the 
world into a view through the eyes of the participant in 
history 
!  
Adding the vertical dimension allows us to bring experience 
and ontology back together as part of a single unified vision.   

The relevance to physics 
 
!  
The negative way:  there is a lot of distracting noise about the 
relationship between Heraclitian and Parmenidean time;  getting clear 
on the status of the heraclitian appearances can at least soften the 
impact of the noise.   
!  
The constructive way: physics is moving into uncharted territory, and 
again time has been a central focus. Worries about the appearance (or 
disappearance) of time in quantum gravity are raising new issues and 
we are seeing here ways of recovering temporal experience that might 
be helpful in that capacity (e.g., a thorough relativization a la Rovelli, 
with time emerging as a relation between two kinds of physical system, 
one of which functions effectively as a clock for the other. ) 
!  
More generally, reexamination of the relationship between the 
fundamental ontology and our experience is being forced by new 
issues in foundations 

