nature physics
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-024-02502-3
Books & arts
Experience under the spotlight
The Blind Spot: Why 
Science Cannot 
Ignore Human 
Experience
By Adam Frank, 
Marcelo Gleiser and 
Evan Thompson
MIT PRESS: 2024. 
328 pp. $29.95
H
ow does a conception of existence  
beyond what is present in expe-
rience emerge? Imagine a crea-
ture crawling out of a primordial 
pond and for whom all of reality is 
solely what its consciousness perceives: light, 
colour, hunger, effort, pain, pleasure. Then, 
something happens that sets off a process of 
articulation. A visual image, a sound, or smell 
acquires a double significance, making it at 
once part of the inner world and a manifesta-
tion of an outer one. There is now a distinc-
tion between the experience and what the 
experience is of; we get the idea that there 
are things beyond what we see and hear. Our 
conception of things becomes increasingly 
abstract. The process that allows us to connect 
the image of a ball to the touch of it separates 
the object from its sensory effects, which are 
relegated to a private inner world. Science is  
the continuation of this process of articulation 
and abstraction.
The authors of The Blind Spot — Adam Frank, 
Marcelo Gleiser and Evan Thompson — suggest 
that there is a flaw at the heart of this vision. 
They argue that the joint attempt to capture 
the structure of a shared environment into a 
closed and complete vision of the universe 
abstracts away our experience. By 'experience' 
they mean the lived experience of you and me —  
the rich stream of sound, light, colour, will, 
thought, emotion and action that is the ordi-
nary unfolding struggle of thinking and living.
They see the displacement of experience as 
being behind a number of scientific, social and 
spiritual ills. On the scientific front, the proper 
understanding of time, life, the cosmos, con-
sciousness, and quantum mechanics. On the 
social and spiritual side, the objectification 
of the world and subjectification of experi-
ence opens up a rift between us and nature 
that manifests itself in a crisis of meaning  
(as well as our willingness to destroy the planet 
for our own needs).
The first chapter identifies the mechanisms 
by which experience was displaced in the tra-
ditional narrative of scientific progress. The 
next three chapters discuss aspects of the 
current scientific understanding that suffer 
from a failure to acknowledge the Blind Spot. 
The case of time provides a good illustration. 
Relativity taught us that the world is not a big 
spatially extended object unravelling in time, 
but a four-dimensional manifold in which time 
appears as one dimension. Of course, there are 
solid scientific reasons for adopting the rela-
tivistic image of time. The mistake comes, the 
authors hold, from the identification of this 
formal structure with time itself. It is common 
nowadays to say that physics has shown us that 
the flow of time is an illusion. But the percep-
tion of the flow of time in an intrinsic feature 
of our experience. To mistake a representation 
that captures the formal structure of time for 
time itself "confuses a mathematical picture 
with what is being pictured; it confuses the 
map with the territory."
Evans, Frank and Gleiser argue not for a 
change to our scientific theories, but rather 
a revision of the philosophical overreach 
that has resulted from science's success. The 
dominant view of the world in physics and 
Anglo-American philosophy is a hardened 
materialism that embraces the completeness 
and autonomy of the scientific worldview. The 
authors do not recommend adding experience 
to physics as a new physical field or quantity. 
Instead, they want to restore experience to a 
central place in our conception of reality, con-
necting science to the lived world of human 
experience without reducing or eliminating 
the latter.
The book does not focus on how to fit expe-
rience into the objective world, but rather 
on how to get a conception of a world that 
extends beyond experience. How experience 
becomes articulated to contain the image of 
itself against the background of a world dis-
tinct from it is not clearly understood. How-
ever it happens, once we begin to discern the 
world in our experience and to view ourselves 
as a small part of an extended existence, expe-
rience acquires a double significance; it is at 
once part of the outer world and the whole of 
the inner one.
The Blind Spot makes a powerful case that 
we cannot analyse experience out of our con-
ception of the physical world without reduc-
ing it to a purely formal calculus, as experience 
grounds the ideas of existence, time, and the 
whole representational hierarchy of physical 
concepts. It's a good corrective: a reductio 
of certain ambitions for science to provide 
a totalistic worldview in which everything 
is reduced without remainder to concepts 
devoid of concrete content. To repair the 
fissure between self and world, experience 
and matter, the authors suggest going back 
to the structure that existed before the fis-
sure opened, to the world where existence 
and experience were synonymous, and see-
ing how the abstract concepts of physics are 
rooted in it.
I recommend this book heartily. It puts its 
finger on the most fundamental philosophical 
questions and articulates a powerful, unified 
diagnosis of a remarkable cluster of current 
scientific problems. It challenges authority 
and orthodoxy in the best way. You may not 
initially agree with the authors, but once you 
see the Blind Spot, you cannot look away.
Reviewed by Jenann Ismael
William H. Miller III Department of  
Philosophy, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. 
 e-mail: jismael1@jhu.edu
Published online: xx xx xxxx
Competing interests
The author declares no competing interests.
 Check for updates

