Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:54
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
139
7
Space, Quantum Mechanics,
and Bohm's Fish Tank
Jenann Ismael
There are complex pressures from many sources in physics for questioning whether
space-time is a fundamental structure. Much of the impetus has come from consid-
erations of cosmology and quantum gravity. Theories of quantum gravity almost all
describe fundamental structures that are signiﬁcantly non-spatiotemporal. In that
setting, the motivation comes from high-level theoretical concerns that are quite far
removed from experience. Much of the discussion is highly technical and has not
penetrated into the philosophical literature.¹ In philosophy, discussion of the possi-
bility that space is not fundamental has centered on a particular proposal for the
interpretation of quantum mechanics: David Albert's wave-function realism (Albert
, ). There, the discussion is conducted in the context of standard, non-
relativistic quantum mechanics and is quite narrowly focused on whether the virtues
of wave-function realism outweigh those of, say, GRW or Oxford Everett. The status
of space on Albert's proposal has mostly been treated as a problem, and one that we
would rather do without. There hasn't been, either in the physics literature or in the
philosophical literature, a clear articulation of the general impetus provided by
quantum phenomena for the move to an ontology in which space is recovered as
an emergent structure. That is what I will try to provide.
I will suggest that there are signs in the most basic and familiar features of quantum
phenomena that space (-time) is not fundamental. I will present simple low-dimensional
examples that reproduce aspects of entanglement and complementarity and explore
the difference between two kinds of explanation:one that looks for causal processes
passing through the space in which the correlated events are situated, and one that
derives them as lower dimensional projections of a higher dimensional reality.
The chapter is meant to display in a simple setting a form of explanation that
connects quantum phenomena to questions about the status of space. For those who
¹ That said, there is a signiﬁcant, and growing, literature in the philosophy of quantum gravity that
considers the reasons (in the context of quantum gravity generally, and within particular approaches) for
treating spacetime as non-fundamental: e.g., Castellani & De Haro (this volume), Crowther (), Oriti
(), Wüthrich ().
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
Jenann Ismael, Space-Time and Quantum Mechanics: A Discussion of Bohm's Fishtank In: The Foundation of Reality:
Fundamentality, Space, and Time. Edited by: Glick, Darby, Marmodoro, Oxford University Press (2020). © Jenann Ismael.
DOI: 10.1093/:oso/9780198831501.003.0008

Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:54
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
140
aren't soaked in the details of quantum mechanics, it is not easy to develop the
physical intuition for what entanglement and complementarity are. The examples
can serve as toy models that exhibit the connection between quantum phenomena
and the (possible) non-fundamentality of space in a vivid way.² They also allow us to
move the discussion in the foundational literature in philosophy away from wave-
function realism, and also avoid some of the contested vocabulary.
The primary goal is to sharpen our understanding of what is at issue here. The
division between those who advocate a non-(fundamentally) spatial account and
those who insist that space has to be a fundamental structure touches on a deep, and
increasingly pronounced divide between two ways of 'doing metaphysics'.
.Bohm's Fishtank and the Kaleidoscope
The ﬁrst example comes from Bohm (with some embellishment) (see Figure .).³,⁴
Imagine that there is a ﬁsh tank containing several multi-colored ﬁsh being ﬁlmed
by one camera from the front and another camera from the side. It's an ordinary
Figure .The set-up.
² Wave function realism (in the form in which it was originally proposed) is a ﬁrst pass at this form of
explanation. It was a bold initiative, and a radical departure from previous ways of thinking. But the case
for treating space (time) as emergent should not be judged solely on its merits.
³ The discussion here is non-relativistic and restricted to space. This is partly for visualizability and
intuitive naturalness, but for other reasons as well. In a relativistic setting, it is more natural to treat space-
time as the emergent structure, but time raises new questions, and I want to leave those aside.
⁴ I've embellished the example and developed it more fully. Bohm presents it as a model of entangle-
ment inBohm ().
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:54
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
141
three-dimensional tank. But suppose that the cameras project side-by-side images on
a ﬂat screen in an adjacent room, integrated seamlessly so that the screen displays just
a two-dimensional expanse of color and moving shapes. Imagine someone whose
experience was conﬁned wholly to the shapes moving across the two-dimensional
screen, who knew nothing directly about the three- dimensional space in which it
(and he) was embedded, and who was keeping track of the on screen movements.
Such a person would notice correlations between the images appearing on the two
sides of the screen. For example, if on the right side of the screen he sees an image
of a lionﬁsh from the side, on the left side he will see another such image this time
from the front. The two images will generally look different from one another. And
we will suppose that if he focuses on either image by itself, he will not be able to
predict its changes or movements from one moment to the next, but there will be
interesting correlations between them. A ﬂick of the tail or turn through an angle
on the left will be mirrored by a ﬂick of the tail and corresponding movement on
the right. These correlations will seem to the viewer to be instantaneous. Someone
whose experience was entirely conﬁned to the two-dimensional images on screen
would naturally try to fathom the mechanism by which the distant events com-
municate or inﬂuence one another. He might look for signals passing between
them or search for causes in their common past. We know that the search would be
misguided because the correlations aren't the product of signals or causal inﬂu-
ences passing through the space of the screen. They are products of redundancy in
the space in which the images of the ﬁsh appear which I'll call hereafter the image-
space. The space in which the images of the ﬁsh appear is a lower dimensional
projection of the space in which the ﬁsh themselves are contained. Where there is
one ﬁsh in the tank, the viewer of the screen sees two. Where there is one tail ﬂick
he sees two. Objects and events located at a single place in the tank produce
multiple copies at different places on the screen.
Another, more obvious example of correlations produced by redundancy in an
image space can be obtained from a kaleidoscope. A kaleidoscope is an optical toy in
a tube; it produces symmetrical patterns as mirrors reﬂect bits of colored glass. It
consists of mirrors that run the full-length of the inside of the scope. There is a ﬁxed
or detachable object case at the end of the mirror tube that gives the scope its images.
In many cases, the scope has a casing that contains glass beads that move freely and
independently of one another inside the conﬁnes of the case. Changes in the
conﬁguration of beads produces changes in the pattern of light and color seen by
someone looking through the eyepiece. The viewer doesn't directly see the three-
dimensional beads or pieces of colored glass located in the casing. He sees those
pieces reﬂected and refracted through the mirrors to produce a two-dimensional
image in which each piece of glass is redundantly represented.
Facts about the way the scope is put together determine the invariant features
of the image; its boundaries, symmetries, and topology.⁵ The number and angles of
⁵ Invariant, that is, under transformations that don't disassemble the scope. These will appear as
kinematic constraints on the space of possible images generated by a particular scope. The dynamics of
the image space will simply describe its trajectory through the space of possible images.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:54
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
142
the mirrors will determine the number of reﬂections viewed.⁶ Someone looking
through the lens wouldn't be able to predict which image will show up next, but
he will notice correlations that would let him use what he observes in one part of
the image space to get information about others. He will know that a blue triangle
in one place will be matched and mirrored by counterparts in others. The sym-
metries are different in every case, but every case possesses them. The symmetries
of a kaleidoscopic image space are more obvious than those of the ﬁsh tank.
Viewers of the ﬁsh-screen focused on small-ish volumes of the space would see
ﬁsh-images moving into and out of view and behaving like effectively autonomous
two-dimensional realities. But for someone with a mathematical eye and a full
view of the two screens, the symmetries of the ﬁsh image-space would be equally
striking.
What is interesting about these examples is that we have a one-many corres-
pondence between events in three-space and events in a non-fundamental image-
space that express themselves as instantaneous dependencies between events at
different image-space locations. Someone whose view was conﬁned to the image
space and who knew nothing of the higher dimensional reality in which they
were embedded would be puzzled by the apparently coordinated randomness. He
might posit causal mechanisms or signals passing between the two sides of the
screen. But of course, as we know, no attempt to explain the correlations
dynamically in the lower dimensional space will be correct. It's not that there
is no explanation of the correlations. It is that there is no dynamical explanation
in the image space. In the kaleidoscope example, the image that the observer sees
when he looks through the eyeglass is two-dimensional, but the observer himself,
the eyeglass, the bits of glass that generate the image, the placement of the
mirrors and the process by which the bits of glass generate the image all live
in three space. In the ﬁsh-tank example, the surface on which the redundant
images of the ﬁsh project themselves is two-dimensional but the tank, the ﬁsh,
the cameras, and the process by which the images on the screen are generated
from the movements in the ﬁsh-tank, are three-dimensional. One may have an
interest in producing a descriptive history of image space, but the physics is given
in three dimensions. We wouldn't expect the screen to be autonomous, well-
behaved dynamics. And no attempt to explain the correlations dynamically in the
lower dimensional space will be correct.
The ﬁsh tank and the kaleidoscope provide low-dimensional examples of a way of
explaining phenomena with suggestive similarities to the behavior of entangled
particles quantum mechanics. In (standard, non-relativistic) quantum mechanics,
the principles for constructing the state-spaces for complex systems—a pair of
particles, an object system, and a measuring apparatus, an observer and her physical
environment—generate states for the whole that cannot be reduced to states for the
components. The result is that the quantum state of a complex system does not in
⁶ For a two-mirror system, a ten-degree angle, divided into , gives reﬂections (or an -point star,
since of the reﬂections will be reversed from the original). A -degree angle divided into degrees
gives reﬂections (or a -point star).
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:54
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
143
general permit decomposition into ontologically distinct components.⁷ Schrödinger
regarded entanglement as the deﬁning trait of quantum theory, and it is the source of
some of the central mysteries of quantum mechanics. The components of a system in
an entangled state behave in ways that are individually unpredictable, but jointly
constrained so that it is possible to forecast with certainty how one component will
behave, given information about the measurements carried out on the other even
though it is impossible to predict how they will behave individually and even though
they are not interacting. The correlations borne by the spatially separated compo-
nents of a system in an entangled state are well veriﬁed and there is no difﬁculty
understanding how to derive them from the formalism. Difﬁculties surrounding
entanglement have to do with trying to arrive at a physical understanding of
how entangled particles manage to exhibit the coordinated randomness that the
formalism predicts. It is in this connection that we get stories about tachyons,
superluminal inﬂuence, or even cosmic conspiracy.
The examples present clearly visualizable models of cases in which observers see
correlations that are the product of redundancy in the space in which the phenomena
are arrayed rather than any real dynamical interaction. There are no signals or causal
inﬂuences passing between the images, no dynamical interaction deﬁned in image
space that explains the correlations. And they suggest a way of seeing what is creating
the difﬁculties in understanding the quantum analogues. Instead of seeing entangled
systems as distinct existences interacting in a three-dimensional space (or events
arranged in a four-dimensional space-time), we can see them as redundant glimpses
of a deeper structure, refracted and reﬂected to provide multiple representations in
the manifest space of everyday sense.
.Complementarity
If Schrodinger regarded entanglement as the central mystery of quantum mechanics,
others have seen complementarity as more fundamental. Questions of what the
fundamental objects are, are of course bound up with questions of what the funda-
mental quantities are. Here I want to point to the relationship between 'observables'
in the image space and beables in three-space.⁸ Focus on the changing image of some
particular ﬁsh as that ﬁsh turns through an angle; the aspect that was presented on
the screen will disappear and be replaced by another. We can say that the view of a
ﬁsh from one angle occludes another if they can appear on the screen individually but
never together. A full frontal view completely occludes a view from the back; a left
side view occludes the right, and so on (see Figure .).
⁷ Or at least not in a way that preserves the logic of part and whole, that is to say that it doesn't permit
decomposition into spatially localized components whose intrinsic states can be characterized independ-
ently of one another and then pieced together to obtain a complete description of the whole.
⁸ Entanglement by itself doesn't suggest that the more fundamental space has to be higher-dimensional.
It is complementarity (the commutation relations between quantum observables) that pushes us to a
higher dimensional space. There are kaleidoscopes, for example, that don't have glass beads, but generate
an image when pointed at a ﬂat, colored surface.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:54
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
144
These relations of mutual occlusion provide constraints on simultaneous obser-
vations of different images cast by ﬁshes on the screen, and it would be natural to
think of views that excluded one another as complementary. We can see what the
back of a ﬁsh looks like and what the front looks like by turning the ﬁsh through an
angle, but we can't simultaneously observe what the back and the front of the ﬁsh
looks like. Those two images of the same ﬁsh never appear together on screen. There
are also relations of partial occlusion. The frontal view obscures the side, so that you
can't get a clear view of the side, when looking at the front, but maybe we can attach
informative probabilities, given a frontal view of a ﬁsh, to what will be seen if it turns
through an angle to expose its side. If these relations of full and partial occlusion were
systematized, we would get a quite complex network of relations between two-
dimensional ﬁsh-images. A full three-dimensional portrait could be pieced together
from a collection of complementary, two-dimensional views if we understood how
that collection was structured in three dimensions, something that we could read off
of the relations of mutual occlusion. And conversely, if we had such a portrait, we
would know everything there was to know about the images that the ﬁsh would
project in image-space if it were turned through different angles.
Let us distinguish categorical from modal properties. Categorical properties are
properties that involve no admixture of possibility. They describe what is the case,
but not what could, might, or would be the case under some possible circumstance. Its
dispositions to decay under certain conditions are modal properties. The categorical
description of a ﬁsh is properly given in three-dimensions, but the three-dimensional
description embodies a good deal of complex, modal information about the images
the ﬁsh would cast when viewed from different angles in image space.
Figure .Front and side views of a ﬁsh.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
145
Observations in image space correspond to image-space observables. The image a
ﬁsh presents when viewed from angle a corresponds to the value it has for the
observable 'view from a'. We know that the relations of occlusion and partial
occlusion among image-space observables derive from the three-dimensional
structure of the ﬁsh, but someone who didn't know that and who tried to interpret
image-space observables as abiding properties of a two-dimensional object would
run into trouble. In visual terms, he would end up with a Picasso-esque construction
of two-dimensional images from different angles superimposed on top of one another
in a geometrically impossible conﬁguration. In mathematical terms, he would ﬁnd
that there is no reduced, categorical two-dimensional description that captures the
invariant content of the information embodied in a three-dimensional description.
He could express all of the information contained in a three-dimensional description in
a wave-function-like mathematical object which embodied a lot of complex, modal
information about the images the ﬁsh would cast in image space, i.e., about the
'values' of different 'image-space observables'. But it would be impossible to
ground all of the dispositions that a ﬁsh has to appear thus and so when viewed
from different angles in a d description of how it is. The categorical description is
irremediably three-dimensional.
And this is suggestive of the commutation relations among quantum observables.
In classical mechanics, the space of possible states for an n-particle system is a
n-dimensional space, usually parameterized by the positions and momenta of
constituent particles. Any function of these basic variables is an observable. And
every system always has a full set of values for all observables. The theory is deﬁned
by the axioms governing the behavior of the basic observables—Newton's equations
for the positions or Hamilton's for positions and momenta. In (standard, non-
relativistic) quantum mechanics, there is more structure on the set of quantities.
The space of possible states is a Hilbert space. States are represented by vectors.
Physical properties are represented by Hermitian operators on that space.⁹ The
dynamics is given by Schrodinger's equation, which describes the evolution of the
state vector if undisturbed. The Eigenstate-Eigenvalue link tells us that we observe
the value for observable A iff the vector representing its state is an eigenstate of
the A-operator. Now, we know that for any Hermitian operator on a Hilbert space,
there are others on the same space with which it doesn't share a full set of eigen-
vectors, and indeed some with which it has no eigenvectors in common. It follows
that we can never observe simultaneous values for all observables and indeed that
there are pairs of quantities whose values we never observe simultaneously. Quan-
tities represented by operators that have no eigenstates in common are canonically
conjugate. The most familiar example of such a pair are the position x and momen-
tum px in the x direction of a point particle in one dimension. These relations of
occlusion and partial occlusion are summarized by the Uncertainty relations given
for the example just mentioned by, [x,px] = iħ
⁹ And the Hilbert space associated with a complex system is, of course, the tensor product of those
associated with its components. The rule for constructing the state-spaces of complex systems is what gives
rise to entangled states.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
146
where [x, px] = xpx  px, x is the commutator of x and px, i is the imaginary unit
and ħ is the reduced Planck's constant h/π.
As in the case of two dimensional ﬁsh-images, the relations take their most
extreme form for canonically conjugate quantities, but if we catalogued them, we
would ﬁnd an interesting network of derivative relations of partial occlusion that
would be preserved by free evolution or any attempt at measurement.
It is very natural to think that the uncertainty relations simply place epistemic
constraints on simultaneous knowledge of a system's properties but that there must
be some more categorical properties that characterize the intrinsic state of quantum
systems and that ground the probabilistic dispositions attributed by the quantum
state in the way that positions and momenta ground the dynamical dispositions of
classical systems, and in the way that the categorical properties of any physical system
ought to ground its law-governed behavioral dispositions. But we know a lot about
the limits of this way of thinking in quantum mechanics. There has been a century of
no-hidden variable results of varying strengths, placing restrictions on attempts to
derive those law-governed dispositions from hidden, categorical properties of sys-
tems that live in three-space. Most people believe those restrictions are too strong to
be met with empirical plausibility.¹⁰ The claim is not that there has to be an intrinsic
fact about a particle that determines how it will behave on any given occasion, we are
trying to introduce hidden variables that will allow us to say that there is an intrinsic
difference between particles that have different law-governed dispositions to show a
particular result in a measurement, or an intrinsic difference in a particular particle
when it goes from having a chance of ½ to a chance of of showing some result. We
would expect analogous results if we tried to ground the information embodied in the
-d description of a ﬁsh in categorical properties in two dimensions.
The suggestion here is that quantum observables do not behave like categorical
properties of a three-dimensional system. If we can derive the commutation relations
among quantum observables from categorical properties of objects that aren't ultim-
ately localized in space, in a manner that mirrors the derivation of the algebra of two-
dimensional aspects from the three-dimensional description of a ﬁsh, that would be
an explanation of a quantum effect that should appeal to your sense of naturalness.
Qualitatively and intuitively, one way of understanding the pathologies of quantum
mechanics is that in quantum mechanics there is nowhere in three-space to house
¹⁰ There are well-known loopholes. Noncontextual hidden variables theories, assigning simultaneous
values to all quantum mechanical observables, are ruled out by Gleason and Kochen-Specker, contextual
hidden variables theories, in which a complete state assigns values to physical quantities only relative to
contexts are left open. See Shimony ()for an especially illuminating discussion. We get an analogue of
contextuality in the ﬁsh-tank example that is suggestive of what might be going on in the quantum case. To
ground the dispositions embodied in the three-dimensional description of the ﬁsh in categorical properties
in two dimensions, we have to relativize image-space observables to camera angles and positions (we say
that a ﬁsh looks thus and so from this or that angle, but not simpliciter). This technique allows us to smuggle
information about the three-dimensional conﬁguration of the ﬁsh into two dimensions, but remains a
purely formal option so long as camera positions and angles can't be speciﬁed in two-dimensions. Put
another way, there's a failure of supervenience of measurable dispositions on (non-contextual) d
observables deﬁned over the image-space in the ﬁsh tank example because we lose information about
relations between observables embodied in the three-dimensional structure of the ﬁsh and allowing
contextuality is just a way of smuggling in -d information.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
147
and ground the dispositions attributed by the quantum state. We have lacked an
understanding of quantum systems that would explain in categorical terms the
measurable dispositions they have to affect ourselves and our measuring instruments
in ways that we can predict with statistical accuracy. Treating space-time as a
derivative structure give us somewhere in the actual world to house and ground
those dispositions.
The examples should not be over-interpreted. They provide toy models of speciﬁc
phenomena, and were intended to give only a qualitative feel for how to connect
those phenomena to the (non)-fundamentality of space. They don't substitute for a
proper theory. They do, however, allow us to address some of the ambiguities that
have hindered discussion of the quantum case.
.Two Kinds of Causal Notions
We can distinguish two kinds of causal notions, both of which are familiar from the
philosophical literature on causation. There are the causal relationships represented
by directed, acyclic graphs (DAGs) and analyzed in terms of intervention counter-
factuals (see Figures .a and .b).
A
B
E
D
C
F
G
I
H
a
b
c
d
c
Figure .Examples of DAGS.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
148
These are introduced to distinguish causal structure from mere probabilistic
correlation. One says that there is a causal relationship (as opposed to a mere
probabilistic correlation) between X and Y just in case in an intervention on X
would produce a change in Y (in technical terms, when you wiggle X, Y wiggles).
Then there are causal processes. These are chains of events called causal interactions,
each of which involves the exchange of some conserved quantity. These are some-
times treated as competing accounts of causation, but we don't need to choose
between these. They are both useful, and in classical physics we ﬁnd both. We have
causal processes at the fundamental level, and manipulable causal relationships of
the kind captured by DAGs all over the place. These are undiscriminating about
levels, and neutral about underlying processes. They represent often local, scaf-
folded relationships among variables that can be investigated experimentally,
frequently without knowledge of the underlying processes. They are part of what
we might think of the surface phenomena of the world. Causal processes, by
contrast, are part of the explanatory substructure. They relate fundamental parameters.
They are local and continuous.
The early history of quantum mechanics interpretation was (in part) a search for
causal processes to explain of entanglement, complementarity, and a suite of other
effects that were slowly teased out of the quantum formalism and put on display. The
quantum formalism as it stood was recognized as an elegant, compact, and precise
embodiment of the regular, law-governed effects of quantum systems on macro-
scopic, spatially localized 'measuring' instruments. But people were looking for an
understanding of the causal processes in space-time that produced quantum effects.
They were hankering after (to use a nice phrase from Bell) an account of what goes
on in 'the limbo between one observation and another' (Bell ; Butterﬁeld ).
As these got increasingly strained and unnatural, and as the quantum formalism
frustrated them systematically, and as no-go theorems of increasing strength made
them seem more and more like perversions of a formalism that had its own inner
logic, people started to deny the need for a causal process explanation (Hughes
; Bub ; Healey a; Spekkens ; Fuchs, Mermin, and Schack ).
Alongside approaches to quantum mechanics that renounced the search for a
quantum ontology, there were those who continued the search, but made radical
departures from classical ontology.¹¹All the while, of course, there were still people
who were doing the more traditional kind of quantum ontology (GRW, Bohmian
Mechanics).¹² The people I'm talking about here were all people who were reacting
to the frustrated attempts to ﬁll in the limbo between experiments with continuous
trajectories and causal processes.
The landscape of possibilities here has become increasingly developed and reﬁned.
Against this background, what the toy models suggest is a way of hanging onto all of
the causal relationships that we ﬁnd in space-time, but instead of looking for micro-
scopic causal processes propagating through space-time, we look for a substructure
¹¹ Albert (, )and the Everettians, well represented in Wallace ().
¹² See Lewis () for an overview.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
149
of connections behind the scenes, threading connections through degrees of freedom
that aren't themselves localized in space.
.Two Notions of Space
Just as we can distinguish two notions of causation, we can discern two notions of
space. Let's use Our-space to refer to the manifest space of everyday sense and Ur-
space to refer to the space in which the fundamental particulars are housed or, if you
like this way of speaking: the space that acts as the ground of individuation for the
fundamental objects, or perhaps the space in which the world decomposes into
separable parts. Each of these ways of speaking evokes a role that Our-space plays
in classical physics.¹³ Then question is, then, whether we should see the kinds of
connections that the quantum formalism predicts about local beables in Our-space as
suggesting the existence of a more fundamental ordering, an Ur-space containing
beables whose connections to space-time beables screens off the connections among
Our-space beables.
The symmetry of the connection between the particles in a Bell experiment (or
the parts of an entangled system), the absence of evident mediating processes, the
complex relations of full and partial occlusion among space-time observables, the fact
that the quantum state contains more information than can ever be directly accessed
in measurements in space-time all suddenly make sense if Our-space has the status of
an image space. They all snap into place, as exactly what is to be expected. The
difﬁculties that we ﬁnd in attempts to ﬁll in the story about what goes on in the limbo
between experiments with continuous trajectories and causal processes in space-time
these have analogues in the examples for observers in the examples trying to do their
physics in the image spaces.
.The Rationale for Moving to Ur-Space
In the contemporary literature surrounding the discussion of wave function realism,
there are two sorts of questions that have been distilled out of the controversy, both
pressed here by Wayne Myrvold, in a symposium on Albert's most recent book:
The general precept at work here seems to be . . . Faced with a physical theory that, taken at face
value, seems to violate the condition of separability [i.e., the requirement that there should be no
connections between systems located in different parts of space that aren't mediated by causal
processes], we are to ﬁnd (or construct) another space, such that states of the theory can
represented as assignment of local quantities to points in that space, and to take some space of
this sort as the fundamental space of the theory. If this is the precept in operation, then I have
two sorts of question about it. One is: in what sense is a space of this sort . . . more fundamental
than the space in which we live and move . . . [and what is the] argument in favour of separability
as a requirement on an acceptable theory of fundamental physics.
(Myrvold)
¹³ The reference here is to Gareth Evans' () discussion of the role of space as the fundamental
ground of individuation of objects. Evans is talking about the role that Our-space plays in the conceptual
scheme of common sense.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
150
The toy models can help us address Myrvold's questions. First they give us concrete,
low-dimensional examples of the sort of relationship that is being proposed to hold
between Our-space and an Ur-space. The philosophical discussion about what it
means to say that space is (or is not) fundamental has been rather cloudy. It turns
inward to reﬂection on what 'fundamental' means, then to analysis of the various
roles that space plays in our experience, on the one hand, and in physics, on the
other. Worries are voiced that on this proposal space would turn to be 'unreal' or
'illusory', and we begin to worry what 'real' means. This is useful in helping us reﬁne
our concepts, but it hasn't helped to clarify the physical proposal.¹⁴
The toy models can at once make the proposal both concrete without using
that vocabulary, and serve as the basis for reﬁning it. And they make the rationale
explicit by highlighting the sorts of clues to which people are responding when they
look to a non-spatiotemporal substructure. Kerry Mckenzie in a recent review
discussing Albert's view puts the demand for the rationale more spiritedly. She
writes that Albert's view:
Seems to be embraced by those who do so . . . only in order that we not be 'saddled' with the
'old-fashioned and unwelcome quantum mechanical weirdness of non-separability' . . . it seems
deeply incongruous to me that respectable philosophers of physics are so sanguine about
letting quasi-aesthetic predilections like this do so much ontological work. . . . There is no
reﬂection, not so much as a momentary expression of regret, over the idea that at some
point we may have no choice but to retreat to largely individual preferences regarding virtues
to support our world view.
(McKenzie )
I have been suggesting that the case for this form of explanation can be made
independently of wave-function realism. It is not a mere 'intuition', expectation
derived from classical habits of thought, or 'quasi-aesthetic' distaste for non-
separability that motivate this exploration but clues in the phenomena of a kind
that are our best guide to the deep structure of the world.
The rationale for suspecting that there might be a structure behind (or under-
neath) space-time that explains the deepest quantum effects is not a perverse
predilection for revisionary metaphysics, a 'quasi-aesthetic' distaste for non-
separability. The complex connections between the events in different parts of
space revealed by the quantum formalism are the same kinds of clues that guide us
in other kinds of inferences when we look for an explanatory structure. That is why
they appeal to our sense of explanatory naturalness. It would be nice here, if we could
invoke a formal normative framework for scientiﬁc inference so that we wouldn't
have to rely on our sense of explanatory naturalness, but the fact is that we don't. Our
sense of explanatory naturalness plays an ineliminable role both in science and in
everyday inference to the best explanation.
¹⁴ This is one of the most important reasons for getting away from abstract, verbal presentations. Words
like 'fundamental' and 'emergent' don't have a clearly deﬁned meaning in current philosophical usage. In
physics, and as I will use them here, 'fundamental' means 'basic in the ontological ordering', and 'emergent'
means 'not fundamental'. But as soon as one moves outside those circles the terms are used in ways that are
complex and contested. Even without a well-deﬁned meaning, the terms are laden with misleading
philosophical connotations. On the question of whether space is 'illusory' if not fundamental, see Lewis
(, ).
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
151
Once the ambiguities in the central notions are resolved, it begins to emerge that
what separates the two sides of the debate is a very deep division between two ways of
doing metaphysics. On the one hand, there is the purist (represented here by David
Albert, and elsewhere by people like David Wallace () and myself) whose
standards for ontology are mathematical clues that guide physics at the fundamental
level. On the other hand, there is the a priori metaphysician whose standards are
closeness to common sense. The standards for choosing between fundamental
ontologies in physics are the kinds of formal clues that I have highlighted here, and
that push in the direction of an Ur-space:one that plays the same role in individu-
ation in fundamental ontology that Our-space plays in individuation of the ontology
of common sense, but which is not three-dimensional.
.Reichenbach's Cube
I want to add here, one last example. This one drawn from Reichenbach. It comes
from Experience and Prediction.¹⁵ It is not a quantum example. Reichenbach writes:
Imagine a world in which the whole of mankind is imprisoned in a huge cube, the walls on
which are made of sheets of white cloth, translucent as the screen of a cinema but not
permeable by direct light rays. Outside this cube there live birds, the shadows of which are
projected on the ceiling of the cube by the sunrays; on account of the translucent character of
this screen, the shadow-ﬁgures of the birds can be seen by the men within the cube. The birds
themselves cannot be seen, and their singing cannot be heard. To introduce the second set of
shadow-ﬁgures on the vertical plane, we image a system of mirrors outside the cube which a
friendly ghost has constructed in such a way that a second system of light rays running
horizontally projects shadow-ﬁgures of the birds on one of the vertical walls of the cube . . . this
invisible friend of mankind . . . leaves [those inside the cube] to their own observations and
waits to see whether they will discover the birds outside.
(pp. -)
Penetration through the walls is impossible, so all that they have to go on is
correlations in the movements of the shadows, and as Reichenbach observes:
If the shade awags its tail, then the shade aalso wags its tail at the same moment. Sometimes
there are ﬁghts among the shades; then, if ais in a ﬁght with b, ais always simultaneously in
a ﬁght with b.
(p. )
The story has a hero—unsurprisingly called 'Copernicus'—who proposed a radical
and suggestive theory.
He will maintain that the strange correspondence between the two shades of one pair cannot
be a matter of chance but that these two shades are nothing but effects caused by one individual
thing situated outside the cube within free space. He calls these things 'birds' and says that
these are animals ﬂying outside the cube, different from the shadow-ﬁgures, having an
existence of their own, and that the black spots are nothing but shadows.
(p. )
The example has the same form as Bohm's ﬁsh tank. It occurs in the context of a
discussion of the inference from cross modal patterns in sensory phenomena to the
¹⁵ Reichenbach (). There is a very nice formal discussion by Elliot Sober () that connects it to
common cause reasoning.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
152
existence of an external world. And that analogy is apt here as well. In each of these
cases, we trace correlations to a common source.¹⁶ We have links between 'images' or
'shadows', which have a secondary existence, connections among which are not
explained by causal processes that pass through the space in they live, but common
links to something outside the space in which the images are projected. The sugges-
tion is that these same inference patterns are pointing towards treating Our-space as
something less than fundamental.
These are the kinds of signs that usually lead us to a search for degrees of freedom
that screen off the connection. What is special about the quantum case is that those
degrees of freedom can't be assigned to volumes of space in the natural and familiar
way (viz., as representing non-contextual, intrinsic properties whose effect on other
regions is mediated by local inﬂuences).¹⁷ The way to think of the epistemic position
of the theories is that she is solving simultaneous equations for the degrees of
freedom controlling a range of observable effects, where the nature of those degrees
of freedom is itself up for grabs.¹⁸ This is what is going on in the example that
Reichenbach was pointing to:the inference from correlations across sensory streams
to an external world.¹⁹ In microphysics, the data streams are instrumentally mediated
sources of information about a world whose ultimate structure is inferred, and the
hope is to approach understanding of the basic elements of nature at least up to the
level to which our instruments are able to probe. We form an increasingly articulate
understanding of the unobservable substructure of the world as we learn to distin-
guish separable components, isolate their individual ranges of motion and see how
their joint movements produce the visible motion. The clues that we use in these
cases are the same ones to which we are responding in these everyday inferences. We
¹⁶ It might seem surprising that Reichenbach does not try to justify this as an instance of his Common
Cause Principle. That Principle received its most explicit defense in his (posthumously published) 
book, The Direction of Time (Reichenbach ). The discussion in Experience and Prediction was
published in . It would be interesting to know more about the trajectory of his thought in this
period.
¹⁷ The idea that there are degrees of freedom that screen off the connection between particles in
entangled states is not new. Many people have suggested that we should just think of the quantum state
as containing information about degrees of freedom that don't have a spatiotemporal location, or can't be
localized in any volume of space. In formal terms, that is a natural thing to say. The wave-function contains
information about degrees of freedom that can't be localized. The problem is that if we allow causal agents
outside of space, we break the connection between space and causal structure that we have in a classical
setting. The suggestion here is that Ur-space just is the space that makes the causal structure explicit. The
role played in a classical setting by Our-space is played in this setting by Ur-space.
¹⁸ Consider a doctor trying to explain an array of co-presenting symptoms. She doesn't start out with
a clear and distinct idea of the source (is it microbe? a tumor? an unknown disease?), but there is a
default assumption that if the symptoms always present together they probably have a common source.
In that case, she can open up the body and check her hypothesis. In physics, this kind of direct
veriﬁcation is not an option. We are like ﬁsherman trying to ﬁgure out what is producing ripples on the
surface of an opaque body of water, we can send down lines and probes, but we can't go down there and
check our hypotheses. We rely unavoidably on heavily mediated information streams, and it is our
theories that individuate their source.
¹⁹ We don't (of course) make that inference consciously. It is made (effectively) by the brain in
processing sensory clues for spatially structured perceptual presentations. Reichenbach is seeking here
simply to make the structure of the inference explicit.
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi



Comp. by: G.Barath
Stage : Proof
ChapterID: 0004539025
Date:6/12/19
Time:13:17:55
Filepath:D:/BgPr/OUP_CAP/IN/Process1/0004539025.3d
Dictionary : OUP_UKdictionary
153
look at mutual constraints on independent variation as symptoms of redundancy in
our information and use them to triangulate to a common source.²⁰
.Shifting the Intuitive Weight
There are two ontological attitudes one can take in approaching the interpretation of
quantum mechanics. One assumes a broadly classical ontology of three-dimensional
objects (particles, conﬁgurations of particles, or macroscopic measuring devices, as
the case may be) and supposes that the quantum laws describe how the categorical
properties of these objects change over time. The other attitude turns that story on its
head. On this view, what we see in three-space, are mere appearances: i.e., partial and
perhaps redundant representations of a reality whose intrinsic structure is unknown.
Correlations trace to underlying identities, dispositions are grounded in categorical
properties, the three-dimensional space of classical physics (or four-dimensional
space-time of relativistic physics) is recovered as a derivative structure.
In practical terms, making the gestalt shift from the ﬁrst to the second attitude
means abandoning the idea that there should be a well-behaved story about what
happens in three-space, calling off the search for a physical process in space-time by
which the components of an entangled system inﬂuence one another, relinquishing
the call for continuous trajectories and rejecting any attempt to describe what is
happening in three-space in the gaps between measurements. It has a rather different
explanatory task:recovering what we see in three-space from a deeper structure. The
two styles of explanation are very different. One asks 'what are the processes in space-
time that explain the correlations?' The other asks 'how do correlations in space-time
emerge from the structure of the underlying reality?'
Many parts of physics have made this shift already. In cosmology, and quantum
gravity, as I said, it is routine to treat space (and perhaps space-time) as a derivative
structure. The reasons are complex, and more highly theoretical.²¹ The physics, as
always, proceeds under its own steam. But the philosophical imagination is lagging
behind. That is in part because the philosophical imagination tends to be guided by
common sense, and not by the kinds of formal clues that I have been pointing to here.
My colleague Richard Healey is fond of saying that if we want to know what physics
is telling us about the world, we should be looking at our best and most fundamental
theories:quantum ﬁeld theory, or quantum gravity, certainly standard, non-
relativistic quantum mechanics. He's right about that. But it is still worth looking
back and seeing whether we can see suggestions of a non-spatiotemporal order even
in the most familiar and elementary quantum phenomena, the ones that are at the
heart of the difference between the classical and quantum world.
Whether an approach like this works will remain to be seen. Ultimately, these are
physical questions. They won't be settled by philosophical argument, but by calcu-
lation and experiment, and the detailed development of theory.
²⁰ If criteria of identity for underlying beables are given independently, the situation is different. So it is
really only when we have no independent criteria of identity for the underlying beables that these kinds of
constraints guide individuation, favoring redundancy over coincidence.
²¹ See Wüthrich and Huggett () as well as the references in note .
OUP UNCORRECTED PROOF - FIRST PROOF, 6/12/2019, SPi
-


