"You know you've achieved perfection in design, not when you have nothing more to add, but when you have 
nothing more to take away." (De Saint-Exupery) 
 
Symmetry and Superfluous Structure: lessons from history and tempered enthusiasmi  
Jenann Ismael 
University of Arizona 
jtismael@u.arizona.edu 
 
In this chapter, I will discuss a particularly powerful method for identifying and excising 
superfluous structure in a formalism.  Superfluous structure is theoretical structure which plays no 
role supporting dynamical behavior.  
Mathematical Methods in Physics 
In its most abstract form, an ontology is an account of fundamental degrees of freedom in nature. 
The metaphysician asks, what are the independently varying components of nature, their internal 
degrees of freedom and the configurations they can assume? The rationalist metaphysician 
supposes that we have some form of rational insight into the nature of reality.  The naturalistic 
metaphysician relies on observation and experiment. Her task is to infer ontology from data. Given 
an ontology and a set of laws, one can generate a range of possible behavior,ii so the naturalistic 
metaphysician faces an inverse problem: how does she infer backwards from a range of observed 
behavior to underlying ontology?  
Pre-scientific metaphysics was led by imagination.  For the likes of Thales, Aristotle, Heraclitus, 
and Abelard, imagination was the primary tool in trying to develop insight into the nature of the 
world.  But imagination has certain inherent limits.  As complexity increases, visualizability 
decreases.  In this setting, mathematics begins to emerge as an essential tool. For one thing, the 
evidence becomes difficult to survey. Mathematics is needed to provide compact ways of 
representing the vast bodies of data we now bring to bear on theorizing. For another thing, 
mathematics gives us new ways of recognizing and disclosing regularities in the data.  From 
Galileo's discovery of the law of the pendulum (1602) to Kepler's discovery of the laws of planetary 
motion (1609, 1619), the most important discoveries turn out to be less a matter of finding new 
phenomena than of revealing hidden patterns in the data. And searching is not a matter of putting 

 
2 
on boots and going out into the wild, but rather of sitting in the parlor in yours slippers and 
looking through the data on paper for hidden patterns. Brahe was a scientist in the first sense. He 
had his eyes trained on the stars.  Kepler was a scientist in this second sense; he had his eyes 
trained on the numbers, and he saw patterns everywhere. There was the famous scheme with the 
geometric solids that was supposed to reveal God's geometrical plan for the universe, and his 
harmonic theory, which linked geometry, cosmology and astrology through a series of musical 
intervals.iii  He did discover the laws of planetary motion, but he also proposed that the ellipticities 
of the planet orbits were determined by tunes they hummed as they circled. As crazy as it looks to 
modern eyes, it has nearly perfect correspondence to Brahe's measurements. 
Once one has one's eyes on the right quantities, regularities in the phenomena emerge with clarity, 
but identifying those quantities takes special insight, and can be a long and arduous process. 
Consider Galileo's discovery of the law of the pendulum. When he was 20 Galileo noticed a lamp 
swinging overhead while he was in a cathedral. Curious to find out how long it took the lamp to 
swing back and forth, he used his pulse to time large and small swings and noticed something that 
no one else had apparently realized: viz. that the period of each swing was the same. People had 
seen swinging lamps before, but they did not have their eyes on the right quantities and (therefore) 
had not seen the regularity or the pattern.  
What led Galileo to see the regularity?  Not just his personal genius. Galileo was educated against 
the background of Aristotelian science, but there was a complex process that led his attention to 
the right quantities.  Kuhn (1970) remarks on this process: 
"Seeing constrained fall, the Aristotelian would measure... the weight of the stone, the vertical 
height to which it had been raised, and the time required for it to achieve rest.  Together with the 
resistance of the medium, these were the conceptual categories deployed by Aristotelian science 
when dealing with a falling body.... Galileo saw the swinging stone quite differently. Archimedes' 
work on floating bodies made the medium non-essential; the impetus theory rendered the motion 
symmetrical and enduring; and Neo-Platonism directed Galileo's attention to the motion's circular 
form. He therefore measured only weight, radius, angular displacement, and time per swing 
...given [these], pendulum-like regularities were very nearly accessible to inspection"iv 
The (sometimes extended) process of zeroing in the invariant relationships can be hidden from 
view; because once the invariant relationships have been identified they get embodied in the 
classifications we employ.v To call a system a pendulum, for example, is already to assimilate it to a 
category of things that are characterized by these invariant relationships, but arriving at the 

 
3 
category of a pendulum is a part of the process of discovery.  'Pendulum' not a category that pre-
Galilean philosophers employed.   
Our brains are attuned to recognizing patterns. We can see that this rug has a repeated pattern,
 
 that this is the same pattern in different colors,  
 
and that the top half of this scene is the same as the bottom half, reflected through an axis,  
 
This are quite simple patterns, but we can also see more complex ones, like that the pattern on the 
wall is the projection on a plane of the pattern on the lamp's surface.  

 
4 
 
In saying that we can see these patterns, I mean that the apprehension of the pattern is a perceptual 
phenomenon: it is a part of the processing of sensory information that requires no conscious effort 
or inference on our part.  Recognizing first order patterns (repetition, symmetry, regularity) in the 
visual, auditory, or tactual field is something that the biological brain was made to do, and it does it 
very well. The regularity that Galileo discerned, however, and the sorts of regularities that get 
embodied in scientific laws quite generally, are not first-order patterns in an array of visually 
presented properties.  They are typically higher-order invariant relationships between measurable 
quantities. They are not the kind of thing one sees in the way one sees the regularity in the pattern 
of a rug, or the symmetry in the photo of the reflected landscape.  
Mathematical representation - whether in symbolic, geometric, or graphical form - discloses 
regularities hidden in the phenomena. It is unavoidable in the search for dynamical regularities, 
since in that case the items whose relations are being examined are not presented simultaneously in 
perception.  We need to write down a time-line, draw a trajectory, or otherwise represent a 
system's history in order to get a look at the relationships between its parts.  We use diagrams, 
graphs and equations in presentations to a set of relationships that we want to call attention to.  In 
the mathematical investigation that precedes discovery, different notations are used in an 
exploratory way.  The physicist introduces notations that highlight some relationships and 
suppress others. When she hits on a good representation, patterns emerge and regularities disclose 
themselves on inspection. One way of describing what she is doing is that she is using 
mathematical representation to transform a higher-order pattern recognition problem into a first 
order problem. She plays around with different ways of representing the phenomena until she finds 

 
5 
one in which previously hidden regularities are rendered visible. So she is using symbolic tools to 
transform a problem into one that the biological brain can handle.vi  
The process is not just useful for capturing patterns in motion over time.  The recognition that 
two apparently very different kinds of motion are the same is also a matter of recognizing an 
abstract, higher-order similarity. This kind of thing is very much in evidence in Galileo's 
notebooks.  Here he is comparing the 3d motion of a pendulum to the motion of objects moving on 
an inclined plane. He didn't have stopwatches and modern instruments to measure how the motion 
of a stone thrown in the air changes speed with height, but he realized that by using gently sloped 
ramps or boards he could effectively slow the motion down to something that could be measured. 
 
 
Metaphysics in the old days was a largely solitary project that made use of sparse, mostly 
qualitative data. Natural philosophers relied on first order regularities in the behavior of visibly 
similar things  (fire rises, massive objects fall), and a single powerful imagination produces a vision 
of the world that reproduces those regularities. Metaphysics in the days of mathematical physics, 
by contrast, uses large bodies of precise, quantitative data. Mathematical methods are employed to 
identify higher order patterns hidden in the data. It is really with Newton that this method receives 
purest expression.  It is obvious in retrospect, once you have your eyes on the right quantities 
where the regularities lie.  But it took Newton's physical insight to see beyond the quantities that 
the impetus theory directed attention to, and fix on force, mass and acceleration as exhibiting the 
kinds of invariant relationships that could be captured in laws. Whitehead said of Newton that 
what was so characteristic of him as a natural philosopher was that he had 'an eye attuned to the 
mathematicizable substructure of reality.' The same could be said for the theoretical physicist quite 
generally.   

 
6 
Symmetries as Clues to Superfluous Structure 
The first task for the physicist is to capture the regularities. But once we have a precise 
quantitative description of the regularities in dynamical behavior in hand, another role emerges for 
mathematics. This one is less obvious and less often talked about in philosophical reflections on 
science.  It is much more recent: it is really only in the 20th century that it has come into its own as 
an important technique in physical theorizing.  It has less to do with the discovery of laws, and 
more to do directly with discerning the underlying ontology. This is where symmetries play an 
important role. What symmetries of the right kind do is help identify and excise structure (either 
structure in the formalism or structure that we've attributed to the object) that is playing no 
dynamical role.  It turns out that here as well, mathematical methods prove much more powerful 
than the imagination by itself. Indeed, the imagination is playing catch up.  We use these methods 
to arrive at a new formal structure (which we now think captures the intrinsic structure of the 
physical reality we are trying to represent), and we are left to try to accommodate our imagination. 
It is really with these methods that physics comes into its own not just as a way of discovering 
laws, but as a very distinctive way of doing metaphysics.   
The first domain of application of these methods was space-time physics. Here the focus is entirely 
on motion. We have formalism in hand that captures the laws of motion and the goal is (i) to excise 
physically insignificant structure in the underlying space, and (ii) to do it cleanly, leaving in place 
structure that is needed to support the dynamics. Let us begin by looking at dynamical symmetries 
i.e., symmetries that preserve a theory's laws.vii  And let us focus on dynamical symmetries that 
map solutions onto empirically indistinguishable counterpart. Now, we can notice that if we regard 
those solutions as representing physically distinct situations, we are recognizing structure in the 
situations depicted by those solutions that is not just unobservable, but indiscernible in a much 
stronger sense.  It generates no measurable effect, plays no role in the law-governed, observable 
dynamics of bodies, measuring instruments, etc. viii If, on the other hand, we identify the physical 
situations represented by those solutions, effectively treating the structure that distinguishes them 
as a merely notational difference, we eliminate the dynamically irrelevant structure, and we are left 
with an account of the underlying structure that doesn't recognize physical differences between 
systems that doesn't produce differences in the observable, law-governed behavior of the system.   
It is now fairly customary to reconstruct the history of space-time physics as one in which the 
theoretical progression is driven by a progressive elimination of excess structure, using symmetries 
as a guide.ix  We start with a dynamics formulated in a space that is quite rich in structure, and 
then we use the dynamical symmetries to help us identify, and whittle away, structure that is 

 
7 
playing no dynamical role.x Newton formulated his dynamics against the background of an absolute 
space and time with a very rich geometrical structure.  Space was attributed the structure of E3. 
Time was attributed the structure of the real line, and the individual parts of space were thought to 
persist through time. It was observed that there are symmetries of the laws - Galilean boosts - that 
map solutions onto empirically indistinguishable solutions that were nevertheless regarded as 
physically distinct. That meant that Newtonian Mechanics with absolute space and time recognizes 
physical structure that plays no dynamical role.  We want to eliminate all and only structure not 
invariant under Galilean transformations.  We find a way to do that by eliminating identity of 
points over time, retaining the structure to distinguish absolute acceleration but eliminating 
absolute velocity (retaining a distinction between inertial and non-inertial motion, but elimination a 
distinction between absolute rest and absolute velocity).  There we have the excision of structure 
that is not playing a dynamical role. The result is Galilean space-time.   
Here is Newtonian space-time, with absolute space and time. 
   
Here is Galilean space-time.  As in Newtonian space-time time is absolute and the spatial geometry 
on every spatial hyper surface is E3.  The difference is that there is no identity of points over time.  
 

 
8 
When phenomena proved resistant to Newtonian treatment, Newtonian physics was replaced by 
Special Relativity. Since we have new laws, we have to repeat the process.  If we want to know the 
intrinsic structure of the space that supports STR, we take the laws of STR and look at their 
symmetries. STR laws are invariant under Poincare transformations and Poincare transformations 
map solutions onto empirically indiscernible counterparts, so we eliminate geometric structure not 
invariant under those transformations.  The result Minkowski space-time. 
Here's the contrast between Galilean space-time and Minkowski space-time. In Galilean space-
time, we don't have identity of points over time, but we have planes of absolute simultaneity. 
 
Those have been eliminated in Minkowski space-time. In its place we have only the light-cone 
structure. 
 
The schema for arriving at a space-time that excises structure not invariant under symmetries 
goes like this:  Start with the space of solutions to the laws. Consider the symmetries of the laws 
that map solutions onto empirically indiscernible solutions.  Those symmetries define an 
equivalence class of solutions that we now regard as physically equivalent. Structure not invariant 

 
9 
under the symmetries (i.e., structure that distinguishes solutions in the same equivalence class) is 
interpreted as physically insignificant. Structure that is invariant (i.e., structure shared by solutions 
in the same equivalence class) is regarded as physically significant. Of course this is a rather 
indirect method of representation, and it is better when we can replace the equivalence classes with 
an intrinsic representation of that geometrical structure but it serves well as a way of capturing the 
logic of the reasoning. Belot calls the state-space obtained in this way, the reduced state space.xi  I 
described this deliberately in the most general way.  The only notions I used were (i) a very general 
notion of symmetry (the mappings of the solution space onto itself), and (ii) empirical 
indistinguishability.  We can build more structure into the state-and require that the 
transformations that are candidates for interpretation as equivalence relations preserve that 
structure.  So, for example, we might require that transformations that are candidates for 
interpretation as equivalence relations preserve differences that produce measurable effects when 
coupled with neighboring theories, or we might have other reasons for thinking that differences 
between models related by a given transformation are physically real. Whatever additional 
requirements we impose, however, would have to be motivated in physical terms. 
What is characteristic of the move to a reduced state space is a simplification of the ontology in the 
sense that there is a reduction in degrees of freedom that are recognized in the state of a classical 
system. Belot carries out the construction, and shows how degrees of freedom get eliminated in 
detail, for the case of classical mechanics.  The state space Newton used for his mechanics of N 
particles is 6N-dimensional. In constructing the reduced space of the Newtonian Mechanics by 
identifying states related by Galilean symmetries, we reduce the theory's degrees of freedom by 10 
(so the reduced state-space has 6N-10 degrees of freedom). Quantities like the position and the 
linear motion of the universe's center of mass have been eliminated. Acceleration, but not position 
or velocity, remains absolute. 
The inference from "S and S* are related by a space-time symmetry" to "S and S* are physically 
equivalent" has been called "Leibniz equivalence," because it is a modern way of motivating 
Leibnizian conclusions about the identity of space-times that exhibit the right kind of 
indiscernibility.xii We can apply Leibniz Equivalence to General Relativity (GR). Unlike the cases 
we just considered, the dynamics of GR isn't defined against the fixed background of a single space-
time. Instead, many distinct space-times (with their own symmetries) are solutions of the same 
theory. Since we are interested in symmetries of the laws that map solutions onto empirically 
indistinguishable solutions, in GR we look to the diffeomorphisms. Applying Leibniz equivalence, a 
physical space-time corresponds to a diffeomorphism equivalence class of mathematical space times. 
The structure transformed by diffeormorphisms is then regarded physically insignificant. 

 
10 
It turns out that this has one nice consequence.  It permits the interpreter of GR to avoid the Hole 
Argument, and the chanceless, unobservable indeterminism that the argument would entail if 
diffeomorphism-related solutions were regarded as represented physically distinct space-times.xiii  
But it also leads to new questions.  So, for example, if we excise structure that is not 
diffeomorphism invariant, then it would seem that the only quantities that remain are constant 
along gauge orbits.  It turns out (as Earman (2002) pointed out) that these quantities don't evolve, 
so it seems we are left with the result that there is no temporal change.  This initiates a lot of 
discussion of what that could mean.  Maudlin has argued that this is an absurd result. Healey has 
argued that there's a mistake in Maudlin's reasoning. But in any case, that's the method.  You apply 
it and see what you get. You use the symmetries as clues to the presence of excess structure (either 
as excess structure attributed to the world, or redundancy in the formalism), but they are only clues, 
part of the naturalistic metaphysician's toolkit. One has to work through the results of applying the 
method to see whether it generates a physically sensible conclusion, and it all has to be done 
judgment and care. 
Remarks  
A few remarks are in order here.  
First, this sort of reasoning has become enshrined as part of the standard way for presenting the 
theoretical progression in space-time physics. It goes along with the very big theoretical shift from 
thinking of space-time as the fixed background against which all of physics takes place to thinking 
of it as part of the subject matter of physics.  It canonizes the accepted justification for rejecting 
Newtonian space-time in favor of Galilean, motivating Minkowski space-time in STR, and guiding 
the interpretation of GR.  But it is not an actual, on-the-ground historical description of the messy 
set of facts that drive the opinion of the individual scientist or the community as a whole. There 
was some of this kind of reasoning on the ground, but it was tangled up with less fruitful lines of 
reasoning, and it emerged with full clarity only in retrospect.xiv In representing the history of 
physics for 'textbook' purposes, we tend to bring into relief arguments that lead us to what we now 
think is the right conclusion, forgetting the false starts and confusions, portraying the theoretical 
progression as a rational exchange of one theory for another.  But that also shows that this kind of 
history has an important normative component that actual history does not. The importance of this 
reasoning has emerged through backward looking filters.  We now know which avenues of 
development turned out to be fruitful.  The authority of this method of identifying and excising 
structure derives from its historical success in leading to those avenues. 

 
11 
Second, translating this reasoning into a technical setting is non-trivial. I used a very general 
notion of symmetry that is much wider than those that are used even in a classical setting when we 
talk of the symmetry group of a theory. Because of that, I needed to invoke a notion of empirical 
indistinguishability to narrow down the class of symmetries that are candidates for defining 
equivalence classes.  Without that restriction, the directive to identify solutions related by 
symmetries of the laws would mean no theory would have more than one solution, so we would 
lose all of those physically real distinctions between solutions that represent manifestly different 
situations.xv The problem, however, is that empirical indistinguishability is a notion that we impose 
from the outside. It is not rigorously defined in a general way.xvi  There are more specific, 
rigorously definable notions of symmetry on offer in classical theories (e.g., the generalized, or 
Hamiltonian symmetries, or variational symmetries).xvii  The reason for not employing those in this 
capacity (i.e., as identifying those symmetries that alert us to the presence of excess structure) is (i) 
we don't want to tie the relevant notion of symmetry too tightly to any particular formalism, and 
(ii) they won't, in any case, do the work that we want them to do here.xviii   
Third, there are few who would deny that (i) if you have a formalism that is empirically adequate, 
and you can identify structure that is playing no physically meaningful role generating testable 
predictions either with respect to the phenomena that are the primary domain of that theory or in 
coupling with other theories to generate that fall outside that domain, it should be excised and (ii) 
that symmetries of the laws that map solutions onto empirically indistinguishable counterparts can 
be a good guide at identifying structure that plays no physically meaningful role, it can be very 
difficult to implement this reasoning in the complex setting of a real theory. But the clean 
separation of physically significant from physically insignificant structure is often very hard to 
achieve. It usually requires the development of new formalisms. And even when we can separate 
the structures, the interpretation of the results is difficult. The re-education of the imagination that 
was needed in the move from Newtonian to Galilean, and from Galilean to Minkowski space-time, 
provide good examples.  It is something that is even more amply illustrated in the case of modern 
gauge theories, so we turn now to those. 
Gauge theories 
When we turn to non-space-time theories like electrostatics, electromagnetism, or quantum 
mechanics, we look to internal symmetries, i.e., transformations that alter the values of physical 
quantities that are supposed to represent the internal degrees of freedom pertaining to a system (or 
the matter in some volume of space-time) rather than changing anything spatially or temporally 
external to it. We distinguish global internal symmetries from local symmetries.  Global internal 

 
12 
symmetries (like the electrostatic potential, or phase transformations in quantum mechanics) act 
identically on the values of all points throughout space-time.  Local symmetries diverge from point 
to point. The best-known example of a theory with local gauge symmetry is classical 
electrodynamics. The vector potential is a four-dimensional vector; the time component is the 
familiar electric potential (V) while the space components collectively form the magnetic potential 
(A). Since physical predictions are fixed by the field tensor, which is left unchanged if we add the 
gradient of a scalar, if we follow the kind of reasoning we applied above, the most natural thing 
would be to regard structure not invariant under this transformation as physically unreal. The 
discovery and experimental confirmation of the Aharanov-Bohm effect, however, seemed to many 
to present an insuperable obstacle to that line of reasoning, because it showed that changes in the 
vector potential lead to a measurable difference in the behavior of quantum particles passing by 
solenoids despite the zero field in their vicinity.xix One could say that there is action at a distance 
from the field inside the solenoid, but if we want to avoid a new form of non-locality that, we have 
to work a little harder to separate physically significant from physically insignificant structure. So 
begins the search for a new ontology for classical electromagnetism. 
Where this reasoning leads 
One of the most interesting aspects of this kind of reasoning from a philosophical point of view is 
that after getting rid of the surplus, we are left with quantities that aren't localized in point-sized 
regions of space. On Healey's view the fundamental quantities are the "holonomies," defined on 
closed loops in space-time (Healey, 2007).xx  On another view - discussed by Maudlinxxi- they are 
gauge-invariant values of the connection, which are (in Maudlin's parlance) "hyper-local," so that 
there is no determinate matter of fact about whether distant space-time points agree as to their 
value. Either way the clues we get from symmetry in this setting push us in new ontological 
directions.  They push against common sense, and they push against programs in analytic 
metaphysics.  One of the defining principles of David Lewis' metaphysical program - which 
occupies a very large share of research in contemporary analytic metaphysics - is that the 
fundamental building blocks of the universe are point-sized events in space-time.xxii 
When we have this kind of conflict - i.e., when the methods described here which use purely 
mathematical clues to isolate the basic degrees of freedom in nature push against the programs in 
analytic metaphysics - it forces us to choose allegiances.  Do we let our ideas about ontology be led 
entirely by physics, or is there some other form of reasoning embodied in the methods of analytic 
philosophy that has authority? A first step in the direction of providing an answer to that question 
is getting a clear idea of what is driving ontology in physics.  I think that if there is a method that 

 
13 
can be discerned in the bewildering detail and specificity of discussions in physics about 
fundamental ontology, this is a big part of it.  We find laws that capture the invariant relationships, 
and then we use symmetries to identify and excise structure that is not playing a dynamical role. 
There is an important footnote to this debate. David Wallace has recently challenged the role that 
the Aharanov-Bohm has played in this discussion.xxiii He argues that if we keep track of the 
complex scalar field to which the magnetic vector potential is coupled, we find gauge-invariant 
features of the scalar field and potential together that explain the effect, and can be given a local 
characterization.  If he is right, the interpretation of gauge -invariance as permuting physically 
insignificant structure be restored, without non-locality, and the more radical conclusions can be 
avoided.  As can be seen from the ongoing nature of these debates, these issues are unsettled, and 
we can hope to gain some clarity in years to come. 
Difficulties of application 
Some general remarks about all of this worth emphasizing: 
First, it is not a simple and straightforward judgment that some bit of structure is not playing an 
empirically meaningful role. There is no way around the case-by-case careful judgment about what 
is empirically significant and what is not.   All of the phenomena have to be considered, including 
phenomena that are generated when a theory is coupled to a theory outside its primary domain of 
application. The Aharanov-Bohm provides a good example of this. The effect emerges only when 
an electromagnetic field is coupled to a complex vector field, and so it doesn't emerge until classical 
electromagnetism is combined with a theory that describes the behavior of quantum particles. 
Second, as I've emphasized, even when we've become convinced that there is some structure that 
is not physically meaningful, excising that structure leaving in place all the physically meaningful 
structure is far from easy.  The sanitized history of space-time theories made it look as though we 
identify empirically superfluous structure and go in to do a clean little surgery to remove the 
offending formation, leaving everything else in place. In retrospect, it looks clear as day.  But while 
we are working in a formalism in which the offending structure is bound up with the living tissue, 
the discussion is complex and extremely hard to sort out. Hence the difficulty of ongoing 
discussion of gauge theories.  
Third, applying the method is never free of interpretive assumptions.  There is no purely formal 
way of recognizing redundant structure.  As I mentioned above, if we simply identify all solutions 
related by symmetries of the laws, we end up with a single solution to every set of laws. Before we 

 
14 
have a structure to which we can apply these sorts of symmetry probing reasons without that kind 
of triviality, we need a set of differences that can function as sufficient conditions for distinctness. 
That has to come from outside the formalism we are working with. I have suggested empirical 
distinguishibility as a generic criterion, because it captures the reasoning that we are trying to 
apply in the murkier, technically involved setting of modern theory. The reasoning is that 
ultimately we are only warranted in postulating unobservable structure that plays a role in 
supporting observable dynamical behavior, and so we should be getting rid of structure that 
doesn't play such a role. The use of symmetries to identify structure that plays no dynamical role, 
however, need not be applied in this general setting. It can also be powerful when applied in a 
setting in which we are willing to take certain structures for granted as representing real physical 
differences for purposes at hand, and we are interested in seeing whether some other set of 
structures play a physically meaningful role (the role of a difference-maker) in producing 
differences at that level. The only way in which this reasoning can be applied in a theory neutral way 
is if there is some basic set of differences that are regarded pre-theoretically as sufficient conditions 
for distinctness.  
Finally, it is a little misleading to say that structures related by a symmetry of the laws never have 
any physical interpretation at all. Carlo Rovelli points out that in the paradigm cases, the structures 
in question are not physically insignificant, but rather implicitly relativized to a reference frame 
that can be embodied in another physical object (like an observer or a measuring device).xxiv  
Frame-dependent quantities like 'being simultaneous with', or 'being at rest' are real and 
measurable (indeed, in some cases, directly observable), but they are not absolute.  So, the problem 
was not that we were regarding as real structures that are 'merely mathematical', but that we were 
regarding as absolute structures that are implicitly relational.  The relations are invariant, and when 
we couple to another object, we can 'measure' the non-invariant quantities directly, though we can't 
translate the results into a description of the invariant quantities until we have a description of our 
own situation in the invariant vocabulary.  So that when we see differences in the values of those 
quantities, we are seeing differences in the perspective from which the object is viewed rather than 
differences intrinsic to the object.  In a Minkowski space-time, for example, observers travelling 
non-inertially relative to one another disagree on simultaneity in the way that observers in 
different locations disagree on what is nearby.  Just so, Rovelli argues, observers who see changes 
in the values of gauge-dependent quantities are seeing changes in their relations to the gauge-
invariant quantities that characterize the intrinsic properties of a system.  
 Justification 

 
15 
There are difficult, open questions about why the method works. There is no a priori logical 
principle that guarantees that this method for limning the structure of our theories won't lead us to 
eliminate structure that represents something real.  We can certainly imagine worlds in which that 
would be so.  Consider, for example, Newton's world with absolute time and space or the non-
localized gauge potential properties view considered by Healey are perfectly intelligible empirical 
possibilities.xxv 
 There are, nevertheless, two broad routes to rationalizing the method that suggest themselves as 
promising. 
(i) The first is the one that I adverted to above:  there is a weaker form of non-logical rationality, 
which we might call 'evidential rationality', that shifts the burden of proof. We start from the 
principle that we aren't warranted in distinguishing elements related by certain kinds of symmetry 
that we know only indirectly, as elements in a structure interpolated behind experience, unless 
differences between those elements produces empirically distinguishable effects. Then we point out 
that someone who recognizes structure that maps solutions of the laws onto empirically 
indistinguishable solutions can be faulted for recognizing structure that they can have no evidence 
for.xxvi  
(ii) The second focuses on issues about reference and argues that if we have a theory in which we 
purport to refer to distinct elements that are not distinguishable by any observation, or their 
relations to anything observable (e.g., two points in absolute space at different times, or internal 
properties that don't make discernibly different impact on measuring devices), we have not really 
managed to do so. We have not actually managed, that is to say, to get our referential hooks into 
two separate elements of reality. What we have, in that case, is actually two names (coined by 
rigidified definite descriptions, obtained from the Ramsey sentence of our theory) for the same 
thing (a coarse-grained object constituted by the pair or more generally, an equivalence class of 
weakly indiscernible objects). This way of rationalizing the method would have the advantage of 
reducing every case of recognizing too much structure in the world to a case of unacknowledged 
redundancy in the formalism.  But it is a tough row to hoe, because it will have to rest on questions 
about how it is that terms in a theoretical formalism come to represent (or refer to) some particular 
bit of the natural world.  That is an issue that is very much contested, and very hard to see one's 
way through.    
The question of why the method works is bound up with the theoretical preference for simpler 
theories. There is a temptation to try to justify the method by appeal to Ockham's razor.  That 

 
16 
temptation should be resisted. xxvii Instead of looking to Ockham's razor for justification of the 
method, better to look at the logic behind the reasoning directly and see if it captures the valid 
heart of Ockham's razor. It might be that the preference for simpler theories is a generalized 
version of the method discussed here.  The idea here would be that whenever you are choosing 
between competing, empirically adequate formalisms, one of which is simpler (where simplicity is 
measured in the most obvious way, by counting up the number of basic degrees of freedom 
postulated), it is a good methodological bet to suppose that the more complex theory has some 
redundancy in the formalism.xxviii   
The real authority of the method, in practice, rests on its historical success at leading to fruitful 
lines of development. It is one of the most distinctive of modern and the question of why it works is 
part of the more general puzzle of why physics works. 
Conclusion 
 I have given the very broad-brush historical background and articulated the kind of reasoning 
behind the use of symmetries of the right kind to zero in on the appropriate ontology, mostly by 
way of providing some context.  The discussion now passes to the highly technical and highly 
specific issues about how to separate the physically significant from the physically insignificant 
structure in classical and quantum gauge theories carried on by those in the trenches, so to speak.  
They are unavoidably complex, unavoidably empirical, and they demand looking at theories in full 
detail, one by one.  
 
 
 
                                                        
i I would like to thank Jim Weatherall, Jeff Barrett, Richard Healey, Gordon Belot, Chris Smeenk, Giovanni 
Valente, Hans Halvorson and other participants in the workshop on the Foundations of Gauge Theories.  
This paper exists because of that invitation, and I learned a great deal from the discussion there. Special 
thanks to Alastair Wilson for inisghtful comments on an earlier draft. 
iiThere are two ways of doing this.  One can apply a combinatorial principle to the basic elements to obtain a 
set of possible configurations and then apply the laws to generate histories.  Or one can apply a combinatorial 
principle to generate all possible sequences of states and then use the laws to narrow those down to 
physically possible histories. 
iii See J. V. Field & M.E. Bowden, "Kepler's Geometrical Cosmology", Annals of Science 51 (1):95-97 (1994), 
P.M. HRMn (1990), "Kepler's Geometrical Cosmology, International Studies in Philosophy 22 (3):103-103;  
Peter Barker (2002), "Constructing Copernicus", Perspectives on Science 10 (2):208-227. 

 
17 
                                                        
iv Kuhn, Thomas 1996. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Third Edition). University of Chicago Press, 
1996,p. 124. 
vInvariant relationships are, in general, relative to a set of transformations. The general concept of invariance 
is a way of capturing what remains fixed when some specified set of other things are allowed to vary.  
vi The idea our ability to use symbolic tools in this way, may be the cognitive innovation that underwrites a 
cascade of characteristically human abilities was originally developed by Karmiloff-Smith (Karmiloff-Smith, 
A. (1979). A functional approach to child language. Cambridge University Press, and (1986). From meta-process 
to conscious access. Cognition, 23, 95-147).  The idea is that symbolic tools allow us to represent knowledge 
in different formats allowing new kinds of cognitive operation and access has been further developed by a 
number of people. For a sampling, see Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A Developmental 
Perspective on Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MIT Press/Bradford Books., Clark, A. (1993). Associative Engines: 
Connectionism, Concepts and Representational Change. Cambridge, MIT Press., Clark, A. and A. Karmiloff-Smith 
(1993). The Cognizer's Innards: A Psychological & Philosophical Perspective on the Development of 
Thought. Mind & Language. Clark, A., (1998). "Magic Words: How Language Augments Human 
Computation," in P. Carruthers and J. Boucher (eds.), Language and Thought: Interdisciplinary Themes. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 162-183. And Dennett, D. (1994). Labeling and learning 
(Commentary on Clark & Karmiloff-Smith 1994). Mind and Language, 8, 54-48. 
viiThis contrasts with the symmetries of individual solutions. There are further distinctions to be made, 
between continuous and discrete symmetries. Continuous symmetries correspond to continuous changes in 
the geometry of the system, described by continuous or smooth functions. Discrete symmetries correspond to 
non-continuous changes in a system (e.g., reflections or rotations through a fixed degree, permutations or 
interchanges.) 
viii This is true only if we demand that the equations be generally covariant.  That requirement forces us to 
make explicit the features of a system that are crucial to its dynamical behavior. See Ismael, "Curie's 
Principle", Norton, "General covariance and the foundations of general relativity: eight decades of dispute", 
Reports of Progress in Physics, 56:791--861 (1993). 
ix Baker, David John. "Symmetry and the Metaphysics of Physics." Philosophy Compass  5, 12 
(2010): 1157-1166. Brading, Katherine A., and Elena Castellani. Symmetries in Physics: Philosophical 
Reflections . Cambridge University Press, 2003. Tim Maudlin. Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time. 
Princeton University Press 2012. Foundations of Space-Time Theories: Relativistic Physics and Philosophy of 
Science by Michael Friedman, Princeton University Press, 1983.  
x See Shamik Dasgupta, "Overview of Symmetries", this volume.  
xi Belot, Gordon 2001. "Symmetry and Equivalence." In R. Batterman (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Philosophy 
of Physics. Oxford University Press, pp. 318-39 , Belot, Gordon, 2001 "The Principle of Sufficient Reason." 
Journal of Philosophy XCVIII: 55-74.  
xii Norton, John D., "The Hole Argument", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), 
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/spacetime-
holearg/>.Carroll, S. 1997: "Lecture Notes on General Relativity". http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9712019.  
xiiiNorton (2011), ibid.  If one does assume, contrary to the present approach, that there are distinct physical 
possibilities related by diffeomorphisms, a kind of unobservable indeterminism arises in General Relativity 
(GR). This is because a diffeomorphism can sometimes leave a particular surface of simultaneity unchanged 
while shufflng around what happens at which point in the future of that surface. Since the shuffling changes 
nothing invariant under GR's symmetries, the indeterminism disappears on the present approach, where only 
such invariants are regarded as physically real. 

 
18 
                                                        
xivAnyone steeped in the actual history will notice that I didn't mention coordinate systems.  These played a 
central, and mostly unfortunate role in the actual history.  Michael Friedman (1983) contains an historical 
overview. 
xv Van Fraassen and Ismael make a similar suggestion: "Symmetry as a Guide to Superfluous Theoretical 
Structure." In Symmetries in Physics:  Philosophical Reflections, ed. Elena Castellani and Katherine Brading. 
Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
xvi David Albert points out that we don't actually need to insist on a hard line between observable and 
unobservable quantities so long as our theories have a certain kind of causal integration.  If we have some a 
device D whose pointer observables are uncontroversially observable, then any physical quantity that can be 
made, by any physical process, no matter how indirect, to influence the pointer observable on D will then 
count as producing observable differences.  "The Technique of Significables." After Physics, Harvard 
University Press, 2015.  The procedure will fail only for a theory that postulates equivocally observable 
quantities that can't be linked to any unequivocally observable quantity by any procedure. 
xvii Castrillon Lopez and Marsden (2008), "Covariant and Dynamical Reduction for principal Bundle Field 
Theories," Annals of Global Analysis and Geometry 34: 263-285. Cantwell, B. (2002), Introduction to Symmetry 
Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 
xviii Belot, G. (2013) "Symmetry and Equivalence." To appear in The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of 
Physics, R. Batterman ed. (New York: Oxford University Press), pp.  318-339. 
xixVaidman, L. (2012). On the role of potentials in the aharonov-bohm effect. Physical Review A 86, 040101. 
xxHealey's Gauging What's Real (Cambridge University Press, 2007). Holonomies are images of oriented 
closed curves that can be constructed from line integrals of the gauge potential along closed curves). Also, 
Leeds, S. (1999). Gauges: Aharonov, Bohm, Yang, Healey. Philosophy of Science 66, 606-627. Maudlin, T. 
(1998). Healey on the Aharonov-Bohm effect. Philosophy of 65, 361-368.  
 
xxi The Metaphysics within Physics, 2007, 78-103. 
xxii More specifically, when we excise structure that is not invariant under local and global gauge 
transformations, we are left with fundamental quantities that aren't point-sized.  Something similar happens 
in quantum mechanics with respect to phase transformations.  In this case, when we 'mod out' the structure 
not invariant under phase transformations, we are left with a failure of Humean Supervenience, because the 
state of a complex system of spatially separated parts does not supervene on the states of the regions in which 
the parts are located.  All of these point to the failure of the idea that the world is composed of spatially 
localized degrees of freedom, which jointly determine the state of the world as a whole. 
xxiii https://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5073 . 
xxiv"Why Gauge?", http://arxiv.org/abs/1308.5599. 
xxv Given any rule that says 'whenever S is a symmetry of the laws and S maps a onto empirically 
indistinguishable counterpart b, then a=b, we can immediately construct a counterexamples in the form of a 
universe in which S permutes physically real elements but in which S is a contingent symmetry of our world. 
Indeed combinatorial principles will entail that for any account of what the basic elements are, there will be 
some metaphysically possible distinct situations a and b that are related by S. If S is reflection through a 
plane P, and the laws are symmetric with respect to S, there will be bilaterally symmetric solutions to the 
laws. So the inference from 'S is a symmetry of the laws and S maps a onto empirically indistinguishable 
counterpart b', to 'a=b', would fail.  
xxviThat is a strong intuition, but making it more than an intuition would require showing that that given a 
body of data that respects the symmetry is much more likely to have been produced by a situation in which 
a=b than a world in which a≠b, i.e., the probability of evidence obeying the symmetry being generated by an 

 
19 
                                                        
a=b world is higher than a a≠b world.  The problem is that these kinds of probabilistic claims always depend 
on a measure over possible worlds, and can be reversed with different choices of measure.  
xxviiThere are as many different versions of Ockham's razor as there are notions of simplicity.  Elliot Sober, 
Ockham's Razors: A User's Manual (2015) is an excellent discussion of different versions of the principle and its 
various applicaitons. 
xxviii This might not be the right way to put it to the extent that it suggests we are identifying structures 
that have no physical interpretation at all, i.e., part of the mathematical machinery that is empty of any 
physical significance. But that is not quite right. Rovelli makes the point elegantly in "Why Gauge?" 
(http://arxiv.org/abs/1308.5599). In the paradigm cases, the structures in question are not physically 
insignificant, but rather implicitly relativized to a reference frame that can be embodied in another physical 
object (like an observer or a measuring device).  Frame-dependent quantities like 'being simultaneous with', 
or 'being at rest' are real and measurable (indeed, in some cases, directly observable), but they are not absolute.  
So, the problem was not that we were regarding as real structures that are 'merely mathematical', but that we 
were regarding as absolute structures that are implicitly relational.  The relations are invariant, and when we 
couple to another object, we can 'measure' the non-invariant quantities directly (though we can't translate 
them into a description of the invariant quantities when we know our own situation, so to speak).  So that 
when we see differences in the values of those quantities, we are seeing differences in the perspective from 
which the object is viewed rather than differences intrinsic to the object.  In a Minkowski space-time, for 
example, observers travelling non-inertially relative to one another disagree on simultaneity in the way that 
observers in different locations disagree on what is nearby.  Just so, Rovelli argues, observers who see 
changes in the values of gauge-dependent quantities are seeing changes in their relations to the gauge-
invariant quantities that characterize the intrinsic properties of a system. None of this means that there aren't 
some symmetries that permute physically empty features of notation. It is only to suggest that gauge 
invariance is not best understood that way 
 

