Educational Philosophy and Theory
ISSN: 0013-1857 (Print) 1469-5812 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rept20
An Education in Narratives
Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher (2014) An Education in Narratives, Educational Philosophy
and Theory, 46:6, 600-609, DOI: 10.1080/00131857.2013.779213
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2013.779213
Published online: 27 Mar 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 736
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rept20

An Education in Narratives
SHAUN GALLAGHERa,b
aDepartment of Philosophy, University of Memphis; bSchool of Humanities, University of
Hertfordshire
Abstract
I argue for a broad education in narratives as a way to address several problems found in
moral psychology and social cognition. First, an education in narratives will address a
common problem of narrowness or lack of diversity shared by virtue ethics and the simulation
theory of social cognition. Secondly, it also solves the 'starting problem' involved in the simu-
lation approach. These discussions also relate directly to theories of empathy with special sig-
niﬁcance given to situational empathy.
Keywords: phronesis, simulation, narrative, diversity, social cognition
A Narrow Road to Virtue: Imitation and Aristotle's Mirror Theory of
Friendship
Phronesis (practical wisdom), as Aristotle deﬁnes it, is a form of excellence that allows us
to discern those actions that are good speciﬁcally in regard to oneself and one's situation
(Nicomachean ethics, 1140a25). It is well known that he does not consider phronesis a
form of theoria. Theory remains on a general level, while phronesis involves a form of
knowledge or know-how that remains with particulars. Knowing a theory, or having
general knowledge by itself, or knowing only a set of rules——none of this is sufﬁcient
since one has to know when and where and with whom, etc., since 'all actions are con-
cerned with particulars' (Aristotle, Metaphysics, 981a, 16-17). He also distinguishes
phronesis from techne——it is not something that we can have simply by following a tech-
nique or technical practice.
How do we gain phronesis? According to Aristotle, one acquires phronesis through a
good upbringing, and this means hanging around with the right people——good people
who provide good examples of good actions. As Iakovos Vasiliou (1996, p. 777) puts it:
'What the experienced, phronimos person has is "the eye"; a perceptual capacity devel-
oped by good upbringing and experience'. Seeing what other good people do develops
our intuition about what the good is. Moreover, the person with phronesis also has an
Educational Philosophy and Theory, 2014
Vol. 46, No. 6, 600-609, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2013.779213
 2013 Philosophy of Education Society of Australasia

Aristotelian eye to see the particulars, 'the that' (to hoti = the facts), i.e. that this (and
not something else) is the case, that this is the way it is——and this is the starting point for
action.1
Yet having the right intuition is not sufﬁcient. To attain phronesis, one must also act
in a good way. It would not be enough simply to watch, or to converse with good
people. One needs to imitate them, to act as they do and to do the kinds of things
that they do.
The virtues we get by ﬁrst putting them into action, as also happens in the
case of the arts as well. For the things we have to learn before we can do
them, we learn by doing them. (Nicomachean ethics, 1103a, 32-33)
Such action and practice in the formation of habit (Nicomachean ethics, 1103a13) give
you the moral virtues, without which there is no phronesis. But, again, one does not
practice alone. Phronesis and moral development depend on imitation, practice and
habit formation in the company of the right kind of people.
Yet, as we also learn from Aristotle, imitation and habit formation in the company
of others can yield a narrow, conservative, rigid ethics. This problem is reﬂected and
reinforced by Aristotle's views on friendship:
... as the virtuous man is to himself, he is to his friend also (for his friend is
another self). (Nicomachean ethics, 1166a30)
This is sometimes referred to as Aristotle's mirror theory of friendship. Ray Pahl
(2000, p. 22) summarizes it in this way: virtuous friends 'enlarge and extend each
other's moral experience ... friends are bound together, as they recognize each other's
moral excellence. Each can be said to provide a mirror in which the other may see
himself'. What is questionable is the idea that in such relationships we necessarily
enlarge and extend our moral experience. Does imitation, and the practice of seeing
ourselves in our friends broaden our experience, or does it provide a narrow road to
narrow virtue?
Two Problems in Social Cognition
If in some important way our moral development——the development of phrone-
sis——depends on our interactions with others, there may be a better way to think of
just what those relations ought to look like. Here, however, I want to temporarily back
out of the 'ought' question and focus on the 'is'; that is, on the empirical question of
how we actually do enter into (or ﬁnd ourselves in) social/intersubjective interactions.
In this respect there are two problems that we should think about in relation to phro-
nesis, and these two problems can best be seen by considering a particular approach
to the problem of social cognition, namely, simulation theory.
According to simulation theory, I understand the other by putting myself in her
place and asking what I would do or think if I were in that situation. I simulate
'pretend' or 'as if' beliefs and desires and then project them on to her, and by doing
so I 'mindread' or attribute to her the mental states that are motivating her action.
Here, for example, is Alvin Goldman's description of the simulation routine.
An Education in Narratives
601

First, the attributor creates in herself pretend states intended to match those
of the target. In other words, the attributor attempts to put herself in the
target's 'mental shoes'.
The second step is to feed these initial pretend states [e.g. beliefs] into some
mechanism of the attributor's own psychology ... and allow that mechanism
to operate on the pretend states so as to generate one or more new states
[e.g. decisions].
Third, the attributor assigns the output state to the target ... [e.g. we infer
or project the decision to the other's mind]. (Goldman, 2005, pp. 80-81)
The ﬁrst problem appears in the very ﬁrst step. I call it the starting problem
(Gallagher, 2011, 2012). It is a version of the frame problem that one ﬁnds in discus-
sions of robotics and artiﬁcial intelligence; it is also a version of a problem in moral
philosophy that Aristotle solves by appealing to phronesis. In the latter two cases the
problem is something like this: if I have a rule to apply in certain situations, how do I
recognize that this particular situation is the kind of situation that calls for this rule?
Phronesis apparently solves this problem because it involves knowledge of particulars
and provides the right kind of intuition that allows humans, but not robots, to solve this
problem. In the case of simulation theory, one sees the problem in Goldman's ﬁrst step:
'First, the attributor creates in herself pretend states intended to match those of the
target. In other words, the attributor attempts to put herself in the target's "mental
shoes"'. But how does the attributor know what mental states would match those of the
other person? In fact, this is what the simulation routine is supposed to tell us, but it
seems that we need to have the answer in order to start the simulation routine.
Accordingly, it is not clear how we get the simulation off the ground.
The second problem is what I call the diversity problem. In each case, for simulation
theory, my understanding of the other is based on my own ﬁrst person experience.
In all cases, observing what other people do or feel is transformed into an
inner representation of what we would do or feel in a similar, endogenously
produced [= simulated], situation (Keysers & Gazzola, 2006, p. 394)
The question is: how does knowing what we would do help us know what someone
else would do? This is a problem that both Max Scheler (1954) and Gilbert Ryle
(1949) pointed out in regard to the older cousin of simulation theory, the argument
by inference from analogy. Scheler argued that the logic of simulation is not right:
imputing to a variety of others what is true of my simulated action ignores the
diversity of their actions. Or as Ryle puts it:
The observed appearances and actions of people differ very markedly, so
the imputation to them of inner processes closely matching [one's own or]
one another would be actually contrary to the evidence. (Ryle, 1949, p. 54)
Let's call this the theoretical diversity problem, since it pertains to the logic of
simulation theory. On Ryle's formulation, we have prima facie evidence for behavioral
diversity, so the imputation of psychological uniformity is unjustiﬁed.
602
Shaun Gallagher

A different question (from whether simulation theory can justify ignoring diversity)
is whether simulation theory describes how we actually do go about understanding
others. In other places, I have raised a number of speciﬁc objections against the simu-
lationist account that I will not rehearse here (but these include the starting problem
and the diversity problem) (Gallagher, 2007, 2008). In general, I have argued that
simulation theory is not a good account of how we actually do understand others.
One possible response to this objection is that there is good evidence that there is a
diversity problem in our real everyday encounters with others; in other words, a real
(and not just theoretical) diversity problem. We often do fail to recognize that others
may not be similar to ourselves. Many simulation theorists (notably Gallese, 2001;
Goldman, 2006; Stueber, 2006) understand empathy to be equivalent to simulation.
In this regard, various studies show that we are more inclined to empathize with
people who are closer and more like ourselves (in-group) than with those who are
more distant and more unlike ourselves (out-group) (Boltanski, 1999; Chouliaraki,
2006; Xu, Zuo, Wang, & Han, 2009; Gutsell & Inzlicht, 2010). If so, the idea that
simulation/empathy is in fact our ordinary way of understanding others may actually
explain why the diversity problem is not simply a theoretical one, but one that we
encounter in our everyday life.
Let me note two things. First, if our everyday understanding of others were based on
simulation, then it would be difﬁcult to see how we might address the real diversity
problem. That is, if (1) simulation just is our default way of understanding others; and
(2) simulation brings along the real diversity problem, then we would simply have to
accept it and say, 'Well, that's just the way we are'. Secondly, however, and as I will
argue below, there may be another way to explain social cognition and why there is, at
least in some cases, a real diversity problem, and this alternative view may give us a way
to see a solution to the theoretical diversity problem and a way to work on the real one.
If you buy this, then I will throw in a solution to the starting problem for free.
Before we get to these solutions, let's note that it does seem possible, in some cases,
to empathize with those who are not like us. We can even empathize with monsters
or aliens from other planets, as portrayed in ﬁlm, and we can empathize with humans
who live in faraway lands who may seem to be very different, or at least are living in
very different situations. The simulation theory of mindreading or empathy does not
offer a good account of how this is possible.
In this regard, Patrick Colm Hogan (2003) offers a helpful distinction between
categorial and situational empathy. Categorial empathy involves a similarity of my
self-concept and the person with whom I am empathizing. Situational empathy is based
on an understanding of the other person's situation. Simulation, on the accounts that we
are considering, is equivalent to categorial empathy since it involves an appeal to one's
ﬁrst-person experience, one's 'own psychology', or self-concept in order to understand
the other. Hogan makes it clear that categorial empathy leads to the diversity problem in
the form of in-group (my friends, those with whom I have grown up and with whom I
have formed good habits, etc.) versus out-group, and this can block the possibility of
compassion for those in the out-group, which then brings along an ethical issue. What
about situational empathy, which depends on understanding the other person's situation?
I suggest, in the following, that situational empathy depends on narrative practices.
An Education in Narratives
603

The Narrative Solution
An alternative, non-simulationist approach to social cognition can offer a solution to
the theoretical diversity problem; that is, it can explain how it is possible that we do
empathize with others unlike ourselves. It can also suggest ways to address the real
diversity problem; that is, offer a prescriptive that could move us away from the
narrow road of narrow virtue.
The alternative that I propose here is part of a larger enactive or phenomenological
approach to social cognition, sometimes called interaction theory (Gallagher 2005,
2012). Interaction theory relies on developmental studies that demonstrate that our
encounters with others are best characterized in terms of embodied interactions rather
than the kind of mindreading defended by simulation theory or other theory-of-mind
approaches. For my purposes here I set aside a full account of interaction theory and
focus on one aspect of the theory, the development of narrative competency starting
around the age of three years; notably around the time that children start to make
friends. I note however, the relevance of the rich embodied aspects of interaction
found in primary intersubjectivity (starting at birth)——which registers the importance of
the close company of others, imitation and dyadic interaction——and the pragmatic
and social interactions of secondary intersubjectivity (from even before one year of age),
which involve acting with others in pragmatic situations, and learning by example.
The third leg of interaction theory includes communicative and narrative competen-
cies (developing from two to four years and onward). Of course, as caregivers we read
or present stories to children even before they can speak or even understand them
(consider 'This little piggy' as a nice example of a narrative that is seriously embod-
ied, since it involves pulling the infant's toes or ﬁngers; but also fairy tales, colorful
children's books, etc.). The full-blown developmental story would be important here,
and it would include the pragmatic and social contexts of secondary intersubjectivity,
and such things as the development of a more conceptual self-other distinction,
essential for empathy. At 15-24 months children acquire language, or as Merleau-
Ponty (1962) puts it, language starts to acquire them and advances their communica-
tive capacities. At 18-24 months, children start to manifest ability for episodic and
autobiographical memory (Howe, 2000). Along with these speciﬁc developments
comes a capacity for narrative practices. Two-year-olds work more from scripts than
from fully ﬂedged narratives; their self-narratives have to be elicited by questions and
prompts (Howe, 2000; Nelson, 2003, 2009). From two to four years, children ﬁne-
tune their narrative abilities by means of a further development of language ability
and memory skills. At this age children 'often "appropriate" someone else's story as
their own' (Nelson, 2003, p. 31). Around four years of age children start to represent
the views of other people in their narratives, contrasting what they know about some
events with what others know about the events (Nelson, 1992; Perner, 1992). In most
cultures children grow up surrounded by stories that transmit cultural meanings and
values and that initiate them into practices of understanding reasons for action
(Hutto, 2008).
In regard to social cognition, narrative practices provide two things. First, they
allow us to implicitly frame the other person's situated actions; that is, we tend to see
604
Shaun Gallagher

others in terms of a story that makes sense out of their actions. Actions occur over
time and in speciﬁc situations, and we tend to interpret those situated actions in
terms of a narrative framework. Secondly, we use narrative reﬂectively and explicitly
to provide reasons for our own actions and for the actions of others. Dan Hutto refers
to this as the 'narrative practice hypothesis'. The idea is that we use folk-psychological
narratives to explain why people do what they do.
More generally, we use narratives to represent intersubjective interactions, motives
and reasons, and to provide a more nuanced and sophisticated understanding of oth-
ers in their situations. When as children we listen to stories, or see them enacted (in
various media) or play-acted (or as adults, when we are exposed to parables, plays,
myths, novels, ﬁlms, television, etc.),2 we become familiarized with sets of characters
and with a range of ordinary or extraordinary situations, and the sorts of actions
appropriate to those situations. An education in narratives of many sorts provides
knowledge of what actions are acceptable and in what circumstances, what sort of
events are important and noteworthy, what accounts can account for action, and what
kind of explanations constitute the giving of good reasons. In other words, narratives
instill norms and shape our understanding of what we, and others, are doing (Nelson,
2003; Hutto, 2008).
Karsten Stueber (2008) suggests that the importance of narrative is simply to
provide 'hints and clues' to enhance the simulation process. My suggestion here,
following interaction theory, is that reliance on narrative resources is actually an
alternative to simulation and provides a more enriched capacity for social understand-
ing and empathy. Speciﬁcally, the development of narrative competency contributes
to the capacity for a certain kind of imaginative practice. In contrast to what Goldman
calls E-imagination (which he characterizes as the imaginative simulation through
which I put myself in your shoes), narrative competency allows for the development
of N(arrative)-imagination. Unlike E-imagination, which seems to ﬂoat in thin air like
a balloon attached by a thread to ﬁrst person experience, N-imagination is grounded
by the particular contextualized details that are provided by narratives. N-imagination
depends not on a simulation mechanism, but on narratively framing the circum-
stances of the other person's actions. It is not that my understanding of the other
reduces the other to my own experience (versus simulationist E-imagination and
categorial empathy). Rather, with N-imagination, I am open to the experiences and
the lives of the others, in their context, as I can understand it, not in terms of my own
narrow experience, but in terms of a diversity of narratives that have informed my
understanding.
The role of narrative competency in social cognition solves the starting problem
because it provides what we can call, following Bruner and Kalmar (1998), the
'massive hermeneutical background' needed to recognize a particular situation for
what it is. That is, my starting point for understanding another person is the wealth
of narrative knowledge that I have garnered by being exposed to narratives from early
infancy. That wealth of particularistic knowledge, which may include knowledge
about the speciﬁc individual with whom I am interacting, provides an insight or a way
into the other's situation that neither general folk-psychological theory nor my own
ﬁrst person experiences can provide. In this sense, even if I did need to simulate the
An Education in Narratives
605

other person's beliefs and desires, I would have to rely on the massive hermeneutical
background provided by narratives. In most situations, however, simulation of mental
states would not be required since rich narrative resources would provide insight into
the circumstances and meaning of the other's actions.3
Narrative competency also solves the diversity problem. We can and do understand
and empathize with others, even in out-groups, when we know their stories; when we
can frame their behavior in a narrative that informs us about their history or their
situation. This explains, also, why we easily empathize with those who are close to
and similar to us. We already know the general lines of their stories. In this respect,
narrative competency supports social cognition and empathy. It provides the contexts
that are broader than my own context and that allow me to understand the other's
situation. It does so not by means of a simulation-style reduction of the other's narra-
tive to the model of one's own self-narrative. With respect to empathy, putting myself
in the other person's shoes will be difﬁcult if the other person does not wear shoes,
and I may be able to make sense of that difference only on the basis of a narrative
that exposes me to that kind of difference.
This suggests a different analysis of, and prescriptive approach to the real diversity
problem as well as to moral development and the acquisition of phronesis that avoids
the problem of narrow virtue. The real diversity problem is not the result of a primary
and pervasive practice of simulating others on the model of simulation theory. Indeed,
interaction theory provides a number of arguments against the claim that understand-
ing others in everyday encounters is based on simulation. Rather, recognizing the role
of narrative competency in social cognition suggests that the real diversity problem
may be based on a certain lack of narrative resources. Either we lack the speciﬁc
narrative
that
would
provide
the
appropriate
background
for
our
empathic
understanding of speciﬁc others, or we lack the broad range of narratives that would
support such understanding.
In the context of Aristotle's analysis of phronesis, we can put it this way: an educa-
tion in narratives can provide a broader notion of the good——a broader knowledge of
what counts as good (or bad) actions based on exposure to a broad range of diverse
narratives. One of the virtues of Aristotle's analysis is that it suggests the importance
of being with others for the development of phronesis. Since it is often the case,
however, that the others we are with as we grow up (our friends and family) are very
much like ourselves, this can narrow the range of our exposure to behaviors that
inform our own actions and understandings. More and varied narratives——a liberal
and continuing education in narratives——can provide us with a less narrow concep-
tion of the good. Furthermore, an education in narratives can supplement and
broaden the diversity and foster the development of phronesis because it frames action
in the very language of the lifeworld——in casuistic terms that focus on particular peo-
ple, and motives, and events, and actions, and interactions——and in a way that avoids
the abstractions and the often reductionist leanings of theory.
More and varied narratives——a liberal and continuing education in narratives——a
less narrow conception of the good ... perhaps this sounds like an attractive solution to
these problems. But I do not mean to suggest that this is a problem-free solution. Some,
like Habermas (1987, p. 137; see Wells, 1996), suggest that narratives themselves are
606
Shaun Gallagher

conservative. Narratives reproduce traditions and reinforce the established power struc-
tures. This throws us back to the problem of deciding what the good is, what narratives
we should be exposed to, and who is to decide that. The sources for narratives may
themselves be narrow: parents, Plato's poets, popes, producers of pop culture, and so
on. But narratives can also offer critical possibilities. They can map out the immediate
and deeper contexts of action and understanding, provide detailed descriptions of
events, objects and persons, help to coordinate complex tasks, deﬁne the identities and
roles of individuals and groups, and express agreement among individuals. Narrative
literature (like art generally) often plays this critical role. Narratives provide one
important source for staking out new or different social arrangements, and for pushing
the boundaries of what is acceptable and what is not. Narratives can be conservative but
they can also contest and serve a critical function. They can be the keepers of memory,
but also represent the blueprints of change. In any case, they can tell us about who the
others are, and who we are.
For this reason, for developing phronesis, it is better to have an educational system
that values humanities, diversity and a contest of narratives that takes us beyond our
own narrow perspectives. If you need support for this intuition, consider the dramatic
contrast of intent in the two following statements.
The confrontation that we are calling for ... does not know Socratic
dialogue, Platonic ideals, or Aristotelian diplomacy. But it does know the
dialogue of bullets, the ideals of assassination, bombing and destruction,
and the diplomacy of the cannon and machine gun.
Millions [of people], pursuing secular as well as religious studies were prod-
ucts of educational systems that generally devoted little if any attention to
the rest of the world's thought, history and culture. The secular education
reﬂected a strong cultural preference for technical ﬁelds over the humanities
and social sciences. Many of these young men [and it is only men], even if
able to study abroad, lacked the perspective and skills needed to understand
a different culture.
The ﬁrst statement is taken from an al-Qaeda training manual (nd). The second is from
the ofﬁcial report of the 9/11 Commission (National Commission on Terrorist Attacks,
2004, p. 73), describing the educational systems and choices of al-Qaeda members. If the
second statement is correct, it suggests that the young men who were being trained did
not even understand what they were rejecting when they opted for bullets and bombs.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to the research support offered by the Australian Research Council (ARC)'s project,
Embodied Virtues and Expertise (project number/ID: DP1095109), led by Richard Menary and
David Simpson. Earlier versions of this article were presented at the ARC sponsored Workshop
on virtues and expertise, University of Hertfordshire (July 2011), the International Institute for
Hermeneutics meeting, Philadelphia (October 2011), and a seminar on narrative practices at The
Balzan Project. St. John's College, Oxford (January 2013). I thank the participants at those
meetings, and two anonymous referees of this journal for helpful comments.
An Education in Narratives
607

Notes
1.
At least on the face of it, what, following Vasiliou, I am calling the Aristotelian eye is akin to
what Karin Kukkonen (private correspondence), following Simon Blackburn, calls the
'Aristotelian nose': the idea that phronesis allows us to sniff out the right answers in difﬁcult
moral situations. Blackburn (2010) writes that 'few have been happy with any compulsory
principle for selecting principles. An alternative, often associated with Aristotle, is that by
education and experience a kind of practical wisdom or 'nose' for solutions can be formed
and trained, becoming eventually a kind of second nature'.
2.
Richard Rorty (1989, xvi) suggests that 'the novel, the movie, and the TV program have,
gradually but steadily, replaced the sermon and the treatise as the principal vehicles of
moral change and progress'.
3.
I am contrasting the idea that we mindread in a way that concerns knowing beliefs and
desires as hidden mental states, and the idea that knowing the circumstances and contextuali-
zed meaning of the other person's behavior is in most cases sufﬁcient for understanding that
person. As I make clear below, the rich insight that comes with a broader and diverse set of
narratives is the sort of intuitive insight provided by phronesis: the Aristotelian eye that
allows us to recognize meaning and relevance in a way that avoids the starting problem.
References
al-Qaeda (training manual). (nd). Declaration of Jihad against the country's tyrants. Military
Series. Cited in Martin, G. (2010). Understanding terrorism: Challenges, perspectives, and
issues (p. 360). London: Sage.
Aristotle. (350 BCE). Nicomachean ethics (W. D. Ross, Trans.). Retrieved from http://classics.
mit.edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.html
Aristotle. (350 BCE). Metaphysics (W. D. Ross, Trans.). Retrieved from http://classics.mit.edu/
Aristotle/metaphysics.html
Blackburn, S. (2010, June 17). Book review of Jeremy Stangroom. Would you eat your cat?
Key ethical conundrums and what they tell you about yourself. Times Higher Education.
Retrieved from http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storycode=412043
Boltanski, L. (1999). Distant suffering. Politics, morality and the media. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bruner, J., & Kalmar, D. A. (1998). Narrative and metanarrative in the construction of self. In
M. Ferrari & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), Self-awareness: Its nature and development (pp. 308-331).
New York: Guilford Press.
Chouliaraki, L. (2006). The spectatorship of suffering. London: Sage.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2007). Simulation trouble. Social Neuroscience, 2, 353-365.
Gallagher, S. (2008). Neural simulation and social cognition. In J. A. Pineda (Ed.), Mirror neu-
ron systems: The role of mirroring processes in social cognition (pp. 355-371). Totowa, NJ:
Humana Press.
Gallagher, S. (2011). Narrative competency and the massive hermeneutical background. In
P. Fairﬁeld (Ed.), Hermeneutics in education (pp. 21-38). New York: Continuum.
Gallagher, S. (2012). In defense of phenomenological approaches to social cognition: Interact-
ing with the critics. Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 3, 187-212.
Gallese, V. (2001). The 'shared manifold' hypothesis: From mirror neurons to empathy. Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 8, 33-50.
Goldman, A. I. (2005). Imitation, mind reading, and simulation. In S. Hurley & N. Chater
(Eds.), Perspectives on imitation II (pp. 80-91). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldman, A. I. (2006). Simulating minds: The philosophy, psychology, and neuroscience of
mindreading. New York: Oxford University Press.
608
Shaun Gallagher

Gutsell, J. N., & Inzlicht, M. (2010). Empathy constrained: Prejudice predicts reduced mental
simulation of actions during observation of outgroups. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46, 841-845.
Habermas, J. (1987). Lifeworld and system: A critique of functionalist reason, Volume 2 of the
Theory of communicative action (T. McCarthy, Trans.). Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Hogan, P. C. (2003). The mind and its stories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Howe, M. L. (2000). The fate of early memories: Developmental science and the retention of child-
hood experiences. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hutto, D. D. (2008). Folk psychological narratives: The socio-cultural basis of understanding reasons.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2006). Towards a unifying neural theory of social cognition.
Progress in Brain Research, 156, 383-406.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, Trans.). London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
National Commission on Terrorist Attacks. (2004). The 9/11 Commission Report: Final
Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States. New
York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Nelson, K. (1992). Emergence of autobiographical memory at age 4. Human Development, 35,
172-177.
Nelson, K. (2003). Narrative and the emergence of a consciousness of self. In G. D. Fireman,
T. E. J. McVay, & O. Flanagan (Eds.), Narrative and consciousness (pp. 17-36). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Nelson, K. (2009). Narrative practices and folk psychology: A perspective from developmental
psychology. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 16, 69-93.
Pahl, R. (2000). On friendship. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Perner, J. (1992). Grasping the concept of representation: Its impact on 4-year-olds' theory of
mind and beyond. Human Development, 35, 146-155.
Rorty, R. (1989). Contingency, irony, and solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Scheler, M. (1954). The nature of sympathy (P. Heath, Trans.). London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul. Original German, 1913.
Stueber, K. A. (2006). Rediscovering empathy: Agency, folk-psychology and the human sciences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stueber, K. R. (2008). Reasons, generalizations, empathy, and narratives: The epistemic struc-
ture of action explanation. History and Theory, 47, 31-43.
Vasiliou, I. (1996). The role of good upbringing in Aristotle's . Ethics Philosophy and Phenome-
nological Research, 56, 771-797.
Wells, S. (1996). Sweet reason: Rhetoric and discourses of modernity. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Xu, X., Zuo, X., Wang, X., & Han, S. (2009). Do you feel my pain? Racial group membership
modulates empathic neural responses Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 8525-8529.
An Education in Narratives
609

