Philosophical Psychology
ISSN: 0951-5089 (Print) 1465-394X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cphp20
Enacting recovery: Virtual reality, active inference,
and cognitive behavioural therapy for depression
Nicola Chinchella & Ben White
To cite this article: Nicola Chinchella & Ben White (22 Sep 2025): Enacting recovery: Virtual
reality, active inference, and cognitive behavioural therapy for depression, Philosophical
Psychology, DOI: 10.1080/09515089.2025.2563072
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2025.2563072
Published online: 22 Sep 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 51
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphp20

Enacting recovery: Virtual reality, active inference, and 
cognitive behavioural therapy for depression
Nicola Chinchella
a and Ben Whiteb
aPhilosophy Science and Cognition (PSCS), University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; bSchool of 
Informatics, University of Sussex, Sussex, UK
ABSTRACT
Attempts to use virtual reality technology in the treatment of 
depression have yielded disappointing results, lacking foun­
dational theoretical principles. In this article, we aim to pro­
vide the theoretical foundation and guidelines for the 
principled use of virtual reality in cognitive behavioral ther­
apy treatments for depression. We leverage the active infer­
ence framework, a neuroscientific theory grounded in 
probabilistic belief updating and action, to furnish us with 
an understanding of action and learning as uncertainty mini­
mization. This approach through active inference is well 
justified, as recent work in active inference has provided 
models of both depression itself, and of the mechanisms 
underpinning the efficacy of cognitive behavioral therapy. 
In short, we argue that the aim of virtually assisted cognitive 
behavioral therapy should be to introduce a degree of flex­
ibility into an individual's action-based world models. Where 
depression is characterized on the computational level by 
overly rigid beliefs, we can use the curation of virtual affor­
dances to disrupt its characterizing patterns, primarily 
through curating affordances that maximize the learning 
rate in relation to desired outcomes.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 6 May 2025  
Accepted 12 September 2025 
KEYWORDS 
Active inference; virtual 
reality; cognitive behavioural 
therapy; depression; 
enactivism; affordances
1. Introduction
Emerging digital technologies carry a potentially revolutionary promise for 
the treatment of psychological and mental health conditions. Virtual reality 
(VR), is a form of computer-generated simulation that can be actively 
engaged with "physically" using special electronic equipment such as head­
sets and hand controllers capable of transmitting visual, auditory, and tactile 
stimulation and feedback. Users of VR are "transported" into a virtual 
location or environment that can engage their senses in different ways, 
offering varying levels of "presence" or "immersion," and offer affordances 
not readily available - or even possible - within the non-virtual world. VR is 
specifically interesting once mental health is understood through two 
CONTACT Nicola Chinchella 
nicola.chinchella2@unibo.it 
Philosophy Science and Cognition (PSCS), 
University of Bologna, Italy
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY                         
https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2025.2563072
© 2025 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 

concepts. Firstly, the concept of care where mental health necessarily 
encompasses the whole agent-environment interaction possibilities where 
mental issues represent a shrinkage in the lived space of the subject, the 
space that affords him actions (Chinchella & Hipolito, 2023). Secondly, 
through the concept of "perturbation," where mental-health issues can be 
understood as "stuck states" and the aim is to break reinforced patterns on 
thinking and behaving (M. J. Ramstead et al., 2020). Both these readings 
suggest how VR therapy should not be aimed at some internal model update 
but at introducing a perturbation resulting in an expansion of the affordance 
space.
Already by the mid-90s, researchers were assessing the efficacy of VR 
systems in the treatment of conditions such as acrophobia (Rothbaum et al.,  
1995). On the basis of some promising preliminary results, VR was subse­
quently utilized in the treatment of an array of conditions, including anxiety 
disorders (Gorini & Riva, 2008; Maples-Keller et al., 2017), post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) (Gonçalves et al., 2012) and pain management 
(Chuan et al., 2021; Pourmand et al., 2018). However, despite optimism 
that VR might prove useful in the treatment of depression, multiple meta- 
analyses revealed no significant difference between treatment with, or with­
out, VR for subjects with depression (Fodor et al., 2018; Park et al., 2019). 
Despite these results, however, researchers in the field continue to hold out 
hope for the effective deployment of VR-based treatments for depression, 
and have emphasized the need for developing new innovative approaches 
based on a better understanding of the variables underpinning the efficacy 
of VR treatment (Dellazizzo et al., 2020; Park et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2018).
In this paper, we unpack and motivate the adoption of principles for 
effective VR treatments based on the active inference framework (AIF). The 
AIF is a novel theoretical and formal development in neuroscience empha­
sizing the importance of learning through probabilistic belief updating and 
uncertainty minimization, emphasizing especially the role of embodied 
action and the importance of environmental affordances (Parr et al.,  
2022). We focus on the potential use of VR for augmenting cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT) in the treatment of depression. CBT is an estab­
lished treatment for depression, enjoying strong evidential support for its 
efficacy (though as we'll see, this efficacy has its limitations) (Beck et al.,  
1979; Cuijpers et al., 2013; Fennell, 2012). CBT is based on the idea that 
psychological problems are rooted in unhelpful ways of thinking and how 
these patterns of thought relate to learned patterns of suboptimal behavior. 
The goal of CBT, therefore, is to target those patterns of thinking and 
behavior in an attempt to disrupt, replace, and restructure them.
However, while it is accepted that CBT operates through learning 
(Bruijniks et al., 2019), there is no widespread agreement on what mechan­
isms underpin its efficacy. In this paper, we use the AIF to elucidate these 
2
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

learning mechanisms and processes, including an AIF model and simula­
tions of CBT in action treating arachnophobia (Smith et al., 2021). It is 
worth noting that this paper is not the first application of the AIF to 
questions around the efficacy of VR as a therapeutic intervention. Clark 
(2023) suggests that "predictive" brains (which is to say brains operating 
roughly in the way described by the AIF), might be "hacked" in various 
beneficial ways (and less beneficial ways) via the deployment of carefully 
crafted virtual worlds. We'll return to connect with Clark's suggestions in 
the final section, once the basics of the AIF have been laid out.
The structure of this paper will be as follows: In Section One we unpack 
some of the fundamentals of CBT and depression, exploring some compet­
ing explanatory models for the key mechanisms underpinning CBT, and 
looking in more detail at where CBT has proven to be most effective and 
where evidence is lacking. We close Section One by surveying some of the 
existing applications of VR to CBT and the treatment of depression. In 
Section Two, we offer a general introduction to the AIF highlighting the role 
of probabilistic belief updating, and especially emphasizing the "ecological- 
enactive" aspect of the framework that centers action and the importance of 
environmental affordances and affect. This forges a direct link between 
a computational account of brain function and phenomenology, which we 
use to explore AIF models of depression. In Section Three, we argue that 
this theoretical groundwork suggests that in so far as we want to effectively 
implement VR into CBT, everything depends on our capacity to facilitate 
the updating of a patient's implicit beliefs in regard to the expected out­
comes of actions. We hypothesize that the most effective way to update 
these implicit beliefs is to have patients engage in skilled action in a zone of 
just-manageable uncertainty, facilitating better than expected rates of error 
reduction, although we develop several principles for application in the final 
section.
2. Depression and cognitive behavioural therapy
2.1. Depression
Major depressive disorder is a debilitating psychiatric condition occurring 
when an individual continuously experiences a combination of different 
symptoms for at least 1 week, especially a low mood, anhedonia, sleep 
disturbances, and fatigue, and these symptoms result in impairment in 
important life domains, such as employment and relationships.1 Recent, 
highly comprehensive, research shows that rates of common psychological 
health complaints including depression have risen dramatically amongst 
young people in the UK since 2000 (Dykxhoorn et al., 2024). In line with 
this, the prescription for antidepressants and anti-anxiety medications has 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
3

more than tripled in the last two decades (Bogowicz et al., 2021). Eurostat 
(2021) reveals that in 2019, 7.2% of EU citizens reported having chronic 
depression and the World Health Organization (2022) highlights that covid- 
19 triggered a 25% increase in the prevalence of depression worldwide, with 
a greater prevalence in young people (Racine et al., 2021). Given the elevated 
prevalence of mental health problems, psychiatric disorders represent 
a substantial socioeconomic and existential burden for patients, caregivers, 
healthcare providers, and for society (Jaffe et al., 2019; Paykel et al., 2005).
Recommended first-line treatment for depression includes antidepres­
sant medications and psychological-behavioral therapies, or a combination 
of the two (Cleare et al., 2015). Choosing between these two pathways, 
however, is not always straightforward. While research shows that for 
patients with severe depression, the benefit of medication over placebo is 
substantial (Fournier et al., 2010), research also suggests that around two- 
thirds of patients do not respond to their initial treatment with antidepres­
sants (Belujon & Grace, 2017), and that exercise regimes include jogging, 
yoga, and strength training may significantly outperform antidepressant 
medication for all baseline levels of depression (Noetel et al., 2024). 
Moreover, antidepressant medication might not be the best choice in the 
case of teenage depression due to adverse side effects and lack of research 
into their overall tolerability in teenage patients (Luft et al., 2018; Strawn 
et al., 2023). A systematic overview comparing the efficacy of pharma­
cotherapies and psychotherapies for major psychiatric disorders head-to- 
head, reveals a trend in favor of psychotherapy for depression (Huhn et al.,  
2014). Evidence-based psychosocial interventions show promising results 
and allow patients to learn skills, challenge beliefs and habits of interpreta­
tion, to overcome and better cope with their symptoms while preventing 
relapse (Barbui et al., 2020), although some research supports the view that 
a combined approach (pharmacological and psychosocial) is the most 
beneficial (Fennell, 2012). This is all to say that the overall picture in 
terms of favored treatment paths remains somewhat unclear, and there 
remains a great need for evidence-based approaches to treating depression, 
especially in populations perhaps less suited to pharmacological 
intervention.
2.2. Cognitive behavioural therapy
Among such established evidence-based psychosocial interventions, cogni­
tive behavioral therapy (CBT) is one of the most tested and effective treat­
ments for depression, proving most effective for patients with mild-to- 
moderate depression (Beck et al., 1979; Cuijpers et al., 2013; Santoft et al.,  
2019). CBT is based on the idea that psychological problems are in part 
rooted in suboptimal or dysfunctional interactions between patterns of 
4
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. In CBT settings, these interactions are 
depicted as the "CAB triangle" showing interactions and dependencies 
between cognition, affect, and behavior (sometimes referred to as just the 
"CBT" triangle) (Smith et al., 2021). The goal of CBT is to target dysfunc­
tional interactions in an attempt to disrupt and restructure them. CBT aims 
to achieve this restructuring using a variety of methods, but primarily aims 
to draw the patient's attention to dysfunctional or distorted patterns of 
thinking and behavior, and then furnishing the patient with a set of learned 
skills to change those patterns. Thus, the effectiveness of CBT is a direct 
function of the patient's ability to learn and then deploy those skills outside 
of the therapy setting (Dozois et al., 2009). While it is accepted that CBT 
operates primarily through the function of learning mechanisms, there is no 
agreement on what those mechanisms actually are or how best to describe 
them (Flynn et al., 2014; Vaske et al., 2011).
There are three proposed models for explaining what happens when CBT 
achieves effective change: first, the "deactivation model" according to which 
the dysfunctional structures of thinking are in some sense "deactivated." 
Second, the compensation model, according to which the goal is for the 
patient to learn compensatory structures that operate to keep at bay symp­
toms of depression. And finally the "accommodation model," according to 
which dysfunctional patterns in thinking and behavior are reshaped, or 
updated, through a learning process in ways that they can now be accom­
modated (Bruijniks et al., 2019). In addition to these theoretical questions, 
about mechanisms and the correct model for the processes underlying CBT, 
practically speaking CBT is only effective in around half of patients (efficacy 
here defined by a 50% reduction in symptoms), while even in effective cases, 
the rate of relapse is high (Cuijpers et al., 2013; Lemmens et al., 2017). This is 
arguably because CBT requires a high level of personal engagement in and 
out of the sessions. In other words, it isn't enough for patients to learn new 
approaches under the conditions of treatment, they must also learn to 
deploy these new thoughts and behaviors outside of the clinical setting, 
under real-world pressures. We think, therefore, that there is a pressing 
need to better understand the underlying mechanisms of CBT and the 
learning processes through which it works, thereby maximizing efficacy 
and increasing compliance and consistency.
In practice, CBT can involve a wide array of practices, including 
keeping a journal to track events, thought and moods, developing pro­
blem solving skills and ways of identifying and recognizing "distortions" 
in one's own patterns of thought and feeling, practising role playing of 
stressful situations, and directly confronting one's fears (exposure ther­
apy) (Bruijniks et al., 2019; Dozois et al., 2009; Flynn et al., 2014). 
Practices can be categorized according to two strategies though: cognitive 
change (or cognitive restructuring) and behavioral action (also known as 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
5

behavioral activation). Sessions to treat depression typically begin with 
a formal assessment to track fluctuations in symptoms week by week and 
to identify big changes (e.g., things improving or worsening markedly) 
(Dozois et al., 2009).
Cognitive change consists in reevaluating the accuracy of one's auto­
matic thoughts in order to disrupt dysfunctional thinking patterns. 
Successful cognitive change is associated with a reduction of depressive 
symptoms (Lemmens et al., 2017). These practices have a distinctive 
metacognitive character, wherein the patient engages in sustained reflec­
tion and assessment of their own patterns of thought and association. For 
instance, cognitive change practice often aims to impact personal mem­
ories with the goal of creating a "mismatch" between those recalled 
experiences and the beliefs associated with them. The idea is that of 
recalling a memory and then targeting reconsolidation, the process in 
which the activated memory is "resaved" to incorporate new information 
that contradicts the associations around the original memory (Elsey et al.,  
2018).
Behavioral activation can be broken down into different kinds of skills or 
training, targeted toward bolstering and reestablishing the healthy behaviors 
that symptoms of depression often disrupt (Eshel & Roiser, 2010). Left 
untreated, these disruptions can lead to a lack of perceived reward in the 
world, which in turn leads to more withdrawal and increased aversiveness, 
thus, as we emphasize in a later section, depression can be cast as a form of 
vicious cycle of mutually reinforcing symptoms. The rationale behind beha­
vioral activation practices is to counter this downturn in positive feedback 
and reinstate a degree of positive reinforcement. Again, thus far it hasn't 
been clear what the cognitive and affective mechanisms are that underpin 
such change; the thought is simply that increasing the amount of positive 
and rewarding events will lead the patient to reassess her beliefs and there­
fore result in symptom relief. This does, though, speak to phenomenological 
studies of depression which consistently highlight the depressed person 
experiencing a world of impossibility, where negative experiences, events, 
and expectations are inescapable, or seem inevitable (Ratcliffe, 2015). As 
we'll see in the following section, the AIF has a great deal to say about the 
mechanism underlying such strategies and experiences, and may provide an 
empirically grounded formal and theoretical framework for understanding 
what can make CBT effective and how best to utilize its strategies.
There have been efforts to implement VR into CBT-based treatments for 
depression. Thus far though, given the lack of clarity around the mechan­
isms underpinning CBT's efficacy, these implementations represent a range 
of different strategies offering very mixed results. There are large-scale trials 
currently underway that aim to implement VR into CBT in a very general 
way, by simply using VR to replace the in-person aspect of the treatment. So 
6
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

rather than meeting with a human therapist, patients can access the same 
kind of intervention using a headset and interacting with a virtual clinician.
A more targeted, but still somewhat simplistic approach has been to use 
VR to implement forms of behavioral action (Lindner et al., 2019). For 
instance, using VR to facilitate physical activity, such as using immersive 
boxing or tennis simulators. The rationale here is that physical activity has 
a significant effect on depression (Noetel et al., 2024). Similarly, VR has been 
used to facilitate social interaction and connection, although, interestingly, 
the link between symptoms of depression, wellbeing, and the use of VR 
social apps and games has been shown to be highly complex, with a network 
of interaction effects, where the effects of using VR to socialize may not 
always be positive (Lee et al., 2021). VR has also been used to facilitate 
cognitive restructuring. One interesting application by Grieger et al. (2021) 
used VR to allow the subject to physically manipulate bits of text in space 
that had triggered negative emotions in the subject. These could be e-mails, 
text messages, or social media comments. The practice saw snippets of text 
appear in virtual space, which the user could then "punch" and "trash," thus 
physically enacting their rejection of phrases or judgments. For some 
participants, this led to a "down-regulation of negative emotion" while 
some users found that it increased feelings of aggression and hostility 
(Grieger et al., 2021).
A concluding note is warranted, CBT is predominantly a talk therapy 
(Fenn & Byrne, 2013; Hayes, 2004). This implies that, even when discussing 
behavioral activation, the patient is not engaging in worldly actions, rather, 
the dysfunctional behaviors are analyzed by means of a dialogue. The "third 
wave" of CBTs did introduce some elements of actual behavioral activation 
such as mindfulness (Hayes & Hofmann, 2017, 2021). As we just mentioned, 
there are some tentative treatments that implement actual physical activity 
(Lindner et al., 2019) or actions (Grieger et al., 2021); however, it is not clear 
whether these can be included into CBT, even more so to maintain 
a demarcation line between what CBT is and CBT is not.
Beside the debate about the theoretical foundations of CBT, it is impor­
tant to highlight the element of action in therapy. Recently psychopatholo­
gies have been conceptualized through the lenses of enactivism, whereby 
cognition is seen as fundamentally embodied, embedded, and enacted 
(brought about) through active engagement with the world (Varela et al.,  
1991). This implies that mental disorders are conceptualized as transcend­
ing the brain to extend into the bodily, dynamic and relational dimensions 
of human experience (de Hann, 2020; Maiese 2021; Nielsen 2023). 
According to enactivism, organisms engage in what is called "sense- 
making," bringing forth a meaningful world through their dynamic inter­
action with the environment. Sense-making is in turn often involved in the 
enactive framing of mental disorders as the main cause. In other words, 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
7

subjects suffering from psychopathologies fail to enact a world that yields 
meaningful and rewarding interactions for the kind of organism they are. 
CBT already shows affinities with the enactive framing of psychopatholo­
gies, trespassing the brain boundaries to include the wider cognitive, affec­
tive and behavioral interactions of the subjects. Yet, the enactivist framing 
hides an important pointer: actively engaging with the world, in order to 
reestablish and healthy sense-making, is key, and should be among the aims 
of therapy (Chinchella & Hipolito, 2023).
3. Active inference
3.1. Active inference
To recap, CBT is aimed toward changing patterns of interactions between 
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors (referred to as the CAB triangle), through 
strategies of cognitive change and behavioral activation. According to the 
AIF, these patterns of thought and behavior can be cast in terms of prob­
abilistic belief updating through perception-action loops, including meta­
cognitive processes wherein agents make observations over and perform 
actions toward their own thought processes (Sandved-Smith et al., 2021). 
The focus of CBT on intervening on cycles of belief, action and perception, 
including metacognitive processes, make the underlying mechanisms highly 
amenable to an account using the AIF.
The AIF is a theory of cognition, closely tied to the free energy principle 
(FEP), that casts perception and action as a form of (Bayes approximate) 
probabilistic belief updating. Briefly, the FEP originated as a theory of brain 
function and has since been applied to characterize the adaptivity and 
persistence of any system separated from its environment by a boundary, 
where persistence can be described as a systems' minimization of a quantity 
called "free energy." Free energy, in simple terms, measures how unlikely 
a state is, given the type of thing the system is. In other words, by minimiz­
ing the free energy, systems occupy the expected states (Friston, 2012, 2013; 
M. Ramstead et al., 2023). The AIF provides a process theory describing how 
human agents minimize free energy through embodied action-perception 
loops driven by probabilistic inference (Friston et al., 2017; Parr et al., 2022). 
According to the AIF, the brain instantiates a hierarchical "generative 
model" encoding sets of prior independent probabilities about states it 
expects to visit (or just "prior") and likelihoods mapping the probability 
of observing a specific input given the state the system is in. In other words, 
by combining priors and likelihoods the system infers the likely causes of its 
own sensory states, and is able to generate predictions that best explain its 
own sense data. Layers higher up in the hierarchy track longer timescale 
features, like contextual features of the environment, constraining the 
8
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

expectations at lower levels, which track and predict faster scale features like 
moment-to-moment sensory information (Clark, 2016). The AIF casts the 
embodied brain as working to always minimize the discrepancy between the 
"top-down" predictions and "bottom up" signals from lower levels, along 
the whole hierarchy. Discrepancy between prediction and signal is called 
"prediction error," and is roughly equivalent to free energy, signaling how 
"surprising" a sensory state is given some prior. We can distinguish between 
two types of prediction errors. State prediction error refers to the mismatch 
between predicted states of the world and the actual states inferred from 
incoming evidence. Outcome prediction error pertains to the mismatch 
between predicted sensory outcomes and actual observed outcomes. The 
first is central for perceptual inference where beliefs about the world are 
updated, the second for action selection, signaling when the environment is 
not behaving as expected under a chosen policy. To reiterate a crucial point, 
according to the AIF, the brain's fundamental drive is to minimize predic­
tion error, thereby shifting the organism from a state of uncertainty to 
certainty (Clark, 2016; Friston, 2010). Crucially, though, agents do not 
only track errors relative to present sensory states but to future expected 
states. Thus, agents are said to track expected uncertainty. This expected 
uncertainty serves a critical role in dictating whether an agent engages in 
pragmatic or epistemic action (explore or exploit) (Kiverstein et al., 2019). 
The more expected uncertainty and the more precise the beliefs about 
resolving that uncertainty, the more driven toward exploration the agent 
will be and the less expected uncertainty, the more likely the agent is to 
exploit a well-trodden path of action (Friston et al., 2015). In other words, 
an increase of outcome prediction error will signal that the current policies 
are not eliciting the expected outcomes, suggesting a shift toward explora­
tion which in turn might produce state prediction errors intimating the 
need for a state update.
Prediction errors can be minimized in two ways. Firstly, through 
a process known as "perceptual inference" whereby priors are updated 
to better accommodate incoming sensory information, thus revising 
the flow of prediction. Imagine, for example, I expect to find several 
colleagues in the office one morning, but on arrival find that nobody 
came in due to bad weather. In this case, I simply update my belief to 
better accommodate the available evidence. Alternatively, prediction 
error can be minimized through actions that change the external state 
of the world to bring it in line with the original prediction, thus 
actively bending the sensory flow to better fit our original prediction 
(essentially, "updating" the world) (Clark, 2016; Parr et al., 2022). 
This is critical, as agents who passively predict the world, even with 
the best model, would soon perish in the face of the demands posed 
by a changing and volatile environment; accurate predictions alone 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
9

are no use in the face of imminent danger. For example, if I were to 
find myself broken down in the desert, simply updating my predic­
tions to accommodate rising body temperature and dehydration would 
do little to help despite minimizing uncertainty. Rather, I expect to be 
hydrated and have a reasonable body temperature, and so I must 
actively enact the world in such a way as to realize those expectations. 
We can, therefore, recognize that the AIF is a fundamentally "enac­
tive" theory of cognition (Bruineberg et al., 2018; M. J. Ramstead 
et al., 2020).
Each prediction error is weighted by a quantity known as precision 
weighting (or simply "precision"), which estimates the reliability of the 
prediction error relevant to a specific context. In AIF, precision is an 
attribute of a distribution, specifically, it can be understood as the inverse 
variance of a distribution, thus serving as a measure of confidence about 
the information encoded by that specific distribution.2 Furthermore, it is 
sensible to assume that there are different precisions associated with 
different distributions (Parr et al., 2022). For example, an agent might 
be very certain about its sensory inputs (sensory precision) and about the 
state transition probabilities (transition precision) but not about the best 
policy (policy precision). In other words, the precision afforded to an 
error informs the system about how useful that error is likely to be, so 
that it can differentiate between signal and noise. The estimation of 
precision weighting is usually associated, in psychological terms, with 
attention; upregulating precision weighting is equivalent to attending to 
a particular stimulus (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2013, 2016; see 
also Parvizi-Wayne, 2024).
Being able to effectively infer the precision weighting on prediction error 
affords an impressive degree of flexibility to the system, and is imperative 
for adaptive agents occupying volatile and noisy environments. For exam­
ple, when crossing a busy city road, precision weighting allows the system to 
filter out the noise of chatting tourists, blinking billboards, and so on, and 
dial up the gain on relevant stimuli such as the noise of an approaching bus. 
On the other hand, in action, precision is analogous to the confidence the 
system has that a specific policy will bring about the expected outcomes. As 
policies result in success or failure, their assigned precision weightings are 
updated accordingly: policies that reliably bring about expected outcomes 
are effectively "dialled in" through increasing precision over time. Case in 
point, when crossing the aforementioned road, the agent might have learned 
that the crossing near the corner is safer because a traffic light serves it, 
hence that policy has been assigned higher precision. If the agent were to 
arrive to find the traffic light gone, the system would register a spike in 
unexpected prediction error, leading to a downregulation in policy precision 
(see Kiverstein et al., 2019, p. 2854).
10
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

3.2. Error dynamics, affectivity, and affordances
The AIF does not only keep track of the system's error minimization about 
a single past or future instance but also on how it fares over periods of time. 
An aspect of the AIF known as "error dynamics" is informative of how the 
system is reducing uncertainty on average (Kiverstein et al., 2019). Crucially, 
this aspect connects well to an agent's first-person phenomenology in the 
form of valenced affect, mood, and emotion (see, for example, Eldar et al.,  
2016; Joffily & Coricelli, 2013; Kiverstein et al., 2020; Van de Cruys, 2017). 
Error dynamics describes how fluctuations in the rate of change in predic­
tion error (how fast it is decreasing or increasing) over time relative to 
expectation underpin subject-level experiences of mood: How well am 
I reducing uncertainty, on average, over time? (Joffily & Coricelli, 2013; 
Kiverstein et al., 2019, 2020). According to this account, a lower-than- 
expected rate generates a negative mood and a higher-than-expected 
a positive mood. Importantly, this adds more flexibility to the AIF. 
Indeed, the error dynamics must not always follow a decreasing trend, or 
in other words the system must not invariably strive for reducing errors, 
instead, it can allow short-term increases in prediction errors for the sake of 
a greater reduction of uncertainty further down the line (e.g., an exploratory 
action).
The picture of action and precision furnished by error dynamics provides 
a particularly ecological-enactive viewpoint on the AIF, where precision 
weighting is understood as intimately connected with opportunities to act in 
the environment (affordances), and felt affective phenomenology. Thus, 
precision "should be understood in the context of tending towards an 
optimal grip on the affordances available in the ecological niche" 
(Kiverstein et al., 2019, p. 2861). Thus, agents on this view should be 
understood as in an intimate connection with their affordances, where the 
ongoing success of their engagements (or lack of) over multiple interlocking 
timescales is felt as valenced mood or affect.
It's here that the AIF connects with a theoretical approach known as 
"skilled intentionality" that emphasizes the significance of both individual 
first-person phenomenology, and of the large-scale socio-cultural dynamics 
that pattern our engagements (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014; Kiverstein & 
Rietveld, 2015; Rietveld, 2008; Rietveld & Kiverstein, 2014). This emphasis 
on the individual, temporally fast dynamics, and the slower large-scale 
dynamics provides a distinction between a landscape of affordances and 
a field of affordances. A landscape of affordances is essentially "the view 
from above," consisting of the nested webs of affordances that shape large- 
scale patterns of behavior that characterize a local niche. Right now, for 
example, my landscape of affordances is the local library, where that library 
is understood as a web of affordances shaped and maintained by socio- 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
11

cultural norms and practices, such as lending systems, shelving systems, 
norms about noise etc. This local niche is relatively stable, although patterns 
may shift over time due to changing norms (a new lending system) and 
material change (it being demolished due to funding cuts). The field of 
affordances instead zooms into the subjective, first-person, perspective, 
capturing the "selective responsiveness" of the agent to affordances that 
stand out in that moment (solicitations). So as I sit in the library working, 
my field of affordances is my computer keyboard and screen, and the coffee 
cup next to me. The field of affordances is subject to fast change and even 
a degree of volatility in response to contextual demands, changes to the 
landscape, and the internal state of the agent (e.g., at some point the library 
restroom will begin to solicit my engagement) (Bruineberg & Rietveld,  
2014).
Given the tools of the AIF, we can understand the field of affordances in 
terms of precision. In the AIF, precision modulates the action readiness 
response to specific affordances. In other words, those affordances that 
stand out as soliciting are affordances weighted as likely to lead to prediction 
error minimization. Thus, it's precision estimation on action that underpins 
the phenomenology of "optimal grip," which is simply the felt sensation an 
agent has that they are coping well with a given situation; lack of grip is 
experienced as a kind of tension, or drive to improve the situation 
(Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014). The system is in a situation of optimal grip 
when it can achieve and maintain a balance between flexibility and stability 
in its responses to the environment, adjusting its actions to reduce error 
without overcompensating or becoming rigid. This notion is important, as 
the confluence of precision weighting and phenomenology will serve us well 
when thinking about how best to utilize action-based interventions in the 
treatment of depression. The phenomenological state of tending toward an 
optimal grip can be mobilized, through curation of virtual affordances, to 
influence the computational level, delicately keeping the agent in a learning 
state where precision weighting on specific forms of action can be increased.
Here an example will help: Imagine a saxophone player who is perfectly at 
home playing with their usual improvisation group. In this familiar setting, 
our player can smoothly reduce prediction error through highly precise, 
well-trodden action routines, responding to the learnt regularities within the 
group. Within this particular landscape of affordances (the regularities and 
routines of the group within their particular socio-cultural niche), the player 
is competently able to maintain a grip on their field of affordances (the 
monument-to-moment shifting demands of the improvisation, as experi­
enced by the player), and this experienced as a lack of tension or frustration. 
But the sax player wants to try out for a coveted conservatory place, some­
thing that they know will be challenging, and will pull them out of their 
comfort zone, and so they begin to play with different groups. Note here that 
12
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

there is something important about the generative model; what charac­
terizes the healthiness of our sax players model is not that it veridically 
represents their actual level of competence, but that it generates expecta­
tions of the goal states that can then be brought about through the correct 
actions. In other words, when it comes to goal states and action, generative 
models come with an inbuilt optimistic, action-oriented, bias (Baltieri & 
Buckley, 2019). Let's suppose though, that the sax player struggles in these 
less familiar settings, suddenly bereft of their usual slickness. This failure is 
no failure of their skills alone; they have the same skills. What's changed is 
the landscape of affordances (not just the players themselves, but the loose 
set of social norms they embody governing how improvisation is likely to 
flow), and thus what were once highly precise action policies, now feel low 
precision, or high uncertainty. This demonstrates the primacy of agent- 
environment dynamics in skilled behavior (Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014; 
Hipólito et al., 2021).
This shift in landscape means the player's field of affordances is disrupted: 
a flattened distribution in terms of weighting on action policies manifests as 
doubts around when to come in, what kind of motifs to run with, or how 
others are likely to respond to their lines. A tension is suddenly present, 
leading to potential frustration and disappointment if grip can't be restored. 
Thus, our sax player can resolve this rising error either by redoubling their 
efforts, perhaps exploratively trying out some different approaches and 
gauging response, or they might decide the best policy is to see that the 
conservatory is currently just beyond their reach, and retreat from the 
difficult to resolve uncertainty.
This push to always be resolving error either in-line with or better than 
expected, and the close tie with embodied affect and phenomenology, has 
already been applied to theories of play (Andersen et al., 2023), and in 
practical terms to understanding video game design (Deterding et al., 2022). 
Interestingly, it has also been used to develop a multi-level account of 
depression.
3.3. Active inference and depression
Active inference models are now common in computational psychiatry, and 
the AIF has provided models of depression emphasizing different aspects of 
the condition. These accounts share the central hallmark of a lack of 
flexibility in action-based world models3 (Badcock et al., 2017; Barrett 
et al., 2016; Fabry, 2020; Kiverstein et al., 2020). In depression, this lack of 
flexibility is understood as the combination of a dysfunction in learning 
rates, overly precise priors and maladaptive internal estimates of the preci­
sion of both internal and external cues. Shaffer et al. (2022) suggest that 
depression might arise from "improperly" weighted interoceptive and 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
13

exteroceptive sense data, for example, difficulty in adaptively generating 
anticipatory changes in visceral states in response to expected future meta­
bolic demands (Barrett et al., 2016), or increased precision of unexpected or 
negative social outcomes (Badcock et al., 2017), meaning that predictions 
fail to tune effectively to current contextual demands (Shaffer et al., 2022). 
An increase in the perceived occurrence of uncertain outcomes (increase in 
the likelihood of low precision beliefs), might lead a system to confidently 
expect unpredictable outcomes (high precision in high uncertainty), result­
ing in confidently expecting uncertain outcomes. If these beliefs become 
resistant to change (overly precise priors), i.e., the system confidently 
expects unmanageable increase in the rate of error dynamics, hence losing 
its optimal grip, this can result in a chronic self-maintaining negative 
emotional state (Smith et al., 2022). Consistently with the active inference 
literature on emotion (Joffily & Coricelli, 2013), negative valence states 
increase learning rate about those states, hence overly increasing the preci­
sion of an already rigid prior.
The model of depression as a dysfunction in learning is supported by 
empirical evidence, though the evidence is complex and far from conclusive. 
For instance, depression has often been linked with dysregulation of both 
the dopaminergic and serotonergic systems, as evidenced by neuroimaging 
and computational studies (see, for example, Cools et al., 2011). 
Dysfunctions in these systems are thought to impair learning, and in the 
case of serotonin, reduced concentrations have been associated with altered 
sensitivity to negative outcomes (Belujon & Grace, 2017; Eldar et al., 2016). 
Moreover, Shaffer et al. (2022) highlight that in cases of major depression 
we see altered activity/connectivity in brain regions such as the hippocam­
pus, medial prefrontal cortex and cingulate cortices, which they interpret as 
a possible overweighting of interoceptive prediction error (Shaffer et al.,  
2022, p. 14). It is also interesting to note that in AIF models of depression 
precision weighting is the mechanism often identified as dysfunctioning, 
and there is burgeoning (although indirect) evidence that precision weight­
ing is modulated through the neurotransmitters most closely associated 
with depression (dopamine, serotonin, and noradrenaline) (Barrett et al.,  
2017; Clark, 2013; Friston, 2009).
Kiverstein et al. (2020), provide an enactive model of depression empha­
sizing how precision weighting dynamics underpin changes in an indivi­
dual's field of affordances. Eventually, in order to gain some semblance of 
predictive grip, the system, expecting unresolvable prediction error, prefers 
to find one of the few states where uncertainty is easily reducible, danger­
ously bending the equilibrium between explore and exploit toward the 
latter. In phenomenological terms subjects begin to expect failure, frustra­
tion, rejection, etc. Kiverstein and colleagues thus poetically sum up depres­
sion by saying that to the individual "failing to flourish will become 
14
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

unsurprising" (Kiverstein et al., 2020, p. 8). This prior for failure then 
entrains high-precision action policies marked by withdrawal, avoidance, 
and passivity; if we expect all else to fail, then these become effective policies 
for minimizing expected uncertainty. Badcock et al. (2017) characterize 
these depressive policies as having a pseudo form of "adaptive" value within 
the context of expected negative outcomes. Indeed, according to their 
"social risk hypothesis," depression is the negative manifestation of an 
evolved strategy for avoiding harms within high-risk social contexts, 
a "better safe than sorry" strategy (Allen & Badcock, 2003). Thus, 
a narrow (and narrowing) set of avoidance strategies are now assigned 
high precision, while the broader gamut of possibilities that characterize 
a flourishing and open life are downregulated. This is what Fabry (2020) 
describes as the "dark room" of depression.
From the agent's perspective, experience changes in ways that are often 
difficult to articulate, but relate to a loss of depth or shrinking of their world. 
Things that once seemed interesting or exciting lose that inviting character; 
this is the anhedonia that is ubiquitous in experiences of depression. In 
other words, the field of affordances is disturbed, now lacking the rich 
solicitation that characterizes healthy dynamics (Kiverstein et al., 2020). 
What is noteworthy here is that depression becomes a malady of agent- 
environment dynamics, rather than a purely brain bound, neurobiological, 
phenomenon (Chinchella & Hipolito, 2023). The reduction of action pos­
sibilities, given a shrinkage of the field of affordances, results in a "stuck" 
state insensible to normal waves of perturbation, or even, excessively repul­
sive to incoming waves, resulting in further closure. Indeed, according to 
Ratcliffe's (2015) in depth phenomenological study, the field of affordances 
may take on a sinister aspect, containing an "inescapable sense of hope­
lessness and passivity," a "growing feeling of all-enveloping failure," and 
a "sense of threat" (pp. 168-9). This indeed reflects well onto the loss of 
optimal grip, where the agent relies onto overcompensation strategies and 
rigid priors (stuck states), resulting in an inability to effectively cope with 
the environment. The interplay between computational dynamics and the 
field of affordances is indeed deeply felt by the agent in a fully embodied 
sense, and the malady of depression becomes a deterioration of the indivi­
dual's ability to actively cultivate possibility through action.
Understood from this perspective we see how depression can quickly 
become a vicious cycle wherein the policies of withdrawal and passivity 
serve only to confirm the expectation that the agent is unable to engage the 
world in a rewarding, meaningful way. In other words, the more a person 
withdraws and isolates, the more likely they are to confirm their negatively 
biased priors. And, critically, the more confirmation those priors receive, 
the stronger they become, and the higher the threshold for the sensory 
evidence that will update them. The Cycle of depression is therefore self- 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
15

reinforcing, whereby the real cruelty of the condition is that it seeks to 
minimize uncertainty through repeatedly confirming its own worst expec­
tations, in a way that consistently ratchets up the strength of the prior. In 
closing this section though, it should be noted that the AIF, with its 
emphasis on prediction error minimization and the role of expectation on 
action and experience, provides an especially convincing formal and con­
ceptual framework for explaining these kinds of vicious loops. Fortunately, 
the central role of expectation and action in cognition and experience, 
which potentiate these loops, also provide powerful opportunities for 
treatment.
4. Virtual reality and depression
4.1. The predictive brain is amenable to "hacking"
The foregoing sections have introduced and developed a lot of theory, 
beginning with the AIF and then connecting that with phenomenology via 
skilled intentionality, before bringing these together to present an AIF- 
based multi-level account of depression. This is useful, because it allows 
us to see how specific technological interventions can be tailored to take 
advantage of these dynamics, potentially shifting them in a way facilitating 
effective therapy. We are not the first to recognize that the AIF offers a clear 
and useful mechanistic account of the way that virtual reality might be 
implemented therapeutically. Clark (2023, 2024) writes that understanding 
the embodied brain through the lens of the AIF opens up opportunities for 
"hacking" the predictive brain. To illustrate what's meant by hacking in this 
context, consider a familiar example: the placebo effect. The case of "honest" 
placebos, where patients know they're inert yet experience symptoms relief, 
highlights how the predictive mind leverages contextual cues to shape 
experience (i.e., the fact that being in a hospital, speaking with a doctor, 
stethoscopes and white coats etc., usually correlate with effective treatment). 
In other words, by providing the right kind of cues the dynamics of the 
predictive mind can be harnessed to produce desired outcomes, as demon­
strated by multiple studies confirming placebos' efficacy (see Kaptchuk & 
Miller, 2018). The honest placebo effect demonstrates the sometimes- 
immense power of sub-personal implicit belief patterns. Placebos are one 
well-known example of how our brains can be "tricked" in ways that 
significantly alter important aspects of our lived experience, but as Clark 
(2023) notes, VR is a tool also well-placed to take advantage of these 
"hackable" dynamics. Clark cites work that utilizes VR as an analgesic 
treatment, placing patients experiencing burning pain into a virtual under­
water world in which they are surrounded by undulating jellyfish and beams 
of refracting sunlight (Colloca et al., 2020). These trials found that 
16
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

immersion within this underwater virtual world was effective at reducing 
pain and in positively impacting the mood and anxiety levels of patients. 
Clark (2023) provides a lucid mechanistic explanation, first focusing on the 
shift in precision weightings, from pain signals to the novel and slowly 
shifting sensory information. By introducing patients into strange and, 
importantly, immersive worlds, the brain must "scramble to make sense of 
this new and constantly shifting environment" (pp. 190). As Clark notes, the 
immersive power of VR is key here, as VR alone has the power to fully 
"trick" the brain into thinking it's actually really there, thus commanding 
attention in a powerful way. The second mechanism through which the 
underwater VR experience operates is by entraining relaxed bodily rhythms, 
with its gentle pulses of light and sound, the immersive experience can 
directly influence our own patterns of breathing and heart rate, thus offering 
positive shifts in mood and reductions in anxiety (see e.g., Charalambous & 
Djebbara, 2023; Shor et al., 2021). Dealing with the problem of immediate 
pain signals in the present is one thing, however, dealing with the persistent 
ongoing and deeply existential experience of depression is another, and 
poses a more daunting challenge for the use of VR. While pain treatment 
involves the moment-to-moment remapping of precision weighting over 
both interoceptive and exteroceptive prediction error, treating depression 
will necessitate effective shifts in error dynamics, specifically shifts in 
expected uncertainty through changes in learning rate. The goal, explicitly 
stated, is to generate a perturbation to un-stuck the subject. Specifically, this 
can be obtained through alterations in the learning rate to effect change in 
priors and in the associations between actions and outcomes. To achieve 
these very specific changes, we will suggest using VR to calibrate persona­
lized, grounded skill-based tasks that are challenging but offer consistent 
small rewards.
4.2. Existing approaches to VR and depression
There have been efforts to implement VR into CBT-based treatments for 
depression. However, given the lack of foundational theoretical principles to 
guide application, these treatments have provided mixed results (Dellazizzo 
et al., 2020; Lindner et al., 2019; Park et al., 2019). One interesting, recent 
attempt to deploy VR as an intervention for depression by fostering well- 
being and mood, tested on participants who self-reported depression, is 
known as "Edge of the Present" (Habak et al., 2020). "Edge of the Present" is, 
strictly speaking, a mixed reality program, that involves patients exploring 
a sparsely furnished room with doors, windows and a table. Participants are 
invited to physically explore the room, opening doors and windows as they 
choose. In other words, the virtual world presents the patient with a range of 
different affordances that can be actively engaged with. These affordances 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
17

reward exploration: doors and windows open onto a series of spectacular 
immersive landscapes, such as Alpine scenes, lush rainforests, tropical 
beaches, etc., accompanied by environmental effects such as a warm breeze 
to intensify the sensory experience. When users open a door or window, the 
scene changes, and the room itself transforms: walls gradually dissolve, and 
elements from the external environment gradually fill the space. The greater 
the engagement with the room, by repeated interaction with affordances, the 
more enriched and pleasant the experience becomes. This interactive envir­
onment, dense with uncertainty, aims to have the user learn that openness, 
curiosity, and exploration can lead to positively reinforcing experiences, and 
that the virtual world itself is progressively enriched by exploration. As the 
authors of the study put it. "The user's experience is about being present, 
open, and curious" (Habak et al., 2020, p. 4). The authors report how Edge 
of the Present led to significant reduction in hopelessness and increase in 
positive mood and well-being when comparing pre- and post-immersive 
session scores.
Another experimental use of VR, undertaken by Falconer et al. (2016), 
focuses on self-compassion and self-criticism. Depression is a condition 
characterized by intensely heightened and concentrated self-focused atten­
tion (Pyszczynski et al., 1987), manifesting metacognitively as critical inter­
nal monologues. In this study, participants met the DSM-IV criteria for 
current major depressive disorder, ensuring that the intervention was tested 
within a clinically relevant population. The designed scenario aimed at 
reshaping the relationship between different aspects of the self and challen­
ging negative self-perceptions. In the VR session, participants were first 
instructed to compassion-focused therapy (validation, redirection of atten­
tion and memory activation). Afterward, they were fitted with the Head 
Mounted Display and the tracking suit and joined a VR where they embo­
died an adult body presented with a scenario of a crying child to whom they 
were instructed to give compassionate responses. The child was pro­
grammed to respond positively after the delivery of each stage of their 
compassionate response. In the second phase, participants were embodied 
in the child's virtual body and reexperienced their previous compassionate 
response from the point of view of the child. The subjects were instructed to 
stand, look and listen to their compassionate response. This resulted in 
a significant increase in self-compassion and a decrease in self-criticism 
(Falconer et al., 2016). "Patients commented that it allows you to: 'step out 
of yourself, apply yourself and "bear witness" to yourself (Falconer et al.,  
2016, p. 5). The changing of perspective allows the patients to understand 
themselves "from the outside," being more open to self-acceptance and 
understanding suffering as a part of the human condition. As anticipated, 
enabling participants to embody both the compassionate adult and vulner­
able child facilitates a shift in self-perspective, reframing negative self- 
18
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

perceptions and engaging in a more compassionate internal dialogue. The 
study yielded significant reductions in depression severity and self-criticism 
and an increase in self-compassion, and some patients reported a mild 
generalizability to real-world situations, for example, by applying the experi­
ence to themselves while upset.
Interestingly, the authors of both papers attribute the success of the 
intervention to its focus on action, though in different ways. In the first 
case, subjects are performing exteroceptive-exploratory actions (Habak 
et al., 2020), actively interacting with the environment. In the second case, 
the focus is on enunciation, where the act of conveying care and under­
standing emphasizes the active role of the subject in shaping and delivering 
meaning (Falconer et al., 2016). In both cases, an action produces an 
observation, and it is , specifically, this latter which is key (more about it 
in the next section). However, neither was specifically designed to fit into 
a CBT treatment program, and as such, they have no clear trajectory for 
progression. As we argue in the next section, the AIF motivates 
a progressive approach to VR-based treatment rooted in incremental learn­
ing. Moreover, these approaches lacked further elements which we take to 
be critical, including personalization, realism, and, importantly, features 
underpinning a robust generalizability.
4.3. AIF-Based principles for optimal treatment
The AIF model of depression highlights three key mechanisms related to 
depression: (i) highly precise (rigid) priors pertaining to a lack of efficacy in 
one's own actions; (ii) a dysfunction in learning rate leading to difficulties 
updating priors; (iii) maladaptive internal and external cues. The above 
experiments, including the VR-based pain treatments, despite some limita­
tions, are encouraging as they suggest some ways that VR can help target 
these mechanisms. Our overarching hypothesis in terms of a principled 
AIF-grounded approach to VR treatment of depression is that by using VR 
to construct a tailored landscape of affordances within a personalized task- 
based environment, we can essentially perturbate the typical maladaptive 
predictive dynamics of depression.
As a fundamental starting point, it would be beneficial for treatment to be 
as fully embodied as possible. The treatment sessions should not remain 
purely cognitive (talkative), hence disembodied and abstracted away from 
specific situations. Rather, patients should be engaged in immersive, emo­
tionally charged social scenarios that reflect themes that are present in their 
real life. This implies being presented with an external world that resembles 
the real one (e.g., sights, sounds, spatial positioning, etc.) where they can act. 
Furthermore, patients need to be able to embody themselves in a resembling 
avatar which successfully integrate external (e.g., tactile, olfaction, hearing 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
19

etc.) and internal sensory modalities (e.g., proprioception and interocep­
tion). VR opens new interesting venues as it allows not only to directly 
modulate exteroceptive predictions' precision, but embodied interoceptive 
(affective) predictions too. Falconer et al. (2016), explicitly leveraged embo­
diment to "alter the relationship between different aspects of the self, and to 
counter negative self-attitudes" (pp. 5), effectively combining exteroception 
with metacognition. Referring to (iii), thoughtfully crafted internal and 
external affordances will be central to the efficacy of VR-based treatments, 
but in all cases, the efficacy of the treatment hinges on the capacity to act as 
effectively and freely as possible, and so even "inward" looking therapies 
such as the Falconer study rely on the role of the body in situating 
a perspective and orientation for action.
4.3.1. Precision engineered learning
Related to (ii), both experiments seemed to demonstrate temporary changes 
in learning rates. During "Edge of the present," for example, users were able 
to engage with affordances in an increasingly open and curious way, learn­
ing that increasing engagement reliably led to increased "rewards." This 
speaks to the power of VR to shift learning rates through its unique ability to 
alter a user's landscape of affordances, and as Smith et al. (2021) note, one 
key aspect of effective CBT is likely to be a modulation in learning rate from 
high to low. Learning rates are impacted by the predicted levels of uncer­
tainty in the environment. Environments offering too little lead to a flat 
learning rate because the environment is seen as offering no opportunities 
for worthwhile exploration. Environments offering too much uncertainty 
lead to a low learning rate because the system essentially becomes over­
whelmed and expects an ability to resolve that level of uncertainty. In either 
case, development and consolidation of new policies is precluded, and the 
subject is stuck in its old ways.4 Consider playing a video game that is far too 
easy or impossibly hard. If the game offers too little challenge (e.g., no 
matter your policies, the outcome is always similar), you're likely to use 
a fixed and repetitive strategy. On the other hand, if the game is impossibly 
hard (e.g., no matter your policies, the outcome is never what you hoped 
for), you are likely to constantly try different strategies without success. This 
probably results in feelings of boredom or frustration, signals telling us that 
there's nothing there to learn and no way of improving our grip on the 
situation.
The modulation of uncertainty, then, is a direct way to alter learning 
rates. In other words, we want to turn up the learning rate during treatment 
in order to effect change, but then lower the learning rate regarding that 
particular network of implicit beliefs, in order to "bed in" the new beliefs 
and make them less sensitive to update and more cross-contextualisable. 
This job of maintaining a field of affordances, which is just challenging 
20
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

enough, within a VR setting, is non-trivial from a design standpoint, but 
should be a core guiding principle. Here, the distinction between 
a landscape and field becomes important; VR allows us to strategically 
craft a landscape of affordances embedding goal structures that are pro­
gressive and tailored to an individual's skills. But real-time adaptation also 
means that we can maintain a field of affordances that best keeps the 
individual in a state of optimized learning. For example, we might design 
a virtual environment containing meaningful goal structures, offering mul­
tiple interactive elements to be explored and developed. However, we could 
also utilize VR to add adaptive elements, toggling the push and pull of 
specific affordances, such as foregrounding elements more closely related to 
that patient's recent thought patterns, or deemphasizing elements that may 
be particularly triggering given the current broader context. The task of 
engineering a landscape of affordances, and of maintaining an appropriate 
a field of affordances may involve tools like fast bio-adaptive feedback 
utilizing wearable technology to monitor markers like heart rate and breath­
ing, or eye tracking technology to monitor the patient's attention, but 
ultimately opens up a space of practical and technological challenge.
Having an environment in which a user can perform "better than 
expected" can foster increased mood and reduced anxiety in the short 
term, and self-acceptance in the long one. In order to treat depression, the 
role of initiating exploratory behavior, or to experience self compassion, is 
not to increase mood per se, but to update stuck priors regarding the level of 
available reward. In other words, we aim at a longer-term objective of 
utilizing error dynamics to update implicit beliefs pertaining to the out­
comes of actions in contexts typically impacted by depression. Smith et al. 
(2021) have demonstrated using AIF simulations that the role of repeated 
engagement with affordances is the updating of implicit belief networks 
(action-outcome mapping), which must be achieved iteratively, through 
engagement with affordances taking place over time.
A second, related principle, which marries well to (i), is that the 
affordances should aim at small but constant surprising engagements, 
providing "just better than expected outcomes." This emphasis on steady 
change is grounded in the empirical, neurobiological literature, where we 
see that learning occurs gradually through smaller and more consistent 
phasic bursts of dopamine (Schultz et al., 1997). As these small, surpris­
ing, rewarding outcomes repeat, the dopaminergic response shifts to the 
cue rather than the outcome, highlighting a form of deep associative 
learning identified as crucial by Smith et al. (2021). For example, a virtual 
environment could closely reproduce a familiar environment that is 
usually experienced as stressful and difficult, providing familiar affor­
dances resulting in repeated positive outcomes that consistently violate 
negative expectations without offering hugely unexpected rewards. This 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
21

is because the positive outcomes must be modeled as plausible outcomes 
of the agent's actions, rather than some anomalous event, such as a giant 
lottery win or suddenly being a widely adored celebrity. Indeed, even 
positive violations of expectation that are too violent may be counter­
productive in that they are taken as evidence that the generative model is 
ill-equipped to succeed in reliably anticipating uncertainty - precisely the 
condition we are aiming to alleviate!
Studies of depression consistently highlight disruption to a person's 
capacity to act effectively, to their sense of agency, and a lack of confidence 
(Kiverstein et al., 2020; Ratcliffe, 2015). As such, we suggest that the 
challenging goal structures of the virtual environment should elicit specific 
skillful interactions that maximize the sense of ownership of success. This 
could relate to the deployment of a person's established skills, such as 
allowing them to deploy their expertise in a specific domain effectively, or 
it could involve the development of new skills. Either way, the affordances 
should be specific and skillful, contrasted against highly generalizable tasks, 
like stacking blocks or opening doors.
In the next section, we address the problem of generalizability directly, 
but in terms of learning rate, Smith et al. (2021) suggest that it might be 
helpful (in regard to generalizability), given the dynamic nature of the 
learning rate, to have treatment decrease the learning rate to solidify the 
changes that have occurred (p. 13). In terms of affordances this will mean 
turning down the perceived uncertainty, until the associated positive out­
comes become highly precise, unsurprising to the individual, and increas­
ingly habitual. Affectively, this will be experienced by the individual as 
a decrease in arousal, a reduced sense of curiosity, and perhaps even the 
emergence of feelings of boredom.
4.3.2. Generalisability
As mentioned previously, one of the major challenges raised by CBT 
practitioners is that the results tend to be brittle, in the sense that changes 
struggle to persist over time outside of the therapy setting. In practical 
terms, the expectations engendered by the VR setting must seep into the 
real world (White et al., 2024). Importantly, while one might imagine that it 
is enough to avoid fantastical concepts, this represents just one extreme. On 
the other end, even attempting to adhere strictly to reality can be surpris­
ingly challenging and may present unforeseen obstacles. Both the experi­
ments above exhibit this issue: opening a window does not always produce 
amazing landscapes, much less these come to inhabit one's room. This is 
important because, if the subject is to construct priors about state-outcomes 
mappings that have to be effective, these must be carried over to non-VR 
settings. In AIF terms, the VR model must be as close as possible to the 
22
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

agent's, in fact, we don't want to construct priors that can make predictions 
and be updated only in the virtual world.
While defeating monsters and exploring jungles may upregulate 
mood in the present, even suppressing significant pain, these effects 
are unlikely to generalize to the failure to result in learned associations 
relevant in the patient's offline life. This has an interesting, potentially 
counterintuitive, implication in terms of design strategy; VR potentiates 
an unlimited and fantastical array of affordances, but this could be 
something designers of treatments for depression should actually 
avoid, resisting the temptation to depict lush fantasy landscapes, undu­
lating jellyfish, or the embodiment of a child. This is critical because, 
the power of VR in its power to let our imaginations run riot, we 
suggest that this would mark a strategic error within a context of 
depression treatment.
For these reasons, we suggest a principle that holds us to designing 
treatments - specifically for depression - based in virtual settings resem­
bling the patient's non-virtual worlds as closely as possible. Note, though 
that this is not the same thing as immersion; environments can be immer­
sive in the sense of providing presence but nevertheless generate predictions 
unlikely to generalize. One area of relevant further research here concerns 
the concept of seepage itself: to what extent does a detailed resemblance 
underpin the transfer of beliefs between online and offline worlds? It may 
well be the case that there are other factors at play, especially including 
individual differences of the kind mentioned earlier such as phenomenolo­
gical control.
One might now wonder, what can be done in VR that can't simply be 
done in the world? In short, its distinctive value lies in making needed sense- 
making behaviors, identified through CBT or different therapy forms, 
experientially available. By allowing individuals to embody alternative per­
spectives, rehearse meaningful actions, and encounter supportive cues 
within immersive scenarios, VR can scaffold a reorientation of the accessible 
affordances in the everyday environment. VR is an environment where 
types of scaffolding that are not available in the real world can be leveraged, 
enabling the updating of maladaptive priors and the establishment of new 
policies. Indeed, VR offers two advantages that the real world might not: 
firstly, it is completely safe. The patients can be free of the fear of unmanage­
able waves of uncertainty, in other words, without the immediate risks or 
burdens of real-world consequences. Secondly, VR can enhance the fun and 
engagement of therapeutic activities, bolstering their effectiveness. In enac­
tivist terms, VR offers the possibility to freely act in the world, enacting 
trajectories of behavior that foster enjoyment, agency and reward, thereby 
facilitating positive sense-making that may not yet be possible outside the 
simulated environment. Designing VR therapeutic environments requires 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
23

striking a balance between realism and therapeutic modulation: they must 
remain grounded in the patient's lived world, yet incorporate subtle adjust­
ments that invite positive re-engagement without erasing the challenges to 
be overcome.
4.3.3. Expanding horizons
We've already outlined that affordances should relate to skillful engage­
ment, but we can further draw from the AIF model of depression in order to 
think more deeply about what the texture of these affordances should look 
like. One important aspect of pathologies like depression is their temporal 
aspect. As Ratcliffe (2015) explores, depression is not experienced synchro­
nically. Rather, depression involves a constriction of scope, or a loss of 
depth, and this is intimately connected to senses of the self as an agent. In 
AIF terms this is underpinned by a reduction in precision weighting on 
action extending over time, reflecting a loss of confidence in those policies 
to be adaptive in the face of environmental demands, and to bring about the 
predicted states (a condition known as "learned helplessness"). This loss of 
confidence is connected to the phenomenology of anhedonia but may also 
result in a reduction of the "temporal thickness" of the agent's generative 
model. As Ramstead and colleagues put it, as long as confidence on future 
action is low "the temporal depth of the generative model is eventually 
eroded, since it no longer serves any purpose" (M. Ramstead et al., 2023, 
p. 31). This loss of temporal thickness represents the capacity to model the 
consequences of one's actions over time, and, if eroded, will lead to quite 
literally a loss of agency (Friston, 2018, p. 5).
The potential loss of temporal thickness of the model (a result of persis­
tent low precision on action) is significant and speaks to some of the 
disturbing aspects of the phenomenology of depression. Ratcliffe describes 
how depression often leads to changes in self-hood, whereby changes in 
"bodily capacities and dispositions" lead to a vastly reduced space of self- 
actualization through action and connection with others. In depression, 
one's sense of self may not be stable over time, with the "self-schema" of 
various beliefs, attitudes, and dispositions disrupted (Ratcliffe, 2015, p. 72). 
In the AIF, the temporal thickness of one's generative model is thought to be 
directly linked to "our ordinary sense of being a self" (Deane, Miller et al.,  
2020), though the self being grounded in the generative model's capacity for 
extended control, underpinning the maintenance of important homeostatic 
set point.
The loss of control seen in depression - through reduced precision and 
potential loss of temporal thickness - is plausibly why, in depression, we see 
a falling back to complete reliance on habitual action, even where habitual 
action now feels effortful (Ratcliffe, 2015, p. 171). Effective grip can, increas­
ingly, only be maintained in the here and now, and not in the face of 
24
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

anticipated future uncertainty. Under the AIF habits are understood as 
relying more on highly precise priors, rather than flexible policies that 
might need to adapt in the face of change (Maisto et al., 2019; Schwoebel 
et al., 2019). This is in contrast to temporally extended, goal-directed 
actions, which must be sensitive to real-time sensory input, requiring 
adjustments of precision in response to new information. This, as we saw 
in the discussion of error dynamics, is precisely the kind of healthy flexibility 
and adaptiveness that's impaired in depression and underpins an optimal 
grip on affordances. This diminished capacity in depression, whereby only 
habitual actions seem even remotely possible, reflects the thought that under 
AIF, habitual action is less cognitively (and therefore metabolically) 
demanding due to them not requiring recurrent updates. However, empha­
sizing the ecological-enactive nature of depression habits can only be 
applied over short timescales in stable environments, where the perceived 
uncertainty in the field of affordances is at a minimum (Maisto et al., 2019).
A key design principle for VR therapy, then, is to restore and support the 
precision on temporally extended action policies: confidence in action must 
not just be concentrated on the immediate, but on our capacity to exert and 
maintain control over the contingencies of projects unfurling through time. 
Here, then, we can see the importance of implementing a role for planning 
in our virtual tasks, whereby individuals engage in a kind of ongoing world 
building containing nested goal structures where skillful action in the 
present pays off with positive outcomes further down the line. This is 
a feature of treatment which, theoretically, could take place across multiple 
sessions, building entire multi-part virtual projects into treatment plans.
4.3.4. A cautionary note
Finally, it's important to say, as was briefly mentioned above, that there will 
be VR settings that depressed subjects should avoid. One class of these cases 
is, to put it bluntly, scenarios that are too difficult, where the levels of 
uncertainty in the VR are unmanageable. For example, tough tasks where 
it is difficult to figure out what to do, or if levels are present, where it is 
difficult to pass the early levels. Similarly, but more subtly, we should avoid 
not just unmanageable uncertainty, but also volatility. This is a form of 
meta-uncertainty wherein the level of environmental uncertainty is itself 
unpredictable. Volatility understood in this way has been linked with 
depression, negative affect, and other forms of psychopathology such as 
PTSD (Miller et al., 2020). Moreover, the great power that VR holds to shape 
generative models can, in theory, cut both ways. Thus, any great power that 
VR holds to shape generative models could plausibly cut both ways. Recall 
that in the AIF, generative models are not aimed toward a neutral veridi­
cality, but contain an action ready bias toward confirming their expectations 
(Bruineberg et al., 2018). In the case of depression (and other pathologies) 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
25

this forms a feedback loop "in which the person samples the social world for 
sensory observations that confirm their expectation of suffering" (Kiverstein 
et al., 2020, p. 9). The capacity of the predictive brain to confirm its own 
Table of principles for VR therapies of depression
Principle
Description
Example
Precision 
learning
The virtual environment must be designed to 
elicit and maintain a specific learning rate 
through the modulation of environmental 
uncertainty. This will involve initially 
increasing the learning rate as the subject is 
completing specific goals and skilled tasks, 
and then modulating uncertainty to lower 
the learning rate to solidify a network of 
implicit beliefs. Changes, research suggests, 
should be gradual, not violating high-level 
expectations about the kind of success that 
is likely.
Studies have shown how different kinds and 
levels of feedback can galvanize and then 
consolidate learning in surgical simulations 
(Tee et al., 2024). For instance, shifting from 
immediate in-sim metrics to more general 
instructor-led evaluations. This suggests 
a potential framework for altering learning 
rate through feedback type, as well as more 
simply modulating the difficulty of the 
environment.
Generalisability In short, the learning that takes place within 
the VR world must generalise to the non- 
virtual world. In other words, the updated 
precision weighting and priors must 
influence expectations out in the subject's 
daily life. There is a delicacy here, though, 
in that we don't want VR worlds to be so 
mundane or crushingly dull that they 
simply reinforce the subject's low moods.
A recent study on VR-based roleplay for 
depression demonstrates this principle 
clearly: patients engaged in immersive, 
emotionally charged social scenarios that 
reflected their core, individualised, 
relational themes — themes that are 
present in their real lives. This design 
remained interesting and engaging while 
still shaping priors in ways that could 
generalize into real-world interpersonal 
interactions, aligning with the need for VR 
to both modulate learning rates and 
transfer updated precision weightings 
beyond the virtual context (Holsteg et al.,  
2024)
Temporal 
expansion
Goal structures are to be temporally 
extended, multi-step and require 
planning — they should elicit new 
behaviours, not rely on the subject's 
engrained, day-to-day habitual routines.
In a videogame context this would reflect 
demands more akin to a strategy-planning 
game like Simcity. In SimCity, success 
depends on forward planning because 
every decision, like where to place roads, 
utilities, or zoning, creates long-term 
consequences for growth, traffic, and 
finances. Players must anticipate future 
needs and design their city with temporally 
extended goals in mind, rather than just 
reacting to immediate demands. This is 
contrasted to games like Call of Duty or 
Tekken in which success depends on 
instinct and habitualised routine. This, in 
effect, resists the temporal constrictions 
that characterise depression.
Avoid Volatility The uncertainty profile of the experience 
should be stable and fit to the subjective 
need of control. Whether easy or 
challenging, that difficulty should itself not 
be subject to unpredictable change. 
Patients can thereby feel safe.
The stability of the uncertainty profile holds 
across different levels of challenge. For 
example, Deterding et al., (2022) describe 
how expected levels of uncertainty are key 
to the appeal of both "idle games" 
(unchallenging), and "souls-like" games 
(frustratingly difficult). VR for depression 
should follow this, and implement 
challenge only in first-order uncertainty.
Enjoyment
The VR therapeutic experience should allow 
sensory as well as emotional pleasure, 
resulting in an overall enjoyable 
experience. In this way patients are prone 
to not only continue the therapy, but also 
recall it during their day-to-day life.
Both Habak et al. (2020) and Falconer et al. 
(2016) showcase the importance of 
enjoyment. In the first case, it was obtained 
through spectacular landscapes, whereas in 
the second by a mix of compassion and 
reassurance.
26
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

expectations should give us pause when designing virtual environments for 
people with depression.
5. Conclusion
This paper has sought to provide a set of guiding principles for the use 
of VR in CBT depression treatments. Based on the AIF, these principles 
can establish a consistent approach to VR therapies, rooted in an 
understanding of the learning mechanisms which underpin changes in 
patterns of thinking, feeling, and acting. Taken as a whole, these 
principles speak to an important aspect of depression and its potential 
treatment; while most existing attempts to utilize VR consisted of using 
VR to replace some aspect of treatment, such as exercise or social 
interaction, they failed to really address depression as a disruption to 
a state of being in the world (Ratcliffe, 2015). In other words, depres­
sion is not merely a pervasive negative mood, it is, rather, a deep 
disruption to our sense of self and our capacity to enact a meaningful 
world (de Haan 2020; Maiese 2021; Nielsen 2023). The AIF furnishes us 
with a deep, multi-level account of depression that connects directly 
with the learning mechanisms of CBT. We've argued that VRs potential 
to treat depression is, in some sense, subtle and not immediately 
obvious. While VR's capacity to produce experiences far beyond the 
everyday, dreamlike and fantastic in nature, might be alluring, and even 
highly effective in treating immediate pain, discomfort, and suffering, 
we've argued that designers should take a grounded approach, situating 
the virtual experience in close relation to aspects of the patients non- 
virtual lived experience. The VR's power is in replicating familiar and 
generalizable affordances, while subtly shifting outcomes to generate 
consistent positive feedback sensitive to the user experience in real 
time.
Viewing depression through the AIF highlights how it is, fundamentally, 
a malady concerned with our capacity to act, and about how our expectations 
about the outcomes of our actions feedback to us to erect a world of avoidance, 
withdrawal, and pessimism. The rigid priors of depression lead to people 
enacting their own worlds of depression; as Ratcliffe (2015, 156) describes, 
depression changes our "structures of anticipation," whereby we anticipate 
nothing good is possible, and so withdraw into a world of restricted opportu­
nity and promise. Using VR to treat depression well first means meeting 
depression on these terms, and utilizing it to shift these structures of anticipa­
tion, gently providing small wins and positive surprises until, gradually, 
patients become increasingly able to enact their own recovery; recovery here 
isn't something that happens to the patient, rather is something patients do.
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
27

Notes
1. Here we wish to point out that the seemingly homogeneous description we give of 
Major Depressive Disorder is intended as partial and does not account for diagnostic 
constructs being tentatively and imperfect description of complex phenomena. While 
we lack the space to expound onto this we refer the readers to authors advocating for 
anti-universalist and classificatory pluralist positions in relationship to mental dis­
order classification (Aftab & Waterman, 2020; Nielsen, 2023; Zachar, 2019)
2. The less variance a distribution has, the more the data points are clustered around the 
mean, therefore increasing estimate precision. These precisions are used as scalar, 
hence multiplied by the distribution. This results in a reduction of variance if the 
precision is high, making the distribution more precise. Conversely, when the preci­
sion is low, it reduces the confidence the agent can have in the distribution, increasing 
data scatterness.
3. Of note is Constant et al. (2021) active inference account of depression, where the 
interactions with the environment play a central role in shaping mood dynamics. 
Depressed mood is modeled as an initially adaptive shift in response to environmental 
volatility, reducing exploration and risk-taking when conditions are unstable. This 
mechanism is especially salient in social contexts, where low mood dampens costly or 
risky interactions and promotes cautious engagement until the environment stabilizes. 
Crucially, these dynamics are reversible: when environmental contingencies regain 
reliability, the agent's behavior shifts back toward typical levels of exploration and 
social engagement. In this way, depressed mood is construed not as a fixed deficit, but 
as a flexible attunement to the stability of environmental conditions. According to the 
authors, it is then when the environment fails to give appropriate responses (e.g., social 
support) that behaviorally adaptive pessimistic beliefs spiral into maladaptive ones.
4. This is very similar to Vygotsky's (1978) Zone of Proximal Development, which refers 
to the gap between what a learner can do independently and what they can achieve 
with supportive guidance. Accordingly, learning occurs when tasks are neither too 
easy nor too difficult.
Acknowledgements
We thank Andy Clark aand Ines Hipolito for useful comments on a previous version of the 
paper.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
Nicola Chinchella is supported by the European Union - NextGenerationEU through the 
Italian Ministry of University and Research under PNRR - Mission 4 - Component 2 - 
Investment 3.1 "Fund for the realization of an integrated research and innovation infra­
structure system" D.M. 118/2023 [CUP B83C22003950001]. BenWhite is supported by the 
University of Sussex's Leverhulme-funded be.AI project: biomimetic embodied artificial 
intelligence.
28
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

ORCID
Nicola Chinchella 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5901-4245
References
Aftab, A., & Scott, W. G. (2021). Conceptual competence in psychiatry: Recommendations 
for education and training. Acad Psychiatry, 45(2), 203-209. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s40596-020-01183-3 
Allen, N. B., & Badcock, P. B. (2003). The social risk hypothesis of depressed mood: 
Evolutionary, psychosocial, and neurobiological perspectives. Psychological Bulletin, 129 
(6), 887-913. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.129.6.887  
Andersen, M. M., Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., & Roepstorff, A. (2023). Play in predictive minds: 
A cognitive theory of play. Psychological Review, 130(2), 462-479. https://doi.org/10. 
1037/rev0000369  
Badcock, P. B., Davey, C. G., Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., & Friston, K. J. (2017). The depressed 
brain: An evolutionary systems theory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(3), 182-194.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2017.01.005  
Baltieri, M., & Buckley, C. L. (2019). The dark room problem in predictive processing and 
active inference, a legacy of cognitivism? University of Sussex. Conference contribution. 
https://hdl.handle.net/10779/uos.23471738.v2 
Barbui, C., Purgato, M., Abdulmalik, J., Acarturk, C., Eaton, J., Gastaldon, C., Gureje, O., 
Hanlon, C., Jordans, M., Lund, C., Nosè, M., Ostuzzi, G., Papola, D., Tedeschi, F., Tol, W., 
Turrini, G., Patel, V., & Thornicroft, G. (2020). Efficacy of psychosocial interventions for 
mental health outcomes in low-income and middle-income countries: An umbrella 
review. Lancet Psychiatry, 7(2), 162-172. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30511-5  
Barrett, L. F. (2016). The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference account of 
interoception and categorization. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, nsw154. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw154 
Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., & Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of allostasis 
and interoception in depression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371 
(1708), 20160011. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0011  
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. 
Guilford Press.
Belujon, P., & Grace, A. A. (2017). Dopamine system dysregulation in major depressive 
disorders. The International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 20(12), 1036-1046.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/ijnp/pyx056  
Bogowicz, P., Curtis, H. J., Walker, A. J., Cowen, P., Geddes, J., & Goldacre, B. (2021). Trends 
and variation in antidepressant prescribing in English primary care: A retrospective long­
itudinal study. BJGP Open, 5(4) https://doi.org/10.3399/BJGPO.2021.0020  
Bruijniks, S. J. E., DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., & Huibers, M. J. H. (2019). The potential 
role of learning capacity in cognitive behavior therapy for depression: A systematic review 
of the evidence and future directions for improving therapeutic learning. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 7(4), 668-692. https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702619830391  
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: 
The free-energy principle from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 
2417-2444. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-016-1239-1  
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
29

Bruineberg, J., & Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-organization, free energy minimization, and 
optimal grip on a field of affordances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00599 
Charalambous, E., & Djebbara, Z. (2023). On natural attunement: Shared rhythms between 
the brain and the environment. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 155, 105438.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2023.105438  
Chinchella, N., & Hipólito, I. (2023). Substance addiction: cure or care? Phenomenology and 
the Cognitive Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-023-09885-3 
Chuan, A., Zhou, J. J., Hou, R. M., Stevens, C. J., & Bogdanovych, A. (2021). Virtual reality 
for acute and chronic pain management in adult patients: A narrative review. 
Anaesthesia, 76(5), 695-704. https://doi.org/10.1111/anae.15202  
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of 
cognitive science. Behavioural & Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181-204. https://doi.org/10. 
1017/S0140525X12000477  
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing uncertainty: Prediction, action, and the embodied mind. Oxford 
University Press.
Clark, A. (2023). The experience machine: How our minds predict and shape reality. 
Pantheon.
Clark, A. (2024). Hacking the predictive mind. Entropy, 26(8), (677). https://doi.org/10. 
3390/e26080677  
Cleare, A., Pariante, C. M., Young, A. H., Anderson, I. M., Christmas, D., Cowen, P. J., 
Dickens, C., Ferrier, I. N., Geddes, J., Gilbody, S., Haddad, P. M., Katona, C., Lewis, G., 
Malizia, A., McAllister-Williams, R. H., Ramchandani, P., Scott, J., Taylor, D., Uher, R., & 
Members of the Consensus Meeting. (2015). Evidence-based guidelines for treating 
depressive disorders with antidepressants: A revision of the 2008 British Association for 
Psychopharmacology 162 guidelines. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 29(5), 459-525.  
https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881115581093  
Colloca, L., Raghuraman, N., Wang, Y., Akintola, T., Brawn-Cinani, B., Colloca, G., Kier, C., 
Varshney, A., & Murthi, S. (2020). Virtual reality: Physiological and behavioral mechan­
isms to increase individual pain tolerance limits. Pain, 161(9), 2010-2021. https://doi.org/ 
10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001900  
Constant, A., Hesp, C., Davey, C. G., Friston, K. J., & Badcock, P. B. (2021). Why depressed 
mood is adaptive: A numerical proof of principle for an evolutionary systems theory of 
depression. Computational Psychiatry, 5(1), 60-80. https://doi.org/10.5334/cpsy.70  
Cools, R., Nakamura, K., & Daw, N. D. (2011). Serotonin and dopamine: Unifying affective, 
activational, and decision functions. Neuropsychopharmacology: Official Publication of the 
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology, 36(1), 98-113. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
npp.2010.121  
Cuijpers, P., Berking, M., Andersson, G., Quigley, L., Kleiboer, A., & Dobson, K. S. (2013). 
A metaanalysis of cognitive-behavioural therapy for adult depression, alone and in 
comparison with other treatments. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry / Revue canadienne 
de psychiatrie, 58(7), 376-385. https://doi.org/10.1177/070674371305800702  
de Haan, S. (2020). Enactive psychiatry. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10. 
1017/978110868521  
Dellazizzo, L., Potvin, S., Phraxayavong, K., & Dumais, A. (2020, September 30). Exploring 
the benefits of virtual reality-Assisted therapy following cognitive-behavioral therapy for 
auditory hallucinations in patients with treatment-resistant schizophrenia: A proof of 
concept. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9(10), 10 3169. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9103169  
30
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

Deterding, S., Andersen, M. M., Kiverstein, J., & Miller, M. (2022). Mastering uncertainty: 
A predictive processing account of enjoying uncertain success in video game play. Front 
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.924953  
Dozois, D. J. A., Bieling, P. J., Patelis-Siotis, I., Hoar, L., Chudzik, S., McCabe, K., & 
Westra, H. A. (2009). Changes in self-schema structure in cognitive therapy for major 
depressive disorder: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting & Clinical 
Psychology, 77(6(2009), 1078-1088. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016886  
Dykxhoorn, J., Osborn, D., Walters, K., Kirkbride, J. B., Gnani, S., & Lazzarino, A. I. (2024). 
Temporal patterns in the recorded annual incidence of common mental disorders over 
two decades in the United Kingdom: A primary care cohort study. Psychological 
Medicine, 54(4), 663-674. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291723002349  
Eldar, E., Rutledge, R. B., Dolan, R. J., & Niv, Y. (2016). Mood as representation of 
momentum. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(1), 15-24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics. 
2015.07.010  
Elsey, J. W. B., Van Ast, V. A., & Kindt, M. (2018). Human memory reconsolidation: 
A guiding framework and critical review of the evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 144(8), 
797-848. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000152  
Eshel, N., & Roiser, J. P. (2010). Reward and punishment processing in depression. 
Biological Psychiatry, 68(2), 118-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.01.027  
Eurostat. (2021). 7.2% of people in EU suffer from chronic depression. Retrieved September 
10, 2021, from https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/edn- 
20210910-1#:~:text=In%202019%2C%207.2%25%20of%20EU,and%20Croatia%20(both 
%2011.6%25 )
Fabry, R. E. (2020). Into the dark room: A predictive processing account of major depressive 
disorder. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 19(4), 685-704. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s11097-019-09635-4  
Falconer, C. J., Rovira, A., King, J. A., Gilbert, P., Antley, A., Fearon, P., Ralph, N., Slater, M., 
& Brewin, C. R. (2016, February 15). Embodying self-compassion within virtual reality 
and its effects on patients with depression. British Journal of Psychiatry Open, 2(1), 74-80.  
https://doi.org/10.1192/bjpo.bp.115.002147  
Feldman, H., & Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-energy. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 4, 215. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00215  
Fenn, K., & Byrne, M. (2013). The key principles of cognitive behavioural therapy. 
InnovAIT, 6(9), 579-585. https://doi.org/10.1177/1755738012471029  
Fennell, M. (2012). Cognitive behaviour therapy for depressive disorders. In M. Gelder Ed.), 
New Oxford textbook of psychiatry (2nd ed., pp. 1305-1313). Oxford Academic. Retrieved 
March 4, 2025, from https://doi.org/10.1093/med/9780199696758.003.0167  
Flynn, H., Warren, R., Eiger, R. I., & Devens, M. (2014). Using CBT effectively for treating 
depression and anxiety. Current Psychiatry, 13(18), 45-47+50. https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pmed.1000123  
Fodor, L. A., Coteț, C. D., Cuijpers, P., Szamoskozi, Ș., David, D., & Cristea, I. A. (2018). The 
effectiveness of virtual reality based interventions for symptoms of anxiety and depres­
sion: A meta-analysis. Scientific Reports, 8(1), Article 10323. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41598-018-28113-6  
Fournier, J. C., DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., Dimidjian, S., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., 
& Fawcett, J. (2010). Antidepressant drug effects and depression severity: A patient-level 
metaanalysis. JAMA, 303(1), 47-53. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2009.1943  
Friston, K. (2009). The free-energy principle: a rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 13(7), 293-301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2009.04.005 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
31

Friston, K. (2010). The free energy principle: A unified brain theory. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 11(2), 127-138. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2787  
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological systems. Entropy, 14(11), 
2100-2121. https://doi.org/10.3390/e14112100  
Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 
20130475. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2013.0475  
Friston, K. (2018). Am I self-conscious? (or does self-organization entail self-consciousness?). 
Frontiers in Psychology, 9(579). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00579  
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active 
inference: A process theory. Neural Computation, 29(1), 1-49. https://doi.org/10.1162/ 
NECO_a_00912  
Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active 
inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 187-214. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/17588928.2015.1020053  
Gonçalves, R., Pedrozo, A. L., Coutinho, E. S., Fi Gueira, I., Ventura, P., & Slater, M. (2012). 
Efficacy of virtual reality exposure therapy in the treatment of PTSD: A systematic review. 
PLOS ONE, 7(12), e48469. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0048469  
Gorini, A., & Riva, G. (2008). Virtual reality in anxiety disorders: The past and the future. Expert 
Review of Neurotherapeutics, 8(2), 215-233. https://doi.org/10.1586/14737175.8.2.215  
Grieger, F., Klapperich, H., & Hassenzahl, M. (2021). Trash it, punch it, burn it - Using 
virtual reality to support coping with negative thoughts. Extended abstracts of the 2021 
CHI conference on human factors in computing systems (CHI EA '21) (pp. 1-6). 
Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3411763.3451738  
Habak, S., Bennett, J., Davies, A., Davies, M., Christensen, H., & Boydell, K. M. (2020). Edge 
of the present: A virtual reality tool to cultivate future thinking, positive mood and 
wellbeing. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 18(1), 
140. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18010140  
Hayes, S. C. (2004). Acceptance and commitment therapy, relational frame theory, and the 
third wave of behavioral and cognitive therapies. Behavior Therapy, 35(4), 639-665.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7894(04)80013-3  
Hayes, S. C., & Hofmann, S. G. (2017). The third wave of cognitive behavioral therapy and 
the rise of process-based care. World Psychiatry: Official Journal of the World Psychiatric 
Association (WPA), 16(3), 245-246. https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20442  
Hayes, S. C., & Hofmann, S. G. (2021). "Third-wave" cognitive and behavioral therapies and 
the emergence of a process-based approach to intervention in psychiatry. World 
Psychiatry: Official Journal of the World Psychiatric Association (WPA), 20(3), 363-375.  
https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20884  
Hipólito, I., Baltieri, M., Friston, K., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). Embodied skillful 
performance: Where the action is. Synthese, 199(1-2), 4457-4481. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s11229-020-02986-5  
Hohwy, J. (2013). The predictive mind. Oxford University Press.
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259-285. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
nous.12062  
Holsteg, S., Askeridis, J. M., Krajewski, J., Mildner, P., Freitag, S., Müller, T., Schnieder, S., 
Gieselmann, A., & Karger, A. (2024). Virtual reality roleplays for patients with depres­
sion: A user experience evaluation. Internet Interventions, 35, 100713. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.invent.2024.100713  .
Huhn, M., Tardy, M., Spineli, L. M., Kissling, W., Förstl, H., Pitschel-Walz, G., Leucht, C., 
Samara, M., Dold, M., Davis, J. M., & Leucht, S. (2014). Efficacy of pharmacotherapy and 
32
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

psychotherapy for adult psychiatric disorders: A systematic overview of meta-analyses. 
JAMA Psychiatry, 71(6), 706-715. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.112  
Jaffe, D. H., et al. (2019, August 7). The humanistic and economic burden of 
treatment-resistant depression in Europe: A cross-sectional study. BMC Psychiatry, 19 
(1), 247. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-019-2222-4  
Joffily, M., & Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free-energy principle. PLOS 
Computational Biology, 9(6), e1003094. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003094  
Kaptchuk, T. J., & Miller, F. G. (2018). Open label placebo: Can honestly prescribed placebos 
evoke meaningful therapeutic benefits? BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 363, k3889. https:// 
doi.org/10.1136/bmj.k3889  
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., & Rietveld, E. (2019). The feeling of grip: Novelty, error dynamics, 
and the predictive brain. Synthese, 196(7), 2847-2869. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229- 
017-1583-9  
Kiverstein, J., Miller, M., & Rietveld, E. (2020). Mood as tuning predictions: 
A neurophenomenological perspective on depression. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 
2020(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niaa003  
Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2015). The primacy of skilled intentionality: On Hutto & 
Satne's the natural origins of content." Philosophia (Ramat-Gan, Israel), 43(3), 701-721.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11406-015-9645-z  
Lee, H.-W., Kim, S., & Uhm, J.-P. (2021, November 30). Social virtual reality (VR) involve­
ment affects depression when social connectedness and self-esteem are low: A moderated 
mediation on well-being. Frontiers in Psychology, 12(753019). https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fpsyg.2021.753019  
Lemmens, L. H. J. M., Galindo-Garre, F., Arntz, A., Peeters, F., Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., 
& Huibers, M. J. H. (2017). Exploring mechanisms of change in cognitive therapy and 
interpersonal psychotherapy for adult depression. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 94, 
81-92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2017.05.005  
Lindner, P., Hamilton, W., Miloff, A., & Carlbring, P. (2019, October 31). How to treat 
depression with low-intensity virtual reality interventions: Perspectives on translating 
cognitive behavioral techniques into the virtual reality modality and how to make 
anti-depressive use of virtual reality-unique experiences. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10 
(792). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00792  
Luft, M. J., Lamy, M., DelBello, M. P., McNamara, R. K., & Strawn, J. R. (2018). 
Antidepressant-induced activation in children and adolescents: Risk, recognition and 
management. Current Problems in Pediatric and Adolescent Health Care, 48(2), 50-62.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cppeds.2017.12.001  
Maiese M. (2021). An enactivist reconceptualization of the medical model. Philosophical 
Psychology, 34(7), 962-988. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2021.1940119 
Maisto, D., Friston, K., & Pezzulo, G. (2019). Caching mechanisms for habit formation in 
active inference. Neurocomputing, 359, 298-314. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2019. 
05.083  
Maples-Keller, J. L., Bunnell, B. E., Kim, S. J., & Rothbaum, B. O. (2017). The use of virtual 
reality technology in the treatment of anxiety and other psychiatric disorders. Harvard 
Review of Psychiatry, 25(3), 103-113. https://doi.org/10.1097/HRP.0000000000000138  
Miller, M., Deane, G., Nave, K., & Clark, A. (2020, September 25). The value of uncertainty. 
Aeon. https://aeon.co/essays/use-uncertainty-to-leverage-the-power-of-your-predictive- 
brain 
Nielsen, K. (2023). Embodied, embedded, and enactive psychopathology: Reimagining mental 
disorder. Springer Nature Switzerland AG. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-29164-7  
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
33

Noetel, M., Sanders, T., Gallardo-Gómez, D., Taylor, P., Del Pozo Cruz, B., van den 
Hoek, D., Smith, J. J., Mahoney, J., Spathis, J., Moresi, M., Pagano, R., Pagano, L., 
Vasconcellos, R., Arnott, H., Varley, B., Parker, P., Biddle, S., & Lonsdale, C. (2024). 
Effect of exercise for depression: Systematic review and network meta-analysis of rando­
mised controlled trials. BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.), 384, e075847. https://doi.org/10. 
1136/bmj-2023-075847  
Park, M. J., Kim, D. J., Lee, U., Na, E. J., & Jeon, H. J. (2019). A literature overview of virtual 
reality (VR) in treatment of psychiatric disorders: Recent advances and limitations. 
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10, 505. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00505  
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. (2022). Active inference: The free energy principle in mind, 
brain, and behavior. MIT Press.
Parvizi-Wayne, D. (2024). How preferences enslave attention: Calling into question the 
endogenous/exogenous dichotomy from an active inference perspective. Phenomenology 
and the Cognitive Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-024-10028-5  
Paykel, E. S., Scott, J., Cornwall, P. L., Abbott, R., Crane, C., Pope, M., & Johnson, A. L. 
(2005). Duration of relapse prevention after cognitive therapy in residual depression: 
Follow-up of controlled trial. Psychological Medicine, 35(1), 59-68. https://doi.org/10. 
1017/s003329170400282x  
Pourmand, A., Davis, S., Marchak, A., Whiteside, T., & Sikka, N. (2018). Virtual reality as a 
clinical tool for pain management. Current Pain and Headache Reports, 22(8). https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s11916-018-0708-2 
Pyszczynski, T., Holt, K., & Greenberg, J. (1987). Depression, self-focused attention, and 
expectancies for positive and negative future life events for self and others. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 52(5), 994-1001. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.52. 
5.994 
Racine, N., McArthur, B. A., Cooke, J. E., Eirich, R., Zhu, J., & Madigan, S. (2021). Global 
prevalence of depressive and anxiety symptoms in children and adolescents during 
COVID-19: A meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatrics, 175(11), 1142-1150. https://doi.org/10. 
1001/jamapediatrics.2021.2482  
Ramstead, M. J., Friston, K. J., & Hipólito, I. (2020). Is the free-energy principle a formal 
theory of semantics? From variational density dynamics to neural and phenotypic 
representations. Entropy, 22(8), 889. https://doi.org/10.3390/e22080889  
Ramstead, M., Wiese, W., Miller, M., & Friston, K. (2023). Deep neurophenomenology: An 
active inference account of some features of conscious experience and of their disturbance 
in major depressive disorder. In T. Cheng, R. Sato, & J. Hohwy (Eds.), Expected experi­
ences (pp. 9-46). Routledge.
Ratcliffe, M. (2015). The experiences of depression: A study in phenomenology. Oxford 
University Press.
Rietveld, E. (2008). Situated normativity: The normative aspect of embodied cognition in 
unreflective action. Mind, 117(468), 973-1001. https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/fzn050  
Rietveld, E., & Kiverstein, J. (2014). A rich landscape of affordances. Ecological Psychology, 
26(4), 325-352. https://doi.org/10.1080/10407413.2014.958035  
Rothbaum, B. O., Hodges, L. F., Kooper, R., Opdyke, D., Williford, J. S., & North, M. (1995). 
Effectiveness of computer-generated (virtual reality) graded exposure in the treatment of 
acrophobia. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 152(4), 626-628. https://doi.org/10. 
1176/ajp.152.4.626  
Sandved-Smith, L., Hesp, C., Mattout, J., Friston, K., Lutz, A., & Ramstead, M. J. D. (2021). 
Towards a computational phenomenology of mental action: Modelling meta-awareness 
and attentional control with deep parametric active inference. Neuroscience of 
Consciousness, 2021(2), niab018. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niab018  
34
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

Santoft, F., Axelsson, E., Öst, L.-G., Hedman-Lagerlöf, M., Fust, J., & Hedman-Lagerlöf, E. 
(2019). Cognitive behaviour therapy for depression in primary care: Systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 49(8), 1266-1274. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
S0033291718004208  
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., & Montague, P. R. (1997). A neural substrate of prediction and 
reward. Science (New York, NY), 275(5306), 1593-1599. https://doi.org/10.1126/science. 
275.5306.1593  
Schwoebel, S., Markovic, D., & Kiebel, S. (2019). An active inference perspective on habit 
learning. 2019 Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience, Berlin, Germany.  
https://doi.org/10.32470/CCN.2019.1061-0  
Shaffer, C., Westlin, C., Quigley, K. S., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Barrett, L. F. (2022). 
Allostasis, action, and affect in depression: Insights from the theory of constructed 
emotion. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 18(1), 553-580. https://doi.org/10.1146/ 
annurev-clinpsy-081219-115627  
Shor, D., Ruitenburg, Y., Boere, W., Lomas, J. D., & Huisman, G. (2021). The resonance pod: 
Applying haptics in a multi-sensory experience to promote relaxation through breathing 
entrainment. In 2021 IEEE World Haptics Conference (WHC), Montreal, QC, Canada (pp. 
1143-1143). https://doi.org/10.1109/WHC49131.2021.9517165 
Smith, R., Moutoussis, M., & Bilek, E. (2021). Simulating the computational mechanisms of 
cognitive and behavioral psychotherapeutic interventions: Insights from active inference. 
Scientific Reports, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89047-0  
Smith, R., Varshney, L. R., Nagayama, S., Kazama, M., Kitagawa, T., & Ishikawa, Y. (2022). 
A computational neuroscience perspective on subjective wellbeing within the active 
inference framework. International Journal of Wellbeing, 12(4), 102-131. https://doi. 
org/10.5502/ijw.v12i4.2659  
Strawn, J. R., Mills, J. A., Suresh, V., Mayes, T., Gentry, M. T., Trivedi, M., & Croarkin, P. E. 
(2023). The impact of age on antidepressant response: A mega-analysis of individuals 
with major depressive disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 159, 266-273. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2023.01.043  
Tee, Y. S., Cheng, C. T., Li, P.-H., Hsieh, M.-J., Liao, C.-H., & Fu, C.-Y. (2024). Optimizing 
modern surgical simulation through instructor feedback - insights from a retrospective 
observational study in a tertiary hospital. BMC Medical Education, 24(1). https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12909-024-06090-x  
Van de Cruys, S. (2017). Affective value in the predictive mind. In T. Metzinger & W. Wiese 
(Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing (pp. 1-21). MIND Group.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and 
human experience. The MIT Press.
Vaske, J., Galyean, K., & Cullen, F. (2011). Toward a biosocial theory of offender rehabilita­
tion: Why does cognitive-behavioral therapy work? Journal of Criminal Justice, 39(1), 
90-102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrimjus.2010.12.006  
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Harvard University Press.
White, B., Clark, A., & Miller, M. (2024). Digital Being: social media and the predictive 
mind. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2024(1). https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niae008 
World Health Organization. (2022, March 2). COVID-19 pandemic triggers 25% increase in 
prevalence of anxiety and depression worldwide. https://www.who.int/news/item/02-03- 
2022-covid-19-pandemic-triggers-25-increase-in-prevalence-of-anxiety-and-depression- 
worldwide 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
35

Zachar, P. (2019). Diagnostic nomenclatures in the mental health professions as public 
policy. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 59(3), 438-445. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0022167818793002 
Zeng, N., Pope, Z., Lee, J., & Gao, Z. (2018). Virtual reality exercise for anxiety and 
depression: A preliminary review of current research in an emerging field. JCM, 7(3), 
42. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm7030042
36
N. CHINCHELLA AND B. WHITE

