Inquiry
An Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy
ISSN: 0020-174X (Print) 1502-3923 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/sinq20
Functionalism about inference
Jared Warren
To cite this article: Jared Warren (2025) Functionalism about inference, Inquiry, 68:2, 718-742,
DOI: 10.1080/0020174X.2022.2075452
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2022.2075452
Published online: 25 May 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 833
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=sinq20

Functionalism about inference
Jared Warren
Department of Philosophy, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
Inferences are familiar movements of thought, but despite important recent 
work on the topic, we do not yet have a fully satisfying theory of inference. 
Here I provide a functionalist theory of inference. I argue that the 
functionalist framework allows us the flexibility to meet various demands on 
a theory of inference that have been proposed (such as that it must explain 
inferential Moorean phenomena and epistemological 'taking'). While also 
allowing us to compare, contrast, adapt, and combine features of extant 
theories of inference into one unified theory. In fleshing out the inference 
role, I also criticize the common assumption that inference requires rule- 
following.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 5 August 2020; Accepted 15 January 2021
KEYWORDS inference; functionalism; inference rules; philosophy of psychology; epistemology
1. What is inference?
My dog, Chrysippus, is fast. I am not. Yesterday, I lost sight of Chrysippus 
around a bend. On coming around the bend I could see that the path had 
split into two. The left-hand path was an open straightaway and Chrysip­
pus was nowhere to be seen. I concluded that he must have gone down 
the right-hand path and happily headed after him. In so doing, I per­
formed an inference. I inferred that Chrysippus went down the right- 
hand path from some of my other beliefs.
Inferences differ from other movements of thought.1 I could have 
formed my belief about Chrysippus in other ways. I could have remem­
bered. I could have been told by a fortune-teller. I could have bumped 
my head and suddenly found myself with the belief. In all these situations, 
I form the very same belief, but not by inference.
Inference is worth understanding for its own sake. But it is also impor­
tant in epistemology and perhaps even in metasemantics. For a long time, 
© 2022 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 
CONTACT  Jared Warren 
jaredwar@stanford.edu, jared1879@gmail.com
1The 'movement of thought' terminology is from Wright (2004).
INQUIRY 
2025, VOL. 68, NO. 2, 718-742 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0020174X.2022.2075452

little philosophical attention was paid to inference. This has changed. 
There has been an explosion of interest in inference as of late. Many the­
ories have been proposed. Here I propose another. I also attempt at least 
two other worthwhile things along the way. First, I suggest a general fra­
mework for theorizing about inference. Second, I criticize an assumption 
common to almost every recent approach to inference. The framework is 
a version of functionalism; the assumption concerns rule-following.
2. Preliminaries
Before building a theory, eight preliminary points of clarification must be 
made explicit and briefly motivated, where needed. 
(i) SEMANTIC. Inferences involve items with content. This is uncontrover­
sial. They are not merely operations on uninterpreted syntax.2 This is 
why most discussions take inferences to involve propositions. But I 
prefer to work with interpreted sentences instead. This helps to keep 
the psychological concreteness of inference in focus. Talk of 'prop­
ositions' risks over-abstracting.
(ii) ACCEPTANCE. Paradigms of inference involve belief. When you infer you 
come to believe something on the basis of some other beliefs. But 
inference can also involve states that fall short of full belief. I 
suppose that Chrysippus has escaped from the yard, on that basis, I 
infer that he has jumped over the fence. I will use the word 'accep­
tance' to cover all belief-like attitudes that figure in inferences. 
These include (at least) full belief and supposing to be the case.3 Infer­
ring under suppositions is such an integral part of our normal reason­
ing practices that it motivated the original development of natural 
deduction formal systems in logic.4
(iii) REJECTION. Inferences can also involve attitudes that are not 'belief- 
like'. In particular, they can involve disbelief. Some sentences I 
accept are inconsistent, so I reject one of them on that basis. As 
'acceptance' was to belief-like attitudes, 'rejection' is to disbelief- 
like attitudes. It covers full disbelief, supposing against, and 
perhaps more besides. As with inferring under suppositions, inferring 
2This is true even if contents arise from transitions on uninterpreted syntax. So this point is not in conflict 
with any version of inferentialism or conceptual role semantics (see Section 6).
3Murzi and Steinberger (2013) use the term 'entertaining' to cover these attitudes. We might also include 
partial belief, but I will be neutral about this. See Staffel (2013) for discussion.
4Invented by Gentzen (1934) and Jaśkowski (1934).
INQUIRY 
719

to and from a rejection is a familiar and integral part of our normal 
reasoning practices.5
(iv) PRACTICALITY. Distinguish theoretical inferences from practical infer­
ences. Theoretical reasoning involves attitudes of acceptance and 
rejection. Practical reasoning involves these attitudes along with 
intentions to perform actions. Something like this basic distinction 
has been recognized since Aristotle and is discussed in the Nicoma­
chean Ethics. Taken in general, inference should be understood 
broadly enough to allow for this.6 Almost everything we say about 
inference should extend to practical reasoning as well.
(v) REDUNDANCY. Inferences can be redundant. You can infer a con­
clusion that you already believe.7 This is a bit more controversial 
than (i) through (iv). All I mean is that you can draw a conclusion 
from some premises that you already believe for independent 
reasons. I prefer to count these as 'inferences', but my approach 
does not strictly require that we do, so I will not put much 
weight on it below.
(vi) TRIVIALITY. Inferences can be trivial. You can infer a sentence from 
itself, in some limiting sense. This is probably even more controversial 
than (v). I prefer to allow trivial inferences for the sake of uniformity, 
but again, my approach does not strictly require doing so. So while I 
will briefly discuss how to accommodate trivial inferences, I will not 
put any theoretical weight on this point below.
(vii) VACUITY. Inferences can be vacuous. You can infer a conclusion from 
no undischarged premises. This is illustrated by the manner in which 
we infer logical truths. Usually, this involves inferring under supposi­
tions that are then discharged. That we do this is not at all controver­
sial, but it is important enough to our reasoning practices that any 
adequate account of inference must allow for it.
(viii) NON-DEDUCTIVE. Not all inferences aim at deductive validity. Some­
times the premises support the conclusion only in a weaker sense. 
Inductive and abductive inferences do not aim at deductive validity 
and can be 'good' even when deductively invalid. With apologies to 
Hume, this is uncontroversial.
5Frege (1960) analyzed rejecting a sentence as accepting the sentence's negation. But Frege's analysis is 
no longer popular - see Priest (2006) and Ripley (2011). I prefer to think of rejection as sui generis, but 
nothing in my discussion requires this. This option requires a slight generalization of validity - see 
Smiley (1996).
6This is noted in Broome (2014b).
7See also Broome (2014a, 2014b).
720 
J. WARREN

As I have already noted several times, some of these I am happy to 
leave as spoils to the victor. Personally I accept all of them, and will 
give a theory of inference that satisfies all of them. When any of these 
points raise difficulties, they will be discussed below.
3. A framework for theory building
Most recent accounts of inference have focused on epistemology. I prefer 
instead to approach inference in psychological terms, at least initially. I 
am not alone in this. Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum recently approached 
inference from a similar direction.8 My differences with them will be dis­
cussed below.
According to naturalists, cognition is causal. This suggests the follow­
ing simple but ultimately unsatisfying account of inference:
CAUSATION: an inference is performed when a thinker's premise-attitudes cause 
their conclusion-attitude
I believe that Chrysippus did not go down the left-hand path. I also 
believe that Chrysippus went down one of the two paths. These beliefs 
cause me to believe that he went down the right-hand path. As a 
theory, this is not an immediate disaster, at least.
For it to allow REDUNDANCY and TRIVIALITY, causation must sometimes be 
redundant or trivial. This sounds a bit unnatural, but it is not a major obstacle. 
Roughly, events A and B are redundant causes of C when both A and B are 
individually sufficient to cause C - both A without B and B without A would 
also have caused C. Trivial causation can be accommodated either by allow­
ing events to count as causes of themselves, in some cases, or by looking at 
things temporally and allowing, in some cases, that accepting p at time t1 
can cause accepting p at later time t2.
Accounting for VACUITY is more difficult. There seems to be no sense in 
which nothing can cause something to happen. Explicitly appealing to 
events can help. When I suppose that Chrysippus escaped from the 
yard, this causes me to suppose that he jumped the fence. This process 
itself causes me to believe that if Chrysippus escaped from the yard 
then he jumped the fence. So if we modify CAUSATION to allow that the 
state of having formed a conclusion-attitude on the basis of a premise- 
attitude itself can cause a thinker to form a new conclusion-attitude, we 
will have allowed for VACUITY. But if taken too literally, this undercuts a 
8In Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum (2018).
INQUIRY 
721

straightforward reading of CAUSATION. Inference would no longer be a 
simple transition between premise-attitudes and conclusion-attitude. I 
do not think this is too worrying though, since we can reconstrue the 
description in terms of 'events' in terms of 'states', instead. Being in the 
state of having formed a conclusion attitude on the basis of some 
premise attitudes itself causes me to form a new conclusion attitude.
Yet even with these added refinements, CAUSATION is problematic. Per­
forming an inference requires more than mere causation. I come home 
and see garbage all over the floor. This causes me to believe that Chrysip­
pus has gotten into the trash. Which causes me to walk toward the back 
room to chastise him. On the way, I slip and hurt my wrist, causing me to 
believe that my wrist is broken. So my belief that Chrysippus got into the 
trash caused my belief that my wrist is broken. But I did not infer that my 
wrist was broken from my belief about Chrysippus and the trash.9
This assumes that causation is transitive, but there are also more direct 
counterexamples.10 I believe that Chrysippus is 5 years old. This causes 
me to note and believe that if my previous dog, Zeno, were still alive 
today, he would be 20 years old. Yet there is no sense in which I inferred 
that Zeno would be 20 years old today from my belief about Chrysippus's 
age.11 Mere association is not inference, even causally direct association.
There are too many non-inferential causal paths between attitudes for 
CAUSATION to be right. This is widely recognized, but there is little agree­
ment about how to build a satisfying theory of inference in light of it. 
Some approaches completely reject CAUSATION as a starting point for basi­
cally the reasons given. Yet the reasons given only establish that CAUSA­
TION alone is not a satisfying theory of inference. So I prefer to respond 
to these issues by building on the causal approach instead of abandoning 
it completely. I think that some other approaches do this implicitly, but I 
prefer to do so explicitly, by moving to an overtly functionalist framework.
Functionalism about some mental states is almost universally accepted. 
It has been bolstered by developments in cognitive science, psychology, 
computer science, and artificial intelligence.12 I think that inference is also 
9Boghossian (2014, 3) gives a similar example, attributing it to Alvin Plantinga.
10Of course, even psychologically direct examples involve cognitive processes that result from various 
sub-processes. They are direct only at the psychological level of description.
11Boghossian (2014, 4) also gives an example like this.
12Influential versions of functionalism were developed by Putnam (1960, 1967), Fodor (1968, 1987), Arm­
strong (1968), and Lewis (1966, 1980). Putnam and Fodor think the functional role of mental states 
come from cognitive psychology. Armstrong and Lewis think they come from folk theory. Arguments 
against functionalism are in Block (1978), Kripke (1982), Putnam (1988), Searle (1980), and Shoemaker 
(1982). For applications outside of philosophy see the discussions in Dennett (1991a), Marr (1982), 
Minsky (1986), and Pinker (1997).
722 
J. WARREN

best understood in functional terms, but since inference is not a mental 
state, the standard functional approach does not apply. Inference is 
instead a (type of) transition between mental states; it is a state transition. 
But there is no serious problem in generalizing functionalism from states 
to state transitions.
Functionalism about mental states characterizes mental state M func­
tionally, in terms of internal functional role. The internal functional role 
of a state concerns both its causal relation to other states, which them­
selves may also be characterized functionally, as well as causal relations 
to behaviors and actions. To generalize functionalism, we consider the 
internal functional role of a causal transition between states. Again, this 
internal functional role will concern relations to other mental states, beha­
viors, and actions both before, after, and during the transition, as well as 
to processes occurring during the transition.
I think the best way to apply this functionalist picture to the notion of 
inference builds on CAUSATION. This approach harmonizes nicely with a 
standard form of naturalism about human cognition, without strictly 
requiring any controversial reductionism about conscious states. It also 
allows us to generalize on standard state functionalist approaches quite 
directly, by considering how the psychological description ('inference') 
arises out of the underlying causal and behavioral pattern in body and 
brain. Understood in this way, inference is a causal process, but it is not 
merely a causal process. We can screen out the non-inferential causal 
paths using functional roles. An inference is a (relatively) direct casual 
path between attitudes that plays the inference role:
FUNCTIONALISM: an inference is performed when a thinker's premise-attitudes 
directly cause their conclusion-attitude in a way that plays the inference role
The directness constraint screens out some of the intuitive counterexam­
ples from above, but - as we have seen - perhaps not all (though more on 
this point below). Largely because of this, FUNCTIONALISM characterizes a 
notion of direct inference; but we can easily generalize from here to a 
notion of indirect inference, involving chains of direct inferences. This 
sort of thing is familiar, so I won't belabor the point. Usually FUNCTIONALISM 
should be read as entailing that the premise-attitudes alone cause the 
conclusion attitude, at least at this level of description, but at one 
crucial point below, I will discuss rolling this back slightly.
It sounds almost circular when put so starkly - FUNCTIONALISM character­
izes 'inference' in terms of the 'inference role'. But this is no more proble­
matic than standard functionalism about mental states. A state is 'pain' 
INQUIRY 
723

just in case it plays the pain role and a state transition is an 'inference' just 
in case it plays the inference role. There is no problematic circularity in 
either case. Of course, just as more needed to be said about the pain 
role, so too must more be said about the inference role.
This is why a functionalist approach to inference is closer to the first 
word than the last. But even so, it provides a framework in which to 
build and compare theories of inference. This allows for an ecumenical 
approach. Most theories of inference agree about the metaphysics of 
inference, but they disagree about the details of the inference role. The 
major challenge is to flesh out the inference role within this framework.
4. Setting up the inference role
Most theories of inference can be fit into my functionalist framework. Not all, 
but most. The theory that inference is constituted by a particular phenomen­
ology - the inference quale, so to speak - is probably not functionalist. Such 
an approach might be favored by fans of phenomenal intentionality theories 
of content.13 But most other currently popular theories of thinking and 
reasoning can be seen as versions of functionalism. Some of these compet­
ing theories can even be seen as differing from each other only in emphasis. 
One focuses on this as opposed to that aspect of the inference role.
Is the inference role given by cognitive psychology or by folk theory? 
This is the first choice point. It mirrors a choice point for standard func­
tionalism. Some functionalists think that the pain role comes from cogni­
tive psychology. To see what pain is, we should look to cognitive 
psychology. Others think that the pain role comes from folk psychology. 
To see what pain is, we should look to folk psychology. Fodor is the first 
kind of functionalist, Lewis is the second kind.
In this respect, I am going to defend something close to a Lewis-style 
functionalism about inference. According to my approach, inference is a 
concept of folk psychology. It exists at the level of the manifest image or 
the intentional stance.14 I do not think it is very likely to cut nature at the 
joints, to use Plato's metaphor. But this does not mean that inference is 
not important or that it does not pick out a 'real pattern' in the world.15 
Inference is a key part of the psychological level of description. It would be 
silly to try to do without the notion in everyday life.16 Of course, we 
13See Horgan (2013) and Pautz (2013), for example.
14See Sellars (1962) and Dennett (1987).
15See Dennett (1991b).
16Pace the eliminativism of Churchland (1981).
724 
J. WARREN

should refine our concept of inference in light of the further development 
of cognitive science. Nearly everyone agrees about that. Our folk concept 
of memory divided into various sub-types under scientific investigation.17 
So too may our folk concept of inference. Starting with folk theory is com­
patible with all of these points.
Above I mentioned Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum's theory. They also 
account for inference in psychological terms, but they focus from the 
start on cognitive psychology rather than folk psychology. What is 
more, they assume a representational approach to cognitive psychol­
ogy.18 For them too, inferences are state transitions. But the transitions 
must proceed by way of in-built cognitive rules, and those rules must 
operate on the constituent structure of the states. I do not think Quilty- 
Dunn and Mandelbaum are functionalists themselves, but we can 
imagine functionalism along the lines they suggest. That would be a 
Fodor-style functionalism about inference, contrasting with my Lewis- 
style functionalism. Instead of criticizing Fodor-style inferential function­
alism, I will press on with my Lewis-style inferential functionalism.
What is the folk role of inference? Most recent discussions begin with 
Boghossian's 'taking' condition.19 The idea is that a good theory of infer­
ence should account for the following:
TAKING: inferring necessarily involves the thinker taking his premises to support 
his conclusion and drawing his conclusion because of that fact.
The taking condition is controversial.20 In more recent work Boghossian 
has relaxed the condition somewhat. Partly this was to recognize less 
explicit types of inference, but it was also to recognize the importance 
of aims and goals.21 Similarly McHugh and Way reject TAKING, but think 
reasoning aims at acquiring fitting attitudes.22
I suspect TAKING itself might be too conceptually demanding for all 
inferences, but surely the conclusion of any inference must be based 
on the premises, in some sense. And surely something of this connection 
must be relevant in inference. This is what allows inferences to be ration­
ally assessed. It is also what allows thinkers to take responsibility for their 
17See Squire and Kandel (1999).
18I have worries about 'computation' and 'representation' talk in neuroscience and psychology, but I will 
not insist on them here. See Cao (2018) for some relevant discussion.
19From Boghossian (2014).
20See Hlobil (2014) and Wright (2014) for early arguments against taking. See McHugh and Way (2016) 
for paper-length criticisms. Broome (2014b) accepts taking but does not think we should impose it up 
front.
21See Boghossian (2018).
22See McHugh and Way (2018). See Hlobil (forthcoming) for criticism.
INQUIRY 
725

inferences.23 These points are key to the importance of inference in our 
lives. The demand to explain them places certain constraints on any 
account of the inference role. For one thing, it requires that inferring is 
an action of some kind or other. Otherwise, we could not take any respon­
sibility for our inferences. For another, it requires that inferring lines up 
with our other attitudes. Including our judgements about the quality of 
the inference. Otherwise, we could not take full responsibility for our 
inferences. These points have been pursued before in isolation but not 
in conjunction with each other. The flexibility of the functionalist frame­
work allows us to bring them together. It will also allow us to distinguish 
between more and less conceptually demanding types of inference.
5. The inference role
Boghossian briefly considers and rejects a counterfactual account of 
TAKING. What is taking some premises to support a conclusion? It is 
when you would cite the premises if asked to support the conclusion. 
He worries that this requires too much conceptual sophistication of thin­
kers, but his main criticism is that it makes inference response-dependent. 
Saying that something is your reason does not make it so. The counterfac­
tual account gets this wrong. He expresses himself by saying:
Causation is part of the idea of...being [a] reason - and causation can't be a 
response-dependent property.24
Boghossian seems to say this because he characterizes TAKING so that the 
conclusion is inferred because the thinker takes the premises as reasons 
for it. Applied here, this almost sounds like the counterfactual approach 
must replace CAUSATION. I think a better idea is to instead combine the 
counterfactual idea with a causal approach. Doing so sidesteps the 
response-dependence charge.
The functionalist framework makes this possible. We can make the coun­
terfactual idea a necessary condition on the inference role. But first we 
should clean it up a bit. What a thinker would do depends on circumstantial 
factors. What really matters is what a thinker is disposed to do. As everyone 
knows, dispositions can be interfered with in numerous ways.25 What 
we care about are dispositions that are stable in 'normal' conditions.26 
23See the discussion in Boghossian (2018).
24Boghossian (2014, 10-11).
25See Martin (1994), Johnston (1992), and Smith (1977) for some of the ways.
26See my (2020a) response to Kripke (1982).
726 
J. WARREN

The normal conditions build in sincerity and much more besides. It is 
also important that the counterfactual condition not assume anything 
implausible about our ability to keep track of things. You infer a con­
clusion from a premise. Years later, you forget all of this. You have 
no additional reason for accepting the conclusion, you just forgot 
what it was based on. So it goes. What singles out inference is a dispo­
sition to cite the premises in the immediate aftermath of accepting the 
conclusion. And having that disposition in the moment is part of what 
distinguishes inference from other causal processes.
All of this can be summed up as follows:
COUNTERFACTUAL: if a thinker's premise-attitudes cause their conclusion-attitude 
in a way that plays the inference role then the thinker has a stable disposition to 
cite those premises (or their negations) when asked for their reasons (in normal 
conditions, shortly after the causal event)
If the premise-attitude is acceptance, the premise is cited. If it is rejection, 
the negation is cited. The stable dispositions in normal conditions leave 
aside slips of the tongue and brief mental lapses. They include only the 
dispositions that survive reflection. Note that this does not mean that 
the inference itself or acceptance of the conclusion must survive reflec­
tion. Only that these premises are stably cited as the reason that the con­
clusion was accepted in this given case. Of course the dispositions could 
be destroyed by a magic spell from a wizard immediately after an infer­
ence, but the provisio about normal conditions is meant to abstract 
away from such worries. Remember too that we're mainly considering 
direct inferences, but we could make some refinements about the dispo­
sitions involved to cover inferences more generally in COUNTERFACTUAL. It is 
also worth noting that the relevant dispositions can be triggered in many 
distinct ways, so there is nothing sacrosanct about the "reasons" terminol­
ogy. This point weakens Boghossian's worry that COUNTERFACTUAL requires 
too much conceptual sophistication of thinkers. We could try to further 
weaken it by making COUNTERFACTUAL conditional, but that might be 
going too far.
To allow VACUITY we should allow for citing previous inferential steps, 
themselves. This requires some sophistication on the part of thinkers. 
Recall the discussion of VACUITY following CAUSATION, from above. I first 
infer that Chrysippus jumped the fence from my belief that Chrysippus 
escaped from the yard. Then, having performed that inference, I go on 
to infer that if Chrysippus escaped from the yard, then Chrysippus 
jumped the fence. This later inference is not based on any undischarged 
INQUIRY 
727

premise. It was instead being in the state of having inferred the earlier 
conclusion from the original premise that caused me to transition into 
the state of believing the conditional on no premises. I am suggesting 
here that COUNTERFACTUAL is also satisfied if a speaker cites a previous infer­
ential step, in order to justify their current conclusion attitude. There are 
many ways to do this. In some cases, the speaker may simply talk 
about the bit of reasoning they just performed. But they need some 
way to cite the inferential basis of a bit of vacuous reasoning, to satisfy 
COUNTERFACTUAL.
The other conditions can be dealt with more quickly. To take account 
of PRACTICALITY, intentions can also be cited. For REDUNDANCY, we must 
admit that these particular premises are one of the things that can be 
cited, perhaps one among many. Contextual factors will determine 
which thing is cited on a given occasion, but in almost any context, the 
premises would be cited, given the appropriate question or trigger. I 
think TRIVIALITY should be treated as a limiting case, perhaps applying to 
axioms and basic principles. In any case, COUNTERFACTUAL handles standard 
inferences well enough.
What COUNTERFACTUAL enforces is a certain level of cognitive pen­
etration. Inference sometimes seems to happen automatically, but 
when we infer something from something else, we can come to an aware­
ness of this. When an inference is fully explicit, this is easy. When not, it is 
not. When the dispositions involved are robust and easily activated, COUN­
TERFACTUAL is satisfied in full. In other cases, it might be only partially 
satisfied. This possibility will be discussed below.
Some may worry that COUNTERFACTUAL does not avoid making inference 
response-dependent, even though the cited premise attitudes must actu­
ally cause the conclusion attitude. Consider again my belief that Chrysip­
pus is 5 years old directly causing me to believe that, if Zeno were still 
alive he would be 20 years old. Let us imagine too that I have a bizarre 
disposition to cite my belief that Chrysippus is 5 years old when asked 
for my reason for thinking Zeno would be 20 years old if he were alive 
today. Have I, thereby, performed an inference? It depends. Citing a 
premise as a reason is not merely uttering it like a parrot. It involves an 
ability to, if asked, explain why - or at least, that - the premise supports 
the conclusion. If someone did that, or attempted to, in this odd case, 
then we would admit that they had performed an inference, however 
bizarre. Doing this with great sophistication is sometimes only possible 
for sophisticated inferences (see below), but the relevant differences can 
be evidenced even in simple inferences.
728 
J. WARREN

This already captures most of the force of TAKING without going too far. 
In some ways though, it does not go far enough. Many philosophers are 
attracted to the idea that inferring requires judging your inference to be a 
good one. In fact, Neta's approach seems to make this the entirety of infer­
ence.27 In my view, this is probably too demanding as a requirement, but it 
does seem to be a feature in more sophisticated inferences. In those, it is 
not just the premise attitudes, but the premise attitudes in conjunction 
with the belief that there is a relevant alethic connection between the 
premises and the conclusion, that causes the conclusion attitude to be 
formed.
This was already partly built into my discussion of why COUNTERFACTUAL 
need not make inference completely response-dependent. My claim 
about sophisticated inferences here goes beyond Neta's claim in that, 
beyond just requiring that the inferrer judge their inference a good 
one, I make this judgment part of what causes the acceptance of the con­
clusion attitude. Again, this is only for fully explicit, sophisticated inferences. 
I think it is plausible that many inferences do not have this feature, since 
they are performed by simple creatures or children. Still, even in these 
cases inferences and judgments about inferences are obviously intercon­
nected. Our theory of inference should recognize this in some fashion.
Hlobil has stressed a related point.28 He argued that our theory of infer­
ence must explain inferential Moorean phenomenon:
IMP: It is either impossible or seriously irrational to infer p from q and to judge, at 
the same time, that the inference from q to p is not a good inference
Care must be taken here. Some early opponents of the axiom of choice 
implicitly used the axiom in their mathematical work.29 And something 
similar happened to early relevance logicians. They used disjunctive syllo­
gism in their proofs while explicitly disavowing it.30 Sometimes people 
infer while at the same time judging their inference a bad one. This is 
possible, in unfortunate moments.
What seems impossible is all of these things being fully explicit at the 
same time. When the relevance logicians realized what they were 
doing, they were horrified. Likewise for the deniers of choice. They 
quickly took to revising their inferential practices. We can imagine 
27In Neta (2013). His account includes a linguistic analysis of constructions like 'so' or 'therefore' as 
picking out some contextually salient doxastic relationship.
28See Hlobil (2014).
29For details, see Moore (1982).
30For details on this and other similar cases, see Burgess (2005).
INQUIRY 
729

things going in the other direction, too. The state of your judging an infer­
ence that you make bad is unstable. When we infer, we take responsibility 
for our thinking. In this state of instability, the thinker both takes and dis­
avows responsibility. This is where the tension comes from.
Say that a thinker's attitudes and behavior are aligned when they do 
not generate Moorean phenomena. Functionalism can cut through this 
tangle with another necessary condition on the inference role:
ALIGNMENT: if a thinker's premise-attitudes cause their conclusion-attitude in a 
way that plays the inference role then the thinker's inferential attitudes are 
aligned - their stable dispositions do not generate inferential Moorean 
phenomena (in normal conditions)
Thinkers who have a stable disposition toward inferential Moorean 
phenomena are not inferring. At least not in any standard sense. The 
ALIGNMENT condition covers all levels of inferential Moorean phenomena. 
Stably judging that an inference you made is not not not a good one is 
also problematic.
ALIGNMENT might seem ad hoc, but I think it can be motivated in a 
natural way. A central difficulty in understanding psychological notions 
like inference is that, for naturalists, they are chimeras. They are causal 
while also being semantic or conceptual (as required by SEMANTIC). The 
idea of FUNCTIONALISM is almost the only plausible strategy for connecting 
these different levels of description in the needed way. What ALIGNMENT 
encodes is recognition that, for a thinker's causal attitude transition to 
correctly be described as an 'inference', certain weak global requirements 
on the agent's overall mental state also need to be satisfied. This is effec­
tively the requirement that our semantically laden description of this par­
ticular causal transition in the agent is coherently applicable. Too much 
misalignment undermines the coherence of the semantic description, of 
this particular causal event, as an 'inference'.
Even if not ad hoc, if these requirements were too demanding, too 
much would be ruled out. But as with COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT is dispo­
sitional. It abstracts away from momentary failings. And nothing in ALIGN­
MENT requires a disposition to explicitly judge an inference. That requires 
too much sophistication. But there is a conditional requirement of this 
kind. If a thinker's attitudes are aligned, they judge their inferences 
good if they judge them at all. So this condition is not so strong as to 
always require that the inference is judged a good one. There may be 
no judgment made about this at all, even dispositionally. The ALIGNMENT 
condition allows for this. For this and related reasons, like COUNTERFACTUAL, 
730 
J. WARREN

ALIGNMENT can be partially satisfied. A thinker's inferential dispositions can 
be more or less aligned with a putative inference, depending upon how 
bound up their judgments about the inference's worth are with the entire 
process. More on this below.
The responsibility involved in inference also requires that inference is 
an action. Maybe this is too strong, but at the very least, inference must 
be action-like. As Boghossian says, inference is 'person-level, conscious, 
and voluntary'.31 We have to be careful here though. When I inferred 
that Chrysippus went down the right-hand path, it was not voluntary in 
the usual sense.32 It happened on automatic. I did not have to will the 
causal event in my brain. Still, I am able to exercise some control. I can 
interfere in the process, by conscious choice. I can refrain from accepting 
the conclusion while I check and recheck my reasoning.
Something similar happens with some other familiar psychological 
processes. The system that controls our breathing often runs fully on 
automatic. It runs when we sleep, it runs when we are distracted. But 
we can consciously take over. We can control the rhythm of our breathing. 
We can delay our next breath (though not indefinitely, unless more 
drastic steps are taken). This contrasts sharply with our total lack of 
control over our heartbeat. Inferring is more like taking a breath than it 
is like a heartbeat. It is quasi-voluntary and action-like, at least. The 
control involved is also direct, unlike the indirect control I can exercise 
over my height by sawing off my legs. The action-like control over infer­
ence does not require external tools or intermediate actions.33
The following condition sums up these ideas:
CONTROL: if a thinker's premise-attitudes cause their conclusion-attitude in a way 
that plays the inference role then the formation of the conclusion attitude can 
be partially but directly controlled by the thinker (in normal conditions)
This applies to the extended causal process leading from premise-atti­
tudes to the conclusion-attitude itself, not merely to actions after the 
fact. The 'can' is important here. Like breathing, in an inference, we can 
(partially) take over control. That is what is important for satisfying 
CONTROL. It does not require that this control is actually exercised, in 
31Boghossian (2014, 3).
32Boghossian recognizes this. In his (2014) he characterizes inferences as 'System 1.5' reasoning. Con­
trasting with Systems 1 and 2 of Kahneman (2011). In his (2018), he distinguishes between inference 
2.0, 1.75, and 1.5.
33This helps to explain why being primed into a belief is not an inference, since presumably the only 
control we could exert would be by avoiding primes or having been more attentive at an earlier 
time. Also, of course, it is extremely unlikely that a primed belief would satisfy COUNTERFACTUAL, but 
perhaps it could via some kind of stable confabulation.
INQUIRY 
731

each particular inference. Even with this noted, CONTROL is intentionally 
vague. And like COUNTERFACTUAL and ALIGNMENT, it can be partially 
satisfied. How fully it is satisfied depends upon how much control a 
thinker is able to exercise.
Does CONTROL make inferring an action? I prefer instead to say it makes 
inference 'action-like'. This is not absolutely precise, of course. I use it to 
indicate that inferences are not completely under the control of the will, 
yet they are partially under the control of the will. The comparison to 
breathing, made above, helps to illustrate this. Talking in this fashion 
implicitly recognizes the obvious fact that inferences are not very 
similar to many of our canonical actions. At the same time, it distinguishes 
inferences from completely unconscious and inaccessible processes.
Together COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT, and CONTROL make sense of what­
ever truth there is in TAKING that applies to all inferences. For the sophis­
ticated inferences of complex creatures like us, there might even be a bit 
more truth in TAKING.
SOPHISTICATED INFERENCE: a sophisticated inference is performed when a thinker's 
premise-attitudes together with the thinkers belief that these premises provide 
sufficient reason for accepting this conclusion, directly cause that conclusion 
attitude in a way that plays the inference role
The idea is that the beliefs about reasons had by sophisticated creatures 
like us are, in fully explicit inferences, part of what cause the conclusion 
attitude. When this happens, COUNTERFACTUAL and ALIGNMENT are satisfied 
almost automatically. And there is no regress looming - we do not 
need to consider beliefs about the premises' and the connecting 
belief's relation to the conclusion. Some mental states have caused 
some other mental state. And there is no deep circularity either, even if 
the connecting attitude is partly constituted by a disposition to infer 
from these premises to this conclusion. This is not obviously required, 
but it is fine either way, given functionalism. The causal relation here is 
particular, the dispositional state is general. The physical state that under­
writes having a certain disposition can cause entry into another physical 
state, in particular circumstances.
I think that some people are thinking only of sophisticated inferences 
when they think of inferences. Still, I do not think that all inferences are 
sophisticated. We should allow the possibility that simple creatures, 
lacking the more sophisticated connecting beliefs, can sometimes infer. 
And that sophisticated creatures arise from simple creatures, when they 
are able to form certain attitudes related to these simpler state transitions. 
732 
J. WARREN

We should also allow that many inferences even in sophisticated crea­
tures, are not, themselves, sophisticated inferences.
Do COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT, and CONTROL fully characterize the stan­
dard inference role, when taken together? Almost every recent approach 
to inference assumes inference-rule-following is also required. It is time to 
examine this idea.
6. Rules in the role?
Boghossian originally thought that TAKING required inference to be guided 
by inference rules. And even among those who reject TAKING, an appeal to 
rules is popular. Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum's recent approach appeals 
to rules. So too does McHugh and Way's approach. Within the functional­
ist framework, this idea becomes:
RULES: if a thinker's premise-attitudes cause their conclusion-attitude in a 
way that plays the inference role then the thinker is guided by an inference 
rule linking the premises to the conclusion in forming their conclusion 
attitude
Rule-following does seem to account for TAKING. Boghossian illustrates this 
by analogy to procedural rules like 'If the light is red, stop!'. Following this 
rule involves taking the light's redness as a reason to stop.34 He also thinks 
that rule-following accounts for the productivity and generality of our 
inferences. And Broome has emphasized how a rule-based approach 
leads to seeing inference as a mental action.35
Together COUNTERFACTUAL and ALIGNMENT account for the truth in 
TAKING, and CONTROL ensures that inference is action-like. So my 
approach does not need RULES to account for these features of infer­
ence. Also, the analogy between procedural rules and inference rules 
can be overstated. Some think that procedural rules involve both 
wide-scope and narrow-scope obligations. You should act so that you 
stop when the light is red. And if the light is red, then you should 
stop. Inference rules do not. I am not obligated to believe everything 
that follows from my beliefs by way of a rule I endorse. Nor am I obli­
gated to either do this or reject one of my beliefs. Harman has long 
emphasized points like this.36
34Boghossian does not use the 'procedural' terminology, but his (Email Rule) is procedural in my sense.
35For Broome's rule-based approach, see his (2014b).
36See Harman (1986). See 4.VIII of my (2020b) for a more nuanced account of the normative role of infer­
ence rules.
INQUIRY 
733

I agree that our inferential practices are productive and general. I also 
agree that this is largely explained by inference rules. We do, in fact, 
follow various inference rules in most of our inferences. Very few 
people would deny this. But the question here is not whether we 
follow inference rules. We do. The question is whether rule-following is 
constitutive of inference. I think it is probably not.
This point is orthogonal to issues of naturalism. Kripke famously argued 
that rule-following, in general, cannot be naturalized.37 Boghossian 
argued that inference rule-following, in particular, cannot be natura­
lized.38 My methodological commitment to scientific naturalism is 
strong enough to make this a non-starter for me. Most others in the 
debate agree, I think. Most, but not all.39 In any case, rule-following can 
be naturalized in dispositional terms.40 So my objection to RULES is not 
an effort to defend naturalism. Even if understood in scientific terms, I 
suspect that RULES is incorrect. I have three worries about it, two 
specific, one general.41
The first specific worry is that many mistaken inferences are not guided 
by inference rules. When I inattentively affirm the consequent, I commit a 
blunder. I am not, in any obvious fashion, guided by the rule of affirming 
the consequent in this reasoning. Nor do I seem guided but led astray by 
some other rule, like modus ponens.
The second specific worry is that RULES requires all reasoning to be rule- 
guided, but ever since grue there have been serious doubts about this, at 
least for formal or syntactic rules.42 Inductive and abductive reasoning 
might not be rule-guided, at least in the way that deductive reasoning 
often is.43 As NON-DEDUCTIVE emphasizes, many inferences are not deduc­
tive. A commitment to RULES requires accounting for both induction and 
abduction using rules. Some people think this can be done. Others are not 
so sure. At the very least, there are significant challenges to RULES, from 
this direction.
37In Kripke (1982).
38In Boghossian (2014).
39Sylvan (2016) offers a similar but more general approach that appeals to Sosa's (2015) notion of a 'com­
petence'. He argues that this has some advantages over Boghossian's view, but notes that it shares the 
cost of taking a psychological notion as a primitive.
40See my (2020a) for a full response to Kripkenstein's anti-naturalism about rule-following in general, 
and and section 2.VIII of my (2020b) for a dispositional analysis of inference rule-following.
41Valaris (2017) has argued against a inference-rule-based approaches to reasoning in favor of a seman­
tically rich approach.
42See Goodman (1955). Personally I do not think the grue puzzle makes broadly formal approaches to 
inductive logic impossible, but I will not insist on this here since it is controversial.
43Norton (2003) explicitly makes the case that induction is not rule-governed in the way that deduction is.
734 
J. WARREN

The general worry is that it seems possible to infer without following 
rules. This is even true of deductive inferences. We, humans, perform 
poorly on Wason's abstract card selection task. We perform much better 
on structurally identical but socially embedded selection tasks. Using 
these points, some psychologists have argued that reasoning is based in 
case-specific mental modules rather than general rules. These modules 
were selected for dealing with situations encountered in the ancestral 
environment.44 But these claims are controversial.45 Worse, they threaten 
to prove too much. Even when initial performance on a reasoning task is 
poor, participants are disposed to correct their answers. They can recog­
nize and accept the right answer when it is explained to them.46 I think 
that the best explanation of this is that humans do follow inference rules 
in their deductive reasoning, but the application of these rules is aided 
by case-specific heuristics.47
So the argument against inference rule-following fails. But a similar 
argument against a somewhat different target does not fail. That argu­
ment shows that there could be inferences without inference rule-follow­
ing. Consider the following case:
MODERN NEANDERTHALS. We thought they went extinct 40,000 years ago, but we 
were wrong. Earlier this year, a small settlement of neanderthals was found in a 
remote region of the Alps. This discovery was momentous. We soon learned 
that unlike us, neanderthals do not engage in abstract reasoning. They 
perform no better than chance at the Wason selection task and remain per­
plexed after the answer is explained to them. But they perform just as well as 
humans at structurally identical but socially embedded versions of the task.
As described, the neanderthals do not follow general and productive 
inference rules. Perhaps they follow more specific rules, rules that have 
nothing to do with form and everything to do with case-specific 
content.48 But these are not rules of the kind imagined by proponents 
of RULES.49 These specific 'rules' are powerless to explain generality and 
productivity.
Is MODERN NEANDERTHALS a possible situation? It seems possible in every 
way that matters. It is physically and biologically possible that things could 
44See Wason (1966, 1968) and Wason and Shapiro (1971) for the Wason selection task. See Cosmides and 
Tooby (1992) for the evolutionary case against general rules.
45See Davies, Fetzer, and Foster (1995), for example.
46See van Bentham (2008).
47Warren (2017) argues for this.
48Compare Brandom's (1994) treatment of material inference.
49As Boghossian (2014) notes (pages 17-18), the rule-following approach to inference puts pressure on 
particularism about reasons. Dancy (2004) defended particularism in morality.
INQUIRY 
735

go this way, even if not historically possible relative to the actual course of 
events. Do the neanderthals reason and infer? I think it is clear that they 
do. Ned the neanderthal's beliefs about some social situation cause some 
of his other beliefs in a way we would count as 'inferences'.
Some might deny the intuitive appeal of this case. In the face of such 
worries, it would not be helpful to simply re-assert my own intuitions. 
Instead, let me make four brief points in response. First: more realistic 
cases might be provided by considering the reasoning of young children 
or sophisticated non-human animals. Most of us agree that these crea­
tures engage in something like reasoning, but it is less plausible that 
they follow productive and general inference rules when they do so. 
Second: denying RULES is compatible with thinking that, in actual fact, 
all actual human inferences are rule-governed. The claim of RULES con­
cerns the inference role. It claims that inference rule-following is constitu­
tive of inference, which is a very strong claim. Third: we can deny RULES 
without, thereby, denying popular inferentialist or inferential conceptual 
role theories of content. Such theories claim that meaning that p or 
having attitudes with the content that p requires following certain infer­
ence rules. This is compatible with the possibility that some specific infer­
ences involving the belief that p are not rule-guided.
Fourth and finally, SOPHISTICATED INFERENCE provides a better way to 
understand the role of rules in inferences. Recall that in this case, a con­
necting belief, that the premises provide a reason for accepting the con­
clusion, is part of what causes acceptance of the conclusion. Many of our 
inferences are sophisticated. And in many of our sophisticated inferences, 
though perhaps not all, the connecting belief comes in the form of a 
belief that the rule linking the premises and conclusion is a good one. 
This way of looking at things allows us to understand the appeal of 
RULES. It also allows us to accept the spirit of RULES, while rejecting its 
letter. For this and other reasons, please do not see my arguments here 
as making light of inference rules or their importance. Far from it. The 
importance of rules to our inferential practices, especially their power 
and scope, is beyond serious dispute. I have elaborated on related 
points at length in my work on logic, mathematics, and meaning.
7. The borderlands
COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT, and CONTROL can all be satisfied in degrees. In 
SOPHISTICATED INFERENCE, they tend to be highly satisfied. This happens in 
fully explicit reasoning, of the kind we find in philosophy or mathematics 
736 
J. WARREN

or puzzle solving. It also happens in cases where a thinker does not 
explicitly know the principles involved in the reasoning but is able 
to reflect on the connection between premise-attitudes and conclusion- 
attitude. These are cases of what Boghossian has called inference '2.0' 
and '1.75', respectively.50 All accounts agree that these cases are infer­
ences.51 Things are less clear when we consider automatic reasoning 
(inference '1.5').
I look into the backyard and do not see Chrysippus. I automatically con­
clude that he must have jumped the fence. Did I perform an inference? It 
depends. What it depends on is the degree to which COUNTERFACTUAL, 
ALIGNMENT, and CONTROL are satisfied. Sometimes in automatic reasoning, 
it is very difficult to isolate the premises (or their negations) for citation. 
Perhaps this is because it is not fully determinate that these premise-atti­
tudes caused that conclusion-attitude. Or perhaps it is determinate but it 
was entirely unconscious and now psychologically inaccessible. Some 
cases of automatic reasoning count as inferences, but not all. Some are 
better thought of as unconscious, classificatory, or something else. And 
some cases are on the borderline.
Any plausible account of inference will have to live with this kind of 
indeterminacy. I do not think this is a serious problem. Vagueness is 
one of the facts of life. If it is a problem, it is a problem for everyone. Mal­
mgren has recently argued that (in my terminology) borderline cases of 
inference raise trouble for the standard views of the epistemological 
worth of inferences.52 But this is only true when epistemologists over- 
reach. They are always free to instead apply their theories only to clear 
and determinate inferences. In clear cases, things proceed smoothly.
This allows us to say that COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT, and CONTROL 
jointly exhaust the inference role, at least in a sense. In ordinary contexts, 
they jointly provide a sufficient condition on causal attitude transitions 
playing the inference role. This is compatible with everything I have 
been saying about how the satisfaction of COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT, 
and CONTROL comes in degrees. In ordinary contexts, high satisfaction of 
each of these jointly suffices for a transition to count as an 'inference'. 
Though in some special contexts, we might also demand that a transition 
be 'sophisticated', in the sense of SOPHISTICATED INFERENCE, in order to truly 
count as an 'inference'. And while there could be some contexts in which 
50In his (2018).
51For Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum (2018) they are 'rich' inferential transitions, in contrast to the more 
fundamental 'basic' inferential transitions.
52In Malmgren (2018).
INQUIRY 
737

middling satisfaction of each dimension suffices for inference, I suspect 
that such contexts are rare.
This flexibility is desirable. We can allow that the demands on inference 
are somewhat  context-sensitive, without saying anything too extreme. 
Some transitions will not count as 'inferences' in any contexts, others 
will always count as 'inferences', no matter the context. Only those 
cases that reside in the borderlands might vary. If they vary, they will 
vary depending on which psychological matters are relevant in a given 
context.
So by my lights, there are state transitions between contentful atti­
tudes that do not count as 'inferences'. These happen in many non- 
human animals and in young children. They also happen in adult 
humans. I say they are distinguished from inference by the inference 
role. Inferences, but not these transitions, interrelate with other attitudes 
in the ways I have spelled out. My view on the line between true and 
ersatz inference is pretty standard, aligning with Boghossian, Broome, 
Hlobil, Wright, and others.53 Kornblith, Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum, 
and perhaps others disagree.54 But fighting over the word 'inference' 
would be a waste of time. Cognitive scientists can call all contentful 
state transitions 'inferences', for lack of a better word. I prefer instead 
to call some of them 'inference-like'. Wholly unconscious, sub-personal 
state transitions are not the responsibility of a thinker.55 The thinker's 
inferences are. This alone is reason enough to distinguish between 
them in our psychological theories.56
8. Our picture of inference
Inference is a functional notion. Like most psychological kinds, it is 
characterized functionally and realized causally. This is a point of meta­
physics; I think it should be common ground in discussions of infer­
ence. My particular characterization of the inference role is more 
controversial. Positively, I have offered COUNTERFACTUAL, ALIGNMENT, and 
CONTROL as exhausting the inference role. Negatively, I have denied a 
role for RULES.
53See Boghossian (2014, 2018), Broome (2013, 2014a, 2014b), Hlobil (2014), and Wright (2014).
54See Kornblith (2012) and Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum (2018).
55This might be a bit too strong - bad habits are, in a sense, the thinker's responsibility. The point here is 
that unconscious processes are not the thinker's responsibility in the same way that inferences are.
56Neither Kornblith (2012) nor Quilty-Dunn and Mandelbaum (2018) substantively disagree with this, 
from what I can tell.
738 
J. WARREN

My approach has been psychological. I looked to the folk-psychological 
role of 'inference' to characterize the inference role. Just as Armstrong, 
Lewis, and others looked to the folk-psychological role of 'pain' to charac­
terize the pain role. No particular physical demand is placed on the causal 
state transitions realizing the inference role. Only that they realize the 
inference role, which requires having other mental states of various 
kinds. For all I have said, Marvin the Martian and Robbie the Robot may 
infer, much as we do. And simpler creatures may engage in proto-infer­
ences without inferring. The psychological zoo holds many wonders.
Functionalists can easily allow for these and other possibilities while 
also endorsing the characterization of the inference role offered here. 
Of course, my characterization may well stand further refinements, both 
simple and subtle. But with the metaphysics of inference integrated 
into a standard functionalist picture of mental states and processes, we 
are well on our way to having a satisfying theory of inference.57
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
References
Armstrong, David. 1968. A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul.
Block, Ned. 1978. "Troubles with Functionalism." In Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 
of Science, edited by C. W. Savage, 261-325, Vol. IX. Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Boghossian, Paul. 2014. "What is Inference?" Philosophical Studies 169 (1): 1-18.
Boghossian, Paul. 2018. "Delimiting the Boundaries of Inference." Philosophical Issues 
28 (1): 55-69.
Brandom, Robert. 1994. Making It Explicit. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Broome, John. 2013. Rationality Through Reasoning. Oxford: Blackwell.
Broome, John. 2014a. "Comments on Boghossian." Philosophical Studies 169 (1): 19-25.
Broome, John. 2014b. "Normativity in Reasoning." Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 95: 
622-633.
Burgess, John P. 2005. "On Anti-Anti-Realism." Facta Philosophica 7 (2): 145-165.
57Thanks to Rosa Cao, Daniel Waxman, Jack Woods, and several anonymous referees. I first finished a 
paper draft giving an account of inference in July 2014. This paper began as a major revision of 
that one. The revision was finished in February 2017. This paper took a long time to publish, 
earning numerous split verdicts, so over the last (nearly) four years I have slightly refined the 
theory and (I hope) greatly improved the writing. Shorter accounts of my functionalist theory of infer­
ence can be found in chapter 2 of my (2020b) and in my (2021). About this paper's first two sentences: I 
do not have and have never had a dog named 'Chrysippus' and I am actually very fast.
INQUIRY 
739

Cao, Rosa. 2018. "Computational Explanations and Neural Coding." In The Routledge 
Handbook of the Computational Mind, edited by Mark Sprevek, and Matteo 
Columbo, 283-296. New York: Routledge.
Churchland, Paul. 1981. "Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes." 
Journal of Philosophy 78: 67-90.
Cosmides, Lea, and John Tooby. 1992. "Cognitive Adaptations for Social Exchange." In 
The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of Culture, edited by 
J. Barkow, L. Cosmides, and J. Tooby. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dancy, Jonathan. 2004. Ethics Without Principles. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Davies, P. S., J. H. Fetzer, and T. R. Foster. 1995. "Logical Reasoning and Domain 
Specificity." Biology and Philosophy 10 (1): 1-37.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1987. The Intentional Stance. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991a. Consciousness Explained. Boston, MA: Little, Brown and 
Company.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991b. "Real Patterns." Journal of Philosophy 88 (1): 27-51.
Fodor, Jerry. 1968. Psychological Explanation. New York: Random House.
Fodor, Jerry. 1987. Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy of Mind. 
Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Frege, Gottlob. 1960. "Negation." In Translations from the Philosophical Writings of 
Gottlob Frege, edited by P. Geach, and M. Black. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gentzen, Gerhard. 1934. "Untersuchungen über Das Logische Schliessen." 
Mathematische Zeitschrift39: 176-210, 405-431
Goodman, Nelson. 1955. Fact, Fiction, & Forecast. Harvard University Press: Cambridge.
Harman, Gilbert. 1986. Change in View: Principles of Reasoning. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Hlobil, Ulf. 2014. "Against Boghossian, Wright and Broome on Inference." Philosophical 
Studies 167 (2): 419-429.
Hlobil, Ulf. forthcoming. "Goodness-Fixing Isn't Enough: A Reply to McHugh and Way." 
Mind.
Horgan, Terence. 2013. "Original Intentionality is Phenomenal Intentionality." The 
Monist 96 (2): 232-251.
Jaśkowski, S. 1934. "On the Rules of Supposition in Formal Logic." In Polish Logic 1920- 
1939, edited by S. McCall. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnston, Mark. 1992. "How to Speak of the Colors." Philosophical Studies 68: 221-263.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking Fast and Slow. NY: Farrar, Strauss, Giroux.
Kornblith, Hilary. 2012. On Reflection. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kripke, Saul A. 1982. Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Lewis, David K. 1966. "An Argument for the Identity Theory." Journal of Philosophy 63 
(1): 17-25.
Lewis, David K. 1980. "Mad Pain and Martian Pain." In Reading in the Philosophy of 
Psychology: Volume II, edited by Ned Block, 216-222. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Malmgren, Anna-Sara. 2018. "Varieties of Inference?" Philosophical Issues 28 (1): 
221-254.
Marr, David. 1982. Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Representation 
and Processing of Visual Information. New York: Freeman.
740 
J. WARREN

Martin, C. B. 1994. "Dispositions and Conditionals." Philosophical Quarterly 44: 1-8.
McHugh, Conor, and Jonathan Way. 2016. "Against the Taking Condition." 
Philosophical Issues 26: 314-331.
McHugh, Conor, and Jonathan Way. 2018. "What Is Reasoning?" Mind 127 (505): 167-196.
Minsky, Marvin. 1986. The Society of Mind. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Moore, Gregory H. 1982. Zermelo's Axiom of Choice: Its Origins, Development, and 
Influence. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Murzi, Julien, and Florian Steinberger. 2013. "Is Logical Knowledge Dispositional?" 
Philosophical Studies166: 165-183.
Neta, Ram. 2013. "What Is An Inference?" Philosophical Issues 23 (1): 388-407.
Norton, John D. 2003. "A Material Theory of Induction." Philosophy of Science 70 (4): 
647-670.
Pautz, Adam. 2013. "Does Phenomenology Ground Mental Content?" In Phenomenal 
Intentionality, edited by Kreigel, 194-234. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pinker, Steve. 1997. How the Mind Works. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Priest, Graham. 2006. Doubt Truth to be a Liar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Putnam, Hilary. 1960. "Minds and Machines." In Dimensions of Mind, edited by Sidney 
Hook, 148-179. New York: New York University Press.
Putnam, Hilary. 1967. "Psychological Predicates." In Art, Mind, and Religion, edited by 
W. H. Capitan, and D. D. Merrill, 37-48. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Putnam, Hilary. 1988. Representation and Reality. Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Quilty-Dunn, Jake, and Eric Mandelbaum. 2018. "Inferential Transitions." Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 96 (3): 532-547.
Ripley, David. 2011. "Negation, Denial, and Rejection." Philosophy Compass 6 (9): 622-629.
Searle, John. 1980. "Minds, Brains, and Programs." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 3 (3): 
417-424.
Sellars, Wilfrid. 1962. "Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man." In Frontiers of 
Science and Philosophy, edited by Robert Colodny. Pittsburgh: University of 
Pittsburgh Press.
Shoemaker, Sydney. 1982. "The Inverted Spectrum." Journal of Philosophy 79: 357-381.
Smiley, Timothy. 1996. "Rejection." Analysis 56: 1-9.
Smith, A. D. 1977. "Dispositional Properties." Mind 86: 439-445.
Squire, Larry R., and Eric R. Kandel. 1999. Memory: From Mind to Molecules. New York: 
Scientific American Library.
Sosa, Ernest. 2015. Judgment and Agency. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Staffel, Julia. 2013. "Can There Be Reasoning with Degrees of Belief?" Synthese 190 (16): 
3535-3551.
Sylvan, Kurt. 2016. "Epistemic Reasons II: Basing." Philosophy Compass 11 (7): 377-389.
van Bentham, Johan. 2008. "Logic and Reasoning: Do the Facts Matter?" Studia Logica 
88 (1): 67-84.
Valaris, Markos. 2017. "What Reasoning Might Be." Synthese 194 (6): 2007-2024.
Warren, Jared. 2017. "Revisiting Quine on Truth by Convention." Journal of 
Philosophical Logic 46 (2): 119-139.
Warren, Jared. 2020a. "Killing Kripkenstein's Monster." Noûs 54 (2): 257-289.
Warren, Jared. 2020b. Shadows of Syntax. New York: Oxford University Press.
INQUIRY 
741

Warren, Jared. 2021. "Infinite Reasoning." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
103 (2): 385-407.
Wason, P. C. 1966. "Reasoning." In New Horizons in Psychology, edited by B. M. Foss, 
Vol. 1. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Wason, P. C. 1968. "Reasoning About a Rule." Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology 20 (3): 273-281.
Wason, P. C., and Diana Shapiro. 1971. "Natural and Contrived Experience in a 
Reasoning Problem." Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 23: 63-71.
Wright, Crispin. 2004. "Intuition, Entitlement, and the Epistemology of Logical Laws." 
Dialectica 58 (1): 155-175.
Wright, Crispin. 2014. "Comments on Paul Boghossian, "What is Inference?"" 
Philosophical Studies 169 (1): 27-37.
742 
J. WARREN

