International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN: 0967-2559 (Print) 1466-4542 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/riph20
McDowell, Phenomenology and the Awareness of
the World
Donnchadh O'Conaill
To cite this article: Donnchadh O'Conaill (2012) McDowell, Phenomenology and the
Awareness of the World, International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 20:4, 499-518, DOI:
10.1080/09672559.2012.713378
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09672559.2012.713378
Published online: 14 Sep 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 312
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=riph20

McDowell, Phenomenology and the
Awareness of the World
Donnchadh O'Conaill
Abstract
John McDowell has claimed that the rational link between perceptions and
empirical judgements allows us to perceive objects as belonging to a wider
reality, one which extends beyond the objects perceived. In this way, we
can be said to have a perceptual awareness of the world. I argue that
McDowell's account of this perceptual awareness does not succeed. His
account as it stands does not have the resources to explain how our percep-
tions can present objects as belonging to a wider reality, regardless of the
judgements we make about that reality. I suggest that we can give a better
account of this perceptual awareness of the world by appealing to transcen-
dental phenomenology. A phenomenological study of perceptual experi-
ences describes how they are structured by a sense of the perceived objects
as belonging to a world containing other objects of possible perception. I
shall outline this sense we have of the world, and argue that it allows us to
perceive objects as belonging to a wider reality. Transcendental phenome-
nology can thus help to explain our perceptual awareness of the world.
Keywords: McDowell; Husserl; perception; phenomenology; world; sense
of the world
In recent work, beginning in Mind and World, John McDowell (1996a)
has outlined a distinctive position on the relation between thought and
the world. This position stresses the role perceptual awareness plays in
linking empirical thinking to the way the world is. One of the key claims
making up this position is that we can perceive objects as belonging to a
wider reality, one which goes beyond the objects perceived. It is this
claim which I shall address in what follows.
Having outlined McDowell's own account of how we perceive objects
as belonging to a wider reality (section I), I shall argue that this account
does not adequately explain the phenomenon (section II). I then suggest
that we can better understand what it is to perceive an object as belong-
ing to a wider world by appealing to transcendental phenomenology. In
section III I sketch a brief phenomenological study of perception, and
use this to argue that perceptual experiences necessarily involve a sense
of the perceived objects as belonging to a world. In section IV, I argue
International Journal of Philosophical Studies Vol. 20(4), 499-518
International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN 0967-2559 print 1466-4542 online  2012 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandfonline.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09672559.2012.713378

that this sense of the world can explain how we are able to perceive,
and not merely think of, objects as belonging to a wider reality.1
I
Much of McDowell's work in Mind & World and elsewhere has con-
cerned intentionality, 'how thought and language are directed towards
the world' (1998a: p. 431).2 In particular, he focuses on how our thoughts
might be answerable to the empirical world, the world as it is available
to us through perception. When we consider empirical thought, we seem
to be led to a paradox. On the one hand, conceptual activity, the activity
of having and assessing thoughts, must be conducted freely if it is to
count as rational. A judgement about the world is something we must be
able to freely accept or reject. But on the other hand, for our thoughts
to be genuinely empirical, they must be rationally constrained by the
way the world is (McDowell, 1996a: p. 6). The tension here is between
the freedom which rationality requires, and the kind of constraint which
directedness to the world (and the concomitant feature of 'getting things
more or less right or wrong') imposes. It can seem as though either our
thinking must be conceived of as completely free, or as constrained by
something from outside the realm of thought. And neither of these
options is palatable; the ﬁrst calls into the question the very rational con-
straint needed to make our thoughts genuinely empirical; the second
saddles us with a constraint which cannot provide justiﬁcation for our
judgements, and so is not genuinely rational.
McDowell proposes to ameliorate this tension by pointing out that our
freedom in thinking and the external constraint which empirical thought
requires are in fact mutually dependent on each other. The concepts we
use in our freely chosen judgements can have empirical signiﬁcance only
if some of those judgements are answerable to the world as we experi-
ence it in perceptual episodes (1996a: pp. 33-4). But these episodes
count as perceptual only if they already enact conceptual capacities of
the very same sort as are drawn on in our freely judging, hoping, imagin-
ing and so on (1996a: p. 11). Our passive perceptual openness to the
world and our ability to freely judge are thus mutually dependent, and
both are required for genuinely empirical thought.
I accept McDowell's basic claim, of a mutual constraint between our
abilities to perceive and to make empirical judgements. My criticism
concerns one particular implication which McDowell draws from this
claim. The implication is that, if the capacities drawn on in receptivity
(that is, perceptual experience) are integrated into the network of capac-
ities we draw on when exercising our spontaneity (for example, when
freely judging that such-and-such is the case), then we grasp what the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
500

perceptual experience reveals to us as part of a wider reality. That is,
perceptual experiences are 'takings in, at least seemingly, of aspects of a
reality that goes beyond what is manifest in the experiences themselves
[...] a wider reality, a reality that is all embraceable in thought but not
all available to this experience' (1996a: p. 32).3 In what follows, I shall
term this awareness of what is perceived as belonging to a wider reality
the subject's perceptual awareness of the world.4
It is crucial to McDowell's position that perceptual experiences do not
rationally constrain only individual judgements. Rather, each empirical
judgment must be able to take its place as an element of the subject's
world-view (1996a: pp. 29-30). McDowell does not deﬁne what he means
by 'world-view', but from his use of the term I take it to be a subject's
conception of how the world is; the total set of empirical judgements the
subject makes or would make at any one time (see 1996a: pp. 11-12, 40).
Understood this way, each world-view is in principle revisable in light of,
amongst other things, perceptual evidence (1996a: pp. 33-4). Note that
this characterisation of a world-view leaves open its exact relation to the
subject's perceptual awareness of the world (that is, the subject's per-
ceiving objects as belonging to a wider world). In particular, we ought
not to assume that the two are identical (I shall address the relation
between them in section II).
The subject's world-view is revisable in light of perception. That is,
one can adjust what one judges to be the case (how one thinks the
world, or a particular part of it, is) in light of perception. This is possible
because one's perceptions actualise conceptual capacities which belong
to 'a rationally organised network of capacities for active adjustment of
one's thinking to the deliverances of experience' (1996a: p. 29). For
example, you wake and think it is night; on throwing open the curtains,
you realise morning has broken; you therefore adjust your judgment
accordingly. This adjustment is possible, according to McDowell, because
the perception that it is morning has the same conceptual content as
your judgement that it is morning.
So we can distinguish three elements in McDowell's picture: percep-
tual experiences; the subject's world-view or conception of how the
world is; and the network of conceptual capacities linking the ﬁrst and
the second elements. With these elements in mind, we come to the part
of McDowell's picture that I wish to take issue with: his account of how
perception can make the subject aware of the perceived object as part of
a wider reality.
By virtue of the way in which the conceptual capacities that are
drawn into operation in an experience are rationally linked into the
whole network, the subject of the experience understands what the
experience takes in (or at least seems to take in) as part of a wider
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
501

reality, a reality that is all embraceable in thought but not all avail-
able to this experience.
(1996a: p. 32)
In other words, the subject's perceptual awareness of the world is to
be explained by the integration of the conceptual capacities actualised in
perception into the subject's overall network of conceptual capacities.
These capacities, in order to count as conceptual, must be such that the
subject can deploy them in making freely chosen judgements. These
judgements (at least, those with empirical content) will belong to the
subject's world-view. So the subject perceives objects as parts of the
world only if the subject also has a world-view, such that the perception
and the world-view are rationally linked.
I agree with McDowell's suggestion that in perceiving we take in
objects as part of a wider reality. What I wish to question is whether
McDowell's own position can provide a way of accounting for how we
do this. I shall suggest that to explain how this feature of perception is
possible, we should appeal to transcendental phenomenology.
II
We can accept that perception requires an awareness of the world as
extending beyond and including the perceived object, and that perception
requires a rational connection with the network of capacities for rational
adjustment of one's thinking. But I suggest that we should deny McDo-
well's further claim, that the subject fulﬁls the ﬁrst of these requirements
by virtue of fulﬁlling the second. I assume that in presenting these rational
connections as the condition 'by virtue of' which the perceived object is
presented as part of the world, McDowell means to indicate something
more than a merely necessary condition. That is, these connections are not
intended to be merely conditions without which the subject could not per-
ceive the object as part of the world; rather, they are that feature of the
subject which explains how he or she is capable of perceiving objects in
this way. Even if this interpretation is incorrect, I think we are still entitled
to ask for an account of what it is about subjects and their perceptual expe-
riences which serves to present objects as parts of the world.
The gap which I think appears in McDowell's account concerns
the content of perceptual experiences in virtue of which the subject is
aware of a wider world as that to which the perceived object belongs.
McDowell's suggestion is that this content is a matter of certain
conceptual capacities being actualised in perception. The key issue is
what these conceptual capacities are, and whether their being actualised
in perceptual experiences can explain the subject's perceptual awareness
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
502

of the world. I think there are two possible ways in which McDowell's
suggestion could be elaborated: by appealing to the integration of the
concepts actualised in perception into a network of conceptual capacities;
or by appealing to the connection between the concepts actualised in the
perception and the subject's world-view, what one holds true about the
world. I shall consider each of these possible explanations in turn.
The ﬁrst possible explanation starts with the fact that one's perceptual
experiences must actualize conceptual capacities which are integrated
into one's overall network of conceptual capacities. The suggestion is
that it is in virtue of this integration - the rational connections between
perception and the overall network - that one perceives objects as
belonging to a wider world. But this cannot be right. These rational con-
nections are dispositional in nature; they are capacities one has, for
example the capacity to adjust one's judgements in light of perception.
But for one to actually perceive objects as belonging to the world is for
a particular phenomenon to occur. These capacities may well be neces-
sary for one's awareness of the world, but they are necessarily insufﬁ-
cient. What is required is the appropriate deployment of some of these
capacities; one's having these capacities does not, in and of itself, explain
this appropriate deployment.
The second possible explanation appeals, not to conceptual capacities,
but to the particular concepts which are actualised in one's perceptual
experiences. The suggestion is that these concepts also appear in the
judgements which make up one's world-view. That is, one's world-view
provides a conception of a wider reality, and this conception is part of
the content of one's perception, speciﬁcally the part presenting the
object as belonging to a wider reality. What is being appealed to here is
not a disposition but an occurrence, an actualization of a particular con-
ceptual capacity. For this reason, the second response avoids my reason
for rejecting the ﬁrst. However, this second response faces a dilemma
regarding the content of this conception of the world.
One way of explicating this conception might be as 'whatever it is my
world-view concerns'. But in that case the conception of 'the world'
seems to have little or no determinate content at all. To perceive an
object as part of a wider world would be, on this account, to perceive it
as belonging to 'whatever is the case'. This seems obviously insufﬁcient
to provide any genuine perceptual content, and so cannot, I take it,
explain the subject's perceptual awareness of the world.
On the other hand, the content of 'the world' might be given by some
conjunction of determinate concepts (e.g., 'the collection of all physical
entities in space and time'). The problem with this suggestion is that it
threatens to make the content of 'the world' overly restrictive. A subject
can take up any one of a wide variety of different world-views.5 But it
seems possible that some of these world-views would preclude any
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
503

conception of the world as 'the collection of all physical entities in space
and time', or indeed any other conception formed by a determinate con-
junction of concepts. Let us call a world-view giving a conception of the
world as the collection of all physical entities an orthodox world-view;
any world-view which excludes this conception we can call heterodox.
The problem is that it seems possible for a subject to have a heterodox
world-view, but to still perceive objects as belonging to a wider reality.
In that case, the content of the subject's perception could not be pro-
vided by the orthodox world-view. This point seems to hold, not just for
a conception of the world as a collection of physical entities, but for any
conception formed by a conjunction of determinate concepts. No such
conjunction can be compatible with all the possible world-views a subject
can take up while still perceiving objects as belonging to a wider reality.
There are two types of world-view which may preclude conceptions of
the world as a collection of physical entities, or anything of that sort.
First, some world-views might involve such radically different concep-
tions of 'space', 'time', 'physical' and perhaps even 'entity' that the
judgement we are able to make, that 'the world consists of physical enti-
ties in space and time', would simply be unavailable. It is arguable that
world-views based on radically incorrect pre-scientiﬁc notions of space,
time and matter might count as examples of world-views within which
this judgement might be impossible. More controversially, it might be
possible that future scientiﬁc theories will eliminate any need for posit-
ing items which correspond to those which we designate by the terms
'space', 'time' and 'physical entity'. In this scenario, a world-view
informed by these future scientiﬁc discoveries would not be committed
to the view that the world consists of physical objects in space and time,
simply because some or none of these items would be taken to exist.6
The second type of world-view which might preclude this conception
of the world is idealist or solipsistic. By 'idealist', I mean any conception
of the world as depending for its existence on the existence of subjects,
or on their taking the world to be a certain way; by 'solipsistic', I mean
any conception of what exists which regards it as identical with one sub-
ject and his or her experiences. I assume that neither idealist nor solip-
sistic world-views are compatible with the judgement that the world is
the collection of physical entities in space and time. But prima facie, it
seems possible to take up an idealist or solipsistic world-view, and to
continue to perceive objects as appearing to belong to a wider reality.
For example, it seems possible to believe that while the world appears
to be an array of physical objects, in fact these are nothing but the cre-
ations of my own mind.
These examples do not by themselves prove that McDowell's account
does not work, but they provide reason to think that it cannot. It seems
prima facie that there is no particular conjunction of concepts which is
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
504

required in order for one to perceive objects as part of a wider reality. If
this is correct, then the subject's perceptual awareness of the world
cannot be explained by any such conjunction of concepts. And in that
case, I cannot see how McDowell's account can be made to work.7 This
leaves open the question of how it is that one can perceive objects as
part of a wider world. What is required, I suggest, is that one has in
perceptual experience an awareness of the world which is not dependent
on any particular conception of the way the world is. To say more about
what this awareness might be, I suggest we turn to transcendental
phenomenology.
Before doing so, I need to brieﬂy consider a methodological problem:
is Husserl's phenomenological approach compatible with the therapeutic
approach McDowell adopts in Mind and World? This problem is too
broad to address in detail here, but a brief consideration of McDowell's
therapeutic project suggests that it is not as opposed to transcendental
phenomenology as it might ﬁrst appear. The therapeutic approach aims
to dislodge assumptions of a speciﬁc sort, those which might lead one to
raise questions about how empirical content is possible at all: 'On the
interpretation that is my concern, a "How possible?" question expresses
a way of thinking that gives the appearance of showing that its putative
topic is conceptually impossible' (McDowell 1996b: p. 290; see also
McDowell, 2002: p. 295). Transcendental phenomenology can be roughly
characterised as a method of describing how the operations and essential
structures of subjective experience make possible our awareness of any-
thing (Husserl, 1960: p. 21, 1982: pp. 207-10; Mohanty, 1985: pp. xxix,
214; Zahavi, 2003: p. 52).8 One way of putting the methodological prob-
lem is as follows: McDowell is seeking to dissolve 'How possible?' ques-
tions, whereas transcendental phenomenology seeks to answer them.
This way of relating the two approaches (the therapeutic project and
transcendental phenomenology) seems to make them incompatible.
However, this incompatibility is only apparent. McDowell allows that
in perceptual experience we are open to facts and to the world (1996a:
pp. 29, 111). He further suggests that perceptual impressions, languages,
and conceptual schemes can ﬁgure as constitutive of this openness
(1996a: p. 155).9 But there seems to be no good reason to stop there.
One can inquire as to how these episodes and structures play the role
McDowell sees for them, without lapsing into either scepticism about
whether they can do so, or into a naturalistic constructive philosophy
which McDowell is also keen to reject (1996a: pp. 94-5). To inquire in
this way would be to follow a suggestion made by Crowell, that our
openness to the world can be explained by appealing to phenomenologi-
cal analyses of experience and thinking (Crowell, 2001: p. 18; see also
Larmore, 2002: pp. 198-202). An inquiry of this sort does not entail
asking the kind of sceptical 'How possible?' questions which McDowell
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
505

seeks to dissolve by means of therapy. Therefore, we have reason
to think that Husserlian phenomenology is not incompatible with
McDowell's therapeutic approach.
III
McDowell's account cannot explain our awareness of the world by
appealing either to world-views or to the network of connections
between a world-view and perceptual experiences. I suggest that this
awareness is itself neither an extra conceptual content belonging to
every world-view, nor a matter of the existence of capacities for ratio-
nally adjusting one's world-view in light of perception. As we shall see,
this is not to say that this awareness has nothing to do with either con-
ceptual content or one's rational capacities. In this section I shall set out
Husserl's description of the sense we have of the objects we perceive as
belonging to a wider world. In the ﬁnal section, I shall argue that this
sense of the world can ﬁll the gap I have outlined in McDowell's
account.
Husserl's account of our awareness of the world begins with individual
perceptual experiences. Each perceptual experience presents an object
or objects to its subject in virtue of instantiating a speciﬁc intentional
content or sense (1982: p. 308).10 For example, if I hear the shouts of a
cox in a rowing-boat passing the window, I will be aware of this person
in virtue of the intentional content of my aural experience (in this case,
something like 'a cox shouting at her crew'). The sense of a perceptual
experience is how the object appears to you in that experience.
Crucially, the sense which structures perceptual experiences can be
expressed in a judgement (i.e., 'I hear a cox shouting at her crew')
(Husserl, 1982: p. 295). It is this which, in Husserl's schema, allows
perceptual
experiences
to ground judgements
about the
perceived
objects.11
The ﬁrst point I wish to draw attention to is that the sense one has of
the object one perceives is never simply of that object alone, but of that
object as located in a group of other objects. Some of these are per-
ceived along with the object, in the background. Others are not them-
selves perceived but are, as Husserl puts it, co-presented or appresented
in the perceptual experience (1960: pp. 109, 122). As I type this sen-
tence, I see the keyboard and the computer screen. In the background I
can see the wall behind the computer. Only some of the wall is visually
presented to me, but I am aware of the rest of the wall, extending from
the door to the far corner of the room. It may well be that my awareness
of the rest of the wall is informed by my having seen it previously, but
we must be careful in describing exactly how it is 'informed' in this way.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
506

In particular, I will not need to infer the existence of the other parts of
the walls from my perceptions; nor do I need to consciously remember
what I saw previously and add it to what I now perceive. Rather, part of
what it is to perceive a particular object or group of objects is to have a
sense of them as belonging to a situation containing numerous other
objects which are not at this very moment perceived.12
This sense of one's situation is not indeterminate, a matter of one's
being aware of 'whatever other objects are nearby'. Rather, my aware-
ness of the objects I perceive at any moment, and which I have just per-
ceived, guides my expectations about what the objects nearby are like.
Sitting in this room, I am aware of it as being of a certain shape and
size, containing objects with certain locations, textures and so on. I may
be mistaken in my awareness of these other objects, but my point is that
this awareness does have some determinate content. That is, I have cer-
tain relatively determinate expectations about what I would perceive
were I to turn around or to move to another part of the room, and these
expectations do not need to be the product of a conscious inference
from what I now perceive or have perceived previously.
The next point is that the sense I have of the objects I perceive also
includes a sense of these objects as belonging to an entire world. The
group of objects we perceive at any one time, 'as the momentary ﬁeld of
perception, always has the character for us of a sector "of" the world, of
the universe of things for possible perceptions' (Husserl, 1970: p. 162).
Another way of putting this is to say that each of my perceptual experi-
ences is structured by a sense of the world as that to which the perceived
objects belong.
As a rough gloss, the sense of the world is the world as it is given to
perceiving subjects, just as the sense of a particular object is how that
object appears. Transcendental phenomenology, in focusing on the sense
of the world, is thus not concerned with the nature or existence of the
world, but with how the world appears to perceiving subjects (Husserl,
1970: p. 154). In the context of the present discussion, the sense of the
world has three crucial features. It is an intentional structure, not an
intentional state or a speciﬁc piece of intentional content; it is not a
judgement or a particular theory; and in it, the world is pre-given, prior
to any particular activity or perception. I shall consider each of these
features in turn.
The sense of the world is not itself an intentional state or a type
of intentional state, which could be contrasted with, for example,
perception. Rather, it is an intentional structure running through every
perceptual experience one can have. To illustrate what I mean by an
intentional structure, consider again one's perception of an object as
belonging to a situation. This perceptual awareness of the situation is not
an extra piece of conceptual content which happens to occur in every
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
507

perception I have (as though I would see on one occasion a table, a chair,
and the situation they belong in; and on another occasion see a pen, a
keyboard and their situation). Rather, in seeing any of these objects, I
perceive them as belonging to some situation. Obviously, the particular
situation will vary from case to case, but what does not vary is their
appearing as situated. This appearing as situated is a structure which runs
through all of my perceptions.
Likewise, the sense of the world is a structure of my perceiving partic-
ular objects. Just as one perceives an object as part of a situation con-
taining other objects which one cannot at that moment perceive, so one
perceives this object as belonging to a reality which is wider again. In
other words, I perceive objects as belonging to a spatiotemporal whole
containing many other objects and situations: 'the objectivities which
could subsequently present themselves, or which, under given circum-
stances would present themselves', were I to alter my spatiotemporal
location (Husserl, 1989: p. 205).
I am claiming that this sense of the world structures each perceptual
experience; but it does not follow that the world will appear as exactly
the same in each experience. Again, a comparison with our awareness of
a situation is instructive. The one situation can appear in different ways
to us (as, for instance, when we walk around, viewing things from differ-
ent perspectives; or when we bring other perceptual modalities into play,
by reaching out and touching a wall or the bark of a tree). Furthermore,
the one situation can come to appear as different, as containing elements
we were previously unaware of, or had not properly appreciated.
Again, the same is true of one's sense of the world. It can be deep-
ened or extended in various ways: by religious conversion; encountering
great artworks; coming to understand new scientiﬁc theories or philo-
sophical positions; or by relationships with other persons. What remains
common throughout any such change is the sense of the objects one
perceives as belonging to a world; their worldliness or mundaneity
(Mohanty, 1985: p. 234).
The second feature of the sense of the world is that it is not a particu-
lar judgement or theory. To be more precise: the sense one has of
objects as belonging to a world need not be part of the content of a spe-
ciﬁc judgement, though it can be taken up in a judgement (e.g., 'That
cafetie`re is part of the world'). Furthermore, the sense of the world need
not belong to any particular scientiﬁc or philosophical theory about the
nature of the world. One reason for thinking this is very similar to a line
of thought raised in the previous section: one can change one's theories
about the world, while still having a sense of the objects one perceives
as being worldly. This point can be put in a methodological way: tran-
scendental phenomenology is not committed to any particular scientiﬁc
theory (or to any metaphysical position about the nature of the world
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
508

itself), and so will not have to be revised because of changes in scientiﬁc
theories or metaphysical positions (Mohanty, 1985: p. xxv).13
This leads to the third feature of the sense of the world I wish to con-
sider. To have a sense of the world in one's perceptual experiences is for
the world to be pre-given; that is, given to one prior to any particular
action one might perform. This is not a temporal priority; I am not sug-
gesting that one must ﬁrst be aware of a world, and can only then per-
ceive
or
respond
to
particular
objects.
Rather,
my
perceiving
or
responding to any particular object necessarily involves an awareness of
the world as the realm of further perceivable objects, the realm of things
I can engage with. In this way, the world is given as the background to
our everyday projects and activities (Husserl, 1960: p. 37, 1970: pp. 148,
152). In our everyday living, including our scientiﬁc or philosophical
work, we focus on some particular part of the world, while co-aware of
the world itself as standing behind this part, as containing all the other
parts we might move our attention to: 'The natural life, whether it is
prescientiﬁcally or scientiﬁcally, theoretically or practically interested, is
life within a universal unthematic horizon', the world as given to us in
our perception of particular objects (Husserl, 1970: p. 145).14
Note that this third feature helps to explain the second feature out-
lined above. Because the sense of the world is a necessary aspect of
one's perceptions and activities, none of these perceptions or activities
could count as evidence for or against it. Nor could this sense be built
up from any set of actions or perceptions, or any interpretation of same.
Therefore, our perceptual awareness of the world in everyday living is
not a theoretical one, open to revision in the same way that a scientiﬁc
or philosophical position must in principle be.
It might be thought that this notion of a sense of the world involves a
commitment to some kind of idealistic metaphysics; that is, to a concep-
tion of the world as in some way dependent upon our perceptual experi-
ence. There are two points which seem relevant by way of reply to this
worry. First, what I am outlining is not a conception of the world itself,
but rather a conception of the sense we have of it. To say that the sense
we have of the world is of a universe of objects for possible perception
is not to be committed, ipso facto, to a conception of the world itself as
nothing but an array of perceivables. Nor is it to commit oneself to the
claim that the existence of the world depends on actual perceptual expe-
riences.15 Indeed (to move on to the second point), to the extent that
this sense of the world ties us to any metaphysical system at all, it ties us
to one that is close to McDowell's own. He deﬁnes the world which we
perceive objects as belonging to as the totality of thinkables: 'everything
that is the case; that is, everything that can be truly thought to be the
case' (1996b: p. 284). Just as I have done, he is at pains to point out that
this does not involve a commitment to idealism, in the sense of the
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
509

world's depending on our thinking (1996a: p. 28, 1996b: pp. 284-5).
There is an obvious difference between talking of perceivable and think-
able items, in that we can think about items which we cannot perceive.
However, for these unperceivable items to belong to the empirical
world, we must think about them by using theories which are themselves
answerable to perceptual evidence (McDowell, 1998a: pp. 464-5).
So as far as I can see, then McDowell and I need not disagree about
the nature of the world itself. The difference I am discussing in this
paper concerns the subject's mode of access to the world. More pre-
cisely, it concerns how it is possible for the subject to have a particular
mode of access which both McDowell and I agree that the subject has
(the subject's having the world in view when he or she perceives particu-
lar objects).
IV
I suggest that the notion of a sense of the world, as outlined in the previ-
ous section, is well suited to ﬁll the gap in McDowell's account. This gap
opens because the rational connections which McDowell describes
between perceptions and conceptual capacities do not, by themselves,
explain why the objects of perception appear as belonging to a wider
reality. My suggestion is that objects appear in this way because of a
structure of our perceptual experiences themselves, namely the sense of
the world. Because this sense is a structure of perceptual experience as
such, that which we perceive will appear as belonging to a wider reality.
And because the world is pre-given to us in perception, objects appear
as belonging to the world regardless of what judgements we are inclined
to make about them, or theories of reality to which we are committed.
The nature of perceptual experience itself ensures that no gap can open
between one's perceiving something and one's awareness of it as belong-
ing to the world.
It may be objected that the notion of the sense of the world is an ad
hoc one, or that my use of it does not really ﬁll the gap in McDowell's
position, but rather re-states this gap. These would be telling criticisms if
nothing could be said of the sense of the world other than its being a
perceptual awareness of the world. However, I think more can be said
of this intentional structure. In particular, it is not simply posited in
order to ﬁll a gap such as that I have outlined in McDowell's position.
Rather, it can be described by means of phenomenological analyses such
as outlined in the previous section. I am not assuming that analyses such
as these are indefeasible or beyond any possible criticism; I am simply
suggesting that they provide grounds for thinking that there is an inten-
tional structure in perceptual experiences, one which presents perceived
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
510

objects as belonging to a wider reality. This intentional structure is what
I have called the sense of the world. I am suggesting that this structure
can ﬁll the gap in McDowell's position; or, to be more precise, because
of the structure, the gap cannot actually open.
McDowell traces the rational connections necessary in order for per-
ceptual experiences to be genuine takings-in of the world, and in order
for our beliefs to have genuine empirical content. These rational connec-
tions are necessary, but I have suggested that they are not sufﬁcient to
explain our perceptual awareness of the world. In addition, one must be
aware of the perceived objects as belonging to a domain within which
one's conceptual capacities can be applied. This domain is the world
itself, given as the background to our everyday activities (perceptions,
judgements, actions, and so on). These activities must all fall under the
rational connections McDowell traces, but the subject's perceptual
awareness of the world (its pre-givenness) does not. This pre-givenness
is not itself a rational awareness, but a pre-rational awareness which
allows for the rational adjustments we can make regarding our empirical
judgements and other activities.
These claims - that the world is pre-given when we have this sense of it,
and that this sense of the world is pre-rational - may give rise to worries,
of which I shall address two. The ﬁrst worry is that talk of pre-givenness
raises the spectre of the Given, the supposed non-conceptual awareness or
impact on our sensibility which a long line of empiricists think ultimately
justiﬁes all our empirical judgments. The Given is deﬁned as a non-concep-
tual impact on our sensibility which is able to ﬁll a double epistemological
role: that of justifying empirical judgements while not itself relying on any
other state for justiﬁcation. As Sellars puts it, the Given is
a structure of particular matters of fact such that (a) each fact can
not only be noninferentially known to be the case, but presupposes
no other knowledge either of particular matters of fact, or of gen-
eral truths; and (b) such that the noninferential knowledge of facts
belonging to this structure constitutes the ultimate court of appeals
for all factual claims - particular and general - about the world.
(1997: x 32)
It is because it fulﬁls this double role that the Given has been thought
of as the foundation of empirical knowledge, a taking in of the world
which is the unmoved mover of all other empirical knowledge (Sellars,
1997: x 38).
I am suggesting that when we perceive objects as belonging to the
world, the world is pre-given to us. This entails that, among other things,
the world is given directly (i.e., non-inferentially) to the perceiving
subject; in perceiving, the subject is not only in direct contact with the
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
511

perceived object, but with the world as that to which this object belongs.
This direct contact with the world cannot be justiﬁed by any other expe-
rience or mental state. In this way, the pre-givenness of the world is
indeed akin to the supposed Given which Sellars excoriates. But there
are two important differences here. First, this direct contact between the
subject and the world does not entail that no conceptual capacities are
drawn on in perceiving objects as part of the world. On the contrary;
perception of any particular object requires the deployment of concep-
tual capacities (at least on McDowell's deﬁnition of 'conceptual' given in
n. 11). The sense one has of each perceived object as belonging to the
world is itself conceptual, on this speciﬁc deﬁnition. So the pre-givenness
of the world has, on at least one understanding of 'conceptual', a con-
ceptual structure, something which the Given supposedly lacks.16
Second, unlike the Given, the subject's sense of the world does not
itself play any epistemic role. In particular, it cannot justify any particu-
lar empirical judgement, since it is compatible with the falsity of any of
them. Even if one were to judge that, contrary to one's previous judge-
ment, a particular item or set of items does not in fact exist, one will
continue to be aware of the world as itself being the very same. Instead
of justifying particular empirical judgements, the pre-givenness of the
world opens the world to us in such a way as to allow us to deploy our
rational powers within it: to test our judgements against perceptual expe-
rience, to move about in order to gain new perceptual experiences, and
so on. Our awareness of the world itself justiﬁes no particular outcome
of any of this activity, as opposed to any other possible outcome. Nor
can it itself be justiﬁed by any such activity. For this reason, it is better
to say that it plays a pre-epistemic role.
A useful analogy here is the relation between possible moves in a
game of chess and the rules of the game. In any particular position in a
game of chess, there will be a number of possible moves available; these
are determined partly by the layout of the pieces, and partly by the rules
of the game which govern the possible moves any piece can make in any
position. The player will select from among these possible moves the
one he or she thinks will best fulﬁl a particular aim (trying to win the
game, or perhaps trying to force a draw). The point this analogy is
designed to highlight is that the rules themselves are not entered into
the player's rational calculation of selecting which move to make. They
play no part in justifying one move as opposed to another.17 Rather, the
possible moves constitute the space within which the player can make
their calculation. The rules of the game help to demarcate this space. In
this way, the rules stand outside of and constrain the relations of justiﬁ-
cation between any particular position and the moves available to the
player.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
512

Similarly, my awareness of the world stands outside of the relations of
justiﬁcation which can hold between my perceptual experience and my
judgments. This awareness of the world cannot itself be adjusted in the
course of my changing my judgements, and does not itself justify my
making any judgement, as opposed to any other. It serves, rather, to
open up the world as that to which my empirical judgements must
answer, by making perceived objects available to me as belonging to the
world as a whole. It is against perceived objects, presented in this way,
that my empirical judgements can be tested and, if incorrect, found
wanting. Therefore, this awareness of the world is not a foundation for
any of my empirical judgements, in the sense of justifying or authorising
them. Rather, it is a condition for the possibility of my judgements being
justiﬁed by what I perceive.
The second worry which I want to address concerns my claim that the
sense of the world is pre-rational. To defend this claim, I must distin-
guish two uses of the predicate 'rational'. In the use of 'rational' by
which our sense of the world is pre-rational, an actualisation of a con-
ceptual capacity counts as rational if and only if the subject can give rea-
sons for actualising it. That is, the subject must be able to provide a
justiﬁcation for this episode, rather than a mere exculpation.18 I assume
that a subject can only justify an episode if the subject could have cho-
sen otherwise; if the episode was under the subject's volitional control.
On this deﬁnition of 'rational', any episode which is not under the
subject's control in this way is not itself a rational actualisation of the
subject's conceptual capacities. It is on this use of 'rational' that I claim
that the sense that a perceived object is part of a wider world is non-
rational. One cannot choose to have the sense of the perceived object as
belonging to a wider world; nor can one justify having experiences with
this sense.
This use of the predicate 'rational' is relatively narrow, and can be
contrasted with a broader use which McDowell often employs. He sug-
gests that perceptual experiences, although they involve a passive actual-
isation of conceptual capacities, nevertheless can be said to belong to
the sphere of the rational. This is because the capacities actualised in
perceptual experience would not be conceptual unless they could be
exercised in 'active thinking, that is, in ways that do provide a good ﬁt
for the idea of spontaneity' (McDowell, 1996a: p. 11). This suggests a
broader use of 'rational' as characterising all of those episodes which
actualise conceptual capacities.
I do not deny that our perceptual awareness of the world falls within
the scope of rationality understood in this way. I am happy to admit that
this awareness has conceptual content, in that it can be taken up in
freely chosen judgements and the like. However, this does not make our
awareness of the world an exercise of spontaneity (that is, a freely
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
513

chosen episode which the subject can justify choosing). And since this
awareness is not itself an exercise of spontaneity, then in a perfectly
good sense (the more narrow use of 'rational', outlined above) it is not
rational.19
My appeal to the sense of the world does not threaten our rational
capabilities, but is an attempt to make clear one of the conditions which
must be in place for us to exercise those capabilities. As the sense of the
world is not itself rational, but is one of the conditions in virtue of which
we can exercise our rational capabilities, it is useful to describe it as
pre-rational. It is easy to misconstrue this claim. For example, it may
be tempting to suggest that the pre-rational sense of the world is a
ground-ﬂoor openness to the world, on which the upper ﬂoors of rational
capacities rest (to use a metaphor from Dreyfus, 2006: p. 48; see also
McDowell, 2007: pp. 344-5). But this way of putting things is misleading
because it carries the suggestion that the ground ﬂoor could be in place
even without the upper stories; that creatures with no rational capabili-
ties could nonetheless have this sense of the world. This possibility is not
implied by the notion of the sense of the world I am defending. On the
contrary, we have reason to think that no creature could have this sense
of the world without having at least some rational capacities. The sense
of the world is an intentional structure of perceptual experiences, and I
agree with McDowell that these experiences actualise capacities of the
right form to be expressed in judgements. On my conception, the sense
of the world comes as part of a package which also includes rational
relations between perceptual experiences and other exercises of concep-
tual capacities. Therefore, I agree that this sense of the world is part of
the way of being which is special to rational animals (McDowell, 2007:
p. 344). Indeed, it may even be that the sense of the world is the crucial
difference between a person's having a world and an animal's living in
an environment (McDowell, 1996a: pp. 115-19). What I want to empha-
sise is that, in an important way, this sense of the world is not itself
rational. It plays a crucial role in supporting the subject's system of
rational capacities, but does not itself feature in this system. This is what
I mean by describing it as pre-rational.
McDowell identiﬁes an important feature of our perception of objects,
namely that we perceive them as belonging to a wider world. He cor-
rectly notes that this feature of perception requires that perceptual expe-
riences be rationally integrated into a network of capacities for adjusting
our empirical judgements. I suggested that this integration does not, in
itself, account for our awareness of the world in perception. To account
for this awareness, I examined perceptual experience, and outlined how
each experience includes an intentional structure, a sense of the world as
a wider reality to which speciﬁc perceived objects belong. This inten-
tional structure is what presents each perceived object as belonging to a
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
514

wider world. Furthermore, it is one of the pre-rational conditions for the
possibility of applying our rational capacities to objects and situations in
the world. Therefore, it is a crucial structure underlying our lives as
rational animals.20
Durham University, United Kingdom
Notes
1 McDowell has already addressed some of the relations between his position
and phenomenology, in his debate with Hubert Dreyfus (Dreyfus, 2006;
McDowell, 2007). However, this paper should not been seen as continuing
that debate, for two reasons. First, my topic is not how phenomenology
relates to McDowell's work in general; rather, I am focusing on the speciﬁc
issue of perceiving objects as belonging to a wider world. This issue is not
explicitly
discussed
in
the
McDowell-Dreyfus
debate.
Second,
Dreyfus
appeals mostly to the existential phenomenology of Heidegger and Merleau-
Ponty, which emphasises the role of embodied coping in our relations with
objects. I am concerned with transcendental phenomenology as developed by
Husserl. This approach does not stand or fall with that of Dreyfus, though
there are interesting links between the two.
2 Mind and World is ostensibly about debates in contemporary epistemology,
but McDowell is careful to situate these debates in the broader context of
discussions of thought and intentionality in general (1996a: p. xiii; see also
1998a: pp. 435-6, 464).
3 In Mind and World, McDowell takes what we perceive to be or at least to
include facts (e.g., 1996a: p. 26). In what follows, I do not assume that we can
only perceive facts, but nor do I assume that we cannot perceive them. I shall
use the term 'object' in a neutral manner, to refer to whatever it is we are
capable of perceiving, be it entities, facts, or items belonging to other catego-
ries. Note that McDowell himself on other occasions discusses perceptual
experiences of objects, in a manner which makes clear that he is not thinking
of objects as necessarily facts (e.g., 1998a: pp. 440-41).
4 It is possible that what McDowell means by 'world' mightn't be precisely the
same as what Husserl means by this term. However, I suggest there is enough
of an overlap to allow Husserl's conception to be usefully brought to bear on
McDowell's (and vice-versa, although I do not do so in this paper). As I shall
outline presently, Husserl uses the term 'world' in the context of discussing
the sense we have of objects as belonging to a wider reality. In principle,
there seems no reason why one could not characterise this wider reality itself
as McDowell does, as the totality of all that is the case (1998b: p. 178). Cer-
tainly, Husserl's phenomenological method itself should not rule this possibil-
ity out (see n. 15 below). Furthermore, even if the word 'object' is taken in a
non-neutral fashion, it is not clear that there is any substantive difference
between a world of objects and the world of facts which McDowell discusses
(see Larmore, 2002: p. 207 n. 11).
5 In saying that two world-views, A and B, are different, I do not wish to sug-
gest that there can be no judgements at all which are common to both A and
B. The difference is that at least one of A or B includes some judgements
which are not common to both.
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
515

6 It is at least arguable that theories such as existence monism (Horgan &
Potrcˇ, 2000) or ontic structural realism (Ladyman and Ross, 2007) would, if
true, entail the abandonment of anything like what we would call a 'physical
entity'.
7 It is worth comparing this criticism to that offered by Michael Friedman.
He argues that a passively received impression can count as a perceptual
experience in McDowell's system only if it is taken as such by the active
exercise of conceptual capacities, and that such experiences cannot, therefore,
serve as a constraint external to our cognition (Friedman, 2002: pp. 34-5).
But Friedman's interpretation is mistaken: while the connection between
experience and 'the reﬂective role of reason' is necessary for perception, 'it
does not explain how neutrally described experiences gain their worldly
content' (Thornton, 2004: p. 216). My criticism does not rely on this interpre-
tation of McDowell's position (cognitive activity taking neutral impressions as
perceptual experiences). I am happy to accept that certain of our passive
impressions are already takings-in, or putative takings-in, of the world. My
point is that I do not think this feature of experiences can be explained by
their connection with the network of cognitive capacities.
8 A more thorough statement of transcendental phenomenology would require
contrasting it with the Kantian method of transcendental deduction (as
opposed to phenomenological descriptions - see Husserl, 1970: pp. 114-18). It
would also require distinguishing between a genuinely transcendental study of
experience and any study which starts from the assumption of the existence
of an objective world (Husserl, 1970: pp. 148-52). However, I am only provid-
ing an outline of transcendental phenomenology which can be compared with
McDowell's therapeutic approach. In this context, I do not think these further
features of transcendental phenomenology are important.
9 He even leaves open the possibility that 'a transcendental constitution of con-
sciousness' might also play a similar role (1996a: p. 155, n. 31). This, of
course, is exactly the possibility I wish to exploit.
10 For the purposes of this paper, I shall set aside those aspects of the inten-
tional content of each experience other than the sense of its object. For more
on this, see Husserl, 1982: x 99.
11 McDowell says something very similar: it is the conceptual content of per-
ceptual experiences which allows them to serve as a basis for our empirical
judgements (1996a: p. 10). A Husserlian might be slow to accept that per-
ceptual experiences can have speciﬁcally conceptual content, but a lot
depends on what is meant by 'conceptual' here. In his more recent work,
McDowell has characterised conceptual content in a broad fashion, as that
content which is present 'in a form in which it already either actually is, or
has the potential to be simply appropriated as, the content of a conceptual
capacity [i.e., a judgement or a linguistic expression]' (2007: p. 348; see also
2009: p. 265). On this deﬁnition at least, the Husserlian can accept that per-
ceptual experiences have conceptual content (compare McDowell's more
recent position with, for example, Shim, 2005: pp. 223-4). Note that this is
not a signiﬁcant concession, since this deﬁnition of conceptual content is
extremely broad, arguably to the point of being vacuous (see Kjosavik,
2004: p. 63).
12 Again, note that I am using 'object' in a broad sense, to include anything of
which we can be aware. The phenomenological descriptions I present in this
section apply equally to our perceptual awareness of facts as well as to our
awareness of objects more narrowly construed.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
516

13 It does not follow from this that transcendental phenomenology involves no
metaphysical commitments. It clearly involves a range of formal ontological
commitments (see Smith, 2007: pp. 294-9). In addition, I take the phenomeno-
logical approach to be committed to various theses about the nature of mental
states, subjectivity, the temporality of conscious experience, and so on.
14 Compare Glendinning's description of Heidegger's conception of the world
as a 'horizon of intelligibility or signiﬁcance' (1998: p. 55). McDowell dis-
cusses Heidegger's conception of the world in his 2007 article. A more
detailed examination of the sense of the world than I can offer here would
focus on the importance of this sense as a necessary background for everyday
activity.
15 There are certainly passages in Husserl where he appears to commit himself
to just this claim (1982: pp. 110; 171, 1960: p. 21). However, I think that such
claims are mistaken. Apart from any other considerations, they would appear
to violate the methodological principle of the phenomenological bracketing,
the abstention from 'any judgement about spatiotemporal factual being'
(1982: p. 61).
16 The distinction between Husserl's general account of perceptual experience
and the Given is drawn by Shim (2005: pp. 223-4) and by Barber (2008: pp.
87-8).
17 In those positions where only one move is permitted by the rules, then the
rules may be said to have helped decide which move is to be played. But they
will not have justiﬁed this move; at most, they will have provided an exculpa-
tion of it (McDowell, 1996a: p. 7).
18 This notion of rationality is thus closely related to Sellars's description of the
space of reasons as the space 'of justifying and being able to justify what one
says' (1997: x 36; see also McDowell, 1998a: p. 434). Note that Sellars does
not deﬁne this space as, for example, 'the space of items to which one can
appeal in justifying what one says'.
19 The same point can be made for perception tout court. In McDowell's
broader sense, perception is rational, but in the narrower sense it is not
rational, since perceptual experiences do not themselves involve exercises of
spontaneity (see Markie, 2005, for a discussion of the issues this raises).
20 I would like to thank audiences at the Durham-Bergen Conference (Durham,
2008), the Irish Philosophical Society's Annual Conference (NUI Galway,
2010) and the Dublin Postgraduate Conference (TCD, 2010) for helpful com-
ments on earlier versions of this paper. I would also like to thank Dawn Phil-
lips, Michael O'Sullivan, Ben Smith and two anonymous readers for reading
and providing invaluable suggestions on earlier drafts.
References
Barber, M. D. (2008) 'Holism and Horizon: Husserl and McDowell on Non-
Conceptual Content', Husserl Studies 24: 79-97.
Crowell, S. G. (2001) Husserl, Heidegger and the Space of Meaning: Paths
towards Transcendental Phenomenology, Evanston: Northwestern University
Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2006) 'Overcoming the Myth of the Mental', Topoi 25: 43-9.
Friedman, M. (2002) 'Exorcising the Philosophical Tradition', in N. H. Smith
(ed.) Reading McDowell: On Mind and World. London and New York: Routl-
edge.
MCDOWELL, PHENOMENOLOGY AND THE AWARENESS OF THE WORLD
517

Glendinning, S. (1998) On Being With Others: Heidegger - Derrida - Wittgen-
stein, London and New York: Routledge.
Horgan, T. and M. Potrcˇ (2000) 'Blobjectivism and Indirect Correspondence',
Facta Philosophica 2: 249-70.
Husserl, E. (1960) Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology,
trans. D. Cairns, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer.
—————— (1970) The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenome-
nology: An Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy, trans. D. Carr,
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
—————— (1982) Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomeno-
logical Philosophy - First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenol-
ogy, trans. F. Kersten, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer.
—————— (1989) Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomeno-
logical Philosophy - Second Book: Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitu-
tion, trans. R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer.
Kjosavik, F. (2004) 'Perceptual Intimacy and Conceptual Inadequacy: A Husser-
lian Critique of McDowell's Internalism', in D. Zahavi, S. Heina¨maa and
H. Ruin (eds.) Metaphysics, Facticity, Interpretation - Phenomenology in the
Nordic Countries, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer.
Ladyman, J., and Ross, D. (with J. Collier and D. Spurrett) (2007) Everything
Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalised, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larmore, C. (2002) 'Attending to Reasons', in N. H. Smith (ed.) Reading
McDowell: On Mind and World, London and New York: Routledge.
Markie, P. (2005) 'The Mystery of Direct Perceptual Justiﬁcation', Philosophical
Studies 126: 347-73.
McDowell, J. H. (1996a) Mind and World (2nd ed.), Cambridge, MA and Lon-
don: Harvard University Press.
—————— (1996b) 'Replies to Gibson, Byrne and Brandom', Philosophical Issues
7: 283-300.
—————— (1998a) 'Having the World in View: Sellars, Kant and Intentionality',
The Journal of Philosophy 95(9): 431-91.
——————. (1998b) Mind, Value, and Reality, Cambridge, MA and London: Har-
vard University Press.
—————— (2002) 'Responses', in N. H. Smith (ed.) Reading McDowell: On Mind
and World. London and New York: Routledge.
—————— (2007) 'What Myth?', Inquiry 50(4): 338-51.
—————— (2009) 'Avoiding the Myth of the Given', in Having the World in View:
Essays on Kant, Hegel and Sellars, Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Mohanty, J. N. (1985) The Possibility of Transcendental Philosophy, Dordrecht/
Boston/Lancaster: Martinus Nijhoff.
Sellars, W. (1997) Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Shim, M. K. (2005) 'The Duality of Non-Conceptual Content in Husserl's Phe-
nomenology of Perception', Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4:
209-29.
Smith, D. W. (2007) Husserl, London and New York: Routledge.
Thornton, T. (2004) John McDowell, Chesham: Acumen.
Zahavi, D. (2003) Husserl's Phenomenology, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
518

