The International Journal of Psychoanalysis
ISSN: 0020-7578 (Print) 1745-8315 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripa20
Receptivity is not passivity: A comparison
between psychoanalysis and phenomenology
concerning experience, judgement and the
analytic attitude
Heinz Weiss
To cite this article: Heinz Weiss (2023) Receptivity is not passivity: A comparison
between psychoanalysis and phenomenology concerning experience, judgement and
the analytic attitude, The International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 104:5, 886-897, DOI:
10.1080/00207578.2023.2255468
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00207578.2023.2255468
Published online: 30 Oct 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 318
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripa20

Receptivity is not passivity: A comparison between
psychoanalysis and phenomenology concerning experience,
judgement and the analytic attitude1
Heinz Weiss
Sigmund-Freud-Institut, Frankfurt a.M., Germany
ABSTRACT
Starting from Edmund Husserl's last book Experience and Judgement,
this paper explores the notions of "passivity" and "receptivity" in
phenomenology and psychoanalysis. Both sciences agree that
receptivity diﬀers from passivity, but they have developed diﬀerent
conceptualizations about the very nature of the rudimentary "ego-
activity" which is the source of receptivity. In phenomenological
terms, "pre-predicative" experience roots in a primary presence
and openness of the ego towards the world, whilst psychoanalysis
has emphasized the role of projective and introjective processes
which are close to bodily experiences and unconscious phantasy.
The second part of the paper draws some conclusions concerning
the analytic situation, in particular the shift among receptivity,
empathy, curiosity and creative imagination as central features of
the analytic attitude from a mainly Kleinian point of view. The
paper argues that receptivity is a ﬁeld where phenomenological
and psychoanalytic approaches can mutually enrich and learn from
each other.
KEYWORDS
Passivity; receptivity;
phenomenology; analytic
attitude
Introduction
Edmund Husserl (1859-1938), the founder of modern phenomenology, and Sigmund
Freud (1956-1939), the founder of psychoanalysis, both lived in Vienna and attended
the philosophical lectures by Franz Brentano at university nearly at the same time. Both
examined the structure of consciousness from diﬀerent angles, but they did not refer
to each other in their later work. Whilst Freud was preoccupied with the unconscious
phantasies underneath the surface of consciousness, Husserl examined the relatedness
of consciousness towards its object. In his late work he approached the area of a "dark
intentionality" which he connects to unconsciousness and the drives. It is in this
context that both researchers, Husserl and Freud, address the problem of activity and pas-
sivity of the ego and its receptiveness towards the world. In this paper the two approaches
are compared and related to each other.
© 2023 Institute of Psychoanalysis
CONTACT Heinz Weiss
heinzweiss3@outlook.de
Sigmund-Freud-Institut, Myliusstrasse 20, D-60323 Frankfurt
a.M., Germany (weiss@sigmund-freud-institut.de)
1This paper is derived from a lecture presented at the 3rd Research Summer School, "Experience and Life. Edmund Hus-
serl's Experience and Judgement in the Light of Phenomenology and Psychoanalysis", at the Polish Academy of Science,
Warsaw, August 2022.
INT J PSYCHOANAL
2023, VOL. 104, NO. 5, 886-897
https://doi.org/10.1080/00207578.2023.2255468

Activity and passivity in psychoanalysis and phenomenology
In his last book Experience and Judgement, Edmund Husserl ([1938] 1973) notes that the
primal activity of the Ego is to take the world in, as it occurs in the act of perception. But it
is interesting that he sees this seemingly passive stance not as something that merely
"happens" or befalls the Ego, but as something that involves a sort of rudimentary activity,
an interest in the world and a readiness "to let something in". He writes in his chapter
about the receptive nature of pre-predicative experience:
The ego turns towards the object [...] the turning ends with the ego being next to the object
and apprehending it by contact. (76)
He continues:
this phenomenologically necessary concept of receptivity is in no way [...] opposed to that of
the activity of the ego [...]. On the contrary, receptivity must be regarded as the lowest level of
activity. The ego consents to what is coming and takes it in. (79)
In psychoanalysis, we use diﬀerent terms for the process of taking something in, like
"introjection", "incorporation" or "identiﬁcation". They all include some kind of activity
on the part of the Ego, but I think, we often have no clear idea about the very nature
of this rudimentary "activity".
The most elementary picture is of course the image of the baby at the breast. The
baby's mouth takes something in: the nipple, the milk and along with them, as Melanie
Klein (1946) has put it, the mother's love and understanding. But even here, whilst the
baby is the recipient, he or she is not passive. He has to suck, to swallow, he may
refuse the milk or even bite the nipple, if she or he is taken over by frustration, anger
or greed. At the same time, there are moments of eye-to-eye contact between the
mother and the infant, moments of seeing and being seen, where the baby also takes in
and receives the mother's gaze.
In his paper on "Negation", Freud (1925b) describes the two fundamental judgements
the primitive Ego has to make as the distinctions between "good" and "bad" and on what
is being experienced as coming from "inside" and from "outside". He emphasizes the
Ego's tendency to greedily take in what is "good" and to expel and get rid of what is
"bad". Through this activity the basic splitting between "good" and "bad" is being
made, which, according to Melanie Klein (1946), is the basis for all later diﬀerentiation
and integration, for judgement and thinking as well as for the experience of space and
time (Weiß 2009; 2020).
It is important to note that Freud depicts another fundamental opposition in mental
life as the opposition between activity and passivity (Freud 1915c, 133-134; 1916-17,
327). Thus, the primitive Ego ﬁnds itself in a permanent oscillation between activity
and passivity, between taking experiences in and pushing other experiences out or, as
one might say, in a permanent oscillation between projective and introjective processes.
Here, it is important to note that introjection is not equated with passivity, but requires
some form of activity to take something in. Referring to the fundamental dichotomy in
Freud's drive theory between activity and passivity, André Green (1999) has made
another distinction, when he diﬀerentiates between passivity that is linked to desire
and "passivation", which is forced upon the subject because of its neediness and
INT J PSYCHOANAL
887

dependency. Furthermore, we have to distinguish "primary" (receptive) passivity from a
"secondary" passivity which is diﬀerent from receptivity and serves defensive purposes
often leadings to states of "psychic retreat" (Steiner 1993).2
This all seems at ﬁrst sight quite far from a classical phenomenological perspective,
which focuses on the intentionality of consciousness. It is striking, however, how much
weight Husserl puts in his last book on the role of aﬀectivity in human experience. He
speaks of the Ego as being "aﬀected", "touched upon" and vividly "interested" towards
the world. He speaks about pre-predicative perception as containing already a primary
knowledge of the world. "Experience" is, therefore, not just a sensual impression
without emotion or meaning; and, on the other hand, there is no phantasy, no imagin-
ation without relation to the world. It was Jean-Paul Sartre (1943) and Maurice
Merleau-Ponty (1945) who further elaborated on these themes, partly referring to psycho-
analytic ideas. However, to some degree, this all is already anticipated in Husserl's Experi-
ence and Judgement.
If we speak of the Ego as being related to the "world" from its very beginnings, the
question arises which "Ego" we mean. Is it the empirical Ego of "lived experience", is it
the reﬂective Ego as the centre of our action and thinking, is it the transcendental Ego
as an a priori category of all apperception and reasoning (Kant [1781] 1968; Fichte
[1794/95] 1992), or is it the "primordial Ego" that Husserl describes in his examination
of "passive synthesis"? Passive synthesis means here that it is not the active Ego that
organizes the unity of our perception, but the perception that presents itself as a unity
to a primordial (pre-reﬂective), receptive Ego.3
From a psychoanalytical point of view, the "Ego" develops from our interaction with
others, from our experience with the world. It constitutes itself by the processes of pro-
jection and introjection in exchange with other human beings: We put parts of ourselves
like "feelers" into the other person and re-introject in a modiﬁed form what has "gone
through" the experience of the Other. This is what has been described as the processes
of "projective" and "introjective identiﬁcation" (see Frank and Weiß 2007), which often
play on a primitive, pre-verbal level with little or only rudimentary symbolization.
There are, again, parallels to this in phenomenological ontology. For Jean-Paul Sartre
([1936] 1992; 1948), the Ego is neither the "home" nor the centre of consciousness, but the
transcendental object of a pre-reﬂective consciousness. In Being and Nothingness (Sartre
1943), he describes the experience of being seen by the Other as fundamental for the con-
stitution of the Ego.
In a similar way, Husserl has examined the primitive, "bodily" ("leiblichen") origins of
experience as the foundations of human intersubjectivity. In his Cartesian Meditations
(Husserl [1929] 1963, 1931, §38, §39) he writes about "active" and "passive synthesis" as
being related to each other, although "receptivity" here seems still to be equated with
a more passive stance. It was on his long journey from "static" to "genetic" phenomenol-
ogy, from "transversal" to "longitudinal intentionality", that Husserl increasingly came to
consider the role of a primordial ego ("Ur"-Ich), which is at the same time constituting as
being constituted by primary, preconscious experience (Ni Yicai 2021). In his recordings,
2I am grateful to Catalina Bronstein who contributed this idea.
3Both the notion of the "Ego" and the notion of "Passivity" have a variety of meanings in the history of philosophy, which
cannot be referred to in the context of this paper. A comprehensive review can be found in the contributions by Herbert
Herring (1976) and Martin Wälde (1989).
888
H. WEISS

collected under the heading Limit Problems of Phenomenology, he speaks about the
drives, unconsciousness and an area of "dark intentionality" (Husserl [1908-1937] 1950;
see also Nakamura 2019), which comes close to psychoanalytic thinking.
In Husserl's phenomenology, the concept of "passivity" has a variety of meanings
(Biceaga 2010; Vameşul 2010), but in the development of his thinking it is increasingly
equated with "receptivity" as a primordial form of activity. In the realm of pre-reﬂexive
experience, activity and passivity are intertwined phenomena. "Attention" is at the
same time "aﬀection", as active interest in the world (De Giovanni 2018). "Memory" can
be active recollection as well as passive "sedimentation". The same accounts for the
periodicity of bodily and emotional experiences insofar as they constitute the experience
of time. Freud has put this into a metapsychological speculation when he says at the end
of his paper on the "Mystic Writing Pad" that the unconscious, via the system Pcpt.-Cs.,
stretches out from time to time "feelers [...] to the external world and hastily withdraws
them as soon as they have sampled the excitations coming from it" (Freud 1925a, 230). He
assumes that this discontinuous method of working "lies at the bottom of the origin of the
concept of time".
Even if we regard this picture as somehow mechanical and philosophically naive, it
oﬀers a vivid imagination about the relationship between activity and passivity: The primi-
tive psychic organization stretching out "feelers" towards the world and taking the
unknown experiences in can be seen as a poetic metaphor for the interrelatedness of
activity and passivity as described by Husserl, who speaks of an "obtrusion" of the
world and an "awakening" of the Ego (Husserl [1938] 1973, 77 −79). This raises the ques-
tion of where the Ego sojourns when it "sleeps" and what happens to the Ego when it
enters the unknown landscapes of "dream life" (Meltzer 1984).
Taking into account these parallels, I will now turn to clinical practice, i.e. to the
relationship between experience and judgement in the analytic consulting room.
Experience and judgement in the analytic situation
As I have tried to show, experience and judgement in the analytic encounter closely link
to the processes of projective and introjective identiﬁcation, i.e. to the exchange of
unconscious phantasies, and the possibility to observe what is going on between the
patient and the analyst. Although Freud (Freud and Breuer 1895d) has characterized psy-
choanalysis as a "talking cure", the meaning that is created in the analytic situation often
reaches beyond the words to emotional experiences, which must be received and experi-
enced before they can gradually be symbolized and understood. Therefore, psychoanaly-
sis can also be understood as a "listening cure"4, if the "listening" comes to stand for the
receptive qualities of the analytic process. Indeed, many aspects that are considered
essential for the analytic situation, like the analysand's "free associations" and the analyst's
"evenly suspended attention" and listening to his "inner experiences" (Green 1993),
require a passive but receptive attitude. Here again, activity and passivity/receptivity
are closely interwoven phenomena.
The same accounts for the concepts of remembering and forgetting. With the concept
of "transference", Freud has conceived a form of unconscious remembering that presents
4Personal communication by John Steiner (London).
INT J PSYCHOANAL
889

itself in the form of "repetition". "Repression" is a form of active and unconscious forget-
ting that goes beyond passive "sedimentation". Finally, the analyst at the receiving end
must open his mind to what resonates from the patient's communications in his
counter-transference.
Thus, although Freud's metapsychology might appear at ﬁrst sight somehow solipsis-
tic, analytic understanding is basically an intersubjective endeavour (Weiß 1988). Already
in his early letters to his Berlin colleague and friend Wilhelm Fließ, Freud expresses his
conviction that it is the "Nebenmensch", the "fellow human being", who is the prerequisite
and unique source for "getting to know" about the world and human understanding
(Freud [1950a] 1985, 331).
I must admit that Husserl's idea of "transcendental intersubjectivity", which he devel-
oped in his work over a length of time - in particular, in the 5th of his "Cartesian Medita-
tions" (Husserl 1931), where he tries to deduce the experience of the "Alien" from the
sphere of the transcendental Ego - seems to me sometimes circuitous and somehow
diﬃcult to understand (see Brudzinska 2013).
Psychoanalysis deals with an unconscious intersubjectvity, with relationships and phan-
tasies that re-surface in the analytic relationship before they become conscious. There is
no experience, no emotion, no perception and no phantasy that does not relate to an
Other and resonate with another person's feelings. The basic assumption of modern psy-
choanalysis that object relations exist from the very beginning of life might ﬁnd a parallel
in the phenomenological concept of "intentionality", i.e. that consciousness is always con-
sciousness of something, i.e. consciousness of an object. Perhaps one could even extend
this parallel to the method of "eidetic reduction" insofar as the analyst, too, puts "all
empirical knowledge (for instance about the patient's past) into parenthesis" to explore
the very nature of the object relation as it presents itself in the transference.
To do so, however, he cannot exclude himself. He has to send out his "feelers" in order
to be receptive for the patient's communications. At this point, I would like to refer to
Melanie Klein's Lectures on Technique from 1936 and her "Clinical Seminars" from 1958,
which have been published and edited recently by John Steiner (2017). Here, in a more
or less open teaching format, she says that analysis cannot be conducted in a "laboratory
atmosphere" (Klein [1936] 2017, 53). On the contrary, she continues, the analyst must be
"fully alive in his feelings" (53). He should make himself available for the patient being
"detached from its subject and at the same time fully absorbed in it", a balance that is
diﬃcult to keep, as she says, and that requires "a good co-operation between diﬀerent
parts of our mind" (30).
I would now like to explore further this equilibrium between involvement and distance,
the shift between receptivity and the ability to observe and understand in the analytic
process.
The meaning of receptivity
Wilfred Bion (1962) and before him already Melanie Klein (1946) and Roger Money-Kyrle
([1956] 1978; [1957] 1978) have described this experience as "containment". Klein, for
instance, writes that the mother "comes to contain the bad parts of the self" (8, italics
mine) and that her "love and understanding [...] can be seen as the infant's stand-by in
overcoming states of disintegration and anxieties of a psychotic nature" (Klein 1946, 10).
890
H. WEISS

Understanding originates from the experience of being understood - a primary
"passive" but receptive experience, to translate it into Husserl's terms. Roger Money-
Kyrle ([1956] 1978; [1957] 1978) has examined in detail the role of the analyst's
counter-transference in taking in, transforming and responding to the projections of
the patient. Bion (1962) conceptualized this process later on in his model of "contain-
ment": The baby projects his raw, unsymbolized experiences (β-elements in Bion's termi-
nology), which are hardly distinguishable from sensory data, into the mother who takes
them in and transforms them into "dream thoughts" as the precursors of symbolic think-
ing. Through an introjective process the baby takes these "digested" emotional experi-
ences in and together with them a capacity for symbolic thinking (in Bion's terms: the
mother's α-function).
Bion's model, which emphasizes the role of maternal "rêverie", may sound unfamiliar to
classical epistemology: Thoughts are not the products of thinking, but thinking results
from the "digestion" of thoughts through the rêverie of another. It also does not
answer the question about the very nature of receptivity, or in Husserl's words, the
capacity of the Ego to feel "attracted", to be "touched upon" and "to let in". It is interest-
ing, however, that Bion uses the term "rêverie" to depict a dreamlike state which is at the
same time active and passive.
If we take a step forward and relate more directly to the situation between the infant
and the parents, it seems signiﬁcant that Klein speaks of the mother's "love and under-
standing". To put it more clearly: There must be a capacity for love or, as John Steiner
(2020) named it, a capacity for generosity, to let experiences in. On the other hand, we
know clinical conditions, which seem incompatible with receptive understanding,
amongst them, in particular, states of hatred, envy, greed, fears of being invaded
and so on (Klein 1958). Roger Money-Kyrle ([1956] 1978, [1957] 1978) has added
another feature, which makes it diﬃcult to take in, namely the dominance of a cruel,
judgemental super-ego, which "knows it all" and does not allow for mistakes. In his
view, "the capacity to tolerate uncertainty" is a basic prerequisite for taking in and
the wish to get to know about the world. Again, I think, there are some parallels to
phenomenological approaches.
Empathy as a prerequisite for understanding
Another feature that Klein mentions in her 1936 lectures is the analyst's capacity for
empathic understanding. That means that he should be able to have an idea about
what the world feels like for the patient, to put himself in his shoes or, as one says in
German, how it feels in the patient's "skin". We could also use Freud's metaphor: to
stretch out our "feelers" with an ability to "draw them back" and to get a "taste" of the
emotional experience of the patient. Again, it is interesting that we use terms like
"shoes", "skin", "taste", "inside" and "outside" to depict the complex movement of
empathic understanding. In psychoanalytic terms, we speak of reversible, attributive, evo-
cative and communicative projective identiﬁcation (see Frank and Weiß 2007), where we
put parts of ourselves into the patient, get close to him, take in his emotional experience
and compare it with our own feelings. It is important that in doing so the identiﬁcation
with the other remains always a partial, reversible and temporary one. That we do not
"fall" into the patient, but retain an ability to keep separate in our understanding. Only
INT J PSYCHOANAL
891

then does empathy not end up in a total identiﬁcation at the cost of observation and
judgement.
In the same vein, Klein has emphasized that not only does the patient put unwanted
parts of his self into the analyst, but that the analyst, too, albeit for diﬀerent reasons, must
be able to put himself into the patient as a part of his empathic understanding. However,
she says, this latter movement is diﬀerent from the patient's projective identiﬁcation:
[The] analyst also projects himself into the patient, up to a point. It is unavoidable if we are to
understand him properly. But, if it is excessive, that process will ruin the analysis. An analyst
who projects too much into the patient cannot distinguish what is going on in the patient
and what is going on in himself.
She concludes:
I project myself into the patient, up to a point, in order to ﬁnd out what is going on in him.
(Klein 1958, 114)
In her view, empathic understanding is based on a balance of projective and introjective
identiﬁcation, which must remain temporary, ﬂuid and open to acknowledge the sepa-
rateness of the other human being.
In his work, Husserl has written a lot about the problem of empathy ("Einfühlung"), i.e. the
human capacity to share another person's feelings (see Flatscher 2013; Mayer 2013).
Empathy widens the concept of intentionality insofar as the other is seen not just as an
object, but as an object that also relates to me and the world or, in other words, as a
subject that harbours feelings that are similar, but not identical to my own feelings. Again,
it remains ambiguous whether "Einfühlung" is an active or passive process, whether we
reach out for the other or whether we are attracted and "touched upon" by the "alien ego".
In analysis, empathy is certainly a basic source of understanding, but it may not oblit-
erate the diﬀerence between myself and the other person. Phenomenologically, we could
say, empathy is not just imitation or inference by analogy, but always bound to an
unknown horizon of otherness. In his work, Emanuel Lévinas (1971; [1979] 1984; 1983)
has worked out this irreducible Otherness in relation to desire, temporality and death.
So, if receptivity describes the process of "being ready" to take new experiences in, to
open up our mind, empathy can be understood as a move towards the other, as an
attempt to ﬁnd out what it feels like inside him. However, in the analytic situation,
these movements are reciprocal, but not symmetrical.
Reciprocity and asymmetry in the analytic situation
Reciprocal, but not symmetrical. What does this mean? First of all, empathic understanding
is not just mirroring the other person's experience. There is an asymmetry between the
bestower and the recipient, between the neediness of the patient and the independence
of the analyst, whose personal life remains largely unknown to the patient. This uneven
distribution of dependency introduces the roughness of reality and interferes with the
illusion of a perfect unity as conceived in the illusion of an ideal relationship between
the baby and the breast. It introduces something that is separate, new and diﬀerent.
For the analytic work is more than just receptivity and empathic understanding. It
introduces a third element, which Klein sees in the wish to explore and to get to know,
892
H. WEISS

i.e. in the analyst's curiosity. The analytic endeavour is neither endless maternal rêverie nor
endless empathic understanding. It aims at a capacity for observation and independent
judgement, perhaps similar to what Husserl calls "predicative judgement".
In his book Seeing and Being Seen, John Steiner (2011) has argued that this diﬀerent
perspective is present from early on. Already when the baby sucks at the mother's
breast, there is also a contact between the infant's eye and the mother's gaze, which intro-
duces the dimension of meaning into this dual relationship. For even though we use the
eye to project ourselves into the Other, seeing and being seen always convey a sense of
separateness and distance.
This diﬀerence becomes even more accentuated if a third party, like a sibling or the
father, enters the scene and interrupts the immediate contact where mother and child
only had eyes for each other. This interruption is painful and may sometimes even be
experienced as traumatic, because it shatters the illusion of a dual symmetry. Therein
lies the deep meaning of the oedipal situation with all its painful feelings of exclusion, jea-
lousy, loss and guilt: the acknowledgement of the "fact of life" (Money-Kyrle [1968] 1978;
[1971] 1978) that the relationship between mother and father is diﬀerent from the
relationship between the mother and the child. In a broader sense, this includes the
acknowledgement of the diﬀerences between the generations and the sexes and
together with it the acknowledgement of ﬁnitude, transience and death.
The capacity to tolerate asymmetry is, therefore, the precondition for observation and
judgement or, in other words, for the acceptance of reality.
The regaining of an observing stance
In the analytic encounter, this means that the analyst from time to time should be able to
extricate himself from the identiﬁcation with the patient. For this reason, he must step
back and open his mind to regain a capacity to observe what is going on between the
patient and himself. Klein describes this movement as "disengagement" and "reinte-
gration": Disengagement from the empathic identiﬁcation with the patient and reinte-
gration of the analyst as a separate person. She emphasizes that the temporary
identiﬁcation of the analyst with the patient is necessary and unavoidable in the move-
ment towards understanding. But she adds: "[...] the question of re-integration is extre-
mely important, to take back suﬃciently to think, 'Now I understand what is going on in
the patient' and 'Now I am myself again'" (Klein 1958, 115).
InKlein'sunderstanding, the"disengagement", "disidentiﬁcation" and"re-integration" are
active steps on the part of the analyst who must, up to a point, be capable of saying "No" to
the patient's projections and tearing himself out of the identiﬁcation with him. I do not know
how one could conceptualize this in Husserl's terms, but perhaps it is somehow similar to the
shift from the relative passivity of pre-predicative perception to predicative judgement.
I am also not sure whether one could ﬁnd a parallel in Husserl's theory of "transcenden-
tal intersubjectivity" to the "third position" of the Oedipus complex. In psychoanalysis,
however, it is exactly this "third position" that allows for observation, judgement and
active understanding. Thus, if the analyst's receptivity comes to stand for the maternal
capacity for containment and for the infant's wish to be understood, his return to an
observing stance represents the paternal position of active understanding, where he is
at the same time close to the child and distant from him in his relation with the mother.
INT J PSYCHOANAL
893

In his recent book Illusion, Disillusionment and Irony in Psychoanalysis, John Steiner (2020)
underlines this oscillation between the two positions. Referring to Kant's ([1781] 1968)
famous quote, we might say, therefore, that empathy without observation remains "blind",
whereasobservationwithoutempathyremains"empty",i.e.entrenchedindetachedjudgement.
To overcome this antagonism, the aim of the psychoanalytic process is to link empathy with
active understanding or, in Husserl's words, to link experience with judgement. It is for that
reason that repeated cycles of empathy and observation are necessary to deepen our
understanding.
Creative imagination and curiosity
In her seminars and lectures, Klein has identiﬁed this third element with the human wish
to know, i.e. with the passionate aspiration to explore the internal and external world -
with the "desire for knowledge", in Husserl's words. This is why analysis cannot be con-
ducted in a laboratory atmosphere, as Klein says. It is a search for truth with emotion
and meaning in which both patient and analyst are involved in a reciprocal, but not sym-
metrical, relationship.
This goes beyond receptive experience, as Husserl reminds us:
The interest in perception, which guides receptive experience, is only the forestage of the inter-
est in cognition in the proper sense [...]. In genuine cognitive interest [...], a voluntary partici-
pation of the ego is in play: the ego wishes to know the object, to pin it down once and for all.
(Husserl [1938] 1973], 197-198)
Even if we have some doubts about the pinning down "once and for all", the quest for
knowledge is an active and to some degree even heroic endeavour. "The ego wishes to
know the object", but on its journey it must face ambiguity and anxiety.
It is the capacity to wait, to tolerate insecurity and to go through temporary states of
chaos and disintegration, that is part of the analytic search for truth. Roger Money-Kyrle
puts this as follows: "Uncertainty and ignorance are not the same as error. But perhaps a
prime cause of error, in analysis as in other ﬁelds, is intolerance of ignorance" (Money-
Kyrle [1957] 1978, 348).
With his remark, Money-Kyrle recalls the peculiar status of psychoanalytic inquiry. It
aims, as diﬀerent from Husserl's predicative judgement (Husserl [1938] 1973, §48), not
at the possession of the object, but at a growing integration through the linking of
disparate, hitherto unconnected elements. As opposed to Husserl's understanding
of "knowledge" as a creation and possession by the ego (Husserl [1938] 1973, §47),
analytic understanding is always linked to the intersubjective process that constitutes
meaning as a presence in absence. An analytic interpretation is neither mere
subjective reasoning (δόξα) nor objective knowledge. It is the exploration of an
unknown meaning as it evolves in the analytic relationship. To give an interpretation
demands, therefore, some courage and audacity on the part of the analyst. Because of
the imponderability and power of the unconscious he has to face a degree of anxiety
to go this step.
As Klein says:
If the unconscious is felt to be of a threatening nature and the anxieties and aggression of the
patient are felt dangerous both to the patient as to the analyst, then the analyst, in giving an
894
H. WEISS

interpretation, may feel as if had set a stone rolling and did not know how far it will go. (Klein
[1936] 2017, 56)
Apart from the uncertainty both have to face, we have to consider that the analyst's
attempt to enter the patient's mind is to some extent also an omnipotent endeavour.
To do so he has to combine observation with curiosity in a somehow heroic spirit of dis-
covery (Steiner 2020, 60-72). This includes his readiness to face disillusionment, to explore
new links and to step back from what he presumes to know. We can only hope that his
judgement is based on experience - experience with himself as well as experience with
other patients. This enables him to avoid the danger of overvaluing his ideas, to orient
himself alongside the reactions of the patient and to take into account diﬀerent and
sometimes even conﬂicting or contradictory points of view.
As Klein explains in her Lectures on Technique, an interpretation is neither a frighten-
ing attack nor a magical healing, albeit it sometimes may be experienced as such by
the patient (Klein [1936] 2017, 56). And it is, in particular, not a judgement emanating
from a cruel super-ego that "knows it all" and demands faith and submission. If it is
likely to promote psychic development, it can be characterized as "creative imagin-
ation", which links a maternal-receptive with a paternal-explorative attitude on the
part of the analyst.
Husserl also states that pre-predicative experience and predicative judgement are
always interwoven (Husserl [1938] 1973, §47), but for him there seems to be some
sort of hierarchy concerning the higher levels of knowledge and diﬀerentiation in pre-
dicative judgement. The analytic inquiry, however, is more like an oscillating movement
in the passionate search for truth in the transference-situation (Blass 2021).
Conclusion: the shift between receptivity, empathy and curiosity as a
central feature of the analytic attitude
I have tried to show how the shifting between a receptive and an active-explorative atti-
tude is a precondition to make proper judgement in the analytic situation. Again, we feel
reminded of Husserl's Experience and Judgement: Receptive experience is not merely
passive, and judgement is only meaningful if it refers to primary receptive experience.
The term "sympathetic imagination", which Steiner (2020, 103) borrows from Bate's
(1945) discussion of romantic literature, goes beyond experience and judgement. It
links receptivity with judgement and curiosity. It is, from a psychoanalytical point of
view, a metaphor for the maternal and paternal positions coming together, recognizing
their otherness and diﬀerence to create new life - new thoughts and imaginations that
were hitherto unknown. This is closely linked to the transition from concrete to symbolic
thinking, to the exploration of the unknown, the anticipation of new ideas and the adven-
ture of thinking - a transition that has been examined by Hanna Segal (1957; 1991; 1994)
from a psychoanalytical and by Paul Ricoeur (1969) from a hermeneutic-phenomenologi-
cal point of view.
It seems likely that the examination of creativity, i.e. the transition from intuitive to
conceptual understanding, opens up a ﬁeld for research for both sciences, clinical psy-
choanalysis and genetic phenomenology. Of course, "intuition" is another interesting
theme at this point, from a psychoanalytical as well as from a phenomenological
INT J PSYCHOANAL
895

perspective (Levinas 1930). However, examining this would go beyond the intention of
this paper.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
References
Bate, W. J. 1945. "The Sympathetic Imagination in Eighteenth-Century English Literature." ELH 12 (2):
144-164. https://doi.org/10.2307/2871777
Biceaga, V. 2010. The Concept of Passivity in Husserl's Phenomenology. London, New York: Springer.
Bion, W. R. 1962. Learning from Experience. London: Heinemann.
Blass, R. 2021. "Die Bedeutung des Wiederholungszwangs beim Narzissmus und bei der
Aufopferungsbereitschaft.
Eine
Freudianisch-Kleinianische
Reﬂexion
über
die
Liebe
des
Menschen zum Anderen." In Wiederholung und Wiederholungszwang. Neuere psychoanalytische
Ansätze, edited by E. Horn, and H. Weiß, 39-62. Frankfurt a.M.: Brandes & Apsel 2021.
Brudzinska, J. 2013. "Mitvollzug und Fremdverstehen: Zur Phänomenologie und Psychoanalyse der
Teilnehmenden Erfahrung." Phänomenologische Forschungen 1 (1): 45-76. https://doi.org/10.
28937/1000107791.
De Giovanni, L. 2018. "Husserl on Intentionality and Attention. from the Logical Investigations to
Genetic Phenomenology." Phänomenologische Forschungen 1: 99-116.
Fichte, J. G. (1794-1795) 1992. Grundlagen der gesamten Wissenschaftslehre. Hamburg: Meiner.
Flatscher, M. 2013. "Grenzen der Einfühlung. Zum Problem der Alterität bei Husserl und Lévinas." In
Grenzen der Einfühlung, edited by Th. Breyer, 183-213. München: Fink.
Frank, C., and H. Weiß, eds. 2007. Projektive Identiﬁzierung. Ein Schlüsselkonzept der psychoanaly-
tischen Therapie. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Freud, S. 1915c. "Instincts and Their Vicissitudes." S.E. 14: 109-140.
Freud, S. 1916-1917. "Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis." S.E. 16.
Freud, S. 1925a. "A Note upon the Mystic Writing pad." S.E. 19: 227-232.
Freud, S. 1925b. "Negation." S.E 19: 233-240.
Freud, S. (1950a) 1895. "Project for a Scientiﬁc Psychology." S.E. 1: 281-391.
Freud, S., and J. Breuer. 1895d. "Studies on Hysteria." S.E 2.
Green, A. 1993. "Two Discussions of ,the Inner Experiences oft he Analyst' an a Response from
Theodore Jacobs." International Journal of Psychoanalysis 74: 1131-1136.
Green, A. 1999. "Passivité - passivation: jouissance and détresse." Revue Francaise de Psychanalyse 63
(3): 1587-1600. https://doi.org/10.3917/rfp.g1999.63n3.1587.
Herring, H. 1976. "Ich." In Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie, Bd. 4, edited by J. Ritter, and K.
Gründer, 3-6. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Husserl, E. (1908-1937) 1950. "Grenzprobleme der Phänomenologie: Analyse des Unbewussten und
der Instinkte. Metaphysik. Späte Ethik (Texte aus dem Nachlass)." In Edmund Husserl, Gesammelte
Werke (G.W.), Bd. 42, edited by R. Sowa and Th. Vongehr. Haag: Martinus Nijhoﬀ.
Husserl, E. (1929) 1963. "Pariser Vorträge." In Edmund Husserl, Gesammelte Werke (G.W.), edited by S.
Strasser, 1-41. Haag: Martinus Nijhoﬀ.
Husserl, E. 1931. Cartesianische Meditationen. G.W. Bd. 3: 43-185.
Husserl, E. (1938) 1973. "Erfahrung und Urteil. Studien zur Genealogie der Logik." In Hamburg:
Claasen & Goverts 1948 (Engl. Experience and Judgement. Investigations in a Genealogy of Logic),
edited by L. Landgrebe. Evanston: Northern University Press.
Kant, I. (1781) 1968. "Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Erstes Buch." In Werkausgabe, edited by W.
Weischedel, Bd. III. Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp.
Klein, M. (1936) 2017. Lectures on Technique, edited by J. Steiner. London, New York: Routledge.
Klein, M. 1946. "Bemerkungen über Einige Schizoide Mechanismen." Ges. Schr., Bd III: 1-41.
896
H. WEISS

Klein, M. 1958. "Seminars on Technique." In Lectures on Technique by Melanie Klein, edited by J.
Steiner, 95-117. London, New York: Routledge.
Levinas, E. 1930. Théorie de l'Intuition dans la Phénoménologie de Husserl. Paris: Vrin.
Lévinas, E. 1971. Totalité et Inﬁni. Esai sur l'Extériorité. La Haye: Martinus Nijhoﬀ.
Lévinas, E. (1979) 1984. Die Zeit und der Andere. Hamburg: Felix Meiner.
Lévinas, E. 1983. Die Spur des Anderen. Untersuchungen zur Phänomenologie und Sozialphilosophie.
Freiburg i. Br.: Alber.
Mayer, V. 2013. "Husserls Beitrag zur Empathie-Debatte." History of Philosophy & Logical Analysis 16
(1): 220-243. https://doi.org/10.30965/26664275-01601010.
Meltzer, D. 1984. Dream Life: A Re-Examination of the Psychoanalytic Theory and Technique. London:
Karnac.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1945. Phénoménologie de la Perception. Paris: Gallimard.
Money-Kyrle, R. (1956) 1978. "Normal Countertransference and Some of its Deviations." In The
Collected Papers of Roger Money-Kyrle, edited by D. Meltzer, and E. O'Shaughnessy, 330-342.
Strath Tay, Pertshire: Clunie Press.
Money-Kyrle, R. (1957) 1978. "The Process of Psychoanalytical Inference." In The Collected Papers of
Roger Money-Kyrle, edited by D. Meltzer, and E. O'Shaughnessy, 343-352. Strath Tay, Pertshire:
Clunie Press.
Money-Kyrle, R. (1968) 1978. "Cognitive Development." In The Collected Papers of Roger Money-Kyrle,
edited by D. Meltzer, and E. O'Shaughnessy, 416-433. Strath Tay, Pertshire: Clunie Press.
Money-Kyrle, R. (1971) 1978. "The aim of Psychoanalysis." In The Collected Papers of Roger Money-
Kyrle, edited by D. Meltzer, and E. O'Shaughnessy, 442-449. Strath Tay, Pertshire: Clunie Press.
Nakamura, T. 2019. "Die Phänomenologie des Unbewussten als Grenzproblem bei Husserl."
Phänomenologische Forschungen 1 (1): 99-115. https://doi.org/10.28937/1000108307.
Ricoeur, P. 1969. Le Conﬂit des Interprétations. Essais d'Herméneutique. Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Sartre, J.-P. (1936) 1992. La Transcendance de L'Ego. Paris: Vrin.
Sartre, J.-P. 1943. L'Etre et le Nèant. Essai d'Ontologie Phénoménologique. Paris: Gallimard.
Sartre, J.-P. 1948. Conscience de Soi et Connaissance de Soi. Paris: Armand Collin.
Segal, H. 1957. "Notes on Symbol Formation." Int. J. Psycho-Anal 38: 391-397.
Segal, H. 1991. Dream Phantasy and Art. London, New York: Routledge.
Segal, H. 1994. "Phantasy and Reality." Int. J. Psycho-Anal 75: 391-401.
Steiner, J. 1993. Psychic Retreats. Pathological Organizations of the Personality in Psychotic, Neurotic
and Borderline Patients. London, New York: Routledge.
Steiner, J. 2011. Seeing and Being Seen. Emerging from a Psychic Retreat. London, New York:
Routledge.
Steiner, J, ed. 2017. Lectures on Technique by Melanie Klein. London, New York.
Steiner, J. 2020. Illusion, Disillusion and Irony in Psychoanalysis. London, New York: Routledge.
Vameşul, G. 2010. "The Broader Horizon of Passivity in Husserl's Phenomenology." Meta: Research in
Hermeneutics, Phenomenology, and Practical Philosophy. II 2: 574-580.
Wälde, M. 1989. "Passivität, Passive Synthesis." In Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie, edited by
J. Ritter, and K. Gründer, Bd. 7, 164-168. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Weiß, H. 1988. Der Andere in der Übertragung. Untersuchung über die analytische Situation und die
Intersubjektvität in der Psychoanalyse. Stutgart, Bad Cannstatt: Frommann-Holzboog.
Weiß, H. 2009. Das Labyrinth der Borderline-Kommunikation. Klinische Zugänge zum Erleben von Raum
und Zeit. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta.
Weiss, H. 2020. Trauma, Guilt and Reparation. The Path from Impasse to Development. London,
New York: Routledge.
Yicai, Ni. 2021. "Schelling and Husserl on the concept of passive synthesis." Phänomenologische
Forschungen 1: 188-206.
INT J PSYCHOANAL
897

