Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
A Phenomenology of Limits: On the Decolonzing
Reduction as a Method of Critical Phenomenology
Martina Ferrari
To cite this article: Martina Ferrari (2025) A Phenomenology of Limits: On the Decolonzing
Reduction as a Method of Critical Phenomenology, Journal of the British Society for
Phenomenology, 56:4, 279-297, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2025.2529799
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2025.2529799
Published online: 11 Aug 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 87
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

A Phenomenology of Limits: On the Decolonzing Reduction 
as a Method of Critical Phenomenology
Martina Ferrari
Philosophy Department, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA
ABSTRACT  
In this article, I investigate the limits of a phenomenology of 
consciousness as generative of a radicalized phenomenological 
method capable of bearing its relationship with coloniality. I call this 
method "decolonizing reduction." The contribution of this article is 
thus twofold. First, it contributes to conversations about the 
method of critical phenomenology, arguing that the normative goal 
of critique of critical phenomenology is achieved via a radicalization 
of the phenomenological method, not its abandonment. Second, it 
contributes to the development of a distinctive method for critical 
phenomenology capable not only of investigating historical and 
contingent conditions of possibility of experience, but of carrying 
out descriptions at the site of colonial violence. By engaging with 
the colonial limits of the phenomenological reduction, the 
decolonizing reduction disrupts the world as we know it and 
generates alternative conditions of experience.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 26 March 2024 
Accepted 1 July 2025  
KEYWORDS  
Critical phenomenology; 
phenomenological method; 
decolonizing reduction; 
passivity; limits; Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty
How could we re-imagine the epoché, not as suspension of belief in the existence of the 
world, but as a disruption of the world as we know it, and of the racist-colonial natural atti­
tude that sustains it?
- Lisa Guenther, "Abolishing the World"1
If rather than exclusively attending to the structures of the (non-) experience of trauma (of 
its latency and compulsive repetition), we attend to the ways in which this experience finds 
its own modes of expression and communicability, we would have to say ... that attempts to 
listen to testimonies in such contexts encounter the paradoxical combination of an absence 
and an excess of sense.
— Acosta López, "Gramáticas"2
This article is intended to contribute to recent debates about the method of phenomen­
ology, particularly with respect to how the method of critical phenomenology radicalizes 
that of classical phenomenology.3 By "critical" phenomenology I mean a modality of 
© 2025 The British Society for Phenomenology 
CONTACT  Martina Ferrari 
martina.ferrari@villanova.edu
Philosophy Department, Villanova University, SAC 108, 
800 Lancaster Ave, Villanova, PA 19085
1 Guenther, "Abolishing the World", 39.
2 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 210.
3 Al-Saji, "Too Late," "Frantz Fanon", "A Debilitating Colonial Duration"; Aldea, Carr, and Heinämaa, Phenomenology as 
Critique; Guenther, "Six Senses"; Mann, "The Difference"; Oksala, "The Method"; Pons, Krema, and Oksala, Phenomen­
ology and Critique.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
2025, VOL. 56, NO. 4, 279-297 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2025.2529799

conducting phenomenological investigations premised on, first, the recognition of the 
co-institution of subject and world and, second, a re-orientation of the inquiry toward 
the political dimensions of that intertwining. The institution of meaning, critical phe­
nomenologists argue, exceeds the purview of a constituting consciousness, being funda­
mentally indebted to historical and social institutions. This means, first, that subjects give 
sense to what appears in response to a solicitation from the sensible world, a call or orien­
tation of a transcendental field of which both the world and the subject are not only part, 
but expressions. Second, this also means that the conditions of meaning are not deemed 
to be necessary and universal, but contingent to the historical, social, and material 
context of their emergence.4 Adopting a term put forth by Lisa Guenther, many critical 
phenomenologists refer to these conditions as "quasi-transcendental".5
While critical phenomenology's starting point regarding the co-institution of subject 
and world is shared by thinkers in the phenomenological canon like Edmund Husserl 
and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, critical phenomenology departs from its canonical descrip­
tive scope by taking on a normative disposition usually distinctive of social critique.6 The 
task of critical phenomenology thus becomes one of critique, wherein "critique" is under­
stood not merely as a description of phenomena and their normative underbelly 
(minimal sense of critique), but as a commitment to "praxes of freedom" that strive to 
challenge structures that wrongfully limit or foreclose horizons of possibility, meaning, 
and action (maximal sense of critique).7 In this article, I take a middle stance vis-à-vis 
the minimal and maximal positions: Following Merleau-Ponty, I take critical phenomen­
ology to be normative in the double sense of, first, acknowledging the sens (meaning and 
orientation) instituted, albeit latently, in the sensible and cultural world. Given the inher­
ence of sens and of the subject in the world that reflexive consciousness seeks to make 
explicit, this means that critique is never finally accomplished, but always in process. 
Second, critical phenomenology is normative in the sense of tracking instances in 
4 Guenther, "Critical Phenomenology", "Six Senses", "Abolishing the World".
5 In an influential article, Lisa Guenther explains that while quasi-transcendental structures are "not a priori in the sense 
of being absolutely prior to experience and operating the same way regardless of context, [...] they do play a consti­
tutive role in shaping the meaning and manner of our experience" ("Critical Phenomenology", 5). In her work and in 
that of other critical phenomenologists, the term "quasi-transcendental" is meant to emphasize the historico-political 
nature of conditions of possibility and, thus, bring attention to the ways in which social, political, and historical for­
mations condition not only the modality of appearance of phenomena, but also the structures of consciousness that 
make the appearing possible in the first place. While, in this paper, I use the term "transcendental" to talk about struc­
tures of experience, my understanding of conditions of possibility of experience is that they are fundamentally con­
tingent and historical. As such, one could call them "quasi-transcendental". This understanding is derived from Maurice 
Merleau-Ponty's own articulation of conditions of possibility in terms of a transcendental field. I will return to such 
discussion in more detail in Part I in the context of my treatment of Merleau-Ponty's ontology of secondary passivity 
and the method of hyper-reflection it calls for. For now, it suffices to know that, on Merleau-Ponty's account, as his­
torical and contingent, transcendental conditions of possibility are not separable from and concretize through sensible 
phenomena. In turn, this means that conditions of possibility are always in the midst of being accomplished, affected 
by the eventuation of being and never fully graspable by objective thought.
6 In recent publications on phenomenology and method, scholars have challenged this fundamental insight, arguing 
that critical phenomenology deploys the same method as "classical" phenomenology, that is, that the latter's 
method was always already critical without any added fiat (Aldea, "Husserlian Phenomenology"; Heinämaa, "On 
the Transcendental"; Rodemeyer, "A Phenomenological Critique"). For a discussion of how "classical" phenomenology 
may be critical yet deploy a different sense of critique than critical phenomenology, see Guenther, "Six Senses".
7 Guenther, "Six Senses", 17. In "Six Senses", Guenther notes that the critique at stake in critical phenomenology is more 
interested in "response and response-ability than in definitive answers or solutions. As such, its aim is not to put an 
issue to rest, but rather to (re)open horizons of indeterminacy, possibility, and becoming-otherwise" (9). This position is 
echoed by Alia Al-Saji in "Frantz Fanon", where she argues that the normative task of an anticolonial phenomenology 
entails a political project that upends cultural and socio-political colonial institutions.
280 
M. FERRARI

which socio-political institutions entail the abortion and crystallization of otherwise gen­
erative and dynamic horizons of possibility for marginalized subjects. In light of this nor­
mative goal, in the passage cited in the epigraph, Guenther inquires after the method of 
critical phenomenology beyond description: "How could we re-imagine the epoché, not 
as suspension of naïve beliefs about the existence of the world, but as a disruption of the 
world as we know it, and of the racist-colonial natural attitude that sustains it?"8
In this article, as I turn to matters of method, I am oriented by Guenther's question. 
Specifically, I am interested in the limits of a phenomenology of consciousness as genera­
tive of a radicalized phenomenological method capable of bearing its relationship with 
coloniality. I call this method "decolonizing reduction". The contribution of this 
article is thus twofold. First, I contribute to the conversation on the method of critical 
phenomenology, arguing that the normative goal of critique of critical phenomenology 
is achieved via a radicalization or deepening of the phenomenological method, not its 
abandonment in favour of post-phenomenology or other kinds of social critique.9 The 
decolonizing reduction, I propose, heeds to the methodological implications of the 
first premise grounding critical phenomenology mentioned above (i.e. the recognition 
of the co-institution of subject and world): taking to heart Merleau-Ponty's remarkable 
observation that the reduction cannot be completed, it commits to a method of hyper- 
reflection, i.e. to a transcendental inquiry aimed at making explicit our ontological 
pre-understanding of the world and its constitutive conditions - of making visible the 
structures that are constitutive of the sense of normal in our lifeworld - while remaining 
acutely aware of the historical and cultural nature of these conditions of possibility. The 
decolonizing reduction heeds also to the second, political premise (and its twofold prax­
ical implications): reaching beyond the classical purview of "exposing the subjective 
genesis of meaning", it tracks the historico-political genesis of meaning (the historical 
and cultural structures that condition meaning), committing itself to a struggle for liber­
ation from oppressive structures.10 Thus, the decolonizing reduction is pivotal to phe­
nomenology's effort to not only describe transcendental conditions of experience, but 
also denaturalize them.
The second intervention of this article is narrower in scope, pushing critical phenom­
enology to contend with its own limitations. Contextualizing the question of a method of 
critical phenomenology within the historical formation of coloniality is pivotal in bring­
ing into relief such limitations and the methodological deepening that a critical phenom­
enology needs to undergo to be decolonizing. As anticipated, central to my claim is that, 
more than the application of the epoché in a colonial context, the decolonizing reduction 
8 Guenther, "Abolishing the World", 39.
9 By "normativity" I broadly mean the norms, values, and assumptions that affect and shape conditions of possibility. 
More specifically, when I speak of the "normative" dimension of the decolonizing reduction I mean that the decoloniz­
ing reduction carries out descriptions of phenomena - or, better yet, of their (present) absence, of their shadows - to 
intentionally identify those norms, values, and assumptions that render life untenable for subjects who do not enjoy 
the privilege of being at-home-in-the-world. The peculiar modality of givenness of these phenomena poses challenges 
to phenomenology's canonical method of description, calling for a revised method, as I argue. Insofar as the issue of 
normativity is concerned, my position slightly differs from Guenther's, Al-Saji's, and Maldonado-Torres's, who see 
"praxes of freedom" as a necessary dimension of critical phenomenology. On my account, the decolonizing reduction 
is a praxis of freedom to the extent that it reveals the contingency of otherwise assumed necessary conditions of possi­
bility, but not insofar as it entails concrete, transformative practices of political resistance. This is to say that although 
practices of resistance may be called for, I do not take them (as a robust normative end) to be necessary to the phe­
nomenological method.
10 Al-Saji, "Frantz Fanon"; Guenther, "Critical Phenomenology", 16.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
281

is a radicalization of the phenomenological method, a deepening borne from a critical 
engagement with the limits of the phenomenological method itself. If, as decolonial scho­
lars have noted and I will discuss in this article, coloniality is a form of assault not only on 
the materiality of life but on the conditions of production of sense that make life legible, 
the epoché falls short at bracketing colonial ontological commitments that shape con­
ditions of possibility of experience deemed transcendental.11 This is not only because 
the very consciousness which must put naïve assumptions out of play has been instituted 
by the prejudices it seeks to neutralize12; it is also because colonial violence undermines 
the very structures of experience that would make these experiences audible and 
intelligible in the wake of coloniality.13 That is, experiences of colonial trauma that 
would bring into relief normative ontological assumptions and schemas constitutive of 
colonial experiences fail to register as experiences in the first place. It is my contention 
that, by engaging with the limits vis-à-vis audibility and intelligibility of the phenomen­
ological reduction, the decolonizing reduction generates alternative conditions of experi­
ence or, as Maria Acosta López calls them, "grammars of listening".14 The decolonizing 
reduction is thus a method that does not call for describing experiences directly, in the 
presence of their appearing. Rather, it requires attending to what Merleau-Ponty calls 
"secondary passivity", that is, the openness and putative absences of meaning of phenom­
ena as revealing of normative colonial ontological schemas and life otherwise.15 Impor­
tantly, via this secondary passivity the epoché no longer functions merely as suspension of 
belief in the existence of the world, but as a disruption of the world as we know it, 
including the denaturalization of the racist-colonial natural attitude that sustains it.
In parts I and II of the paper, I situate the present inquiry within a discussion of the 
limits of a phenomenology of consciousness in respect to both any inquiry into sense 
making beyond subjective constitution and the naturalization of coloniality at the 
empirical and transcendental levels. In part III, I introduce the decolonizing reduction 
as a tool that, I argue, radicalizes the phenomenological method by investigating the con­
ditions of possibility of critical, decolonial phenomenology. To bring into relief notable 
features of a critical, decolonial phenomenological method, I turn to Frantz Fanon's 
work. Through an engagement with the methodological "failures" Fanon describes in 
chapter five of Black Skin, White Masks and a phenomenology of listening that attunes 
to the materiality of voice - instead of its propositional content - that Fanon puts 
forth in "This is the Voice of Algeria", I show how secondary passivity is key to bringing 
into view (without making epistemologically transparent) the "residues or reminders that 
are not 'exactly adjusted' to consciousness".16 This approach makes it possible to, first, 
identify and challenge taken for granted norms (that there are failures in the first 
place is due to these unquestioned norms) and, second, start tracking their operations 
at the ontological level (that these failures often remain mute, unable to articulate them­
selves within the instituted fields of sense, points to the operation of coloniality at the 
ontological level). The decolonizing reduction, then, works at those limits to make 
11 Acosta López, "Gramáticas"; Gordon, "Shifting the Geography"; Maldonado-Torres, "Frantz Fanon and the Decolonial 
Turn".
12 Mann, "The Difference"; Oksala, "The Method".
13 Acosta López, "Gramáticas".
14 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 214.
15 Merleau-Ponty, Visible, 173.
16 Toadvine, "Phenomenology", 27.
282 
M. FERRARI

visible phenomenology's and transcendental structures' latent content, their colonial 
shadow. At those limits, it grounds the phenomenological project anew by asking, 
how is the phenomenological attitude, which takes for granted coloniality as racist/ 
imperial Manichean misanthropic scepticism, possible? What are the mechanisms, at 
the transcendental level, whereby coloniality is naturalized?
Part I - On the Limits of a Phenomenology of Consciousness
Although debates about the relationship between critical phenomenology and classical 
phenomenology are far from settled, the indebtedness of the former to the latter is 
without question. For the scope of the present inquiry into a method of critical phenom­
enology capable of attending to the "appearing" of phenomena at the site of colonial 
trauma, two figures from the tradition stand out as especially formative for the critical 
project of phenomenology: Maurice Merleau-Ponty and Frantz Fanon. While I will 
return to the latter in part III, I begin this article by grappling with some of the methodo­
logical insights offered by the former. As early as the Preface of the Phenomenology of 
Perception, Merleau-Ponty notes that the fact that the "subject is destined to the 
world" and that this world is "always 'already there'", prior to any analysis or act of con­
sciousness, marks the limit of a phenomenology of consciousness.17 Arguably, this 
insight not only anticipates one of the guiding concerns of much of the second half of 
the twentieth century French philosophy; it also inaugurates, albeit deferredly, what 
we today call critical phenomenology.
As a transcendental project, phenomenology suspends the natural attitude to gain the 
critical distance vis-à-vis the world necessary to account for the conditions of possibility 
of experience, which, as David Carr reminds us, are nothing else but the conditions for 
the natural attitude itself.18 It is through the epoché, i.e. the bracketing of our everyday 
modalities of uncritical understanding of the world (including the naïve assumption 
that a world exists apart from consciousness), that the distance required for a transcen­
dental investigation into the constitutive conditions of experience is achieved. Yet, the 
fact that the subject knows herself in the world means not only that this return to the 
things themselves is different from an idealist return to (transcendental) consciousness, 
but also that the latter is impossible. The world is neither to be "constructed nor consti­
tuted", and it does not stand, in front of consciousness, spread out in "absolute transpar­
ency".19 Rather, the reduction reveals a world in its "unmotivated springing forth"20: as 
reflection steps back, it catches glimpses of a transcendent world that remains opaque to 
consciousness. This is what Merleau-Ponty calls the "being-at-a-distance of the per­
ceived": sensible appearance is conditioned by an irreducible gap (from both the percei­
ver and the background from which it emerges), a dehiscence that accounts for the 
impossibility of grasping phenomena without residue or reminder.21 At its limit, then, 
a phenomenology of consciousness discovers the paradoxical combination of a world 
17 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology, lxxiv, lxx.
18 Carr, "On the Functions", 12.
19 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology, lxxiii, lxxiv.
20 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology, lxxvii.
21 Merleau-Ponty, Manuscripts 8.2, fol. 72b. In his later, ontological turn, Merleau-Ponty will thematize this gap in terms of 
the écart, an operation central to the movement of being understood as "flesh of the world" (Merleau-Ponty, Visible, 
144).
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
283

that is of the subject as much as the subject is of the world, of an "absence" and excess of 
sense.
As scholars have noted, the reduction's radical revelation of this ineliminable residue 
of the world sanctions Merleau-Ponty's turn toward the latent content of experience, a 
re-orientation that pushes a phenomenology of consciousness and its method beyond 
its limits.22 Via the reduction, in fact, Merleau-Ponty locates, at the core of reflection, 
act intentionality, and the phenomenological method, a "mystery of passivity" that effec­
tively transforms the transcendental project of phenomenology into an aporetic endea­
vour: the experience of the conditions of possibility of experience is an openness or 
incompleteness - a "dispossession" - of consciousness itself.23 But it is not only the 
subject that is revealed to be always already outside of herself.24 Merleau-Ponty 
reworks the classical notion of the "transcendental": it no longer designates conditions 
that precede experience, but a field that is immanent to the experience and phenomena 
it conditions and, as such, is affected by experience's and phenomena's unfolding. That is, 
as a field, conditions of possibility are, like the subject, always outside of themselves: the 
field's diacritical structure at once distributes while connecting things with one another, 
which is also to say that it is by virtue of the field's own oblivion that objects appear 
(against this receding ground) as determinate.25 Methodologically, as a sensuous, diacri­
tical field, conditions of possibility are not thetic objects to be perceived directly or logi­
cally deduced, but are perceived indirectly, investigated through phenomena. To this end, 
Merleau-Ponty devises the method of hyper-reflection (surréflexion). Tasked with 
describing this non-objectifiable, receding transcendental field, phenomenological ana­
lyses walk the challenging line of providing a faithful account of the world - of investi­
gating the conditions that make experience possible - without resolving the openness, 
oblivion, or resistance that are essential to it. Put differently, albeit it refrains from posit­
ing conditions of experience as structures that can be (propositionally) known in 
advance, phenomenology advances transcendental investigations that treat such con­
ditions as sensible, historical, partial, and, therefore, opaque. The methodological ques­
tion then becomes, how can phenomenology reflect on that which makes our reflection 
possible when the latter is revealed as contingent and receding, and the former ill 
equipped to account for itself?26
While I will return to a closer analysis of the methodological transformations entailed 
by the decolonizing reduction in part III, for now, note three things: First, the residues 
22 Disprose, "A Guide to Merleau-Ponty", 10; Toadvine, "Phenomenology", 24.
23 Merleau-Ponty, "The Eye and the Mind", 175; Merleau-Ponty, Visible, 266.
24 By attending to the failures of the epoché, that is, to the sense of non-sense and the presence of absence, the deco­
lonizing reduction shines a light on the dissolution of the phenomenological subject. It is in this vein of a project of de- 
subjectification but also of de-grounding of conditions of possibilities that we can understand the normative impetus 
of the decolonizing reduction.
25 This feature prompts Merleau-Ponty to talk of an "oblivion of the sensible" (Manuscripts 6, fol. 241). Following Merleau- 
Ponty, in this article, I will use terms like "secondary passivity" to refer to this peculiar feature of the transcendental 
field.
26 Note that scholars have proposed a variety of approaches to address the question of how to effectively carry out an 
investigation of the conditions of possibility for phenomenology. These approaches range from a Husserl-derived 
radical imaginative variation (Aldea, "Husserlian Phenomenology"; Salamon, "What's Critical") to a Foucault/ 
Hartman-modelled archival turn (Guenther, "Six Senses"), a Beauvoirian-informed reduction through labour (Mann, 
"The Difference"), and a Fanon-inspired decolonial methodological hesitation (Al-Saji, Hesitation). Although the evalu­
ation of each of these approaches is beyond the scope of this paper, contextualizing them within the scope of coloni­
ality brings to the fore the general shortcoming of deploying ready-made phenomenological tools to investigate 
colonial norms.
284 
M. FERRARI

mentioned above "are revealed less through the application of the phenomenological 
method than through its limits, its 'latent content' or its 'unconscious' (PhF 71)".27
Relevant for the question of the relationship between critical phenomenology and clas­
sical phenomenology is the fact that, on Merleau-Ponty's account, hyper-reflection 
does not entail abandoning the phenomenological reduction, but, rather, performing 
it differently; it requires moving through, rather than abstracting from, the partial given­
ness of the sensible in an endless return to phenomena.28 That is, it is the 
reduction's very own incompleteness or "failure" that discloses a new type of being 
that Merleau-Ponty calls "vertical" or "wild" being, an excess in beings and sense that 
is not reducible to either side of the visible being/absence or thetic meaning/non-sense 
pole the binary, but precedes them. Insofar as the essence-method relation is concerned, 
Emmanuel Alloa stresses that the revealed "incompleteness" of being and sense means 
that, 
the invariance of a thing is not what is "absent from every bouquet" ... ; rather, it exits only 
amid the variations themselves. ... The invariant is not a positive term ... ; it is rather what 
can be detected negatively through [the variants]. There is no essence as ground or sub­
stance: The eidos is what, in exceeding singular phenomenalizations, persists through 
them.29
The eidos is not some kind of static core beneath or beyond appearances. Indirectly dis­
cernible through experiences, it is what takes form as a modulation or style across 
phenomenal variation. In this sense, we can say that "modality precedes essence."30
Put differently, since we know that the transcendental field recedes into oblivion resisting 
direct perception, the eidos becomes traceable by attending not only to the visible appear­
ing of phenomena through which it finds expression as style, but also to their latent 
dimensions, which presence indirectly as the medium through which sensible objects 
become visible and are integral to their style. What is asked of phenomenological redu­
cation as hyper-reflection, then, is a particular kind of attention to the latency or spacing 
between things and the "secondary passivity" of being.
Implicit in the preceding discussion is the fact that, second, an interrogation at and of 
the limits of the phenomenological method does not mean abandoning phenomenology 
or transitioning to a post-phenomenology and other forms of social critique.31 Rather, as 
27 Toadvine, "Phenomenology", 27. This insight brings Merleau-Ponty to see a compatibility between (a non-Cartesian) 
phenomenology and (an ontological) psychoanalysis, an affinity that the philosopher makes explicit in several of his 
writings, including The Passivity lectures and "Preface to Hesnard's L'Oeuvre de Freud".
28 In a working note to The Visible and the Invisible, Merleau-Ponty writes of the importance of the reduction to his 
method of phenomenological ontology: "what is at issue is to operate the reduction, that is, for me, to disclose 
little by little—and more and more—the 'wild' or 'vertical' world" (Visible, 177). In that same working note, 
Merleau-Ponty specifies that the incompleteness of the reduction is not to be understood as "an imperfection ...  
but as a philosophical theme: the incompleteness of the reduction ... is not an obstacle to the reduction, it is the 
reduction itself, the rediscovery of vertical being.—" (Ibid., 178).
29 Alloa, Resistance, 93.
30 Merleau-Ponty's remarks, in the working notes, convey this position: "perception is not first a perception of things, but 
a perception of elements (water, air ...) of rays of the world, of things which are dimensions, which are worlds ... " 
(Visible, 218).
31 In "A Phenomenology of Gender," Johanna Oksala defines post-phenomenology as a modification of the phenomen­
ological method that is better suited to deal with the "constitutive importance of the social and cultural world" (237). 
Oksala's understanding of post-phenomenology closely aligns with the commitments of critical phenomenology. I 
push against the adoption of this terminology because it risks obfuscating how phenomenology itself presupposes, 
at the structural level, a radical reflexive turn, a deepening of its own method to account for the constitutive force 
of normative ontological schemas.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
285

Merleau-Ponty noted, it calls for a deepening of phenomenology, i.e. a radical and con­
stant revision of its own method such that it becomes capable of "bear[ing] its own 
shadow," that is, better "unveil a back side of things that we have not constituted" and 
take responsibility for the opacity of the world.32 As phenomenology strives to under­
stand its relationship with its own limits - in the example above, with the constitutive 
conditions of reflection - thinking from or attuning to these limits and residues trans­
forms its method, generating phenomenology anew.33
Third, this gesture is inaugural of what today we know as critical phenomenology. 
Thus understood, in my view, critical phenomenology is a phenomenology of limits 
that moves away from grounding its own enterprise in the adequate givenness of trans­
cendental consciousness, situating itself instead at the limits of phenomenological reflec­
tion - in its encounter with the resistance and passivity of sense and sensible phenomena 
- to track the geneses of experience, reflection, and phenomenology in a transcendent 
world - in sum, to track the excess of sense.
With these general onto-methodological considerations in mind, it is now crucial to 
take into account the particular challenges posed by the specific historical formation 
of coloniality. Functioning as a (historical and contingent) transcendental condition of 
possibility, coloniality raises insidious obstacles for phenomenology as it strives to 
bear its (colonial) shadow. How can phenomenology track (to dismantle) oppressive 
colonial normative structures when those structures condition not only the methods 
and modalities of phenomenological investigation, but also experience itself?
Part II - On the Colonial Limits of Phenomenology
Coloniality refers to the structures or relationships of power inaugurated in 1492 with the 
European conquest of the Americas and featuring Western civilization as the culmination 
of (teleological) historical time and Europe as the geo-cultural centre of the world. Although 
coloniality as an institution remains largely unthought by Merleau-Ponty, it is telling that it is 
in terms of "shadows" or the "darker side" of modernity that decolonial thinkers often speak 
of coloniality, thus making Merleau-Ponty's general methodological query relevant to the 
task at hand.34 Framing coloniality as a shadow brings into relief how one of the distinctive 
moves of Western modernity, i.e. the elaboration of Eurocentric paradigms of rational 
knowledge and knowledge validation, of categories of thought and structures of experience 
presented as universal, did not merely take place in the context of coloniality, but was predi­
cated on while also giving shape to that power formation. That is, it makes explicit how colo­
niality was and continues to be the constitutive yet hidden condition of modernity, thus 
resembling, in structure and function, the aforementioned "shadows" of phenomenology, 
"what resists phenomenology" yet "should have its place within it".35 This framing, in 
32 Merleau-Ponty, The Philosopher and his Shadow, 178, 180.
33 Notably, this is still a transcendental project: Merleau-Ponty is adamant that phenomenological investigations are 
carried out through a "series of reductions" (Merleau-Ponty, Visible, 179).
34 Dabashi, Europe and Its Shadows; Lugones, "Heterosexualism"; Mignolo, The Darker Side. Merleau-Ponty speaks of colo­
nialism in his 1955 and 1957 lectures commissioned by the Alliance France and delivered in several African countries. 
Yet, his problematization of colonialism does not amount to a transcendental investigation of the latter as a condition 
of possibility of meaning, an analysis called for by critical, decolonial phenomenology (Al-Saji, "Frantz Fanon"; 
Guenther, "Six Senses").
35 Merleau-Ponty, "Eye and Mind", 178.
286 
M. FERRARI

other words, invites a reading of coloniality as a contingent yet conditioning dimension of 
colonial/modern experience that resists and recedes from direct reflective analysis. 
Western modernity's empire of transcendental reason central to coloniality entails and 
relies upon the institution of a world and ontology normed by aesthetic sensibilities and epis­
temic schemas that normalize and make life intelligible for some, while pathologizing and 
rendering unintelligible that of others.
In Against War, Nelson Maldonado-Torres frames this dynamic phenomenologically: 
modernity institutes a colonial natural attitude, i.e. a naturalized, pre-reflective disposi­
tion toward the world and others guided by a permanent suspicion vis-à-vis the human­
ity of colonized peoples. Following Enrique Dussel, Maldonado-Torres calls this 
disposition "racist/imperial Manichean misanthropic scepticism".36 Analogous to the 
grounding of modern episteme, the certainty of the project of colonialization rests on 
doubt. Yet, this scepticism is operative well beyond propositionally held beliefs, manifest­
ing also at the pre-reflective and ontological levels. Maldonado-Torres accounts for the 
former via the notion of the natural colonial attitude and for the latter via the notion 
of the "the coloniality of being".37 Closely engaging Fanon's work, Maldonado-Torres 
points to how the sense of the colonial natural attitude is reprised by the body-subject 
from within a transcendental field previously instituted and instituting of sense. The 
colonial natural attitude, that is, is instituted through particular orientations toward 
and attunements to the world as well as acts of perception, imagination, memory, etc. 
that are made possible by while also re-instituting the fabric of possible ways in which 
embodied consciousness may reprise the given. As more than an epistemic matter, 
this means that coloniality conditions the production of being38: Within its transcenden­
tal field (and through its reprisals by the colonial natural attitude), the category of being is 
restricted to colonial subjects, while the colonized are cast as damné, i.e. beings who are 
"not there", not existing and dispensable. As Maldonado-Torres points out invoking 
Fanon's famous expression, the coloniality of being concretizes as a "zone of non- 
being" wherein a "non-ethics of war" that, at once, undercuts the possibility of any 
ethical relations across differently racialized subjects and normalizes the otherwise extra­
ordinary affair of being confronted with one's own death reigns supreme.39
The import of these insights cannot be overstated. Maldonado-Torres's notion of the 
coloniality of being stresses how the structuring of coloniality is not operative exclusively 
at the empirical level, manifesting subjectively as a set of commitments and attitudes 
(propositionally or pre-reflectively held) or as "affective disorders"40; rather, coloniality 
is a transcendental structure that demarcates the phenomenal fields of sense and non- 
sense, being and non-being, humanitas and anthropos along racial lines. Albeit historical 
and contingent and traceable through material/sensible phenomena, coloniality is a 
structure - an institution (Stiftung), to be precise - that generates meaning and 
36 Dussel, "Modernity", 245. Enrique Dussel calls this type of subjectivity "ego conquiro", insisting that the certainty of the 
self as conqueror precedes and grounds Descartes's ego cogito, the self's certainty as a thinking thing (Dussel, "Mod­
ernity", 133).
37 Maldonado-Torres, "On the Coloniality", 240.
38 Maldonado-Torres, "Frantz Fanon and the Decolonial Turn," 434. "The emergence of the concept 'coloniality of Being'", 
Maldonado-Torres writes, "responded to the need to thematize the question of the effects of coloniality in lived experi­
ence and not only in the mind" ("On the Coloniality", 242).
39 Fanon, Black Skin, xii; Maldonado-Torres, "On the Coloniality", 255.
40 Fanon, Black Skin, xii.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
287

conditions the possibility of experience, ontologizing, for folks like Fanon, as an "ampu­
tation of his being", the eradication "of opportunity", and "be[ing] locked in the substan­
tialized 'tower of the past'".41
Although, as I will show, coloniality conditions structures of "experience" and the 
possibility for sense in even more subtle and pernicious ways, at this juncture, we are 
poised to grapple with a first set of limits posed to a phenomenology of consciousness 
by coloniality as a transcendental structure. For phenomenology to bear its colonial 
shadow, a simple application of the epoché would not suffice. Here, feminist scholars' 
problematization 
of 
the 
phenomenological 
reduction 
vis-à-vis 
investigations 
about gender - another set of norms constitutive of the transcendental field - is insight­
ful: In the context of her analysis of Simone de Beauvoir's phenomenological method, 
Bonnie Mann notes that "[l]oosening the intentional threads is not possible through 
an act of the will, nor ... any amount of 'imaginative variations' that I do by myself, 
sitting in a room".42 This is because "the very consciousness which must discipline 
itself to put such things out of play has already been shaped by the prejudices it seeks 
to neutralize".43 That is, coloniality - like gender - is naturalized at that very transcen­
dental level of structures of consciousness and the phenomenal field that is its correlate.44
Qualitatively different from naïve beliefs about the world that one can make explicit 
through the reduction, as naturalized, coloniality infuses the very operations of bracket­
ing that seek to suspend it, thus concealing its transcendental rootedness and operations. 
Since what is not instituted by coloniality registers, to consciousness, as non-sense and 
non-being - we could say that it does not register as a phenomenon or experience to 
begin with - coloniality is naturalized at the transcendental level, hidden through its 
colonial horizon and the appearing of phenomena within it. Put differently, 
coloniality conditions the possibility of sense; it affects structures of consciousness 
(think of Fanon's account of the epidermal and racial historical schemas) and the trans­
cendental field (think of Fanon's discussion of the zone of nonbeing). And since it 
demarcates sense from non-sense, the phenomena and experiences that appear to con­
sciousness are always already mediated by coloniality itself such that coloniality registers 
simply as "what is." Ultimately, then, this means that transcendental phenomenology's 
rich descriptions and imaginative variations of the appearing of phenomena and the 
structures conditioning it remain confined within given naturalized normative phenom­
enal fields, in terms of both what they describe and the modalities of their descriptions.
While these critiques are pertinent to investigations of colonial norms carried out via 
diverse methodologies, coloniality poses additional and specific limitations to the phe­
nomenological reduction not fully captured by the above-mentioned concerns. Although 
not phenomenological, María Acosta López's thematization of coloniality as colonial 
traumatic violence brings these limitations to the fore. Putting in conversation decolonial 
and psychoanalytic theory, in "Gramáticas de lo inaudito as Decolonial Grammars", 
Acosta López argues that coloniality is a form of trauma insofar as it undermines 
41 Fanon, Black Skin, xv, xii, 7, 75, 201. A sociogenic approach like Fanon's reveals how the genesis of meaning always 
rests on a political - colonial, to be precise - foundation/institution.
42 Mann, "The Difference", 55.
43 Mann, "The Difference", 55-56.
44 Note how this makes, e.g. structures of consciousness quasi-transcendental in the sense that I explained in footnote #5.
288 
M. FERRARI

conditions of possibility of experience and sense-making, thus foreclosing experience 
and sense as they are conceived within a modern/colonial tradition.45 As she explains, 
in "traumatic neurosis" one cannot appropriately or strictly speak about an "experience" 
being communicated: usual structures do not apply, not even the usual breakdowns of 
these structures, and thus it is the very idea of a structure of experience, itself, that seems 
to have to be put into question.46
A defining feature of trauma, in fact, is that the original event resists integration into 
consciousness, a working through that would make the event localizable and available 
as a memory-trace. In addition to the fixity of trauma recall (as opposed to the fading 
and forgetting characteristic of memory), the original event's unlocatability also means 
that trauma features the "erasure of the traces of the original violence irruption".47 This, 
Acosta López continues, "ensures the establishment of such original violence as definite 
precisely because of its inaccessibility".48 In this sense, by "colonial traumatic violence", 
Acosta López does not index merely an attack on the materiality of life (although colo­
niality is, importantly, also that), but a "particular structure of experience that, in its 
devastating effects, profoundly colonizes the subjectivities, identities, bodies, and 
languages it cuts through", undermining the very "conditions of production of sense 
that make life legible" in the global present.49 Thus, colonial violence raises the struc­
tural challenge of how to perceive the felt absence of sense it produces, of how, if at all, 
one can both bear witness to the violence to which one is subjugated and listen to the 
voices of those who speak from a place that has been deeply normed by colonial 
violence.
While there are forms of trauma that do not entail the breakdown of structures of 
experience, Acosta López's formulation of coloniality as traumatic violence shines a 
light on the difficulties entailed in taking up second- and third-person accounts of 
different systems of normality, an approach advocated for by scholars like Johanna 
Oksala and Guenther as another way of effecting a phenomenological reduction, i.e. of 
becoming aware of hidden aspects of our epistemic and ontological assumptions and 
their constitutive conditions, that does not privilege the first person perspective.50
While at times this archival work can reveal "sedimented structures of a situation that 
[the subject] inhabit[s], but which they cannot access through personal memory or per­
ception alone", the structural operations of colonial traumatic violence are such that they 
tend to eschew detection in such accounts because the latter are often implicitly obtained 
through methods devised to track canonical structures of, e.g. consciousness, experience, 
45 It is important to stress, here, that this claim does not imply that conditions of experience and sense are limited to 
modern/colonial ones. As it has long been argued within the feminist and decolonial traditions, subjects existing in 
relation with traumatic power structures like coloniality have experiences and sense. Yet, Acosta López's claim 
brings attention to the fact that, given these experiences' non-conformity to hegemonic and naturalized structures 
of knowledge and experience, "experiences" of colonial violence are too often articulated in ways that 
remain inaudible and unintelligible in colonial contexts. Acosta López's argument thus relveals the coloniality of struc­
tures of experience.
46 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 209.
47 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 209.
48 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 209.
49 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 208.
50 Both Oksala's post-phenomenology and Guenther's third sense of phenomenological critique invite engaging beyond 
first-person analyses to become aware of the hidden aspects of our own thoughts as well as of naturalized ontological 
schemas and their constitutive conditions.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
289

and sense.51 As Acosta López points out in her discussion of survivors of traumatic vio­
lence (whose testimony would constitute such second- and third-person accounts), "[t]he 
only possible access to such an event is the compulsive repetition of the originary fright 
that marks or refers to the absence of an experience - its unprocessed character - rather 
than to an experience as such".52 Casting coloniality as colonial traumatic violence, then, 
brings into relief how coloniality eschews detection not only from a philosophy of con­
sciousness; it also eludes a critical phenomenological investigation attentive to how his­
torical material conditions intertwine with transcendental conditions unless the latter 
developed what Acosta López calls grammars of listening, i.e. "prax[es] of signification 
capable of subverting the breakdown of meaning produced by traumatic violence and 
its colonizing effects".53 Note how "grammars" is not to be understood exclusively or pri­
marily in terms of linguistic or semantic structures, but in terms of frameworks that 
organize perception and sense-making more broadly - what I have been calling in this 
article "transcendental field" or institution (Stiftung) - and that are capable of rendering 
audible/legible lives that colonial traumatic violence threatens to confine to a zone of 
nonbeing. Grammars of listening subvert the colonial breakdown of meaning by, first, 
bringing to light and denouncing the erasures and the erasing structures of coloniality 
and, second, by striving to create novel frameworks to make sense of otherwise unintel­
ligible experiences.
In light of these considerations, what further radicalization of its method does critical 
phenomenology have to undergo to bear its colonial shadow, i.e. to subvert the break­
down of meaning produced by colonial traumatic violence, which is to say, to listen to 
the "absence" of sense generated by coloniality, to attune to its excess instead without 
resolving its opacity through transparent epistemic frameworks that, registering it as 
unintelligible, would either dismiss it as non-sense or strive to translate it into pre-estab­
lished grammars of sense?54
Part III - The Decolonizing Reduction
The preceding discussion makes explicit the normative dimensions of critical phenom­
enology. Methodologically, while the risk of "bracketing" coloniality to investigate trans­
cendental conditions of possibility is the naturalization of coloniality at the 
transcendental level, putting coloniality out of play requires a reduction capable of track­
ing the operations of historical formations at that very level. More specifically, a critical 
phenomenology that is decolonizing is tasked with devising a method that cannot assume 
a notion of experience constituted by and confined to the present of the subject. Struc­
tured by act-intentionality, this kind of phenomenological description would take the 
inquiry only as far as experiences that can be captured as object-directed, making it ill 
equipped to grapple with the absence of experience and the pre-objective, diacritical 
level at which coloniality operates. Instead, as we have anticipated in part I, a 
51 Guenther, "Six Senses", 11-12.
52 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 209.
53 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 215.
54 In this context, note also the concerns raised by Gordon, Maldonado-Torres, and Guenther that tools like "method" and 
"critique" are themselves complicit in the project of colonial modernity (Gordon, "Theory in Black", "Shifting the 
Geography"; Guenther, "Six Senses"; Maldonado-Torres, "Frantz Fanon and the Decolonial Turn"). See footnote #60 
for a more detailed discussion of this issue.
290 
M. FERRARI

decolonizing phenomenology must be able to grapple with the transcendence of sense, 
with its emergence from and intertwining with what may be experienced as non-sense. 
We are dealing with the experiental limit of reflection, which cannot be grasped by the 
thought reflection produces. This means that a decolonizing phenomenology must be 
able to account for experience as undergone by the subject, describe those residues not 
exactly adjusted to consciousness, which is also to say that it should be able to give an 
account of an instituting temporal movement that extends beyond the life of the 
subject and that remains open or passive to that very subjective experience it conditions. 
A decolonizing phenomenology, in other words, is tasked with developing grammars of 
sense that hold both sense and non-sense, being and non-being, experience and uninte­
grated "experiences" (like those instituted by colonial traumatic violence). In sum, a 
decolonizing phenomenology must devise strategies to attune to the gaps and resistances 
of being and phenomena. Although only preliminarily, in what follows, I propose that 
what I call the decolonizing reduction is one such method: it not only doesn't claim to 
return to an origin, to transcendental conditions of possibility55; by attending to the "fail­
ures" of the classical method, as I will show, it reveals and attunes to the residues not 
exactly adjusted to consciousness or, to stick with the sensory metaphor deployed 
earlier, "the shadows" conditioning the light side of modernity. But what does it 
mean, methodologically, to attune to the "failures" of the reduction? How does such 
an attunement yield decolonizing grammars of sense?
Following Merleau-Ponty, attending to these failures is done by de-prioritizing con­
sciousness as constitutive of experience. This de-prioritization does not mean a simple 
substitution of the first- with second- and third-person perspectives. As noted, coloniality 
poses barriers to the intelligibility of the latter perspectives, contemporary or archival. 
Rather, I propose, it entails developing methods of secondary passivity, that is, 
methods that track the intertwining of others' experiences with one's own, especially 
when the former remain latent, when the inquirer lacks a grammar to make sense of 
them because that grammar may only emerge through the inquiry itself. It is at this junc­
ture that the notion of secondary passivity becomes critical for the method of a decolo­
nizing phenomenology.56
Stemming from Husserl's own reflections on the passive-synthesis of streaming-con­
sciousness, Merleau-Ponty develops the notion of passivity beyond the subjective-sphere, 
recognizing it as a central feature of a supra-subjective, latent ontological intentionality at 
stake in intergenerational sense-emergence. On his account, secondary passivity is not 
the opposite of activity - it is not passive givenness - but it pre-exists the opposition 
as the condition whereby time and sense are open and, thus, affected by time's and 
sense's very own movement of becoming. As such, secondary passivity accounts for 
the inexhaustible generation of sense.
In line with what we have seen regarding hyper-reflection, methodologically, second­
ary passivity comes into play as phenomenology accepts that all reflexion is sedimented 
55 As such, I would argue, a decolonizing reduction qualifies as an instantiation of hyper-reflection. As we saw in part I, in 
his later work, Merleau-Ponty introduces the notion of hyper-reflection as the general method to grapple with the 
ontological question of the kind of being that would make hyper-reflection possible as its condition, i.e. a being 
wherein negativity is encroached at its heart, non-sense intertwined at the kernel of sense, and passivity at the 
core of activity. Hyper-reflection is a form of interrogation that acknowledges its origin in a being that it does not 
constitute, in something prior to itself that resists it and to which, therefore, it is open, passive.
56 Merleau-Ponty, Visible, 173.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
291

or instituted, including the reflexion at stake in an eidetic phenomenological reduction 
striving to account for the essence of things. This reflexion (and, in turn, the epoché) 
cannot expect a return to the things themselves, transcendental structures, or conditions 
of possibility without residue. Rather, as Merleau-Ponty famously points out in The Phe­
nomenology of Perception, it needs to remain open - which, as we have just seen, also 
means passive - to what, at once, escapes while conditioning its own reflexion.57 It 
needs to remain open to and learn to track a phenomenon that recedes from conscious­
ness, that becomes perceptible indirectly. What's required, as Emmanuel Alloa explains 
discussing how to perceive the spacing between things, is "a specific operation". Analo­
gizing this kind of perception to that of the atmosphere, he writes that "[o]ne perceives an 
atmosphere indirectly—one breathes it in more than one conceives it; one perceives in 
accord with it, through it".58 Since that which resists or remains unavailable to 
reflexion does so "always from within that same reflection",59 my suggestion is that the 
method at stake in this article is a method that operates through the limits of the classical 
epoché, perceiving according with those limits and their failures. Although Fanon found 
methods to be not only inadequate to account for a reality that is incomplete, but also 
complicit with the colonial/modern project, I would contend that we find concrete dis­
plays of what I have been calling a decolonizing reduction at work in both Black Skin, 
White Masks and "This is the Voice of Algeria".60 It is to these texts that I briefly turn 
in what follows to sketch the operations of the decolonizing reduction.61
Scholars agree that Fanon adopts a distinctive approach: a sociogenic (phenomenolo­
gical) approach that tracks "both the impact of the social world on the emergence of 
meaning and human identities and how individual situations relate to the development 
and preservation of social and political institutions".62 Closely attending to how Fanon 
deploys this approach brings attention to what, in my view, is distinctive of a decoloniz­
ing reduction: it not only (1) denaturalizes the structures that condition something as 
experience (while rendering other experiences impossible) by situating itself at and 
exposing the limits of hegemonic ways of knowing and being; through its re-orientation 
toward and investigation of these limits, gaps, and lived "impossibilities", it (2) institutes 
novel conditions of possibility for perceiving according with latency.63 That is, it insti­
tutes a perceptual re-orientation toward those spacing and gaps that a philosophy of con­
sciousness and the epoché fail to register.
57 This is a notable reversal of Husserl's early thesis on intentionality since, for Husserl, intentionality is act- or object- 
intentionality while, for Merleau-Ponty, it is first and foremost of "dimensions", "rays of the world", "elements" 
(Visible, 218), that is, of the écart - the spacing and lag - between things.
58 Alloa, Resistance, 94.
59 Alloa, Resistance, 66.
60 Much has been written on the topic of Fanon's stance vis-à-vis method, and I do not intend to rehash that conversation 
here. Briefly, Maldonado-Torres's position regarding whether Fanon adopts a phenomenological method or abandons 
method altogether because of its complicity in the colonial/modern project in favour of "attitude" remains ambiguous 
(Maldonado-Torres, "Frantz Fanon and the Decolonial Turn"). His latter position resonates with Lewis Gordon's, who 
argues that a project of "radical anti-colonial critique" entails "the suspension of method" (Gordon, "Shifting the 
Geography", 97 and "Theory in Black", 200). Alia Al-Saji has argued that Fanon invents an original, decolonial phenom­
enological method that is grounded in affect and that makes possible touching the wounds of colonialism (Al-Saji, 
"Frantz Fanon").
61 It is not lost on me that I here turn to the work of a thinker who analyses his own trauma as a survivor of colonial 
violence to develop a decolonizing reduction aimed to be deployed mostly (given academia's current demographic) 
by beneficiaries of colonial violence.
62 Gordon, What Fanon Said, 2.
63 Fanon, Black Skin, 39.
292 
M. FERRARI

Regarding the first feature, the decolonizing reduction's peculiar relationship with 
limits is most apparent in chapter Five of Black Skin, White Masks. Throughout the nar­
rative, as Lewis Gordon has noted, Fanon deploys a tactic of "demonstration by failure" 
wherein Fanon the colonial subject undergoes a series of performative failures as he 
strives to fit in and become a human being.64 These failures position Fanon the theorist 
to make visible the implicit ontological-Manichean commitments - such as who counts 
as a human being or the purportedly universal structures of the body schema - consti­
tuting his lifeworld and how they collapse under scrutiny, ultimately "compel[ling] a 
re-evaluation of the context of inquiry".65 Fanon's failures as an embodied, racialized, 
colonial subject at returning, from the standpoint of his own lived experience, to the 
things themselves constitute the success of Fanon the - decolonizing, I may add - phe­
nomenologist, whose aims are to reveal the coloniality of transcendental structures and 
being and demand systemic and systematic change.66 Fanon not only clearly shows that 
the "things" are not in "themselves"; he also reveals how their colonial conditioning 
structure systematically relegates his impure lived experience to an impossibility, to 
non-sense and non-being.
But there is more. In my view, the decolonizing reduction does not limit itself to 
actively decolonize ontological assumptions; in its attending to the failures of hegemonic 
structures, it institutes novel grammars of sense at the site of colonial trauma. This is the 
meaning, I would suggest, of Fanon's famous observation that "there is a zone of non- 
being, an extraordinarily sterile and arid region, an incline essentially stripped bare, 
from which a genuine new emergence can be born".67 As Acosta López notes, because 
the "zone of non-being" is the systematic constitutive exclusion of colonized subjects 
and experiences from "the frames of sense that sustain and perpetuate the colonial oper­
ation ... any task of decolonization [requires] the reinvention of the very conditions of 
possibility of sense".68 The decolonizing reduction reveals the generativity of hegemonic 
structures' "absences" precisely by partaking in the creation, generated from and 
through a failure, of counter-hegemonic conditions of possibility and sense.
For a concrete application of the second feature of the decolonizing reduction, 
namely, its institution, via its re-orientation toward and investigation of these limits, 
gaps, and lived impossibilities, of novel conditions of possibility, we may turn to 
Fanon's "This is the Voice of Algeria". Published in 1959 in the midst of the Algerian 
liberation struggle, this text gives us not only the extraordinary account of the role the 
radio receiver played in anticolonial resistance; it also offers Fanon's phenomenology of 
listening of many Algerians to the National Liberation Front (NLF)'s broadcast, The 
Voice of Free and Fighting Algeria. Speaking specifically of the experience of listening 
to The Voice, Fanon stresses the pivotal role the radio played in building a national con­
sciousness, noting that listening to the radio was "hearing the first words of the 
64 Gordon, What Fanon Said, 24-25.
65 Gordon, "The Black", 76.
66 In those regards, my understanding of the decolonizing reduction echoes that of Maldonado-Torres's "de-colonial 
reduction". Though my account finds confirmation in Maldonado-Torres's view that the decolonial/ising reduction 
is a "thinking from the limits" (Maldonado-Torres, Against War, 100), by deploying the gerund in "decolonizing", I 
aim to emphasize the normative, praxical, and creative dimensions of the reduction, of an epoché aimed not 
merely at suspending the world as we know it, but at its disruption.
67 Fanon, Black Skin, xii. My emphasis.
68 Acosta López, "Gramáticas", 218.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
293

nation".69 One of the distinctive features of this phenomenological approach is that it 
does not describe things' discrete appearing or voices' semantic meaning to identify 
their transcendental conditions of possibility; such an approach is bound to fail as 
the "sound-wave warfare" between the NLF and French authorities meant that the 
broadcast was constantly jammed, presencing, at best, through "echoes" and, at 
worst, as "absent, physically inaudible".70 Instead, by attending to the failures (of listen­
ing to semantic content and revealing transcendental structures), Fanon's phenomenol­
ogy attunes to the receding and resisting dimensions of phenomena, to the spacing 
between words, concretized, in "This is the Voice", as the static noises of the broadcast 
and an emergent affective consciousness that attunes to such noise. As I argue in 
"Fanon's Revolutionary Murmurs: Toward a Critical Phenomenology of Listening," 
this is to say that the "first words of the nation" - the conditions for the birth of an 
Algerian consciousness and nation - are revealed to be akin to the "indecisive 
murmurs" of the world that Merleau-Ponty talks about referring to the soliciting of 
the world in sense perception, the world's "non-sense" or transcendent/tacit sense 
from which propositional meaning is born.71
Although only gestured toward here, this phenomenological method of a decolonizing 
reduction challenges the tenets of a phenomenology of consciousness, offering a glimpse 
of how phenomenology can listen to "echoes" and "murmurs", attuning itself to the 
spacing between things - breathing it in more than conceiving it, to return to Alloa's for­
mulation - by at once exercising and attending to a secondary passivity operative in the 
institution of colonial sense. Notably, in fact, Fanon both enacts and shows how listening 
- which requires this openness and passivity - to The Voice's murmurs marks a shift in 
perception whereby The Voice is not understood, but "felt", its reality "sensed".72 Fanon's 
insight, in other words, is that the burgeoning Algerian nation, revolutionary conscious­
ness, and novel modalities of life were instituted by a shift in sensibilities the phenomen­
ological tracking of which, via a description of the failures of a philosophy of 
consciousness, makes experiences previously rendered nonsensical and inaudible not 
only possible, but also the site of political d/enunciation.
In conclusion, thus understood, the decolonizing reduction is a radicalization of the 
phenomenological method in at least three ways. First, by describing the failures, 
rather than the contours, of hegemonic structures of experience, the decolonizing 
reduction transforms the classical method of phenomenology, offering a modality of cri­
tique able to expose the "crack in the polished finality of the given as pre-given", revealing 
and contesting the mechanisms through which coloniality is naturalized at the transcen­
dental level.73 This means, second, that a decolonizing phenomenology is not satisfied 
with descriptions of political residues and conditions of possibility as distinct phenom­
ena, but becomes a normative phenomenology aimed at denaturalizing conditions of 
69 Fanon, "The Voice", 93.
70 Fanon, "The Voice", 85, 86. As Fanon notes, after hours of listening to the radio without any success at synching to the 
broadcast frequency, 
the listener would sometimes leave the needle on a jammed wave-length or one that simply produced static, 
and would announce that the voice of the combatants was here. For an hour the room would be filled with the 
piercing, excruciating din of the jamming. (Fanon, "The Voice", 88)
71 Merleau-Ponty, "Eye and Mind", 172.
72 Fanon, "The Voice", 87.
73 Aldea, "Husserlian Phenomenology", 69. Aldea uses this language in describing the role of the imagination.
294 
M. FERRARI

im/possibility that entail, on the one hand, a collapse of the body schema, a closure of 
possibilities, and the freezing of time, while, on the other, the institution of a fluid 
body schema, norms of epistemic transparency that foreclose understanding beyond 
colonial frameworks, and the possibilities and openness of lived time. Third, through 
its description of what fails to appear as an intentional object, a decolonizing phenom­
enology creates new conditions of possibility that can listen at the site of colonial 
trauma. The normative critique at work in the decolonial reduction, in other words, is 
not the doing of a theoretical attitude whose mode of givenness is judgment, i.e. the posit­
ing of being and doxic theses.74 Although subjects come to the reduction differently situ­
ated vis-à-vis colonial horizons and, as such, relate to them with varying degrees of 
awareness, for both colonizing and colonized subjects, the decolonial reduction entails 
instead working through colonial prejudices to begin the never-ending task of neutraliz­
ing their hold on us, inhabiting them as the habits and orientations they are to show the 
impasse and amputations to which they lead, to reveal the incoherence and dissonance 
between the possibilities they institute and the lived experience of those relegated to 
the zone of nonbeing. In this sense, what Mann says of Beauvoir's transformation of 
the epoché applies here also: the decolonial reduction is "a matter of labour, not of 
willpower".75
Returning to the first epigraph of this paper, the decolonizing reduction eschews com­
plicity in a colonial/modern project that relies on and perpetuates the separation of self- 
determining subjects and the exclusion of externally-determined no-bodies exposed to 
total violence.76 Rather, it offers a promising avenue for the possibility of a decolonizing 
phenomenology aimed not at reparation but abolition of the (racist colonial) world as we 
know it. As Guenther explains, the task of ending the world as we know it seems imposs­
ible. After all, for classical phenomenology, the "world" indexes the background or field 
of possible ways in which consciousness may apprehend and constitute the meaning of 
the given through intentional acts. "From this perspective, ... the world just is the world 
as we know it, and it could not be otherwise".77 Yet, it is precisely through the labour of 
the decolonizing reduction that not only new values, norms, and commitments are insti­
tuted at the transcendental level, but also new structures of experience and, with them, 
fields of possibility for life otherwise. Thus, the decolonizing reduction is a suspension 
of method as judgment and the deployment of method as praxical, normative, creative 
force. Put differently, the decolonizing reduction is not an abandonment, but a deepening 
or radicalization of phenomenology such that it can think and create the excess of its 
limits. The limits offer points of resistance, puzzling openings that can generate a 
different world and phenomenology as a praxis of decolonization.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
74 Exposing the limits of colonial horizons to denaturalize coloniality and institute decolonizing ones cannot be accom­
plished via a neutral and detached theoretical attitude not only because, as Fanon painstakingly shows, in a colonial 
world, the adoption of such an attitude is reserved to those deemed humanitas, not anthropos. It is also because the 
intentional threads that tether consciousness to the world cannot be slackened via an act of will.
75 Mann, "The Difference", 56.
76 Guenther, "Six Senses", 28.
77 Guenther, "Six Senses", 31.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
295

References
Al-Saji, Alia. Hesitation: Critical Phenomenology, Colonial Duration, and the Affective Weight of 
the Past. forthcoming.
Al-Saji, Alia. "Too Late: Fanon, the Dismembered Past, and a Phenomenology of Racialized Time." 
Fanon, Phenomenology and Psychology. Eds. Leswin Laubscher, Derek Hook, and Miraj Desai. 
New York: Routledge, 2021. 177-193.
Al-Saji, Alia. "Frantz Fanon: Anticolonial Phenomenology, Refusal, and the Question of Method." 
The Routledge Handbook of Political Phenomenology, 2023a. 120-133.
Al-Saji, Alia. "A Debilitating Colonial Duration: Reconfiguring Fanon." Research in 
Phenomenology 53.3 (2023b): 279-307. doi:10.1163/15691640-12341529.
Aldea, Andrea Samaranda. "Husserlian Phenomenology as Radical-Immanent Critique - Or How 
Phenomenology Imagines Itself." Phenomenology as Critique: Why Method Matters. Eds. 
Andrea Samaranda Aldea, David Carr, and Sara Heinämaa. New York: Routledge, 2022. 56-79.
Aldea, Andrea Samaranda, David Carr, and Sara Heinämaa, eds. Phenomenology as Critique: Why 
Method Matters. New York: Routledge, 2022.
Alloa, Emmanuel. The Resistance of the Sensible World: An Introduction to Merleau-Ponty. Trans. 
Jane Matie Todd. New York: Fordham University Press, 2017.
Carr, David. "On the Functions of Examples in Critical Philosophy: Kant and Husserl." 
Phenomenology as Critique: Why Method Matters. Eds. Andrea Samaranda Aldea, David 
Carr, and Sara Heinämaa. New York: Routledge, 2022. 9-24.
Dabashi, Hamid. Europe and Its Shadows: Coloniality after Empire. London: Pluto Press, 2019.
Diprose, Rosalyn. "A Guide to Merleau-Ponty: Key Concepts." Merleau-Ponty: Key Concepts. Eds. 
Rosalyn Diprose, and Jack Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2008. 8-14.
Rosalyn Diprose and Jack Reynolds, ed. Merleau-Ponty: Key Concepts. New York: Routledge, 2008.
Dussel, Enrique. "Modernity, Eurocentrism, and Trans-Modernity: In Dialogue with Charles 
Taylor." The Underside of Modernity: Apel, Ricoeur, Rorty, Taylor, and the Philosophy of 
Liberation. Ed. and trans. Eduardo Mendieta. Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities, 1996. 
129-59.
Fanon, Frantz. "This is the Voice of Algeria." A Dying Colonialism. Trans. Haakon Chevalier. 
New York: Grove Press Inc, 1965. 69-97.
Fanon, Frantz. Black Skin, White Masks. Trans. Richard Philcox. New York: Grove Press, 2008.
Ferrari, Martina. "'Fanon's Revolutionary Murmurs: Toward a Critical Phenomenology of 
Listening'." The Southern Journal of Philosophy 62.1 (2023): 79-96. doi:10.1111/sjp.12541.
Gordon, Lewis. "Theory in Black: Teleological Suspensions in Philosophy of Culture." Qui Parle 
18.2 (2010): 193-214. doi:10.5250/quiparle.18.2.193.
Gordon, Lewis. "Shifting the Geography of Reason in an Age of Disciplinary Decadence." 
Transmodernity: Journal of Peripheral Cultural Production of the Luso-Hispanic World 1.2 
(2011): 95-103.
Gordon, Lewis. What Fanon Said: A Philosophical Introduction to His Life and Thought. New York: 
Fordham University Press, 2015.
Guenther, Lisa. "Critical Phenomenology." 50 Concepts for a Critical Phenomenology. Eds. Gail 
Weiss, Ann V. Murphy, and Gayle Salamon. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 
2020. 11-16.
Guenther, Lisa. "Six Senses of Critique for a Critical Phenomenology." Puncta: Journal of Critical 
Phenomenology 4.2 (2021): 5-23. doi:10.5399/PJCP.v4i2.2.
Guenther, Lisa. "Abolishing the World as we Know it: Notes for a Praxis of Phenomenology 
Beyond Critique." Puncta: Journal of Critical Phenomenology 5.2 (2022): 29-44.
Heinämaa, Sara. "On the Transcendental and Eidetic Resources of Phenomenology: The Case of 
Embodiment." Phenomenology as Critique: Why Method Matters. Eds. Andrea Samaranda 
Aldea, David Carr, and Sara Heinämaa. New York: Routledge, 2022. 113-137.
Husserl, Edmund. The Idea of Phenomenology: A Translation of Die Idee Der Phänomenologie 
Husserliana II. Trans. Lee Hardy. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999.
296 
M. FERRARI

López, Acosta, and Maria Rosario. "Gramáticas de lo inaudito as Decolonial Grammars: Notes for 
a Decolonization of Listening." Research in Phenomenology 52 (2022): 203-222. doi:10.1163/ 
15691640-12341496.
Lugones, María. "Heterosexualism and the Colonial/Modern Gender System." Hypatia 22.1 
(2007): 186-219.
Maldonado-Torres, N. "On the Coloniality of Being: Contributions to the Development of a 
Concept." Cultural Studies 21.2-3 (2007): 240-270.
Maldonado-Torres, N. Against War: Views from the Underside of Modernity. Durham: Duke 
University Press, 2008.
Maldonado-Torres, N. "Frantz Fanon and the Decolonial Turn in Psychology: From Modern/ 
Colonial Methods to the Decolonial Attitude." South African Journal of Psychology 47.4 
(2017): 432-441. doi:10.1177/0081246317737918.
Mann, Bonnie. "The Difference of Feminist Philosophy: The Case of Shame." Puncta: Journal of 
Critical Phenomenology 1.1 (2018): 41-73. doi:10.31608/PJCP.v1i1.4.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. "Eye and Mind." The Primacy of Perception and Other Essays on 
Phenomenological Psychology, the Philosophy of Art, History and Politics. Ed. John Wild. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1964a. 159-90.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. The Visible and The Invisible. Trans. Alphonso Lingis. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1968.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Institution and Passivity. Course Notes from the Collège de France (1954- 
55). Trans. Leonard Lawler and Heath Massey. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 
2010.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. Donald A. Landes. New York: 
Routledge, 2012.
Mignolo, Walter. The Darker Side of Wester Modernity: Global Futures, Decolonial Options. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2011.
Oksala, Johanna. "A Phenomenology of Gender." Continental Philosophy Review 39 (2006): 229- 
244. doi:10.1007/s11007-006-9025-2.
Oksala, Johanna. "The Method of Critical Phenomenology: Simone de Beauvoir as a 
Phenomenologist." European Journal of Philosophy 31 (2023): 137-150. doi:10.1111/ejop.12782.
Pons, Daphne, Andrew Krema, and Johanna Oksala, eds. "Special Issue." Phenomenology and 
Critique. Puncta: Journal of Critical Phenomenology 6.2 (2023): 6-23.
Rodemeyer, Lanei M. "A Phenomenological Critique of Critical Phenomenology." Phenomenology 
as Critique: Why Method Matters. Eds. Andrea Samaranda Aldea, David Carr, and Sara 
Heinämaa. New York: Routledge, 2022. 95-112.
Salamon, Gayle. "What's Critical in Critical Phenomenology?" Puncta: Journal of Critical 
Phenomenology 1.1 (2018): 8-17.
Toadvine, Ted. "Phenomenology and "hyper-reflection"." Merleau-Ponty: Key Concepts. Eds. 
Rosalyn Diprose, and Jack Reynolds. New York: Routledge, 2008. 17-29.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY 
297

