South African Journal of Philosophy
ISSN: 0258-0136 (Print) 2073-4867 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rsph20
Phenomenology of contingency: Reﬂections on
More's African phenomenology
Abraham Olivier
To cite this article: Abraham Olivier (11 Sep 2025): Phenomenology of contingency:
Reﬂections on More's African phenomenology, South African Journal of Philosophy, DOI:
10.1080/02580136.2025.2536958
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/02580136.2025.2536958
Published online: 11 Sep 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rsph20

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
Printed in South Africa — All rights reserved
This is the final version of the article that is published 
ahead of the print and online issue
Copyright © 2025 Philosophical Society of Southern Africa
SOUTH AFRICAN JOURNAL  
OF PHILOSOPHY
ISSN 0258-0136   EISSN 2073-4867
https://doi.org/10.1080/02580136.2025.2536958
South African Journal of Philosophy is co-published by NISC (Pty) Ltd and Informa UK Limited (trading as Taylor & Francis Group)
Phenomenology of contingency: Reflections on More's  
African phenomenology
Abraham Olivier
Philosophy, University of Fort Hare, East London, South Africa
Correspondence: aolivier@ufh.ac.za
There is a need for the exploration of works of African phenomenologists such as 
the work of Mabogo More. This article aims to serve such an exploratory purpose 
by introducing central aspects of More's approach to African phenomenology. I 
try to show how More draws on the works of Fanon, Heidegger, Biko, Gordon, 
Manganyi, and especially Sartre, to develop what he calls an African existentialist 
phenomenology. A central theme in his work is the concept of contingency, more 
specifically, the contingency of what he calls "being-black-in-the-world". More's 
specific concern with contingency is not merely out of theoretical interest, but 
rather he views it as the "origin" of racism and as such as an existential problem. I 
argue that More's theoretical work on contingency distinguishes his own approach 
to African phenomenology, and further, that his theoretical analysis leads to his 
practical advocacy for strategies against racism, which gives his approach to African 
phenomenology its further distinguishing features.
Introduction
In his recent contribution to the first anthology on African phenomenology, Phenomenology in an 
African Context (Olivier et al. 2023), Mabogo More writes: "Phenomenology and existentialism 
among African people in South Africa have a long history, which unfortunately has not been explicitly 
thematized or philosophically engaged" (More 2023, 129). This also seems to apply generally to 
phenomenology in Africa. Unlike, for instance, Africana (African diaspora) phenomenology, the 
concept of "African phenomenology" is not used widely, and the anthology mentioned above 
is its first systematic book introduction. There is a need for the exploration of works of African 
phenomenologists such as Paulin Hountondji, Dismas Masolo, Tsenay Serequeberhan, Achille 
Mbembe and Mabogo More himself. My article aims to serve such an exploratory purpose by 
introducing some aspects of More's approach to African phenomenology. I try to show how More 
draws on the works of Sartre, Fanon, Heidegger, Biko, Gordon and Manganyi to develop what 
he calls an African existentialist phenomenology. As his latest book title Sartre on Contingency 
(2021) indicates, a central theme in his work is the concept of contingency, more specifically, the 
contingency of what he calls "being-black-in-the-world". More's specific concern with contingency 
is not merely out of theoretical interest, but rather he views it as the "origin" of racism and as such 
as an existential problem. As he puts it: "The form one's contingent bodily being assumes may 
determine how, where and whether one lives or not" (More 2021, 101). I argue that More's work on 
contingency distinguishes his own approach to phenomenology, thus, how he develops an African 
phenomenology of contingency.1
1 
Note that this is not the first systematic introduction to More's work. Two recent works deserve mentioning. First there is Tendayi Sithole's 
book Mabogo P. More: Philosophical Anthropology in Azania (2022). This book is "about the philosophical conduct of a philosopher 
who engages in philosophical anthropology" (Sithole 2022, 1). Sithole refers to More's work as "The Phenomenology of Azania" (see 
the title of the second chapter). In this chapter he endeavours to "deploy More's Africana existentialist phenomenology to make a case 
for Azania", that is, for a name for South Africa that "critiques the foundation of settler-colonialism, and what is advocated is not only a 

Olivier
2
It seems fair to say that Sartre's phenomenology is a basic point of reference throughout More's 
works, particularly in his main books Biko: Philosophy, Identity and Liberation (2017) and Sartre 
on Contingency (2021), but also in his memoirs Looking Through Philosophy in Black (2019) and 
pivotal essays such as "Gordon on Contingency" (2008), "Black Solidarity" (2009) and "Chabani 
Manganyi: The Lived Experience of Difference" (2023). My focus will be on how he uses Sartre's 
work, and links it to the work of others to develop his own take on African phenomenology. It 
is important to make clear from the outset that More is not simply a philosophical commentator 
and follower of Sartre. Sartre's work influenced his philosophy, but as More says himself, that 
does not mean they are the "cause" of his philosophy, or that he merely "applies" Sartre's thought 
(More 2021). Thus, this article is not primarily about More's own distinct reading of Sartre and its 
merits, but rather about how he uses Sartre to develop his own theoretical and practical approach 
to African phenomenology. More precisely, I try to show that More's theoretical analysis of 
the concept of contingency leads to his practical advocacy for strategies to fight racism. These 
strategies give his approach to African phenomenology its further distinguishing features. Due to 
limited space, I focus on More's ontological and moral strategies, and reserve his political strategy 
for another study.
The first section contextualises More's approach to African phenomenology by offering 
an introduction to the concept of African phenomenology compared to Western and Africana 
phenomenology and existentialism. The following sections explore More's notion of contingency as 
the origin of racism, which is central to his African phenomenological approach. And then I discus 
some of his strategies against racism.
African phenomenology
As I said in the introduction, the use of the concept of "African phenomenology" is relatively 
new and has seen its first systematic book introduction only recently in the form of the anthology 
Phenomenology in an African Context (Olivier et al. 2023).2 This concept goes back to the 
phenomenological work of some renowned African philosophers who contributed to this anthology, 
including Paulin Hountondji, Tsenay Serequeberhan, Achille Mbembe, and specifically Mabogo 
More. The contributions to this anthology show in various ways how the African context challenges 
phenomenology to self-apply its classic method of suspension, i.e. to bracket itself and self-reflect 
radically upon the methodological assumptions its proponents make. To use Paget Henry's (2006) 
concept in his introduction to "Africana Phenomenology", one can say that the subject that practises 
phenomenology "decentres" themselves by subjecting the activities of their own consciousness to 
self-reflection. The idea is that through such bracketing the constituting activities of consciousness 
can come to the fore and be available to description. African and Africana phenomenology 
seem to share this methodological approach of decentring qua self-bracketing with traditional 
name change, but the uprooting of the infrastructure of racism that informs South Africa even in its post-1994 formation" (Sithole 2022, 
14). Sithole does not as much explore the character of More's phenomenology, that is, "Azanian phenomenology" as use it to argue for an 
anthropological and political project, that is, for More's "politics of being". Second, in Sarah Setlaelo's doctoral thesis, "An Existential 
Phenomenology of Black Female Difference: Extending the Reach of Mabogo P. More's Politics of Being" (2023) the aim is "to provide a 
black feminist existentialist account of the politics of being by drawing on, critiquing and supplementing More's work" (Setlaelo 2023, 8; 
emphasis in original). To this end, she wants to "conduct a study of the phenomenology of black African female embodied difference" and 
its psychological, social, cultural, religious, economic and political consequences (Setlaelo 2023, 8). Unlike both Sithole and Setlaelo, my 
aim is to explore More's notion of African phenomenology as such, rather than to supplement it with political or feminist studies. Further, 
like Sithole, Setlaelo's theoretical framework is "Africana philosophy" and its sub-field of black existentialism. This she connects with 
black feminist theory, specifically the theory of intersectionality (Setlaelo 2023). Again, my focus on African phenomenology is narrower, 
although I do discuss its connection to Africana philosophy and black existentialism in More's work. I do not work with black feminism 
specifically, as my focus is only on introducing and not supplementing More's work; however, I consider Setlaelo's feminist work to be of 
great importance that invites further exploration. Moreover, unlike Setlaelo and Sithole, my focus is on what I take to be the most central 
concept in More's phenomenology, that is, contingency. Strikingly, Sithole does not discuss the concept of contingency at all in his main 
work on More. Setlaelo does discuss contingency; however, not as a main theme in More's work, but as a subtheme to alienation (Setlaelo 
2023). I say more about that in the first section (footnote 2). 
2	
My brief discussion of African phenomenology relies on our editorial and my personal introductions to the concept in this anthology 
(Olivier 2023).

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
3
phenomenology as it has been introduced in the Western context. 
However, the technique of "decentring" seems to mark a decisive difference between traditional 
Western phenomenology on the one hand and African and Africana phenomenology on the other. In 
Husserl's classic transcendental approach, the focus is on the reasoning capacities of consciousness 
that humans are purported to share universally, invariant of their particular contextual conditions, 
including social, political, and economic factors. In African and Africana phenomenology, it seems 
rather different in that contextual conditions are considered to be a central part of the constitutive 
activities of consciousness (Olivier et al. 2023). This difference is what the decentring technique of 
phenomenology seems to bring to the fore. This technique is meant to show the formative effect of 
environmental conditions on consciousness.  
African and Africana phenomenology offer some classic examples of accounts of the formative 
effect of contextual conditions on subjects' consciousness, by forming what Du Bois (1996) called 
"double-consciousness" (of being an American and African), and Biko (2005) dubbed "black 
consciousness". Similarly, Mabogo More speaks of the experience of "being-black-in-the world". 
These examples show how a racialised context, and its social, cultural, political and economic 
manifestations, is considered a formative part of what makes a subject conscious. 
To be sure, Western phenomenologists typically support the claim of the situatedness of 
subjectivity in what Husserl (1965) classically called the "lifeworld". However, unlike Western 
phenomenologists, African and Africana phenomenologists understand situatedness not as 
a universal category that concerns all humans equally, but rather they would take it in its 
particularity, and claim to deal with very different "lifeworlds".3 So one may say, if classic Western 
phenomenology seeks to identify seminal structures of the constituting activities of consciousness 
independent of the subject's specific conditions of living, then African and Africana phenomenology 
take consciousness to be constituted by such conditions in the first place. Thus, the lived conditions 
of the conscious subject in their particularity are viewed as part of the conditions of the possibility 
of its consciousness. 
African and Africana phenomenologists have in common that they can be broadly characterised 
by their critical focus on the lived experience of black persons and peoples of African descent who 
were and are subjected to the formative workings of slavery, colonialism, racism, exploitation, and 
sexism. As Outlaw (2017) indicates, however, African phenomenology refers more strictly to the 
critical analysis of the shaping effect of the lived context on African persons and peoples, while 
Africana phenomenology has its focus on the African diaspora. Accordingly, as Lewis Gordon 
(2000, 10) points out, African persons and peoples, and those of African descent, will have their 
own unique settings and sets of "existential questions" regarding their "lived context of concern". 
I said that one can call More's approach an African existential phenomenology. The remaining 
question is, what is the relation here between "existential" and "phenomenology"? Lewis Gordon, 
whose work influenced More, makes some distinctions to point out what he means by "existential" 
which help to say why one can consider More's approach an "African existential phenomenology". 
Let us consider these distinctions briefly. 
Gordon (2000, 10) distinguishes between "existentialism" and "existential philosophies", 
which he also calls "philosophies of existence". He writes: "I regard existentialism - the 
popularly named ideological movement - as a fundamentally European historical phenomenon". 
He considers European existentialism as just "one continent's response to a set of problems that 
date from the moment human beings faced problems of anguish and despair" (Gordon 2000, 6). 
Existential philosophies (philosophies of existence) regard similar "concerns of freedom, anguish, 
3 
Note, this does not mean that Husserl advocates an undifferentiated conception of the lifeworld. As, for instance, Anthony Steinbock (1995) 
shows extensively in Home and Beyond, Husserl distinguishes between "home-world" and "alien-world" as two different lifeworlds. 
However, this distinction is still assumed to apply universally to all humans, compared to the claim of African phenomenologists who 
argue against such application. For instance, More would argue that in the racist world to be black means to be "homeless" from the 
outset and to have no "home-world". As More (2023, 141) puts it: "It means that the world becomes a home in which a black person is 
paradoxically homeless". Thus, African phenomenologists such as More draw attention to the constitutive effect of the particularity of 
situatedness, especially in its oppressive forms, on subjectivity. For a more detailed explanation of the difference between African and 
Western phenomenological views of situatedness, see Olivier (2023).  

Olivier
4
responsibility, embodied agency, sociality, and liberation" (ibid.). However, unlike existentialism, 
which considers one continent's issues of universal concern, "philosophies of existence are marked 
by a centring of what is often known as the situation of questioning or inquiry itself" (ibid.). 
Gordon (2000, 10) calls the "situation of questioning" the "lived context of concern". He speaks 
of existential Africana philosophy to make clear that people in the African diaspora have particular 
existential questions arising from their specific lived contexts of concern. Thus, he refers to the 
"existential demand for recognising the situation or lived context of Africana peoples' being-in-the-
world" and the "question of value raised by the people who live that situation" (ibid.). Similarly, 
one can say that African peoples have particular existential questions arising from the crises of 
lived contexts of concern with neocolonial, racist and other forms of oppression. Such questions 
constitute the subject of an African existential philosophy. 
Gordon (2000, 5) makes further distinctions by pointing out that "Africana existential philosophy 
is a branch of Africana philosophy and black philosophies of existence". He writes: "In Africana 
philosophy, there is focus on the unique features of Africana cultural experience on the one hand, 
and the reality that Africana people are a black people and hence are impacted by the significance 
of race and racism on the other" (Gordon 2000, 6). The terrain of black philosophies of existence 
is broader than Africana - and for that matter African - philosophies of existence as they bear 
reference to black subjects that do not live only in Africana or African communities. In any case, 
the point to be stressed is that the significance of blackness and anti-black racism is a main, albeit 
not only, existential issue within Africana existential philosophies, and certainly also in African 
existential philosophy such as Mabogo More's.
Notably, Gordon (2000, 72) further maintains that "although my focus is existential, the way I go 
about conducting my analysis is phenomenological". He explains more specifically that to conduct 
the analysis of the Africana experience in its lived context of existential concerns, he uses the 
phenomenological method of bracketing. It means a critical analysis in the sense of (a) the suspension 
or critique of the natural attitude that anti-black racist and colonialist/neo-colonialist regimes are 
premised on, and (b) an inquiry into the existential concerns with the lived experience and liberation 
of black people under such regimes. This critical phenomenological analysis is in line with Paget 
Henry's approach to Africana phenomenology, and so we shall see, More's use of Husserl's notion 
of the suspension of natural attitudes in his approach to African phenomenology. In this line, one can 
also speak of an African existential phenomenology, thus an African existential philosophy with a 
phenomenological methodology. This methodology is about the critical analysis of anti-black racism 
and other forms of oppression of existential concern in the African context as related to other contexts 
such as the African diaspora or black communities outside the African diaspora.
Mabogo More, so we shall see in the next section, adopts some of Gordon's work in developing 
his own position in African existentialist phenomenology. Generally, one can designate More's work 
as African existentialist phenomenology as far as it is focused on a phenomenological analysis of 
existential issues concerning anti-black racism and other forms of oppression in the African context 
as related to other contexts. Central to his work is the concept of contingency which gives his 
position its distinguishing features, to which I turn now.
More's concept of contingency
More (2008) offers his first distinct analysis of contingency in his essay "Gordon on Contingency". 
This early work contains core elements of his main work on contingency in Sartre on Contingency 
(2021). He makes clear from the outset in both these works that contingency is central to both 
Sartre's phenomenology and Gordon's work on Sartre in Bad Faith and Antiblack Racism (1995), 
although he thinks that Gordon does not make this sufficiently explicit. As he puts it in Sartre on 
Contingency, his aim is to make explicit that "contingency constitutes the foundation of Sartre's 
thinking" (More 2021, 93), particularly Sartre's anti-racist thinking. Moreover, whereas Gordon 
offers bad faith as an explanation of racism, More wants to offer contingency as its origin (More 
2008; 2021).
So, what exactly is meant by "contingency"? In "Gordon on Contingency", More gives a succinct 
explanation of Sartre's view of contingency. "Contingency in Sartre's system may be understood in 

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
5
two closely related ways: the non-essential and/or the non-necessary" (More 2008, 28). He designates 
the "non-essential" as "those properties without which a thing could still be what it is" (ibid.). For 
example, it belongs to the essence of an apple to be round, and we identify it by the property of 
"roundness". Other properties like an apple being green or yellow, sweet, or sour, are accidental, and 
we do not essentially identify an apple by such properties. In short, the contingent is the non-essential. 
The "non-necessary" More defines as having a "lack of necessity, foundation or justification" (ibid.). 
What is coincident is a designation of something that need not be and could have been otherwise; 
its existence is "unjustified", "superfluous, gratuitous and without foundation" (ibid.). For example, 
humans are "thrown into the world" by being born in some place without choice or reason, replete 
with bodily properties they did not choose such as sex, skin colour or height.
These designations of contingency find elaborate explanation in Sartre on Contingency (2021) 
where More places them at the heart of Sartre's philosophy and its link to anti-racism. Here, More 
takes the two designations of contingency to operate on two realms. The non-necessary operates on 
the realm of existence and the non-essential on the realm of the body, which the next two sections 
deal with respectively.4 
The contingency of existence
More traces Sartre's view of the non-necessity of existence back to his novel Nausea (1964), 
which was intended to be a "pamphlet on contingency" and precursor to Being and Nothingness 
(More 2021, 94). Here the main character, Roquentin, famously looks at the root of a chestnut tree, 
which appears to be simply there without any reason like the rest of the things he observes, himself 
included. He finds the observation to exist without justification nauseatingly unsettling. As More 
points out, in Being and Nothingness, Sartre would call such an encounter with a thing like a tree the 
consciousness of something that exists as "being in-itself", independent of anything else, without 
a reason for being, thus with no justification or determination like, for instance, something created 
for some purpose. As More argues, lacking a creator, it (being in-itself) is superfluous, "de trop, 
overflowing, too much, absurd" (More 2021, 98). But not only the tree, the thing in-itself, appears 
to be without reason; also the conscious being observing the tree, that is, what Sartre calls "being 
for-itself", seems completely random, unjustified, superfluous, hence with no reason whatsoever 
to be there. Such consciousness that nothing is necessary is indeed unsettling, as More (2021, 117) 
confirms with Sartre's Nausea: "It is indeed disturbing to realize that one is not necessary to the 
world or to any being in the world because then one has nothing to live for. Whether one is dead or 
alive amounts to the same thing". 
However, in this consciousness of contingency is also the kernel of what Sartre views as freedom. 
As More notes, Sartre follows Husserl's phenomenological view of consciousness as being structurally 
intentional, as being about and directed to things that it is not itself. To be a conscious subject means 
that, prior to any reflection or thetic decision, one is conscious of things, free to turn whatever thing 
one is conscious of into what this thing is not in-itself, i.e. into an object of consciousness, something 
that exists for a conscious subject, thus "for-itself" (Sartre 1956). Sartre argues that consciousness is 
thus directed toward a thing in a way free to "nihilate" it, to make out of it a thing "for" consciousness, 
which is in effect "nothing". Hence it is "nothing" but the contents of consciousness (Sartre 1956, 12). 
In this sense, consciousness is free to turn everything into "nothing", which is the reason why Sartre 
equates consciousness with "nothingness" as opposed to "being". 
This notion of consciousness, so we shall see shortly, is of great importance to More. In Sartre's 
view, the intentional structure of consciousness makes it possible to transcend oneself from objects 
and situations. This renders subjects free to choose whatever meanings they attribute to objects or 
situations and whatever projects they want to pursue. However, we do not choose to be free in this 
way, we are intentionally structured to be free and therefore make choices about what objects and 
4	
Note again, recently Setlaelo (2023) has given a detailed discussion of the concept of contingency in More's work. However, my account 
of contingency is systematically different from hers, as I focus on the defining features More attributes to it, i.e. non-necessity and non-
essentiality. Setlaelo focuses on contingency in relation to the theme of alienation in particular as linked with the other themes she focuses 
on (consciousness, identity and freedom). 

Olivier
6
situations mean to us. Sartre thus proffers a theory of autonomous freedom - the inevitable freedom 
to make one's own choices. He emphasises his contention that we do not choose our freedom by his 
famous claim that "we are condemned to freedom" (Sartre 1956, 439). We are condemned to be free 
and thus to make choices. However, one can only be free in relation to contingent existence, that is, 
to circumstances, to the given, to things and others in a particular situation, with regard to which one 
makes choices. In short, freedom is contingent upon facticity. Conversely, facticity means that one 
cannot but be free, contingent upon one's relation to things and others in specific situations. 
More is right to see contingency at the heart of Sartre's pivotal concepts of facticity and freedom. 
What primarily characterises the facticity of freedom is its contingency, the contingency of situations 
which we are condemned to be randomly thrown in as much as we are condemned to be free from 
such situations.
This means, on the one hand, so More expands on Sartre's view, that existence is bound to the 
contingency of facticity. Contingency applies to a host of given facts about human reality in the world, 
including, for example, "one's race, gender, height and weight, physical condition (whether I am 
crippled or blind) - in short, the body which I am" (More 2021, 99). Thus, to exist involves being 
contingently in a corporeal mode. "The contingency of this facticity is that there is simply no reason or 
possible explanation why we assume this facticity" (ibid.). As More rightly states, Sartre's concept of 
facticity is to some extent similar to Heidegger's idea of "thrownness", i.e. the idea that "we are 'thrown' 
into the world without being consulted" (ibid.). From birth to death, we face "given facts and situations 
which are neither of our making nor are we responsible for their emergence into being" (ibid.).
On the other hand, although our facticity means that we do not choose our bodies or sex or ethnic, 
social, or racial affiliations and past, our consciousness has free access to choose the meaning we 
give to our facticity. As More (2021, 99) puts it:
If for example, I am a black human being in an anti-black society - which means that I did not 
choose to be black - I, however, choose the way I shall exist in my blackness. I may exist with 
my black body as "shameful", "intolerable", "humiliating", or as a "source of pride".
More's (2021) specific concern with contingency is clearly not merely out of academic interest, but 
as I said in the introduction, it is an existential matter. It is a "big issue". The sceptic, he writes, may 
immediately ask: "Why should contingency be such a big issue?". His response is compelling:
Indeed, the simple answer is that questions about existence are often questions of life and 
death. In a universe where the contingency of one's body, sex, or race, for example, are not 
taken for what they are, serious consequences such as sexism, misogyny, and racism may 
follow. Racism, as well as sexism, are serious issues. (More 2021, 101)
Thus, contingency is an existential concern, a matter of life and death. This is an answer that More, 
for instance, also gives in his essay "Gordon on Contingency" (2008), one, as he points out, that has 
gained particular relevance recently in the Black Lives Matter movement. Importantly, however, the 
sceptic may object that 
[i]f existence and individual human beings are themselves contingent and thus meaningless, 
unjustified, or superfluous, then why, the objection continues, should we then worry to make 
the life of certain groups, be they racial, sexual, religious, or political, worth living and 
worthy of being free from oppression? Are we not all superfluous? If we are, why would we 
even attempt to make the meaningless life meaningful? (More 2021, 101)
To address this question, More makes a helpful distinction, one he thinks Sartre fails to make. 
This is the distinction between "absolute contingency" and "relative contingency". He accuses 
Sartre of entertaining a notion of absolute contingency, which "ends up with a nihilistic philosophy 
that renders everything unnecessary, useless, meaningless, and without justification" (ibid.). The 
contrary is relative contingency premised on the assumption that our immediate and individual 
existence requires some sense of necessity for the sustenance and perpetuation of life. He gives the 
example of a mother who is necessary for their newborn baby who is dependent on their mother for 
growing up. This "justifies the mother's existence and renders her necessary" (ibid.). Thus, More 

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
7
(2021, 101) concludes insightfully that
[w]hile it may therefore be accepted in principle that from an ontological point of view 
human existence is superfluous in the absolute sense, it is, however, also true that once in 
existence, each one of us becomes necessary, for a multiplicity of reasons, to someone in 
certain existential situations.
I am not sure if Sartre does not make the same kind of distinction, but that is not the issue here. The issue 
is that More's distinction is helpful to counter the misrepresentation that because we are contingent it 
means "necessarily" that "human beings can have no reasons at all or purpose for existing" (ibid.). 
There is no reason to be born, but once born, one creates reasons to exist and to justify one's contingent 
existence. There is thus relative justification for one's existence. Ways of self-justification are through 
the creation of material things or intellectual production (writing, art, science). In this sense, one is free 
to create values that offer reasons for being relatively valuable and thus justified.
Humans are inclined to live in bad faith and deny their contingency. In More's understanding it 
means, on the one hand, to deny, citing Gordon (1995, 6; in More 2008, 30), "that whatever we are 
is not always what we have to be". This is a denial of one's freedom to change events and create 
values, and in this way to justify one's life as relatively necessary. On the other hand, it means to 
deny one's facticity and to view one's values, specifically, the value of one's life as absolute. This 
denial of facticity manifests in the desire to be invaluable, to be absolutely justified, which comes 
down to the desire to be God, the being that is purported to be absolute and self-justified.
More confirms both Sartre's and Gordon's views that deep down humans desire to exist with 
godlike necessity, that is, to pursue the "original project of becoming God" (More 2008, 31). This 
pursuit takes place in what More and Gordon call, after Sartre, a "spirit of seriousness" (More 2008, 
33). It involves the adoption of "an attitude of self-importance", one that "leads the serious person to 
the self-deceiving belief that he or she exists by right" (ibid.). Notably, so More argues, in the spirit 
of seriousness, some claim this right to exist over and above others, in fact, they claim the right to 
the justification of the existence of others. It is in the spirit of seriousness that the white anti-black 
racist assumes their existence as justified over and above the existence of blacks with the right to 
judge black lives as unjustified. This supremacist assumption, so More argues, is as such based on 
contingent grounds, the contingency of being a white or a black body. This brings us to the other 
aspect of contingency, the non-essential, that operates in the realm of the body.
The contingency of the body
Traditional Cartesian dualism regards the mind and body as separate entities, and as More (2021, 
103) rightly observes, "the mind is regarded as the real person or the real self and the body merely 
a material cover of the real person, a mere extension of nature". More defends Sartre's attempt to 
overcome this dualism in his main works, for instance, in Biko (2017) and specifically in Sartre on 
Contingency (2021). Already in his early work, "Gordon on Contingency", More sides with Gordon 
in endorsing Sartre's view that the "reality of human existence is to be an embodied consciousness", 
"it is by being bodily incarnated that consciousness is thrown in and situated in the world", thus 
"without bodily being, human existence is impossible" (More 2008, 34). Contrary to dualism, More 
thus proffers the view that what is real about human reality is its bodily existence. However, if 
existence is contingent, so also must be our bodily existence. More (2008, 34) puts it concisely that
while it is necessary that I be a body, it is simply contingent that my body, be this particular 
body, black; that someone else is brown, white, yellow or blue. I am not the foundation 
of what I am. I did not freely choose to be born black and short rather than white and 
tall. Therefore, being in this body rather than in some other, and being here rather than 
somewhere else is a contingency. 
Following Sartre, in Sartre on Contingency, More identifies three dimensions of the body. The first 
is one's first-personal experience of being a body, the body for myself; the second is the experience 
of the body of others (other persons), and the third is being a body for another person, the body for 
others. More relates these dimensions to the contingency of the body without explicitly connecting 

Olivier
8
them to the non-essential as one would expect. My discussion in what follows attempts to make this 
connection explicit. 
The first dimension is the first-personal experience of being a body. As More (2021, 105) puts 
it, "it is through my body that I am present to and engaged in the world". It is because "I am body" 
that "I experience myself as an individual consciousness concretely situated in the world" (ibid.). 
The body is the first-personal perspective one takes in the world. But while "I" am necessarily a 
body, my specific body with its properties, short or long, black or white, male or female, is not 
the only reality I am. These are not properties defining the essence of my reality. Instead, the 
body designates my lived engagement with the world, a perspective I take, and this is a dynamic, 
contingent condition rather than a static state. On the one hand, my body situates me in facticity, 
my body is like other things "being in-itself", replete with "physiognomic" properties. On the other 
hand, it is my point of view, which I am free to intentionally transcend and to be a "being for-itself". 
The contrary would be to deny my transcendence in an act of bad faith. Recall Sartre's example of 
the waiter in a café. Bad faith means, for the point I am trying to make, the denial that one can be 
more than a waiter. This comes down to allowing oneself to be essentialised in terms of static bodily 
properties such as a role, or sex, or race. Such an act of bad faith strips one's freedom to transcend 
one's facticity.  
The second dimension of bodily existence is the experience of the body of others - More uses 
Sartre's phrasing to speak of "the body-of-others, that is, the body as used and known by the Other, 
the body as seen by other people" (More 2021, 105). Taking recourse to Heidegger's notion of 
everyday situations of encountering others, he situates the experience of the body of others in the 
dynamics of practical dealings like, for instance, work situations. While the other's body is first 
given to me in its physical presence as an object, the possibilities of my dealings with the other 
transcend its object status. The other does not even need to be physically present to be able to work 
together with me. For example, if I work on a project together with another person, their presence 
is implied the moment I work on the project even if they are physically elsewhere in that moment. 
As More (2021, 105) puts it, "[t]he body of the Other is always already given in a situation and 
defines itself through a complex of relations with other objects". In such situations, the body of the 
other designates the possibilities of their lived engagement with me, which is a dynamic, contingent 
condition that transcends the physical presence of their body as object.
More concludes that "the body of the Other reveals two characteristics of contingency" (More 
2021, 105). The first characteristic is that the body of the other "is here and could be elsewhere; 
that is, things could be arranged otherwise than they are now and the distance between it and its 
instrumental things could be different than what it is". Imagine Sartre working on his novels on 
World War II in a café, being physically present and yet remaining absent minded by revisiting 
events of the war through his thoughts. He would be using writing equipment but would at the same 
time be distant from the physical presence of the instruments he uses. One may see Sartre working, 
with his body there for others to observe, but that is not "essentially" all to see of Sartre. He cannot 
be essentialised as the body in the café because he will also be elsewhere, lost in thought.
The second characteristic of contingency is that the body of the other "is like this and could be 
otherwise for it possesses the power to escape its objectivity" (More 2021, 105-106). Consider the 
body of the other in a situation of passport control. The other is physically present as a body with 
particular properties that make them identifiable, for instance, as bearer of a passport or identity 
document stating their essentials such as date of birth, sex, age, nationality, etc. However, as More 
(2021, 105) says, the body of the other escapes this essentialising designation, for "even if the 
person is physically present, that person need not be exactly there", but rather, as before, the physical 
body designates the subject's lived engagement with the world, and this is a dynamic, contingent 
condition with the power to escape any essentialising objectification. 
The third dimension of bodily existence is my body as seen by others. More views this 
dimension in terms of Sartre's famous analysis of "the look" in Being and Nothingness. As Sartre 
(1956, 351) puts it: "With the appearance of the Other's look I experience the revelation of my 
being-as-object, that is, of my transcendence as transcended". More (2021, 106) elaborates on this 
concisely, saying that 

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
9
[w]hen the Other looks at me, I experience the upsurge of my being-for-the-Other as an 
object for her. My body as I experience it escapes me and alienates itself from me. While it 
is necessary that I appear as body, that the body may be seen as crippled, ugly, strong, black, 
or white by the Other, it is simply contingent.
The contingency of the body in this dimension comes to the fore in that one is objectified by the 
other in a way that one is not responsible for. It is like one is thrown into the look of the other 
without choice. The look has the power to cast one as "being-there as precisely the body" (Sartre 
1956, 352; in More 2021, 106; More's emphasis). More (2021, 106) elaborates that "[t]his is the 
body experienced under the look of the Other, the consequence of which is shame, embarrassment, 
or pride". I do not ask to be looked at by the other in the way they objectify me, in the way that 
may cause me shame, embarrassment or, conversely, pride, even in their physical absence. But the 
look of the other paradoxically brings to the fore the fact that their look is itself contingent in that 
it does not take a determined form. The look of the other cannot be static; it is contingent upon the 
dynamics of lived engagement, for instance, the chance that the look is returned, or that it can be 
internalised in many different ways. 
However, the look can "imprison" one in various ways, even in the absence of the other. Sartre 
demonstrates such imprisonment in terms of his analysis of antisemitism and racism, and More follows 
suit. Sartre (1956, 523) writes in Being and Nothingness, for example: "Here I am - Jew, or Aryan, 
handsome or ugly, one-armed, etc. I am all of this for the Other with no hope of changing it". Sartre 
makes a distinction between the choice to apprehend "the-Other-as subject" or "the-Other-as-object" 
(Sartre 1956, 526). The Other-as-object manifests particularly in terms of collective identification. 
Through the upsurge of the other, certain determinations arise - ways in which others are essentialised 
as they certainly have not chosen to be. More (2021, 106) links such collective identification with the 
objectification of "black bodies in an anti-black society". As an example of this third dimension of 
the body, that is, of how the other can look at a subject as a collective object, More (2021, 106) uses 
Fanon's famous example of a white boy observing him (Fanon) on a train in France: 
The classic example of the body in its third dimension is given by Frantz Fanon's encounter 
with a little white boy who screams to his mother "Look, A Negro!" Fanon's [1967, 113] 
explanation is telling: "My body was given back to me sprawled out, distorted, recoloured, 
clad in mourning in the white winter day".
More (2021, 106) confirms Fanon's observation that one's body seen as a collective entity by white 
others "dominates black bodily experience". It is in the racist view that a subject finds themselves 
presented back as essentially a collective black object. One can say that by looking back and writing 
about the incident, Fanon returned the classifying look of white others by writing against it, as a 
subject with the power to escape being essentialised as a collective object.
More concludes that, ultimately, the three dimensions of the body bring to the fore the following 
paradox. On the one hand, according to the "law of essence", "a being cannot be without being a 
particular kind of being" (More 2021, 107; emphasis in original). One cannot but be a bodily being 
replete with its properties of sex, size, skin colour, etc. This is how others tend to look at my body and 
how I look at others and myself, e.g. when one goes through passport control. On the other hand, the 
body is the first-personal perspective every conscious subject takes. I am this body being looked at, 
e.g. this person carrying the passport. Our consciousness, that is, the other's consciousness like my 
own consciousness, continuously takes the freedom to surpass our bodies as looked at by others; we 
are not just the persons showing our passports, the persons seen by others looking at us, but rather we 
are subjects who can look back and refuse to be reduced to objects. In Sartre's words, freedom makes 
it possible "to be what one is not", to escape the look of others, or one's assumed role. 
In this sense bodily existence is not predetermined by essence but rather, as Sartre (1992, 31) 
famously states, "existence precedes essence". Bodily existence remains non-essential; one cannot 
essentialise someone based on bodily properties. However, as More (2021, 107) refines this claim, 
this does not mean "that a human being has no essence, but rather that consciousness continuously 
surpasses this essence". Thus, "[i]t is its essence in the mode of not being it" (ibid.). So although I 

Olivier
10
am essentially "this body" (ibid.; emphasis in original), there is not an essential way I relate to my 
body and other bodies, but rather, I constantly surpass such relations and relate in new ways. I am in 
the phenomenological sense a lived body contingent upon the relations I keep making.
To conclude, More's view of contingency thus far shows in part his contribution to a 
phenomenological analysis of lived experience of existential concern in an anti-black racist 
African or Africana context. More goes a step further by making a significant connection between 
contingency and difference, partly in Sartre on Contingency, and more specifically in his recent 
work, "Chabani Manganyi: The Lived Experience of Difference" (2023), to which I turn now.
The creation of difference
More's (2023) recent essay, "Chabani Manganyi: The Lived Experience of Difference", expands on and 
brings together central features of what he explicitly calls "African existentialist phenomenology". In the 
following, I try to make clear the link More establishes, but does not make sufficiently explicit, between 
"difference" and the "contingency of existence" and the "contingency of the body" respectively.
More argues that the clinical psychologist Manganyi (1973, 4) poses a central existential-
phenomenological question: "Is there a black mode of being-in-the-world? Stated differently: Is 
being-black-in-the-world different in fundamental respects to being-white-in-the-world?". More 
calls this the "Black question". He uses the capital B for black to bring to the fore the question 
of difference.5 This question holds the claim that there is a fundamental difference between black 
modes and white modes of being. On the one hand, he adopts Heidegger's and Sartre's basic 
assumption that the human condition is the same for all human beings, of being contingently thrown 
in the world. As he puts it, "[w]e all are born and die, feel the pangs of hunger and the desire 
for sleep, experience joy or sadness, and so forth" (More 2023, 142). However, he agrees with 
Fanon that Sartre, and for that matter, Heidegger, does not account for the fact that there is still a 
fundamental difference between white and black modes of being. As he cites Fanon: 
Jean-Paul Sartre had forgotten that the Negro suffers in his body quite differently from the 
white man. This is because, as a Black man and because of the colour of his body, he is 
"overdetermined from without". (Fanon 1967, 116; in More 2023, 142)
For More, as for Fanon, the question of "being" is essentially a question of difference, thus of a 
phenomenology of different experiential white and black modes of existence. Consequently, he 
follows Frantz Fanon and calls his approach an existentialist "phenomenology of difference". This 
notion of a "phenomenology of difference" is premised on the distinct methodological assumption 
of what Husserl called "suspension" (bracketing). More (2023, 137) puts it in a refreshing way: 
In phenomenology, one does not simply accept what one sees. Doing phenomenology 
requires vigilance on the part of the subject on its object of consciousness. In my view, 
phenomenology requires a suspension of the habitual ways of seeing; of ways of doing. 
To suspend habitual ways of seeing and doing starts for More with what Husserl (1983, 51ff) calls 
the "natural attitude" that we commonly take in encountering things and others. In the natural 
attitude, for instance, we take for granted that people exist independent of how they are seen, replete 
with their different properties such as skin colour, sex, size, etc. But, More (2023, 137; emphasis in 
original) holds that
the moment I apply Husserl's principle of "bracketing" or suspension of the phenomena of 
the natural attitude, I constitute them into phenomena or objects of consciousness. Instead 
of "what is a black person" I phenomenologically shift to "what does it mean to be black-in-
the-world?". The question of meaning then comes into play. 
The phenomenological question thus is: what does it "mean" to be black in the world? It seems fair 
to take the term "meaning" in phenomenological terms (at least as shared by Husserl, Heidegger 
5	
In what follows, I try to follow More's use of the capital B for Black wherever I cite him, noting that he also uses the lower case b for 
black. This is not always easy to apply, thus I use the capital B only when citing him. 

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
11
and Sartre) as that which is of "concern" or "significance", that is, what "matters". So the question 
phenomenologically is: how does it matter to be black in the world? 
As we saw, More wrote in "Gordon on Contingency", that being black in an anti-black world 
is an existential issue, one of life and death. More locates his phenomenological analysis of why 
being black matters in the African context. To digress for a moment, he refers to Manganyi and 
Biko occasionally as Africana instead of as African phenomenologists. This is slightly confusing 
as African and Africana situations are quite different, as M. John Lamola (2020) in his review of 
More's book Biko points out. But it seems fair to say that the point here is to emphasise that although 
More sets out to develop an African phenomenology by locating his phenomenological analysis in 
the African context, at its core it also pertains to the African diaspora, specifically what it "means" 
to be black in any anti-black racist situation. What it "means" is to be identified as "ontologically" 
different, as being not only a black other, but no other person at all. To use the jargon of the day, as 
More (2023) does, why it matters to be black in the anti-black racist world is that here black lives 
do not matter.
Like Fanon, More uses Sartre's terminology against himself to explain more precisely what it 
means not to matter. Not to matter means to lack something. Recall Sartre's notion of the experience 
of a "lack of Being" in Being and Nothingness. Humans are contingent and lack any absolute 
justification; at the same time, they are free to desire and seek some form of relative justification for 
their existence. For "black lives" it is different. More (2023, 132) writes that
[a]gainst Sartre's view of consciousness as a lack of Being and a source of freedom, Fanon 
argues that within an anti-black racist society, the Black man is denied consciousness and 
thus the capacity to be a lack, precisely because he is reduced to brute Being, a thing or 
object without freedom. 
More makes a strong argument. In an anti-black racist world, Blacks are chained to their bodies, 
their skins, and denied the capacity to even constitute themselves as a lack of Being. They are in 
fact considered to lack consciousness, the very capacity to be aware of one's contingency. "Black 
consciousness" in this jargon means in fact "denied consciousness", and therefore denied freedom, 
for it is through consciousness that we are free to find some justification for our contingency. 
This brings us finally to the link between difference and contingency. Following the structure of 
the first two sections, in what follows I try to link difference with the contingency of existence and 
the body respectively.
First, consider the link between difference and the contingency of existence. Recall, More argues 
that the contingency of existence is about the assumption that existence is non-necessary and 
therefore has no absolute justification; however, while no human existence is absolutely necessary, 
once one exists, the exigencies of existence justify the relative necessity to exist, for instance, for 
a mother to be there for her baby. Now, so he further argues, anti-black racism creates a racist 
difference between white and black modes of existence in terms of their justifiability: the white 
mode is designated as absolutely justified and the standard of the justification of the black mode of 
existence. More precisely, the racist difference introduces a Manichean distinction between whites 
and blacks. Whites are associated with the standard of what is good, wholesome, beautiful, rational, 
and blacks by the white standard of what is bad, unwholesome, ugly, irrational. Consequently, "to 
be Black-in-the-anti-black-world is to be raced, named, marked, considered non-rational, criminal, 
emotional, deviant, pathological, different" (More 2023, 142). More argues that the "appearance" of 
black people in the racist world "automatically amounts to an unjustified appearance, an illegitimate 
presence which requires justification" (More 2023, 141), and such justification is bestowed upon 
them by whites according to their own interests. Accordingly, black lives only matter to the extent 
that they serve white interests. 
Now to the relation between difference and bodily contingency, that is, the non-essential of our 
bodily being. More characterises the difference between black and white embodiment in terms of 
Merleau-Ponty's notion of the "body schema" in Phenomenology of Perception (1962). Recall, 
the body schema is not about a body image, the reflective awareness one has of one's own body, 
but rather it refers to one's bodily capability to be aware, prior to reflection, of one's location, 

Olivier
12
orientation, movement and functioning in one's surroundings. One could say, whereas the subject 
may have a perceptual image of their body, the body offers the subject a schema to perceive the 
world, themselves included. The schema is our basic mode of awareness not of but as bodily beings 
in the world. 
Now, More poses Manganyi's question as to how the body may determine, through its schema, 
the way one is being-black-in-the world. In response, he draws on Merleau-Ponty and Fanon's 
reading of the latter to distinguish between "individual schema" and "sociological schema" (More 
2023, 145). The individual schema is in Sartre's language "the body for oneself", that is, the 
body as one's first-personal perspective on the world. The sociological schema pertains to the 
"body-for-the-other", that is, "the socialisation of our body image which is culture bound and 
specific" (ibid.). If I understand him correctly, More argues that socialisation not only influences 
one's view (image) of one's own body, but also shapes the very perspective (schema) one takes in 
the world. For instance, the anti-black racist world imposes a Manichean image on the black body 
as being "inferior" and the white body as being "superior", and this image becomes "interiorised" 
as a schema through which white and black bodies are perceived. In these terms, white bodies 
become the societal standard of "wholesomeness" through which individual black bodies are 
degraded to the status of "unwholesomeness". As More cites Manganyi (1973, 6; in More 2023, 
145): "If, for instance, an individual is Black, 'he begins to know, through various subtle ways, that 
his black body is unwholesome, that the white body is the societal standard of wholesomeness'". 
At the core, the sociological schema is about how "in a white supremacist culture, the black 
body schema is socially constructed as a negative sociological schema" (ibid.). The result is 
self-alienation, a divided self, "a rupture or split" between the individual and sociological schema. 
The individual learns systemically from the anti-black racist society that there is a societal standard 
of wholesomeness that they should try to reach, but cannot reach because they are black and 
remain unwholesome. 
More does not explicitly link the notion of "sociological schema" to the idea of "systemic racism", 
but his analysis of the notion of schema does suggest a strong link. He often speaks of racism as a 
system. For instance, he agrees in his discussion of different definitions of racism about its systemic 
aspect as follows: 
From the above definitions we notice that racism is understood as an ideology. When as a 
set of beliefs or ideas it is connected to the power structure and power-relations of a given 
society, then it becomes an ideology. Hence, it is commonly characterized as "a system of 
domination". (More 2021, 40)
Accordingly, the link between racism as ideological "system of domination" and "sociological 
schema" manifests when the sociological schema of a white supremacist society, which sustains as 
a "social standard" a false belief in the superiority of whites and inferiority of blacks, establishes a 
connection to a system of power relations in which whites institutionalise the oppression of blacks 
not only socially, but also politically and economically. The system is nothing but contingent. It is 
contingent upon a false white supremacist belief in their own superiority. But clearly racism is not 
simply a matter of contingent, personal opinion, namely a patently false belief which associates 
blackness with inferiority (which, as contingent, stands to be remedied). Such an analysis of 
contingency would sidestep the structural sociological nature of racism. Instead, one must keep 
in mind that More's analysis of contingency throughout addresses it as an origin of racism both in 
terms of schemas of individual perception (belief) and sociological domination. In his work, the 
sociological schema is evidently linked with the system of social, political, and economic power 
relations that dominate individuals in a given society. One can conclude that sociological schemas 
are inclusive of social, political, and economic power relations and are pivotal in determining and 
dominating individual schemas of perception. Finally, one can say, in racism, sociological schemas 
create a systemic phenomenological difference between different modes of being on contingent 
grounds of individual bodily appearance.  

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
13
The ontological strategy 
Thus far, I have tried to expound the theoretical part of More's approach to contingency as the 
origin of the racist difference between black and white modes of existence. Racists consider this 
difference justified as necessary and essential, thus as what has to be the case. But the difference 
is made on contingent grounds. Contingency tells us that existence is non-necessary and bodily 
attributes are non-essential. What is the case does not have to be the case. Racism does not have to 
be the case. The very anti-black racist society that creates differences based on contingency is by the 
same measure unjustified. It can be changed. Racism can be stopped. So, how to stop racism? This 
brings me to the practical part of More's view of contingency. As I said in the introduction, I focus 
on the ontological and moral strategies that he introduces, while I reserve the political strategy for 
another study. More argues that the "struggle" against racism begins with an "ontological solution", 
more particularly, an act of what he calls after Sartre "radical conversion", which I deal with in this 
section. 
More's adoption of Sartre's concept of "radical conversion" goes back to his early essays "Biko: 
Africana existentialist philosopher" (2004), "Gordon on Contingency" (2008) and "Black solidarity" 
(2009) and finds expanded discussions in Biko (2017) and Sartre on Contingency (2021). He admits 
that "conversion" is a contentious concept, and "one of Sartre's concepts whose meaning has acquired 
multiple interpretations" (More 2021, 167). However, his interest is not in the controversy around 
the use of the term in Sartre's work. As is clear from his books on Biko and Sartre, his focus is on its 
"liberatory potential" (More 2017, 270; 2021, 167). This is apparent in the way he defines conversion as
a move through a process of self-recovery from a consciousness that was previously 
corrupted to one in which freedom is the absolute value, one in which we recognize that our 
situation does not have to be as it is, that this racist situation can and ought to be changed. 
(More 2008, 41)  
"Radical conversion" thus starts with what More calls a "self-recovery" from a "corrupted" 
consciousness. "Corrupted consciousness" refers here to the attitude of bad faith, the denial 
of one's freedom to change whatever is the case, particularly, if the case is a racist situation. A 
"self-recovery" designates the move from the attitude of self-denial to self-awareness of one's 
freedom to change the situation. Notably, according to More, such "self-recovery" requires what he 
calls in Biko a "conscientization process" (More 2017, 272), one that educates awareness of both the 
impediments of the situation of racism as well as the freedom to change it. More specifically, such 
conscientisation educates "a lucid and clear consciousness" of the challenges to change the situation 
and the resolute acceptance of what is required in the "struggle to change it" (More 2021, 172). The 
main challenge, however, remains to fight bad faith itself, that is, the denial that the situation can 
change. Thus, More (2021, 169) asks in reference to Sartre's short story "No Exit" (1949): 
Is there then a way of deliverance or salvation from the clutches of bad faith? If racism is a 
form of bad faith, and if there is "No Exit" from bad faith as Sartre seems to suggest, is there 
then equally "No ontological Exit" or salvation from the terror of racism? 
At the root of the terror of racism is the denial of its contingency. It is the denial that the racist 
situation does not have to be. Conversion means to "recover" from the clutches of such denial 
and recognise that it has an "exit", that is, that racism has nothing necessary or essential and thus 
inescapable to it. In Sartre's depiction of hell in "No Exit", one is stuck forever with the same 
people. As Sartre (1949) said famously: "Hell is the other". Hell is that they will not change. The 
exit from hell is to recognise that the people in hell have contingent features. They do not have to 
be as they are perceived, but rather, there is an "ontological exit", for they can change their ways of 
being. As More (2008, 41) writes, "[n]o black has to be black. No white has to be white". 
More thus argues that one is not condemned to the "hell of the other" as in Sartre's "No Exit" 
(1949). He insists that there is an "exit", even out of the worst of situations. The very impediments 
of what appears to be an inescapable situation can be seen to pose a challenge to grasp one's 
freedom to escape it. More cites Sartre's provocative statement: "Never were we freer than under the 
German occupation" (Sartre 1944; in More 2021, 171). This means accepting as "absolute value" 

Olivier
14
one's freedom in, and despite, a situation. The basic assumption is that it is through limitations 
that freedom arises, like it is through the walls of prison that freedom manifests as the challenge to 
escape. To escape does not simply mean to get out of the situation, but to see that the situation and 
the people in the situation are contingent, that things can change, that what seems to be the case does 
not have to be the case no matter how limited the chances of change may appear. More (2021, 171) 
thus proffers Sartre's view that "limitations to freedom become the condition for freedom". 
More concludes that the radical conversion of attitude is a necessary but still not sufficient 
condition for the struggle against racism. Such a conversion happens on an ontological level; it is 
a choice for a particular mode of being, one that takes freedom in a situation seriously as absolute 
value. However, the change of attitude is not sufficient and calls for a transition from ontology to 
morality, thus from a recognition of what must not be the case to "concrete" moral solutions (More 
2008). This brings us to More's quest for these "moral solutions".
Moral solutions
More's view of "moral solutions" to racism is something he claims Sartre could have worked out 
but did not. His (More's) argument for moral solutions is found in slightly different versions in 
various texts, including "Gordon on Contingency" (2008), "Black solidarity" (2009), Biko (2017) 
and Sartre on Contingency (2021). The most systematic account for these solutions seems to be in 
Sartre on Contingency, which I focus on.
To begin with, More is well aware of the problem involved in the call for a transition from the 
ontological assumption that racism must not be the case, to moral strategies to fight racism. He 
agrees with Sartre that "[o]ntology itself cannot formulate ethical precepts. It is concerned solely 
with what is, and we cannot possibly derive imperatives from ontology's indicatives" (Sartre 1956, 
625; in More 2021, 173). More (2021, 173) endorses Sartre's "refusal to move from factual givens 
to value judgments", thus to avoid the naturalistic fallacy. However, his contention is that Sartre's 
concept of contingency as a basis of conversion offers a foundation for effectively denouncing 
moral ills such as racism, sexism, homophobia, etc. He does not endeavour to engage in Sartre's 
contested ethical theory, but rather, his focus is "on a possible ethical position emanating from the 
theory of contingency as it appears in Sartre's works" (More 2021, 173-174). As indicated, he 
thinks Sartre fails to work out "the full moral implications of his doctrine of contingency" and wants 
to fill this gap with an outline of his own original position on the moral implications of the concept 
of contingency. 
More (2021, 175) starts his outline of a moral solution with the important question: "Why should 
contingency or its form, accident of birth, have ethical signification?". Referring to Sartre's (1993) 
book on Flaubert, The Family Idiot, More writes that Sartre is rightly contemptuous of people who 
hold other people responsible for certain physical contingencies of birth such as sex or race, while 
they know that people have absolutely no control over them. This is exactly what anti-black racists 
do. Taking recourse to the view of Anthony Kwame Appiah, More (2021, 175) writes that racists 
"hate black people for their physical appearances (especially colour) and correlate these bodily 
appearances with moral attributes". In the Manichean world of racism, blackness is associated with 
badness, and in a circular way, people are made morally responsible for the very badness associated 
with their blackness. But as More argues, responsibility is generally understood to be commensurate 
with our ability to control or exercise power over how things should turn out. Thus, racists apply 
the concept of responsibility not only in a circular but also a contradictory way. Racists designate 
blacks as bad because of their skin colour, and, while knowing blacks have no control over their 
being black, they hold them responsible for being bad because they are black. In short, the racist 
assumption is that black people are morally responsible for being born black.   
More (2021, 176) counters the racist assumption with a concise moral claim: "I am not responsible 
for being born black, but I am responsible for the meaning I attach to my blackness". One can 
unpack his claim in terms of an argument containing four sub-arguments. 
First, as More (2021, 177) points out, one is not responsible for the "accident of skin". "Accidents 
of birth are morally undeserving", consequently, "human beings cannot possess a moral right or title 
to them". Second, however, one might be held responsible for the way one deals with the "accident 

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
15
of skin", e.g. by "freely appropriating" one's blackness and "using it to gain advantage over others" 
(ibid.). To appropriate blackness is thus a "matter of choice". The choice, so More cites Sartre, is 
premised on the assumption that "[m]an [sic] makes himself" (ibid.). One has the choice to give 
appropriate meaning to the contingency of the accident of skin. Third, the choice of meaning that 
one gives to blackness happens in the concrete situation of racist oppression. Fourth, the racist 
situation is immoral and demands one to choose effective moral action to change the situation. The 
conclusion is that responsibility for the meaning of blackness can be taken through the choice of 
effective moral action that can change anti-black racist situations. 
More thus argues for a moral solution to racism. The strategy is to choose effective moral action 
that can change the racist situation. What kind of "effective" moral action is meant? More responds 
to this question by making use of Sartre's (1992) distinction between abstract and concrete morality 
in the latter's Notebook for an Ethics. 
"Abstract ethics" is grounded on the "bourgeoise" assumption of a "moral world" in which the 
playing field is level, one in which it is accepted that the "status quo is as it is, moral, without 
injustices, oppression, and dehumanization" (More 2021, 179). Such ethics is in bad faith by 
denying "that certain sections of humanity, be it race, class or gender, are oppressed, exploited, and 
dehumanized; and further, that the whole world is not moral" (ibid.) By such denial, abstract ethics 
becomes complicit in allowing uneven situations of oppression, including exploitation, racism, 
violence, starvation, etc., and fails to account for the need to change such situations. In short, 
abstract ethics takes the moral high ground in denial of the uneven playing fields it permits. 
"Concrete ethics" as More advocates it speaks to situations of oppression and unlevel playing 
fields, which demand effective moral solutions for existential realities such as exploitation, racism, 
sexism, starvation, etc. More (2023, 179) demonstrates this demand with a striking example:
Hunger, for example, is not a metaphysical evil; it is an existential evil, and that is it. Needs 
such as hunger must come before ethics for one does not attempt to teach a starving person 
to leave the food of others alone. 
Ethics seeking effective moral solutions cannot assume "moral purity", but rather accepts that on 
an unlevel playing field of oppression, moral action requires in the first place to address the fact 
that the playing field is uneven. Moral action starts with the need to change the uneven situation in 
which agents act. Such action, as any action in an uneven situation, may permit "dirty hands". One 
example is again that one cannot expect someone in a hopeless situation of starvation not to steal 
food. Concrete ethics exactly addresses the need to change such situations, thus ones of economic 
injustice. Another example is that the need to change such situations itself may require "dirty 
hands" as in the use of violence as a last resort to be effective. More (2021, 179) follows Sartre 
and argues in this respect that although "violence is essentially unjustified, it may nevertheless be 
justified because necessary", thus in "a society in which violence is both endemic and systematic, 
the rightness or wrongness of violence becomes irrelevant". Conversely, an oppressive society 
may enact violence, such as a morally unjustified act of terrorism, to maintain its power over the 
oppressive situation. Typically, the oppressor will justify their own use of violence as a pure means 
to preserve or save the status quo of the "moral world" that they claim to represent. It falls beyond 
my scope to address the justification of violence here. Suffice it to say that More's point is that 
abstract ethics suits the oppressor, and not the oppressed, because it does not address the uneven 
playing field of the situation of oppression. More (2021, 179) concludes that abstract ethics leads to 
"inaction and resignation because it is incapable of challenging the status quo or changing it". The 
contrary is concrete ethics, which seeks to change the status quo and level the playing field premised 
on the assumption of its contingency: it must not be the case and ought to change. 
Concrete ethics, as More argues, leads further to political strategies, or as he says, a "revolutionary 
politics of liberation". As I said, I do not have the space to deal with his political strategies. I only 
say a bit more about the relation between moral and political strategies in the conclusion.
Conclusion
I argued that More's work on contingency distinguishes his approach and contribution to African 

Olivier
16
phenomenology. I tried to show how More uses the works of Fanon, Heidegger, Biko, Gordon, 
Manganyi and especially Sartre as a point of departure to argue that contingency refers to the 
non-necessary and non-essential features of bodily existence, and that, based on these features, the 
anti-black racist introduces a racist difference between white and black modes of being, with the 
white mode arbitrarily seen as justified over and above the black mode of being. More locates his 
phenomenological analysis of this racist difference in the African context, but also extends it to the 
African diaspora and other contexts of oppression. More's argument that contingency is the origin of 
anti-black racism is enough to claim that he makes an original contribution to scholarship in Sartre 
and race studies, and most importantly for my purpose, to an African and Africana phenomenological 
analysis of lived experience of existential concern in an anti-black racist context. But there is more 
to his contribution to African phenomenology than this analysis of contingency as an origin of 
racism. I tried to show how More expands on his phenomenological analysis of contingency by 
exploring ontological and moral strategies to fight racism. The ontological strategy is to call for a 
"radical conversion" of attitude, from denying the contingency of any situation to recognising one's 
freedom to change whatever is the case, particularly if the case is a racist situation and considered 
justified as necessary and essential. This conversion calls for concrete moral strategies to change 
such oppressive situations.
Moral strategies, as I indicated, demand further political strategies. According to More, the "moral 
solutions" of a "concrete ethics" require and lead to "political solutions" to stop racism. He also speaks 
of them as "ontic solutions" as they refer to concrete social and economic situations of structural 
racism that need redress. In this sense, More (2021, 180) speaks of a "turn from existential ontology 
to an existential-historical situation of politics" in Sartre. Ontological considerations of "authentic 
being", and per implication, "being moral", thus call for "ontic or practical choice of involvement - 
concrete political decisions, resoluteness, and commitments" (More 2021, 181) to stop racism. How 
exactly this turn to politics relates to and enhances More's ontological and moral strategies requires 
more extensive discussion than is possible here, and will be the topic of another study.
References
Biko, S. 2005. I write what I like. Cambridge: ProQuest. 
Du Bois, W. E. B. 1996. The Souls of Black Folk. The Project Gutenberg eBook.
Fanon, F. 1967. Black Skins White Masks. London: Pluto Press.
Gordon, L. R. 1995. Bad Faith and Antiblack Racism. Atlantic Highlands: Humanities.
Gordon, L. R. 2000. Existentia Africana: Understanding Africana Existential Thought. New York: 
Routledge.
Henry, P. 2006. "Africana Phenomenology: Its Philosophical Implications." Worlds and 
Knowledges Otherwise 1(3): 1-22. https://globalstudies.trinity.duke.edu/sites/globalstudies.
trinity.duke.edu/files/documents/v1d3_PHenry.pdf.
Husserl, E. 1965. Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy. Translated by Quentin Lauer. New 
York: Harper & Row.
Husserl, E. 1982. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy: First Book. Translated by F. Kersten. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lamola, M. J. 2020. "Book Review of Biko: Philosophy, Identity and Liberation by Mabogo Percy 
More." Journal of Contemporary African Philosophy 1(1): 75-78. https://jocap.domuni.eu/
jocap/article/view/philosophy-identity-and-liberation/11.
Manganyi, N.C. 1973. Being-black-in-the-world. Johannesburg: Ravan Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. Translated by Kegan Paul. London: 
Routledge.
More, M. P. 2004. "Biko: Africana Existentialist Philosopher." Alternation 11(1): 79-108. https://
hdl.handle.net/10520/AJA10231757_687.
More, M. P. 2008. "Gordon on Contingency: A Sartrean Interpretation." CLR James Journal 14(1): 
26-45. https://doi.org/10.5840/clrjames20081414.
More, M. P. 2009. "Black solidarity: A philosophical defence." Theoria: A Journal of Social and 
Political Theory 56(120): 20-43. https://doi.org/10.3167/th.2009.5612003.

South African Journal of Philosophy 2025, 1-17
17
More, M. P. 2017. Steve Biko: Philosophy, Identity and Liberation. Cape Town: HSRC Press.
More, M. P. 2019. Looking Through Philosophy in Black. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
More, M. P. 2021. Sartre on Contingency: Antiblack Racism and Embodiment. Lanham: Rowman 
& Littlefield.
More, M. P. 2023. "Chabani Manganyi: The Lived Experience of Difference." In Phenomenology 
in an African Context: Contributions and Challenges, edited by A. Olivier, M. J. Lamola, and J. 
Sands, 127-152. Albany: SUNY Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.6947034.9.
Olivier, A. 2023. "African Phenomenology - what is that?" In Phenomenology in an African 
Context: Contributions and Challenges, edited by A. Olivier, M. J. Lamola, and J. Sands, 15-36. 
Albany: SUNY Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.6947034.4.
Olivier A., M. J. Lamola, and J. Sands, eds. 2023. Phenomenology in an African Context. Albany: 
SUNY Press. https://doi.org/10.2307/jj.6947034.
Outlaw, L. T., Jr. 2017. "Africana Philosophy" In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 
(Summer 2017 Edition) edited by E. N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2017/
entries/africana/.
Sartre, J-P. 1944. "Paris Alive: The Republic of Silence." The Atlantic 174(6): 39-40.
Sartre, J-P. 1949. No Exit, and Three Other Plays. New York: Vintage Books.
Sartre, J-P. 1956. Being and Nothingness. Translated by H. E. Barnes. New York: Philosophical 
Library.
Sartre, J-P. 1964. Nausea. Translated by Lloyd Alexander. New York: New Directions.
Sartre, J-P. 1992. Notebook for an Ethics. Translated by D. Pellauer. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Sartre, J-P. 1993. The Family Idiot: Gustave Flaubert, 1821-1857. Translated by C. Cosman. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226822006.001.0001.
Setlaelo, S. 2023.  "An existential phenomenology of black female difference: extending the reach 
of Mabogo P. More's Politics of Being." PhD thesis. University of Johannesburg, South Africa. 
https://hdl.handle.net/10210/506084.
Sithole, T. 2022. Mabogo P. More: Philosophical Anthropology in Azania. Lanham: Lexington. 
Steinbock, A. J. 1995. Home and Beyond: Generative Phenomenology after Husserl. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press.
Received 31 January 2024; revised 1 October 2024; accepted 2 October 2024

