Psychoanalytic Inquiry
A Topical Journal for Mental Health Professionals
ISSN: 0735-1690 (Print) 1940-9133 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hpsi20
Disruptions of the Meshed Architecture in Autism
Spectrum Disorder
Shaun Gallagher, Laura Sparaci & Somogy Varga
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher, Laura Sparaci & Somogy Varga (2022) Disruptions of the
Meshed Architecture in Autism Spectrum Disorder, Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 42:1, 76-95, DOI:
10.1080/07351690.2022.2007032
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/07351690.2022.2007032
Published online: 18 Feb 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 341
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hpsi20

Disruptions of the Meshed Architecture in Autism Spectrum 
Disorder
Shaun Gallagher, Ph.D.
, Laura Sparaci, Ph.D., and Somogy Varga, Ph.D.
ABSTRACT
We take a wide view of social cognition to include embodied and situated 
processes of intersubjective interaction, which include, for example, non­
verbal cues, joint attention and joint action, social affordances and direct 
enactive perception of intentions and affective states. In this article we 
propose a model that can help to capture and organize the many different 
factors involved in social cognition, and we evaluate how this model may 
inform research on Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Specifically, we pro­
pose that social interaction can be viewed as a form of embodied-situated 
performance. In this respect the model of a meshed architecture, borrowed 
from performance studies, can provide some insight into social cognition, 
and specifically into social cognitive problems in ASD. As currently under­
stood this model integrates cognitive and embodied motoric processes. We 
have developed a more enhanced model of a meshed architecture that 
applies more generally to situated cognition, and we apply this enhanced 
model to studies on social cognition and ASD.
KEYWORDS
Autism; social cognition; 
conversation; meshed 
architecture; dynamical 
relations
Introduction
Social cognition can be taken in a narrow sense as it is usually portrayed by theory of mind (ToM) 
explanations (e.g., Baron-Cohen, 1995). The latter are centered on the notion of mindreading and 
are framed in terms of methodological individualism, that is, the idea that we can explain social 
cognition by identifying mechanisms found in the individual, or the individual brain (such as 
a simulation or a ToM module). In a wider sense, social cognition does not stay "in the head" but 
involves embodied and situated processes of intersubjective interaction which include, for example, 
joint attention and joint action, social affordances and direct enactive perception of intentions and 
affective states (Gallagher, 2020). In this paper we pursue this wider framework. We present a model 
that can help to capture and organize the many different factors involved in social cognition, and we 
test this model on accounts of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) that focus on understanding the 
interpersonal world of people with autism (Gallagher & Varga, 2015).
We propose that social interaction can be viewed as a form of embodied-situated performance.1 
For example, both social interaction and performance involve skills of various sorts. In this respect 
we think that we can derive some insight into social cognition, and specifically into social cognitive 
problems in ASD, by borrowing the model of a meshed architecture from performance studies. As 
currently understood in performance studies this model integrates cognitive and embodied motoric 
processes (Christensen et al., 2016). We have developed a more enhanced model of a meshed 
architecture that applies more generally to situated cognition (Gallagher & Varga, 2020), and here 
we'll apply this enhanced model to social cognition and to autism.
CONTACT Shaun Gallagher, Ph.D. 
s.gallagher@memphis.edu 
Department of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Clement 
337, Memphis, TN 38152.
1We mean this in the limited sense that performance theory may provide useful insight on some of the processes, behaviors and 
mechanisms involved in social cognition. We don't mean that social interaction is in all respects a kind of performance that one 
might find on the stage, where, for example, we might be aware that our actions are enclosed in a fictional scenario.
Copyright © Melvin Bornstein, Joseph Lichtenberg, Donald Silver
PSYCHOANALYTIC INQUIRY                                                                                                  
2022, VOL. 42, NO. 1, 76-95
https://doi.org/10.1080/07351690.2022.2007032

This paper is organized as follows. In the first part we describe the model of meshed architecture 
as it is outlined in performance studies. We then explain the more enhanced model. In the second 
part we apply this model to an embodied-situated conception of social cognition, focusing on 
developmental psychology and intersubjective conversation. In the third part we analyze problems 
of social cognition found in ASD and show how the notion of a meshed architecture helps to 
explicate these problems. In our conclusion we'll mention some limitations of this approach, and 
some further strategies for developing a fuller explanation.
The model of a meshed architecture
In performance studies, the model of a meshed architecture has been developed in part as a critique 
of Hubert Dreyfus's analysis of expert performance in which he portrays expert embodied coping as 
being in a mindless flow. According to Dreyfus (2005, 2007), any form of reflective cognition would 
be disruptive of performance. On his view, as long as things are going smoothly the agent can be on 
automatic pilot; specifically, there is no need for self-consciousness, which may only emerge when 
the agent detects something going wrong (Dreyfus, 2007, p. 377).
In contrast to Dreyfus, a number of other theorists have argued that performance involves 
mindful elements. They conceive of a top-down process where low-order processes of embodied 
coping are modulated by higher-order, reflective cognitive aspects. Reflective cognition, rather than 
disrupting performance, guides it. For example, Barbara Montero (2010; 2015), in studies of dance 
performance, argues that optimal performance often coincides with reflective, thoughtful perfor­
mance, where thoughtful means
self-reflective thinking, planning, predicting, deliberation, attention to or monitoring of [or] conceptualizing 
[of] actions, control, . . . having a sense of the self, and acting for a reason. (Montero, 2016, p. 38) 
In a similar fashion, Robert Cohen (2013), in the context of theatrical performance, refers to the 
actor's "preparatory thinking as she readies herself for the role, and in-performance thinking, 
which, in an ideal situation, is 'aligned' with the [performer's] action" (Cohen, 2013). Likewise, 
Richard Shusterman (2008), for a number of different types of performance, describes an explicit 
reflective consciousness "we are not only conscious of what we perceive as an explicit object of 
awareness but we are also mindfully conscious of this focused consciousness as we monitor our 
awareness of the object of our awareness through its representation in our consciousness" 
(Shusterman, 2008, p. 53)
John Sutton et al. (2011) describe the general idea behind this approach.
Skill is not a matter of bypassing explicit thought, to let habitual actions run entirely on their own, but of 
building and accessing flexible links between knowing and doing. The forms of thinking and remembering 
which can, in some circumstances, reach in to animate the subtle kinaesthetic mechanisms of skilled perfor­
mance must themselves be re-described as active and dynamic. (Sutton et al., 2011, p. 95) 
Sutton, together with Christensen and McIlwain, have proposed the model of a meshed archi­
tecture to explain how these mindful processes "reach in" to motoric processes during perfor­
mance. Christensen et al. (2016) explain the meshed architecture as a hybrid view according to 
which "cognitive control reduces during skill learning as automatic control comes to play an 
increasing role, but cognitive control continues to make a substantial positive contribution at 
advanced levels of skill" (p. 41). The mesh involves "a broadly hierarchical division of control 
responsibilities, with cognitive control usually focused on strategic aspects of performance and 
automatic processes more concerned with implementation" (2016, p. 43). They reference the idea 
of a situation awareness as an important part of what allows the mesh to function. Automatic 
processes are monitored and controlled, and thus "are closely integrated in skilled action . . . [so 
that] cognitive control directly influences motor execution in many cases" (Christensen et al., 
2016, p. 43).
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
77

Different interpretations of the meshed architecture are possible, however, depending on how we 
understand the cognitive elements (explicit thinking and remembering vs heedful, situated aware­
ness) and/or the motoric components (automatic versus not-so-automatic).
Starting with this idea, we have developed a more complex conception of the meshed architecture 
on a vertical and horizontal axis, specifying four enhancements (Gallagher & Varga, 2020).
(1) A more complex conception of the cognitive aspects - from higher-order thought to pre- 
reflective awareness.
(2) A concept of intrinsic control: control is not entirely top-down, but rather, on the vertical 
axis there are important bottom-up processes that are not automatic.
(3) The inclusion of affective processes that modulate the dynamics of integration on both 
vertical and horizontal axes.
(4) A horizontal axis that integrates environmental, social and normative factors.
Here we'll briefly explain the additional complexity introduced by these points. First, complex 
cognition: a more complex conception of the cognitive aspects involved in the mesh include 
variations on the thoughtful, heedful processes involved. Depending on circumstances, these may 
involve self-reflective thinking, planning, predicting, deliberation, as Montero suggests; they may 
involve selective target control (as in athletic performance), a conscious monitoring, a sense of one's 
rightly configured body (Montero describes this as part of a dancer's awareness), or an enhanced 
prereflective awareness (Legrand, 2007), which may be proprioceptive, performative or pragmatic. 
Accordingly, what Christensen et al. (2016) call "situation awareness" can be a matter of degree, 
ranging from thoughtful, reflective consciousness, to a thin performative prereflective awareness, 
with different gradations in between. In this regard, the phenomenology of performance may be 
complex and varied. Expert performers may be able to shift across a full register, from explicit 
conscious control to implicit prereflective consciousness, to spontaneous body-schematic processes, 
adjusting and attuning to changing conditions through improvisation. Regardless of how these 
mindful processes are conceptualized, they need to be integrated with motor control processes in 
performance.
Second, intrinsic control. The integration of mindful processes with motor processes will also 
depend on how we conceive of the motoric processes involved. A central question is whether the 
motor-control, body-schematic processes are fully automatic. If automatic means consistently the 
same, repetitive, unchanging, unadapting to different circumstances, then the answer should be "no." 
On one reading, however, which is close to Christensen et al.'s (2016) interpretation, the motor 
processes are entirely automatic (blindly doing the same thing in each circumstance and therefore 
requiring guidance by propositional knowledge). This involves control from the top by cognitive 
processes. This is akin to intellectualist views of know-how (e.g., Stanley, 2011; Stanley & 
Willlamson, 2001). On this view, know-how or skill is equivalent to thinking, a form of knowing- 
that, which guides purely automatic or perfectly general motor control processes. In contrast to this 
view, there is significant empirical evidence from the study of kinematics that shows motor control is 
not automatic but situation-specific, adaptive and highly dynamical (e.g., Bernstein, 1984; Berthoz, 
2000). Body-schematic processes are highly specific and modulated by task and environment 
(Gallagher & Aguda, 2020). Here we can appeal to the notion of habit. Habitual movement or 
behavior is not blind or repetitive or always the same; adjustments are made relative to task, 
environment, bodily position, and the agent's intention-in-action (see the discussion of procedural 
learning below). Along this line, Merleau-Ponty proposed a conception of intelligent habit, which is 
not automatic or repetitive although it may be close-to-automatic, or automatic in some aspects. 
Intelligence is built into bodily movement so that control is intrinsic: "[the body] acquires the power 
of responding with a certain type of solution to a certain form of situation" (Merleau-Ponty, 2012). 
Instead of blind automatic repetition, habit is an open and adaptive way in which the body learns to 
cope with familiar or unfamiliar situations. Likewise, John Dewey endorses habit as intelligent 
78
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

practice: "Repetition is in no sense the essence of habit. . . . The essence of habit is an acquired 
predisposition to ways or modes of response . . .." (Dewey, 1922, p. 42).
Third, affectivity. In addition to a more complex conception of cognition, and a less automatic 
conception of motor control processes, it is important to highlight the role of affectivity. Affect, in 
the most general sense (which includes emotion, but also basic bodily states such as hunger, 
fatigue, pain) shapes our ability to cope with the surrounding world, and works differently in 
different types of skilled actions. Affective processes (such as fatigue or anger, for example) directly 
shape body-schematic motor-control processes - slowing down or speeding up such processes, for 
example, or leading to the adoption of certain initial postures that may influence performance and 
how the agent is functionally integrated with the world. Affect (including vitality effects [Stern, 
2010] - see below) and body-schematic processes are integrated - still part of what we might call 
the vertical mesh in expert performance - but they also allow for an integration attuned to targets 
and environmental features, taking us into horizontal features in the performance situation 
(Figure 1).
Finally, the horizontal axis includes our relations with artifacts, instruments, established practices, 
and other people. One could think of this horizontal axis in terms of extended mind (Clark, 2008), 
distributed cognition (Hutchins, 2014), or material engagement theory (Malafouris, 2013), as 
a number of performance theorists do (e.g., Krueger, 2014; Schiavio et al., 2021; Tribble, 2016). 
Neither body-schematic nor affective processes are isolated from the agent's environment; rather 
they are attuned to both stabilities and variations in environmental factors, including other agents. 
Simon Høffding (2019), in his analysis of group musical performance, describes what he calls an 
interkinaesthetic affectivity as a binding force that helps to integrate the vertical and horizontal 
elements - the latter including, specifically, the ecological, normative, cultural, and intersubjective 
aspects of the physical and social environment, including material and social affordances that may 
emerge as we interact with artifacts and other people.
We suggest that this enriched meshed architecture serves to frame a number of questions that can 
lead to a fuller explanation of various types of performance. It's clearly more complex along both 
vertical and horizontal lines. As we'll indicate in our conclusion, however, further explanation 
Figure 1. Vertical and horizontal axes of the meshed architecture.
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
79

requires an account of the dynamical relations that exist among all of these elements so that we start 
to think of the mesh more as a dynamical gestalt of processes in which vertical and horizontal are 
clearly just explanatory abstractions.
Social cognition as interactive performance
We now want to apply this model to social cognition, in the wide sense that involves embodied and 
situated intersubjective interactions. This interaction approach contends that understanding others is 
primarily a form of embodied practice rather than a form of theoretical inference nor internal 
simulation. The broader picture of social cognition involves a pluralism of different practices in 
addition to any narrow or specialized sets of cognitive processes that we sometimes use to relate to 
others (see Andrews et al., 2020; Gallagher, 2020). Interactive approaches cite evidence from 
developmental psychology, neuroscience and phenomenology. Here we'll mention some of the 
insights from developmental psychology that pertain, nonetheless, to most of our everyday social 
interactions as adults. We will then look closely at one example of social interaction - an analysis of 
conversation - to show how we might use the model of meshed architecture in this context.
Colwyn Trevarthen (1979, 1998) and a number of developmental psychologists (e.g., Hobson, 
1993; Reddy, 2008; Rochat, 2014) have focused on the development of social interaction from birth 
onwards. Trevarthen distinguishes between primary and secondary intersubjectivity. Primary inter­
subjectivity involves sensory-motor/perceptual and affective processes that drive interaction, starting 
early in infancy. Infants and caregivers attend to faces and facial expression, but also register the 
postures, movements, vocal intonations, gestures, and vocalizations of others in face-to-face, dyadic 
interactions. Secondary intersubjectivity, starting around 9 months of age, involves joint attention 
and joint action in pragmatic situations where shared environments and artifacts mediate our 
understanding of others. We play and later work with others in contexts that make clear what 
their intentions are and how they will act. In many cases others have specific roles, and we all tend to 
follow particular social practices that provide a framework which allows us to comprehend what 
their actions mean. Primary and secondary intersubjectivity are not developmental phases that we 
leave behind, or just precursors to more intellectual mindreading skills; they involve processes that 
operate as we continue to engage with others throughout our adult life.
Studies on early child development offer a unique possibility for describing the links highlighted 
above between social cognition, motor skills, affect and context and their flexible and adaptive 
nature. During infancy objects that are initially explored through multiple modalities (e.g., oral, 
manual, visual), begin to be used in relation to their affordances and to be exploited within specific 
motor actions. For example, a spoon, which may be explored across multiple modalities (e.g., 
grasped or mouthed indifferently by the handle or bowl) gradually becomes linked to spoon- 
specific action sequences that highlight knowledge of its affordances (e.g., grasping the spoon by 
its handle), function (e.g., mouthing the bowl of the spoon or placing it in proximity of a plate) and 
social potential (e.g., banging, dropping, mouthing to initiate a social response in caregivers) within 
feeding scenarios (Connolly & Elliott, 1972; Gesell & Ilg, 1937; Lockman, 2000). These behaviors 
contribute to the acquisition of context-related skills (e.g., feeding), but in the process they involve 
explorative, open-ended and flexible movement requiring constant monitoring as children dynami­
cally and gradually learn to adapt their motor skills to specific objects and the contexts that they 
encounter in their daily life (Lee et al., 2006; Newell, 1986; Newell et al., 1990; Thelen & Smith, 
1996). In turn, these early behaviors support the acquisition of gradually more sophisticated 
communication skills. For example, object exploration is linked to specific vocalizations that elicit 
caregiver responses, and the acquisition of object function and tool-specific actions paves the way 
toward the production of gestures which in turn support word learning (Bates et al., 1979; Iverson, 
2010; Volterra et al., 2018).
Clearly, however, as we develop, linguistic communication adds to our capacity for understanding 
others, and both communicative and narrative practices can account for more nuanced and more 
80
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

complex social understanding (Gallagher, 2020; Gallagher & Hutto, 2008). Thinking of these 
practices, along with primary and secondary intersubjective processes, in terms of interactive 
performances, we should be able to apply the model of a meshed architecture.
Here we'll look at conversation as an example of a social practice that clearly bridges primary and 
secondary intersubjective, and communicative processes, and we'll then try to map this kind of 
interaction onto the vertical and horizontal axes of the mesh.
The task is made easier by the work of Charles Goodwin (2000, 2017). His conversation analysis is 
a rich analysis of speech acts that not only express or communicate thought, but constitute thought - 
situated in affectively constrained circumstances that involve both embodied aspects (posture, move­
ment, position) and ecological factors (environmental arrangements, affordances, other persons, etc.) 
Goodwin (2000) provides a detailed analysis of a dispute between two young girls (Carla and Diana) over 
a game of hopscotch. He maps out the interactive organization of various phenomena ("different kinds of 
semiotic resources") that have to be considered to understand the full encounter. "For example, spoken 
language builds signs within the stream of speech, gestures use the body in a particular way, while posture 
and orientation use the body in another, etc." Goodwin emphasizes the "visible, public deployment of 
multiple semiotic fields that mutually elaborate each other" (Goodwin, 2000, p. 1494). They include
(1) The temporal flow/rhythm of high vs low, hard vs soft vocal intonation of speech - features 
which can have a deontic rather than descriptive force, and can clearly reflect various 
emotional/ affective states of the participants.
(2) Bodily position: One girl intentionally moves and stands in the way of the other girl, 
interrupting the game. This is embodied intersubjective interaction (primary intersubjectiv­
ity in the context of secondary intersubjective joint action).
(3) The bodily orientations of the two girls allowing for eye contact and joint attention toward 
the hopscotch pattern on the ground - but also there are temporal modifications in those 
postures.
(4) An ongoing reference to a completed action (throwing a marker on one of the squares).
(5) A set of instituted norms: the rules in the game of hopscotch.
(6) The other people, who are close by and looking on.
(7) Hand gestures are dynamically integrated with the speech, but also with body positions of 
both girls.
With respect to body position and gesture, for example, Goodwin notes:
Carla has to use her body in a quite precise way while taking into account the visible body of her co-participant. 
She is faced with the task of using not only her talk, but also her body, to structure the local environment such 
that her gestures can themselves count as forms of social action. . . . Unlike talk, gestures can't be heard. [This 
means] Carla actively works to position her hand gestures so that they will be perceived by Diana . . .. Carla's 
hand is explicitly positioned in Diana's line of sight . . .. [T]hrusting the gesturing hand toward Diana's face 
twists Carla's body into a configuration in which her hand, arm and the upper part of her torso are actually 
leaning toward Diana. (Goodwin, 2000, p. 1498) 
How close is the gesture to the other girl's face? That proximity itself has a meaning. If, for example, 
it were not a gesture, but a touch, then how hard or soft, and where the touch occurred would also 
have meaning. The gesture is meant to be attention grabbing, forcing one girl to orient to the point 
being made in other's speech, or to a point of joint attention on something in the environment. 
A grab could do the same thing.
In this embodied interaction, the conversation is not confined to vocalization and gesture - 
reference is made to the physical environment. There are mutual glances to the hopscotch squares 
under discussion. We can think of this in terms of distributed cognition where the hopscotch squares 
scaffold our understanding of what is being communicated. Importantly for considerations of 
interaction, the process is not one-sided. Diana is standing on one foot, attempting to finish her 
jump through the hopscotch squares. By doing so she is attempting to ignore the other girl, and an 
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
81

accusation of cheating. As the encounter proceeds, joint attention is disrupted when Diana looks 
away. This shows that the accomplishment of meaning involves two-way interaction and is not 
under the control of just one individual.
There is here a complex integration of primary and secondary intersubjective capacities, situated 
within a pragmatic and social context, that is both supplemented with and supporting the commu­
nicative processes. We think that by mapping these rich details onto the model of meshed archi­
tecture we can gain a fuller and perhaps more organized picture of the dynamic integration in social 
interaction.
One thing we can learn from Goodwin's analysis is that speech finds its way into the mesh - and 
specifically into the vertical integration of cognition/thought and motor control. As J. L. Austin 
(Austin, 1962, p. 67) put it, "by saying something, we do something," a view that correlates well with 
Maurice Merleau-Ponty's idea that "speech accomplishes thought" (Merleau-Ponty, 2012, p. 218). 
The cognitive processes in the mesh are in some regards accomplished in speech acts, but also in 
gestures and meaningful postures and movements. They are constituted as they are communicated. 
In the conversation one may have strategic thoughts about what to say, or how to put the 
accusation - but these thoughts take shape within the particular circumstances of the communicative 
situation.
In addition, the communication is motivated and modulated by each girl's affective state. There 
may be feelings of anger or of injustice, and such feelings may characterize both sides, sharpening 
some of the facial expressions and gesture kinematics in a way that generates meaning. This may 
involve a smirk, a grimace, a look of exasperation; it can take the shape of that way of being "in your 
face."
These factors of expression (including speech, facial expression and gesture) and affect, already 
involve the horizontal axis since there are two sides to the interaction, each girl acting as the other to 
the one. In Goodwin's analysis, other elements on the horizontal axis come into play: the material 
and normative factors, the various semiotic resources that populate the environment, and the 
dynamical interactions that bring these things together and that situate the performance. These 
include, artifacts - e.g., the marker, hopscotch squares and space; normative factors, e.g., the rules of 
the game; but also other people, which may help to constitute the affective atmosphere (Slaby, 
2014) - perhaps the amusement or the discontent of the other players make a difference. This is part 
of what Høffding calls the interkinaesthetic affectivity that in this case may be felt when others take 
sides.
Clearly we can use the model of meshed architecture to clarify some of the factors involved in 
intersubjective interaction. This can only be a first step, however, as we'll make clear in the 
conclusion. A second step is to try to work out some of the dynamical relations amongst these 
factors. One might approach this task experimentally using an interventionist notion of causality in 
which one factor is removed or altered, or a more dynamical approach focused on changes in feed- 
back, in order to see what happens in the meshed integration. A different approach would be to look 
at a specific disorder, such as ASD, to see how the structure of this meshed architecture may differ.
Applying the meshed architecture to ASD
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) include a spectrum of genetically-based neurodevelopmental 
disorders characterized by multiple symptoms including absence or delays in social interaction skills 
(i.e., eye gaze, language and symbolic play) and presence of restricted interests and repetitive 
behaviors (American Psychiatric Association (APA), 2013). Diagnosis is often based on multiple 
standardized measures, and reliable age of diagnosis is rarely earlier than 24 months in high-income 
countries, while rising to 45-57 months in low- and middle-income countries (Kim & Lord, 2012; 
Samms-Vaughan, 2014).
On some standard approaches, problems with intersubjective interactions present in people with 
ASD have been interpreted as due to high-level cognitive impairments in ToM (Baron-Cohen, 2000). 
82
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

But numerous studies, in particular research on early markers of ASD in infancy, have brought to 
light other explanations for the origins of atypical social development in ASD.2 In fact, researchers 
attempting to capture behaviors occurring before average age of ASD diagnosis have often resorted 
to longitudinal studies of infants at high-risk for ASD (i.e., later-born infant siblings of children 
diagnosed with ASD). The rationale being that an 18.7% recurrence rate for ASD has been 
documented among later-born siblings (Ozonoff et al., 2010). Longitudinal studies of infant siblings 
who are at heightened risk (HR) for ASD are of particular relevance; not only because they allow for 
the unpacking of complex patterns of social behavior, but also because they support outlines of how 
symptoms emerge and develop from early ages (Jones et al., 2016; Rogers, 2009).
Studies on HR infants have shown, among other things, growing evidence of sensory-motor 
anomalies and delays in motor development.3 These problems affect both gross and fine motor skills 
that play an important role in the acquisition of developmental milestones and that scaffold effective 
social interactions. For example, some studies have shown that HR infants later diagnosed with ASD 
at 36 months show a slower progression in the development of gross motor skills such as unsup­
ported sitting and walking (Leezenbaum & Iverson, 2019; West et al., 2019) and fine motor skills 
such as grasping and functional object use (Sparaci et al., 2018). In typical development as infants 
reach independent sitting, the hands, no longer used for bodily support, are free to be used in 
reaching, grasping and exploring objects, or to point at things and initiate joint attention bouts with 
caregivers (Iverson, 2010). Walking extends further the world of the child allowing access to distant 
objects as well as carrying objects and approaching caregivers to share them (Karasik et al., 2011). 
Being able to grasp and manipulate objects while sharing them with others has been shown to 
support communication and in particular word learning in typical development (Pereira et al., 2014; 
Yu & Smith, 2012). A number of studies now suggest that differential development of motor skills in 
HR infants that later receive an ASD diagnosis may have cascading effects on vocabulary acquisition, 
gestures and social skills, suggesting a rather different account of the origins of problems in social 
interactions compared to traditional ToM approaches (Bhat et al., 2011; Cook, 2016; Iverson & 
Wozniak, 2007; Iverson et al., 2018; Sparaci et al., 2018; West & Iverson, 2017; West et al., 2019).
Differential developmental patterns in motor skills may therefore have an effect on children's 
engagement in joint attention and joint actions with others as well as on communication. Given the 
diversity of problems in ASD, two of us have argued that a pluralist approach might best capture the 
variant range of cascading disrupted processes (Gallagher & Varga, 2015). While applied research 
has brought to light the existence of differences in how infants at high-risk for ASD progress through 
motor milestones also reflecting a different path toward social impairments in ASD, theoretical 
frameworks attempting to capture this broad picture are still scarce. In this sense the meshed 
architecture proposed above may prove helpful in establishing and highlighting important concep­
tual links.
In the meshed architecture, starting from the horizontal axis described above, major attention 
should be paid to the role of artifacts, instruments, established practices, and other people. A similar 
argument has been brought forth by Iverson and Wozniak (2016). They suggest that communicative 
delays and atypicalities in intentional and symbolic communication in children with ASD have far- 
reaching cascading effects and should be considered as extending beyond the individual since they 
have an impact on social partners and the communicative environment understood in a broader 
2These include more pervasive deficiencies involving attention (Chawarska et al., 2013; Courchesne et al., 1994; Pierce et al., 1997), 
affectivity (Hobson et al., 1988), and language (Rutter, 1978).
3In addition, studies of individuals with ASD provide growing evidence concerning sensory-motor problems that can interfere with 
motor control (specifically disrupted patterns in afferent and proprioceptive sensory feedback (Brincker & Torres, 2013; Torres, 
2013; Torres et al., 2013). These may involve postural instabilities, atypical gait, mistiming of motor sequences, motor 
coordination problems, problems with anticipatory postural adjustments and expressionless faces (Cattaneo et al., 2007; Cook 
et al., 2013; Fabbri-Destro et al., 2009; Gallese et al., 2013; Hilton et al., 2012; Whyatt & Craig, 2013), all of which may have 
implications for primary intersubjectivity. Such disorders affect early childhood, when typically developing children engage in 
joint attention and joint action with others, and learn to communicate. Given the diversity of problems in ASD, we have argued 
that a pluralist approach might best capture the variant range of cascading disrupted processes (Gallagher & Varga, 2015).
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
83

sense. The authors stress how an individual communicator-centered perspective would fail to fully 
capture the dynamic interplay between the communicator and his/her social and material environ­
ment. Far from being a trivial problem, the study of context-related dynamics in order to understand 
how targeted interventions may modulate the paramount importance of supportive contexts is 
a continuous challenge for researchers and clinicians alike. For example, Iverson and Wozniack 
suggest that:
although caregivers initially respond to virtually any signal produced by their infant (even burps and sneezes) as 
though it is intentional, over time and with the emergence of increasingly sophisticated infant behaviors, adults 
gradually become more selective in the types of behaviors to which they respond and in the types of responses 
that they provide to these behaviors. The implication of this growing selectivity is that over time, commu­
nicative forms that are earlier-emerging and less advanced may begin to receive progressively fewer responses, 
particularly those of the sort that can be beneficial for development. For individuals who are delayed in the 
emergence of intentional and/or symbolic communication and for whom the window for use of earlier- 
emerging communicative forms (e.g., eye contact alone, vocalization alone) may be temporally extended, 
such changes in caregiver responding could create a further disadvantage for an already vulnerable commu­
nicative system.[. . .] From a treatment perspective, it may be worth encouraging the caregivers of individuals 
with communication delays and challenges to broaden their patterns of responding so that they respond 
consistently and contingently to communicators' gestures and nonword vocalizations, regardless of their 
developmental level or social salience. (Iverson & Wozniak, 2016, p. 66) 
As for the vertical axis, we have seen above that the meshed architecture encourages uncovering the 
inner dynamics of complex cognition, intrinsic control and affectivity. The development of habits 
and basic skills, even if not directly relevant to social communication, are often important for 
participating in joint action and for processes involved in secondary intersubjectivity. The impor­
tance of a deeper understanding of these mechanisms in ASD has been shown by studies exploring 
procedural learning and vitality effects.
Procedural learning can be considered the fabric of our daily habits on which we often sew new 
bits and pieces to achieve smoothness in our daily actions. Procedural learning underlies the 
acquisition of many daily skills that we seem to perform effortlessly and mindlessly (i.e., tying 
a shoelace, riding a bike). These skills are usually learned through repeated exposure and practice, 
resulting in knowledge that is usually difficult to verbalize and/or visualize and is very task-specific, 
such that slight changes in environmental conditions require a new learning process to adapt (Cohen 
& Poldrack, 1997; Rosenbaum, 2010; Squire, 1986; Vicari et al., 2007).
Although many motor skills have been found to be impaired in persons with ASD not only in 
infancy, as indicated above, but also in childhood (Bhat et al., 2011), procedural learning does not 
seem to be impaired. Children with ASD showed improvements comparable to typically developing 
(TD) controls in tasks specifically requiring the learning of implicit motor procedures (Frith & Frith, 
1974; Gidley Larson & Mostofsky, 2008; Wek & Husak, 1989). Most of these tasks measure 
improvements only in terms of increased success, relying on environmental changes to assess task- 
specific learning, for example, in the pursuit rotor task.4 The successful accomplishment of a task, 
however, is only the tip of the iceberg, especially if we consider that habits are not reducible to 
a mindless flow, but are adaptive or "intelligent" as suggested above. Importantly, the adaptive or 
"intelligent" part of a habit lies in specific strategies exploited in learning. Just as there are many 
ways to tie a shoelace or ride a bike, there are multiple ways to stay on target during the pursuit rotor 
task. In a study using a computer version of the pursuit rotor task, Sparaci et al. (2015) were able to 
capture the strategies exploited by school-age children with ASD in learning the task, comparing 
them to the strategies emerging in TD controls matched for age and IQ. While both groups of 
participants showed similar improvements over time in skill acquisition and similar consolidation 
4The pursuit rotor task requires participants to manually track a moving target using a stylus by keeping the tip of the stylus on 
the target. Overall time of target is used to measure improvement in skill acquisition, while changes in target speed or pattern 
shape are used to evaluate procedure-specific learning (C.D. Frith, 1968; Eckert, 1974; Karlin, 1965; Mounoud et al., 1985; 
Whitehurst & Del Rey, 1983; Zanone, 1990).
84
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

after rest, the task was significantly more difficult for children with ASD. Although this could be 
explained by difficulties in motor action planning, which has been documented in ASD (Fabbri- 
Destro et al., 2009), children with ASD were also less affected by changes in target speed, something 
harder to explain as it may easily imply either better adaptation to change or less procedure-specific 
learning. Closer investigation of 2D motor trajectories of the stylus during the task showed relevant 
differences in motor strategies exploited during learning: while TD children tended to chase the 
target and then gradually fell into its repetitive movement and speed, children with ASD mostly tried 
to draw the overall target pattern (often producing smaller or larger patterns); alternatively they 
attempted to stay on target by producing scribbling actions rather than a smooth pursuit. While 
strategies used by TD and ASD children led to equivalent amounts of time on target, the ones 
exploited by children with ASD were less affected by changes in speed; however, they also required 
greater energy expenditure (Sparaci et al., 2015). Such studies can scratch the apparently mindless 
and seamless surface of habit to uncover a more complicated weave of intrinsic control, which then 
may differently manifest in adaptability to change, efficiency and effectivity, that can come to 
constrain joint action and social interactions.
Another aspect raised by the enhanced meshed architecture is the importance of considering how 
affectivity shapes our everyday actions and our ability to interact effectively with others in social 
contexts. Movement is not only functional, but also communicative. We observe and interpret 
others' actions and are in turn interpreted in our actions by others. Some authors suggest that this 
may occur at various levels: observing another person picking up a book we may understand what is 
being done (e.g., a book is being grasped rather than touched or stroked), why it is being done (e.g., 
specific grasp types and their locus anticipate that the other person is going to open the book) and 
finally how it is being done (e.g., the smooth and slow movement with which the book is being taken 
anticipates that the other person is in a calm state of mind possibly savoring future reading, rather 
than choleric and ready to throw the book) (Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2016). Even from this brief 
description of a simple act it is clear that intentionality and affectivity are often implicitly grasped in 
others' overt behavior (see Gallagher & Varga, 2014), and vice versa, our responses are often grasped 
as intentional and imbued with affective content. Recent research suggests that our ability to 
perceive, interpret and predict others actions is influenced by how we move ourselves, and that 
persons with ASD may encounter specific difficulties with these mechanisms which involve picking 
up on implicit movement kinematics (Cook, 2016; Rizzolatti & Sinigaglia, 2016). For example, some 
studies have shown that children with ASD have difficulties in predicting why an action is being 
done by another person based on kinematic cues and this may reflect difficulties in the children's 
own motor planning (Boria et al., 2009; Cattaneo et al., 2007). Furthermore, these difficulties 
manifest themselves in patterns that differ from the ones observed in other neurodevelopmental 
disorders affecting social cognition (Sparaci et al., 2014).
As described above, actions are also communicative in relation to how they are being performed. 
Daniel Stern introduced the term "vitality forms" to capture how the dynamics of perceived action 
style in everyday interactions convey relevant information, while subsequent research detected 
neural correlates of vitality form recognition (Di Cesare et al., 2014; Stern, 2010). Studies on 
understanding of action style originally highlighted that vitality forms are hardly ever perceived by 
children with ASD attempting to imitate others, possibly affecting social skill learning (Hobson & 
Lee 1999). Further investigations specifically targeting vitality forms strengthen this conclusion by 
showing difficulties even in basic vitality form recognition during the observation of others' actions 
(Di Cesare et al., 2017; Rochat et al., 2013). Following on our metaphor of habits as clothing daily 
interactions with others and motor procedures as the fabric of social interactions, vitality forms may 
be considered as the style we chose to wear. To pick up on different kinematic or vitality styles may 
require different degrees of familiarity or empathy. Stern describes it as involving a Gestalt emerging 
from the "theoretically separate experiences of movement, force, time, space and intention" (Stern, 
2010, p. 5). While being rooted in physical actions vitality has a holistic meaning that would be lost 
when fragmented into its individual components (Rochat et al., 2013). Possibly this is what makes 
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
85

vitality form perception and understanding hard to measure in experimental science, and why 
studies on the clinical impact of impairments of vitality form understanding in persons with ASD 
are still scarce. However, this concept may well be integrated in the notion of affect as described in 
the enhanced meshed architecture described above, showing once more how this model may act as 
a guide toward a more holistic understanding of impairments in social cognition in persons 
with ASD.
Although there is much more to say about social cognition and ASD more generally, for our purposes 
here we want to bring the focus back to conversation as one example of intersubjective interaction. In this 
regard it is relevant to consider the question of language in children on the ASD spectrum. In regard to 
language, in ASD there can be a developmental delay or absence of speech as well as various prosodic 
idiosyncrasies, word/phrase repetition and echolalia or irregularities in pitch and intonation of speech, 
and problems initiating and sustaining conversations (American Psychiatric Association (APA), 2013; 
Rutter & Schopler, 1987). Some children with ASD never develop speech (Aarons & Gitten, 1992; 
U. Frith, 1989); some who have words do not engage in conversation (Messer, 1994; Ricks & Wing, 
1975), and even high-functioning people with ASD who have language may fail to reach typical 
communicative speech or pragmatics (Baltaxe, 1977; Baron-Cohen, 1988; Tager-Flusberg & Anderson, 
1991).
Children with ASD have difficulty in initiating and maintaining topics in conversation (Prizant & 
Wetherby, 2005; Rutter & Schopler, 1987). Tager-Flusberg and Anderson (1991) studied conversational 
ability comparing children with ASD with children with Down syndrome and typically developing 
children. For children with Down syndrome an increase in language ability correlated with an increase in 
conversational ability such that new information and topics were introduced into conversations. In 
contrast, increases in language ability did not lead to increases in conversational abilities for children with 
ASD. This result can be interpreted in a number of ways. Tager-Flusberg and Anderson suggested that 
the impairment in conversation in ASD is due to deficits in ToM development.
Hadwin et al. (1997) tested this hypothesis by training children with ASD on tasks that employ 
ToM abilities to understand mental states in others, focusing on beliefs, emotional states, and 
pretense. They compared prior to training and post-training using four categories of conversational 
ability: (a) The answer category in which a child simply provided a one-word reply to a question and 
did not further engage in conversation; (b) the development category in which a child is able to 
produce utterances that involved two or more sentences; (c) the perseverative category where 
responses were echolalic or repetitive; and (d) the unclear category when responses were non- 
sequiturs or not clearly connected with the question. Hadwin et al. showed that both prior to 
training and after training on ToM tasks, with improvement for beliefs and emotion (but not play), 
the majority of children remained in the answer category and did not improve. The researchers 
provided examples of responses that fell into the answer category.
What's on the table there? 
Dinner 
What's that on the table? 
Flowers. 
What do you think they are eating for dinner? 
Potatoes and sausages. 
Generally the children were not able to expand on their answers. Hadwin et al. also asked whether 
the children increased their use of mental state terms in their speech. Although most of the children 
did improve on ToM tasks, there was no difference in the quantity of mental state terms in their 
conversation. The conclusion:
86
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

The results show that children, through teaching, did learn to pass tasks concerning emotional and belief 
understanding. However, there was no corresponding advance in social communication skills. Specifically, no 
improvement in the development of conversation and no increase in the use of mental state terms in speech 
was found. (1997, p. 533) 
A study by García-Pérez et al. (2007) gets us closer to what may be some more basic problems in the 
conversational ability of autistic children and points to something more central in the meshed 
architecture as it applies generally as well as in conversational contexts, namely, affect. Hobson 
(Hobson, 1989, 1993), and a number of others (Charman, 2003; Dawson et al., 1998; Klin et al., 1992; 
Loveland & Landry, 1986; Mundy, 1995; Rogers & Pennington, 1991; Sigman & Capps, 1997), have 
argued that problems with intersubjective or relational affect in ASD can lead to significant 
disruption of social engagement between the child and others. Together with the problems with 
proprioceptive sensory feedback and motoric behavior mentioned above (Brincker & Torres, 2013), 
as well as developmental delays involving purposeful actions (object exploration and functional 
actions) beginning in infancy, and their possible cascading effects on later language development 
(Sparaci et al., 2018), issues pertaining to affect can easily disrupt nonverbal aspects of conversation. 
Wimpory et al. (2000), for example, have shown that very young children with ASD show impair­
ments in nonverbal communication that can disrupt timing in intersubjective engagement, fre­
quency of eye contact and turn-taking, as well as referential looking and pointing. Nonverbal cues 
are important for the smooth flow of conversation. García-Pérez et al. (2007) showed that subjects 
with ASD "made fewer headshakes/nods (but not smiles) when the interviewer was talking" 
(p. 1310). A principle of social interaction, as we saw reflected in Goodwin's conversational analysis, 
is that it involves two-way interaction. In this respect García-Pérez et al. also studied the responses of 
the conversational partners, the interviewers who interacted with the children with ASD. It turns out 
that they also made fewer head-shakes/nods when the children were talking compared to their 
typical conversation style. In this regard the dynamics of the conversation as a whole changes when 
the interkinaesthetic affectivity of the interaction goes off. This kind of affective disruption was 
reflected in significant differences measured as "subjective" ratings of (a) affective engagement and 
(b) the smoothness of reciprocal interaction (as rated by two evaluators blind to diagnosis, rating 
emotional connection during the videotaped conversation and the flow of the conversation on scales 
of 1-5).
García-Pérez et al. suggest that children with ASD show a deficient propensity to engage with the 
bodily-expressed attitudes of others (also see Hobson & Lee, 1998). Children with ASD are less likely 
than matched controls to spontaneously respond with speech or gesture, to make eye contact, to 
engage in joint attention, joint action or social referencing (Dawson et al., 1990; Kasari et al., 1990; 
Phillips et al., 1992, 1995; Sigman et al., 1992; Snow et al., 1987; Stone et al., 1994). They may also be 
impaired in perceiving the vitality forms in the other person's communicative style (Di Cesare et al., 
2017).
Although a study of adolescents with ASD conducted by Capps et al. (1998) found more 
headshaking and nodding in response to yes or no questions, the subjects were less likely to nod 
while listening to their conversational partners talk. They concluded that "children with ASD 
demonstrated limited involvement in the co-construction of a shared conversational trajectory 
through nonverbal as well as verbal channels' (1998, p 337). The study was inconclusive about 
gesture. We saw, however, that gesture plays a significant role for the construction of meaning 
during conversation. Studies on HR infants later diagnosed with ASD have shown evidence of 
differences in both initial skills levels and growth patterns in gestures, highlighting differences in 
developmental trajectories (J. M. Iverson et al., 2018). Logitudinal studies between 14 and 
41 months also showed lower gains in gesture variety and absence or extreme rarity of supple­
mentary co-speech gestures (Colgan et al., 2006; Landa et al., 2007; Sowden et al., 2013). Studies of 
gestures in ASD have struggled at times to move beyond an exclusive focus on deictic gestures (e.g., 
pointing) and the proto-imperative (requesting an object or assistance) vs. proto-declarative 
(pointing as part of joint attention) distinction (see Sparaci, 2008; 2013; Sparaci et al., 2019 for 
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
87

a review). But considering different gesture types as well as qualitative aspects of gesture execution 
or links between gesture and speech, studies on older children with ASD have outlined a more 
complex scenario. In fact, while gesture production in terms of quality, as well as gesture-speech 
synchrony and processing of co-speech gestures seem to be affected, gesture frequency may be 
spared (De Marchena & Eigsti, 2010; Hubbard et al., 2012; Silverman et al., 2010; So et al., 2016). 
Overall, gestural behavior in ASD contrasts to gestural behavior manifest in other developmental 
disorders such as Down syndrome (DS). In fact, children with DS use gestures to compensate for 
speech difficulties showing particular strengths in gesture use and producing gestures at rates 
comparable to or sometimes even higher than TD peers (Capirci et al., 2010; Caselli et al., 1998; 
Franco & Wishart, 1995; J.M. Iverson et al., 2003; Singer Harris et al., 1997; Stefanini et al., 2007). 
Differences with regard to other developmental disorders are particularly relevant as they shed new 
light on the ASD phenotype.
In summary, by distinguishing a number of factors within the meshed architecture of conversa­
tion we can understand some of the complexity involved in social cognition and the relevant 
differences to be found in people with ASD. Goodwin's (2000) analysis identified multiple semiotic 
resources that could be mapped onto the vertical and horizontal axes of the mesh, including gestures, 
the dynamics of vocal intonation in speech, body position and orientation, joint attention, reference 
to completed action, and other people who help construct the affective atmosphere of interaction. In 
the case of ASD disruptions seemingly occur along both axes. On the vertical axis the verbal 
accomplishment of thought seems impaired in conversation when most responses are simple 
answer-type replies. This impoverishment of expressed thought may not be divorced from the 
various anomalies involved in sensory-motor processes that can disrupt the intrinsic control 
processes involved in nonverbal and gestural performance. Likewise, problems in the affective 
dimension may disrupt the possibility of smooth dynamics amongst these factors as well as with 
factors on the horizontal axis. The deficient interactive response of others to people with ASD may 
not only reinforce disruptions to interkinaesthetic affectivity, but may also signal a change in 
normative expectations that accompany most social and cultural practices. Indeed, the integrative 
meshing of what we called the whole dynamical gestalt of intersubjective interaction seems to be 
differently aligned in the case of ASD.
Conclusion
The model of a meshed architecture is not intended to be a complete explanation. It's only a first 
step. To explain the actual meshing of the very different types of variables involved (words, gestures, 
artifacts, physical environments, normative elements, and so forth), a second step may be to 
experimentally test the dynamical integration of all these factors using a method based on interven­
tionist causality. That is, we can map out not just the various factors, but the dynamical relations that 
are enabling, constraining, or that involve reciprocal causality, by intervening, that is, by changing, 
adding or subtracting one element in the system to see what happens with the other elements and 
with the organization of the whole. We may find improved or distorted, or just different styles or 
forms of communication and social interaction. In this regard ASD presents us with this kind of 
difference. Ideally, if one could experimentally vary one factor without intervening on the others, one 
could arrive at some understanding of how factors relate. In a gestalt arrangement, however, 
a change to one part or component, above a certain threshold, will likely cause changes in other 
parts of the system. Disrupting gesture, for example, may have an effect on speech and lead to 
modulations in the affective tone of the conversation.
To get a more precise account of how such factors are dynamically related may require using 
dynamical systems models of coordination dynamics (e.g., Tognoli et al., 2020). Coordination 
dynamics, can specify the relations that structure a wide range of different factors - e.g., speech, 
gesture, bodily movements, artifacts, cultural practices, other people - that form a temporary 
coherent system. These relations can be characterized mathematically as coupled self-organizing 
88
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

dynamical systems. This type of analysis can capture both the underlying and overarching processes 
that, at the personal or phenomenological level, one can define as a way of being-in-the-world. 
A different arrangement of these factors, as in ASD, can define a different way of being-in-the- 
world.
If, in contrast to standard theories of social cognition that reflect intellectualist conceptions of 
mindreading and methodological individualism (reducing processes to mechanisms within the 
individual or brain to explain it), we pursue the idea that social cognition is a kind of performance 
(which takes us some distance away from mindreading, and from a reductive, internalist explanation 
in terms of neural activations), then we need an explanation of how embodiment, affect, social and 
communicative practices, ecological and normative factors come to play a role in social cognition - 
we need a model (or a complex set of models) that allows us to capture and organize all the relevant 
factors. We suggest that mapping the relevant factors onto the meshed architecture of social 
interaction is a first step toward a more detailed account.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Notes on contributors
Shaun Gallagher, Ph.D., is the Lillian and Morrie Moss Professor of Excellence in Philosophy at the University of 
Memphis (USA), and Professorial Fellow at the University of Wollongong, Australia.
Laura Sparaci, Ph.D., is a researcher at the Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies (ISTC), National Research 
Council (CNR) (Italy).
Somogy Varga, Ph.D., is Professor of Philosophy, Aarhus University (Denmark) and affiliate researcher at the African 
Centre for Epistemology and Philosophy of Science, University of Johannesburg (South Africa).
ORCID
Shaun Gallagher 
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3147-9929
References
Aarons, M., & Gitten, T. (1992). The handbook of autism. Routledge.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-V) (5th 
ed.).
Andrews, K., Spaulding, S., & Westra, E. (2020). Introduction to folk psychology: Pluralistic approaches. Synthese, 
1-16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-020-02837-3
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Harvard University Press.
Baltaxe, C. A. M. (1977). Pragmatic deficits in the language of autistic adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 2(4), 
176-180. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpepsy/2.4.176
Baron-Cohen, S. (1988). Social and pragmatic deficits in autism: Cognitive or affective? Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 18(3), 379-401. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02212194
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An essay on autism and theory of mind. MIT Press.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2000). Is Asperger syndrome/high-functioning autism necessarily a disability? Development and 
Psychopathology, 12(3), 489-500. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579400003126
Bates, E., Benigni, L., Bretherton, I., Camaioni, L., & Volterra, V. (1979). The emergence of symbols: Cognition and 
communication in infancy. Academic Press.
Bernstein, N. A. (1984). Some emergent problems of the regulation of motor acts. In Whiting, H. T. A. (Ed.), Human 
motor actions: Bernstein reassessed (pp. 354-355). North-Holland.
Berthoz, A. (2000). The brain's sense of movement (G. Weiss, trans.). Harvard University Press.
Bhat, A. N., Landa, R. J., & Galloway, J. C. (2011). Current perspectives on motor functioning in infants, children, and 
adults with autism spectrum disorders. Physical Therapy, 91(7), 1116-1129. https://doi.org/10.2522/ptj.20100294
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
89

Boria, S., Fabbri-Destro, M., Cattaneo, L., Sparaci, L., Sinigaglia, C., Santelli, E., Cossu, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (2009). 
Intention understanding and autism. PLoS ONE, 4(5), e5596. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0005596
Brincker, M., & Torres, E. B. (2013). Noise from the periphery in autism. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 7, 34. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2013.00034
Capirci, O., Caselli, M. C., & De Angelis, V. (2010). Gesture for speaking and gesture for thinking in children with 
typical and atypical development: A new theoretical framework. In Riva, D. & Njiokiktjien, C. (Eds.), Brain lesion 
localization and developmental functions. Basal ganglia, connecting systems, cerebellum, mirror neurons (pp. 
201-216). John Libbey Eurotext.
Capps, L., Kehres, J., & Sigman, M. (1998). Conversational abilities among children with autism and children with 
developmental delays. Autism, 2(4), 325-344. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361398024002
Caselli, M. C., Vicari, S., Longobardi, E., Lami, L., Pizzoli, C., & Stella, G. (1998). Gestures and words in early 
development of children with Down syndrome. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41(5), 
1125-1135. https://doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4105.1125
Cattaneo, L., Fabbri-Destro, M., Boria, S., Pieraccini, C., Monti, A., Cossu, G., & Rizzolatti, G. (2007). Impairment of 
actions chains in autism and its possible role in intention understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 104(45), 17825-17830. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0706273104
Charman, T. (2003). Why is joint attention a pivotal skill in autism? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 358(1430), 315-324. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2002.1199
Chawarska, K., Macari, S., & Shic, F. (2013). Decreased spontaneous attention to social scenes in 6-month-old infants 
later diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 74(3), 195-203. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biopsych.2012.11.022
Christensen, W., Sutton, J., & McIlwain, D. J. (2016). Cognition in skilled action: Meshed control and the varieties of 
skill experience. Mind & Language, 31(1), 37-66. https://doi.org/10.1111/mila.12094
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford University Press.
Cohen, N. J., & Poldrack, R. A. (1997). Memory for items and memory for relations in the procedural/declarative 
memory framework. Memory, 5(1-2), 131-178. https://doi.org/10.1080/741941149
Cohen, R. (2013). Acting power. Routledge.
Colgan, E. S., Lanter, E., McComish, C., Watson, L. R., Crais, E. R., & Baranek, G. T. (2006). Analysis of social 
interaction gestures in infants with autism. Child Neuropsychology, 12(4-5), 307-319. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09297040600701360
Connolly, K., & Elliott, J. (1972). The evolution and ontogeny of hand function. In Blurton-Jones, N. (Ed.), Ethological 
studies of child behavior (pp. 329-381). Cambridge University Press.
Cook, J. (2016). From movement kinematics to social cognition: The case of autism. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 371(1693), 20150372. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2015.0372
Cook, J. L., Blakemore, S. J., & Press, C. (2013). Atypical basic movement kinematics in autism spectrum conditions. 
Brain, 136(9), 2816-2824. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt208
Courchesne, E., Townsend, J., Akshoomoff, N., Saitoh, O., Yeung-Courchesne, R., Lincoln, A., Haas, R., & Lau, L. 
(1994). Impairment in shifting attention in autistic and cerebellar patients. Behavioral Neuroscience, 108(5), 1-17. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7044.108.5.848
Dawson, G., Hill, D., Spencer, A., Galpert, L., & Watson, L. (1990). Affective exchanges between young autistic 
children and their mothers. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 18(3), 335-345. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF00916569
Dawson, G., Meltzoff, A. N., Osterling, J., Rinaldi, J., & Brown, E. (1998). Children with autism fail to orient to 
naturally occurring social stimuli. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 28(6), 479-485. https://doi.org/ 
10.1023/A:1026043926488
de Marchena, A., & Eigsti, I. M. (2010). Conversational gestures in autism spectrum disorders: Asynchrony but not 
decreased frequency. Autism Research, 3(6), 311-322. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.159
Dewey, J. (1922). Human nature and conduct. Henry Holt & Co.
Di Cesare, G., Di Dio, C., Rochat, M. J., Sinigaglia, C., Bruschweiler-Stern, N., Stern, D. N., & Rizzolatti, G. (2014). The 
neural correlates of 'vitality form' recognition: An fMRI study. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9(7), 
951-960. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nst068
Di Cesare, G., Sparaci, L., Pelosi, A., Mazzone, L., Giovagnoli, G., Menghini, D., Ruffaldi, E., & Vicari, S. (2017). 
Differences in action style recognition in children with autism spectrum disorders. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 1456. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01456
Dreyfus, H. L. (2005). Overcoming the myth of the mental: How philosophers can profit from the phenomenology of 
everyday expertise. In American Philosophical Association, Proceedings and addresses of the American Philosophical 
Association (pp. 47-65). American Philosophical Association.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2007). The return of the myth of the mental. Inquiry, 50(4), 352-365. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00201740701489245
Eckert, H. M. (1974). Variability in skill acquisition. Child Development, 45(2), 487-489. https://doi.org/10.2307/ 
1127974
90
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

Fabbri-Destro, M., Cattaneo, L., Boria, S., & Rizzolatti, G. (2009). Planning actions in autism. Experimental Brain 
Research, 192(3), 521-525. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-008-1578-3
Franco, F., & Wishart, J. (1995). Use of pointing and other gestures by young children with Down syndrome. 
American Journal on Mental Retardation, 100(2), 160-182.
Frith, C. D. (1968). Strategies in rotary pursuit tracking and their relation to inhibition and personality. Life Sciences, 7 
(2), 65-76. https://doi.org/10.1016/0024-3205(68)90348-2
Frith, U. (1989). A new look at language and communication in autism. International Journal of Language & 
Communication Disorders, 24(2), 123-150. https://doi.org/10.3109/13682828909011952
Frith, U., & Frith, C. D. (1974). Specific motor disabilities in Down syndrome. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 15(4), 293-301. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1974.tb01253.x
Gallagher, S. (2020). Action and interaction. Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S., & Aguda, B. (2020). Anchoring know-how: Action, affordance and anticipation. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 27(3-4), 3-37.
Gallagher, S., & Hutto, D. (2008). Understanding others through primary interaction and narrative practice. In 
Zlatev, J., Racine, T., Sinha, C., & Itkonen, E. (Eds.), The shared mind: Perspectives on intersubjectivity (pp. 
17-38). John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S., & Varga, S. (2014). Social constraints on the direct perception of emotions and intentions. Topoi, 33(1), 
185-199. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-013-9203-x
Gallagher, S., & Varga, S. (2015). Conceptual issues in autism spectrum disorders. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 28 
(2), 127-132. https://doi.org/10.1097/YCO.0000000000000142
Gallagher, S., & Varga, S. (2020). The meshed architecture of performance as a model of situated cognition. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 11, 2140. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02140
Gallese, V., Rochat, M. J., & Berchio, C. (2013). The mirror mechanism and its potential role in autism spectrum disorder. 
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 55(1), 15-22. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8749.2012.04398.x
García-Pérez, R. M., Lee, A., & Hobson, R. P. (2007). On intersubjective engagement in autism: A controlled study of 
nonverbal aspects of conversation. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37(7), 1310-1322. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10803-006-0276-x
Gesell, A., & Ilg, F. L. (1937). Feeding behavior of infants. J.B. Lippincott.
Gidley Larson, J.-C., & Mostofsky, S. H. (2008). Evidence that the pattern of visuomotor sequence learning is altered in 
children with autism. Autism Research, 1(6), 341-353. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.54
Goodwin, C. (2000). Action and embodiment within situated human interaction. Journal of Pragmatics, 32(10), 
1489-1522. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-2166(99)00096-X
Goodwin, C. (2017). Co-operative action. Cambridge University Press.
Hadwin, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Howlin, P., & Hill, K. (1997). Does teaching theory of mind have an effect on the ability 
to develop conversation in children with autism? Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 27(5), 519-537. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025826009731
Hilton, C., Zhang, Y., Whilte, M., Klohr, C. L., & Constantino, J. (2012). Motor impairment in sibling pairs concordant 
and discordant for autism spectrum disorders. Autism, 16(4), 430-441. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361311423018
Hobson, P. (1993). Autism and the development of mind. Lawrence Erlbaum.
Hobson, P., & Lee, A. (1998). Hello and goodbye: A study of social engagement in autism. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 28(2), 117-127. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026088531558
Hobson, P., Ouston, J., & Lee, A. (1988). Emotion recognition in autism: Coordinating faces and voices. Psychological 
Medicine, 18(4), 911-923. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291700009843
Hobson, R. P. (1989). On sharing experiences. Development and Psychopathology, 1(3), 197-203.
Hobson, R. P., & Lee, A. (1999). Imitation and identification in autism. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
and Allied Disciplines, 40(4), 649-659.
Høffding, S. (2019). A phenomenology of musical absorption. Palgrave-Macmillan.
Hubbard, A. L., McNealy, K., Scott-Van Zeeland, A. A., Callan, D. E., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Dapretto, M. (2012). 
Altered integration of speech and gesture in children with autism spectrum disorders. Brain and Behavior, 2(5), 
606-619. https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.81
Hutchins, E. (2014). The cultural ecosystem of human cognition. Philosophical Psychology, 27(1), 34-49. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/09515089.2013.830548
Iverson, J. M. (2010). Developing language in a developing body: The relationship between motor development and 
language development. Journal of Child Language, 37(2), 229-261. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000909990432
Iverson, J. M., Longobardi, E., & Caselli, M. C. (2003). Relationship between gestures and words in children with 
Down's syndrome and typically developing children in the early stages of com- municative development. 
International Journal of Language & Communication Disorders, 38(2), 179-197. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
1368282031000062891
Iverson, J. M., Northrup, J. B., Leezenbaum, N. B., Parladé, M. V., Koterba, E. A., & West, K. L. (2018). Early gesture 
and vocabulary development in infant siblings of children with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 48(1), 55-71. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-017-3297-8
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
91

Iverson, J. M., & Wozniak, R. H. (2007). Variation in vocal-motor development in infant siblings of children with 
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 37(1), 158-170. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-006-0339-z
Iverson, J. M., & Wozniak, R. H. (2016). Transitions to intentional and symbolic communication in typical develop­
ment and in autism spectrum disorder. In D. Keen, H. Meadan, N. C. Brady, & J. W. Halle (Eds.), Prelinguistic and 
minimally verbal communicators on the autism spectrum (pp. 51-72). Springer.
Jones, E. J., Venema, K., Earl, R., Lowy, R., Barnes, K., Estes, A., Dawson, G., & Webb, S. J. (2016). Reduced 
engagement with social stimuli in 6-month-old infants with later autism spectrum disorder: A longitudinal 
prospective study of infants at high familial risk. Journal of Neurodevelopmental Disorders, 8(1), 7. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s11689-016-9139-8
Karasik, L. B., Tamis-lemonda, C. S., & Adolph, K. E. (2011). Transition from crawling to walking and infants' actions 
with objects and people. Child Development, 82(4), 1199-1209. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01595.x
Karlin, L. (1965). Effects of delay and mode of presentation of extra cues on pursuit-rotor performance. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 70(4), 438-440. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0022228
Kasari, C., Sigman, M., Mundy, P., & Yirmiya, N. (1990). Affective sharing in the context of joint attention interactions 
of normal, autistic, and mentally retarded children. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 20(1), 87-100. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02206859
Kim, S. H., & Lord, C. (2012). Combining information from multiple sources for the diagnosis of autism spectrum 
disorders for toddlers and young preschoolers from 12 to 47 months of age. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry, 53(2), 143-151. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02458.x
Klin, A., Volkmar, F. R., & Sparrow, S. S. (1992). Autistic social dysfunction: Some limitations of the theory of mind 
hypothesis. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 33(5), 861-876. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1992. 
tb01961.x
Krueger, J. (2014). Affordances and the musically extended mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1003. https://doi.org/10. 
3389/fpsyg.2013.01003
Landa, R. J., Holman, K. C., & Garrett-Mayer, E. (2007). Social and communication development in toddlers with early 
and later diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(7), 853-864. https://doi.org/10. 
1001/archpsyc.64.7.853
Lee, M. H., Liu, Y. T., & Newell, K. M. (2006). Longitudinal expres- sion of infant's prehension as a function of object 
properties. Infant Behavior & Development, 29(4), 481-493. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2006.05.004
Leezenbaum, N. B., & Iverson, J. M. (2019). Trajectories of posture development in infants with and without familial 
risk for autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 49(8), 3257-3277. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10803-019-04048-3
Legrand, D. (2007). Pre-reflective self-consciousness: On being bodily in the world. Janus Head, 9(2), 493-519. https:// 
doi.org/10.5840/jh20069214
Lockman, J. J. (2000). A perception-action perspective on tool use development. Child Development, 71(1), 137-144. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00127
Loveland, K. A., & Landry, S. (1986). Joint attention and language in autism and developmental language delay. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 16(3), 335-349. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01531663
Malafouris, L. (2013). How things shape the mind. MIT Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2012). Phenomenology of perception (D. A. Landes trans.). Routldge.
Messer, D. J. (1994). The development of communication. Wiley.
Montero, B. (2010). Does bodily awareness interfere with highly skilled movement? Inquiry, 53(2), 105-122. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/00201741003612138
Montero, B. G. (2015). Thinking in the zone: The expert mind in action. The Southern Journal of Philosophy, 53(S1), 
126-140. https://doi.org/10.1111/sjp.12119
Montero, B. G. (2016). Thought in action: Expertise and the conscious mind. Oxford University Press.
Mounoud, P., Viviani, P., Hauert, C. A., & Guyon, J. (1985). Development of visuomanual tracking in 5- to 9-year-old 
boys. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 40(1), 115-132. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0965(85)90068-2
Mundy, P. (1995). Joint attention and social-emotional approach behavior in children with autism. Development and 
Psychopathology, 7(1), 63-82. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579400006349
Newell, K. M. (1986). Constraints on the development of coordination. In Wade, M. G. & Whiting, H. T. A. (Eds.), 
Motor development in children: Aspects of coordination and control (pp. 341-360). Martinus Nijhoff.
Newell, K. M., Scully, D. M., McDonald, P. V., & Baillargeon, R. (1990). Task constraints and infant grip 
configurations. Developmental Psychobiology, 22(8), 817-832. https://doi.org/10.1002/dev.420220806
Ozonoff, S., Iosif, A. M., Baguio, F., Cook, I. C., Hill, M. M., Hutman, T., Rogers, S. J., Rozga, A., Sangha, S., Sigman, 
M., & Steinfeld, M. B. (2010). A prospective study of the emergence of early behavioral signs of autism. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 49(3), 256-266. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/ 
articles/PMC2923050/
Pereira, A. F., Smith, L. B., & Yu, C. (2014). A bottom-up view of toddler word learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 21(1), 178-185. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-013-0466-4
92
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

Phillips, W., Baron-Cohen, S., & Rutter, M. (1992). The role of eye contact in goal detection: Evidence from normal 
infants and children with autism or mental handicap. Development and Psychopathology, 4(3), 375-383. https://doi. 
org/10.1017/S0954579400000845
Phillips, W., Gomez, J. C., Baron-Cohen, S., Laa, V., & Riviere, A. (1995). Treating people as objects, agents, or 
"subjects": How young children with and without autism make requests. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
36(8), 1383-1398. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1995.tb01670.x
Pierce, K., Glad, K., & Schreibman, L. (1997). Social perception in children with autism: An attentional deficit? Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 27(3), 265-282. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025898314332
Prizant, B. M., & Wetherby, A. M. (2005). Critical issues for enhancing communication abilities for persons with 
autism spectrum disorders. In F. Volkmar, R. Paul, A. Klin, & D. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook of autism and pervasive 
developmental disorders: Assessment, interventions, and policy (3rd edition; pp. 925-945). John Wiley & Sons.
Reddy, V. (2008). How infants know minds. Harvard University Press.
Ricks, D. M., & Wing, L. (1975). Language, communication, and the use of symbols in normal and autistic children. 
Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 5(3), 191-221. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01538152
Rizzolatti, G., & Sinigaglia, C. (2016). The mirror mechanism: A basic principle of brain function. Nature Reviews. 
Neuroscience, 17(12), 757. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.135
Rochat, M. J., Veroni, V., Bruschweiler-Stern, N., Pieraccini, C., Bonnet- Brilhault, F., Barthélémy, C., Malvy, J., 
Sinigaglia, C., Stern, D. N., & Rizzolatti, G. (2013). Impaired vitality form recognition in autism. Neuropsychologia, 
51(10), 1918-1924. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.06.002
Rochat, P. (Ed.). (2014). Early social cognition: Understanding others in the first months of life. Psychology Press.
Rogers, S. J. (2009). What are infant siblings teaching us about autism in infancy? Autism Research, 2(3), 125-137. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.81
Rogers, S. J., & Pennington, B. F. (1991). A theoretical approach to the deficits in infantile autism. Development and 
Psychopathology, 3(2), 137-162. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579400000043
Rosenbaum, D. A. (2010). Human motor control (2nd ed.). Academic Press/Elsevier.
Rutter, M. (1978). Diagnosis and definition of childhood autism. Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 8(2), 
139-161. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01537863
Rutter, M. R., & Schopler, E. (1987). Autism and pervasive developmental disorders: Concepts and diagnostic issues. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 17(2), 159-186. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01495054
Samms-Vaughan, M. E. (2014). The status of early identification and early intervention in autism spectrum disorders 
in lower-and middle-income countries. International Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 16(1), 30-35. https:// 
doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2013.866271
Schiavio, A., Ryan, K., Moran, N., van der Schyff, D., & Gallagher, S. (2021). By myself but not alone: Agency, 
creativity and extended musical historicity. Journal of the Royal Musical Association.
Shusterman, R. (2008). Body consciousness: A philosophy of mindfulness and somaesthetics. Cambridge University 
Press.
Sigman, M., & Capps, L. (1997). Children with autism: A developmental perspective. Harvard University Press.
Sigman, M. D., Kasari, C., Kwon, J.-H., & Yirmiya, N. (1992). Responses to the negative emotions of others by autistic, 
mentally retarded, and normal children. Child Development, 63(4), 796-807. https://doi.org/10.2307/1131234
Silverman, L. B., Bennetto, L., Campana, E., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2010). Speech-and-gesture integration in high 
functioning autism. Cognition, 115(3), 380-393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.01.002
Singer Harris, N., Bellugi, U., Bates, E., Jones, W., & Rossen, M. (1997). Contrasting profiles of language development 
in children with Williams and Down syndromes. Developmental Neuropsychology, 13(3), 345-370. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/87565649709540683
Slaby, J. (2014). Emotions and the extended mind. In Von Scheve, C. & Salmella, M. (Eds.), Collective emotions (pp. 
32-46). Oxford University Press.
Snow, M. E., Hertzig, M. E., & Shapiro, T. (1987). Expression of emotion in young autistic children. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 26(6), 836-838. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583- 
198726060-00006
So, W. C., Wong, M. Y., Cabibihan, J. J., Lam, C. Y., Chan, R. Y., & Qian, H. H. (2016). Using robot animation to 
promote gestural skills in children with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 32(6), 
632-646. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12159
Sowden, H., Clegg, J., & Perkins, M. (2013). The development of co-speech gesture in the communication of children 
with autism spectrum disorders. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 27(12), 922-939. https://doi.org/10.3109/ 
02699206.2013.818715
Sparaci, L. (2008). Embodying gestures: The Social Orienting Model and the study of early gestures in autism. 
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 7(2), 203-223. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-007-9084-9
Sparaci, L. (2013). Beyond the point: A basic guide to literature on pointing abilities in children with autism. Humana. 
Mente Journal of Philosophical Studies, 6(24), 177-202. https://www.humanamente.eu/index.php/HM/article/view/ 
155
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
93

Sparaci, L., Formica, D., Lasorsa, F. R., Mazzone, L., Valeri, G., & Vicari, S. (2015). Untrivial pursuit: Measuring 
motor procedures learning in children with autism. Autism Research, 8(4), 398-411. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur. 
1455
Sparaci, L., Lasorsa, F. R., & Capirci, O. (2019). More than words: Gestures in typically developing children and in 
children with Autism. In Grove, N., and Launonen, K. (Eds.), Manual sign acquisition in children with develop­
mental disabilities (pp. 37-58). NOVA Science Publishers.
Sparaci, L., Northrup, J. B., Capirci, O., & Iverson, J. M. (2018). From using tools to using language in infant siblings of 
children with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 48(7), 2319-2334. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10803-018-3477-1
Sparaci, L., Stefanini, S., D'Elia, L., Vicari, S., & Rizzolatti, G. (2014). What and Why understanding in Autism 
Spectrum Disorders and Williams Syndrome: Similarities and differences. Autism Research, 7(4), 421-432. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/aur.1370
Squire, L. (1986). Mechanisms of memory. American Association for Advancement of Science, 232(4758), 1612-1619. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.3086978
Stanley, J. (2011). Know how. Oxford University Press.
Stanley, J., & Willlamson, T. (2001). Knowing how. The Journal of Philosophy, 98(8), 411-444. https://doi.org/10.2307/ 
2678403
Stefanini, S., Caselli, M. C., & Volterra, V. (2007). Spoken and gestural production in a naming task by young children 
with Down syndrome. Brain and Language, 101(3), 208-221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2007.01.005
Stern, D. N. (2010). Forms of vitality exploring dynamic experience in psychology, arts, psychotherapy, and development. 
Oxford University Press.
Stone, W. L., Hoffman, E. L., Lewis, S. E., & Ousley, O. Y. (1994). Early recognition of autism: Parental reports vs 
clinical observation. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 148(2), 174-179. https://doi.org/10.1001/arch 
pedi.1994.02170020060010
Sutton, J., McIlwain, D., Christensen, W., & Geeves, A. (2011). Applying intelligence to the reflexes: Embodied skills 
and habits between Dreyfus and Descartes. Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 42(1), 78-103. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2011.11006732
Tager-Flusberg, H., & Anderson, M. (1991). The development of contingent discourse ability in autistic children. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 32(7), 1123-1134. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1991.tb00353.x
Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1996). A dynamic systems approach to the development of cognition and action. MIT press.
Tognoli, E., Zhang, M., Fuchs, A., Beetle, C., & Kelso, J. S. (2020). Coordination dynamics: A foundation for under­
standing social behavior. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14, 317. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.00317
Torres, E. B. (2013). Atypical signatures of motor variability found in an individual with ASD. Neurocase, 19(2), 
150-165. https://doi.org/10.1080/13554794.2011.654224
Torres, E. B., Brincker, M., Isenhower, R. W., Yanovich, P., Stigler, K. A., Nurnberger, J. I., Metaxas, D. N., & 
José, J. V. (2013). Autism: The micro-movement perspective. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 7, 32. https://doi. 
org/10.3389/fnint.2013.00032
Trevarthen, C. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of primary intersubjectivity. In 
Bullowa, M. (Ed.), Before speech: The beginning of interpersonal communication (pp. 321-347). Cambridge 
University Press.
Trevarthen, C. (1998). Children with Autism: Diagnosis and interventions to meet their needs. Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers.
Tribble, E. (2016). Distributed cognition, mindful bodies and the arts of acting. In Blair, R. & Cook, A. (Eds.), 
Languages, bodies, and ecologies: Theatre, performance, and cognition (pp. 133-140). Bloomsbury.
Vicari, S., Verucci, L., & Carlesimo, G. A. (2007). Implicit memory is independent from IQ and age but not from 
etiology: Evidence from Down and Williams syndromes. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 51(12), 932-941. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2788.2007.01003.x
Volterra, V., Capirci, O., Rinaldi, P., & Sparaci, L. (2018). From action to spoken and signed language through gesture: 
Some basic developmental issues for a discussion on the evolution of the human language-ready brain. Interaction 
Studies, 19(1-2), 216-238. https://doi.org/10.1075/is.17027.vol
Wek, S. R., & Husak, W. S. (1989). Distributed and massed practice effects on motor performance and learning of 
autistic children. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 68(1), 107-113. https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1989.68.1.107
West, K. L., & Iverson, J. M. (2017). Language learning is hands-on: Exploring links between infants' object 
manipulation and verbal input. Cognitive Development, 43, 190-200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2017.05.004
West, K. L., Leezenbaum, N. B., Northrup, J. B., & Iverson, J. M. (2019). The relation between walking and language in 
infant siblings of children with autism spectrum disorder. Child Development, 90(3), e356-e372. https://doi.org/10. 
1111/cdev.12980
Whitehurst, M., & Del Rey, P. (1983). Effects of contextual interference, task difficulty, and levels of processing on 
Pursuit tracking. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 57(2), 619-628. https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1983.57.2.619
Whyatt, C., & Craig, C. (2013). Sensory-motor problems in autism. Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, 7, 51. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2013.00051
94
S. GALLAGHER ET AL.

Wimpory, D. C., Hobson, R. P., Williams, J. M. G., & Nash, S. (2000). Are infants with autism socially engaged? 
A controlled study of recent retrospective parental reports. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 30(6), 
525-536. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1005683209438
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and word learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125(2), 244-262. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2012.06.016
Zanone, P. G. (1990). Tracking with and without target in 6-to 15-year-old boys. Journal of Motor Behavior, 22(2), 
225-249. https://doi.org/10.1080/00222895.1990.10735512
DISRUPTIONS OF THE MESHED ARCHITECTURE
95

