Journal of Occupational Science
ISSN: 1442-7591 (Print) 2158-1576 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rocc20
Occupational Science and Phenomenology:
Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical
Responsibility
Michael D. Barber
To cite this article: Michael D. Barber (2004) Occupational Science and Phenomenology:
Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility, Journal of Occupational Science, 11:3,
105-114, DOI: 10.1080/14427591.2004.9686538
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2004.9686538
Published online: 26 Sep 2011.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 662
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rocc20

105
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                  Michael D. Barber
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Occupational Science and
Phenomenology: Human Activity,
Narrative and Ethical Responsibility
Michael D. Barber
Gray (1997) published an important article in this journal on
applying phenomenological method to the concept of
occupation. Relying heavily on detailed methodological
prescriptions by Herbert Spiegelberg, she articulated a
number of features essential for occupation. In this essay I
briefly describe phenomenology and its method, and
pinpoint the unique contribution that phenomenology, in
contrast and in relation to the natural and social sciences,
can make to a discussion of occupation. I will further
illustrate phenomenology's usefulness in this regard by
discussing contributions that phenomenologists have
already made to three areas of crucial importance to the
understanding of occupation: human activity, narrative, and
ethical responsibility.
Phenomenology
Phenomenology, a particular framework for thinking about
philosophical problems, takes its origins from Edmund
Husserl (1859-1938). Husserl studied with experimental
psychologist Carl Stumpf and philosopher Franz Brentano,
who had rehabilitated the concept of intentionality, namely
that human thinking is oriented toward an object. This
relationship between subject and object underpins
Husserl's first major work, the Logical Investigations
(Husserl, 2001; Spiegelberg, 1982). In that work Husserl,
like his contemporary Gottlob Frege, opposed psychologism
by arguing that the truths of logic exist independently of
the conscious acts through which one comes to know them,
though Husserl devoted extensive attention to these
conscious acts. Subsequent stages of Husserl's work saw
him examining thoroughly the field of consciousness as
well as the objects, truths, and persons appearing within
that field. He also explored the world of everyday life, from
which scientific and philosophical theory emerges.
The phenomenological movement that sprang from
Hussel's work has been concentrated in three geographical
sites: a German phase including Husserl, Max Scheler, and
Martin Heidegger; a French phase consisting of the works
of Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, Maurice Merleau-
Ponty, Paul Ricoeur, and Emmanuel Levinas; and an
expansion beyond the European continent through the
work of such thinkers as Aron Gurwitsch and Alfred Schutz
(Embree, & al., 1997; Spiegelberg, 1982). Spiegelberg
emphasized how each of these thinkers built on and modified
Husserl's work, with the result that "there as many
phenomenologies as there are phenomenologists" (p. xxviii).
These authors and several others have produced a vast
philosophical literature, and my eight years of team-teaching
Abstract
Phenomenology frees us from prejudices and enables us to
see things, people, and human activity freshly. It
supplements and enriches the natural and social sciences by
clarifying the everyday world they explain and by
illuminating how actors from a first-person point of view
experience their world and the meaning of their actions. As
such, phenomenology assists occupational science in
understanding what occupation means to one engaged in it.
Furthermore, phenomenologists have already made
significant contributions to clarifying three areas of crucial
importance for occupational science: human activity,
narrative, and ethical responsibility. Human activity involves
a three-tiered structure of purposes, automatic behaviors,
and neural-physiological processes. Narrative, the regular
method of commonsense self-explanation, entails recovering
past motives correlative to the future-oriented purposes that
direct occupations. Ethical responsibility is evoked by other
persons and experienced face to face. It underlies the
commencement and execution of occupations, and both
informs and reconfigures narratives when they are
interrupted.
Key Words
Action theory
Intentionality
Ethics
Phenomenology
Dr Michael D. Barber is Hotfelder Distinguished Chair in
the Humanities and Professor of Philosophy at St. Louis
University, and he regularly team-teaches courses in the
St. Louis University Department of Occupational Science
and Occupational Therapy. Having recently completed a
philosophical biography of philosopher Alfred Schutz, he
is at present working on Schutz's approach to Goethe's
novels and, for a long-range project, on the relationship of
phenomenology to neo-pragmatism.
Address for correspondence:
Michael D. Barber, Ph.D.
Department of Philosophy
St. Louis University
3800 Lindell Blvd.
P. O. Box 56907
St. Louis, MO 63156-0907
United States of America
Phone:
1 314 771 5884
Fax:
1 314 771 6953
Email:
Barbermd@slu.edu

106
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                   Michael D. Barber
courses in occupational science with members of the
Department of Occupational Science and Occupational
Therapy at St. Louis University, have helped me see the
relevance of select authors and works for occupational
science. I have chosen Husserl's work as a focus for this
discussion for three reasons. His methodology is
foundational for the phenomenological tradition. He affords
a philosophical foundation for the natural and social
sciences so important for occupational science. And this
foundation pays special attention to the first-person point
of view of an actor, which is also emphasized in occupational
science. In order to develop an account of human activity,
necessary for understanding what occupation means, I have
turned to both Maurice Merleau-Ponty's account of those
spontaneous but unplanned activities through which one
engages the world and Alfred Schutz's notion of deliberate,
planned action. Schutz's theory of action and motivation
depends upon the temporality that commonsense actors
understand in terms of a life-narrative, whose properties
Paul Ricoeur has spelled out. Likewise, in my view,
Emmanuel Levinas's description of how another person
summons us to ethical responsibility improves upon other
phenomenological explanations of intersubjectivity and
shows how occupations, activity, and narratives are
engendered and reconfigured. I may have neglected aspects
of occupation, and one might mine the phenomenological
tradition for other authors and other works that might better
explain what I have discussed or overlooked, but I present
here what I have found to be the most helpful to date.
But what is the methodology of phenomenology? Basically,
phenomenologists begin with the world of everyday life in
which we take many things for granted as we engage in
everyday activities such as driving to school, conversing
with friends, or purchasing needed goods. Following Plato,
who insisted that the unexamined life is not worth living,
Husserl (1970) attempted to subject this everyday "life-
world" to examination by inviting us to take up a particular
reflective stance toward our existence. Instead of uncritically
accepting our assumptions about how things are and the
dogmatism usually accompanying such assumptions,
Husserl (1983) suggested that we refrain from making any
assumption that things are and that instead we restrict
ourselves to attending carefully to how they appear. Thus
when driving down the road, instead of assuming that what
gleams in the sunlight ahead of us is a mirage (since it
could be water), we can refrain from judging what it is and
simply concentrate on describing its appearance (e.g., its
sparkle; its fuzzy, ever shifting boundaries). Likewise, the
phenomenologically inclined psychologist can invite clients
not to bother about (at least temporarily) whether their
recurring hallucinations really exist but rather to describe
what appears in them. Since the Greek word for "that which
appears" is "phenomenon," philosophers named the whole
movement that Husserl began "phenomenology." Husserl
envisioned this reflective stance toward everyday life,
technically called the "phenomenological reduction"
(Husserl, 1983, pp. 57-62), as freeing us from everyday
prejudices and enabling us to see things, people, our
activity, and ourselves freshly, as if for the very first time.
Husserl (1960) conceived this unprejudiced return to
everyday experience as leading to further reflections about
whether there might be essential features, for instance of
how a hallucination presents itself in contrast to how a
perceptual object appears, or how an act of perceiving
differs from an act of judgment. Subsequent
phenomenologists explored the essential features of human
embodiment, human action, and the face-to-face encounter
with another person. To determine the essential features
"without which the object cannot be intuitively imagined
as such" (Husserl, 1973, p. 341), Husserl (1973) developed
a disciplined method of imaginatively running through
variants of that object to discover its invariant, essential
features. Such findings can be further tested through
dialogue with interlocutors (Scheler, 1973). One ought to
accept their criticisms, if one finds them convincing, from
within the autonomous perspective within which one carries
on these investigations and assesses proposed claims. This
perspective is closely related to the first-person perspective
developed below insofar as I do not simply observe what
others and I think, but decide what I take to be true for
myself, as a participant rather than observer of the
discussion.
Phenomenology and the Natural and Social
Sciences
The natural sciences (e.g. chemistry, physics and biology)
commence too from the everyday life-world. Beginning with
what is given in everyday experience, such as light, the
regular falling of physical objects to the earth, or plants
and animals, they adopt unique theoretical stances to
explain what is given. While phenomenology, for instance,
seeks to depict the essential features differentiating animate
beings from inanimate ones, biologists often take such a
distinction for granted, provide physical-chemical
explanations of living beings' organic behaviors, and verify
those explanations against such behaviors. They do so
without needing to clarify the animate/inanimate distinction
(Husserl, 1989).
Phenomenology's conceptual analyses of the essential
features of what is experienced in everyday life complement
the work of the natural sciences, which are so intent on
offering scientific explanations that it is not their concern
to provide accounts of the essential features of what is
experienced. Phenomenology is not opposed to natural
science, but complementary to it, providing theoretical
descriptions that natural science does not have an interest
in providing. Thus, phenomenology helps natural science
to be more fully aware of its own presuppositions and, in
that sense, become more rational (Husserl, 1970).
Phenomenology complements the natural sciences in
another way, namely, by paying heed to how persons
experience their world in the first person, as opposed to the
third-person extrinsic viewpoint typical of the natural
sciences. For instance, phenomenology can give an account
of how one experiences the seeing of a blue ball, in a way

107
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                  Michael D. Barber
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
quite different from a natural scientific account of this same
process of seeing. A physiologist, for example, might explain
this seeing in terms of physical-chemical reactions taking
place on the retina, but this account of seeing from an
observer's perspective misses the lived experience of the
one who sees. Moreover, insofar as such scientific
explanations usually strive to coordinate conscious
experience (e.g., hearing tones) with explanations based
upon accompanying cerebral nerve-firings, it seems likely
that neuroscience will continue to rely on reports of what
the person being studied is experiencing (e.g. regarding
the tones being heard). Thus, the careful, disciplined
reports that phenomenological observers, including self-
observers, might provide of such experience would be of
particular relevance for neuroscience.
Furthermore, Alfred Schutz (1962) argues that
phenomenology provides a method highly suitable for the
social sciences since through it one can describe how an
actor experiences an action and what the action means to
the actor, as opposed to simply observing the action from
without. For instance, one can come across someone
chopping wood in the forest, but that action could have a
number of meanings for the actor. The woodchopper might
be chopping to exercise, or to keep the house warm by
having something to burn in the fireplace, or to intensify a
sense of masculinity that results from acting out a Paul
Bunyan role. Obviously to explain what an action means to
an actor, one would have to discuss that action's purpose,
and Schutz (1962, 1967), as we shall see, has developed a
phenomenological account of the essential features of such
concepts as purpose, action, and motivation.
Schutz's clarification of these terms in effect produces a
refined vocabulary upon which social scientists might rely
when they set out to understand the meaning of the actions
of everyday actors. Moreover, insofar as occupational
science has frequently defined occupation in terms of
purposeful human activity (Carlson & Clark, 1991; Hocking,
2000; Wilcock, 1998; Yerxa, 1998), it too could make use of
the vocabulary Schutz articulates. In addition, since
occupational science is concerned both with an actor's
purposes and what an action means to an actor (Molineux
& Rickard, 2003; Weinblatt, Ziv, & Avrech-Bar, 2000) its
concerns converge in this regard with those of the social
sciences. Of course, occupational science also understands
full well how occupation depends upon underlying neural,
anatomical, and physiological processes, and hence
occupational science requires a thorough grasp of such
natural sciences as anatomy and physiology. In other
words, occupational science stands at the intersection of
the natural and social sciences. To the extent, however,
that occupational science seeks to understand how people
experience their world beyond natural medical or
physiological explanations, what their purposes are, and
what their actions mean to them, phenomenology affords
occupational science a useful approach and vocabulary.
Phenomenological Clarifications of Human
Occupation
Human activity and occupation
What contribution can phenomenology make to an
understanding of occupation, understood, as Wilcock
(1998) expresses it, as all purposeful human activity?
Phenomenologists, concentrating on how actors experience
their activity, have affirmed that human activity functions
principally as "intentional." It is important to see, though,
that the term "intentional" here does not mean "deliberately"
or "on purpose," but rather "being directed toward" or
"aimed at" the world (Husserl, 1960, 1983; Schutz, 1962).
For instance, the activity of seeing, even when one allows
one's eyes to wander arbitrarily, for no purpose at all,
involves an entire bodily orientation toward the object seen,
which presents itself correlative to that orientation.
Likewise, when one knits, one gears oneself up, ordering
one's movements and bodily processes and deploying
needles and yarn under an overarching project—the
production of a sweater, for example.
Two famous phenomenologists, among others, have
developed the theme of human activity as intentional, and
a consideration of their analyses can illustrate the
usefulness of phenomenology for this theme of such
significance for occupational science. Intentionally directed
activity toward the world takes place on two levels:
operational intentionality, discussed by Maurice Merleau-
Ponty (1962, p. xviii), and intentionality of action,
characterized by Alfred Schutz (1962, p. 211). Merleau-Ponty
examined the notion of operational intentionality and
resisted Descartes's dualistic view, also opposed by
occupational scientists and psychologists (Strauss, 1993;
Wilcock, 1998; Zemke, 1996). To a Cartesian, only the mind
knows and the body, by contrast, operates like a mindless
machine. Merleau-Ponty dissolved this Cartesian dualism
by contending that there is a kind of bodily "knowing,"
even though it falls short of the clarity and deliberateness
characteristic of intellectual inference. For instance, after
many falls, one gradually learns to ride a bicycle, to maintain
one's balance, to be immediately aware of the slightest loss
of equilibrium and to compensate by leaning one way or
another, shifting one's weight, or turning the handlebars
smoothly or sharply in one direction or other. The
interesting thing is that one's body "knows" how to do all
these things without even thinking about it. In reflection,
one might be able to make explicit some of these activities,
which one's body deploys to maintain its balance. Such
reflection makes explicit the body's operative intentionality,
by showing, for instance, how in anticipation of an
unavoidable bump in the road one's hands, focused on the
handlebars, tighten and the rest of one's body slackens up.
Usually, however, the body carries on its intentional
orientation toward the bicycle and road, and adjusts to
problems without any intellectual planning or reflection at
all.
Of course, neurologists or physiologists can explain the

108
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                   Michael D. Barber
neural or physical-chemical processes involved in such
motor control but inaccessible to bicyclists. That is,
bicyclists cannot stop and report what nerve is firing in
their right leg since they do not experience specific nerve
firings. This scientific explanation, valid and important as it
is, adopts an observer's perspective on bicyclists' activity.
The viewpoint of the neurologist or physiologist is quite
different from bicyclists' viewpoint, reporting how they
experience the maintaining of balance as participants in
the activity, as they lean, shift weight, and turn. In addition
to this "motor-intentionality," one also intends the world
affectively, sexually, linguistically, and in many other ways
without reasoning, in such a way that Merleau-Ponty
justifiably claims "that consciousness is in the first place
not a matter of 'I think that ...'" (Merleau-Ponty, 1962, p.
137).
Clearly, Merleau-Ponty's findings on operational intentionality
are significant for occupational science, in that they make
possible a presentation of the participant's experience of human
activity, beneath the level of intellectual reflection. Its unique
focus on the subjective perspective contrasts with the
important, but different approach to occupation articulated
by Wilcock (1998), whose attention to brain functioning and
anthropological studies of the evolution of occupation adopt
an observer's viewpoint. Extensive research has been (and
will be) conducted regarding the operational intentionality,
(though not under that explicit rubric), which people deploy
without self-conscious reflection. Such intentionality is most
often automatic and habitual, often acquired after an initial
period of learning, and is implemented as the result of a
deliberate decision to pursue particular purposes. Operational
intentionality is exhibited, for example, in the space and object
management skills exhibited by children in play (Howell &
Pierce, 2000; Knox, 1966a); mothers' responses to infant cues
(Fraits-Hunt & Zemke, 1996); complete absorption in flow
activities (Parham, 1996); travel routines (Primeau, 1996a); the
attractions and preferences through which one selects a mate
(Krishnagiri, 1996); the skilled handling of needles in sewing
(Pendleton, 1996); the eye-hand coordination, spatial
orientation, and tool-use skills of quilting (Dickie, 2003; Howell
& Pierce, 2000); the motor, emotional, and social skills that
senior citizens enjoy exercising while shopping (Weinblatt,
Ziv, & Avrech-Bar, 2000); the habitual and automatic
patterns that can make work enjoyable (Larson & Zemke,
2003); and the exercise of muscoskeletal, neurological, and
symbolic capacities, and communication/interaction skills
(Hocking, 2000). While actors might be only vaguely aware
of these activities, an outside observer could through
questioning enable such actors to become explicitly aware
of how they are experiencing these activities, to describe
them, and perhaps to become increasingly self-conscious
of further details of their future experience. Because these
activities, crucial for engaging in occupation, often operate
below the threshold of deliberate, self-conscious planning,
and so are easily overlooked, a concerted effort is needed
to examine these activities and, especially, to elicit from
actors how they experience them.
Beyond the level of operational intentionality, Schutz (1962,
1967) has developed the notion of intentionality of action,
an intentionality that involves conscious deliberation and
planning. He asserts that when we undertake a project, such
as knitting a sweater or obtaining a B.A. degree, we imagine
the project already finished. That is, as an act that will
have been completed. This completed act, phantasied in
future perfect tense, functions as the guide for all the sub-
actions directed toward its realization. In this sense, for the
knitter who purchases yarn and needles and who day in
and day out labors on little segments, the meaning of those
multiple, intricate activities is the completed project, the
finished sweater. The meaning of a project's sub-acts is the
overarching project itself, which Schutz also refers to
interchangeably as the purpose or in-order-to motive of
those sub-acts.
One might object that Schutz's account of temporality is
culturally specific since it reflects what Mircea Eliade (1963)
has called the "linear" (p. 169) time of history prevailing in
the West versus the circular, "cyclical" (pp. 51-53) time
characteristic of non-Western cosmologies. While Eliade's
reflections make sense at the macro-level of mythic
cosmogonies, it still seems correct that on the micro-plane
of individual consciousness one essentially phantasises a
scenario of what will have been completed before one
undertakes the sub-acts leading to its completion. While
the existence of alternative, non-Western viewpoints on
time prevents an empirical generalization that all cultures
agree on the meaning of time, in determining the essential
features involved in devising a project for action, one must
consult one's own experience, consider counter-arguments,
and take one's stand, as Husserl's methodology suggests.
However, the mere fact that others disagree with what one
commits oneself to take for true, from within one's own
first-person perspective, need not dissuade one from making
such a commitment. One needs, of course, to evaluate from
his or her first-person perspective, all the concepts in this
paper as well as the accompanying claims that these
concepts pick out essential characteristics of action,
narrative, and ethical responsibility.
Again, one can imagine the role that intentionality of action
could play in future research based on the usefulness of
that concept for research that has already been completed.
For instance, as research (Weinblatt, Ziv, & Avrech-Bar,
2000) has shown, one would misunderstand the occupation
senior citizens engage in by going to the supermarket if
one conceives their in-order-to motive as purchasing food
instead of pursuing pure leisure through the exercise of
motor, emotional, and social capacities. Likewise, Wood,
Towers, and Malchow (2000) illustrated how chimpanzees
exhibit an intentionality of action analogous to humans',
insofar as the purpose of finding food organizes underlying
(operational) occupational behaviors such as the manual-
oral manipulations that constitute foraging - though animals
seem not to plan or deliberate about purposes as human
do. Other studies (Hocking, 2000; Wright-St. Clair, 2003)
have pinpointed how subjectively experienced purposes
or goals are essential elements of occupation.

109
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                  Michael D. Barber
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
These two levels of activity, operative and action, which
take their cue from the perspective of a participant engaging
the world, interact as one engages in an occupation. To
illustrate this, let us imagine the case of a middle-aged
woman who has returned to college in the hope of
completing a B.A. degree and has enrolled in several courses.
On the level of intentionality of action, this woman has
adopted the in-order-to motive of obtaining a B.A. degree.
Because of this overall project, she sets in motion a series
of sub-acts, such as meeting core requirements, choosing
a major, and taking the courses requisite for her major each
semester. In each course, in turn, the governing in-order-to
motive of passing the course requires sub-acts of attending
class, reading books, and passing examinations. However,
once she decides to achieve the in-order-to motive of
reading a book, she sets in motion a series of operational
activities. These include holding the book in her hands and
moving her eyes and head as she follows written lines and
passes down a page. These movements, exemplifying
operational intentionality, are operational in the sense that
one does not deliberate about them, plan them, or choose
to execute them step-by-step. Rather one enacts them
almost automatically, only vaguely aware of their intricacies,
of which one might be able to give at least a partial account
should one reflect on them. These movements are
intentional in that they are oriented to the letters, words,
and pages of the book. Furthermore, this operational
intentionality in turn relies upon underlying neural and
physiological processes of which the reader has no explicit
experience, but of whose functioning a neurophysiologist
from an observer perspective might be able to give an
explanation.
Ordinarily, we are so focused on in-order-to motives, such
as obtaining a degree, passing a course, or reading a book
that we do not give a second thought to the operational
intentional activities involved in performing the sub-acts
leading to the long-range goal. As intentional beings, we
live, as it were, extroverted toward the world, engaged with
it.
Let us suppose, though, that the woman above, before
beginning to read late at night, has been engaged all day
long in strenuous visual work (e.g., recording census data
into a computer) and finds herself so tired that the page
begins to appear blurred. Her relationship with the world
becomes disrupted insofar as the physical and neural
processes, upon which both operative intentionality and
the intentionality of action depend, have become
problematic. As a result, she can no longer direct herself to
the book she was reading, but is forced to take up a more
introverted approach, perhaps struggling over and over
again to focus her eyes on the page before her. She finds
herself compelled to concentrate not on the world but on
her own intending of the world, in particular on her
operational intentionality, whose underlying neural and
physiological support processes are at present proving
unreliable. If repeated acts of attempted focusing fail, she
must resort to other accommodations, such as resting before
trying to read again, calling it quits and going to bed, or, if
the problem occurs regularly, deciding whether to give up
her day job or the project of obtaining a degree.
Narrative and occupation
Schutz's phenomenology of everyday life motives includes
another set of motives (discoverable in the past) in addition
to future-directed in-order-to motives, and, as a result, his
entire account of motivation opens out toward the topic of
narrative, another prominent theme in occupational science.
While pursuing the future in-order-to motives of my action,
I am able to stop and inquire about those motives from my
past that may have prompted me to adopt a future-oriented
in-order-to project. Thus I may have the in-order-to motive
of becoming a teacher, but it could be that I have been
motivated to choose this project because of my past.
Perhaps, for example, I developed close relationships with
teachers during my childhood, and they have inspired me
to want to be like them. In searching out these "because
motives" that influenced the decision I have made to be a
teacher, I am looking for events that happened before my
decision (a decision that itself has already taken place and
so is past), in other words, in the pluperfect tense. In
discovering these past motives, actors undertake from their
present an interpretive selection of past events that seem
relevant to their present and future. Thus, given that I want
to be a teacher, I select the details from my past (e.g.,
encounters with impressive, dedicated instructors) that seem
to correlate with my present and future projects as their
significant influences. Since this process is interpretive,
dependent on selectivity shaped by one's present situation
and focused on what one takes to be past influences rather
than causes, Schutz would no doubt concur with
psychologists who resist causal-mechanistic or instinctive
accounts of motivation (Bruner, 1990; Strauss, 1993; White,
1959). Although it is frequent to find articles in occupational
science discussing motivation (Knox, 1996b; White, 1996;
Whiteford & Wicks, 2000), I cannot recall any research
distinguishing the different temporal frameworks according
to which we can experience and analyze motivation.
In addition, Schutz believes that from the moment we are
born into the world of everyday life, we are taught (through
language especially) to view objects and persons in typical
ways, as dogs, trees, parents, etc., and these generalizations
or categories, he calls "typifications" (Schutz, 1962, pp. 7-
10). Typifications are always used in conjunction with
systems of interests, called "relevances" (Schutz, 1962, pp.
9-10). Thus, if my purpose is driving to school (and this
purpose is my overriding "relevance"), I might notice a
"dog" by the side of the road, but for my purposes or
relevances (driving to school), I do not need any more
refined typification than "dog." But suppose that dog is
swaying and foaming at the mouth, then my system of
relevances alters. Since the dog could be rabid and endanger
the children of that neighborhood, I suddenly find that the
relevance of protecting those children takes precedence
over getting to school; and I am compelled to stop and call
the humane society or police. While on the phone with the
humane society (as a result of my reordered system of
relevances), I have to resort to more refined, detailed

110
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                   Michael D. Barber
typifications, as I inform the authorities that the dog is "a
German shepherd," about "three-feet tall," with a "white
spot on its throat."
When one adopts an in-order-to motive, such as "doing a
term paper" or "passing a course" or "becoming a teacher,"
these purposes are all conceived through typifications, and
these typifications are inherently vague. The paper that
one finally produces, the way one finally passes the course,
or the teacher one finally becomes take a much more definite
shape than the nebulous typification that one starts with
as an in-order-to motive. Also, we typify others and
ourselves in executing roles, and hence one typifies oneself
as a "teacher" and one's charges "students." Beyond
typifying oneself and one's students in roles, one might
sub-typify students as "lazy" or "quiet" or "hard-working."
Clearly, since it is inevitable that we typify each other and
since we often do so immediately and unreflectively,
typifications can be dangerous, destructive, or mildly
distressing and call for a continual process of revision,
particularly in interpersonal relationships of every kind.
Our self-typifications actually amount to roles (mother,
father, and teacher) according to which we engage in the
kinds of purposeful activities (e.g. raising children or
instructing pupils) that constitute occupations. As Paul
Ricoeur (1984) has observed, these roles of necessity carry
with them a more or less elaborated kind of story. Every
self-typification contains its implicit narrative. Thus, if I
typify myself as the "dedicated teacher" mentioned earlier,
I would have vaguely in mind a set of past events in which
I worked diligently and lovingly, with pupils profiting from
my efforts. If I were invited to explain why I am the kind of
teacher I am, I might respond not by presenting logical
reasons as if I were a historian (Bruner, 1991), but by
providing a narrative. My narrative, looking into the past
and selecting out the events that led to the present and
brought me to where I am, would reveal what I take to be
the "because motives" of my present self-typification
(although I might not deploy Schutz's technical
terminology). In this reflective moment, I self-consciously
construct a life narrative through a "poetic act of
emplotment" (Ricoeur, 1984, pp. 21-22) that "draws a
configuration out of simple succession" (Ricoeur, 1984, p.
65). Such emplotment brings together in an intelligible whole
"agents, goals, means, interactions, circumstances, and
unexpected results" (Ricoeur, 1984, p. 65).
In recounting my narrative, I inevitably select (since
anyone's past is so rich that one can never comprehend all
the events) those events I take to have influenced me in
becoming who I am, emphasizing some events rather than
others. For instance, in conceiving of myself as a "dedicated
teacher," I might overlook memories of teachers who
egotistically made themselves the center of attention and
who influenced me insofar as my own "dedication" at times
serves the purpose of winning adulation for myself, even
at the expense of students' learning. Since every narrative
is constructed and its past events selected and interpreted
from a present, dominated by present self-typifications and
relevances, all narratives are inescapably tentative,
constructed "for now," always open to revision and re-
construction. This is so since our present set of relevances
and typifications are always alterable, even from moment
to moment, as the above example of going to school and
encountering a rabid dog illustrates.
The events of life can provoke a reconsideration of one's
life narrative and possibly a reconfiguration of one's system
of relevances. Suppose, for example, that the national
educational system in which I teach underwent a severe
crisis leading to downsizing that would leave me
permanently unemployed. This crisis would interrupt the
narrative that had provided me with my identity and would
appear to ruin my possibilities of being a dedicated teacher.
Actually, my narrative would still be a work in progress,
and I would imagine different possible endings, which
would take my narrative in different directions and which
would involve different life-projects (in-order-to motives)
and self-typifications. For instance, I might think of allowing
the crisis to overwhelm me, to lead me to withdraw in
bitterness and succumb to addictions of drugs or alcohol,
or I might abandon the narrative of being a dedicated teacher
and look for more secure employment in a business career.
It is even conceivable that I might envision my noble,
patient, resilient struggle to cope with this crisis as
providing a better instance of teaching (by example) for
those young people I have known than anything I may
have done in a classroom. Friends or counselors can assist
one to imagine alternative narratives and decide upon a
guiding story. Whatever life narrative one endorses, it will
act back on one's life and shape it since, as Bruner (1991)
mentions, narratives "may have quite as powerful influence
in shaping our modes of thought as they have in creating
the realities that their plots depict"(p. 15). As in the case of
intentionality of operation and action, the concept of
narrative makes it possible to understand how actors
themselves are experiencing their own lives and occupations
and conferring meaning on them, as opposed to a meaning
that an observer might assign.
The literature of occupational science abounds with
instances of research that has utilized aspects of narrative
to examine: the motives driving people toward particular
occupations and their self-typified "occupation persona"
(Whiteford & Wicks, 2000, p. 49); the family origins of moral
careers (Knox, 1996b); the interpretation of past events by
those who age successfully (Jackson, 1996); scholars'
understanding of the turns their career development took
at key moments of decision (Pierce, 1996); Miles Davis's
explanation of the factors inclining him to the occupation
of jazz (White, 1996); autobiographical accounts of the
importance of running (Primeau, 1996b); and senior citizens'
explanation of why they go to supermarkets (Weinblatt,
Ziv, Avrech-Bar, 2000). Molineux and Rickard (2003)
summarize the importance of narratives for research when
they state that eliciting people's narratives helps meet the
"need to privilege the subjective experience of participants
to understand the meaning and purpose of occupational
engagement" (p. 53).

111
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                  Michael D. Barber
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Ethical responsibility and occupation
Phenomenology has been useful for revealing features
crucial for understanding occupation: the different levels
of activity through which people engage with their world,
the typifications and relevances that constitute everyday
life, and the temporal-narrative structures of human
existence. But one would misunderstand all these features
and occupation in general if one conceived them in isolation
from relationships with other persons, as if the human agent
in whose consciousness they appear were not thoroughly
immersed in relationships with others. Following the
discussions of Husserl (1960) on how others come to
appearance, 
prominent 
philosophers 
in 
the
phenomenological tradition, such as Heidegger (1962),
Merleau-Ponty (1962), Sartre (1956), and Schutz (1962, 1967),
have seriously investigated the topic of intersubjectivity.
Indeed, intersubjective relationships have been implicit in
virtually all the examples of occupation presented above
since one could not knit a sweater, ride a bicycle, attend a
university, be a dedicated teacher, or undergo counseling,
without others from whom one has learned or for whom or
with whom one acts. A conceptual framework for
occupational science that would fail to make this
intersubjective dimension of occupation explicit would be
seriously deficient.
But there is a particularly forceful and potent dimension of
intersubjectivity that lies at the root of so much occupational
activity and that treatments of intersubjectivity have not
adequately examined, namely the ethical responsibility that
is evoked in the presence of another person. Emmanuel
Levinas (1981), who has analyzed this aspect of experience
more than any other phenomenologist, describes how other
persons appearing to me, from my first person point of view,
prior to any reasoning or justification, solicit me to respond
to them in accord with their dignity. To illustrate this appeal
of the other to be treated ethically, Levinas points to
examples in order to assist us to attend to whether we can
find this ethical summons of the other in our experience.
Thus, when we enter a room, find an unexpected stranger
there, and salute her with "Good morning," Levinas argues
that in this case the mere presence of the other person
evokes an acknowledgment of their presence and a wish
for their well-being. Although salutations appear to be
merely customary, Levinas would argue that
phenomenological analysis reveals that the summons of
the other person to be treated courteously—and ignoring
their presence would be rude, even insulting—precedes
and reveals itself in the polite response, which therefore
takes on an additional ethical character. Indeed whole
societies develop entire practices of etiquette in response
to the prior, evocative dignity of persons, who are not to be
ignored but taken account of even in the most insignificant
details of life, such as entering rooms, passing through
doors, or eating meals. Similarly, when others make a
theoretical claim and we embark, almost immediately, upon
discourse with them, we do so in response to them who
appeal to us to take them seriously, to understand them, to
agree or, if we disagree, to offer full and fair reasons why
(Levinas, 1979). For this reason, the encounter with the
other inviting an ethical response precedes justification,
since those who offer justifications for their beliefs to
another have already recognized the right of the other
person to an explanation.
Levinas is not making an empirical statement that everyone
empirically recognizes this ethical summons—a statement
that many behaviors in the twentieth and twenty-first
centuries would belie. Rather, he believes that a careful,
unbiased, phenomenological consideration of the
commonplace experience of being faced with another person
will reveal what is often so taken for granted as not to be
seen: the other inviting us to respect, to respond, or, at the
least, not to hurt. Cultural determinants might affect whether
one notices the other's appeal for ethical treatment, but the
practice of phenomenological reflection highlights how that
appeal is there, independently of one's cultural background.
In fact, one often experiences this appeal from a first person
viewpoint of oneself facing the other, in spite of one's
cultural upbringing.
One can illustrate how the ethical summons of the other
functions as a key component of occupation itself. For
instance, the past teachers, whose dedication to me may
have prompted my own choice of the teaching profession,
themselves exhibited, through their acts of professional
responsibility, an ethical responsibility to me and for me.
Likewise, it would be quite difficult for diligent, dedicated
teachers to separate the professional demands they meet
for their students from an ethical sense of responsibility
undertaken for these students and evoked by them. Even
in those moments when teachers recognize that they may
have pursued adulation at the expense of their students'
development, the very recognition depends upon the
recognition that these students require and deserve better
treatment.
It is not difficult to imagine how ethical responsibility for
another is constitutive of various other occupations, and
the literature is replete with examples that also suggest
directions for future research. For instance, one can find
the responsiveness to what Levinas calls the summons of
the other in occupations when one fosters play with a child
on the child's terms (Knox, 1996a); when mothers displace
their own needs to serve their children (Krieger, 1996); when
parents' sense of responsibility pervades their tasks and
shared routines (Primeau, 2000) and they suspend the
dominating ideology of individualism in favor of an ideology
of commitment to their children (Segal, 1999); when social-
scientific professionals, out of regard for the persons they
study, become wary of "concealing or making invisible the
work people do" (Smith, 2003, p. 64) or of mistakenly
categorizing elder persons' activities according to
categories drawn from the world of the young (Weinblatt,
Ziv, Avrech-Bar, 2000); when an abused person participates
in research to help prevent the abuse of others (Lentin,
2002); when one pursues an in-depth consultative process
with community members to avoid the possibility of welfare
exploitation (Whiteford, 2003); when the elderly find
generosity, generativity, and caregiving enhancing their

112
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                   Michael D. Barber
quality of life (Jackson, 1996); and when the quiltmaker's
anticipation of giving a finished quilt to a specific person
guides the making of the quilt itself (Howell & Pierce, 2000).
Angela Scoggin (1999) put her finger on just this ethical
moment when she observed how caregivers for hospitalized
Peruvian children experience a sense of purpose in daily
tasks "that transcended working only for material rewards"
(p. 40).
Given the power of a sense of ethical responsibility to direct
and motivate the purposes one adopts, and its implicit
pervasiveness in so many discussions of occupations, it is
surprising that occupational science literature has not made
it more explicit. Perhaps occupational scientists avoid
discussing explicitly the ethical dimension of occupation
because of the relativity of ethical convictions about which
actions are right or wrong and the diversity of ethical-
theoretical principles (e.g. Kantian, utilitarian). However,
by focusing on an ethics of responsibility engendered in
face-to-face relationships, before one articulates
convictions about what is right or wrong or develops
theories, Levinas evades these difficulties and provides a
fruitful paradigm for future research.
Even and perhaps especially in those moments in which
the events of life interrupt one's occupation and compel a
change of narrative, as when, for instance, the breakdown
of the national educational system might leave teachers
permanently unemployed, the ethical dimensions of
occupation might prove themselves extremely significant.
It would, for example, be quite natural for a dedicated
teacher, now unemployed, to be overwhelmed, to be tempted
to withdraw in bitterness or even to succumb to various
addictions. Levinas (1979) sees just this point when he
observes that there is a certain pathos that belongs to
suffering and death insofar as they are our own. When
suffering befalls us or death approaches, it is natural to
fixate upon ourselves, to mourn the fact that these things
are happening or will happen to us. But Levinas (1979)
suggests that we can rob suffering and death of their hold
upon us, the obsession with ourselves, the self-pity they
are inclined to produce, if even in suffering or facing death
we can heed the call of the other person(s) and put our
suffering at their service. Thus, displaced teachers would
come to understand their displacement ethically if they were
to envision, as suggested above, their noble, patient, and
resilient struggle to cope with the crisis as providing
possible inspiration to their students. Because of their
sense of ethical responsibility, they would embrace the new
purposeful activity, or occupation, of trying to cope or
looking for new work as teaching in a new way. The factors
leading toward withdrawal and self-pity could be narratively
reconfigured as providing an opportunity for demonstrating
resilience in the midst of adversity, for the sake of those
who might some day experience adversity themselves.
Finally, service of the other, far from reducing one to a weak,
timid subservience, galvanizes one's self and makes
possible a vigorous, full participation in whatever
occupations one pursues since one occupies "a privileged
place with regard to responsibilities for which no one can
replace me" (Levinas, 1979, p. 245). One thinks of great
moral heroes, like Martin Luther King, Mahatma Gandhi, or
Archbishop Oscar Romero, who engaged so fully in the
occupation of seeking justice for those whose summons
they had felt, that the dangerous consequences of that
occupation could not dissuade them from their dedication
to others. Romero, for instance, threatened constantly and
finally assassinated in 1979, never ceased condemning
publicly the murder of innocent peasants. He took the mortal
leap, salto mortale in the words of Levinas (1979, p. 246),
of fearing the murder of others more than his own death.
Romero thereby robbed his own death of its pathos and
sting and lived like the freest of persons, completely
absorbed in the occupation of preventing the murder of
others.
Ethical responsibility, a là Levinas, complements the
phenomenological analyses discussed above since it can
limit occupations that imply the injury of others, and elicit
or direct occupations and their purposes that organize lower
level operational intentionality. Likewise, narratives can
present a developing occupational identity that can be
formed or recovered through its dedication to others.
Moreover, insofar as these other concepts make possible a
first-person account of occupation, Levinas supplements
them by illuminating how the other is experienced ethically
from the viewpoint of the first-person participant, facing
another. In fact, one loses sight of the other's summons
when one reflects on relationships from a third-person
observer stance, as if one were not a participant in these
relationships. Paradoxically, the experience of the others'
summons requires the first-person participant also to pay
heed to others' first-person point of view, to inquire about
how these others experience their world—in brief, to do
that delving beneath third-person accounts that has been
the hallmark of phenomenology since its inception.
Conclusion
In sum, this discussion, developed from within the
phenomenological tradition, presents three concepts
central for an understanding of occupation and for
classifying and directing occupational science research:
human activity, narrative, and ethical responsibility.
Phenomenology, as Husserl conceived it, attends to the
first-person descriptions of conscious experience, in
contrast to the natural sciences that concentrate on third
person observer account of physical-chemical processes,
and to the advantage of the social sciences that can improve
their accuracy by examining what actions mean to actors.
Phenomenologists, such as Merleau-Ponty and Schutz,
have developed an account of the intentional orientation
toward the world on two activity levels, that of habitual,
automatic activities and that of the purposes such activities
serve. Through the interaction of these levels one can
understand how actors experience occupation. Schutz's
description of future-oriented purposes mirrors his past
directed-exploration of because motives, to which actors
attend in constructing from their first-person perspective

113
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                  Michael D. Barber
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
the narratives correlative to and explanatory of their present
self-typifications and relevances, narratives whose
structure Ricoeur has thoroughly explored. All these
concepts for understanding occupation from an actor's first-
person point of view, however, pertain to an intersubjective
context that phenomenologists have also discussed.
Levinas, in particular, highlights the imperative character
of ethical responsibility elicited by the other person whom
one faces in the first-person. This other summons one to
undertake in responsibility innumerable occupational
activities as well as to attend to the first person point of
view of the other person. This attention to other's first
person point of view brings us full circle, revealing the
ethical significance of Husserl's phenomenology, which
articulated a way of attending to the first-person point of
view of consciousness, neglected by the natural and social
sciences, at the price of their own completion or accuracy.
Acknowledgements
I have come to see the relevance of these three areas that
phenomenologists have analyzed to the concept of
occupation through team-teaching with St. Louis University
professors Shirely Behr, Debbie Rybski, and Jill Mueller of
the Department of Occupational Science and Occupational
Therapy. I am most grateful to them for having allowed me
to teach for several years a segment on phenomenology
and occupation in a course entitled Clinical Reasoning and
in a recent course entitled The Lived Experience: The Impact
of Disability and Chronic Illness upon Occupation.
References
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Bruner, J. (1991). The narrative construction of reality.
Critical Inquiry, 18, 1-21.
Carlson, M., & Clark, F. (1991). The search for useful
methodologies in occupational science. The American
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 45, 235-241.
Dickie, V. (2003). The role of learning in quilt making. Journal
of Occupational Science, 10(3), 120-129.
Eliade, M. (1963). Myth and reality. New York: Harper &
Row.
Embree, L. & al. (Eds.). (1997). Encyclopedia of
phenomenology. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Fraits-Hunt, D., & Zemke, R. (1996). Games mothers play
with full-term and pre-term infants. In R. Zemke & F.
Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The evolving
discipline (pp. 217-226). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Gray, J. M. (1997). Application of phenomenological method
to the concept of occupation. Journal of Occupational
Science: Australia, 4(1), 5-17.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time. San Francisco, CA:
Harper San Francisco.
Hocking, C. (2000). Occupational science: A stock take of
accumulated insights. Journal of Occupational Science,
7(2), 58-67.
Howell, D., & Pierce, D. (2000). Exploring the forgotten
restorative dimension of occupation: Quilting and quilt
use. Journal of Occupational Science, 7(2), 68-72.
Husserl, E. (1960). Cartesian meditations: An introduction
to phenomenology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers.
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis of European sciences and
transcendental phenomenology: An introduction to
phenomenological 
philosophy. 
Evanston:
Northwestern University Press.
Husserl, E. (1973). Experience and judgment: Investigations
in a genealogy of logic. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press.
Husserl, E. (1983). Ideas pertaining to a pure
phenomenology and to a phenomenological
philosophy. First book: General introduction to pure
phenomenology. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff
Publishers.
Husserl, E. (1989). Ideas 2: Studies in the phenomenology
of constitution. Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer
Academic Press.
Husserl, E. (2001). Logical investigations, 2 vols. New York:
Routledge.
Jackson, J. (1996). Living a meaningful existence in old age.
In R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science:
The evolving discipline (pp. 339-361). Philadelphia: F.
A. Davis.
Knox, S. (1996a). Play and playfulness in preschool children.
In R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science:
The evolving discipline (pp. 81-88). Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis.
Knox, S. (1996b). Shared moral careers and occupational
choice in a family. In R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.),
Occupational science: The evolving discipline (pp. 331-
337). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Krieger, M. (1996). A phenomenology of motherhood. In R.
Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The
evolving discipline (pp. 243-246). Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis.
Krishnagiri, S. (1996). Mate selection as occupation. In R.
Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The
evolving discipline (pp. 193-203). Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis.
Larson, E., & Zemke, R. (2003). Shaping the temporal
patterns of our lives: The social coordination of
occupation. Journal of Occupational Science, 10(2),
80-89.
Lentin, P. (2002) The human spirit and occupation: Surviving
and creating a life. Journal of Occupational Science,
9(3), 143-152.

114
Journal of Occupational Science, November 2004, Vol 11, No 3, pp 105-114.
Occupational Science and Phenomenology: Human Activity, Narrative and Ethical Responsibility                   Michael D. Barber
Levinas, E. (1979). Totality and infinity. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Levinas, E. (1981). Otherwise than being or beyond essence.
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). The phenomenology of
perception. London: Humanities.
Molineux, M., & Rickard, W. (2003). Storied approaches to
understanding occupation. Journal of Occupational
Science, 10(1), 52-60.
Parham, L. D. (1996). Perspectives on play. In R. Zemke & F.
Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The evolving
discipline (pp. 71-80). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Pendleton, H. (1996). The occupation of needlework. In R.
Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The
evolving discipline (pp. 287-295). Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis.
Pierce, D. (1996). The work of scholars. In R. Zemke & F.
Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The evolving
discipline (pp. 125-141). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Primeau, L. (1996a). Human daily travel: Personal choices
and external constraints. In R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.),
Occupational science: The evolving discipline (pp. 115-
124). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Primeau, L. (1996b). Running as an occupation: Multiple
meanings and purposes. In R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.),
Occupational science: The evolving discipline (pp. 275-
286). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Primeau, L. (2000). Divisions of household work, routines,
and child care occupations in families. Journal of
Occupational Science, 7(1), 19-28.
Ricoeur, P. (1984). Time and narrative. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Sartre, J. P. (1956). Being and nothingness: A
phenomenological essay on ontology. New York:
Washington Square Press.
Scheler, M. (1973). Selected philosophical essays.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Schutz, A. (1962). The problem of social reality. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff.
Schutz, A. (1967). The phenomenology of the social world.
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Scoggin, A. (1999). Caregiving as an occupation:
Developmental intervention for a group of hospitalized
Peruvian children. Journal of Occupational Science,
6(1), 34-41.
Segal, R. (1999) Doing for others: Occupations within
families with children who have special needs. Journal
of Occupational Science, 6(2), 53-60.
Smith, D. (2003) Making sense of what people do: A
sociological perspective. Journal of Occupational
Science, 10(1), 61-64.
Spiegelberg, H. (1982). The phenomenological movement:
A historical introduction. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Strauss, A. (1993). Continual permutations of action. New
York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Weinblatt, N., Ziv, N., & Avrech-Bar, M. (2000). The old
lady from the supermarket - categorization of occupation
according to performance areas: Is it relevant for the
elderly? Journal of Occupational Science, 7(2), 73-79.
White, J. (1996). Miles Davis: Occupation in the extreme. In
R. Zemke & F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The
evolving discipline (pp. 259-273). Philadelphia: F. A.
Davis.
White, R. (1959). Motivation reconsidered: The concept of
competence. Psychological Review, 66, 297-233.
Whiteford, G. (2003). Enhancing occupational opportunity
in communities: Politics' third way and the concept of
the enabling state. Journal of Occupational Science,
10(1), 40-45.
Whiteford, G., & Wicks, A. (2000). Occupation: Persona,
environment, engagement and outcomes. An analytic
review of the Journal of Occupational Science profiles.
Part 2. Journal of Occupational Science, 7(2), 48-57.
Wilcock, A. A. (1998). An occupational perspective of
health. Thorofare, NJ: Slack.
Wood, W., Towers, L., & Malchow, J. (2000) Environment,
time-use, and adaptedness in prosimians: Implications
for discerning behavior that is occupational in nature.
Journal of Occupational Science, 7(1), 5-18.
Wright-St. Clair, V. (2003). Storymaking and storytelling:
Making sense of living with multiple sclerosis. Journal
of Occupational Science, 10(1), 46-51.
Yerxa, E. (1998). Health and the human spirit for occupation.
The American Journal of Occupational Therapy, 52,
412-418.
Zemke, R. (1996). Brain, mind, and meaning. In R. Zemke &
F. Clark (Eds.), Occupational science: The evolving
discipline (pp. 163-170). Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.

