British Journal for the History of Philosophy
ISSN: 0960-8788 (Print) 1469-3526 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbjh20
Phenomenology, idealism, and the legacy of Kant
James Kinkaid
To cite this article: James Kinkaid (2019) Phenomenology, idealism, and the
legacy of Kant, British Journal for the History of Philosophy, 27:3, 593-614, DOI:
10.1080/09608788.2018.1526166
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2018.1526166
Published online: 30 Oct 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 676
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbjh20

ARTICLE
Phenomenology, idealism, and the legacy of Kant
James Kinkaid
Department of Philosophy, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
ABSTRACT
Martin Heidegger closes his Winter Semester 1927-28 lectures by claiming that
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, read through the lens of Edmund Husserl's
phenomenology,
conﬁrmed
the
accuracy
of
his
philosophical
path
culminating in Being and Time. A notable interpretation of Heidegger's debt to
Kant, advanced by William Blattner, presents Heidegger as a temporal idealist.
I argue that attention to Husserl's adaptation of Kant's critical philosophy
shows that both Husserl and Heidegger are realists. I make my case by tracing
a uniﬁed philosophical problematic through three puzzling passages: the
Schematism chapter of the ﬁrst Critique, Husserl's thought experiment of the
destruction of the world in Ideas, and the passage in Being and Time that
motivates Blattner's idealist reading. Husserl and Heidegger give accounts,
derived from Kant, of how the consciousness of time makes it possible for
objects to be perceived as enduring unities, as well as 'genealogies of logic'
that show how a priori knowledge, including ontology, is possible. These
accounts are idealistic only in the sense that they concern the ideal or
essential features of intentionality in virtue of which it puts us in touch with
things as they are independently of the contributions of any mind of any type.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 12 November 2017; Revised 11 June and 1 September 2018; Accepted 17
September 2018
KEYWORDS Heidegger; Husserl; Kant; phenomenology; idealism; realism
Heidegger closes his Winter Semester (WS) 1927-28 lecture course 'Phenom-
enological Interpretation of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason' (PIK) by signaling
his aﬃnity with both Kant and Husserl:
When some years ago I studied the Critique of Pure Reason anew and read it, as it
were, against the background of Husserl's phenomenology, it opened my eyes;
and Kant became for me a crucial conﬁrmation of the accuracy of the path which
I took in my search.
(PIK 292)
This remark raises the following question: What elements of Kant's philosophy
show up in Being and Time, and how did the background of Husserl's phenom-
enology open Heidegger's eyes to these elements? William Blattner ('Is
© 2018 BSHP
CONTACT James Kinkaid
jkinkaid@bu.edu
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
2019, VOL. 27, NO. 3, 593-614
https://doi.org/10.1080/09608788.2018.1526166

Heidegger a Kantian Idealist?'; Heidegger's Temporal Idealism; 'Heidegger's
Kantian Idealism Revisited') answers: Heidegger adopts a modiﬁed version
of Kantian idealism that corrects inconsistencies in the original account.
In what follows, I develop a realist alternative to Blattner's reading. I argue
that Heidegger found the seeds of a realist phenomenology in the Critique of
Pure Reason and that he did so by reading it through the lens of Husserl's phe-
nomenology. I show this by tracing a uniﬁed philosophical problematic through
three crucial, but puzzling, passages: the Schematism chapter of the ﬁrst Cri-
tique, the thought experiment of the destruction of the world in Ideas I, and
the passage in Being and Time that Blattner makes central in his defense of
the idealist interpretation. In §1 I lay out Blattner's reading. In §2 I draw a con-
nection between the schematism and Husserl's thought experiment and piece
together a critique of Kant from Husserl's scattered remarks on the critical
project. In §3 I turn to Heidegger's interpretation of Kant. I argue that Heideg-
ger's objections to neo-Kantian interpreters of the ﬁrst Critique suggest that he
agrees with Husserl's critique and thereby adopts a form of realism. I close by
considering Heidegger's proposal for moving beyond Kant.
Before moving forward, I need to get clear on what I mean by 'idealism' and
'realism'. Denying that Husserl and Heidegger are idealists in the sense
deﬁned below is compatible with recognizing that they belong to a loosely
uniﬁed Kantian and post-Kantian idealist tradition. We can only make
headway on the question of whether Husserl and Heidegger were idealists
or realists by connecting precise deﬁnitions to these terms. Such deﬁnitions
should not be ad hoc - it would be a defect of a deﬁnition of 'idealism' that
it implies that Berkeley is not an idealist, for example - but they need not
capture some commitments shared by everyone who has ever rallied
around the 'idealist' banner. My deﬁnition is saved from arbitrariness by
three features: ﬁrst, it implies that Blattner's 'temporal idealist' Heidegger is
an idealist; second, it implies that some interpreters of Husserl read him as
an idealist; and third, it captures the core idealist idea that the mind makes
the world the way it is.
I understand idealism as the view that the existence or nature of physical
objects stands in a relation of generic modal dependence on conscious sub-
jects. More precisely, it is the view that for all x, necessarily: if x exists and is a
physical object, then some conscious subject exists. This deﬁnition rules out
possible worlds in which physical objects exist and have the natures they
do but no conscious subjects exist. The kind of dependence is generic, not
rigid - that is, physical objects depend on there being some mind or other,
not a speciﬁc mind. I understand realism as the denial of idealism - that is,
it is the view that some physical objects depend for neither their existence
nor their nature on any mind (Devitt, Realism and Truth, 13-5). Realism
requires only that some physical objects are modally independent of minds.
It is thus compatible with the obvious fact that some physical objects, like
594
J. KINKAID

baseballs and skyscrapers, causally depend on us. Finally, by the 'natures' of
physical objects I have in mind not only their intrinsic properties, but also
those features that Kant (on one reading, though not on Heidegger's)
argues are dependent on the structure of the mind: spatiality, temporality,
persistence, causality, and so on.
In addition to this claim of generic modal dependence, an idealist may
endorse a further grounding claim: the existence or nature of physical
objects is grounded in the structure of some subject. Grounding is an expla-
natory, non-causal form of ontological determination that captures the core
idea that the mind makes the world the way it is - it is because or in virtue
of the structure of the mind that physical objects exist and have the
natures they do. This grounding formulation plausibly entails the generic
modal dependence formulation and serves to explain the modal correlation
it expresses (Rosen, 'Metaphysical Dependence', 118).
It is important to distinguish idealism in either its dependence or its ground-
ing formulation from what A.D. Smith calls Husserl's 'ideal veriﬁcationism'. Ideal
veriﬁcationism is the view that everything that exists is in principle intuitable.
More precisely, it is the view that for all x, necessarily: if x exists, then possibly:
there exists a mind that intuits x. Ideal veriﬁcationism does not immediately
entail idealism. Indeed, Smith recognizes this when he uses ideal veriﬁcationism
as one among other premises in the argument for idealism he reconstructs on
Husserl's behalf (Smith, Husserl and the Cartesian Meditations, 183-8).
It may seem natural to characterize ideal veriﬁcationism as a kind of onto-
logical dependence - namely, the dependence of all entities on possible con-
sciousness. But I think this is misleading. 'Dependence on possible
consciousness' could mean one of two things. First, it could mean depen-
dence on potential intuitive consciousness: for all x, necessarily: if x exists,
then there exists a y such that possibly: y is intuitively conscious of x. This is
an idealist thesis, which might contrast with another idealist view on which
entities depend on actual (i.e. occurrent) consciousness. Second, it could
mean 'dependence' on the possibility of intuitive consciousness. But this is
dependence in name only. This claim simply doesn't have the right logical
form to be a claim of ontological dependence. Indeed, it is misleading to
use the ontological language of dependence to characterize what is essen-
tially an epistemological thesis. Finally, note that grounding is usually taken
to be factive, which rules out grounding a fact on a merely possible fact.
Even if ideal veriﬁcationism has historically been associated with the idealist
tradition and its denial with the realist tradition, it is distinct from idealism as I
construe it. Moreover, my formulation of idealism is not unduly narrow, since it
implies that Berkeley, Blattner's Heidegger, and Kant and Husserl on various
interpretations are idealists. Blattner reads Heidegger as endorsing 'temporal
idealism', the view that the temporal features of entities depend on us. More-
over, he claims that Dasein's temporality stands in an explanatory relationship
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
595

to the temporal features of other entities (Blattner, Heidegger's Temporal Ideal-
ism, 19). Complexities of Blattner's changing views aside, this suﬃces to make
Blattner's Heidegger an idealist: the natures (viz. temporal features) of physical
objects are explained by (i.e. grounded in) structures of the subject.
§1 Blattner's idealist interpretation
Blattner's interpretation is motivated primarily by the following passage from
§43 of Being and Time (BT).
Of course only as long as Dasein is ... 'is there' [gibt es] being. When Dasein does
not exist, 'independence' 'is' not either, nor 'is' the 'in-itself'. In such a case this
sort of thing can be neither understood nor not understood. In such a case even
entities within-the-world can neither be discovered nor lie hidden. In such a case
it cannot be said that entities are, nor can it be said that they are not. But now, as
long as there is an understanding of being and therefore an understanding of
presence-at-hand, it can be said that in this case entities will still continue to be.
(BT 255)
On Blattner's 1994 interpretation, in this passage (call it 'the dependence
passage') Heidegger is following Kant in distinguishing between two stand-
points: the human or empirical standpoint and the transcendental standpoint.
From the empirical standpoint ('now', 'in this case') we can say that some enti-
ties - present-at-hand (vorhanden) entities - are causally independent of
human beings, and thus could continue to exist if humans disappeared.
From the transcendental standpoint ('in such a case'), on the other hand,
the 'ontological framework' within which existence questions make sense is
suspended. From the transcendental standpoint, it cannot be said of a situ-
ation in which there were no Dasein that entities would exist, nor that they
would not exist. This is because being - the 'ontological framework' in
virtue of which existence questions are meaningful - depends on Dasein.
Blattner rejects interpretations on which Heidegger is led to ontological
idealism by redeﬁning 'being' as intelligibility. In contrast, he sees ontological
idealism as the substantive conclusion of an argument that's developed in
Division II of Being and Time and that mirrors the B-Deduction of the ﬁrst Cri-
tique. The form of this argument, according to Blattner, is the following:
a. The understanding of being (Kant: the concept of an object) discloses (Kant:
refers to) the temporal structure of things.
b. Time, and thus the temporal structure of things, depends on us ...
c. That in virtue of which an entity is an entity (Kant: an object is an object)
depends on us.
('Is Heidegger a Kantian Idealist?', 191-2)
(a) and (b), which Blattner calls 'the temporality of being' and 'temporal
idealism', respectively, imply (c), 'ontological idealism'.
596
J. KINKAID

A plausible realist reading of Being and Time has to satisfy two criteria. First,
it has to show that, for Heidegger, the above argument is unsound. The
premise I intend to reject as an interpretation of Heidegger is (b), temporal
idealism. Second, it has to explain away what seems to be a bald statement
of idealism in the dependence passage. Those who interpret 'being' as intel-
ligibility or meaning have an easy way to satisfy this second criterion; my task
is made more diﬃcult, however, by the fact that I follow Blattner in rejecting
such interpretations.1 My strategy for satisfying these two criteria is to under-
stand the dependence passage in terms of the Schematism chapter, which
Heidegger considers the 'central core' of the ﬁrst Critique (KPM 63). To see
why Heidegger's appropriation of the doctrine of the schematism is compati-
ble with realism, though, I begin by showing how Husserl's phenomenology
revolves around a similar project. Heidegger claims that Kant's method was,
at least in its innermost intentions, phenomenological in a sense ﬁrst laid
out by Husserl (PIK 49). Showing that Husserl's transcendental phenomenol-
ogy is realist despite appearances illuminates the 'background' against
which Heidegger developed his reading of Kant (PIK 292).
§2 Husserl's transcendental aesthetic
Widely diverging interpretations of Husserl's transcendental idealism have
emerged in the literature. Scholars have interpreted him as claiming that
the physical supervenes on consciousness (A.D. Smith, Husserl and the Carte-
sian Meditations; Meixner, 'Husserls Idealismus'); as a phenomenalist in Ideas I
(Gurwitsch, 'Husserl in Perspective') or even already in the Logical Investi-
gations (Philipse, 'Transcendental Idealism'); as attempting to 'conceive of
the real world and its elements as purely intentional objectivities which
have their ontic and determining basis in the depths of the pure conscious-
ness that constitutes them' (Ingarden, Literary Work of Art, lxxii; Ingarden,
On the Motives); as concerned only to map the 'space of meaning' that
'cannot be approached with the resources of traditional metaphysical
(ancient) or epistemological (modern) philosophical paradigms' (Crowell,
The Space of Meaning, 182); and as a 'correlationist' and thereby 'well
beyond both metaphysical neutrality and metaphysical realism' (Zahavi, Hus-
serl's Legacy, 114). Still others contend that he never abandons realism but
simply tries 'to clarify and describe the sense of ... existence as it is manifested
in consciousness' (Carr, The Paradox of Subjectivity, 82) and that he speaks of
1I argue against the meaning or intelligibility interpretations of Hubert Dreyfus, Taylor Carman, Thomas
Sheehan, and Steven G. Crowell in 'Phenomenology and Metaphysics in Being and Time'. I argue in par-
ticular that meaning interpretations are inconsistent with an Aristotelian view of essence that Heidegger
endorses, that they cannot make sense of the full range of features that Heidegger subsumes under
'being' - that-being, essence, such-being, and true-being - and that they oversimplify the complex
relationship between phenomenology and ontology in Being and Time.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
597

'idealism' only to emphasize the indispensable role of idealities in phenomen-
ology (Willard, 'Realism Sustained?'; D.W. Smith, Husserl). For present purposes,
my aim is to show (following Ameriks, 'Husserl's Realism') that a central
passage in the case for an idealist reading of Ideas I (hereafter Id) - the
thought experiment of the destruction of the world - is compatible with
realism; moreover, I suggest that at least as late as 1924, in a lecture commem-
orating the bicentennial of Kant's birth, Husserl sees realism as a component
of the natural attitude not to be challenged by the transcendental turn.
As with Heidegger, the prospects for a realist reading of Husserl initially look
dim. In Cartesian Meditations (CM), Husserl writes that '[o]nly those who misun-
derstand the most profound sense of the intentional method or of the transcen-
dental reduction or even of both, may want to separate phenomenology from
transcendental idealism' (CM 86). He is clear that his idealism is not Kantian (CM
86; Id §43) or Berkeleyan (Id §55) and that 'transcendental idealism is nothing
more than ... an explication of my ego as subject of every possible cognition'
(CM 86). While this caveat may seem to open up some space for a realist
reading in the sense deﬁned above, other texts suggest that Husserl intends
to make a stronger dependence claim.
In Ideas I Husserl performs the thought experiment of the destruction of
the world.
It is conceivable that experience is teeming with irresolvable conﬂicts, conﬂicts that
are irresolvable not only for us but in themselves; that experience in a ﬁt of obsti-
nacy shows itself all at once to be opposed to the presumption that it coherently
sustains its positing of things. In sum, it is conceivable that the connectedness of
experience loses the ﬁxed, regulated order of proﬁles, construals, appearances -
that there is no longer a world. It may be the case thereby that rough formations
of unity would come to be constituted to some extent, ﬂeeting stopovers for intui-
tions, that would be mere analogues of intuitions of a thing since such analogues
are entirely incapable of constituting sustained 'realities', enduring unities that
'exist in themselves, whether they are perceived or not'.
(Id 88)
The striking conclusion of this thought experiment is as follows:
The immanent being is, therefore, without doubt absolute being in the sense
that, in principle, nulla 're' indiget ad existendum [it needs no 'thing' to exist].
On the other hand, the world of the transcendent 'res' is utterly dependent
upon consciousness, and, indeed, not some logically thought up consciousness,
but a currently actual consciousness.
(Id 89)
In what follows, my strategy is to interpret the thought experiment of the
destruction of the world as addressing a philosophical problematic similar to
that of Kant's Schematism chapter. I argue that Husserl modiﬁes this proble-
matic in a realist direction through a rethinking of what Sacha Golob helpfully
calls 'the "form" of intentionality' (Golob, '"Form" of Intentionality'). Based on
598
J. KINKAID

the importance Heidegger attaches to the Schematism chapter, as well as the
inﬂuence of Husserl on his reading of the ﬁrst Critique, I oﬀer a reading of the
dependence passage on which Heidegger is making a similar point about the
necessity of intentional form.
As Aron Gurwitsch remarks, '[t]hough he was not a historian, either by tem-
perament or by training, Husserl repeatedly and most emphatically insisted
upon the continuity of his endeavors with the great tradition of Western phil-
osophy, especially modern philosophy ... ' ('Husserl in Perspective', 25). Both
aspects of this remark are evident in the case of Kant. On the one hand,
Husserl recognizes a deep commonality between Kant's project and his
own: ' ... the essential aﬃnity of the problem of the evident structure of the
world of possible experience with the problems of Kant's transcendental aes-
thetic and analytic, and even his dialectic, is unmistakable' (Phenomenological
Psychology (PP) 71). He claims, too, that the A-Deduction 'is actually already
moving on phenomenological ground' (Id 114), although he (i) worries that
Kant falls prey to 'psychologism of the mental faculties' (Logical Investigations
(LI) 65n), (ii) seeks to replace Kant's 'half-mythical concept of the a priori' with a
phenomenological account of essence, and (iii) decries the 'in the worst sense
of the word, "metaphysical" stock elements of the critique of reason' ("Kant
and the Idea of Transcendental Philosophy" (KITP) 13). On the other hand,
even Husserl's most sustained discussion of Kant - the 1924 bicentennial
lecture - 'keep[s] Kant at a certain distance' (KITP 16). Indeed, this lecture
serves more as an overview of Husserl's transcendental phenomenology
than as an interpretation and criticism of Kant's critical philosophy. For this
reason, a considerable amount of reconstruction is required to trace the
points of convergence and divergence between these two thinkers. In the fol-
lowing, I suggest that Husserl is drawn to Kant's account of synthesis, particu-
larly the imaginative synthesis studied in the Schematism chapter, though he
reinterprets it to do away with the idealistic consequences Kant draws from it.
Let's begin by rehearsing the trajectory of the ﬁrst Critique up to the Sche-
matism chapter, in particular the Transcendental Deduction and the begin-
ning of the Analytic of Principles. The task of the Transcendental Deduction
is to secure the objective validity of the pure a priori concepts of the under-
standing (the categories) for experience. This task is made pressing by the
threat of Humean scepticism about the application of certain non-empirical
concepts to experience. For Hume, we cannot be rationally justiﬁed in attri-
buting causal relations (Hume, Enquiry, §4) or a distinct and continued exist-
ence to objects (Hume, Treatise, 1.4.2); we are simply subjectively disposed
via custom to associate perceptions in regular ways that give rise to a senti-
ment of belief in persisting, causally related, and mind-independent objects.
Kant's strategy in the Transcendental Deduction is to show that certain uncon-
troversial features of experience - the transcendental unity of apperception in
the 'argument from above' and universality and necessity in the 'argument
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
599

from below' - cannot be captured on this associationist picture. Instead,
experience must be uniﬁed via a process of synthesis through the categories
(Pereboom, 'Kant's Transcendental Arguments', 6). These forms of unity are,
moreover, conditions for our experiencing objects at all.
Kant begins the Analytic of Principles by posing a puzzle about the power of
judgement. Judgement is 'the faculty of subsuming under rules; that is, of dis-
tinguishing whether something does or does not stand under a given rule'
(A132/B171). Kant argues that this faculty can't be explained in terms of
further rules - this would give rise to an inﬁnite regress. He concludes that 'judg-
ment is a peculiar talent which can be practiced only, and cannot be taught'
(A133/B172). However, more can be said than this. The Schematism chapter
asks how intuitions can be subsumed under concepts. The results of the Deduc-
tion require in particular a story about how intuitions can be subsumed under
the categories, but Kant begins the account with a discussion of empirical and
pure sensible (mathematical) concepts. Mediating between a concept and an
intuition is a schema, which is a 'representation of a universal procedure of
the imagination in providing an image for a concept' (A140/B179-80). The
schema of a concept - dog, say - is not itself an image, since images lack the
generality of concepts. Rather, schemata make images possible. The general
point is that the ability to subsume an intuition under a concept (the power
of judgement) is accounted for by an ability to produce images of the
various ways in which a dog, say, might appear to intuition.
The ability to subsume an intuition under a concept presupposes that intui-
tion has a certain structure: in particular, that it aﬀords persisting objects that
can be given as unities through changing appearances. This structure is due to
the transcendental schemata. David Bell describes their function as follows:
'To schematize ... is to discover in the diversity of sensory experience a felt
unity, coherence, or order, which is non-cognitive and non-conceptual, but
which is a necessary condition of the possibility of all rule-governed
thought and judgment' (Bell, 'The Art of Judgement', 238-9). Transcendental
schemata, moreover, are 'a priori determinations of time' (A145/B184); the
schema of substance, for instance, 'is permanence of the real in time'
(A143/B183). The ability to perceive an enduring object like a dog involves
'tacitly connecting the intuition with other actual and possible dog-like intui-
tions in such a way that it becomes part of a coherent system of past, present,
and future intuitions which collectively represent a single, persisting dog'
(Pendlebury, 'Making Sense of Kant's Schematism', 790).
For Kant, schematizing is a synthetic activity of the productive imagination.
Kant distinguishes between two types of synthesis: ﬁgurative synthesis (syn-
thesis speciosa), which is the work of the productive imagination, and intellec-
tual synthesis (synthesis intellectualis), which occurs 'without any imagination
merely through the understanding' (B151-2). Figurative synthesis is the 'syn-
thesis of the manifold of sensible intuition', that is, the synthetic activity
600
J. KINKAID

through which experience attains the structure necessary for judgement to be
made on its basis (B151). Intellectual synthesis, on the other hand, is the syn-
thesis of concepts involved in mere thought.
This distinction is crucial for both Husserl and Heidegger. Husserl follows Kant
in calling the study of ﬁgurative synthesis a 'transcendental aesthetics', though he
claims that what Kant understood under that title was narrowly restricted to the
'higher constitution of the constitution of a thing' in natural science (Id II 22n;
Formal and Transcendental Logic (FTL) 265, 291-2). He also sees Kant as anticipat-
ing what he calls the 'genealogy of logic' - the project of tracing various levels of
spontaneity back to their origins in receptivity: 'When Kant in his great work
speaks of an analytic [i.e. intellectual] synthesis, he means cognition deployed
there in explicit forms of concepts and judgments, and this points back, for
him, to a productive [i.e. ﬁgurative] synthesis' (Analyses Concerning Passive and
Active Synthesis (PAS) 410). For Heidegger, the productive imagination is the
'common but to us unknown root' from which the two stems of knowledge, sen-
sibilityand understanding, arise, which Kant swallowed back into the understand-
ing in the second edition (A15/B2; Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics (KPM)
113). Husserl's appropriation of Kant's doctrine of ﬁgurative synthesis emerges
in his analyses of passive synthesis and the various levels of activity built oﬀof
it. I now turn to a summary of these analyses, which provide the resources for
a realist reading of the thought experiment of the destruction of the world.
Productive or passive synthesis produces 'syntheses of identiﬁcation' in
virtue of which one object can be given through changing appearances: '
... the same object is perceived, perceived diﬀerently again and again,
namely according to its diﬀerent sides, aspects, etc.' (PAS 486). Husserl's 'phe-
nomenology of constitution' studies the immanent intentional structures in
virtue of which persisting unities can be given with a consciousness of identity
despite changes in how they appear. Central to constitutional analysis is the
claim that sensuous content alone is insuﬃcient to account for the way in
which perceptual acts give or aﬀord their objects. Indeed, the ﬁrst part of
Ideas II traces the constitution of the material thing from a mere sensuous
'phantom' to a full-ﬂedged, causally related, and intersubjectively perceivable
object. In addition to sensuous content ('hyletic data'), Husserl recognizes
various forms of 'apperception' and 'horizonal intentionality'. As Walter
Hopp puts the point: 'To accommodate the phenomenology of perceptual
experience, we must acknowledge a surplus of intentionality beyond that sup-
plied by mere sensation' (Hopp, Perception and Knowledge, 43).
Husserl assigns a central role in his phenomenology of constitution to hor-
izons (CM 48). There are both internal and external horizons; the former are
the hidden sides and features of the object, while the latter are the back-
grounds against which an object is perceptually foregrounded. Describing
the intentions toward internal horizons essentially involved in the perception
of spatial objects, Husserl writes:
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
601

When we view the table, we view it from some particular side, and this side is
thereby what is genuinely seen. Yet the table has still other sides. It has a
non-visible back side, it has a non-visible interior ... Original consciousness is
only possible in the form of an actually and genuinely original conscious-
having of sides and a co-conscious-having of other sides that are precisely
not originally there.
(PAS 40)
Some basic distinctions from the Logical Investigations are useful here. Husserl
distinguishes between empty (signitive, symbolic) and ﬁlled (intuitive) inten-
tions. One type of empty intention is mere thought; I can merely think about
the table without having it intuitively (perceptually, imaginatively, memorially)
presented to me. But non-conceptual empty intentions are also involved in
the perception of a spatial object. Only one side of the table is intuitively
present to me at a time, but it nevertheless appears to have more to it.
The distinction between these two types of empty intentions corresponds
to a distinction between two types of fulﬁlment. In the sixth Logical Investi-
gation, Husserl analyses knowledge in terms of an act called 'fulﬁllment' in
which an empty thought is 'ﬁlled' by a corresponding intuition: 'What the
intention means, but presents only in a more or less inauthentic and
inadequate manner, the fulﬁllment ... sets directly before us ... In fulﬁllment
our experience is represented by the words: "This is the thing itself"' (LI VI
226-7). But fulﬁlment is also involved in perception itself. As I move around
a table, empty intentions directed at its hidden sides are ﬁlled, as previously
ﬁlled intentions pass into emptiness. In general, perception has a more or
less determinate anticipatory structure; objects are perceived according to
an 'empty horizon of familiar unfamiliarity' or 'prescriptions of a style of expli-
cations to be realized' (EJ 38). Just as conceptual fulﬁlment is a synthesis of
identity - the identity of the given and the meant - so too is perceptual fulﬁl-
ment - the identity of the emptily anticipated and the intuitively presented.
The most basic level of horizonal intentionality is time-consciousness. Tem-
porally extended objects can only be given in virtue of empty intentions directed
toward the past (retentions) and future (protentions). Take a melody for
example. The perception of a melody involves retentions of previous notes
and protentions of future notes, which account for the perception of the
melody as a unity, rather than a mere succession of disconnected notes. A
similar analysis applies to the perception of substances, i.e. objects that persist
through time and qualitative change. A consciousness of unity is constituted
by retentions and protentions; the object of my present intention appears as
one that was just seen (or existed before I turned my attention to it) and will con-
tinue to be seen (or will continue to exist after I turn my attention away from it).
With these Husserlian concepts in hand, we can now see why the thought
experiment of the destruction of the world is compatible with realism. In a
famous letter to Marcus Herz dated February 21, 1772, Kant announces the
602
J. KINKAID

guiding question of his critical project: 'What is the ground of the relation of that
in us which we call "representation" to the object?' (Kant, Correspondence, 133).
In his breakthrough to transcendental phenomenology in his 1907 lectures,
Husserl poses the same question: 'One can ask: how can knowledge reach out
beyond itself, how can it make contact with a being that is not to be found
within the conﬁnes of consciousness?' (The Idea of Phenomenology (IP) 62). For
both Kant and Husserl, objectivity - in the sense of reference to an object - is
only possible if experience attains a kind of unity: 'Objectivity presupposes con-
sciousness of unity, consciousness of identity' (On the Phenomenology of the Con-
sciousness of Internal Time (PCIT) 70). Without such unity, 'it would be possible for
a swarm of appearances to ﬁll up our soul without experience ever being able to
arise from it', and 'in that case all relation of cognition to objects would disap-
pear' (A111). The resemblance of this passage to the thought experiment of
the destruction of the world is striking. For reference beyond the immanent
sphere to be possible, experience must be structured such that it aﬀords persist-
ing unities; for both Kant and Husserl, this structure is at bottom due to temporal
synthesis. The lesson that Husserl draws from the thought experiment of the
destruction of the world, I submit, is that objects transcendent to consciousness
can only be given in virtue of harmonious interconnections of perceptual adum-
brations that constitute a consciousness of identity. Consciousness of identity is
constituted at the pre-predicative level due to horizonal intentions, including the
retentions and protentions of time-consciousness.
The fact remains that Husserl seems to make two stronger claims here: that
consciousness is 'absolute' and that the world depends on consciousness.
Moreover, even if the straightforward readings of these claims can be
explained away, the interpretation of the thought experiment that I've
oﬀered is merely compatible with realism; it rules out neither an idealist
understanding of objects nor the kind of metaphysical neutrality supposedly
advocated in the Logical Investigations (see Zahavi, Husserl's Legacy, Chapter
2). Husserl makes clear, nonetheless, that the natural attitude contains
realism as a presupposition that is not challenged by the transcendental
turn. Judgement on the basis of harmonious experience is said to constitute
'the norm of truth for the world itself, as it is in and for itself, whether we live or
die, whether we cognize it or not' (KITP 21). In bracketing the natural attitude
in order to attend to the constitutive accomplishments of consciousness, 'no
damage of any kind is supposed to be done by that to the proper legitimacy of
this life' (KITP 22). If this is right, Husserl should be interpreted as claiming only
that consciousness is absolute in that it can exist without constituting any
transcendent objects (see Zahavi, Husserl's Legacy, 103) and that the world
is dependent only for its givenness on the structure of consciousness (see
Hardy, Nature's Suit, 168-80). As Lee Hardy emphasizes, Husserl's phenomen-
ological claims occur in a justiﬁcation-theoretic, rather than metaphysical,
context (Nature's Suit, 179). I argue in the next section that the dependence
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
603

passage should likewise be read as a claim about givenness, rather than onto-
logical dependence.
A natural objection may arise at this point: the text I've just cited is compa-
tible with Husserl, like Kant and Blattner's Heidegger, endorsing transcenden-
tal idealism and empirical realism. According to Kant, 'the transcendental
idealist is an empirical realist, and grants to matter, as appearance, a reality
which need not be inferred, but is immediately perceived' (A371). Husserl
could be read as endorsing this pair of claims in the Encyclopedia Britannica
article: 'Phenomenology's transcendental idealism harbours natural realism
entirely within itself ... ' ('Phenomenology' 102). While a full response to this
objection exceeds the scope of this essay, a close consideration of Husserl's
primary objections to Kant's theoretical philosophy demonstrates, I submit,
the plausibility of a reading of Husserl's phenomenology as not only compa-
tible with empirical realism, but fully realist in the sense deﬁned above.
In the Logical Investigations, Husserl claims that Kant, despite his best inten-
tions, fell prey to 'psychologism of the mental faculties' (LI 65n). Even after
taking his own transcendental turn, Husserl continues to accuse Kant of 'trans-
cendental psychologism'. In the 1929 Formal and Transcendental Logic, for
instance, Husserl argues that Kant's critical philosophy, while an improvement
on Hume's ﬁctionalism, was still too beholden to the Lockean-Humean sensa-
tionalistic psychology. Not only that: Kant failed to distinguish pure psychol-
ogy from transcendental phenomenology, and thereby could not get
beyond psychologism (FTL 258). Both objections point to Husserl's rethinking
of the form of intentionality. Max Scheler gives forceful expression to the phe-
nomenological objection to Kant's residual sensationalism. If one accepts the
Humean picture, as Kant apparently does (FTL 257),
one must conclude that all such given contents of experience which go beyond
the elements of its 'sensible content' and are not congruent with them are some-
thing added by us or are results of our 'activity', a 'forming', a 'treatment', etc.
Consequently, relations, forms, Gestalten, values, space, time, motion, objectiv-
ity, being and non-being, thingness, unity, multiplicity, truth, causality, the phys-
ical, the psychic, etc., must all, without exception, be reduced to a 'forming' or
'feeling into' or some other kind of subjective 'activity'. For these are supposedly
not contained in the 'sensible content', which alone 'can' be given to us, and
which alone therefore ... 'is' given.
(Scheler, Formalism in Ethics, 55)
Husserl's objection to the Kantian understanding of form as 'forming' was
alluded to above in terms of Kant's 'half-mythical concept of the a priori'
(KITP 13). In the Thing and Space lectures of 1907, Husserl warns against a
Kantian understanding of form: '"Form of intuition" is a fundamentally false
expression and implies, even in Kant, a fatally erroneous position' (Thing
and Space (TS) 35). While experience must have a certain form - namely,
that of horizonal intentionality - in order to afford spatial objects, this
604
J. KINKAID

should not be read, as it may be on at least one reading of Kant, as denying
that '[s]pace is a necessary form of things and is not a form of lived experience
... ' (TS 35). Indeed, despite his praise for Kant's doctrine of ﬁgurative syn-
thesis, Husserl notes that 'Kant was not in the position to recognize the
essence of passive production as intentional constitution' and thereby
'missed the problem of evidence' (PAS 410). For Husserl an object is given
with evidence (Evidenz) when it is apprehended "in an originary way", as it
is in itself "in person"' (Id 13). These remarks suggest that that a mistaken
understanding of intentionality led Kant, in Husserl's view, to endorse the
idealist notion that the natures of material objects, and not simply their
being given, are grounded in the structure of consciousness.
Why might Kant's failure to distinguish pure, intentional psychology from
transcendental phenomenology commit him to transcendental psycholo-
gism? Pure psychology is an a priori, eidetic discipline that seeks to 'establish
whatever is essentially necessary to the psychic as such, without which psyche
and psychic life is utterly inconceivable, contrary to sense' (PP 31). Transcen-
dental phenomenology is supposed to diﬀer from pure psychology by virtue
of 'an inquiry into the various categories of "objects" - but purely as objects of
possible consciousness' (Id II 425). Indeed, the thought experiment of the
destruction of the world is designed to disclose an essential feature of trans-
cendent objects - namely, that they are necessarily only given inadequately,
in one-sided adumbrations.
Husserl expresses this point by contrast to the Kantian view according to
which divine intuition (intellectus archetypus) can grasp objects without the
mediation of the forms of sensibility, and thus in themselves: 'On this supposition,
God, the subject of absolutely perfect knowledge and thus of every possible ade-
quate perception, naturally possesses what we ﬁnite creatures are denied: knowl-
edge of the thing in itself ... But this view is absurd' (Id 76). On my reading, Kant
can be said to endorse a form of transcendental psychologism because, while he
does investigate the necessary features of (ﬁnite, receptive) consciousness rather
than the contingent features of human consciousness, his account is not
grounded in the essential features of the things themselves. The charge that
Kant falls prey to transcendental psychologism suggests that Husserl seeks to
invert Kant's idealistic grounding of the natures of objects in the structure of con-
sciousness, claiming instead that acts aﬀording a particular type of object must be
structured in a particular way because of the nature of the object.
In this section I have argued that one of the most ostensibly idealistic pas-
sages in Husserl's work - the thought experiment of the destruction of the
world - is intended to show that consciousness must have a certain kind of
unity, which is due to horizonal (and ultimately temporal) intentionality, in
order to aﬀord material objects. In this respect, the thought experiment par-
allels Kant's Schematism chapter, which shows that the unity required for
reference to an object is due to the time-determinations of the transcendental
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
605

schemata. Husserl's charge that Kant commits the errors of transcendental
psychologism, however, shows that Husserl not only disavows the idealistic
consequences Kant draws from his theory of synthesis, but also that he
modiﬁes this theory in a realist direction. In the next section, I argue that Hei-
degger adopts this Husserlian understanding of intentional form and that this
provides the resources to reject Blattner's temporal idealist reading.
§3 Heidegger's interpretation of Kant
In his 2004 article, Blattner appeals to a passage from the WS 1927-28 lectures
where Heidegger rejects the thing in itself:
Along with the assumption of an absolute intuition ... the concept of a thing in
itself also dies away ... For appearances are the things themselves, and they are
the things that they are without these things having to be thought as things in
themselves on the basis of an untenable concept of being and on the basis of
the assumption of a representing God, additionally as object for this God.
(PIK 68-9)
Blattner takes this passage as evidence that Heidegger adopts a more consist-
ent idealist position than Kant. Speciﬁcally, he sees Heidegger's position as an
improvement upon Kant's because it avoids the problem of employing one of
the categories - existence - transcendentally, i.e. beyond the scope of possible
experience. Since existence claims are only meaningful when the transcenden-
tal constraints of the understanding of being are in place, Blattner concludes
that 'Heidegger argues that nature neither does nor does not exist, if the under-
standing of being is not granted' (Blattner, 'Kantian Idealism Revisited', 322). If
my interpretation of Husserl is correct, however, a new way of interpreting the
above passage opens up: it doesn't express Heidegger's commitment to a more
consistent version of Kantian idealism, but rather a commitment to realism.
In the WS 1927-28 lecture courses quoted at the beginning of this essay,
Heidegger proposes a phenomenological interpretation of the ﬁrst Critique.
Heidegger means a few things by designating his interpretation 'phenomen-
ological'. First, he claims that the method of the ﬁrst Critique is proto-phenom-
enological: 'In its basic posture the method of the Critique is what we, since
Husserl, understand, carry out, and learn to ground more radically as phenom-
enological method' (PIK 49). This means in part that the investigation of the
subject 'is neither anthropology nor psychology' (PIK 49). Second, a phenom-
enological interpretation emphasizes that 'all thinking stands in service to
intuition' (PIK 57). Third, and in connection with the second point, a phenom-
enological interpretation is posed against the interpretation of the Marburg
school of neo-Kantianism (PIK 54). The Marburg school, led by Hermann
Cohen and Paul Natorp, held that '"intuition" no longer remains a cognitive
factor which stands across from or is opposed to thinking' (Natorp, 'Kant
and the Marburg School', 186). Heidegger seeks to determine how the
606
J. KINKAID

Transcendental Aesthetic and Transcendental Logic hang together, not by
giving pride of place to the latter, but instead by tracing them back to the pro-
ductive imagination. Heidegger is particularly critical of the Marburg interpret-
ation of two elements of the ﬁrst Critique: the Copernican revolution and the
quaestio juris (PIK 206). In the following, I argue that Heidegger's criticisms of
the neo-Kantians suggest that he objects to the idealistic consequences they
draw from Kant's conception of form.
The Copernican revolution, recall, is the methodological shift Kant deems
necessary to establish the possibility of synthetic a priori knowledge:
Hitherto it has been assumed that all our knowledge must conform to objects.
But all attempts to extend our knowledge of objects by establishing something
in regard to them a priori, by means of concepts, have, on this assumption,
ended in failure. We must therefore make trial whether we may not have
more success in the tasks of metaphysics, if we suppose that objects must
conform to our knowledge.
(Bxvi)
In particular, the thesis is that objects must conform to the forms of our
sensibility and understanding. Heidegger argues that the notion of form
easily leads to misunderstandings that are endemic to the neo-Kantian
interpretation. He proposes to clear away these misunderstandings by 'phe-
nomenologically interpreting what it means that space and time are pure
forms of intuition' (PIK 84).
Heidegger rejects the interpretation of form as forming discussed in the
last section:
This characterization of "form" easily leads to an irrelevant view—and the
ensuing misunderstanding becomes more fatal—if one takes the concept
which is opposed to 'form', i.e. matter, in such an irrelevant way as 'stuﬀ' or
'dough' which is formed in the form of a cake.
(PIK 85)
In rejecting this 'irrelevant' view, Heidegger is clear that he is targeting the
Marburg interpretation and not Kant himself, though he admits that Kant's
text invites misinterpretation. Indeed, like Husserl, Heidegger sees in Kant
both glimpses of his own phenomenology and lapses into transcendental
psychologism:
To be sure, there are signiﬁcant obscurities in Kant which understandably give
rise to misinterpretations of his Copernican revolution. However, Kant never
meant that, in grasping some object that we come across, for example this
chair, the thing called 'chair' will correspond to what I determine about the
chair in myself.
(PIK 38)
The lesson of the Copernican revolution, Heidegger says, is that 'ontic knowl-
edge of beings must be guided in advance by ontological knowledge' (PIK 38).
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
607

Unpacking this thesis will illuminate how Heidegger follows Husserl in rethink-
ing the form of intentionality along realist lines.
Heidegger disavows any interpretation of the Copernican revolution
according to which the existence or natures of the objects of perception
are grounded in the structure of the subject - that is to say, any idealist
interpretation of the thesis that 'ontic knowledge of beings must be guided
in advance by ontological knowledge'. Instead, he claims that the 'philosophi-
cally fruitful' sense of the a priori is that according to which it 'means
"enabling"' (PIK 73). What is enabled by the a priori structure of the subject
is 'the standing-over-against as ob-ject [Gegen-stand]' of the object of percep-
tion (PIK 217). In this connection, recall the guiding question of Kant's critical
project that he announced in his letter to Marcus Herz: 'What is the ground of
the relation of that in us which we call "representation" to the object?' (Kant,
Correspondence, 133). The phenomenological question that Husserl and Hei-
degger draw from Kant is this: How must the subject (whether consciousness
or Dasein) be structured such that transcendent entities can 'stand over
against' it as objects? By emphasizing that these structures are enabling, I
suggest, Heidegger intends to reject the understanding of form that leads
to idealism by emphasizing that intentional form allows spatial and temporal
objects to be given without thereby contributing or grounding their spatial
and temporal natures. Indeed, he notes that space, as the form of sensibility,
'is not something freely invented, but something which directly corresponds
to the being-extant-together of objects' (PIK 237). By this he means that both
coexistence and succession, i.e. space and time, must be 'in objects them-
selves' (PIK 237). Recall here Husserl's warning from Thing and Space about
the dangers inherent in the phrase 'form of sensibility'. Like Husserl, Heideg-
ger understands a particular kind of intentional form - namely, horizonal
intentionality - as an essential feature of any subject capable of having
spatial and temporal objects aﬀorded to it. As Daniel Dahlstrom notes, Hei-
degger ﬁnds in Kant a kind of phenomenological realism on which 'the
object ... is the thing in itself as it appears against a horizon (world) co-consti-
tuted by the subject's activity of turning toward entities on hand in a way that
allows them to stand opposite it' ('Heidegger's Interpretation of Transcenden-
tal Imagination', 399).
Despite his appreciation of much of the critical project, Heidegger is
harshly critical of the centerpiece of the Transcendental Analytic: 'Viewed as
a quaestio juris, the transcendental deduction is the most disastrous
segment of teaching in Kantian philosophy to which one can refer. The trans-
cendental deduction is almost without exception untenable' (PIK 209). Kant
presents the Transcendental Deduction as an answer to the question 'quid
juris?' - that is, by what right do we ascribe objective validity to our pure con-
cepts, rather than seeing them as products of mere custom or attributing their
success to a pre-established harmony? He contrasts this question with the
608
J. KINKAID

quaestio facti, which traces concepts back to their empirical origins as in
Locke's 'physiology of the human understanding' (Aix). Heidegger claims
that the quaestio juris is motivated by an interpretation of the a priori as
'what resides in the isolated subject' (PIK 213). On this subjectivist construal
of the a priori, transcendental inquiry revolves around the question 'What
justiﬁes taking this subjective element for something ob-jective, which basi-
cally it is not?' (PIK 213). In contrast to Kant's juridicial inquiry, Heidegger
claims that the true transcendental question is a quaestio facti, though not
an empirical one. Rather, transcendental phenomenology is concerned with
'a fact in the sense of the ontological and essential structure of Dasein, the trans-
cendental constitution of the subject' (PIK 224). More precisely, Heidegger
understands the transcendental question to be about Dasein's 'ontological
transcendence', that is, the relation to being that makes all directedness
toward particular entities ('ontic transcendence') possible (PIK 226). Scheler
nicely sums up what I take to be a uniﬁed phenomenological conception of
the a priori in contrast to the Kantian conception. The realm of the a priori
comprises three realms of essential interconnections: '(1) the essences (and
their interconnections) of the qualities and other thing-contents given in
acts (thing-phenomenology); (2) the essences of acts themselves and their
interconnections and relations of foundation (phenomenology of acts or
foundational orders); and (3) the essential interconnections between the
essences of acts and those of things ... ' (Formalism in Ethics, 72). For Heidegger,
as for Husserl and Scheler, phenomenology is a study of the a priori features of
the subject ('the ontological and essential structure of Dasein') in virtue of
which objects of various kinds can appear, but the existence or natures of
these appearing objects are not dependent upon or grounded in features
of the subject, as they are on a subjectivist understanding of the a priori.
My account of Heidegger's interpretations of the Copernican revolution
and the quaestio juris should suﬃce to at least weaken the plausibility of a
reading of him as a temporal idealist, i.e. as endorsing the thesis that
'[t]ime, and thus the temporal structure of things, depends on us' (Blattner,
'Is Heidegger a Kantian Idealist?', 191). Dasein's temporality is an enabling con-
dition for the appearance of objects that are spatial and temporal indepen-
dently of any contribution from us. If I'm right, this shows that Heidegger
does not endorse the argument Blattner attributes to him from 'the tempor-
ality of being' and 'temporal idealism' to 'ontological idealism'. What remains
to be shown, ﬁrst, is that the dependence passage is not, as Blattner claims, an
endorsement of ontological idealism, and second, that it is the continuation of
a philosophical problematic carried out in the Schematism chapter and the
thought experiment of the destruction of the world.
Blattner rejects 'weak' readings of the dependence passage that trivialize
its claims that without Dasein, nothing would be discovered, understood, or
said, nor would there be independence from Dasein (Blattner, 'Is Heidegger
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
609

a Kantian Idealist?', 188). David Cerbone proposes a 'weak', non-idealist
reading of the passage on which 'there is a more substantial point lurking
just beneath the surface' (Cerbone, 'Realism and Truth', 258). Heidegger's aim
in the dependence passage, according to Cerbone, is to emphasize 'the depen-
dence of what can be said about entities (as opposed to the entities them-
selves) on the understanding of being' (Cerbone, 'Realism and Truth', 258).
This emphasis is the culmination of earlier arguments that express 'his opposi-
tion to the idea of a worldless subject' (Cerbone, 'Realism and Truth', 258). I
follow Cerbone in claiming that the dependence passage, while ostensibly
trivial, stands in for more detailed analyses of the structure of subjectivity.
Notice that a similar charge of triviality could be levelled against one
reading of Husserl's 'transcendental insight', i.e. his claim that 'this world ...
with all its objects derives its whole sense and existential validity which it
has for me from me myself' (CM 26). Indeed, A. D. Smith considers (and
rejects) a 'weak' reading of the transcendental insight as claiming only that
'something can exist "for me" ... only if I'm around' (Husserl and the Cartesian
Meditations, 32). Yet even on a 'weak' reading, the transcendental insight is, to
paraphrase a famous letter from Husserl to Natorp, a 'large banknote' that
must be turned into 'small change' by detailed constitutional analyses (B
56). These include the horizonal analyses and analyses of the various levels
of receptivity and spontaneity discussed in the last section.
There are two keys to unpacking the dependence passage along realist
lines. First, note that when Heidegger claims that being, independence, the
'in-itself', and so on depend on Dasein, he is naming an entity with an onto-
logical structure called 'disclosedness'. Heidegger distinguishes disclosedness
(Erschlossenheit) from discoveredness (Entdecktheit), which corresponds to the
distinction between ontological and ontic transcendence in the Kant lectures.
John Haugeland helpfully lays out the following features of these concepts:
1. Intrawordly entities can be discovered only because of or in terms of a prior
disclosedness ...
2. What is disclosed is not the same as the entities that are discovered in terms of
it. According to some passages, what is disclosed is the being of those entities
... but according to others, it is dasein ... or even the world ...
3. Disclosedness is primordial truth, and, as such, it is the condition of the possi-
bility of the truth of assertions ...
(Dasein Disclosed, 17-8)
Heidegger gives circumspective concern and lingering to look at some-
thing (das verweilend hinsehende Besorgen) as examples of discovery.
On my reading, disclosedness does the work for Heidegger that constitution
does for Husserl: it makes originary givenness (discovery) possible. This is why
Heidegger calls disclosedness 'primordial truth'; following Husserl, Heidegger
610
J. KINKAID

understands the experience of fulﬁlment - the recognition of the identity of the
given and the meant - as an experience of truth (BT 260), and disclosedness is a
necessary condition of truth as discovery. Disclosedness has a horizonal struc-
ture; entities are discovered because the horizon that Heidegger calls the
'world' is ﬁrst understood. And this horizonal structure is at its most basic
level temporal; it's the goal of Division II to demonstrate this. The seemingly
trivial claim of a 'weak' reading of the dependence passage, then, is turned
into the 'small change' of the analysis of disclosedness into the basic Existenzia-
lien and their subsequent reinterpretation into temporal terms. Heidegger is
impressed by the Schematism chapter precisely because it recasts the cat-
egories, as enabling conditions of the experience of objects, in temporal terms.
The second key to unpacking the dependence passage is to read the
German phrase 'es gibt' with geben in mind (see also Golob, Concepts,
Freedom, and Normativity, 177-8). The aim of the extant portion of Being
and Time is to show how ontology is possible through an ontological analysis
of the ontological questioner; it aims to provide 'ontological grounds for ontol-
ogy' (BT 487) or, in the language of the Kantbuch, it is a 'laying of the ground
for metaphysics' through an 'ontological analytic of the ﬁnite essence of
human beings' (KPM 1). Following Husserl, Heidegger believes that the a
priori claims of ontology must be grounded in intuition (see BT 75n). To
claim that only when there is Dasein 'is there' (gibt es) being, independence,
and the 'in-itself' is to claim, I submit, that it is only in virtue of the structure of
disclosedness that ontology is possible. In this way, Being and Time aims, like
Husserl's work, to develop a 'genealogy of logic' - an account of how the
highest reaches of spontaneity (knowledge of essences) arise from the
lowest depths of receptivity (pre-predicative experience).
§4 Beyond Kant
One of Heidegger's stated aims in his Kant lectures is to 'protect Kant from the
Kantians' (PIK 210). Part of what this means is protecting Kant from himself. As
I have shown above, Heidegger by no means thought that Kant had fully rea-
lized the promise of his critical philosophy; indeed, this is why a so-called
'violent' interpretation is called for (KPM 141). One of the central theses of Hei-
degger's Kant reading is that Kant 'shrank back' in the B-edition of the ﬁrst Cri-
tique from the discovery of the productive imagination as the 'unknown root'
of the two stems of knowledge, sensibility and understanding (KPM 112). On
this point Husserl appears to agree: he writes in Ideas I that the A-Deduction 'is
actually already moving on phenomenological ground', though 'Kant misin-
terpreted it as psychological and, thus, gives it up in turn himself' (Id 114).
To close, I brieﬂy lay out two proposals that Heidegger makes for moving
beyond Kant to a more expansive form of transcendental philosophy as phe-
nomenological ontology.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
611

Heidegger closes his WS 1927-28 lectures by signaling two directions for
further research: 'Universality of being and radicality of time are the two titles
which together denote the tasks which a further thinking of the possibility of meta-
physics calls for' (PIK 289). First, Kant's transcendental project is restricted to
natural objects; Heidegger calls for constitutional analyses that '[encompass]
... all possibilities of regional variation' (PIK 289). Second, and corresponding
to the ﬁrst task, Heidegger thinks that such analyses call for a move beyond
the 'ordinary concept of time' to those described in Division II of Being and
Time. In his bicentennial speech, Husserl echoes Heidegger's ﬁrst proposal:
... the manifold human socialities and the cultural formations arising in their
communal life, therefore also the cultural sciences related to them, must be
brought into the transcendental consideration as 'objects of possible experi-
ence,' and Kant's 'prejudice for natural science' must be overcome.
(KITP 52)
Whether and to what extent Husserl and Heidegger's visions of a universal
transcendental philosophy agree in the details is another (and a longer) story.
I have argued for an alternative to Blattner's account of Heidegger's appro-
priation of Kant by situating that appropriation against the backdrop of Hus-
serl's phenomenology. If correct, my reading undercuts Blattner's case for
reading Heidegger as an idealist. This is because, for both Husserl and Heideg-
ger, the horizonal form of experience makes it possible for objects to be given
without thereby contributing or grounding their spatial and temporal natures.
Their shared rejection of a 'half-mythical' and 'irrelevant' view of intentional
form suggests that they want to retain the core insights of Kant's doctrines
of synthesis and the schematism without drawing any idealistic consequences
from them. Insofar as Blattner's account is the most sophisticated case for an
anti-realist reading of Heidegger on oﬀer, my alternative readings of the depen-
dence passage and Heidegger's interpretation of Kant form an important ﬁrst
step in the development of a fully realist reading of Being and Time.2
Bibliography
Works by Heidegger
BT Heidegger, M. Being and Time. Translated by J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson.
New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1962.
KPM Heidegger, M. Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. Translated by R. Taft.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
PIK Heidegger, M. Phenomenological Interpretations of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.
Translated by P. Emad and K. Maly. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
2I am grateful to Andrew Butler, Colin Cmiel, Daniel Dahlstrom, Walter Hopp, Emma Jerndal, Zach Joachim,
Eric Scarﬀe, Matt Shockey, and two anonymous reviewers for this journal for helpful discussion and com-
ments on earlier versions of this essay.
612
J. KINKAID

Works by Husserl
FTL Husserl, E. Formal and Transcendental Logic. Translated by D. Cairns. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1969.
LI Husserl, E. Logical Investigations. 2 Vols. Translated by J. N. Findlay. New York:
Routledge, 1970.
EJ Husserl, E. Experience and Judgment. Translated by J. C. Churchill and K. Ameriks.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973.
KITP Husserl, E. 'Kant and the Idea of Transcendental Philosophy'. Translated by T. E.
Kein Jr., and W. E. Pohl. The Southern Journal of Philosophy 5, no. 3 (1974): 9-56.
PP Husserl, E. Phenomenological Psychology. Translated by J. Scanlon. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1977.
Id II Husserl, E. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy: Second Book. Translated by R. Rojcewicz and A. Schuwer. Dortrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989.
PCIT Husserl, E. On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893-1917).
Translated by J. B. Brough. Dortrecht: Springer Science+Business Media, 1991.
B Husserl, E. Briefwechsel. Band 5. Die Neukantianer. Edited by K. Schuhmann. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.
EB Husserl, E. '"Phenomenology": The Encyclopedia Britannica Article Draft A'. In
Psychological and Transcendental Phenomenology and the Confrontation with
Heidegger (1927-1931), translated and edited by T. Sheehan and R. E. Palmer, 83-
102. Dordrecht: Springer Science + Business Media, 1997.
TS Husserl, E. Thing and Space Lectures of 1907. Translated by R. Rojcewicz. Dortrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1997.
CM Husserl, E. Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology. Translated by
D. Cairns. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999.
IP Husserl, E. The Idea of Phenomenology. Translated by L. Hardy. Dortrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1999.
PAS Husserl, E. Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis: Lectures on
Transcendental Logic. Translated by A. J. Steinbock. Dordrecht: Springer Science +
Business Media, 2001.
Id Husserl, E. Ideas I. Translated by D. O. Dahlstrom. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2014.
Works by other authors
Ameriks, K. 'Husserl's Realism'. Philosophical Review 86 (1977): 498-519.
Bell, D. 'The Art of Judgement'. Mind; A Quarterly Review of Psychology and Philosophy
96, no. 382 (1987): 221-44.
Blattner, W. 'Is Heidegger a Kantian Idealist?'. Inquiry 37 (1994): 185-201.
Blattner, W. Heidegger's Temporal Idealism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Blattner, W. 'Heidegger's Kantian Idealism Revisited'. Inquiry 47 (2004): 321-37.
Carr, D. The Paradox of Subjectivity: The Self in the Transcendental Tradition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1999.
Cerbone, D. 'Realism and Truth'. In A Companion to Heidegger, edited by H. L. Dreyfus
and M. A. Wrathall, 248-64. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2005.
Crowell, S. G. Husserl, Heidegger, and the Space of Meaning: Paths Toward Transcendental
Phenomenology. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 2001.
Dahlstrom, D. O. 'The Critique of Pure Reason and Continental Philosophy: Heidegger's
Interpretation of Transcendental Imagination'. In The Cambridge Companion to
Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, edited by P. Guyer, 380-400. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2010.
BRITISH JOURNAL FOR THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY
613

Devitt, M. Realism and Truth. Princeton University Press, 1997.
Golob, S. 'Heidegger on Kant, Time and the "Form" of Intentionality'. British Journal of
the History of Philosophy 21, no. 2 (2013): 345-67.
Golob, S. Heidegger on Concepts, Freedom and Normativity. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2014.
Gurwitsch, A. 'Husserl's Theory of the Intentionality of Consciousness in Historical
Perspective'. In Phenomenology and Existentialism, edited by E. N. Lee and M.
Mandelbaum, 25-57. Baltimore: The John Hopkins Press, 1967.
Hardy, L. Nature's Suit: Husserl's Phenomenological Philosophy of the Physical Sciences.
Athens, OH: Ohio University Press, 2013.
Haugeland, J. Dasein Disclosed: John Haugeland's Heidegger. Edited by J. Rouse.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013.
Hopp, W. Perception and Knowledge: A Phenomenological Account. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2011.
Hume, D. A Treatise of Human Nature. 2nd ed. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1978.
Hume, D. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. 2nd ed. Edited by E. Steinberg.
Indianapolis: Hackett, 1993.
Ingarden, R. The Literary Work of Art. Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1973.
Ingarden, R. On the Motives Which Led Husserl to Transcendental Idealism. Translated by
A. Hannibalsson. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoﬀ, 1975.
Kant, I. Correspondence. Translated and edited by A. Zweig. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999.
Kant, I. Critique of Pure Reason. Translated by N. K. Smith. New York: Palgrave, 2007.
Kinkaid, J. 'Phenomenology and Metaphysics in Being and Time'. Unpublished paper.
Meixner, U. 'Husserls Transzendentaler Idealismus als Supervenienzthese: Ein Interner
Realismus'. In Husserl und die Philosophie des Geistes. Edited by M. Frank and N.
Weidtmann, 178-208. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp, 2010.
Natorp, P. 'Kant and the Marburg School'. In The Neo-Kantian Reader. Edited by S. Luft,
180-97. New York: Routledge, 2015.
Pendlebury, M. 'Making Sense of Kant's Schematism'. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 55 (1995): 777-97.
Pereboom, D. 'Kant's Transcendental Arguments'. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2014 Edition). Accessed May 19, 2017. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-
transcendental/
Philipse, H. 'Transcendental Idealism'. In The Cambridge Companion to Husserl. Edited
by B. Smith and D. W. Smith, 239-322. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Rosen, G. 'Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and Reduction'. In Modality:
Metaphysics, Logic, and Epistemology. Edited by R. Hale and A. Hoﬀman, 109-36.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Scheler, M. Formalism in Ethics and Non-Formal Ethics of Values. Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1973.
Smith, A. D. Husserl and the Cartesian Meditations. New York: Routledge, 2003.
Smith, D. W. Husserl. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2013.
Willard, D. 'Realism Sustained? Interpreting Husserl's Progression into Idealism'. Paper
presented at the Early Phenomenology Conference, Franciscan University of
Steubenville, April 29-30, 2011.
Zahavi,
D.
Husserl's
Legacy:
Phenomenology,
Metaphysics,
and
Transcendental
Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
614
J. KINKAID

