Journal of Mental Health
ISSN: 0963-8237 (Print) 1360-0567 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ijmh20
Understanding the phenomenology of borderline
personality disorder from the patient's
perspective
Georgia Black, Joanna Murray & Graham Thornicroft
To cite this article: Georgia Black, Joanna Murray & Graham Thornicroft (2014) Understanding
the phenomenology of borderline personality disorder from the patient's perspective, Journal
of Mental Health, 23:2, 78-82, DOI: 10.3109/09638237.2013.869570
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.3109/09638237.2013.869570
Published online: 01 Apr 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2059
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ijmh20

2014
http://informahealthcare.com/jmh
ISSN: 0963-8237 (print), 1360-0567 (electronic)
J Ment Health, 2014; 23(2): 78-82
! 2014 Shadowfax Publishing and Informa UK Limited. DOI: 10.3109/09638237.2013.869570
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Understanding the phenomenology of borderline personality disorder
from the patient's perspective
Georgia Black1, Joanna Murray2, and Graham Thornicroft2
1UCL Department of Applied Health Research, London, United Kingdom and 2Health Services and Population Research, Institute of Psychiatry, King's
College London, London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Background: Guidelines and clinical practice focuses on behavioural symptoms of borderline
personality disorder, yet other experiences are more persistent and detrimental to psychosocial
function. It is unclear how this relates to the experience of individuals with the diagnosis.
Aims: To understand more about phenomenology of borderline personality disorder from the
patient's perspective.
Methods: We interviewed nine people with a borderline personality disorder from specialist
services in South London, UK. The data were analysed using a phenomenological qualitative
method.
Results: Individuals experienced frightening perceptual changes that were rationalised in
meaningful ways. Participants related their intense experiences to their families, finding them
both protective and burdensome.
Conclusions: The results illuminate contradictory behaviours, offering content for clinical
interventions. Particularly, this study has provided some novel perspectives about suicidality
and interactions with family and friends.
Keywords
Borderline personality disorder,
phenomenology, qualitative research
History
Received 13 March 2013
Revised 28 August 2013
Accepted 4 September 2013
Published online 27 March 2014
Introduction
The defining clinical features of borderline personality
disorder are still interpersonal (Gunderson, 2009) and these
dominate guidelines in the UK (NHS. National Institute for
Health
and
Clinical
Excellence.
Antisocial
personality
disorder:
treatment,
diagnosis
and
prevention.
2009).
Zanarini and colleagues found that these acute interpersonal
symptoms had a remission rate exceeding 85% at 10-year
follow-up (Taulke-Johnson, 2010). The list of acute symptoms
was dominated by interpersonal difficulties such as stormy
relationships and suicidality. Temperamental symptoms (such
as chronic anger, unusual perceptual experiences and annihi-
lation concerns) tended to have higher baseline prevalence,
and had the most detrimental effect on psychosocial func-
tioning (Taulke-Johnson, 2010) suggesting a greater need for
understanding of perceptual and emotional experiences.
Evidence on the phenomenology of illness from the patients'
perspective, however, is rarely used in guideline or treatment
development.
Phenomenology of illness is fundamental to our under-
standing of living with it, in order to know what individuals
require in terms of help from health professionals (Svenaeus,
2000). Understanding what the patient feels helps the
clinician to recognise the symptoms that are more amenable
to therapeutic change; for example, Gunderson suggests that
without taking into account feelings of ''badness'' it is hard to
understand
self-harm
as
an
act
of
self-punishment
(Gunderson, 2009).
This article presents patients' phenomenological experi-
ences of borderline personality disorder through the use of
interview data; this may have implications for service
development and clinical training.
Methods
This study was conducted as part of a large doctoral project,
with the aim of understanding the experience of personality
disorder. The themes described here were chosen for publi-
cation due to their common focus on borderline personality
disorder phenomenology. This study was approved by the
Joint South London and Maudsley and the Institute of
Psychiatry Research Ethics Committee.
Sampling and inclusion criteria
We sampled nine participants (one male) from dedicated
personality disorder services in South London, UK. A sample
of nine is typical for this idiographic method of analysis
(Smith et al., 2009). Participants were purposively recruited
who had experience of the borderline personality disorder
Correspondence: Georgia Black, UCL Department of Applied Health
Research, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HB E, United
Kingdom. Tel: +44 (0)20 3108 3226. Fax: +44 (0)20 7813 0242.
E-mail: g.black@ucl.ac.uk

diagnosis (confirmed by their clinical team). All were
young adults (18-40 years), had long histories of psychiatric
care and a variety of current and past diagnoses. Clinical,
ethnic and socio-demographic information was not recorded
because this type of personal information was not seen to be
relevant to the study. Pseudonyms are used throughout
the results.
Procedure
Service managers were contacted, given details about the
study
and
a
list
of
inclusion
and
exclusion
criteria.
Participants were contacted by service staff to see if they
wanted to take part. Individuals who gave informal consent to
take part were then contacted by the researcher and given an
information sheet to read about the study before giving formal
consent. All participants were currently receiving care from
dedicated community services.
The interviewer (first author) has a background in
social psychology. Participants were informed that the
interviewer had no links with their clinical team, which
helped them to open up in discussion. The interviews lasted
20-90 min. A representative from the charity Emergence UK
helped to develop an appropriate and comfortable interview
guide about participants' perspectives on the diagnosis,
including written vignettes about patients' experiences of
health services taken from qualitative papers about borderline
personality disorder. Vignettes are often used to help discuss
distressing interview matter (Hughes & Huby, 2002). The
interviews were recorded and transcribed. Identifying infor-
mation was
removed
from
the transcripts
to
preserve
confidentiality.
Interview data were analysed by the first author using an
Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA), a method of
qualitative analysis that elicits themes about experience
and
interpretation
(Smith
et
al.,
2009;
Smith,
2011).
Each interview was read and re-read for familiarity, and
annotated. Sections of the text were highlighted and labelled
with initial codes pertaining to participants' meanings and
experiences. When this process had been completed for each
participant, codes were developed into interpretative themes.
Themes were revised by iterations of analysis with the
interviews, and discussion with the other authors. A wide
range of themes were produced for the doctoral thesis; the
themes relating to phenomenology of borderline personality
disorder are presented in this article.
Results
Two superordinate themes were generated in response to the
generated themes: Internal dynamics, experiences that are
contained within the bodily sensations of the individual; and
External dynamics, experiences that arise through interactions
with other people. The subtheme titles are taken from
participants' words in the interviews.
Internal dynamics
Participants reported dramatic and confusing perceptual
states, including feeling as though they were disappearing
or no longer existed, and longing for death. They tried to cope
with these states by seeking help from others or self-harming.
The multiple functions of self-harm are well documented
(McAllister, 2003), and these are borne out and illustrated by
these participants.
I just go into the zone
All participants experienced dramatic perceptual and psycho-
logical changes, including a ''zone'' which increases the
impulse to self-harm. This may be relevant to the concept of
''dissociation'' in clinical contexts, a predictor of self-harm in
female in-patients (Gornall, 2011). Brenda encounters a state
where her perception changes and she cannot tell what is
happening around her:
When you self-harm you kind of go into this zone [. . .] and
you don't actually really know what's happening in that
point and then you sort of come out of it and look at it and
think ''oh god what have I just done?'' you know?
Brenda describes self-harm as a reflex or semi-conscious act,
leading to shock after realising what has happened. Michael
also encounters an altered state, but his is strongly focussed
on self-harm, and he cannot think about anything else:
Because I find it so blinding, you know. It practically blots
everything else out. [. . .] I can't focus on reasons around it,
I'm very focused on it and it alone. [. . .] afterwards there is
a time where I can engage, a few months where I can
engage in logical discussion of why, why I did it and the
reasons around it but then it starts again, it goes in cycles.
The preoccupation with self-harm is all-consuming and takes
away Michael's ability to hold a ''logical discussion.'' Many
describe being able to cut themselves or inflict other injuries
without feeling any pain until after the event. Other partici-
pants describe experiencing psychological changes, including
memory loss, the absence of pain, and hallucinations. Emma
does not self-harm, but still experiences an altered state of
consciousness where she confronts the possibility of her own
death:
I went in front of a car but I had a hallucination, I had a
vision of myself dead. And I don't, so I don't think I did
step in front of the car otherwise I would've been hit. But I
did see myself being hit [. . .] But it didn't, it wasn't what
really happened.
Emma still displays a lot of uncertainty about what ''really
happened,'' showing her distorted memory and perception,
struggling with logic in order to try and make sense of this
distressing experience. Thus, the ''zone'' experienced by
these participants involves a loss of control, focussing on
harm and death, a loss of memory and distorted perception of
pain and physical reality.
Just seeing the blood reminds me that I am here
Participants evoked particular meaning in the sight of their
own blood. One consequence of entering a perceptually
changed state is feeling that they do not exist - seeing blood
reassures participants of their own existence. Emma finds the
DOI: 10.3109/09638237.2013.869570
Phenomenology of BPD
79

contradiction between feeling non-existent and being alive
overwhelming:
. . . if no-one thinks you exist then you make yourself not
exist because that's the only way of achieving any psychic
consonance, if that makes sense.
Emma interprets other people's actions as a sign that she does
not exist. Nina experiences the sight of blood as a focus and
stops her feeling like she's ''disappearing'':
I feel like I'm kind of disappearing, that I'm no longer
being, so just seeing the blood it kind of reminds me that I
am here [. . .] obviously my heart's still beating because the
blood's still coming out and it's just nice to just see firm
evidence that I am alive.
The blood is experienced as a reassuring sign that Nina is still
alive. Like Nina, Brenda cannot avoid drawing blood when
she self-harms as otherwise it doesn't work for her:
Most of the time I can't self-harm so superficially that it
doesn't bleed very, very a lot because it's the blood that
somehow visually I have to see blood.
Having ''quite a lot of blood happening'' makes Brenda's
self-harm effective and satisfies her visually. This raises
questions about psychotherapeutic interventions for self-
harm, and understanding the particular role of blood.
It was like the voices were drawing me
Participants differentiated between an immediate plan to die,
and being comfortable with death, rationalising their desires
to kill themselves. Rationalisation of suicide is documented
elsewhere (Perseius et al., 2005), where individuals reported
being comforted by the possibility of death, frantically
longing for it and being full of self-hatred. In contrast, these
participants were unconcerned about death: as Linda puts it,
''if I was to die tomorrow it would not bother me the
slightest''.
Linda has made several suicide attempts. She rationalises
her pull towards death through the strength of her relationship
with her deceased father:
The amount of overdoses I've done and I haven't
succeeded yet you know I find myself at home talking to
my dad's photo talking to my sister's photo saying to him
'I'll be with you shortly, I'll be with you shortly'.
Visualising a reunion with her father, Linda understands death
as a resolution of her distressing feelings of loss and by
inventing
a
reality
after
death,
a
purposeful
afterlife.
Likewise, Joanne's religion means that she does believe in
life after death, and this strengthens her desire for it:
That's why I think of suicide because I do believe in life
after death and just to finish this [pause] hell.
Other participants experienced a passive approval, where if
death came naturally they would be accepting of it. Penny
explains an agreement she has with her mother between the
possibility of death when she self-harms, and actively seeking
it (when she overdoses as well). Therefore, if she only self-
harms, even if it gets infected or goes too deep, it does not
matter:
Well I . . . I just say to her [Mum] it doesn't really matter if
I self-harm or . . . because normally I take an overdose and
self-harm at the same time.
Participants therefore describe two experiences of suicidality:
first, an immediate and forceful need to die, and second, an
acceptance and rationalisation of death.
I'm torn between not wanting to be here and being here
For those participants who expressed suicidal thoughts, the
feelings were not always clearly defined - the conflict
between wanting to live and wanting to die was described as
the primary source of difficulty. Brenda outlines this diver-
gence in thinking after a suicide attempt, where she struggled
to make sense of her feelings about death:
Then you kind of get past that and you have all these mixed
feelings so yeah 'didn't really want to be alive or did I?
Am I pleased that brought me back or should they really
have left me?' Do you know what I mean?
As Brenda points out, recovery from a suicide attempt can
itself generate new feelings, including reinforcing suicidal
thoughts, low self-esteem and a sense of failure. Like Brenda,
Penny was angry to have survived a major suicide attempt,
and describes how she then ''shut down'':
Think I just totally shut down for a little while. I was just
angry that someone found me and woke me up, I was very
angry with that.
Penny reassesses her desire to live, and her instinct is to feel
anger towards the person that found her. Similarly, Linda
describes how she felt a sense of not belonging after waking
from an overdose, as she should have died. She considers an
immediate re-attempt:
Yeah many a time I come out there and think to myself
''do you know what I might as well go and done it again,
and do it again properly this time'' [. . .] all I kept on
saying to myself was ''I shouldn't be here I should be in
the slab now . . .''
Although Linda considers further suicide attempts, she is still
alive. The conflict between life and death is hard for both
women, as they also want to be alive for their family. Other
studies have not explained contradictory desires for living
with suicidal feelings, such as overdosing in a context
where they know they are likely to be found (Brooke &
Horn, 2010). Here, we see that failed suicide attempts
and low-level overdoses can be a reasonable reaction to
conflicting desires.
External dynamics
Families of individuals with borderline personality disorder
have been found to suffer from increased stress (Giffin, 2008),
and
these
participants
recognise
and
respond
to
this.
80
G. Black et al.
J Ment Health, 2014; 23(2): 78-82

They feel their relationships have changed during the course
of their illness, and have a particular relationship to their
distress.
It is hard enough dealing with what happens to me
Many participants described that their illness affected their
parents particularly, as they had frequently been involved in
their health care. Participants recognised this, modifying their
behaviour to protect them and help them to cope. This also
helped them by minimising difficult discussions about their
illness.
Brenda manages her relationship with her mum by hiding
her suffering, only contacting her when she needs extra
support. She feels that it is easier to cope with her feelings
alone, which is hard enough:
I think I have enough trouble with myself dealing with
what happens than trying to deal with their reaction and
trying to help them through something.
Anna also worries about hurting her dad when she's in a
bad mood, or when her feelings become uncontrollable.
She protects him by trying to keep him away:
He's there if I need him, you know if I say to him Dad
don't come up today I'm not in a good mood, I'm not in a
good place I don't really want to see you because I don't
want to upset you.
As well as their parents, three participants experienced
concerns about their children and their roles as mothers.
Linda worries about what would happen to her children if she
eventually succeeds in committing suicide. Despite her efforts
to ''get better for [husband's] sake and the girls' sake'', Linda
still frequently overdoses in secret.
Joanne also hides her visible signs of distress at home by
telling her children that she is tired, creating mistrust and
anger:
I didn't want to make a thing with it and just say ''Oh, I'm
just a bit tired'' and I've been saying that for years [laughs]
and it doesn't go away. And so like, he's getting angry with
me and sort of like sort of saying ''you don't tell us
anything''.
Joanne chooses to persist in hiding her illness, because she
thinks ''they cannot cope with it'' putting her need for support
below the maintenance of her children's standard of life.
Joanne's husband also has a mental health problem. Despite
understanding his needs, Joanne is often highly distressed and
feels that ''we're both struggling to cope with each other, you
know?''.
There is little evidence about the complex needs of
families where several members have mental health problems.
Five participants in this study had family members with
mental health problems, suggesting that this may be a
common situation. Even where this is not the case, partici-
pants' illustrate that seeking support from family requires
management of others' needs. While some
feel more
supported than others, all of them hide or moderate their
feelings to protect themselves and those around them.
The only thing that has kept me here
This theme explores the social meanings attached to the
relationship with death discussed in the Internal Dynamics
section. Families are seen as important motivating factors for
change in personality disorder (Zanarini, 2008), and family
support is known to be a protective factor against suicide in
at-risk adolescents (Sharaf et al., 2009); placing ultimate
importance in these relationships, some participants describe
their otherwise inevitable suicide as being solely prevented by
these protective roles:
It's like I haven't really nothing to live for, that's how I feel
at the moment, but I mean, if you spoke to my dad he'll tell
you a billion things that I want to do, but I can't even
remember [. . .] really he's the only person I actually love.
I don't love anyone else.
Anna's understanding of the protecting effect of her rela-
tionship with her dad is the love between them. Like Anna,
Linda's
suicidal
feelings
are
constantly
present
and
compelling. She characterises her relationship to her husband
as ''quite close'' and feels that he is ''very supportive''.
Linda considers that she would not be alive without her
husband and children (''I would not be here no way''). Before
she was married she was suicidal, but ''didn't [go through
with it] because I didn't know what my mum and dad would
be like''.
Interpreting this further, it might be that participants
identify their desire to be alive in their families. The structure
of family life gives Emma a feeling of purpose which
contrasts with her suicidal ideas. She considers how her life
would be different without her family:
I'm going home and you know I'm not going to commit
suicide on the way home because I've got four children,
because I have . . . you know my evenings are structured.
Emma's rationale for not committing suicide is that the act
would be in functional discord with the idea of her role as a
mother. She rejects suicide through practical, present tense
considerations, saying ''you know I've got things to do, I've
got people who rely on me''. Therefore, participants' experi-
ence of contrasting self-destructive and preserving instincts
can be made sense of through their identification with
family roles.
Discussion
This research has built on the findings of similar studies such
as Perseius et al. (2005) and Brooke and Horn (2010) by
revealing social roles that interact with altered perceptual
states and suicidality, and passive aspects of the relationship
with death.
All participants introduced the topics of self-harming and
suicidality spontaneously, suggesting that these are predom-
inant concerns. It has been suggested that dialogue about the
meaning of self-harm is therapeutically beneficial to service
users with this diagnosis (Birch et al., 2011), and these results
may provide some discussion points. The themes here about
suicidality are particularly important, as understanding the
meaning of death for people with this diagnosis may aid
DOI: 10.3109/09638237.2013.869570
Phenomenology of BPD
81

therapeutic contact and reduce stigma (Commons Treloar &
Lewis, 2008).
In non-specialist clinical settings, primacy is given to acute
interpersonal symptoms that respond more effectively to
treatment (Taulke-Johnson, 2010). For example, clinical
criteria such as unstable relationships and impulsive behav-
iour are rarely linked to feelings of disappearing and closeness
to death.
Family members were seen as a reason for living, and
sometimes perceived to provide crucial support, but this often
led to hiding of feelings leading to disagreement and
isolation. By understanding how specific perceptual states
interact with social relationships, psychotherapeutic practi-
tioners might consider how this will affect group (Hummelen
et al., 2007) and individual (Scanlon & Adlam, 2009; Wright
et al., 2007) interventions.
Limitations
This study only included one male participant; we anticipate
that the themes relating to family may be particularly relevant
to female participants. Additionally, the experiences described
here are not exhaustive. We did not conduct this study with
the aim of describing the phenomenology of borderline
personality disorder so the themes described here arose from
the open-ended discussions in the interviews.
Conclusions
As new interventions emerge, it is hoped that phenomeno-
logical categories based on service users' experiences are
incorporated (Gunderson, 2009), and the defining clinical
features used in guidelines adjusted to reflect this. These
results are intended form a critical and informative pivot
between practitioners, policy makers and service users in need
of very specific forms of understanding.
Declaration of interest
Work conducted at Health Services and Population Research
department, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London,
London, UK. The authors declare no conflicts of interests.
The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing
of this article.
References
Birch S, Cole S, Hunt K, et al. (2011). Self-harm and the positive
risk taking approach. Can being able to think about the possibility of
harm reduce the frequency of actual harm? J Ment Health, 20,
293-303.
Brooke S, Horn N. (2010). The meaning of self-injury and overdosing
amongst women fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for borderline
personality disorder. Psychol Psychother: Theory Res Pract, 83,
113-28.
Commons Treloar AJ, Lewis AJ. (2008). Professional attitudes towards
deliberate self-harm in patients with borderline personality disorder.
Austra New Zeal J Psychiatr, 42, 578-84.
Giffin J. (2008). Family experience of borderline personality disorder.
Austra New Zeal J Fam Thera, 29, 133-8.
Gornall L. (2011). Review of mixed method design: Principles and
procedures. Qualit Res, 11, 456-57.
Gunderson J. (2009). Borderline personality disorder: Ontogeny of a
diagnosis. Am J Psychiatr, 166, 530-9.
Hughes R, Huby M. (2002). The application of vignettes in social and
nursing research. J Adv Nurs, 37, 382-6.
Hummelen B, Wilberg T, Karterud S. (2007). Interviews of female
patients with borderline personality disorder who dropped out of
group psychotherapy. Int J Group Psychother, 57, 67-91.
McAllister M. (2003). Multiple meanings of self harm: A critical review.
Int J Mental Health Nurs, 12, 177-85.
NHS. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. (2009).
Antisocial personality disorder: Treatment, diagnosis and prevention.
Available
from:
http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/pdf/
CG77NICEGuideline.pdf [last accessed 16 Feb 2009].
Perseius K, Ekdahl S, A¨ sberg M, Samuelsson M. (2005). To tame a
volcano: patients with borderline personality disorder and their
perceptions of suffering. Arch Psychiatr Nurs, 19, 160-8.
Scanlon C, Adlam J. (2009). 'Why do you treat me this way?': Reciprocal
violence and the mythology of 'deliberate self-harm' [References].
In: Motz A, ed. Managing self-harm: Psychological perspectives.
New York (NY): Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group, 55-81.
Sharaf AY, Thompson EA, Walsh E. (2009). Protective effects
of self esteem and family support on suicide risk behaviors
among at risk adolescents. J Child Adolesc Psychiatr Nurs, 22, 160-8.
Smith JA. (2011). Evaluating the contribution of interpretative phenom-
enological analysis. Health Psychol Rev, 5, 9-27.
Smith J, Flowers P, Larkin M. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological
analysis: theory, method and research. London: Sage.
Svenaeus F. (2000). The body uncanny — further steps towards a
phenomenology of illness. Med Health Care Philos, 3, 125-37.
doi: 10.1023/a:1009920011164.
Taulke-Johnson R. (2010). Review of qualitative research in education -
A user's guide. Qualit Res, 10, 276-7.
Wright K, Haigh K, McKeown M. (2007). Reclaiming the humanity in
personality disorder. Int J Ment Health Nurs, 16, 236-46.
Zanarini M. (2008). Reasons for change in borderline personality
disorder (and other Axis II Disorders). Psychiatr Clin N Am, 31,
505-15.
82
G. Black et al.
J Ment Health, 2014; 23(2): 78-82

