Qualitative Research in Psychology
ISSN: 1478-0887 (Print) 1478-0895 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uqrp20
A meditation on boredom: re-appraising its value
through introspective phenomenology
Tim Lomas
To cite this article: Tim Lomas (2017) A meditation on boredom: re-appraising its value
through introspective phenomenology, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 14:1, 1-22, DOI:
10.1080/14780887.2016.1205695
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2016.1205695
Published online: 29 Jul 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1173
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 8 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uqrp20

A meditation on boredom: re-appraising its value through
introspective phenomenology
Tim Lomas
University of East London, London, United Kingdom
ABSTRACT
Boredom is almost universally regarded as a dysphoric mental
state, characterised by features such as disengagement and
low arousal. However, in certain quarters (e.g., Zen Buddhism),
boredom is seen as potentially having great value and even
importance. The current study sought to explore boredom
through a case study involving introspective phenomenology.
The author created conditions in which he would experience
boredom for an hour and recorded his experience in real-time
using a variant of the Experiencing Sampling Method. The data
were
analysed
using
an
adaptation
of
Interpretative
Phenomenological Analysis. The results indicated that the state
of boredom contained three main sources of value: altered
perception of time, awakened curiosity about the environment,
and exploration of self. Consequently, the article offers a re-
appraisal of boredom, suggesting that rather than necessarily
being a negative state, if engaged with, boredom has the
potential to be a positive and rewarding experience.
KEYWORDS
Boredom; introspection;
meditation;
phenomenology; wellbeing
The problem of boredom
Boredom is almost universally regarded as a negative mental state. This
disparaging appraisal is reflected in Vogel-Walcutt et al.'s (2012, p. 90)
definition of it as "temporary feelings of low-arousal and unpleasant emo-
tions induced by environmental factors," and in Fisherl's (1993, p. 396)
depiction of boredom as an "unpleasant, transient affective state, in which
the individual feels a pervasive lack of interest." However, these sparse
definitions do not really begin to capture the range of dysphoric feelings
that have historically been associated with the term "boredom" (Toohey
1988). Toohey suggests that boredom — or non-English translative equiva-
lents, since "boredom" did not enter the English language until 1852 with
Charles Dickens' (1853) Bleak House — has been used throughout history to
depict states of malaise that involve some dispiriting combination of frustra-
tion, surfeit, depression, disgust, indifference, apathy, and confinement.
Moreover, each historical epoch has tended to emphasise particular elements
CONTACT Dr. Tim Lomas
t.lomas@uel.ac.uk
University of East London, School of Psychology, Room AE
3.29, Stratford Campus, London E15 4LZ, United Kingdom.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
2017, VOL. 14, NO. 1, 1-22
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2016.1205695
© 2016 Taylor & Francis

of this dysphoric state. One of the earliest literary works, the Sumerian Epic
of Gilgamesh (transcribed circa 2000 B.C.), describes the Mesopotamian King
Uruk as being "oppressed by idleness" (cited in Maier 1997, p. 314); this
ennui is then the premise for Uruk embarking on a quest to discover some
sense of purpose and legacy. A somewhat more frustrated state is depicted in
Homer's Iliad (circa 850 B.C.), in which a mood akin to boredom is cited
when the Achaeans are waiting restlessly to fight the Trojans, with the state
taking on shades of vexation and impatience (Toohey 1988).
Later, in classical Greek and Roman philosophy, we find states comparable
to boredom taking on weighty existential overtones that verge on despair,
emotional states that are arguably close to the modern psychiatric diagnosis
of depression (Szasz 2002). For instance, the Stoic philosopher Seneca (4 B.
C.-65 A.D.) lamented the ubiquity of Taedium vitae (tiredness of life), which
he describes chillingly as "the tumult of a soul fixated on nothing" (cited in
Hecht 2013, p. 42); indeed Taedium vitae was recognised by Roman law as
one of the few morally acceptable reasons for suicide (though Seneca did not
himself advocate this). In medieval times, boredom took on shades of
spiritual listlessness and melancholia in the form of acedia (Latin); this was
often referred to by Christians as the "demon of noontide" and was described
by St. Thomas Aquinas (1273) as "sorrow of the world" and the "enemy of
spiritual joy" (cited in Frevert 2011, p. 31). In more recent centuries, this
existential sense of anomie and of the melancholia that would often accom-
pany it were recast and labelled in a variety of ways, including the "English
disease" in the 17th and 18th centuries, the "mal de siècle" in 19th century
Europe, and the "nausea" of continental existentialists in the 20th century
(Toohey 1988).
Coming into the present day, contemporary psychological theory has
sought to identify and operationalise different forms of boredom. For
instance, Toohey (2011) suggests that boredom can be differentiated into
existential boredom, situational boredom, and boredom of surfeit. The first
encapsulates many of the melancholic states depicted above, such as Taedium
vitae. However, as noted, this form of deep, existential boredom is perhaps
more likely to be characterised in today's medicalised discourse as "depres-
sion," and in its extreme versions to be treated clinically as a psychopathol-
ogy (Szasz 2002). In contrast, situational (or "situative") boredom, referred to
by the novelist Flaubert (1856) as "common boredom," arises when a specific
situation is judged to lack interest or value. As Svendsen (2005) notes, this
context-specific state can be distinguished from existential boredom in
numerous ways, not least their physiological manifestations; situational bore-
dom is revealed by signs of restlessness and/or tiredness, from fidgeting to
yawning; in contrast, existential boredom is not necessarily accompanied by
any particular physical/behavioural patterns. Finally, boredom of surfeit
captures the kind of decadent overabundance where one encounters a lack
2
T. LOMAS

of constraining limits (e.g., as experienced by the very rich), but where one
also lacks the ability or passion to make any value distinctions, thereby
finding all options to be equally uninteresting.
Another contemporary approach to boredom, driven by psychometric per-
sonality theory, has been to differentiate between trait and state boredom, and
to elucidate the differential factors comprising these. Trait boredom, that is,
general tendencies toward experiencing boredom, has most commonly been
assessed using the "boredom proneness" scale developed by Farmer and
Sundberg (1986). Although initially operationalised as a single factor, subse-
quent analyses (e.g., Vodanovich, Wallace & Kass 2005) identified two main
factors: lack of external stimulation (which pertains to one's need for variability
and change) and lack of internal stimulation (which concerns an inability to
produce stimulation for oneself). Conversely, state boredom relates more to
what Toohey (2011) refers to as situational boredom, that is, lack of interest in
one's
current
situation.
In
this
respect,
Fahlman
et
al.'s
(2013)
Multidimensional State Boredom Scale comprises five main factors: disengage-
ment, high arousal, low arousal, inattentiveness, and (altered) time perception.
In turn, both trait and state forms of boredom have been associated with a host of
negative outcomes. For instance, trait boredom has been identified as a risk factor
for anxiety and depression (LePera 2011); negative social orientation, such as
alienation or paranoia (Leong & Schneller 1993); impulsivity (Watt & Vodanovich
1992); and dysfunctional behaviours, for example, pathological gambling
(Blaszczynski, McConaghy & Frankova 1990). Similarly, state boredom has been
linked to multiple adverse outcomes; for example, in the context of work, bore-
dom has unsurprisingly been connected to greater dissatisfaction with most
aspects of work, from work itself, to pay and co-workers (Kass, Vodanovich &
Callender 2001), as well as poorer performance as rated by managers (Watt &
Hargis 2010). More broadly, adopting a phenomenological perspective, Bargdill
(2000) explored more extensive forms of boredom, analysing the experiences of
six people who felt "bored with their lives" (p. 188). His analysis revealed that this
type of enduring malaise arose in part from an assessment that endeavour and
action were futile, leading to feelings of apathy and emptiness.
Re-evaluating boredom
So, as the preceding section has illustrated, boredom is generally considered to
be a problematic or dysphoric state. While there are multiple ways of concep-
tualising boredom, these all point to, in Klapp's (1986, p. 127) words, a "deficit in
the quality of life." However, alongside this dominant negative perspective, it is
possible to discern a subtly different strand of thought, one that is less obvious
but actually finds some strange value in boredom. In this line of thinking, the
issue is not so much with boredom per se, but with people's inability to tolerate
or engage with it. Indeed, many of the issues above, such as the dysfunctional
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
3

gambling behaviour associated with boredom proneness, can be viewed as the
result of a desperate fleeing from boredom; it is this common intolerance of
boredom, and the resulting troubles, that led to the existentialist philosopher
Søren Kierkegaard (1843, p. 281) arguing forcefully that "boredom is the root of
all evil." In a less dramatic way, the anthropologist Genevieve Bell (2011)
suggests that recent technological innovations like the smartphone have created
a world of constant distraction that prevents people from ever having to be
bored. On the surface, according to the conventional negative appraisal of
boredom outlined above, these technological developments are surely a good
thing, alleviating its ubiquitous and problematic burden. However, Bell argues
that actually this easy distraction is an issue, since allowing oneself to experience
boredom can not only be valuable, but important and vital. Indeed, she points to
the emergence of trends such as "digital detoxing" (Morrison & Gomez 2014) as
indicators that people need the time and space to occasionally be bored. Why
might that be? What could boredom have to offer that might be of value?
Indeed, the impetus for the current article stems from a similarly curious
and provocative question by Robert Pirsig (1974) in his classic Zen and the
Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, in which he discusses the value of meditation.
A wealth of recent research has suggested that meditation (e.g., mindfulness)
can be highly beneficial for wellbeing, from alleviating mental illness (Zindel
et al. 2002) to helping people function better at work (Shapiro et al. 2005). In
his book, Pirsig makes a striking point in relation to the Zen practice of zazen
(essentially a form of mindfulness): "Zen has something to say about bore-
dom. Its main practice of 'just sitting' has got to be the world's most boring
activity. . . You don't do anything much: not move, not think, not care. What
could be more boring? Yet in the very center of this boredom is the very
thing Zen Buddhism seeks to teach. What is it? What is it at the very center
of boredom that you're not seeing?" (p. 317). This article attempts to explore
this question.
In exploring relevant literature in pursuit of possible answers, three main
responses emerged: altered perceptions, creativity, and exploration of the self.
Regarding altered perceptions, the most striking example is shifts in one's
experience of time. Indeed, Heidegger (1938), who wrote extensively on the
importance of becoming attuned to boredom, felt that it amounted to a
physical experience of time (and of our existence through time). More
specifically, Heidegger argued that in boredom, which he referred to as an
"existential orientation" rather than a mood (Slaby 2010), subjective time
tends to slow down, as if to a halt. In a similar vein, the Russian author and
Nobel laureate Joseph Brodsky (1997) argued that boredom "represents pure,
undiluted time in all its repetitive, redundant, monotonous splendour." Of
course, this sense of time slowing is a familiar feature of boredom; indeed,
experiments in time perception suggest that high boredom prone people do
experience time as subjectively passing more slowly (although they can often
4
T. LOMAS

still accurately judge the objective passing of chronometric time) (Watt1991).
However, what is striking about the position of Heidegger and Brodsky is the
great value of entering into this altered mode of time perception. For
instance, Brodsky described boredom as our "window on time's infinity,"
the experience of which could radically alter our sense of place in the cosmos.
Similarly, for Heidegger, deep boredom creates a clearing space in which one
gains insights into the nature of reality, including the sense that one is
responsible for creating meaning in life, and moreover is free and empow-
ered to do so (Slaby 2010).
Such insights brings us to the second key value of boredom in the literature:
creativity. One can find many testimonials from geniuses attesting to the
generative power of boredom. For instance, Nietzsche (1882, p. 108) wrote
that great artists "require a lot of boredom if their work is to succeed. For
thinkers and all sensitive spirits, boredom is that disagreeable 'windless calm'
of the soul that precedes a happy voyage and cheerful winds. They have to bear
it and must wait for its effect on them." Similarly, Kets de Vries (2014) argued
that boredom played a crucial role in many great artistic and scientific break-
throughs: Descartes allegedly "discovered" the notions of x and y while idling
in bed watching a fly on the ceiling, while Einstein reportedly achieved his
initial pivotal insight into the nature of relativity while abstractly daydreaming.
Thus, as Stern (1988) puts it, the "heavy-gaited time" (p. 5) of monotony and
boredom serves as a gestational space, and finally as a "reluctant but never-
theless urgent passageway to creativity" (p. 11). Such anecdotes have been
corroborated by recent research. For instance, Gasper and Middlewood (2014)
and Mann and Cadman (2014) found that participants induced into a state of
boredom performed far better on creativity tests (e.g., thinking of novel uses
for plastic cups) than people who were either elated, relaxed or distressed. One
explanation given was that boredom allowed attention to wander, and the
mind to free-associate, thus facilitating creativity. Indeed, from a neurophy-
siological perspective, boredom may activate the default mode network
(Raichle et al. 2001), which is thought to play a key role in creativity (e.g.,
stimulus independent thought; Takeuchi et al. 2012).
Finally, and perhaps most dauntingly but also most transformatively,
boredom can be a means of self-exploration, of coming face-to-face with
oneself. This brings us back to meditation and to Pirsig's (1974) point that
"in the very center of this boredom is the very thing Zen Buddhism seeks to
teach" (p. 317). Zen is generally regarded to have begun with the Indian
monk Bodhidharma, who brought Buddhism to China in 520 A.D. (Watts
1957). According to semi-historical legend, upon arrival in China, he initially
was not well-received and retreated to a cave, where he spent nine years
meditating facing its wall. Such was his subsequent influence that wall-facing
became the dominant form of meditation in Zen (Senauke 2006). The
contemporary teacher Osho (2015) freely acknowledges that this activity is
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
5

perhaps the very epitome of boredom. However, Eastern traditions have an
interesting explanation for this boredom: at its core, it is the result of
psychological tension that arises if people are uncomfortable being alone
with themselves. As such, it is suggested that many people seek company or
distraction to avoid this type of uncomfortable self-encounter (Pezeu-
Massabuau 2013). However, Buddhist theory holds that if one can tolerate
and push on through this boredom and discomfort, one is able to gain vital
insights into one's mind and self-identity (Biceaga 2006). From a psycholo-
gical growth perspective, such experiential insights can potentially be liberat-
ing and transformative; as Osho puts it, "watching the wall - slowly, slowly
thoughts disappear, thinking stops, mind evaporates and what is left is your
authentic reality" (p. 486).
Although boredom has tended to be conceptualised as a negative state,
there are valid reasons to suppose that it may potentially be of some value.
The current study is an exploratory investigation of boredom, aimed at
enquiring into its nature and understanding any positive experiential ele-
ments. To do this, the study uses the relatively unconventional method of
phenomenological introspection. Introspection was a much valued metho-
dology in the early years of psychology, pioneered by phenomenological
philosophers such as Edmund Husserl (1931). Indeed, William James
(1890, p.185) wrote that "introspective observation is what we have to rely
on first and foremost and always." The technique fell out of favour due to
numerous factors, from the dominance of Skinner's (1938) behaviourism in
the first half of the 20th century to the critique of self-knowledge and agency
provided by post-constructionist theories of identity in the latter half (e.g.,
Gergen 1985). However, in recent years, the value of phenomenology has
once again been recognised, most prominently within consciousness studies
with the emergence of Varela's (1996) neurophenomenology paradigm. As
outlined in Varela and Shear's (1999) edited book The View from Within:
First-Person Approaches to the Study of Consciousness, first-person reports of
subjectivity have an invaluable (and indeed irreplaceable) role in furthering
our understanding of psychological processes and experience. As such, this
study brings the introspective phenomenological method to bear on the
experience of boredom, with the aim of enquiring whether boredom may
contain value or uses that are not readily apparent in conventional (i.e.,
negative) appraisals of this state.
Method
Overview
Introspective phenomenology is a form of empiricism that involves observing
and reporting on one's own subjectivity with as much accuracy as possible. As
6
T. LOMAS

Sinnott-Armstrong (2008, p. 85) puts it, "the method is simple: describe the
phenomena. More precisely: introspect on your own experience and then
describe what it is like to have certain kinds of experience." The method can
arguably be situated within the broader emergent paradigm of auto-ethnogra-
phy (Denzin 2013), distinguished in particular by efforts to engage with one's
current subjective experience. For this study, conditions were established in
which I would experience boredom for an hour, specifically, in the middle of a
13-hour airplane flight. (Given the nature of the project, the first person voice
will be used from here on in.) I recorded my experiences in real time using an
adaption of Csikszentmihalyi and Larson's (1987) Experiencing Sampling
Method. The recorded data were explored for thematic content and analysed
using an adaptation of Smith's (1996) Interpretative Phenomenological
Analysis (IPA).
Participant
Reflexivity is important in qualitative research since the personal background
and qualities of the researcher impact the research at all stages of the process,
including serving as the "filter of salience through which data are sieved"
(Schreiber 2001, p. 60). As such, it is worth mentioning a few salient details
about myself here that are relevant to the study. (That said, I shall keep this
brief, for reasons given in the discussion.) I am a 36-year-old lecturer in
psychology. I was born in London into a very loving middle class family
(although my parents, both teachers, have a working class background), with
one brother and sister. I did well academically at school, despite it being a
rough place, and spent much of my time playing music and football. Before
university I taught English for six months in China and returned the follow-
ing year to visit Tibet; it was there I became interested in Buddhism and have
tried ever since (with varying success) to maintain a regular meditation
practice. I moved up to Edinburgh to study psychology, and stayed there
for nine years. I spent five years in a touring and recording band while also
working as a psychiatric nursing assistant. I moved back to London in 2008
to undertake a PhD, studying the impact of meditation on mental health, and
took up a position as a lecturer at the University of East London in 2013.
Data collection
The intention was to gather real-time data on my own subjective experience of
boredom. The data collection method was an adaption of Csikszentmihalyi and
Larson's (1987) Experiencing Sampling Method (ESM). Standard ESM protocol
involves participants being contacted at various intervals (e.g., via pager), at
which point they are asked to self-rate current experience (e.g., in terms of
affect). The variation pioneered in the current study might be termed the
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
7

"micro-experience auto-sampling method" (MEASM). It is micro because it
covers a relatively short period of time (one hour in this case). It is auto in
two respects: (a) it is autonomous, in that the data was elicited and recorded by
myself rather than at the prompting of an independent researcher; and (b) it is
automatic, in that the prompts were regulated by a set timer (in this case, setting
my phone to alert me, via a vibration, every 60 seconds).
The specific details of the data collection are as follows. A period of time was
selected in which I was likely to be bored. The occasion chosen was a 13-hour
flight (leaving Singapore at 7 am, bound for London). I selected the midpoint of
the flight (i.e., after six hours) as the hour in which data collection would occur.
This was chosen as an ideal situation for boredom, given (a) flights are generally
regarded as somewhat boring; (b) after six hours, I was already likely to be bored;
(c) limited opportunities for movement (none in fact occurred during the hour);
(d) limited opportunities for interaction (none in fact occurred during the hour);
and (e) a relatively unchanging visual scene (window blinds were purposefully
kept closed, and my entertainment screen turned off). Moreover, prior to the data
collection hour, I specifically sought to ensure that I would already be in a state of
boredom. For the first four hours of the flight, I watched two films (The Usual
Suspects and American Beauty), both of which I like but had seen at least twice
before. I then spent two hours doing nothing (i.e., not entertaining myself in any
way, and also not specifically trying to meditate or engage in interesting mental
activities), to further foster a state of boredom. For the data collection hour itself,
I sat comfortably in my chair and set my phone to vibrate every 60 seconds. At
each 60-second prompting, I quickly wrote a note (a few words) on my laptop,
simply recording what I was thinking, feeling or experiencing at that particular
moment. Immediately at the end of the hour, I then expanded each note into a
full sentence, drawing on my still-fresh memory to provide slightly more detail
and context to each note.
Data analysis
The data analysis method was a variation on Smith's (1996) IPA. Standard
IPA protocol was developed for the analysis of one-to-one interviews of a
small group of participants who are "homogenous" in some way. However,
recent years have seen adaptations to suit various methodological contexts,
for example, focus groups (Palmer et al. 2010). IPA usually aims toward
moving from the particular (i.e., one person's experiences) to the shared
(i.e., experiences people have in common). However, in the current study,
the aim was to explore the particular in some depth through a sustained
exercise in introspection, thereby providing a case study of boredom. In
other respects, however, the protocol of IPA was followed, that is, moving
from the descriptive to the interpretative via a process of close line-by-line
coding followed by identification of emergent themes.
8
T. LOMAS

The data analysis occurred immediately after the data collection hour. The
raw data were the 60 notes I had made during the hour (one per minute).
Thus, the first stage of the analysis was the process of expanding these notes
into whole sentences, as indicated above, which took about 20 minutes. I
then moved into the initial coding stage, in which I sought to identify up to
three themes for each of the 60 entries (with an entry consisting of the
original note plus the expanded sentence). In doing so, since the experience
was still fresh in my mind, I was able to move from description to inter-
pretation by drawing on memories and reflections of the hour itself, thereby
substantiating and fleshing out the recorded notes. This coding process
generated 82 separate themes (some shared by more than one entry). Next,
I looked for emergent patterns of commonality by grouping the themes into
categories based on conceptual similarity, which generated 20 categories. The
categories were themselves then grouped into five meta-categories, again
based on conceptual similarity: time, world, subjectivity, self/identity, and
project.
Results
The data collection hour generated 60 separate initial notes (one per minute),
as detailed below verbatim in Table 1. The expanded sentences based on the
notes (written immediately after the hour) are included in the third column.
These entries were coded thematically and grouped into categories and
meta-categories. The themes, categories, and meta-categories are shown in
Table 2, together with the specific entries associated with each theme.
Analysis and discussion
The results offer a revealing insight into the phenomenology of boredom,
showing this to potentially be a rich and dynamic state, full of value and
possibility. Of course, there are the obvious caveats, such as the impossibility
of generalising from this one intensive observation by one person to all other
people and contexts. Nevertheless, as a sustained introspective exercise, the
results offer a unique case study of the kaleidoscopic nuances of boredom; it
can be seen, in this case at least, that boredom is not necessarily the dull,
valueless state that it is commonly taken to be but rather can facilitate a
fascinating array of experiences and insights. The hour yielded positive or
intriguing moments relating to two of the three main sources of value out-
lined above — altered perception of time and exploration of self — with an
additional boon not previously identified, namely, curiosity regarding the
external world. There were some experiences pertaining to the third main
strand above, namely creativity, such as the generation of novel mental data
through free association. In general though, there did not appear to be many
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
9

Table 1. Results from the data collection hour.
Minute
Verbatim note
Expanded sentence
1
why do this, futile
Question futility of exercise
2
thinking of items! pressure
Wonder about pressure to write one item per minute
3
fast min
Surprised by speed of the previous minute
4
dirty screen
Notice computer screen needs cleaning
5
blank, fuzzy mind
No thoughts in mind - head fuzzy
6
weird screen pattern
Notice unusual pattern in background to computer screen
7
sound stream wash over
Feel like I'm in a stream of sounds, washing over me
8
suites? etym.
Wonder about etymology of word 'suites'
9
knot - me, self?
Identify my 'sense of self' with a psychological 'knot' behind my
forehead
10
quiet - nice!
Pleasant moment of silence
11
lipread aisle man
Try to lipread conversation of man standing in the aisle
12
plastic - inventor?
Wonder about who invented plastic
13
sudden breath - odd
Sharp intake of breath highlights the irregularity of my breathing
14
shoulder - old emo hurt?
Wonder whether tension in shoulder is an old emotional wound
15
nice water, thanks
Gratefully accept a glass of water
16
tired, seeing nothing
Feel like I've exhausted my observational powers
17
child sound like bird
Think that child in front sounds like a bird when she talks
18
untie knot in mind
Return to psychological 'knot,' and try to untie it mentally
19
eyes dart - look for interest Feel my eyes darting around to find something of interest in
environment
20
eyes to window. free?
Head turns involuntarily towards window; wonder about free will
21
time gone - sad at time
passing
A sudden sadness at 20 minutes of my life having evaporated
22
blue light trance
Hypnotically drawn to blue light on cabin ceiling up ahead
23
time waste
Condemn this whole project as a waste of time, and unusable
24
words elusive
Finding that appropriate descriptive words are increasingly elusive
25
emails! anxious, chest
A flutter of anxiety in chest about returning to work emails
26
thoughts - come from?
Wonder how thoughts are being formed, and by who
27
mind = ocean, looking for
fish
Feel like I'm peering into the ocean, waiting for fish (thoughts) to pop
to the surface
28
want choc van ice
Craving for chocolate and vanilla ice cream
29
blinking = weird, nice
Think that blinking is an odd bodily activity, but pleasant
30
shins tingle
Tingling sensation in my shins
31
words like centipede
chasing
Think that words on screen look like little centipedes chasing each
other
32
thick tongue - want to poke Tongue feels saturated - an urge to poke it out
33
clearing, no thought
A clearing, without thoughts
34
feeling endurance, keep at
it
A feeling of endurance, like I could stick at this
35
time quick, surprise
Surprised at the relative speed of the exercise
36
my bonnie
The tune 'My bonnie' darts into my mind
37
ossle ossle
Some of its lyrics morph into nonsense syllables ("ossle ossle")
38
sunshine field at home -
urge to run
Sudden urge to sprint across a field (behind my parents' house) in
the sunshine
39
nice fest, happy
A happy memory of being at a music festival
40
uniforms - pretty
Admire ornate uniforms of cabin staff
41
bad election, annoyed
Bitterness at recent UK elections
42
red dungarees
Recall a pair of red corduroy dungarees I wore as a child
43
old and sad
Feel old, and a bit despondent
44
knot tight
Throbbing sensation in forehead - the knot tightening?
45
eyes closing - drowsy
Eyes close involuntarily; wave of drowsiness
46
time stopped
Feel that time hasn't moved at all (despite clock changing)
47
crew at curtain - clumsy
magic
Flight attendant emerges suddenly from behind curtain, like a
clumsy magician
(Continued)
10
T. LOMAS

moments of creativity per se. However, this is not especially surprising: in the
literature, boredom is often presented as a prelude to creativity, a germinal
state in which new associations are perhaps being made below the surface of
awareness, which then burst forth after the period of boredom (Mann &
Cadman 2014). Thus, the three main sources of value were altered time
perception, environmental curiosity, and exploration of self. These shall be
outlined below.
However, before discussing the phenomenology of boredom in this
instance, it is worth re-iterating one key point: I truly was bored! That is,
as I began to engage with the exercise (i.e., at the beginning of the hour), I
was in the midst of an on-going state that I would have no hesitation in
describing as "boredom." More specifically, I was experiencing what could be
called "situational" (Toohey 2011) or "state" boredom (Fahlman et al. 2013),
characterised by lack of interest in my current environment, comprising
elements like restlessness combined with tiredness, disengagement, and inat-
tentiveness, all of which are factors of Fahlman et al.'s Multidimensional
State Boredom Scale. However, following the advice of Brodsky (1997),
rather than seeking to escape or distract myself from the boredom, as I and
others might normally do, I tried to enter deep into it, to really probe and
explore it. In doing so, the experience started to change; I might still have
plausibly and legitimately described the hour as "boring," yet at the same
time it began to become vibrant and interesting, full of mystery and depth.
Whether it then still truly counts as boredom is a fascinating question, and
one that highlights the limitations of language in capturing the ineffable
nuances of experience (Brockmeier 2002). Indeed, this question actually
highlights the shape-shifting nature of emotional and experiential categories,
Table 1. (Continued).
Minute
Verbatim note
Expanded sentence
48
slow thoughts, all
incomplete
Thoughts slowing down, and emerging half finished
49
knot again - Nietz recur
A recurrence of the knot - a sense of 'eternal recurrence'
(Nietzsche)
50
Nietz like koan - mystery
Think Nietzsche sounds like a Zen koan, and equally mysterious
51
me a ball on hill
Feel like I'm a ball, bobbling haphazardly down a gentle, bumpy,
never-ending hill
52
vertigo, not just plane
A sudden vertigo, not related to being on a plane
53
silly task - me too!
Find myself quite preposterous for doing this
54
no blame
Admitting stupidity seems to absolve me of responsibility
55
peace, happy
Feeling quite peaceful, happy even
56
I don't matter - fine
My own insignificance strikes me as a relief
57
nearly done, free
Quite liberated at the thought of nearly finishing the hour
58
full? empty? strange
A strange sensation of being both fuller and emptier than when the
hour began
59
hopeful future - mix of
images
A sense of hopefulness about the future (arising from relatively
inconsequential images)
60
nice unusual hour
Grateful for spending the hour in this unusual way
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
11

Table 2. Themes, categories and meta-categories from the data collection hour.
Meta-category
Category
Theme
Entry
Time
Perception
Shifting time perceptions
3, 35
Time quickening
3, 35, 52
Time slowing
46
Strangeness of passage of time
42, 46
Usage
Time well spent
57, 60
Time as a resource
60
Existential
Life passing quickly
21, 39, 43, 52
reflection
Preciousness of time
21
Make the most of time
21, 39
Nostalgia
39, 43
Sadness at time passing
43
World
Attentiveness
Noticing new features
4, 6, 22
Surprise at surroundings
4, 47
Perception/appreciation of detail
6, 24
Attention 'ensnared/captured'
20, 40
Lack of attentiveness
16
Epistemic hunger
19
Altered
Aesthetic appreciation
6, 22, 40
relationship
Perceptual shifts
7, 31, 47, 51
Immersion in world
7
Transience/impermanence
7
Curiosity about phenomena
8, 11, 12, 50
De-familiarisation (see old as new)
8, 12, 17, 31
Engagement
Yearning for activity
38, 59
Yearning to explore world
38, 39, 57, 59
Sense of possibility
39, 52, 57
Intentions for future activities
4, 34
Probing the world
12, 19
Receiving goods
15
People
Attention to people
11, 15, 17, 40, 47
Care/regard for others
11
Broader
Reflection on events
41
concerns
Worry/concern about life
25, 41
Subjectivity
Embodiment
Somatisation of emotions
25
Unfamiliarity with body
13, 14, 30, 32
Involuntary nature of bodily processes
13, 32
Getting to know body
30
Sensations in head
5, 9
Vivid memory
28, 38, 39, 42
Mental
Slipperiness of mind
37
strangeness
De-familiarisation of internal world
29, 30, 32
Mind as sea of potentials
27
Content emerging unbidden
26, 27, 36, 41, 58, 60
Sudden (involuntary?) shifts in
attention
13, 20, 22, 44
Strangeness of internal world
26, 29
Clearing
Internal space
10, 33,
Mental quietude
5, 10, 33
Calmness
10, 33,
Lightness
56
Creativity
Creative imagination
31, 37, 59
Free-associating (creativity/play)
8, 17, 36, 37, 47, 50, 60
Positivity
Happiness
55, 56
Freedom
56
Delight/pleasure
28
(Continued)
12
T. LOMAS

showing that if an experience such as boredom is fully embraced, it may no
longer be boring per se. It is this same rationale that underpins mindfulness-
based interventions, which are based on the premise that if dysphoric states
like anxiety are engaged with in a particular spirit (e.g., open, curious, kind,
and non-judgmental), then these states become somehow transmuted into
less noxious or threatening versions, and perhaps even dissipate entirely
(Kabat-Zinn 2003).
The first emergent meta-theme was altered time perception. A slowing or
lengthening of subjective time is one of the archetypal features of boredom,
identified theoretically by philosophers such as Heidegger (1938), and corro-
borated in empirical experiments (e.g., Watt 1991). However, in the current
study, there was a strange sense of time both slowing and quickening: at
points (e.g., minute 46) time felt almost static, yet at other moments (e.g.,
minutes 3, 35, and 52) I was surprised by the swiftness of the preceding
minute, with a sensation of time slipping away through my fingers. Perhaps
such juxtapositions are not so unfamiliar; as Roeckelein (2008) elucidates, the
elusive, paradoxical nature of time has been recognised at least as far back as
the Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea (circa 490-430 B.C.). It has been argued
that eventful (i.e., interesting) experiences seem to pass quickly at the time
Table 2. (Continued).
Meta-category
Category
Theme
Entry
Pleasant sensation
29, 30
Gratitude
15
Desire
28
Negativity
Mind drowsy/sluggish
45, 48
Mental fuzziness
5
Bodily discomfort
14, 18, 49
Boredom
16
Negative cognitions
25
Self/identity
Awareness
Witnessing consciousness
27, 44, 58
Self-consciousness
53, 55
Insignificance of self
55, 56
Aspects of
Emptiness of self
58
self
Plenitude of self
58
Probing self/identity
9, 14, 18, 20, 26, 42, 44, 49
Lack of volitional control
36, 45, 51
Creation of
Linked to mental tension (knot)
9, 18, 44, 49
identity
Self-as-repetition
49
Sense of personal history/journey
14, 39, 42, 51
Project
Concerns
Doubt about value of project
1, 23, 53, 54
Doubts about own ability
2, 16, 23, 24, 53, 55
Exercise feels contrived
2
Difficulties
Ineffability of experience
23, 24, 48, 50
Exercise feels unfamiliar
1
Strangeness of activity
46
Positives
Appreciating activity
34, 57
Enjoying activity
34, 35, 54, 57
Flow
54, 55
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
13

but seem lengthy in retrospect (due to the formation of substantive and
varied memories), while uneventful (i.e., boring) experiences pass slowly but
seem short afterwards (due to a lack of discrete memorable components;
Hammond 2012). However, in the current study, sensations of time quicken-
ing and slowing appeared to alternate and even co-exist; indeed, an over-
riding feeling was simply of the strangeness of time, once observed up close.
Added to this strangeness was a strong, melancholic awareness of time as a
precious resource that was fast depleting, as captured in minute 21. This in
turn evoked a range of emotions, from nostalgia for time gone by, to an
urgent wish to "make the most" of future time. For instance, in minute 42, I
recalled a pair of red trousers I used to wear as a child (which are vivid to me
still, as there is a photo of me wearing them, in which I just look completely
happy); this memory led inexorably, in the next minute, to a sense of sadness
at growing old. However, this melancholy train of thought then seemed to
dissipate, and by the closing of the hour (e.g., minute 59), I was feeling rather
more hopeful about life, and about the time that still lies ahead of me.
Arguably these varied reflections corroborate Heidegger's point about the
value of boredom as an embodied experience of time itself, generating vital
existential insights, such as the need to act and seize the day before it passes
(Slaby 2010).
The second meta-theme was curiosity regarding my surroundings, both
proximally (i.e., the aircraft cabin) and more distally (the world "generally").
Usually, lack of interest in one's environment is a defining feature of bore-
dom as conventionally understood (Fisherl 1993). Indeed, I myself felt dis-
engaged and inattentive at the beginning of the introspective hour (having
deliberately induced boredom). However, as the hour proceeded, I noticed an
unusual phenomenon. I had previously judged my surroundings as devoid of
interest, hence boring. Normally, this would be the cue to seek alternative
surroundings, or at least to distract myself. By removing these options
though, I began to find value in stimuli that I had previously judged as
lacking. I found myself noticing new features of my environment I had
previously overlooked, and indeed appreciating these aesthetically (minutes
4, 6, 22, and 40); moreover, stimuli I had become habituated to became
"de-familiarised," that is, seeming new and strange. For instance, I became
mesmerised at one point (minute 40) by the beautifully ornate patterns on
the uniforms of the cabin crew, which is certainly not something I have ever
paused to appreciate or even notice previously. These experiences reflect a
passage in Pirsig (1974), in which he describes people in the prairies noticing
subtle phenomena that might be overlooked by people caught up in the
sensory overload of the city, quiet moments of beauty that "can be noticed
because other things are absent" (p. 24). In cognitive/epistemic terms, atten-
tion is often drawn to phenomena that are novel, salient, or urgent (Posner &
Petersen 1990). Phenomena that lack these qualities are thus often judged as
14
T. LOMAS

lacking interest. But if attention is compelled to stay with such phenomena, it
is as if the mind finds ways to make these novel or salient. An example of this
is the "mindfulness of breathing," a meditation practice focusing on the
breath. Usually, one might take one's breathing for granted or see it as
lacking interest. However, practitioners report that, once engaged with, the
breath can become a source of great fascination, possessing subtle depths and
nuances (Kapleau 1965).
This last point brings us to our final meta-theme, exploration of the self
(comprising both subjectivity and self/identity in the results table). Here we
return to the idea that boredom brings us face-to-face with ourselves. As
Stern (1988, p. 5) puts it, boredom is a "void [that] becomes a vital capability,
[one that] confronts the question of 'Who am I?.'" Indeed, in Zen, the rigours
of wall sitting meditation are designed to encourage/compel practitioners to
"push through" boredom and to interrogate their identity (Watts 1957).
Essentially, the aim of Zen meditation is for people to realise that their
"ego" (their conventional identity) is an "illusion" (an on-going project of
construction) and instead to experience the liberation of not "having" an ego
per se (Kapleau 1965). During my introspection, I cannot claim to have had
any such insights. However, I did certainly journey "into myself," exploring
unfamiliar aspects of my being, and becoming attentive to my mental
dynamics. For instance, there was a recurrent observation of a sensation of
a "knot" behind my forehead (minutes 9, 18, 44, and 49). This observation
occurred in conjunction with a feeling that my sense of identity was some-
how bound up with this sensation, as if, were the sensation to dissipate, so
might my sense of self.
Similarly, I noticed the way that thoughts appeared to emerge unbidden (i.e.,
without me volitionally "thinking" them), as in minute 26. While such observa-
tions are common currency in Buddhist theory — indeed, the title of a prominent
book on Buddhism and psychotherapy is Thoughts without a Thinker (Epstein
2004) — it was interesting to notice this for myself. However, this does raise the
question as to whether my prior reading of Buddhism influenced my interpreta-
tion of minute 26; that is, was I primed to feel as if thoughts were arising unbidden
due to my exposure to a philosophy that explicitly conceptualises thoughts thus?
More generally, I was intrigued by how slippery, elusive, and strange the mind
was, a fleeting dance of vague ephemera; not for nothing did William James (1890)
famously refer to consciousness as a "stream." Indeed, I was particularly captivated
by a meta-image that occurred to me in minute 27, that is, an image about the
nature of mind itself, and about the nature of the introspective activity I was
engaged in. In particular, I felt that the process was much like peering into an
ocean and waiting for fish (i.e., thoughts) to appear. In retrospect, this image does
indeed capture my feelings about the exercise, and the mind generally, quite
effectively. I also found that my sphere of subjectivity appeared to widen, encom-
passing more phenomenological "terrain." For instance, I often tend to live "in my
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
15

head," that is, wrapped up in discursive thoughts, and am rather inattentive to my
embodied experience. However, here I enjoyed the sensation of exploring the
subjectivity of my body (e.g., minutes 29, 30, and 32), corroborating studies that
have linked enhanced body awareness to wellbeing (Brani et al. 2014). That said, it
was not an unmitigated enjoyment; both minutes 29 and 32 felt "weird" in that I
was acutely aware of the sheer fact of my physical being, which evoked subsequent
parallels in my mind with the sensation of "nausea" described by Sartre (1938).
I encountered a range of absorbing experiences during the hour. As I will
suggest below, such empirical data have the potential to facilitate a re-appraisal
of boredom, showing that it is not necessarily the dysphoric state it is usually
conceived as being, but has the potential to also be of some psychological value.
Before making this claim, however, I must introduce the inevitable caveats regard-
ing the generalisability of the data. First, the design of the study, and in particular
the decision to elicit an observation every 60 seconds, inevitably influenced the
nature of the data collected. In practice, this period of time actually felt very brief,
and therefore the prompts were experienced as somewhat intrusive. Indeed, two of
my first three observations (minutes 2 and 3) related specifically to the pressure I
felt relating to the need to note down observations so frequently. Moreover, this
design structure arguably impacted on the nature of the observations, in a number
of ways. For instance, one mightargue thatthe rapidityof theobservationsequence
impeded the chance for boredom to truly "set in." There was roughly only 50
seconds between completing my note for a given minute and being prompted for
my note for the subsequent minute. Moreover, given that I knew in advance how
soon my next observation would be prompted, in the seconds leading up to the
prompt I often found myself already composing the notes I would write when
prompted. This latter point was exacerbated by my knowledge that I would seek to
report and publish my observations, which perhaps created a certain pressure to
make them interesting or noteworthy. As such, it could be said that I was actually
task-focused for much of the time, rather than actually allowing myself to be bored.
Given these points, I have some suggestions below for how future research in this
area might remedy these limitations.
A second point regarding the generalisability of the data is the fact that this is
just one person's experience of boredom on one occasion. Reflexivity demands
that I acknowledge the data as necessarily particular, determined by my own
history and characteristics. To this extent, I have tried to give some brief indica-
tions of how my personal history may have shaped the "filter of salience" through
which the data were sieved (Schreiber 2001, p. 60), such as my familiarity with
meditation and my prior familiarity with Buddhist theory. However, I am wary
about focusing overly on my personal characteristics. This study is a phenomen-
ology of boredom, not of me, and there is a risk that excessive reflexivity turns into
a form of "epistemological narcissism," in which researchers are more concerned
with accounting for themselves than their data (Cutcliffe 2003). Moreover, there
are limits to reflexivity: even the lengthiest autobiographies fail to capture the
16
T. LOMAS

near-infinity of stories and experiences that constitute a person. Moreover, as
psychoanalytic theory has recognised, there is so much about the person that is
hidden to themselves (Luft 1969); thus, the idea that I can ever fully "account for"
myself, let alone within the confines of a short academic paper, is something of an
impossibility. In any case, the study is not about proving that boredom can be a
valuable experience for everybody all of the time. No doubt there are many people
who experience severe boredom, such as isolated older adults (Gabriel & Bowling
2004), and need genuine assistance to find engaging activities and relationships to
alleviate its burden. Rather, this is simply a case study to suggest that boredom has
the potential at least to not be an entirely negative and unfulfilling state of mind.
That being said, it could also be argued that my ability to engage with boredom
and to find interest in it was due to my experience as a practising meditator, as well
as to the possibility that I was motivated to make the experience interesting.
Indeed, it could even be suggested that, during the activity, I was actually
meditating (i.e., trying to observe my internal world with nonjudgemental curi-
osity), rather than being bored. However, this latter reflection is precisely the point
of this article, with its aim of "reappraising" boredom. As Biceaga (2006) argues,
perhaps meditation is boredom, and boredom is meditation? The only difference
between the two then is that boredom is conventionally appraised as negative (and
hence people tend to denigrate or devalue it), whereas meditation is usually
regarded as a worthwhile and beneficial mental activity (Kabat-Zinn 2003).
Consequently, if people were able to regard their boredom as a meditative
experience, it may no longer be appraised as negative; indeed, it may no longer
even be boring — as I found during the hour, the boredom became interesting!
These kinds of reappraisals have relevance for fields such as positive psy-
chology (PP), which are concerned with wellbeing and flourishing (Lomas,
Hefferon & Ivtzan 2014). PP initially appeared to make a distinction between
mental states that were "positive" (e.g., optimism) and those that were "nega-
tive" (e.g., anxiety). It furthermore often implied that the former were neces-
sarily good, and should be sought, whereas the latter were intrinsically bad,
and should be eschewed. However, in recent years, a second wave of the field
has been emerging (Held 2004; Wong 2011; Lomas & Ivtzan 2015), in which it
is recognised that (a) ostensibly positive states can be detrimental to wellbeing
in certain circumstances, for example, "excessive optimism" is linked to health
risk behaviours (Weinstein 1987); (b) apparently negative states can sometimes
be conducive to flourishing, for example, anxiety can alert us to potential
threats and encourage pro-active coping (Norem 2001); and (c) many desirable
states, for example, love, are actually "co-valenced" and involve a complex
dialectical blend of light and dark elements (Lazarus 2003). In this context,
perhaps the current article can contribute toward a re-appraisal of boredom,
challenging the conventional view that it is necessarily "negative" and devoid
of value and suggesting that it has the potential, if engaged with, to be a
positive and rewarding experience.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
17

However, this potential needs further corroboration through future research,
given the limitations of the current study, as outlined above. Based on these
limitations, I would like to offer various recommendations for any such research
into this topic. First, in terms of generalisability, it will be helpful to recruit a broad
range of participants, of varying age, gender, ethnicity, and educational level.
Efforts could also be made to compare people with and without meditation
experience, to explore the intriguing notion that meditators may have developed
a particular ability or capacity to appreciate boredom. Second, in terms of the
session itself, a longer time period than 1 hour would ideally be allocated to allow
boredom to truly manifest; indeed, researchers might try experimenting with
different durations to compare their impact (e.g., two hours versus one whole
day). Third, and similarly, it would be prudent to space the observation prompts
further apart than 60 seconds. As discussed above, in practice, this interval felt too
short and intrusive, making the hour too "task-oriented." Gaps of 5 or even 10
minutes would be preferable in this regard. Moreover, researchers might give
thought to spacing these intervals with a degree of randomness, for example,
giving the first prompt after 10 minutes, the second after 6 minutes, the third
after 14 minutes, the fourth after 3 minutes, and so on. This would prevent
participants anticipating or waiting for a prompt (e.g., trying to guess when 5
minutes had lapsed, and preparing their observation in advance), as I did here.
Fourth, to alleviate task demands, it would be better for participants to be able to
verbally report their observations (via audio-recorder) rather than having to write
these down.
Finally, in terms of recruiting participants, it may be worth developing a
protocol where the period of boredom appears to participants as merely acciden-
tal. This would help prevent participants realising that it was a study about
boredom, a realisation which would (a) reduce the likelihood of their participation
in the first place and (b) influence their responses. For instance, participants could
ostensibly be recruited to an experiment which seems appealing and interesting,
such as a flight simulation. Then, on arrival to the experiment, participants could
simply be asked to sit alone in a waiting room, with no distractions. Once there,
they might be warned that there might be a "bit of a wait," of up to two hours, say,
before the experiment started. The researchers might then contrive some reason to
intermittently check on the participants and enquire what they are thinking about.
Obviously, this is just one suggestion, but arguably something akin to this might
be needed to generate an ecologically valid situation of genuine boredom. If this is
managed, then we shall get a better idea of whether boredom can indeed be a
useful and valuable state, as this current article has suggested.
Notes on contributor
Dr. Tim Lomas is a lecturer at the University of East London, where he is the associate
programme leader for the MSc in Applied Positive Psychology and Coaching Psychology.
18
T. LOMAS

Tim completed his PhD at the University of Westminster in 2012, focusing on the impact of
meditation on men's mental health. He is the author of numerous books and papers, covering
topics including mindfulness, Buddhism, gender, linguistics, cross-cultural psychology, and
neuroscience. His latest book, The Positive Power of Negative Emotions, will be published by
Piatkus in fall 2016.
References
Aquinas, StT 1273/1981, Summa theologica (Fathers of the English Dominican Province,
Trans.), Christian Classics, Westminster, MD.
Bargdill, RW 2000, 'The study of life boredom', Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, vol.
31, no. 2, pp. 188-219.
Bell, G 2011, The value of boredom, paper presented at the TEDxSydney Conference, Sydney,
Australia.
Biceaga, V 2006, 'Temporality and boredom', Continental Philosophy Review, vol. 39, no. 2, pp.
135-53.
Blaszczynski, A, McConaghy, N & Frankova, A 1990, 'Boredom proneness in pathological
gambling', Psychological Reports, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 35-42.
Brani, O, Hefferon, K, Lomas, T, Ivtzan, I & Painter, J 2014, 'The impact of body awareness
on subjective wellbeing: the role of mindfulness', International Journal of Body
Psychotherapy, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 94-107.
Brockmeier, J 2002, 'Ineffable experience', Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 9, no. 9-10, pp.
79-95.
Brodsky, J 1997, On grief and reason: essays, Macmillan, London.
Csikszentmihalyi, M & Larson, R 1987, 'Validity and reliability of the experience-sampling
method', The Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, vol. 175, no. 9, pp. 526-36.
Cutcliffe, JR 2003, 'Reconsidering reflexivity: introducing the case for intellectual entrepre-
neurship', Qualitative Health Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 136-48.
Denzin, NK 2013, Interpretive autoethnography, Sage, London.
Dickens, C 1853, Bleak house, Bradbury and Evans, London.
Epstein, M 2004, Thoughts without a thinker: psychotherapy from a Buddhist perspective, Basic
Books, New York.
Fahlman, SA, Mercer-Lynn, KB, Flora, DB & Eastwood, JD 2013, 'Development and valida-
tion of the multidimensional state boredom scale', Assessment, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 68-85.
Farmer, R & Sundberg, ND 1986, 'Boredom proneness: the development and correlates of a
new scale', Journal of Personality Assessment, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 4-17.
Fisherl, CD 1993, 'Boredom at work: a neglected concept', Human Relations, vol. 46, no. 3, pp.
395-417.
Flaubert, G 1856/2009, Madame Bovary (RN MacKenzie, Trans.), Hackett Publishing,
London.
Frevert, U 2011, Emotions in history: lost and found, Central European University Press, Paris.
Gabriel, Z & Bowling, A 2004, 'Quality of life in old age from the perspectives of older
people', in A Walker & CH Hennessey (eds.), Growing older: quality of life in old age,
McGraw Hill, Maidenhead, pp. 14-34.
Gasper, K & Middlewood, BL 2014, 'Approaching novel thoughts: understanding why elation
and boredom promote associative thought more than distress and relaxation', Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 52, pp. 50-7.
Gergen, KJ 1985, 'The social constructionist movement in modern psychology', American
Psychologist, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 266-75.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
19

Hammond, C 2012, Time warped: unlocking the mysteries of time perception, Canongate
Books, London.
Hecht, JM 2013, Stay: a history of suicide and the philosophies against it, Yale University Press,
Boston.
Heidegger, M 1938/2001, The fundamental concepts of metaphysics: world, finitude, solitude,
Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
Held, BS 2004, 'The negative side of positive psychology', Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 9-46.
Husserl, E 1931/1999, Cartesian meditations: an introduction to phenomenology (D Cairns,
Trans.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, London.
James, W 1890/1981, The principles of psychology, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kabat-Zinn, J 2003, 'Mindfulness-based interventions in context: past, present, and future',
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 144-56.
Kapleau, RP 1965, The three pillars of Zen, Anchor, New York.
Kass, S, Vodanovich, S & Callender, A 2001, 'State-trait boredom: relationship to absentee-
ism, tenure, and job satisfaction', Journal of Business and Psychology, vol. 16, no. 2, pp.
317-27.
Kets de Vries, MF 2014, Doing nothing and nothing to do: the hidden value of empty time and
boredom, Faculty and Research Working Paper, INSEAD, Fontainebleau, France.
Kierkegaard, S 1843/1959, Either/or (DF Swenson & LM Swenson, Trans.), Anchor Books, New
York.
Klapp, O 1986, Overload and boredom: essays on the quality of life in the information society,
Greenwood Place, New York.
Lazarus, RS 2003, 'Does the positive psychology movement have legs?', Psychological Inquiry,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 93-109.
Leong, FT & Schneller, GR 1993, 'Boredom proneness: temperamental and cognitive compo-
nents', Personality and Individual Differences, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 233-9.
LePera, N 2011, 'Relationships between boredom proneness, mindfulness, anxiety, depres-
sion, and substance use', The New School Psychology Bulletin, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 15-25.
Lomas, T, Hefferon, K & Ivtzan, I 2014, Applied positive psychology: integrated positive
practice, Sage, London.
Lomas, T & Ivtzan, I 2015, 'Second wave positive psychology: exploring the positive-negative
dialectics of wellbeing', Journal of Happiness Studies, doi:10.1007/s10902-015-9668-y.
Luft, J 1969, Of human interactions: the Johari model, Mayfield, Palo Alto, CA.
Maier, JR 1997, Gilgamesh: a reader, Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers, London.
Mann, S & Cadman, R 2014, 'Does being bored make us more creative?', Creativity Research
Journal, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 165-73.
Morrison, SL & Gomez, R 2014, 'Pushback: expressions of resistance to the "evertime" of
constant online connectivity', First Monday, vol. 19, no. 8.
Nietzsche, F 1882/1974, The gay science: with a prelude in rhymes and an appendix of
songs (W Kaufman, Trans.), Vintage Books, New York.
Norem, JK 2001, The positive power of negative thinking, Basic Books, New York.
Osho 2015, The great Zen master Ta Hui: reflections on the transformation of an intellectual to
enlightenment, Osho Media International, New York.
Palmer, M, Larkin, M, de Visser, R & Fadden, G 2010, 'Developing an interpretative phenom-
enological approach to focus group data', Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 7, no. 2, pp.
99-121.
Pezeu-Massabuau, J 2013, A philosophy of discomfort, Reaktion Books, London.
Pirsig, RM 1974, Zen and the art of motorcycle maintenance, Vintage, New York.
20
T. LOMAS

Posner, MI & Petersen, SE 1990, 'The attention system of the human brain', Annual Review of
Neuroscience, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 25-42.
Raichle, ME, MacLeod, AM, Snyder, AZ, Powers, WJ, Gusnard, DA & Shulman, GL 2001, 'A
default mode of brain function', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 98, no.
2, pp. 676-82.
Roeckelein, JE 2008, 'History of conceptions and accounts of time and early time perception
research', in S Grondin (ed.), Psychology of time, Emerald, Bingley, UK, pp. 1-50.
Sartre, J-P 1938/1964, Nausea (L. Alexander, Trans.), New Directions, New York.
Schreiber, RS 2001, 'The "how to" of grounded theory: avoiding the pitfalls', in RS Schreiber
& PN Stern (eds.), Using grounded theory in nursing, Springer Publishing, New York, pp.
55-83.
Senauke, HA 2006, 'A long and winding road: Soto Zen training in America', Teaching
Theology & Religion, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 127-32.
Shapiro, SL, Astin, JA, Bishop, SR & Cordova, M 2005, 'Mindfulness-based stress reduction
for health care professionals: results from a randomized trial', International Journal of
Stress Management, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 164-76.
Sinnott-Armstrong, W 2008, 'Is moral phenomenology unified?', Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 85-97.
Skinner, BF 1938, The behavior of organisms: an experimental analysis, Appleton-Century,
Oxford.
Slaby, J 2010, 'The other side of existence: Heidegger on boredom', in S Flach, D Margulies &
J Söffner (eds.), Habitus in habitat II: other sides of cognition, Peter Lang, Bern, pp. 101-20.
Smith, JA 1996, 'Beyond the divide between cognition and discourse: using interpretative
phenomenological analysis in health psychology', Psychology and Health, vol. 11, no. 2, pp.
261-71.
Stern, EM 1988, 'An awakening and complexity', The Psychotherapy Patient, vol. 3, no. 3-4, pp.
5-16.
Svendsen, L 2005, A philosophy of boredom, Reaktion Books, London.
Szasz, TS 2002, Fatal freedom: the ethics and politics of suicide, Syracuse University Press, New
York.
Takeuchi, H, Taki, Y, Hashizume, H, Sassa, Y, Nagase, T, Nouchi, R & Kawashima, R 2012,
'The association between resting functional connectivity and creativity', Cerebral Cortex,
vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 2921-9.
Toohey, P 1988, 'Some ancient notions of boredom', Illinois Classical Studies, vol. 13, no. 1, pp.
151-64.
Toohey, P 2011, Boredom: a lively history, Yale University Press, Boston.
Varela, FJ 1996, 'Neurophenomenology: a methodological remedy for the hard problem',
Journal of Consciousness Studies, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 330-49.
Varela, FJ & Shear, J (eds.) 1999, The view from within: first-person approaches to the study of
consciousness, Imprint Academic, Thorverton, UK.
Vodanovich, SJ, Wallace, JC & Kass, SJ 2005, 'A confirmatory approach to the factor structure
of the boredom proneness scale: evidence for a two-factor short form', Journal of
Personality Assessment, vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 295-303.
Vogel-Walcutt, JJ, Fiorella, L, Carper, T & Schatz, S 2012, 'The definition, assessment, and
mitigation of state boredom within educational settings: a comprehensive review',
Educational Psychology Review, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 89-111.
Watt, J & Hargis, M 2010, 'Boredom proneness: its relationship with subjective under-
employment, perceived organizational support, and job performance', Journal of Business
and Psychology, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 163-74.
QUALITATIVE RESEARCH IN PSYCHOLOGY
21

Watt, JD 1991, 'Effect of boredom proneness on time perception', Psychological Reports, vol.
69, no. 1, pp. 323-7.
Watt, JD & Vodanovich, SJ 1992, 'Relationship between boredom proneness and impulsivity',
Psychological Reports, vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 688-90.
Watts, AW 1957, The way of Zen, Penguin Books, London.
Weinstein, N 1987, 'Unrealistic optimism about susceptibility to health problems: conclusions
from a community-wide sample', Journal of Behavioral Medicine, vol. 10, no. 5, pp.
481-500.
Wong, PTP 2011, 'Positive psychology 2.0: towards a balanced interactive model of the good
life', Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 69-81.
Zindel, V, Segal, J, Williams, MG & Teasdale, JD 2002, Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
for depression: a new approach to preventing relapse, Guilford, New York.
22
T. LOMAS

