Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Humanity in Schillebeeckx's Hermeneutic
Phenomenology. Towards a Methodology
Ramona Simuț
To cite this article: Ramona Simuț (2018) Humanity in Schillebeeckx's Hermeneutic
Phenomenology. Towards a Methodology, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology,
49:2, 139-155, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2018.1431008
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2018.1431008
Published online: 03 Feb 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 278
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Humanity in Schillebeeckx's Hermeneutic Phenomenology.
Towards a Methodology
Ramona Simuț
Faculty of Theology, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa
ABSTRACT
This paper offers an analysis of Edward Schillebeeckx's insights on
different perceptions of revelation as related to concepts like
salvation, God, church, human experience and creation in the
work Jesus in Our Western Culture. The incentive of Schillebeeckx's
hermeneutical method in nowadays Western phenomenology,
upon which God "breathed his breath of life", triggered our
interest in meanings which Schillebeeckx ascribes to human
history as the realm of God's work for the benefit of men and
women. This meaning is suggested in the very beginning of the
book by its original Dutch title If Politics is not Everything. As
stated in this work's introduction, Schillebeeckx's main theme is
the origin of salvation in the humanum, from the Abba experience
to nowadays revelatory events. Our attempt is to see how
Schillebeeckx's humanum, which is the embodiment of human
experience of consciousness, becomes relevant for the Christian
doctrines and why Schillebeeckx reckons that bringing them
together would impact both his worldview and Western culture.
KEYWORDS
Schillebeeckx; Western
culture; humanum;
hermeneutics;
phenomenology
1. Introduction
All discussions about social and Christian ethics in Schillebeeckx's thought have to be
taken for what they are, namely the support on which he later developed his definition
of God, Christology, soteriology and church. The fact that Schillebeeckx, the Flemish theo-
logian based in the Netherlands, witnessed the Second World War, the Cold War period,
post-totalitarian democracies and also post-modern society and politics until end of 2009
when he died, was for him an incentive to relate all these experiences to biblical statements
in a personal hermeneutics. Our analysis of Schillebeeckx's take on the doctrine of God as
reflected in both the Old and the New Testament is the first step toward building the image
of the Old Testament God conceived in relationship with creation and stories about it.
This is because without this interpretative framework of creation, the doctrine about rev-
elation would miss its point, as Schillebeeckx asserts that the New Testament statements
about God the creator need be compared with the statements about Jesus the Saviour.
Thus, Schillebeeckx brings divine disclosure in human history closer to its full purpose
of depicting revelation within godhood and within history.
© 2018 The British Society for Phenomenology
CONTACT Ramona Simuț
r.simut@gmail.com
Faculty of Theology, University of Pretoria, Lynnwood Road and
Roper Street, 0132 Hatfield, Pretoria, South Africa
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY, 2018
VOL. 49, NO. 2, 139-155
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2018.1431008

It is Schillebeeckx's conviction that a genuine doctrine of God, Christ and man would
provide a better understanding of what humanity means in a society of suffering. Conse-
quently, he envisages a study of the ministry of Jesus and the Easter events which conveys
the idea of the perfect human action towards human welfare. Schillebeeckx's view on the
foundation of human experience and ethics as a relationship between suffering and love is
constructed on the model of nowadays church life and its impact on non-believers. This
study will bring into discussion the different influences that shaped Schillebeeckx's
thought in the course of this work in order to grasp his theory of the humanum as the
genuine fulfilment of ethics. Thus, Schillebeeckx's phenomenology will be viewed as a
step forward from his insistence on Christian dogma and faith to the new reality of con-
temporary men and women in their particular settings.
2. Phenomena and the Divine Disclosure
Edward Schillebeeckx's contact with Western phenomenology and anthropology dates
back to times previous and during the Second World War, when in 1934 he studied phe-
nomenology in Leuven with the Dominican philosopher Dominic Maria De Petter, who
initiated him into neo-Thomism, the phenomenologies of Husserl and Heidegger1 and
also opened his mind to the new possibilities of studying Catholic dogma in the light of
the historical critical method.2 Because traditional Catholicism pertaining to Mediaeval
scholasticism viewed as extremely controversial the way in which humanism approached,
first, the doctrine of revelation (which was believed to have ended with the last of the apos-
tles), the supreme authority of the Church in proclaiming the inextricable truth of Catholic
dogma and also the path to analysing biblical texts, DePetter's influence on Schillebeeckx
could also be defined as controversial.
To clarify, Schillebeeckx came to acknowledge that human experience can play an
important role in explaining divine revelation and the doctrines of salvation, sin and
redemption. This shift was especially favoured by the fact that right after the War, Schil-
lebeeckx began travelling for studies in France, where he came into contact with new
attempts at approaching phenomenology through the works of Jean-Paul Sartre and
Maurice Merleau-Ponty. Thus, if "Husserl employed phenomenological methods to
analyse experience and human consciousness, ... and Sartre analysed human freedom
phenomenologically, ... Merleau-Ponty advanced a phenomenological theory of bodili-
ness and human embodiment in the world."3 Suffice it to say, at a close lecture of Schille-
beeckx's works, that these thinkers proved to be an unending source of inspiration for this
Continental theologian. To resume, however, it is in this context of approaching phenom-
enology that the first chapter of Schillebeeckx's Jesus in Our Western Culture (here and
after called JOWC) analyses creation as a realm which encapsulates the beginning of
both salvation and perdition as two concepts present throughout Schillebeeckx's
hermeneutic.
As human salvation is Schillebeeckx's greatest concern here, this account of creation
infers that the history of salvation is to be searched for in human history. Human
1 For details, see Kee-Fook Chia, Edward Schillebeeckx and Interreligious Dialogue, 58.
2 Abdul-Masih, Edward Schillebeeckx and Hans Frei, 55.
3 Kennedy, Schillebeeckx, 42.
140
R. SIMUȚ

history by itself is considered secular because it is anthropocentric and can be expressed in
words known to men and women. Thus such concepts as well-being, which we promote,
or evil, which we fight against, help us envision a God who brings salvation for every man
or woman through love. Love is the term that Schillebeeckx uses as an expression of the
highest human ideal, i.e. human ethics. Love is meant to guide every human action in
order to secure universal hope in the history of humanity. God disclosed his love in
history both through the created order and through the life and ministry of Jesus Christ.
At this point, Schillebeeckx is ready to say that Jesus Christ is not the only one by whom
God revealed himself within human history. There are also other religious factors which
support the cause of humanity. Schillebeeckx takes this idea and transforms it into a pos-
tulate which makes him assume that terms like church and religion are not compatible,
precisely because of the "liberating events" experienced by different religions. These liber-
ating events, as Schillebeeckx calls them in his book, Jesus in Our Western Culture. Mysti-
cism, Ethics and Politics,4 are historical periods which make us conscientious of the present
of God within history. This idea is also to be remembered because it makes Schillebeeckx's
doctrine of revelation easier to understand.
Beside those liberating events which secure the continuity of God's revelation within
human history, Schillebeeckx follows the traditional line of thought and asserts that the
transforming death of Jesus of Nazareth was indeed the means to verify the truth of rev-
elation. This observation is contradictory when it is compared with the concept of revel-
ation in the writings of other representatives of this method of applying theology "from
below". For instance, the statements issued by Wolfhart Pannenberg concerning God's
self-revelation in Jesus Christ are related inextricably to Jesus' resurrection. Schillebeeckx
associates God's revelation in Jesus to his ministry and death. For Pannenberg, the resur-
rection is precisely the only true historical event that anticipates the whole, unique and
direct self-revelation of God in history. Jesus' resurrection was indeed proleptic because
it realized in the present time all the eschatological expectations of both the people of
the Old and the New Testament. On the one hand, the resurrection was a historical
event as it meant the fulfilment of God's promises for the Jews of the Old Testament.
On the other hand, it was the fulfilment of the pre-Easter claims made by Jesus that he
was the self-revelation of God in history for the people of the New Covenant/Testament.
There was no need for any apocalyptical expectations anymore, because Jesus' claim to be
one with the Father has been verified and approved at his resurrection. And again, con-
trary to Schillebeeckx's claims, this is also an occasion for Pannenberg to bring into dis-
cussion the problem of Jesus' divinity as an emphasis on the reality of the Trinity:
In the framework of the revelational unity of God and Jesus, the divinity of Jesus has to be
understood as the unity of the Son with the Father, which leads directly to the Christian
understanding of God as Trinity.5
This assertion is set against both Schillebeeck's discussion on revelation as an interpret-
ative series of historical events and his understanding of the relationship between revel-
ation, God and humanity. The fact that Pannenberg sees the revelation of God in Jesus
as direct (not at all indirect or expected to become complete in the eschaton) due to the
4 See Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 8, 10.
5 Ford, The Modern Theologians, 183.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
141

resurrection of Jesus implies two aspects. First of all, as Pannenberg has plainly shown, it
receives a universal character and consequently it is open "to every one who has eyes to
see".6 Second, revelation already comprises the promises of God hoped for, those which
were meant to be fully accomplished in the last days. However, this idea would raise a
major question concerning the role of the Holy Spirit in the believer's life after the ascen-
sion of Christ and the importance of the doctrine of the second coming of Christ, a see-
mingly important teaching for Schillebeeckx because he addresses it from a Christological
and also ethical perspective.
By giving way to the idea of suffering in his theology, Schillebeeckx attempts to explain
the revelation seen through the eyes of the eschaton. This is precisely the opposite way
Pannenberg understood revelation. Schillebeeckx's position is understandable only in
relation to his concept of suffering which shapes the meaning of every revelatory event,
and this realm lowers revelation to "the limits of history ... , of language, and ... of
human vulnerability", making it a "revelation in the human dimension".7 As one may
see throughout the compendium to his work, Schillebeeckx sketches an interesting and
original image of the way in which human facts and words disclose the meaning of a
certain historical action as being an event of liberation from suffering. In spite of one's
expectation that a tradition of ethics should be the outcome of the divine word spoken
to man, Schillebeeckx implies that
facts only become history within a framework of meaning, in a tradition of interpreted facts.
This is the first level of meaning ... Within a religious tradition of experience of belief in God,
that human element of liberation is interpreted on a second level of meaning: in relation to
God ... The secular event becomes the material of the "word of God". In this sense, revelation
has a sacramental structure.8
So far the dual nature of revelation as both an event happening within a certain tradition of
interpretation (its ﬁrst level, i.e. human) and as an episode in the life of divinity (its second
level, i.e. sacred) appears to be the line within which Schillebeeckx deﬁnes this concept
throughout his works. For him, revelation is therefore one of the "sacraments of
nature", thus pertaining to humanity, whereby it receives "the religious signiﬁcance that
according to the historians of religions some phenomena and actions had in all cultures
and religions".9 Some difﬁculties could occur, however, as Schillebeeckx mentions a "tra-
dition of experience", which suggests that the sacred which comprises the second level of
interpreting the revelation is not necessarily recognizable throughout creation, meaning
that although at some point the divine penetrated the secular realm in order to initiate
a relationship, it is fair to say that yet another part of that secular realm remained
outside this relationship.
3. Revelation and Religion
Two problems emerge at this point. First of all, in the secularized realm, the term "revel-
ation" could be misused because its first level of meaning is entirely anthropological.
Second, there is a new element introduced by the second "level of meaning". At this
6 Ibid., 182.
7 Schaeffer Rocha, 'Neither Sola Scriptura, nor Solus Spiritus', 1173-92.
8 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 10.
9 Borgman, Edward Schillebeeckx, 209.
142
R. SIMUȚ

level, Schillebeeckx assumes that the subject of revelation is the person of Jesus Christ.
Consequently the object of revelation which allows a relationship to God or to what
has been revealed becomes the community of believers, or simply the believer who
grasps the real sense of revelation through the "word of God". It is particularly the other-
ness of God, which is an "underivable concrete phenomenon"10 that shapes the believer
and helps him progress from the first level of interpreting this liberating event to the
second level of understanding the event sacramentally. The non-believer is also able to
interpret a certain event as revelation, but he can only do that on the basis of a language
common to all people, that is, a language bound up with history. The non-believer cannot
reach the theological meaning of revelation, but can establish a common language to
debate the special event with the believer on the basis of his religious consciousness,
and his human freedom "innately" and "analogically" deriving from "nature's radical
otherness to God".11
Schillebeeckx is very sympathetic and tries to explain very carefully the non-believer's
place in a revelatory event. God first disclosed himself in nature, consequently the
intended object of revelation was the believer as well as the non-believer. Schillebeeckx
claims that God's presence in all these liberating events would finally unveil to the non-
believer as it once did to the believer, and this is where Schillebeeckx sets on a different
path than, say, Wittgenstein with his contrasting example of the happy man and the
unhappy man when they both look at the world.12 To Schillebeeckx, the non-believer is
not so different from the believer in this event, because they both have the conscience
of a greater instance than human history, which secured the event as liberating.
However, both the believer and the non-believer are unable to escape the reality of
human mediation in a revelatory event. If Jesus of Nazareth, for example, was just an
extraordinary man, one may ask if the revelation is really about God's word spoken to
man or is it rather man words spoken to man. This is, after all, a valid question in the
context of movements such as Death of God theology, which embraces the thought that
recent events in Western culture altered "the conditions of human experiences; man
has learned to understand the world and to order his life apart from God. God is dead
in the way Latin is dead".13
Nevertheless, Schillebeeckx makes his point clearer on this subject by stating that reli-
gion provides humans with the consciousness of God, and thus it represents a distinct
segment within the history of humanity. All of a sudden, secularism encounters Christian-
ity due to Jesus' death, which transforms the history of human suffering into the reality of
eternal life. Moreover, this is the point where human history meets the history of revel-
ation. Therefore, religion is "the place where men and women become explicitly aware
of God's saving actions in our world-wide history and in which this saving actions
within history call religions and religious salvation to life".14
For Schillebeeckx this assertion is not a means of analysing which religion came out of
which or, for that matter, which is more important; instead, it is for him an occasion of
saying that different religions are the scenes of interpretative experiences of salvation
10 Schillebeeckx, The Collected Works of Edward Schillebeeckx, vol. X, 91.
11 Flynn and Murray, Ressourcement, 367.
12 Wittgenstein, in Rego, Suffering and Salvation, 190.
13 Rose, 'Death of God Fifty Years On', 43-48.
14 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 8.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
143

from God. Religions in their diversity are the scene of God's revelation, especially in the
context of suffering, which is profoundly human. They are universal, thus revelation
itself has a universal character. Schillebeeckx continues this idea by saying that any tenta-
tive notion of bringing together the experience of salvation with concepts like religion and
church as synonymous is "exclusivist". In other words, Schillebeeckx sets the basis of a
more articulate dialogue between a theologian and a historian of religions, who would
otherwise find it difficult to approach religious matters from the partial point of view of
the phenomenology of philosophy. Schillebeeckx the theologian, who in this instance
speaks for the phenomenology of religion,15 considers that salvation has a more profound
origin than an intellectual or philosophical opinion. We need to search for this origin in
the history of humanity, which for him "is not entirely the same thing as the history of
revelation".16 Without universal salvation, Schillebeeckx says, a special revelation like
that reflected in the life and death of Jesus of Nazareth is meaningless.
4. Historical/"Liberational" Dimensions of Revelation and Phenomenology
While explaining the process of interpreting the revelation, Schillebeeckx retains several
Bible passages beginning with Exodus in the Old Testament up to the history of Jesus
interpreted by his apostles as the Messiah. Schillebeeckx asserts that after Moses killed
the Egyptian, his brothers from several Semitic tribes stood up at his side against
Pharaoh and released themselves from its tyrannical oppression. This moment remained
in the secular history and conscience as a "liberating event". Only after several centuries, at
the time YHWH believers initiated the tradition of re-reading major historical events, this
particular reference became known as a "saving event". What Schillebeeckx means is that
the YHWH believers were keen on transforming the old historical memories into explicit
themes of the Old Testament. That is, they succeeded in drawing a clear distinction
between a particular and antique movement in the history of humanity and the salvation
history of the Hebrew tradition. This is an excellent example of how Schillebeeckx under-
stands the transition from the mere interpretative experience to the "language of faith"
which acquired material form with the raise of faith in God:
[Believers in God] arrived at the experiential insight that the Lord has saved his people from
Egypt. Here the structure of salvation history and the history of revelation becomes clear ...
Human talk about the transcendence of God has no other ground than our contingency ... as
a possible "deciphering" of deeper dimensions which can nevertheless be experienced.17
This is to say that a revelatory event can be conceived only on the grounds of human
language which supports every religious tradition if religious tradition is understood as
the totality of models which work as mentors in the believer's life. Thus, Schillebeeckx
tackles the nature of revelation and salvation, whereby the said contingency becomes
the "experience of consciousness" that would consequently make revelation relevant to
modern phenomenology.18
15 For the need to put these traits together in a more qualitative debate on mystery and reason, see Dupré, Religious
Mystery and Rational Reflection, 98-101.
16 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 9.
17 Ibid., 12.
18 Steinfels, 'Edward Schillebeeckx, Catholic Theologian, Dies at 95', A.26.
144
R. SIMUȚ

Almost the same thing happened with the life of Jesus of Nazareth. He is to be understood
as a man in his own historical environment, but with a special task: that of liberating men
and women, which is the most noble ethical action. Nevertheless, his historicity only provides
us with Jesus' liberating mission. The salvation that his life evokes was experienced by his
followers only after the consummation of his death. He was then to be recognized as Jesus
the Messiah, as a special Son of God. Schillebeeckx adds another commentary to this by
saying that "without Jesus' historical human career, the whole of Christology becomes an
ideological superstructure".19 It is important to notice, however, that the divine attributes
of the Saviour are not the material of his human nature, that is, they were not brought into
existence at Jesus' natural birth: they are eternal. His divine nature is not a question of deduc-
tion but, as Schillebeeckx very well noticed in other instances, it is a problem of confession. If
the confessional aspect is not being stressed, one cannot assert, as Schillebeeckx does, that the
religiousmeaning ofJesus' earthly life suddenly becomesa revelatory one. This meansthat the
proclamation of Jesus' double nature is not at the hand of secular criticism, but is an act of
faith. Nevertheless, it is debatable if such confession today would have the same meaning
as for Jesus' disciples, for whom recognizing Jesus as God had much to do with his
nominal question and their personal acknowledgement.20 Schillebeeckx challenges us with
a delicate question: whatever religious meaning Jesus' human life could involve, it was not
complete outside the revelation of his divinity, which is confessional:
... unless we also take into account the positive relationship of Jesus to God, above all his
Abba experience, this human liberating event that Jesus is never leads to a liberating Chris-
tology and soteriology. In that case there is a break between Christology and ethics, between
Christ mysticism and ethical commitment, both personal and political.21
Here a problem arises: if those who confess Jesus as Christ, as Messiah, are the believers
only, what happens to the alternative? In other words, what is the role of human con-
sciousness in a process where the liberating historical event becomes a saving and soter-
iological action?
Schillebeeckx answers that what revelation accomplishes in human beings is not the
creation of a superior being endowed with higher degrees of consciousness than other
humans. Revelation only opens humanity to the religious meaning of well-motivated
human action carried for the best of society and politics in the "secular" world. In this
context, the reason we have the Scriptures is that they provide us with the right way of
understanding God's action in our human history. They present us to what Schillebeeckx
calls the "divine way" in all the liberating movements in history. On the other hand, they
also teach us that the "human way" or the religious conscience by which people act is not
entirely God's way, because God is not restrained by our limited life and history:
[God] does not coincide with any particular historical liberating event, not even with the lib-
erating exodus event of the Jewish people ... The name of God, for Christians symbolised in
the name Jesus Christ, can be misused not only by oppressors but also by liberators ... ; he is a
liberating God - liberating constantly by means of men and women, but at least in the end
never in a purely human way.22
19 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 13.
20 See Tilley, The Disciples' Jesus, esp. chapter 2, note 3).
21 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 13.
22 Ibid., 14.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
145

From a simple comparison with the theology of liberation, the concept of God that Schil-
lebeeckx is promoting is greater than the concept of God promoted by liberals. In trying to
deﬁne God to modern men and women, Schillebeeckx associates him to the concept of
suffering which is familiar to us and can be removed precisely because God is said to
have all the attributes needed to change suffering into happiness. Notice, though, that
Schillebeeckx is not a political theologian seeking to introduce us to the concept of suffer-
ing as present in Jürgen Moltmann and Johann Baptist Metz. Like Metz, however, he is
concerned with men and women for whom the social and political life represents a real
challenge in everyday existence.23 The difference between them, however, is that Schille-
beeckx does not link the concept of suffering to a political situation, but deﬁnes anthro-
pology in relation to the inner self of the individual. However, this makes the object of
our future interest in Schillebeeckx's thought.
Schillebeeckx insists that revelation is not to be confounded with human suffering or
human history. This is precisely because God is the totally other and also because
human suffering changed its meaning in time.24 Today there is a different kind of anthro-
pology than the one which made the object of the Middle Ages, at least from an ecclesio-
logical point of view. Nowadays men and women do not expect for salvation to be brought
to them on the basis of a pre-understood (à priori) notion of God. From a phenomeno-
logical point of view, nowadays men and women want to make salvation urgent and
they express the need for a redefined, "re-understood" divinity. It is a reality that makes
Schillebeeckx draw a sharp comparison between the Middle Ages "churchly times" and
modern "religious times":
God, the hope of religious man, had in the past to function as his refuge in those secular
spheres in which he had not yet achieved a firm hold on the world and human society ...
Now that man seems to be capable of coping with the world on his own, he no longer
appeals to God and the Church to supply for its impotence. This aspect of the modern
phenomenon can legitimately be called secularization.25
In modern times God is not sought as a mere "supplement" for the helplessness of
human social life. Modern times are religious not because churches are built up all
over the earth but because social suffering seeks its healing in meaningful liberating
events. The suggestion Schillebeeckx is making regarding modern man seems to
imply that secularization, man on himself, is no better solution for the future of
humanity that has suffering as destination. In this context, and somehow in relation
to Moltmann's position on suffering history,26 Schillebeeckx claims that the concept
of God is to be deﬁned in terms related to these men and women's actual historical
condition, but must not be identiﬁed with the experience of suffering. As dramatic
as human suffering may be, Schillebeeckx also advises that we should not minimize
God, who is still the "totally other" in every instance. Schillebeeckx is very sympathetic
to the theology of liberation up to a certain point, that of retaining the attributes of
God as alterus. We have to understand that there is still a break between mysticism
and politics, between communion with God and political action for humanity. This
23 See Boeve, Depoortere, and van Erp, Edward Schillebeeckx and Contemporary Theology, 70 fwd.
24 Schillebeeckx, The Collected Works of Edward Schillebeeckx, vol. X, 178; Poulsom, The Dialectics of Creation, note 273.
25 Schillebeeckx, God the Future of Man, 173-74.
26 See Moltmann, The Crucified God.
146
R. SIMUȚ

was meant by Schillebeeckx when he said that the human way followed from the divine
way in history.
In the beginning of the second chapter of JOWC, Schillebeeckx takes us back to the
original designation of the name "Jesus Christ". He states that, without being a proper
name, but a double name with a confessional character, this name evokes both a historical
reality and an eschatological promise. Jesus Christ thus is on the one hand a historical
messenger with a special message from God, and on the other hand the Messiah promised
in the Old Testament to the next generation of Israel: in the context of Israel both charac-
teristics involve some anthropological peculiarities whose historical data are conclusive for
the phenomenology of religion.27 Living in Nazareth, Jesus has strong historical roots
which need not be overlooked, otherwise confession about Jesus Christ is irrelevant. More-
over, without the confessional character of the name Jesus Christ, which "provides the
basic structure of all Christology",28 the name Jesus of Nazareth presents no importance
today. All New Testament's records about Jesus Christ, Schillebeeckx reckons, lead to the
impressive and outstanding career of Jesus of Nazareth:
In modern times this reference to history is at the same time an expression of Christian oppo-
sition to ideological misuse of the name of Jesus Christ, for the church's use of the name
Christ is subject to the criticism of the name Jesus, to the criticism of his message, and the
distinctive nature of his career, which led to his death.29
Nowadays, Schillebeeckx's concern for the historicity of Jesus Christ is understandable.
The purpose of making Jesus more historical is to demythologize Christology, to set it
on a material and objective foundation in time. But what is, on these grounds, the relation-
ship between Christ and God? Is the Trinity a simple ideological approach which in itself
does not exist except if it is put into words acceptable for today's men and women? If
Christianity removes the ideological displacement of the name Jesus Christ by demytho-
logization, what happens to the Doctrine of God and the Holy Spirit? One has to keep in
mind that God is not a mythical being, but an entity which is active in history through his
word and deeds.
Throughout his work, Schillebeeckx always takes time to describe the God of Jesus and
their relationship to each other. Like the rest of us, Jesus can be best defined in terms
related to his spirituality (his relationship to God) and his character (his relationship to
humans). Schillebeeckx establishes two coordinates which help us get a better description
of how God is and how he is active in our history. Firstly, Jesus' entire life was a portrait of
God, and secondly, the way we can get to know God is in the light of the reciprocal
relationship between Jesus of Nazareth and God, which forms Schillebeeckx's theory of
the "Abba experience".30 In developing his "Abba theory", Schillebeeckx points out
that, even if Jesus was the "decisive and definitive revelation" of God, he always had the
conscience that "the Father was greater than him", as John 14:28 shows. This is one of
the Bible verses on which Schillebeeckx consolidates his "Abba" theory as a process of
development in Jesus' cognition that he was the son of God. There is no doubt that Schil-
lebeeckx works primarily with the biblical text in trying to offer his readers a better
27 See a portrait of the Messiah in context, in Leaf, The Anthropologies of Western Religions, 123.
28 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 15.
29 Ibid., 15.
30 Ibid., 17.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
147

orientation throughout the major Christian doctrines. In hermeneutics his efforts to reor-
ientate the reader towards the very essence of the Christian faith is quite praised; however,
his supporters often find themselves reproving Schillebeeckx for being too daring with the
"Abba" theory or subjects related to it, like Christology and aspects of the resurrection.31 It
could be said that Schillebeeckx's account on Jesus as the Son is incomplete and at times
misleading, because it either corrects or adds to accounts about him already given in both
the Old and New Testament. For instance, when Jesus is said to have spoken of the
kingdom of God as the symbol of salvation for humanity, Schillebeeckx counts it as an
occasion for Jesus to submit himself to God and his purposes primarily as part of the
created order and secondly as the Christ coming to judge the non-repenting nature:
Jesus is involved in the eschaton of creation, so precisely because of that Colossians in par-
ticular also gives Christ a role at the beginning of creation, just as wisdom dwelt with God ...
when he created the world ... The early-Jewish missionary confession of faith continues to
exercise its influence, in a Christian interpretation ... Here (in 1 Thessalonians 1:8) faith is
faith in God and Christology is an ingredient of faith in God. There is as yet still no
mention of faith in Jesus Christ; this is the object of eschatological hope.32
The eschatological hope coming from faith in the second coming of Jesus as the Christ is
part of a "tripartite creed". This tripartite creed is represented by: (a) the faith in God as the
Creator; (b) the belief that there will be a judgement day for the unrepentant; (c) the escha-
tological hope for those who repent.
4. Church and World. Towards Schillebeeckx's Hermeneutic Methodology
With the third chapter of the book JOWC, we move towards a more precise definition of
the concepts of ministry, anthropology, and social ethics in the theology of Edward Schil-
lebeeckx. This third chapter opens the second half of his book. If the first half was mainly
orientated towards the relationship between the God of the Old Testament and the cosmic
ethics articulated in the experience of creation and salvation through Jesus of Nazareth, the
chapter about the church-world relationship opens somehow strategically the second half
of the book. It is already a statement in Schillebeeckx's theology from his early works to the
latest to link "the specifically ecclesiological and sacramental with an underlying funda-
mental theology of revelation and salvation",33 and so far we have analysed these traits
and their specificity. From the very beginning, Schillebeeckx introduces us to a new
area of interest, namely the doctrine of the church and its "human face", the world. Con-
sequently, what Schillebeeckx does is to suggest both the way of interpreting the outcome
of Jesus' sacrificial death on the cross, that is, the birth of the church, and the reason for the
existence of the church, that is, the mediation of the divine disclosure into our human
history. Thus, given the inner structure of the book and Schillebeeckx's thinking, the
church is called to proclaim the transitional character of ethics from a cosmological to
an anthropological dimension, in an effort which in his book from 1985, The Church
with a Human Face, was coined as a "new and expanded theology of ministry". That is,
the church is the place in which the act of salvation in Christ becomes a genuine historical
event for nowadays men and women. As a Catholic, Schillebeeckx is eager to underline
31 See Schreiter quoted in Ford, The Modern Theologians, 159.
32 Schillebeeckx, Christ - the Christian Experience in the Modern World, 525.
33 Thompson, 'The Church as Sacrament', 33.
148
R. SIMUȚ

that the church makes the transition from doctrine to history, from the things belonging to
the cosmic order to the things belonging to contingency.
Nevertheless, contrary to the directives of the Catholic Church, Schillebeeckx does not
give much credit to the church as an institutional defensor fidei (a self-proclaimed attribute
of the Catholic Church otherwise known in the Netherlands as pietas ordinum).34 Rather,
Schillebeeckx tries to develop a new way of talking about the church with an accent on the
social and natural character of Christian dogma. The reason why he finds it uneasy to
present a traditional image of the church is that, as he says, hundreds of years of
church life have taken the doctrine away from people and thus broken the balance
between theology and humanity: "We need a bit of 'negative ecclesiology', church theology
in the minor key, to achieve a healthy balance, in order to undo the centuries long eccle-
siocentrism of the empirical phenomenon of 'Christian faith' ... for God's sake, for the
sake of Jesus the Christ and for the sake of humanity".35 Schillebeeckx's concern is not
the reiteration of the doctrinal status of the church. Instead, he reiterates the famous
quote of the nouvelle théologie that theology must start from below. The hint that it
should "begin from humanity and raise toward God" was also present in Barthian theol-
ogy, but what this new theological wave did was to elaborate on the concept.36 Schille-
beeckx maintains that faith must be defined in human language, so that the Christian
phenomenon might regain its empirical dimension and become a religion of the people
as it once was. As a consequence of this idea, Schillebeeckx urges that the redefinition
of the church infers as a precondition the redefinition of the main Christian doctrines
to which we payed attention in the first chapter of JOWC.
Hence, Schillebeeckx speaks of the church from a twofold perspective. In the first place,
he speaks of the doctrinal or theological dimension of the church. The first chapter of
JOWC left us with an open question regarding the role of the church within God's
eternal plan of transforming the "secular history" into "salvation history". The question,
as Schillebeeckx put it, refers to the role of the church in this process, whether it mediates
the significant transformation or not. To clarify, though, this dimension of the church
would imply the clarification of Christian doctrine, and it is more philosophical in
nature. It envisages rather the rethinking of the concept of God, Jesus and creation,
without giving an explicit statement about the role of the church as mediator, because
"[our] direct contact with the highest reality" is presupposed without the authority/
mediation of the church.37 Only in the second place does Schillebeeckx speak of the
church as having a relational dimension. Only when it comes to "the relationship of the
church of Christ to Jesus of Nazareth" is the role of the church in the salvation history
clarified as it retains both the significance of the sacraments for the believers and the
core of Christ's presence in the community in a so-called "social phenomenology of eccle-
sial presence".38 As Schillebeeckx stated in the first chapter of JOWC, if the death of Jesus
was necessary in order to redo the unity between God and humanity, his resurrection
would set Jesus of Nazareth in a new light as the Christ of faith by the mediation of the
community of faith which is the church:
34 Kuyper, On the Church, esp. chapter 27, note 53.
35 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 31.
36 See details in De Bary, Theological Reflection, 23.
37 See the early Mediaeval roots of this idea defined in Kersten and Zaner, Phenomenology, 47.
38 McKenna, 'Eucharistic Presence', 291-317.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
149

One can say that the "church of Christ" which came into being on the basis of the resurrec-
tion of Jesus is the deepest significance of the "appearances of Jesus": in the church commu-
nity "assembled" in faith there appears, is present, the crucified but risen Christ.39
Thus, the church of Christ already receives a relational signiﬁcance secured only by the
resurrection of Jesus. The church was the one to interpret the "appearances of Jesus" as
resurrection and in this power was enabled to mediate the message of Jesus' death to
the world as salvation from suffering. In this sense, the second perspective from which
Schillebeeckx deﬁnes the church as having a relational and also an ethical structure.
This implies the mediation of the beneﬁts of Jesus' death to the "dehumanised"40 and
its purpose is to bring about the Kingdom of God or the humanum, the full realization
of humanity according to God's eternal plan for it.
In the closing part of his discussion on the church, Schillebeeckx approaches a more
recent theme in theological talk about this institution, namely the communion of the
Church with other Christian churches, which he calls the "pluralism of the Christian
churches". Schillebeeckx is keen on understanding the concept of pluralism in this
context as unity between all the churches of Christendom, in line with the new political
orientation of the Roman Catholic Church since the 2nd Vatican Council.
Given the two perspectives from which Schillebeeckx defines the church, i.e. the doc-
trinal and ethical perspectives, future discussions will follow the logical path already fam-
iliar to us from the first chapter. Hence, the subject on the relationship between church
and world will take the place of the previous debate regarding the relationship between
God and creation, whereas the subject on the relationship between church and Jesus of
Nazareth will replace the previous Jesus-world debate. This circular orientation of the
book gives Schillebeeckx the opportunity to reiterate the importance of Christian
dogma and faith in the light of a new and redefined reality for contemporary men and
women, and also to draw near to the final part of his book, the importance of Jesus as
ethics for nowadays society and politics.
As stated before, Schillebeeckx's soteriology in JOWC proves to be more historical, in a
chronological way, than dogmatic. What is meant by this is that Schillebeeckx always
reminds us that at first the idea of salvation did not have a religious character but was
bounded historically.41 It was a "worldly reality" due to the fact that it was born in the
very context of creation without any religious influences whatsoever. In fact, in the first
part of the book, Schillebeeckx gives so much credit to creation that he attributes to the
natural order a sacramental meaning. Creation is indeed the sacrament of God in
history because it encapsulates all the particularities of the future Kingdom of God,
given both the characteristics of human persons and the purity of the natural environ-
ment. As Schillebeeckx put it,
Creation is a blank cheque to which only God himself stands guarantor. It is a vote of con-
fidence which gives the person who believes in the creator God the power to believe ... that
the kingdom of God ... is in fact in the making for humanity, in the power of God's
creation.42
39 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 27-28.
40 Ibid., 27.
41 Problem discussed by Yarbrough, The Salvation Historical Fallacy?, 122.
42 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 18.
150
R. SIMUȚ

Therefore, creation in itself was, in the Old Testament, the unveiling of God's love and
salvation and it was perceived as such in the consciousness of ancient men and women.
Likewise, Schillebeeckx continues his thoughts in the third chapter by saying that, in
the new order to which we are exposed in the New Testament, the church is perceived
as a "sacrament" or a sign of God's salvation in this new historical context. Most interest-
ing here is the fact that one may need to differentiate between the church in itself as the
unveiling of God and the church in the world or the outward church. The reason is that in
the ﬁrst chapter Schillebeeckx presented a speciﬁc situation where the revelation of God in
creation meets the religious need of the human person, and thus revelation comes to be
understood as liberation from historical suffering. In this circumstance, Schillebeeckx
sought to explain revelation to the believer as particular and higher than the revelation
to the non-believer or to the religious man because they do not interpret the meaning
of revelation in the same way.43 Nevertheless, Schillebeeckx is very careful not to
misuse the meaning of salvation when he clariﬁes the sense of revelation. This is to say,
although particular religions and different churches are the expression of man's need
for salvation, they are not in themselves salvation, because salvation entails a much
higher meaning and a special human mediation in the person of Jesus from Nazareth.
Although Schillebeeckx does not make very clear yet what is the role of the "church of
Christ" and whether it can be identiﬁed with the church witnessing a post-Easter Jesus,
it is less clear whether Schillebeeckx makes any difference at all between religion and
church as soteriological sacraments. This question comes on the basis of Schillebeeckx's
statement that
[Religions and churches] are the explicit identification and ultimate fulfillment of ... salva-
tion. Churches are the places where salvation from God is made a theme or put into
words, confessed explicitly, proclaimed prophetically and celebrated liturgically. So there is
an unbreakable relation between "world" and "religion".44
The question above stays if we think of the implications of Schillebeeckx's statement on his
concept of church ecumene. This statement identiﬁes the ecumenical character of the
church and the very concept of ecumene with the unity of the Christian churches,
rather than with other signiﬁcant world religions like Hinduism, Buddhism or Islam. It
also shows that the church interpretative frame of the Jesus event can provide the herme-
neutical basis for "a contextualised response to the [divine] discourse" related both to
incarnation and salvation.45 To resume Merleau-Ponty's idea that phenomenology is
related to the "human embodiment in the world",46 in the ﬁrst chapter of JOWC Schille-
beeckx himself argued that the soteriological experiences of the believer are to be set above
the liberation experiences of the non-believer (called the religious experience). How, then,
is Schillebeeckx right to maintain that both religions and churches are the anamnesis of
God's saving presence in the world? In this context, the ecclesiastical sacraments ﬁnd
their basis in the events before and after Easter, so much so that the existence of the
church is not sustained exclusively by social and political activity. This Christian convic-
tion is a biblical statement and it represents the very Roman Catholic teaching regarding
43 An idea opposed by Rosenzweig quoted in Rashkover, Revelation and Theopolitics, 79.
44 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 32.
45 Meadowcroft, 'Between Authorial Intent and Indeterminacy', 199-218.
46 See Kennedy, Schillebeeckx, 42.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
151

the birth and the future of the church (Matthew 16:17-19). Contrary to this, Schillebeeckx
asserts that religions and churches must prove effective social implication, on one con-
dition, however: that of not perverting their functions which can be sacramental or
ritualistic:
... churches have a wrong understanding of themselves: (a) if they do not understand them-
selves in relation to the world events; and (b) if in their participatory and interpretative
relationship to world events they think that they can abandon specifically religious forms
like confession, word and sacrament. If the churches have a political significance, this signifi-
cance must find its basis in the mystical dimension of the church and not in secular power.47
This last statement shows that Schillebeeckx should not be confounded with a religious
partisan. However, one may still want to wait for explanations regarding the meaning
of genuine mysticism and politics, which Schillebeecks only offers at the end of his
book. Nevertheless, the impression that is being created here is that one needs to divide
the concept of religion and church into two separate and very distinct aspects of
human faith. This is because Schillebeeckx identiﬁes the so-called universal conscience
of creation about God and salvation (as in the ﬁrst chapter of JOWC) with a "universal
saving presence" which the concept of religion entails while it ignores the latter's more
particular characteristics.48 What is meant here is that in this context the conscience of
creation is one with the religious conscience of the modern man. Thus, the concept of
church is not at stake here anymore than the concept of religion, although one individual
does not share the same religious conviction with another individual and even if the fun-
damental doctrines of world religions do not share a common content and practice.
Indeed, Schillebeeckx speaks of world religions individually, but the concept of church
is not identified as a unique ecclesiastical instance. Moreover, the Christian church is not
at all "the one [and only] church", a particular concept as in Hans Küng's The Church from
1976, but it is rather a "segment of faith" among many other "segments of our human
history". Consequently, "synagogues and pagodas, mosques and churches" are religious
forms and religions, as "Hinduism, Buddhism, Israel, Jesus, Islam ... are a segment of
our human history and cannot be understood without this 'profane history'".49
What is more interesting is that in his Western context Schillebeeckx switches easily
between the functions of the church and the particularities of religions. The fundamental
functions of the church are well known by Schillebeeckx, who identifies them as: confes-
sion, word (or the function of proclamation) and sacrament (his writings on the Eucharist,
ordination and marriage, for instance, have had a sound influence both on clergy and
laymen in the Roman Catholic Church):
Confession and word, sacrament and practice of faith, action to heal and to open up com-
munication ... do not make the experience of the world event superfluous, while the so-
called worldly "outside event" makes speaking in the language of faith and Christian
praxis necessary ... Historical and also social and political praxis in the world cannot be sep-
arated from action in proclamation, pastorate and sacraments. To break this connection is to
damage the inner structure of religion and church.50
47 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 33.
48 A phrase similar to the "universal consciousness of creation" employed and defined by Richard Niebuhr quoted in
Sherman, The Shift to Modernity, 226.
49 Schillebeeckx, Jesus in Our Western Culture, 33.
50 Ibid., 34.
152
R. SIMUȚ

With Schillebeeckx, however, these ecclesiastical functions receive a broader meaning as
"speciﬁcally religious forms". This is precisely the reason why we mentioned the need
to divide Schillebeeckx's interrelated concepts of religion and church into two separate
concepts. We also have to keep in mind Schillebeeckx's comparison between the church
as the unveiling of God and the world as the veiling of God, especially if religion is under-
stood as a "segment of profane history".51 In this context, to identify religion with the
church is to erase the imminent line of demarcation between the "sacrament" of the Chris-
tian faith (a title for church in Schillebeeckx) and the "outside event" of human experience
of God present in world religions.
5. Conclusions
Schillebeeckx's thought on the relationship between God and human history was an
opportunity for us to analyse the means of God's disclosure within humanity or God's rev-
elation. This long trip started in the Old Testament, where God used the created order as a
means to reveal his being. Schillebeeckx thinks that the awareness of God's revelation in
creation is common to all people, thus it is not a prerogative of one nation only.
The universality of God's revelation suggests the fact that revelation implies two differ-
ent meanings. There is a first level of understanding revelation, which is merely anthro-
pological. It does not assume faith in God, but rather a common language about God.
Therefore, this first level is called "the level of experience" and his subject is the non-
believer. The second level of understanding God's revelation was named here "the level
of meaning", and this study envisaged the category represented by this level, namely
the believer. The believers are thus able to define God properly through the "word of
God" disclosed in the historical person of Jesus Christ.
Later on, the salvation ministry of Jesus was follow through this tradition of meaning, in
which the community of believers ascribed to Jesus the supernatural qualities which the
title of Messiah evoked only after his sacrificial death. Thus the role of Jesus as the
Saviour, the Messiah, is thought to have a confessional character in this hermeneutic
tradition.
The nature of the divine disclosure within human history was analysed here in the
context of the church from a twofold perspective, beginning with Schillebeeckx's
attempt at defining his phenomenological method in relation to the doctrinal or theolo-
gical dimension of the church in God's eternal plan to transform secular history into sal-
vation history. In this process, Schillebeeckx reckons, the role of the church is either to
mediate the disclosure or to transform human history by reconceptualizing the Christian
doctrine. The other means Schillebeeckx employs toward a particular phenomenology is to
recontextualize the church in its relational dimension, and thus clarify the role of the
church in the history of salvation.
While in Old Testament times, creation was perceived as the unveiling of God's love
and salvation within history, thus being kept alive in the consciousness of ancient men
and women, Schillebeeckx points out that in the new order, where we are introduced
by the New Testament, the church in his definition is the new "sacrament" or sign of
God's salvation for today's men and women.
51 Ibid., 33.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
153

Acknowledgement
This paper is part of a two-year postdoctoral research program (2015-2017) at the Faculty of Theol-
ogy, the Department of Practical Theology within the University of Pretoria, South Africa, under
the supervision of Professor Johann Meylahn.
Bibliography
Abdul-Masih, Marguerite. Edward Schillebeeckx and Hans Frei. A Conversation on Method and
Christology. Toronto: Canadian Corporation for Studies in Religion, 2001.
Boeve, Lieven, Frederiek Depoortere, and Stephan van Erp, eds. Edward Schillebeeckx and
Contemporary Theology. London and New York: T&T Clark, 2010.
Borgman, Erik. Edward Schillebeeckx: A Theologian in His History, volume 1. Trans. John Bowden.
London and New York: Continuum, 2004.
De Bary, Edward O. Theological Reflection. The Creation of Spiritual Power in the Information Age.
Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 2003.
Dupré, Louis K. Religious Mystery and Rational Reflection: Excursions in the Phenomenology and
Philosophy of Religion. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1998.
Flynn, Gabriel, and Paul D. Murray, eds. Ressourcement. A Movement for Renewal in Twentieth-
Century Catholic Theology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012.
Ford, David F. The Modern Theologians. An Introduction to Christian Theology in the Twentieth
Century, 2nd ed. Oxford: Blackwell, 1997.
Kee-Fook Chia, Edmund. Edward Schillebeeckx and Interreligious Dialogue. Perspectives from Asian
Theology. Eugene, OR: Wipf and Stock, 2012.
Kenedy, Philip. Schillebeeckx. Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1993.
Kersten, Fred, and Richard M. Zaner, eds. Phenomenology: Continuation and Criticism. The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1973.
Küng, Hans. The Church. New York, NY: Sheed and Ward, 1976.
Kuyper, Abraham. On the Church. Collected Works in Public Theology. Bellingham, WA: Lexham
Press, 2016.
Leaf, Murray J. The Anthropologies of Western Religions. Ideas. Organizations, and Constituencies.
New York and London: Lexington Books, 2014.
McKenna, John H. 'Eucharistic Presence: an Invitation to Dialogue'. Theological Studies 60, no. 2
(1999): 294-317.
Meadowcroft, Tim J. 'Between Authorial Intent and Indeterminacy: the Incarnation as an Invitation
to Human-Divine Discourse'. Scottish Journal of Theology 58, no. 2 (2005): 199-218.
Moltmann, Jürgen. The Crucified God. Norwich: Hymns Ancient and Modern, 2015.
Poulsom, Martin G. The Dialectics of Creation. Creation and the Creator in Edward Schillebeeckx
and David Burrell. London and New York: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2014.
Rashkover, Randi. Revelation and Theopolitics. Barth, Rosenzweig and the Politics of Praise. London
and New York: Continuum T&T Clark, 2005.
Rego, Aloysius. Suffering and Salvation. The Salvific Meaning of Suffering in the Later Theology of
Edward Schillebeeckx. Louvain: Peeters/Eerdmans, 2006.
Rose, Matthew. 'Death of God Fifty Years On.' First Things: a Monthly Journal of Religion and
Public Life 265 (2016): 43-48.
Schaeffer Rocha, Abdruschin. 'Neither Sola Scriptura, nor Solus Spiritus: The Revelation in the
Human Dimension.' Horizonte 14, no. 44 (2016): 1173-92.
Schillebeeckx, Edward. Christ - the Christian Experience in the Modern World. London: SCM Press,
1990.
Schillebeeckx, Edward. The Church with a Human Face. A New and Expanded Theology of Ministry.
New York, NY: Crossroads, 1985.
Schillebeeckx, Edward. The Collected Works of Edward Schillebeeckx, volume X: Church. The
Human Story of God. London and New York: Bloomsbury T&T Clark, 2014.
Schillebeeckx, Edward. God the Future of Man. New York, NY: Sheed and Ward, 1968.
154
R. SIMUȚ

Schillebeeckx, Edward. Jesus in Our Western Culture. Mysticism, Ethics and Politics. London: SCM
Press, 1987.
Schillebeeckx, Edward. World and Church. New York, NY: Sheed and Ward, 1971.
Sherman, Robert J. The Shift to Modernity. Christ and the Doctrines of Creation in the Theologies of
Schleiermacher and Barth. New York, London: T&T Clark, 2005.
Steinfels, Peter. 'Edward Schillebeeckx, Catholic Theologian, Dies at 95'. New York Times, January
17, 2010. A.26.
Thompson, Daniel Speed. 'The Church as Sacrament: Schillebeeckx's Contributions to the
Construction of a Critical Ecclesiology'. Religious Studies and Theology 17, no. 1 (1998): 33.
Tilley, Terrence W. The Disciples' Jesus: Christology as Reconciling Practice. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis
Books, 2008.
Yarbrough, Robert W. The Salvation Historical Fallacy?: Reassessing the History of New Testament
Theology. Dorset: Deo Publishing, 2004.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
155

