Jung Journal
Culture & Psyche
ISSN: 1934-2039 (Print) 1934-2047 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ujun20
Phenomenology of the Transcendence of Space-
time Coordinates
Evidence from "Death Announcements"
Gustavo DanielBeláusteguiLIC., MG.
To cite this article: Gustavo DanielBeláusteguiLIC., MG. (2010) Phenomenology of
the Transcendence of Space-time Coordinates, Jung Journal, 4:2, 85-89, DOI: 10.1525/
jung.2010.4.2.85
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1525/jung.2010.4.2.85
Published online: 01 Feb 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 62
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ujun20

Phenomenology of the Transcendence 
of Space-time Coordinates
Evidence from "Death Announcements"
gustavo daniel beláustegui
Te phenomenological exploration of the psyche's relationship to the death of the 
physical body, including the function of the Self, can be traced back to the pioneer-
ing work of C. G. Jung, Marie-Louise von Franz (1984), and Elisabeth Kübler-Ross 
(1972, 1991). Te Self 's ontogenetic origin is contemporaneous with the remark-
able onset of multiple representations and metacognition at three or four years of 
age (Perner 1991). Without this capacity, the human being would not be able to 
experience—in a healthy and integrating way—nonordinary states of consciousness 
(Bourguignon 1972; Grof 1992, 2001) and to be conscious of those states in order 
to communicate them (Nuttin 1980). Owens (1972) writes about mystical experi-
ence and the values encountered during a transmutation along the lifespan up to the 
"visible" end. Te concept of acausal relationships in the "physical" world entered 
the realm of theoretical physics in the twentieth-century, for example, in the work of 
Wolfgang Paulí (the recipient of the 1945 Nobel Prize in Physics), who clearly and 
intuitively grasped the existence of synchronicity. A potent hypothesis arises: Might
the Self anticipate its continuous transformations through time, thus providing emer-
gent resources to elaborate on critical irruptions of the diﬀerent stages in human life, 
including death?
One of the fundamental proofs of the psyche's capacity to anticipate change— 
especially when this change is not predictable, such as an accident or sudden death—is 
the appearance of death announcements. Such bordering experiences create challenges 
for scientiﬁc study, even within a clinical methodology.
Jung Journal: Culture & Psyche, Volume 4, Number 2, pp. 85-89, ISSN 1934-2039,  e-ISSN 1934-2047.  
© 2010 Virginia Allan Detloﬀ Library, C.G. Jung Institute of San Francisco. All rights reserved. Please 
direct all requests for permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the  University of 
California Press's Rights and Permissions website at www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintinfo/asp. DOI: 
10.1525/jung.2010.4.2.85. 

86 
jung journal: culture & psyche 4:2 / spring 2010
Tis article gives two examples in which an individual's physical death appears to 
be within the awareness of the Self: one is representational and the other written. Both 
have a common denominator: the individual knows or anticipates the end of biological 
life, in circumstances that were not known in ordinary reality. One might suggest that 
both of these examples are from teenagers, who are ofen preoccupied in a symbolic 
way with death and transformation, yet the speciﬁcs argue that these examples repre-
sent an acausal knowledge present in the Self.
Case 1. Drawing "Sent with Certain Uneasiness of Conscience"
In high school, this teenage girl took drawing classes with china ink as an extracurric-
ular activity. In this drawing, she shows a diurnal night, a destroyed Castle, a woman 
on a cornice, and vegetation, symbols that are ofen associated with the anticipation of 
death (von Franz 1984). She died six months later, in October 1993, in a military plane 
crash near the City of Paraná, Province of Entre Ríos, Argentina.
Case 2. Text Found in Personal Computer
Te saddest thing of this . . . is that I don't know if it is day, night or afernoon.
But, well . . . I have been in a lot of pain lately, and thank God, I mean, His gif was to 
allow me write down this letter.
Today, I'm not here . . . I'm gone and won't be back, I know this is diﬃcult to understand 
but let's face it . . . 

Gustavo Beláustegui, Death Announcements 
87
As I write this down I feel like thinking that . . . nothing is funny about this, everything 
ends here to me, and it's not nice, you know.
It's pretty hard to accept that I won't come back, I can imagine it . . . I feel that, I can't 
explain it, everything just for this.
And I'll miss you a lot, I'm leaving . . . and I won't come back.
I'd like to tell you that I love you:
Daddy: You mean everything to me; you taught me many things, old man, and relax I've 
learnt them in fact. I love you dad, just remember this . . . 
Whenever you feel upset remember what I've told you and think about me, but don't 
enslave yourself, and if I see your dad I will hug him for you and for me.
Mom: Bye mom, you know that it's hard for me to write this down because my hands are 
shaking . . . but you taught me to write, and I love you did.
Take care mom; send my regards to the grandparents that . . . what a fool I was, I never 
visited them.
Lots of kisses mom, I love you.
Nico: I know brother that almost always I pestered you . . . . but I did it because I needed 
you to pay attention to me, you are cool little brother, and I deeply love you  . . .  I'd give 
the world for you kiddo . . . 
I loved to hang around with you, you know . . . I love you . . .  and send a big kiss to Tona 
and tell her that I love her.
Meli: Well . . . this is the hardest part to write down . . . you are a very, very important 
woman to me, be always respected because you deserve it, and please remember me, and 
read some of my poems . . . but don't cry, because in truth I'll read them with you.
I love you . . . a big kiss. Say hi to Román and Eric, to everyone, tell them I'll miss them 
and love them a lot.
Lauri: With you I spent the best time; you are my best friend besides being my sister, and 
I imagine it's hard for you to read this, but don't be afraid, I'll take care of you and I'll 
never leave you, you know, when you enter the ﬁeld, think of me, and play thinking about 
me, because I'll be by your side there, you know?
Remember all advises I've given you, I deeply love you kiddo, you know . . . a kiss.
Well now, my heart aches a lot so I say a quick goodbye, because if it were for me I will 
keep on writing this forever.
I want you to know that it is important to me that you read this, and that you remember 
me as your son and brother.
Say my name, and don't cry because if you do so I'll cry too.
Enjoy as a family, go out and go on vacations since I can't do so, have fun.
Fight always for what you want . . . never give up.
I love you with all my heart, and goodbye . . . 
Tis seventeen-year-old did not give this note to his family but entered it into his 
computer during November, as indicated in the computer's memory. Tere were no 
outward signs of diﬃculty or depression. His sudden death due to a brain aneurism 
occurred on February 1 of the following year.
Living organisms cannot be fully understood from a mechanistic, materialistic point 
of view (Behe 1996). To accept, however, that living beings have emergent organizational 
capacities, made possible by their genetic makeup (Sheldrake 1988), is also to accept, 

88 
jung journal: culture & psyche 4:2 / spring 2010
from an ontological viewpoint, the existence of what we call the soul. We might also con-
sider the potent concept of a "morphic ﬁeld" (Shermer 2005), which was developed by 
Sheldrake (1988), as a conceptual counterpart to Jung's psychology of the soul.
Tese two examples of "death announcements" show the anticipatory capacity of 
the Self to bring to consciousness and perhaps to begin to integrate aspects of one's 
death. Tey lie beyond any ordinary knowledge of illness and reveal a property of the 
human soul that transcends psychology as empirical science. An epistemological inter-
section of objective and subjective approaches is required to deal with the relationship 
of the Self to biological death, which compromises the mind's contents, including the 
subjective warmth of what has been lived (Beláustegui 2001, 2008). We cannot know 
what is lef afer the loss of spatial and temporal reality, and yet we know that in life it 
can be transcended. As Elisabeth Kübler-Ross states in her work, we have an important 
task—that is, to prepare ourselves to welcome this transformation.
bibliography
Behe, M. J. 1996. Darwin's black box. New York: Te Free Press. (Trad. Cast. C. Gradini.) La 
caja negra de Darwin. El reto de la bioquímica a la evolución. Santiago de Chile: Editorial 
Andrés Bello, 1999.
Beláustegui, G. D. 2001. Perspectiva de la transcendencia en psicología. Los diversos modelos 
de la mente desde la dimensión objetiva y subjetiva. Universtidad del Norte Santo Tomás 
de Aquino. Studium: Filosofía y Teología 4 (8): 273-287.
———. 2008. Relaciones interpersonales. Imágenes y huellas del Self. La consciencia, el cuerpo y  
la afectividad. Buenos Aires: Editorial de la Universidad Católica Argentina.
Bourguignon, E. 1972. La Danza Trance (De Dance Perspective 35, 1968, by dance PERSPEC-
TIVES Foundation). En. Te highest state of consciousness (Trad. Cast. D. Rosenbaum.) 
La Experiencia Mística y los Estados de consciencia. Abraham Maslow, comp. Barcelona: 
Kairós.
Grof, S. 1992. Te holotropic mind. San Francisco: Harper.
———. 2001 Estados no-oridnarios de consciencia: el potencial sandor y heurístico. En Tinking 
beyond the brain. U.K: Scientiﬁc and Medical Network, and Floris Book. (Trad. Cast. V. 
Merlo.) Más allás del Cerebro. La expansion de la conciencia. Barcelona: Kairós.
Kübler-Ross, E. 1972. On death and dying. New York: Macmillan Publishing Company. (Trad. 
Cast. N. Daurella.) Sobre la muerte y los moribundos. Barcelona: Grijalbo, 1975: 13-24.
———.1991. Conferencia. Death is of vital importance. EE:UU: Station Hill Press, Inc. (Trad. 
Cast. Danne Smith.) Madrid: Luciernaga, 1997.
Nuttin, J. 1980. Téorie de la motivation humaine. Du besoin au porjet dácttion. París: Press 
universitaires de France. (Trad. Cast. R. Núñez.) Teoría de la motivación humana. España: 
Paidós, 1982.
Owens, C. M. 1972. La experiencia mística: hechos y valores. En Te highest state of conscious-
ness. (Trad. Cast. D. Rosembaum.) La Experiencia Mística y los estados de la consciencia.  
De H. A. Maslow, et. al (sexta edición). Barcelona: Kairós, 2003.
Perner, J. 1991. Understanding the representational mind. MA: Te Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.
Sheldrake, R. 1988. Te present of the past. London: Blond and Briggs. (Trad. Cast. M. Cor-
onado.) La presencia del pasado. Resonancia mórﬁca y hábitos de la naturaleza. Kairós:  
Barcelona, 1990.

Gustavo Beláustegui, Death Announcements 
89
Shermer, M. 2005. Rupert's resonance: Te theory of "morphic resonance" posits that people 
have a sense of when they are being stared at. What does the research show? Scientiﬁc 
American (October).
von Franz, M-L. 1984. Traum und tod. München: Kösel Verlag. (Trad. Cast, C. Fantl.) Sobre los 
sueños y la muerte. Barcelona: Kairós, 1992. Cap. 11 y 12.
gustavo daniel beláustegui, lic., mg. is Head Professor, General Psychology and 
Psychology of Personality at "Saint Tomas Aquinas," Northern University. He is Director 
of the "Revista de Psicologia" (Pont. U. C. A.). He graduated in Licenciatura of Psychology 
from Pontiﬁcia Univesidad Católica Argentina and received his Magister/Masters in Cognitive 
Psychology and Learning from the Universidad Atónoma de Madrid. Correspondance: Av. 
Del Libertador 5569 7 piso Dto. ¨C,¨ (1426) Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
E-mail: gustavodanielbelaustegui@gmail.com and belausteguidaniel@uca.edu.ar.
abstract
"Death announcements," which are related to actual physical death in circumstances that could 
not be rationally anticipated, challenge a materialistic view of the human psyche. Two instances 
of this phenomenon are presented—one representational, the other written. Might there be 
something that transcends the content of experience in time and space, perhaps a function of 
the Self in an active principle named "soul," or the "morphic ﬁelds" of contemporary science? A 
phenomenology based upon lived experience includes "death announcements," a knowledge of 
one's death that emerges without any rational explanation.
key words
accidents, death and dying, near-death experiences, phenomenology, precognition, rites of pas-
sage, self preservation

