Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation
ISSN: 1074-9357 (Print) 1945-5119 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ytsr20
Medical Phenomenology and Stroke
Rehabilitation: An Introduction
Gary Goldberg
To cite this article: Gary Goldberg (2011) Medical Phenomenology and Stroke Rehabilitation:
An Introduction, Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 18:1, 1-5, DOI: 10.1310/tsr1801-1
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1310/tsr1801-1
Published online: 05 Jan 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 108
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ytsr20

1
Top Stroke Rehabil 2011;18(1):1-5
© 2011 Thomas Land Publishers, Inc.
www.thomasland.com
doi: 10.1310/tsr1801-1
Medical Phenomenology and Stroke 
Rehabilitation: An Introduction
Gary Goldberg, BASc, MD1,2
1Medical Director, Polytrauma Transitional Rehabilitation Program, Hunter Holmes McGuire Veterans Administration Medical Center, 
Richmond, Virginia; 2Professor, Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Medical College of Virginia/Virginia Commonwealth University 
Health System, Richmond, Virginia
This issue of Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation explores the theme of medical phenomenology and stroke rehabilitation through 
open peer commentary format. The theme is introduced by a brief summary and overview of phenomenology as a branch 
of philosophy whose focus is the development of methodology for describing and ordering human experience. The 
application of this philosophical approach to medicine in general and stroke rehabilitation in particular is then considered. 
An approach to patients informed by both phenomenology and science provides a more complete, holistic, and humanistic 
framework than science alone. Phenomenology helps the clinician to understand the importance of narrative, the process 
of adaptation at the level of the integrated whole person, and the important role of context in determining how recovery 
unfolds. Embodiment is presented as an organizing principle that links the nature of conscious experience in the lived body 
and the basic transformation in experience and function associated with an acquired pathology such as stroke. Finally, the 
nature of open peer commentary is considered and introduced in terms of how it has been speciﬁ cally implemented in this 
issue of Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation. Key words: embodiment, holistic, phenomenology, rehabilitation, stroke
Issue Topic
Phenomenology is the study of day-to-day 
human experience and how we become conscious 
and aware of the world around us through 
such experience.1 The word comes from the 
Greek meaning a discourse ("logos") regarding 
appearances ("phaenomena"). It is an approach 
that, rather than relegating subjective data to the 
status of second-class "metaphysics" as opposed 
to "real science," views ﬁ rst-person report as 
primary and foundational information. Its focus 
is the development of methodology for describing 
and ordering experience and for examining 
the encounter between consciousness and the 
world.2 It is the examination of how things 
manifest themselves in consciousness through our 
experience of them. It is a philosophical stance 
that can be traced back to Plato but that effectively 
fell by the wayside with the advent of the scientiﬁ c 
revolution and the accompanying domination 
of thought in the Western world by scientiﬁ c 
positivism. In philosophy, the idea that the human 
mind can abstract truth from experience through 
analysis may be traced back to Kant's "Copernican 
revolution" that sought a constructive synthesis 
between rationalism and empiricism. Scientiﬁ c 
positivism maintains that the abstraction from 
direct empirical experience achieved through the 
application of the scientiﬁ c method is the best and 
only real legitimate approach to understanding 
natural processes, both in the physical and in 
the human realms. Scientiﬁ c positivism basically 
maintains that the only true knowledge is that 
which can be sensed and objectively veriﬁ ed 
through scientiﬁ c analysis. Anything else cannot 
be relied upon as evidence. Logical positivism 
that evolved out of scientiﬁ c positivism rejected 
all forms of investigation that included subjective 
reports of human experience as speculative 
metaphysics, inherently "non-scientiﬁ c." In the 
worldview of logical positivism, all knowledge of 
reality is reducible to pure logic. In psychology, 
logical positivism led to the development of 
behaviorism and the view that organisms were 
reducible to a mechanistic compounding of 
reﬂ exive responses. Reﬂ ective thought was not 
felt to be within the realm of scientiﬁ c inquiry. It 
is clear that a great deal in the way of fundamental 
understanding of mechanisms underlying natural 
observations has been gained through the attempt 
to reduce the world to logical structure. But what 

2 
TOPICS IN STROKE REHABILITATION/JAN-FEB 2011
Medicine, Baron bemoaned the fact that "our 
medical world view is rooted in an anatomico-
pathologic view of disease that precludes a rigorous 
understanding of the experience of illness."6(p606) 
He went on to suggest that what is needed
to remedy this problem is not just the admonition to 
remember that our patients are people, but a radical 
restructuring of what we take disease to be. The philosophic 
discipline of phenomenology is used to present a vision of 
disease that begins with an understanding of illness as it is 
lived. (p. 606)
The need for recognition of the phenomenologic 
perspective was illustrated in a clinical vignette 
in which the cardiologist at the bedside asks 
the patient to "be quiet" so that auscultation 
of the heart could be performed, thereby 
conveying the message that more important 
and relevant information could be gained by 
listening directly to the audible manifestations of 
the heart's actions than to what the person was 
saying to the doctor.
One of the first clinicians to introduce 
phenomenological thinking and approaches 
to brain injury rehabilitation was Goldstein 
whose book, The Organism, proposed a "holistic 
approach to biology" based upon the study of the 
effects of brain injury on behavior in humans.7 
Goldstein proposed an alternative holistic scientiﬁ c 
methodology to the study of organismic function 
while critiquing the predominant approach of 
scientiﬁ c analysis, thus reaching back to Goethe's 
approach to examination of natural phenomena 
as proposed, developed, and then subsequently 
buried. With regard to the question of how to 
examine living systems, Goldstein commented:
We have said that life confronts us in living organisms. But 
as soon as we attempt to grasp them scientiﬁ cally, we must 
take them apart, and this taking apart nets us a multitude 
of isolated facts that offer no direct clue to that which we 
experience directly in the living organism...we thus face the 
basic problem of all biology, possibly of all knowledge...
the question can be formulated quite simply: What do the 
phenomena, arising from the isolating procedure, teach us 
about the "essence" (the intrinsic nature) of an organism? 
How from such phenomena do we come to an understanding 
of the behavior of the individual organism? (p. 27)
Goldstein described an approach that involved 
careful detailed observation of behavior in a 
particular ecological context directly as it appears 
to the observer without succumbing to the 
has been sacriﬁ ced in the process, both in terms 
of our own human existence as well as that of 
the natural systems around us and our respect 
and reverence toward them? Can we truly expect 
to be able to reduce all of nature to a clock-like 
mechanism captured with logical precision and 
mathematical description as Newton maintained? 
Are we expected to respect and be in awe of Nature 
when she is understood as a soul-less machine?
Effectively, the goal of the scientiﬁ c worldview 
is to construct faithful quantitative models of 
external reality excluding human consciousness 
and its contents. That is, the manner in which 
the world appears in consciousness - the primary 
appearances - is placed outside the realm of study. 
In doing so, science negates the subjective so as 
to focus on the objective, effectively eliminating 
the ﬁ rst-person perspective and the products of 
conscious reﬂ ection.
Phenomenology recognizes that abstractive 
science alone is incomplete as a means of accounting 
for natural phenomena, particularly living systems, 
and seeks to reinstate the ﬁ rst-person perspective 
through which meaning and relevance in 
everyday life emerge. Spiegelberg maintained that 
phenomenology was part of a "countermovement 
to the wave of abstractive science initiated by 
Galileo with his suppression of the mathematically 
unmanageable world of the qualitative and the 
'subjective'."3(pxliv) This countermovement to "save 
the phenomena," to return to the appearance of 
things in consciousness, and to recover deeper 
understanding from the full expression of 
qualitative experience, found powerful expression 
in the structured study of nature in the original 
work of Goethe. Goethe's method of study, as an 
example, developed a viable theory of the nature 
of color beginning with the experiential aspects of 
color perception and including consciousness as a 
key player. This was opposed to Newton's theory 
of color that depended on a mathematical model of 
differential refraction of light by a prism, a theory 
that eliminated the human observer and conscious 
perception from the equation.4,5 Newton was 
embraced as a scientiﬁ c genius, while Goethe was 
viewed as a brilliant poet and dramatist whose 
dabbling in science was not quite as inspired.
In an introductory article on medical 
phenomenology published in the Annals of Internal 

 
Introduction 
3
temptation to abstract from the observations and 
analyze and theorize about underlying causes. He 
pointed out the critical context-dependence of 
behavior and the adaptive nature of the process 
of recovery through which the person reorganizes 
and adjusts so as to retain as much of their nature 
and wholeness as can be achieved under the 
transformed circumstances imposed by the injury. 
Rehabilitation was viewed as a process of active 
re-construction of the whole organism, the whole 
person. Goldstein's concept of the organism was 
that of a living system driven to "self-actualize" - to 
achieve its optimal potential in the face of various 
challenges to its existence, including that due 
to illness. Rather than abstracting immediately 
from the observations and hypothesizing about 
underlying mechanisms and then seeking to prove 
their existence, Goldstein's approach involved 
gathering unbiased observations and then ﬁ nding 
organizing principles to make these observations 
systematically more understandable. His approach 
to brain injury rehabilitation has continued 
in current holistic rehabilitation programs for 
treatment of individuals with acquired brain 
injury.8 Notably, Goldstein's approach to the study 
and understanding of living systems, particularly 
in the context of the challenges of illness, has been 
placed in its particularly unique historical context 
by Harrington9 and has been further elaborated 
upon in terms of its relationship to phenomenology 
as a philosophical endeavor and as an inﬂ uence on 
psychological thinking by Gurwitsch.10
The phenomenological perspective helps 
to re-instate humanistic understanding into 
medical practice by recognizing that the scientiﬁ c 
perspective alone, through its abstractions, 
de-values the manner in which conscious 
experience is linked to meaning and relevance for 
human beings.11,12 Phenomenological thinking 
may lead to an improved understanding of 
the nature of the relationship between health 
professionals and their patients and the different 
ways in which the meaning and understanding 
of illness may be understood from each side of 
the relationship.13 It brings into the picture the 
idea that "medicine should be understood as 
an inherently moral enterprise, a form of praxis 
focused on the 'healing relationship'...best 
conceived as a form of dialogue."14(p303),15,16 In this 
sense, the manner in which personal experience 
is framed and informed by narrative - by telling 
stories that convey aspects of individual and group 
identity and the meaning of experience - is also a 
byproduct of and linked to a phenomenological 
worldview and understanding.17-19 Assistance with 
the construction of a narrative that enables and 
facilitates recovery and positive reconstruction 
of personal identity may well be viewed as an 
important issue in rehabilitation.20
Undoing Cartesian Dualism and Recognizing 
the Central Importance of Embodiment 
in the Shaping of Experience
A clear phenomenologically informed 
understanding of the healing process at the 
holistic level involves a philosophical stance 
that rises above mind-body dualism and seeks a 
conceptual framework that views the organism as 
an integrated whole.21 The artiﬁ cial separation of 
mind and body introduced famously by Descartes 
as a means of separating out the concerns of 
religion from those of science permitted the 
development of modern science. Science was 
thus able to gain a foothold and sought tolerance 
by "parceling reality out to two entirely separate 
conceptual systems, one theological and the other 
scientiﬁ c and mathematical."21(p2) Thus emerged 
the separation of the subjective from the objective.
Phenomenology views experience as being 
entirely dependent upon and made possible by 
embodiment so that the objective and subjective 
are intrinsically linked at the level of the body under 
normal conditions.22  Merleau-Ponty understood 
perception and the speciﬁ c embodiment that 
makes it possible as being key to perceptual 
experience.23 Being embodied then becomes the 
core principle of human existence. The body is 
uniquely both subject (as a "lived body" that gives 
rise to experience) and object (as the physical 
entity that admits to objective assessment and 
scientiﬁ c examination) at the same time. This 
framework seems ideally suited for describing 
and comprehending the experience of illness, 
which is often associated with a long-term shift 
in the nature of embodiment.2 An understanding 
of embodiment in the context of phenomenology 
creates the possibility of common ground for 

4 
TOPICS IN STROKE REHABILITATION/JAN-FEB 2011
context in its most expansive sense cannot be 
ignored in the rehabilitation enterprise and, in fact, 
is critical to how the process unfolds. For example, 
the context in which function and recovery are 
embedded may include surrounding culture, 
personality traits, and premorbid experience 
and include the experience, expectations, and 
participation of caregivers.
Issue Format
The approach chosen to address the issue theme of 
Medical Phenomenology and Stroke Rehabilitation 
for this issue of Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation was 
an open peer commentary format whereby a 
target paper was distributed to a group of invited 
commentators. Each invited commentator then 
generated a commentary on the paper and an aspect 
of the issues it raises. The target paper is reprinted 
along with all of the commentaries submitted. The 
target paper selected24 was identiﬁ ed through an 
extensive review of the literature on the issue topic 
and was chosen because of the lucid manner in 
which the author presented the issues and then 
provided concrete examples of their application, 
together with its relevance to the relationship 
between rehabilitation professionals and their 
patients with stroke. This paper originally appeared 
in the medical anthropology literature and was 
unlikely to have had broad exposure, therefore, 
to a range of medical rehabilitation professionals 
in its original appearance. The opportunity to 
republish this paper in this journal in this context 
will hopefully provoke thought and discussion 
among clinicians directly involved in the enterprise 
that it addresses.
I am deeply grateful to the editors and the 
publisher of Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation for being 
open to the suggestion and agreeing to permit this 
rather unconventional approach to the assembly 
of a theme-focused issue of the journal. I am also 
thankful to the author of the original target paper, 
Sharon R. Kaufman, PhD, Professor of Medical 
Anthropology at the University of California, 
San Francisco, for her enthusiastic support 
of this project. Finally, and most important, I 
am extremely grateful to the 12 commentators 
who agreed to participate in this project by 
contributing their thought and energy to the 
meaningful communication between health care 
professionals and patients and opens up the 
possibility of appreciating the impact of illness 
on patient and caregivers' lives as manifestations 
of the effects of biological disease and as primary 
meaningful phenomena.
A recent paper by Carel2 provides a detailed 
review of the principles underlying the application 
of embodied phenomenology in medicine and 
proposes an ambitious program of research and 
medical education through which beneﬁ t could be 
obtained by
narrowing the gap between objective assessments of 
 well-being in illness and subjective experiences which 
are varied and diverse; developing a more attuned 
dialogue between physicians and patients based on a thick 
understanding of illness; developing research methods 
that are informed by phenomenology and thus go beyond 
existing qualitative methods; and providing medical staff 
with a concrete understanding of the impact of illness on 
the life-world of patients.
Relevance to Stroke Rehabilitation
Why would phenomenological thinking have 
special relevance to medical rehabilitation and, 
specifically, stroke rehabilitation? It can be 
argued that rehabilitation practice is rooted in 
patient experience and that experiential aspects, 
including patient's perceptions and expectations, 
are of ultimate importance to rehabilitation. As a 
specialty, rehabilitation focuses on the unfolding 
process of healing and adaptation involving 
the whole illness-affected person rather than 
on pathology involving a speciﬁ c organ system 
as many other modern medical specialties do. 
This process that underlies recovery is thus 
fundamentally holistic and experiential so that 
the understanding of how the process works 
to affect outcome and achievement of healing 
has a deep phenomenological connection. As 
mentioned, issues such as understanding of 
narrative, self-concept, and daily function are 
inherently linked to the personal life world of 
the patient. This comes into particular focus 
when the illness centers on the brain - the 
central bodily locus of adaptive response - as it 
does in stroke.
Rehabilitation also focuses on function, which is 
fundamentally contextually dependent. Therefore, 

 
Introduction 
5
project, generating their commentary papers, 
and then reviewing and providing cogent 
critiques of each other's commentaries. I hope 
REFERENCES
each contributing commentator found their 
participation as stimulating and enjoyable as I 
found serving as the issue editor to be.
 
1. Sokolowski R. Introduction to Phenomenology. New 
York: Cambridge University Press; 2000.
 
2. Carel H. Phenomenology and its application 
in medicine. Theor Med Bioeth. Published 
online November 20, 2010. http://www.
u n b o u n d m e d i c i n e . c o m / m e d l i n e / e b m /
record/21103940/full_citation/Phenomenology_
and_its_application_in_medicine_
 
3. Spiegelberg H. Phenomenology in Psychology and 
Psychiatry. A Historical Introduction. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press; 1972:xliv.
 
4. Bortoft H. The Wholeness of Nature. Goethe's Way 
Toward a Science of Conscious Participation in 
Nature. Herndon, VA: Lindisfarne Books; 1996.
 
5. Seamon D, Zajonc A. Goethe's Way of Science. A 
Phenomenology of Nature. Albany, NY: SUNY Press; 
1998.
 
6. Baron RJ. An introduction to medical phenom-
enology. I can't hear you while I'm listening. Ann 
Intern Med. 1985;103:606-611.
 
7. Goldstein K. The Organism. A Holistic Approach 
to Biology Derived from Pathologic Data in Man 
[Der Aufbau des Organismus]. New York: Zone 
Books; 1995. The Hague: Nijhoff; 1934.
 
8. Ben-Yishay Y, Daniels-Zide E. Examined lives: 
outcomes after holistic rehabilitation. Rehabil 
Psychol. 2000;45:112-129.
 
9. Harrington A. The self-actualizing brain and the 
biology of existential choice. In: Re-enchanted 
Science. Holism in German Culture from Wilhelm II 
to Hitler. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 
1996:140-174.
 10. Gurwitsch A. Goldstein's conception of biological 
science. In: Studies in Phenomenology and 
Psychology. Chicago, IL: Northwestern University 
Press; 1996:69-88.
 11. Schwartz MA, Wiggins OP. Science, humanism, and 
the nature of medical practice: a phenomenological 
view. Persp Biol Med. 1985;28:331-361.
 12. Robinson M. Absence of Mind. The Dispelling of 
Inwardness from the Modern Myth of the Self. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press; 2010.
 13. Toombs SK. The meaning of illness: A 
phenomenological approach to the patient-physician 
relationship. J Med Philos. 1987;12: 219-240.
 14. Zaner RM. Medicine and dialogue. J Med Philos. 
1990;15:303-325.
 15. Pellegrino ED. Being ill and being healed: some 
reﬂ ections on the grounding of medical morality. 
In: Kestenbaum V, ed. The Humanity of the Ill. 
Phenomenological Perspectives. Knoxville, TN: 
University of Tennessee Press; 1982:157-166.
 16. Pellegrino ED, Thomasma DC. A Philosophical 
Basis of Medical Practice: Toward a Philosophy and 
Ethic of the Healing Professions. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1987.
 17. Charon R. Narrative Medicine. Honoring the Stories 
of Illness. New York: Oxford University Press; 2006.
 18. Kleinman A. The Illness Narratives: Suffering, 
Healing and the Human Condition. New York: Basic 
Books; 1988.
 19. Mehl-Madrona L. Narrative Medicine: The Use of 
History and Story in the Healing Process. Rochester, 
VT: Bear & Company; 2007.
 20. Fraas MR, Calvert M. The use of narratives to 
identify characteristics leading to a productive life 
following acquired brain injury. Am J Speech Lang 
Path. 2009;18:315-328.
 21. Schwartz MA, Wiggins OP. Psychosomatic 
medicine and the philosophy of life. Philos Ethics 
Humanities Med. 2010;5:2. http://www.peh-med.
com/content/5/1/2
 22. Gadow S. Body and self. A dialectic. In: Kestenbaum 
V, ed. The Humanity of the Ill. Phenomenological 
Perspectives. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee 
Press; 1982: 86-100.
 23. Merleau-Ponty M. The primacy of perception and 
its philosophical consequences. In: The Primacy 
of Perception [Cobb W, trans]. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press; 1964:12-42.
 24. Kaufman SR. Toward a phenomenology 
of boundaries in medicine: chronic illness 
experience in the case of stroke. Med Anthropol Q. 
1988;2(4):338-354.

