Culture and Organization
ISSN: 1475-9551 (Print) 1477-2760 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/gsco20
Nikos Kazantzakis's phenomenology and its
relevance to the study of organizations
Stephanos Avakian
To cite this article: Stephanos Avakian (2020) Nikos Kazantzakis's phenomenology and
its relevance to the study of organizations, Culture and Organization, 26:3, 250-267, DOI:
10.1080/14759551.2019.1570195
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2019.1570195
Published online: 24 Jan 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 302
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gsco20

Nikos Kazantzakis's phenomenology and its relevance to the study
of organizations
Stephanos Avakian
Business School, University of Brighton Business School, Brighton, UK
ABSTRACT
This paper examines Morgan's theorization of images of organizations
from
a
phenomenological
perspective
using
the
works
of
Nikos
Kazantzakis. The paper argues that Morgan's representation of metaphors
currently favours an entitative interpretation of inﬂuence and control,
undermining
novel
processes
deeply
embedded
within
existential
nuances situated in the realm of the human experience. By focusing on
Kazantzakis's phenomenology, the paper proposes that a theorization of
transitionality demonstrates that a content-process struggle is rooted
within a permanence-temporality struggle constantly conditioned against
individuals'
transitoriness
of
existence.
Relatedness,
aﬃrmation
and
temporality represent three interdependent process states and each
exposes self-existential tensions that regulate the directionality of one's
transitions. Such transitions are thought to challenge the entitative form
with which organizations are portrayed in the individual. The paper shows
that a conceptualization of transitionality through Kazantzakis provides a
new scope for understanding the structure of movements situated in the
self and for customizing the forces of permanence and temporality.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 7 October 2017
Accepted 8 January 2019
KEYWORDS
Nikos Kazantzakis; images;
metaphors; Morgan;
phenomenology; process
Introduction
This paper examines the creative use of metaphors found within Morgan's conceptual work (1980,
1983, 1986, 1996). In presenting a diverse range of metaphors, Morgan (1980, 1983, 1986) identiﬁes
that images can be conceptualized as capable entities. They condition how human consciousness can
become an extension of either conscious and/or unconscious motifs. For Morgan the organization is
viewed as a social entity that can create attachment, commitment, recognition and acceptance. It is
an entity that possesses an identity of its own and can regulate human behaviour. In discussing the
power of the images, Morgan (1986, 1996) argues for the rising importance of symbolism as a dom-
inating factor that carries a catalytic eﬀect. Hence, managers can be inspired by images of progress to
create an ongoing impulse towards growth and development whilst seeking to stimulate interest and
invite commitment from others (Nicotera 2013). This paper chooses to focus on the conceptual limit-
ations of Morgan's metaphors accounting for 'process' and 'content' relationships situated in the
experience of transitionality. Hence, it advances earlier conceptualizations on process theory by
using Nikos Kazantzakis's process philosophy. By developing a process typology the paper proposes
that the accommodation of organizational processes, as identiﬁed within the nuances of human
experiences, requires a great exposition of the human existential struggle between 'entities' and 'pro-
cesses'. I argue that the presentation of a theoretical framework that can enable the study of human
reactions requires the deployment of a phenomenological perspective that can account for the
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Stephanos Avakian
s.avakian@brighton.ac.uk
Business School, University of Brighton Business School, Lewes
Road, Mithras House, Brighton, BN2 4AT, UK
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
2020, VOL. 26, NO. 3, 250-267
https://doi.org/10.1080/14759551.2019.1570195

nuances of existence itself. Provided that the metaphors by which organizations are portrayed can
change in light of changing human conditions, there is a need to account for the timely transience
of this development. The research question I seek to address therefore is how can a Kazantzakian
process philosophy respond to an entitative understanding of organizations as metaphors and
advance nuances concerning the experience of human existence? By drawing insights from the lit-
erary works of Nikos Kazantzakis (Kazantzakis 1952, 1960a, 1960b, 1979; Kazantzaki 1968), the
paper proposes that a struggle between content and process remains part of a greater and existen-
tial struggle rooted between permanence and temporality. The need to bring forth into existence
underpins a greater existential desire to use methods of production to achieve permanence and
continuity. However, such permanence is continuously challenged in the course of one's life tran-
sitions and generates repetitive voids of meaning that contribute to frustration and desperation
(Middleton 1994, 2005, 2007). In translating Kazantzakis's works my typology is based on three
phenomenological states of existence, namely (a) relatedness, (b) aﬃrmation and (c) temporality.
The contribution of this typology advances earlier insights on process theory that demonstrate
the instrumental role of the individual in making self-centred transitions that accommodate but
also simultaneously challenge accounts of permanence and continuity. These transitions emerge
from a human existential struggle but extend into organizational life in terms of work processes
being identiﬁed and performed by members (Tsoukas and Chia 2002). I propose that a theorization
of self-led transitions cannot be substituted by a presentation of metaphors, as was previously
thought. Kazantzakis's analysis shows that all entities are experienced as highly fragmented and
their control is continuously self-regulated by the appropriation of existential transitions of perma-
nence and temporality.
The paper is divided into three parts. The ﬁrst part focuses on Morgan's (1986) metaphors, exam-
ining how metaphors enable the development of comparative associations that lead to new insights
about the order by which processes are organized. Morgan's (1980, 1983, 1986) reference to organ-
izations as instruments of domination, brains, systems, machines etc. suggests that metaphors carry the
capacity to be an alternative analytical exposition that situates the parts and the whole within a
common frame of analysis. The creation of associations with and within images carries an explanatory
function (Sid 2002). Images expose an autopoietic system of self-production and self-continuation
(Morgan 1980). Ultimately, the function of an image is rooted in the organizing logic that makes
up the core operations of the system that sustains it over time. Hence, a study on images accelerates
the methods for making observations as an outcome and for producing diﬀerent associations about
the image and from diﬀerent angles (Kostera 2012; Shepherd and Sutcliﬀe 2015).
The second section of the paper ﬁnds that the interpretation of the metaphors is situated within a
series of entitative attributes that undermine the development of human-related processes that inter-
act with the entitative aspects of the organization. For example, organizations are considered instru-
ments of domination, because of their power to control human behaviour, and as psychic prisons,
because of their capacity to inﬂuence the perceived boundaries with the intention of fostering
employee compliance. A current limitation that requires further development in the literature is the
study of human reactions (Demir and Lychnell 2015), as these are triggered by the entitative
power of the organizations' conﬁnement. A conceptualization of metaphors needs to account for
entitative but also process-like qualities (Weick 1979; Weick and Sutcliﬀe 2001; Weick 2003).
However, such an investigation needs to account for greater nuances behind the ﬂow of human
experiences (Reissner, Pagan, and Smith 2011), which can explain the interpretation of tensions
that develop from the human accommodation of content and process properties.
The third section of the paper introduces the work of Nikos Kazantzakis, focusing on the develop-
ment of his phenomenological exposition, where the struggle between content and process is rooted
within a much broader existential struggle between permanence and temporality. This section intro-
duces a typology of three transient relationships that are identiﬁed as states of existence. It suggests
that a conceptualization of transitionality advances a range of previous phenomenological motifs
regarding the individual self and to accommodate existential tensions. These tensions are made
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
251

evident through a wider conceptualization between permanence and temporality (Bien 2007a; Mid-
dleton 1998, 1994). A conceptualization of transitionality captures, metaphorically speaking, diﬀerent
stations in the course of the development of one's life. Hence, the need for permanence comes into
conﬂict with the reality of temporality. I argue that a phenomenological exposition through Kazant-
zakis identiﬁes a greater set of structures that mobilize and organize tensions between content and
process ultimately rooted in the struggle between permanence and temporality. Furthermore, Kazant-
zakis identiﬁes that transitions are regulated through interpretive accounts of existence that are self-
centred (Middleton 1994, 1998). This view proposes that an accommodation of organizations as
images needs to identify with the transitoriness of human existence within the diﬀerent pinnacles
of its development.
Images of organizations
Morgan's (1980, 1983, 1986, 1993) deployment of metaphors assists with furthering theorization on
organizations as systems of production, instruments of domination, psychic prisons, natural organisms
etc. (Schoeneborn, Vásquez, and Cornerlissen 2016). Metaphors comprise conceptual schemata
and carry an autonomous function contributing to the development of self-explanatory accounts
that emerge from the primary function of the metaphors (Putnam and Boys 2006; Kostera 2012).
For example, Morgan's (1986) reference to organizations as machines advances prior understandings
of the power of automation and repetitiveness. A machine has clear and deﬁnable structures and its
control lies outside its design. Its organized order is championed through an exercise of rational
logic and diﬀerent forms of causal relationships (Orlikowski 2007). However, the perceived and prac-
tical added value of its behaviour is found in the premise that it is measurable and predictable. An
experience of organizing through a machine metaphor can be deﬁned by the segmentation of
tasks and by producing controllable and measurable outputs (Baritz 2005). However, the power of
the machine or similar images is found not only in the description of the metaphor itself (Morgan
1983, 1986, 1996) but also in its capacity to be used as a medium from which to produce insights
through the making of new/diﬀerent comparisons. Following the robust integration of machines
within our society, it is accepted that their heightening signiﬁcance demonstrates that they have gen-
erated an important outcome by simplifying prior and complex operations through repetition (Orli-
kowski 2007). Machines constitute an indispensable element of society whose absence can generate
greater harm than good. This is because a system of transactions has already been built on a web of
interdependent relationships that happen to maintain order and sustain prior functions (Orlikowski
2007). Prior operations cannot be replaced through non-technological means. Hence, machines
created new constraints in terms of how human judgements and expectations on productivity
and eﬃciency are created. Methods of human intervention continue to evolve with new advance-
ments in automation. The advancement of robotics exerts a more self-autonomous and domineering
pressure than ever before seen in the history of humanity. Hence, the attributes of a metaphor are
found in the detection of repetitive behaviour patterns that carry a teleological scope (Kostera
2012; Schoeneborn, Vásquez, and Cornerlissen 2016). However, the conceptual usefulness of the
metaphors is found in their capacity to reveal new/diﬀerent interdependent qualities hidden from
view (Searle 1979; Boje 1991, 2001, 2014; Shepherd and Sutcliﬀe 2015). Organizations' members
might not realize the insensitivity in which they operate unless such an analogy is created (Morris
and Feldman 1996). Hence, the metaphors' self-imaginative power is found in deciphering a new syn-
thesis between cognitive and emotional forms of representation that would be diﬃcult to obtain
otherwise (Weick 2011). Furthermore, a metaphor becomes a meaningful construct because it
carries diﬀerent layers of understanding that cannot be easily obtained solely from the study of a
phenomenon (Schatzki 2005; Smith 2001). Thus, it is suggested that metaphors create a mirroring
eﬀect, enhancing the quality of human reﬂexivity and used to obtain reliable information from
within (Morgan 1983, 1986, 1989; Strati 1997). For example, the position that the organization is a
systems of control (Morgan 1986) assumes that there is a deﬁned presence of tangible and intangible
252
S. AVAKIAN

boundaries that literally and/or symbolically control access. A system operates within reciprocal
relationships that deﬁne and redeﬁne roles and relationships between parts and their connections
to the whole. In a similar way, members are several and separate entities that work in isolation
from each other yet remain part of the same organizing body. Organizations' members contribute
to the organization as an entity that exists separate to themselves (Shepherd and Sutcliﬀe 2015;
Schoeneborn, Vásquez, and Cornerlissen 2016). This metaphor suggests that an understanding of
the organization is advanced through a study of natural organisms or machines. Despite the concep-
tual novelty of Morgan's metaphors, still little is known about the conceptualization of the metaphors'
content and process properties situated within the diﬀerent categories of the human experience.
Berger and Luckmann (1966) initiated a discussion of diﬀerent processes in which images are inter-
nalized. Their categorization includes (a) objectiﬁcation, (b) internalization and (c) externalization.
Through these typologies they suggest that the embeddedness of social reality is conditioned
within a series of recursive and transformative stages that occur at diﬀerent points in the course
of the human experience. This view was also advanced by Weick (1995) through his concept of reiﬁ-
cation. Reiﬁcation suggests that people exert a participatory role in enacting that which might be
considered merely ambiguous and imaginary. Enactment enables a stabilization of the ambiguous
properties that might be associated with an action or desire. For Weick (1995), this human action
reinforces the presence of the seeming ambiguous act and contributes to the process of organizing.
Despite the contributions made in the literature, still little is known about the relationship between
the organizing principles that regulate the abovementioned transitions within the human experi-
ence. Hence, the research question this paper seeks to examine is how can a Kazantzakian process
philosophy respond to an entitative understanding of organizations as metaphors and advance
nuances concerning the experience of human existence? A study of a process perspective remains valu-
able for understanding how perceptions of position and/or conﬁnement are regulated via members'
experiences (Hernes and Maitlis 2010; Langley et al. 2013). Following research on the phenomenol-
ogy of organizations (Holt and Sandberg 2011), it is suggested that unearthing processual motifs is
still a scantly researched phenomenon for understanding the design of human processes. For
example, one's position within a speciﬁc metaphor cannot suggest that the individual has the
exact same experience within the place of another metaphor. The variation of the members' experi-
ences is dependent on the members' engagement with tangible events and with their own repertoire
of interpretations developed on the basis of these events (Searle 1979; Morgan 1986). However, a
description of the metaphor is important for determining the human reactions that emerge from
it. Morgan's (1986) metaphors attempt to integrate many broad theoretical positions. These are
founded within diﬀerent disciplines and include theories from sociology, psychology, natural
science, organization studies etc. However, the emergence of process studies (Langley et al. 2013)
shows that the study of the individual is not clearly understood for how entitative and process struc-
tures are organized. For example, a study of when and how images are internalized within the
diﬀerent stages of the human experience requires further examination to understand the timely
development of the events themselves and their impact on members' experiences (Oswick,
Keenoy, and Grant 2002; Höpﬂ2005). Images can be internalized within the experiences of organiz-
ations' members so that the representation of the metaphors remains inadequate for understanding
the unfolding relationship between the entity and process relationships (Demir and Lychnell 2015). A
generalization of the function of the metaphor mechanism is associated with the human reaction
that responds to the stimuli of that particular metaphor. For example, the achievement of a task
remains a profound event for an organizational member (Koerner 2014). The experience of
success can be internalized as an achievement of one's potential success and even career progression
(Hochschild 1997, 2003). An individual can develop a strong and/or weak association with the organ-
ization such that she/he can generate strong emotions that favour/resist management decisions.
However, the internalization of success is not a stable process on its own but can change over
time depending on other stimuli and reactions. For example, the possibility of one member challen-
ging the perceived accomplishment of another can demoralize the latter (Michel 2014). Hence, the
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
253

organizational members' support or resistance is dependent on how events are internalized within
the arena of the members' own experiences and these experiences transition over time (Morris and
Feldman 1996; Langley et al. 2013). Studies on well-being (Brook 2013) and emotional labour
(Hochschild 2012) indicate that members go through diﬀerent stages of identifying and transform-
ing the signiﬁcance of outer events within their own anticipations. Such a process enables them to
conform to a challenge or to a desired outcome. The individual self remains an anthropomorphic
autonomous schema of cognition, logic and emotion. It can reciprocate inputs and outputs as
representing already-self-deﬁned activities. This view has recently been advanced in the literature
through a growing research interest in emotional labour (Hochschild 1983, 1997, 2003, 2012) and
mindfulness (Kudesia forthcoming), where the accommodation of organizational pressure carries
repercussions for one's sense of well-being. The expectations of management can be overwhelm-
ing for employees, who may suppress their own feelings (Morris and Feldman 1996). However,
studies in this literature carry a growing attention on the role of the individual in managing her/
his quality of life against the expectations of the organization. This view suggests that members
move through diﬀerent spectrums of consideration when it comes to conditioning and compli-
ance. The decision to support and/or resist a course of managerial decisions is rooted in the
belief that it can aﬀect the well-being of the people involved. It is suggested that the exercise
of human reﬂexivity can become a catalyst for understanding incidents of emotional attachment
and detachment, but also for generating the capacity to manage conﬂict in the midst of power
struggles (Czarniawska 1998).
Nikos Kazantzakis and organization studies
Few novelists attract as much global attention as Nikos Kazantzakis (Bien and Middleton 1996). The
Greek novelist was feted for his ability to articulate complex meanings through storytelling (Mid-
dleton 2007, 2010). Following his studies with Henri Bergson (1859-1941) and his doctorate on
Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), Kazantzakis (1883-1957) did not follow a conventional academic
career that could assure him of immediate ﬁnancial gains (Middleton 1994, 1998, 2000, 2005, 2007,
2010). Instead, he dedicated his life producing novels and translating works between German,
French and Greek. Kazantzakis captured important philosophical truths and translated complex
ideological problems into simple propositions made accessible to the common reader (Bien and
Middleton 1996; Galanopoulos 2010). Kazantzakis was a modernist thinker but chose a phenomen-
ological way to narrate his ideas (Bien 2007a, 2007b). He gained international reputation for his
capacity to bring epistemological and ontological perspectives into a single grand metanarrative
(Bien 2007b, 2007b). Kazantzakis realized modernity's limitations and anticipated postmodern strat-
egies for reading and living (Bien 1998). His selective use of symbols transcend through time and
space (Dombrowski 2010). The epitome of Kazantzakis's work was the experience of the human
struggle in the context of man's experience of (a) void, (b) creaturely existence, (c) meaning and
(d) death (Beaton 1998). His use of imagery sought to challenge already established norms with
the intention to generate reﬂexivity about the meaning of existence itself (Bien 1963; Bien
2007a; Calotychos 2010). His work came under severe criticism because of its alleged transgression
against the religious and political establishment of his day (Racheotes 1991; Bien 2007a, 2007b;
Arkoudeas 2015). He was perceived as an enemy of the state and accused of threatening the integ-
rity of the Greek government and Eastern Christianity (Bien 1998; Middleton 2000, 2007). The
struggle led to political opposition and eventually prevented him from being awarded the
Nobel Prize (Bien 2007a, 2007b; Arkoudeas 2015). Despite his own obstacles, Kazantzakis depicted
the human struggle within the wider arena of society where organizations are found in tension
with the individual's struggle for meaning and self-aﬃrmation (Kazantzakis 1952, 1960a, 1960b,
1979). Even though his literary works are widely recognized and have gained growing recognition
within the academic community, no eﬀort has been made to translate the novelty of his work to
the study of organizations.
254
S. AVAKIAN

Phenomenology and the imagery of process and content relationships
An overarching motif underpinning Kazantzakis's works is the point of the human struggle in which
opposing tensions permeate (Racheotes 1991; Middleton 1998). Tensions between content and
process, certainty and uncertainty, stability and instability, life and death remain seminal literary
motifs of his works (Middleton 2000). Kazantzakis's intention was not only to dominate the plots
of his narratives with captivating stories but to generate opportunities for understanding phenom-
enological transitions of the human experience of being and becoming, but also the absence of
being (i.e., non-being) (Middleton 2007, 2010). The attempt to unravel the signiﬁcance behind his
system of thinking remains challenging (Owens 1996). In contrast to the development of a formal
academic approach, Kazantzakis decided to communicate his ideas through stories. Following his
emphasis on the experience of human existence, Kazantzakis used literary works as platforms for
building up a systemic exposition of his thinking (Paschalis 2010). In the course of his works, his atten-
tion was placed on the constitution of the diﬀerent stages of existence that involve a struggle for
meaning (Petrakou 2010). Three stages are part of a greater existential development and summarize
the main premises of his thinking: ﬁrst, the impulse of existence (i.e., élan vital) as an inherent quality
found in all forms of human activity and the desires towards the act of creation (Bien 2007a); second,
the position of the individual self in experiencing an existential struggle to come to terms with the
ﬂeeting reality of creaturely existence whilst challenging the sense of permanence (Dossor 2002);
and, third, the growing realization of one's timely development leading to an evident and yet ill-under-
stood separation from the world (Dombrowski 2010). For Kazantzakis, the human desire to bring forth
into existence permeated as a metaphysical need to move above and beyond the necessity to
produce in the physical/material world. However, the experience of separation from materiality
becomes an adverse reality that challenges one's sense of permanence (Galanopoulos 2010). In trans-
lating the above motifs I use a typology based on the development of existence and its transitions
between diﬀerent states of existence. These states are discussed under three headings, namely (a)
relatedness, (b) aﬃrmation and (c) temporality. The discussion on each separate state illustrates
Kazantzakis's thinking concerning the ongoing struggle between matter and spirit as it is conditioned
within the transitions of the individual self. A primary thread of his premise is the presentation of two
opposing tensions. First, the human capacity to create in the physical world is underpinned by a
strong sense of permanence that corresponds to an existential impulse that ultimately cannot be
controlled for what it is (Kazantzakis 1960a, 1960b, 1979). Second, the timely development of
one's development constantly faces the grim reality of one's own temporality. This tension operates
within the individual self and requires the capacity of the individual to transform one's development
in the making of her/his life transitions (Maskaleris 2010). This can be done by developing an under-
standing of life as a rite of passage (Bien and Middleton 1996). An emphasis on transitions is rooted in
the belief that the need for organizing but also production is underpinned by an existential impulse,
namely the élan vital (Bien and Middleton 1996). The development of a relationship with a creaturely
existence indicates an internalization of permanence as an inherent quality found in the human self.
However, for Kazantzakis the individuals runs the risk of losing sight of the temporality of existence,
thereby undermining the signiﬁcance of temporality itself. Kazantzakis's emphasis on the making of
transitions is designed to illustrate the experience in which a heightening tension between content
and process, matter and spirit, and life and death reaches an impasse and demands some form of res-
olution (Bien 1963; Beaton 1998). For example, an emphasis on aﬃrmation is made to illustrate the
development of the human virtue in which the individual is able to commit to a higher purpose
without being merely conﬁned by earthly demands (Bien 2012). The development of courage is
underpinned by a moral capacity to withstand unknown adversities. For Kazantzakis, the self
remains the single entity that needs to face the limitations of creaturely existence and yet must
work with them and move beyond them (Kazantzakis 1952, 1960a). Existence cannot become a
process fully attached to materiality because it moves into a developmental process where it recog-
nizes that ultimately it remains a timely and temporary activity that can perish (Kazantzakis 1960b,
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
255

1979). However, such realization generates new concerns about the value of existence itself and the
directionality with which diﬀerent forms of physical production and consumption occur. Hence,
Kazantzakis addresses the content-process dichotomy through the lens of the human experience,
where the capacity to create in the physical world needs to be seen in direct and ongoing relation
to an inner realm of one's never-lapsing existential concerns (Kazantzakis 1979). Kazantzakis believes
that the failure to recognize the transitoriness of a creaturely existence provides an ineﬀective
approach to the management of human progress. Hence, his aim is to demonstrate that the
power of creaturely existence is situated in the decision-making realm of the individual self. It
oﬀers the opportunity to deploy alternative metaphors for understanding the relationship
between content and process and these are made evident during diﬀerent states of one's existence.
Hence, I argue that a theorization of transitionality through Kazantzakis advances prior considerations
of the dichotomy between content and process because the human self exerts a primary role in the
development of her/his associations with entities and processes. Such a view carries implications for
the study of organizations and the creative deployment of metaphors for understanding their role
and function.
Relatedness
Coming from a process philosophy and deeply inﬂuenced by the works of his tutor Henri Bergson
(Bien and Middleton 1996), Kazantzakis's attention was constantly situated in the existential impli-
cations of the concept of élan vital. An emphasis on the ontology of being is carefully crafted through-
out his literary writings. For Kazantzakis, ontology is deﬁned as the study of the human existence,
situated within the unexcepted currents of life and emerging from the Bergsonian idea of the élan
vital. Relatedness is deﬁned as the experience of the present where the individual is not only devel-
oping but also internalizing relationships between objects and subjects that eventually come to
deﬁne her/his existence. However, for Kazantzakis (1979), to relate within a never-ending process
raises new questions about the meaning of existence and the struggle with ambiguity. The creative
element of his work is demonstrated in the presentation of relatedness as a process directed by the
decision-making power of the individual. In exposing his system of thinking, Kazantzakis (1960a,
1960b) seeks to develop a world view that can accommodate the wide range of human incidents
within a homogenous framework of understanding. Through a creative constitution of narratives
Kazantzakis deploys a phenomenological approach for capturing the timely development of
events and the meanings associated with those events. Kazantzakis paid considerable care to project-
ing a range of ill-reﬂected tensions (Middleton 1998) that constantly move his actors and stretch to
the boundaries between materiality and existence. Hence, relatedness is developed through an expo-
sition of the human struggle to identify a position within a meaningless world. However, relatedness
is also an experience that is directed through one's experience and management of existence heigh-
tened during the course of one's aging and self-development. Kazantzakis's goal is to raise knowl-
edge of the human experience within a polemic of diﬀerent contestations that eventually seek an
existential resolution outlet. Narratives do not serve solely as a literary vehicle for communicating
information (Middleton 2000). Instead, narratives enabled Kazantzakis to present the constitution
of a system of thought in which an exposition of the human experience of relatedness remains a
timely activity. Furthermore, relatedness remains an evolving phenomenon that triggers diﬀerent
reactions at diﬀerent points in one's life development. This element of his work underpins a progress-
ive development of diﬀerent images situated between one's perceptions of being and becoming
(Dombrowski 2010). Here, material entities and processes are found in constant tension. It is as if
they are guided by an outer force that almost forces and regulates this development over time.
The constitution of a process and structure analogy enabled Kazantzakis to make speciﬁc assertions
about the personalization of the impulse of existence whilst identifying generic impulses that
apply to all humanity. Hence, narratives enabled Kazantzakis to develop a wide spectrum of expla-
nations where the development of an awakening experience emerges through one's self-insight
256
S. AVAKIAN

(Kazantzakis 1979). This is the outcome of a struggle where diﬀerent perspectives oﬀer a synthesis of
diﬀerent images that together integrate opposite forces. However, such literary images serve as an
arena for presenting a contestation of diﬀerent perspectives that together challenge prior dichoto-
mies whilst seeking new resolutions. For Kazantzakis, to relate is identiﬁed with a strong conviction
about the direction that someone needs to take. Kazantzakis identiﬁed that a sense of directionality is
often forced onto the individual and this creates new constraints for internally seeking a direction in
compliance with the eternal struggle of process. In his work Report to Greco, Kazantzakis (1965, 273)
refers to his own experience from visiting the Eastern Orthodox monks at Mount Athos. In discussing
his encounter with the monks, the inner struggle between good and evil shifted from being a subject
of contestation with the Devil alone to now also becoming a contestation with God. Kazantzakis
recounted a private conversation with a particular monk on the experience of the human struggle.
Kazantzakis asked the Orthodox monk:
'Do you still struggle with the devil father Makarios?' ... 'I now struggle with God ... and do you expect to win? ... I
expect to lose'. (Kazantzakis 1965, 273)
This brief conversation demonstrates the individual monk's change of understanding through his
own struggles. The Eastern Orthodox monk reaches a very distinct form of a resolution that
cannot be understood if it is not experienced for what it is. The contrast between materiality and
the existential tension of the self remains a key consideration in Kazantzakis's work. The capacity
to create in the material world constitutes only an outer extension of a deeper desire to create per-
manence against temporality (Kazantzakis 1952, 1960a, 1960b). Bringing something forth into exist-
ence is a symbolic act of creating order. Such an endeavour enabled Kazantzakis to deploy a
metanarrative that moves from (a) the tangible and limited artefacts towards (b) the intangible
and spiritual drives (Petrolle 1993; Galanopoulos 2010; Paschalis 2010). Kazantzakis made the
effort to accommodate abstract and speciﬁc relationships between all contents and all processes
(Bien 2007a, 2007b). Such a literary method remains profound because matter and spirit constitute
primitive elements in which both are needed to create something. A struggle with materiality
(Hess 2012) is by inference a struggle with the fundamental premise of the experience of how
work is understood in organizations. After all, human capital is the primary means by which any
form of production is accomplished (Kostera 2012). Bringing forth into existence remains a central
topic in the literature and interprets the nuances of work in terms of performance, achievement,
growth, resource utilization, branding etc. By engaging with the processual quality of transitoriness
(Höpﬂ2005; Hugo, Kuiper, and Houweling 2011) Kazantzakis was able to identify the ﬂow and devel-
opment of existential concerns as these are situated in different symbolic motifs and at different
points in one's development (Middleton 1994). Morgan's (1986) metaphor representations
advance prior conceptualizations of the constructive usefulness of organizations through the creative
scope of the different schemata. However, the human existence of those schemata seems to be
tightly conﬁned by the entitative constitution to which they are subscribed in the ﬁrst place (Schoe-
neborn, Vásquez, and Cornerlissen 2016). Hence, an organization is believed to represent a psychic
prison because of its ongoing power to control resources but also how its intentions need to be ful-
ﬁlled by its organizational members (Morgan 1986). Aspirations of success and growth are con-
sciously or unconsciously internalized within organizations' members (Hochschild 2012). The
success of organizations through the deployment of organizations' members is closely related to
the human capacity to maintain power structures that sustain successful outputs (Baritz 2005).
This paradigm contrasts with Kazantzakis's view of relatedness, where the individual self exerts a
new level of impact through the making of her/his inner associations. These associations cannot
be fully controlled by the organization as they are emergent from within the individual self. Kazant-
zakis identiﬁes the experience of organizations as a rite of passage where the struggle with materi-
ality comprises an event that constantly moves under its own development (Bien 2012). The
organization can be perceived as the entity that provides stability for the individual but at the
same time can become the entity that threatens her/him (Schatzki 2005; Brook 2013). Kazantzakis
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
257

(1960b) underlined the fragility of the interpretation of any form of schemata and, in particular, the
sensitivity with which the schemata's internalization takes place in the individual's experience. This
view carries implications for understanding the power of organizations as entitative structures that
can regulate meaning but also become void of meanings.
Aﬃrmation
In Kazantzakis's thinking, the development of a heightening tension between individuals and organ-
izations reaches a new state of development (Kazantzakis 1960b). Overwhelmed by the impulse of
existence itself and driven by his desire to explain how existence is connected to a cosmic and evol-
utionary development, Kazantzakis (1979) designed his literary works around the individual's struggle
to transcend norms. His method in presenting the development of inner tensions is in light of an
alternative set of tensions found in the individual self. Aﬃrmation is deﬁned as the development of
the human capacity to sustain one's self despite the forces that negate it (Kazantzakis 1960a,
1960b, 1965). Kazantzakis's exposition on aﬃrmation becomes a new conceptual territory through
which he is seeking to identify with those inner forces responsible for organizing how contestations
are situated in individuals' thoughts and actions. The development of aﬃrmation is not an individual
choice that is made at a single point in time. Instead, it is a process that undergoes time and devel-
opment before it comes to fruition. Kazantzakis's (1965) development of aﬃrmation is situated within
prior historic, mythical and religious literary expositions of earlier writings. His argument is that the
human self reaches a new point of development when it realizes that the self is only able to transcend
circumstances by identifying with a speciﬁc value of the self as a property not found in other entities.
Through his own study with Bergson, Kazantzakis (1965) identiﬁes that a person undergoes a creative
and transformative process when she/he is at tension with organizations. The act of self-aﬃrmation is
deﬁned as a moral act where the individual is seeking to aﬃrm existence against those forces that
negate and challenge it. A state of aﬃrmation indicates a point of development because the individ-
ual is working through a set of oppositions and is encouraged to associate with self-qualities that
remain hidden. For example, the human capacity to exert a sense of aﬃrmation against opposition
requires a sense of directionality, which is challenged by the composition of the tensions themselves.
This can be viewed in the relationship between employees and management and in employees'
decisions to go against policies and procedures. The capacity to exert resistance is situated within
a wider sent of judgements where beneﬁts and losses are carefully considered. Kazantzakis does
not present aﬃrmation as merely the exercise of opposition in the context of one's disagreement.
Instead, he identiﬁes that aﬃrmation regulates the development of direction in the making of
one's current and future identity. This development is not an ad hoc event but a long-term
process that has decisive importance for the life and fate of the individual, but also has special impor-
tance for humanity (Maskaleris 2010). Kazantzakis's presentation of aﬃrmation is illustrated in the
deployment of religious ﬁgures where the exercise of resistance, and even sacriﬁce of one's self, is
willingly made for achieving a higher end. The pains of this decision and associated consequences
are contrasted with the immediate beneﬁts that could be gained had this decision not been
made. For example, in his book The Last Temptation of Christ (Kazantzakis 1960b) a young carpenter
is portrayed as a skilful individual who manufactures crosses for the enemy (i.e., the Romans). He is
suddenly confronted by his friend Judas, who senses that the carpenter's aspirations are greater than
his provocative role in manufacturing crosses for the enemy. At some point, Judas senses that the
carpenter starts to consider himself a potential saviour and yet the carpenter remains highly secretive
about it. In an angry mood, Judas unexpectedly confronts him, demanding to know his true inten-
sions. His direct questioning is perceived as threatening and patronizing: 'Are you the one? You!?'
Through this incident Kazantzakis captures the perception of one's identity as being conditioned
by the immediate social environment but also conditioned by one's aspirations to become
someone who is not for the well-being of others. Judas's strong tone almost forces the unidentiﬁed
young man to give a range of excuses for not being the Messiah. However, the young man is going
258
S. AVAKIAN

through a struggle of identity reconciliation. Even though he seems to conform to the expectations of
his local community, over time the carpenter comes to reject them. He accepts his role as being the
Christ. This is an experience created by him rather than a property given to him. In this way the Christ
is appropriating his own struggle, which gradually enables him to go to the cross and oﬀer himself as
the ultimate sacriﬁce for others. Following Bergson's (1911) process philosophy, Kazantzakis elevates
the role of aﬃrmation as the most important organizing pathway that enables man to tackle existen-
tial concerns in transition (Calotychos 2010; Galanopoulos 2010). As Bien and Middleton (1996, 11)
note, such conviction started when 'Bergson taught Kazantzakis that the élan vital ﬁrst clothes
itself in ﬂesh and then divests itself'. The power of aﬃrmation within a phenomenological approach
is found in its capacity to reconcile being and non-being (i.e., the absence of being). The study of
aﬃrmation is a theme already situated within a Bergsonian process philosophy and is connected
with a greater cosmic evolutionary development. However, Kazantzakis builds on this motif. He
sees man represented as a 'little worm' who is thrown onto the ground and 'eats mud', constantly
limited by time and space (Jacobs 2005). Yet, the paradox of her/his condition is that this same indi-
vidual is capable of reaching the highest level of existence, namely God. The contrast between the
'liminality' of human existence within the conﬁnements of society and the moral 'capacity' to over-
come the boundaries created by the constitution of society suggests a new level of moral responsi-
bility. For Kazantzakis, aﬃrmation begins at the point of realizing that the individual is a symbolic
arena of opposing forces. Against ongoing contestations the individual has the responsibility to trans-
form them into a higher state of existence through struggle. Thus, Kazantzakis's conceptual contri-
bution to aﬃrmation advances Morgan's (1980, 1983, 1986) metatheoretical deployment of
metaphors in alleviating the power of the individual self to challenge power ties that seem to be
impossible to challenge. Kazantzakis's works suggest how the disruptive forces found in aﬃrmation
suggest a greater impact that is not rooted in the formal position of the individuals who performed
them. Instead, it is situated in the inherent power of the act itself, which has the capacity to generate
disruption and even challenge the well-being of a social system. Existential considerations in the
development of one's identity are often subdued through an emphasis on the organizational require-
ments that determine the development of the speciﬁc identity accounts (Willmott 1997; Searle 2009).
Hence, an aﬃrmation of the 'self' oﬀers a power-comparative contrast with the organization as an
entity that operates through its concentrated resources and power structures. This view extends
to supporting the unprecedented impact of work by individuals like Edward Snowden and Aaron
Swartz.
Temporality
For Kazantzakis there is an ongoing struggle between existence and materiality. Both elements exist in
an interdependent relationship. They enable processes to occur as changes over time. Yet, the
tension between the two entities is made evident when acknowledging the temporality of human
existence as a liminal process that carries an ontological end (Kazantzaki 1968). Since the study of
process represents the core element of a new synthesis generated through an ongoing collision
between processes (Hernes and Maitlis 2010), change remains an inevitable reality that cannot be
escaped from in one's creaturely existence (Heidegger 1927; Giddens 1984). The struggle between
life and death is manifested in the development of a wider tension between (a) the need to create
in the material world, and at the same time (b) to operate within the temporal span of existence.
In advancing the Bergsonian process philosophy, Kazantzakis is faced with the person's management
of existence as a response to acknowledging the temporality of existence itself. In stretching the phi-
losophical paradigm that supported the development of his earlier roots, Kazantzakis identiﬁes that
the liminality of existence actually presents a new opportunity to reconsider the meaning of human
development, not only as a system but also as a human experience in transition. This phenomeno-
logical endeavour can be materialized through one's long-term engagement with the underpinnings
of one's experience of separation from materiality (Galanopoulos 2010). For Kazantzakis (1965), the
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
259

possibility of non-existence is not considered a ﬁnite event that will take place in the future. Instead, it
is a process that needs to challenge the engagement of one's existence within the timely space of
temporality (Jacobs 2005). The management of one's experience in the present gains new signiﬁcance
for the future and when it is seen in light of the upcoming absence of one's existence. In an eﬀort to
capture the friction created between opposites (e.g., life and death, or being and non-being), Kazant-
zakis constructs his plots so that the management of temporality becomes an event of the present
(Middleton 2005). This act is illustrated through a creative range of literary means, including the
Abyss and the Cretan Glance (Kazantzakis 1965). For example, the imagery of the Abyss is rooted in
earlier biblical and mythological contexts where man is confronted by an unavoidable void that
cannot be escaped for what it is. The Abyss is complemented by a diﬀerent imagery schema, the
Cretan Glance. Its purpose is to alleviate the position of one's outlook and to come to terms with
the Abyss. By deploying these literary metaphors, Kazantzakis dwells on the development of an atti-
tude that concerns not only the individual as a unit but also the development of humanity (Bien
2007b). The Cretan Glance represents the development of a new state of being that can account
for the absurdities of life but yet work through them (Bien and Middleton 1996). The desire to
account for temporality is driven by his earlier engagement with a Bergsonian understanding of
process where life and death remain interchangeable entities and the individual has the responsibility
of diﬀusing their force within the territory of creaturely existence (Galanopoulos 2010). In expositing a
phenomenological position of separation from attachment, Kazantzakis examines the process of
internalizing images of permanence through the experience of self-creation and self-development.
However, in doing so, Kazantzakis understands that the desire to achieve permanence, especially
within a society dominated by a steep growth of production, innovation and technology, does not
only culminate in the production of the material world per se (Bien 2007a, 2007b). Instead, it
carries a deeper connotation: transcending the anguish of temporality into materiality. Despite this
experience not being fully realized at the time the individual is bringing forth into existence, it never-
theless becomes apparent in the ﬂeeting course of time. The fear of temporality is made evident as a
process of retrospection, where the possibility of the absence of one's being becomes the ultimate
threat to the representation of existence itself. Hence, accounting for a ﬁnal and permanent separ-
ation of materiality raises new existential concerns about the social, economic and political structures
on which society is creating order (Middleton 1994, 1998, 2000, 2007). For Kazantzakis, the rigid
failure of society to account for the weight of its own temporality undermines the painful realities
of human existence (Bien 2007b). The implications of such a development undermine the responsi-
bility of the individual for grabbling with life and death through the realities of existence (Bien 2007a).
Theoretical implications
Following recent attention on Morgan's (1980, 1986, 1996) work on organizations as images, there is
growing interest on the relationship between content and process relationships situated in these
images (Schoeneborn, Vásquez, and Cornerlissen 2016). Despite Morgan's conceptual advancements,
still little is known about the entitative constitution of organizations (Knights 2005) in regulating
human experiences and in light of their organizational structure and expectations (Kostera 2012).
Studies on the human receptivity to organizations triggered new research interest in the embodiment
of organizations (Weick 1979, 1995; Oswick, Keenoy, and Grant 2002; Gergen 2009). In particular,
earlier attempts that sought to theorize the relationship between meaning and existence focused
on the development of the diﬀerent stages of self-development (Kudesia forthcoming). For
example, Berger and Luckmann (1966) suggest the role of (a) internalization, (b) externalization and
(c) objectiﬁcation as diﬀerent states that explain the inner and outer representation of images. This
conceptualization explains the presence of an ongoing and transient development responsible for
regulating the ﬂow between entities and processes. For example, the experience of objectiﬁcation
suggests that the experience of an event is transformed from an inner property into outer
symbols. Ambiguous properties are codiﬁed through the making of tangible representations.
260
S. AVAKIAN

However, ambiguous properties are also internalized, shifting away before they can be accepted and
supported by other members. This view was further developed through Weick's (1995) concept of
reiﬁcation, in which the individual is assuming an active role by self-enacting the ambiguous organ-
izational processes through the performative space of her/his own existence. The individual is
responsible for a process of transformation where the intangible and ambiguous are converted
into tangible and 'real' entities. Despite the conceptual advancements made in the prior literature,
still little is known about the constitution of a conceptual paradigm that can account for how indi-
vidual nuances can be connected to a wider spectrum of content-process tensions situated in organ-
izations and their members. In developing Kazantzakis's philosophy, I argue that a conceptualization
of transitionality advances organization theory in three ways. First, it identiﬁes that the structural
relationships between a content and process tension is situated within the human experience but
also triggered through the human interactions with organizations. In contrast to Morgan's (1986)
entitative interpretation of organizations, a conceptualization of process via Kazantzakis is rooted
in a wider existential repertoire where permanence and temporality remain in tension and constitute
greater forces that operate and transcend the nuances behind the human experience. This argument
suggests that organizations represent social entities that remain emblems of permanence, yet their
entitative qualities trigger new reactions that are connected to an inherent existential struggle. This
struggle is an impulse that forces man to struggle not only for existence but also for assurance about
the creation of permanence itself. Thus, a conceptualization of transitionality, viewed through the
lens of a typology that identiﬁes diﬀerent states of existence, suggests that individuals play a
primary role in customizing content and process tensions within their own experience. Such tensions
are intensiﬁed during the diﬀerent states of development but are also embedded in the manner in
which methods of production are organized within organizations. For example, the design and cham-
pioning of process entities like achievement and success are situated within a speciﬁc context of
interaction that is organization-centred (Czarniawska and Joerges 1995; Kostera 2012). To an organ-
ization, success means advancing the organization's goals. An exploration of Kazantzakis's thought
demonstrates that the act of production remains a metaphysical need triggered by two elements.
First, it is triggered by an inherent impulse for creation that challenges the individual's confrontation
with materiality. Second, it is triggered by the impulse of self-aspiration, where an eﬀort towards per-
manence complements the temporal span of existence. An experience of organizations as metaphors
situated within Morgan's (1986) typology suggests that the human experience is conﬁned to
content-process associations regulated by intentions emerging from the metaphor itself. For Kazant-
zakis, a content-process tension is intertwined within a permanence-temporality tension. This
process remains integral throughout all forms of human existence and cannot be contained in organ-
izations or by organizations as the entities that regulate this relationship. Hence, a theorization of
transitionality is conceptualized as the process that is seeking to engage the individual self as the
primary entity responsible for customizing nuanced interactions and in the course of the develop-
ment of one's life. Kazantzakis's process philosophy advances theoretical conceptualizations that
further phenomenological thinking as previously found in Bergson and Heidegger. However, this
is done by furthering the power of the experience of one's existential struggles and these are
reﬂected through the creative power of literary narratives. Kazantzakis shows that, apart from a sys-
tematic analysis of phenomenology, an engagement with literary narratives demonstrates that these
can used as instruments for advancing insights into the transitions in the struggle between content
and process. A theorization on relatedness explains that there are diﬀerent positions in one's process
of self-development that cannot be accounted for at a particular point in one's existence. Time exerts
considerable force on the constitution of the self, also causing the position and perception of the
world to change. This view suggests that a consideration of reiﬁcation, as developed by Weick
(1995, 2001), is not exerted as an individual choice. Instead, it is conditioned by the forces of perma-
nence and temporality within the parameters of the individual self. This Kazantzakian insight
advances an alternative conceptualization of the order and sequence of human transitions that chal-
lenges the fashion in which an organization's structures and operations are extended to its members
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
261

and how they are experienced within the organization. In particular, the human experience of organ-
izations cannot be interpreted as an entity that remains receptive and accommodating to the direc-
tion and control exerted by the organization. Instead, it is an experience that grows through self-
centred struggles. The regulation of the organization becomes contingent only on the realization of
the permanence-temporality tension as it emerges through one's own life transitions. Following
current emphasis on the study of integration between organizations and their members, it is also
suggested that a state of perceived alignment remains necessary for the success of an organization
(Hernes and Maitlis 2010). This view advances the development of a new state of strategic alignment,
where an organization's members are invited to be supportive of the organization's actions (Hochs-
child 1997, 2003, 2012). Furthermore, it is suggested that the state of integration between the organ-
izational self (Pratt and Kraatz 2009) and the members' individual selves (Hochschild 2012) remains
detrimental for the overall performance of the organization as a coherent unit in action (Pratt and
Kraatz 2009; Brook 2013). In light of Kazantzakis's conceptual expositions, it can be argued that a
need for integration is fostered by a greater existential need to secure a predictable and stable
working environment. However, such a view undermines the human reactions that emerge from
this very interaction. Thus, a conceptualization of transitionality shows that the weight of those
deeper human considerations can be understood as responsible for the creation of permanence,
which itself is to be understood as the desire for continuity through extrapolating the human-
created entities that can withstand the passing of time. In this sense, permanence is associated
with the human desire to establish actions that carry a predictable orientation in the production
and distribution of outcomes. Kazantzakis demonstrated that the human reaction for permanence
is triggered and reinforced by a realization of temporality and the need to separate from it. Hence,
the possibility of an individual exerting rejection of permanence might be triggered not by the indi-
vidual actions situated in the organization and in seeking to meet its goals but, rather, by the indi-
vidual's self growing an awareness of the limitations of a content-oriented development that
gradually comes to ignore life as a temporal activity. Hence, a consideration of transitionality ident-
iﬁes that the development of an amounting conﬁdence in organizations becomes heightened
through the creation of permanence. However, this seeming permanence acts as prime cause to gen-
erate new and diﬀerent accounts of deeper tensions between and within organizations' members.
A second contribution made through Kazantzakis's work is found in the conceptualization of the
self as the entity that unites but also needs to regulate transitions between permanence and tempor-
ality. An emphasis on the self should not be understood as merely an attempt to satisfy one's needs
or satisfy one's needs at the expense of others. Instead, a conceptualization of aﬃrmation suggests a
self-creative process in which the individual seeks to organize reactions that challenge the sense of
stability and continuation. The self is the entity that acts as the nucleus of decision-making consider-
ations. It is predominately concerned with the possibility of being and non-being (Tillich 1956). More-
over, it exerts directionality in the appropriation of tensions and in an eﬀort to aﬃrm existence despite
those forces that negate the self. As with Bergson (1911), Heidegger (1927) and more recently Tillich
(1956), the aﬃrmation of one's self is considered a moral act where the internalization of outer forces
are creatively transformed through the makings of the individual's judgement. In organization theory,
a conceptualization of aﬃrmation/courage (Koerner 2014) is further heightened through a contesta-
tion of diﬀerent images where the organization can act as a powerful social and political entity (e.g., a
psychic prison) that can regulate the conscious and unconscious traits. Kazantzakis's personal experi-
ence of this tension was heightened through his long-term decision to adopt literary and religious
images that could foster a clearer understanding of the person's existential struggle. The literary
schema did not conform to the religious establishment of his day and faced rejection. Through his
own struggles Kazantzakis identiﬁed that the human self constitutes the most valuable entity,
whose capacity to reach a higher set of ideals can only become possible through an experience of
appropriating the inner struggle and in light of the capacity to transform it. It is for this reason
that a constitution of aﬃrmation through an understanding of courage is viewed as a moral act. It
carries the power to transcend the self beyond the organized entities of her/his time. Studies
262
S. AVAKIAN

about employees as social capital that carries potential for innovation, creativity, imagination, leader-
ship etc. are attracting increasing attention in the literature (Michel 2014). Researchers have identiﬁed
that the development of an awareness about a desired course of action requires the prior act of self-
commitment (Schatzki 2005; Koerner 2014). Self-determination in leadership remains an eclectic
process where mindfulness is situated against interpersonal sociopolitical forces that challenge its
development (Weick 1995; Brook 2013). The decision of the individual to aﬃrm or reject a course
of action is contrasted with the organization's interests, either supporting or disregarding the creative
capacity of the individual to bring change (Miceli, Near, and Dworkin 2008). For Kazantzakis, the
development of a capacity towards the making of self-aﬃrmation is predominately rooted within
an internalization of a deeper permanence-temporality tension that ultimately seeks an existential
resolution outlet. In this way, the individual's act of aﬃrmation is found in the capacity to streamline
but also transform that which remains highly individualistic yet capable of having transcending
power on entities outside the individual. Furthermore, a tension between the individual and the orga-
nized system of society is demonstrated in the capacity to undertake risky decisions (Smith 2001;
Palmer 2012). For example, some organizations' members (e.g., whistle-blowers) exert resistance
against a coordinated power structure that ultimately remains more capable than the individual
(Miceli, Near, and Dworkin 2008). A range of individuals that resisted organizations (e.g., Sherron
Watkins, Edward Snowden) were perceived as threatening to the greater establishment and were
even treated as traitors. Despite the wide proliferation of the political motives that might inﬂuence
an organization's member to exert resistance, it is also evident that a similar development
happens in individuals who support the interests of the organization even where the ﬁrm
commits some misconduct (McDonald and Robinson 2009). However, the powerless individual is con-
trasted with the powerful organization. An act of self-aﬃrmation can be perceived as threatening to
the integrity of an organization, despite the direct contrast of the diﬀerent power structures. Such a
threat is situated within a polemic of diﬀerent interpretations of what is 'right' or 'wrong' (Palmer
2012). For Kazantzakis, the advance towards one's state of aﬃrmation remains the aftermath of
the development of a primordial inner tension (Bien and Middleton 1996). It oﬀers a unique oppor-
tunity for the individual to express that which remain integral part of a cosmic struggle (Bien 2007a).
Furthermore, it contributes to the authenticity of the human experience, which itself alleviates the
signiﬁcance of one's sense of being.
A third theoretical contribution to the literature is made in the conceptualization of temporality as
a state in which the absence of one's being acts with force to challenge prior considerations about the
value of permanence. Kazantzakis's emphasis on temporality is not intended to generate a nihilistic
representation of the human existence (Dossor 2002). Instead, he uses it as a tool to trigger consider-
ations about the boundaries of being with the intention of generating a creative set of reactions that
can reaﬃrm the importance of existence for what it is, namely a temporal activity. Thus, a conceptu-
alization of temporality challenges the boundaries of existence because it is an element barely inte-
grated into conceptualizations about human development and progress (Dombrowski 2010).
However, the development of a phenomenological exposition that can accommodate the weight
of the temporality of existence suggests a new level of consideration about the meaning of perma-
nence and its translation within the diﬀerent forms of organizing and production. A creative retro-
spection of temporality, found in the internalization of the experience of permanence, is a
property that can withstand the ﬂow of time itself. Hence, Kazantzakis did not seek to refute the
decision to produce and develop through the deployment of resources and through organizations.
However, he did seek to challenge the extent to which a consideration of temporality can act as a
catalyst to enable the individual to reconsider one's ultimate approximation to permanence.
Despite the Bergsonian development in Kazantzakis's thinking, where the ongoing ﬂow of change
remains the overarching process that overpowers all content and process interactions, a conceptu-
alization of transitionality shifts the focus to the social structures by which aspirations of permanence
are established in organizations. Considerations of temporality are often associated as negative. They
demonstrate pessimistic reactions to the possibility of human progress (Höpﬂ2005; Putnam and Boys
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
263

2006). However, Kazantzakis challenged this position through his works. He demonstrated that a con-
sideration of existence, when performed through an awareness of temporality, acts as an organizing
force that constitutes a seminal platform for the evaluation of human development and progress. This
view challenges current assumptions about the development of human progress situated within a
theorization of organization as systems of production and where the mobilization of human
capital advances and extends organizational success (Boje 2001, 2014).
Conclusion
Following prior calls for further research on the relationship between content and process and in light
of Morgan's (1980) metaphors of organizations (Schoeneborn, Vásquez, and Cornerlissen 2016), this
paper advances conceptualizations through the phenomenology of Nikos Kazantzakis. In interpreting
the relevance of his work I concentrate on the case of the transitionality between diﬀerent progress-
ive states of existence. A theorization of transitionality suggests that content and process transitions
follow diﬀerent states of existence. This development challenges the dominance by which the
images' entitative attributes are associated in organizations and conditioned within the course of
one's existence. Kazantzakis's work demonstrates that a struggle between content and process
remains part of a wider tension that remains highly personal and existential. A state of relatedness
identiﬁes a position of existence where associations with physical and non-physical phenomena
go through diﬀerent transitions and these are regulated by the life-path of existence itself. Kazantza-
kis identiﬁed that the struggle for achieving permanence against life's time span is a metaphysical
need that often undermines the constraints of creaturely existence (Bien and Middleton 1996).
Kazantzakis noted that the capacity of the individual self to accommodate and transform this struggle
enables her/him to identify with the liminalities of existence and to work through them. By dedicating
large parts of his work to re-enacting the experience of aﬃrmation and separation from materiality,
Kazantzakis was interested in exposing transitions that oﬀer people alternative perspectives for
understanding their struggle towards existence (Middleton 2005, 2007, 2010). The conceptual impli-
cations of his work could be viewed in light of a theory of transitionality where the development of an
awareness of the diﬀerent states of existence oﬀers new outlets for understanding the conﬁnement
of organizations as systems that can exert inﬂuence on human behaviour. Kazantzakis's work demon-
strates that the struggle between content and process advances understanding of the process by
which the individual develops diﬀerent representations of organizations. This understanding
carries implications for understanding the use of Morgan's (1986) metaphors. In particular, Kazantza-
kis demonstrates that people exert considerable force in the management of their existence through
a realization of the diﬀerent progressive states of their lives but also in realizing death. This view
carries theoretical and practical implications for understanding the management of tensions
through which organizations support the continuity of their members but also threaten their exist-
ence. Such threat does not necessarily come from the organization itself but from the associations
that the individual creates with the entitative and process aspects of her/his interaction with the
organization as an entity in transition (Weick 2011). A struggle with organizations is a metaphor
for an existential struggle with materiality but also with the attachment to the symbolic permanence
with which materiality is envisaged at the time of production (Bien 2007a). Such a conceptualization
positions the work of the individual self above the constitution of organizations as metaphors. The
individual's regulative capacity to identify with an existential repertoire of motifs moves beyond exist-
ence represented as a temporal activity that has a beginning and an end. A ﬁnal contribution made by
Kazantzakis is made by eliciting the creative but also destructive power of the human will to bring
into existence something which carries greater permanence and stability than the immaterial con-
sideration of existence. In a similar way to Bergson, Kazantzakis identiﬁed with the human frustration
and the possibility of meaninglessness deriving from the human incapacity to accommodate the
absurdity of life within the diﬀerent domains of existence. A phenomenological interpretation of
human progress, in light of relatedness, aﬃrmation and temporality, suggests that an appropriation
264
S. AVAKIAN

of existence requires diﬀerent qualities, which are not made evident in the current metaphoric articu-
lation of organizations, that is, as entities that contribute to the creation and development of funda-
mental meaning-making associations.
Acknowledgement
The author remains sincerely grateful to Professor Darren J. N. Middleton for his support, insights and constructive com-
ments on the paper. I would like to also thank Dr Max Tookey for his constructive comments and suggested edits.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
References
Arkoudeas, K. 2015. Το χαμένο Νόμπελ. Μια αληθινή ιστορία. Athens: Kastaniotis.
Baritz, L. 2005. "The Servants of Power." In Critical Management Studies. A Reader, edited by C. Gray, and H. Willmott, 29-
45. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Beaton, R. 1998. "Of Crete and Other Demons: A Reading of Kazantzakis's Freedom and Death." Journal of Modern Greek
Studies 16 (2): 195-220.
Berger, P. L., and T. Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. Garden
City, NY: Doubleday.
Bergson, H. 1911. Creative Evolution. (A. Mitchell, Trans.). New York: Dover.
Bien, P. 1963. "Zorba the Greek, Nietzsche, and the Perennial Greek Predicament." Antioch Review 25: 147-163.
Bien, P. 1998. The Last Temptation of Christ. Nikos Kazantzakis. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Bien, P. 2007a. Kazantzakis: Politics of the Spirit. Vol. 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bien, P. 2007b. Kazantzakis: Politics of the Spirit. Vol. 2. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bien, P., ed. 2012. The Selected Letters of Nikos Kazantzakis. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Bien, P., and D. J. N. Middleton. 1996. God's Struggler: Religion in the Writings of Nikos Kazantzakis. Macon, GA: Mercer
University Press.
Boje, D. M. 1991. "The Storytelling Organization: A Study of Story Performance in an Oﬃce-Supply Firm." Administrative
Science Quarterly 36: 106-126.
Boje, D. M. 2001. Narrative Methods for Organizational and Communication Research. London: Sage.
Boje, D. M. 2014. Storytelling Organizational Practices: Managing in the Quantum Age. London: Routledge.
Brook, P. 2013. "Emotional Labour and the Living Personality at Work: Labour Power, Materialist Subjectivity and the
Dialogical Self." Culture and Organization 19 (4): 332-352.
Calotychos, V. 2010. "Kazantzakis the Greek?: Travel and Leisure, Hunger and Pathos, Localism and Cosmopolitanism
Journeying." Journal of Modern Greek Studies 28 (1): 189-217.
Czarniawska, B. 1998. A Narrative Approach in Organizational Studies. London: Sage.
Czarniawska, B., and B. Joerges. 1995. "Narration or Science? Collapsing the Division in Organization Studies."
Organization 2 (1): 11-33.
Demir, R., and L. O. Lychnell. 2015. "Mangling the Process: A Meta-Theoretical Account of Process Theorizing." Qualitative
Research 15 (1): 85-104.
Dombrowski, D. A. 2010. "Why Should we Read Kazantzakis in the Twenty-First Century?: A Constructive (Rather Than
Deconstructive) Postmodern Response." Journal of Modern Greek Studies 28 (1): 39-50.
Dossor, H. F. 2002. The Existential Theology of Nikos Kazantzakis. Wallingford, PA: Pendle Hills Publications.
Galanopoulos, C. 2010. "Anti-nihilism in the Thought of Nikos Kazantzakis." Journal of Modern Greek Studies 28 (1): 7-37.
Gergen, K. J. 2009. Relational Being: Beyond Self and Community. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Giddens, A. 1984. The Constitution of Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Heidegger, M. 1927. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. (A. Hofstadter, Trans.). Indianapolis: Indiana University Press.
Hernes, T., and S. Maitlis. 2010. Process, Sensemaking and Organizing: An Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hess, F. 2012. "The Case for a Contemporary Kazantzakis." Journal of Modern Greek Studies 30 (2): 339-343.
Hochschild, A. R. 1983. The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling. London: University of California Press.
Hochschild, A. R. 1997. The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home Becomes Work. New York: Metropolitan Books.
Hochschild, A. R. 2003. The Commercialization of Intimate Life: Notes From Home and Work. London: University of California
Press.
Hochschild, A. R. 2012. The Outsourced Self: Intimate Life in Market Times. New York: Metropolitan Books.
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
265

Holt, R., and J. Sandberg. 2011. "Phenomenology and Organization Theory." In Research in the Sociology of Organizations,
Vol 32, edited by H. Tsoukas and R. Chia, 215-250. Bingley, UK: Emerald.
Höpﬂ, H. 2005. "The Organisation and the Mouth of Hell." Culture and Organization 11 (3): 167-179.
Hugo, L., C. Kuiper, and L. Houweling. 2011. "Live Metaphor: Hardiness and Postcards." Culture and Organization 17 (5):
389-401.
Jacobs, K. A. 2005. "'We're all Brothers! All Worm Meat!' A Consideration of Kazantzakis's Zorba the Greek in the Quest for
the Just Society." Contemporary Justice Review 8 (2): 229-237.
Kazantzaki, E. N. 1968. Nikos Kazantzakis: A Biography Based on his Letters. (A. Mims, Trans.). New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kazantzakis, N. 1952. Zorba the Greek. Trans. Carl Wildman. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kazantzakis, N. 1960a. The Saviors of God: Spiritual Exercises. (K. Friar, Trans.). New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kazantzakis, N. 1960b. The Last Temptation of Christ. (P. Bien, Trans.). New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kazantzakis, N. 1965. Report to Greco. (P. Bien, Trans.). Oxford: Brunnon Cassiser.
Kazantzakis, N. 1979. The Suﬀering God: Selected Letters to Galatea and to Papastephanou. (P. Ramp and K. Anghelaki-
Rooke, Trans.). New York, NY: Caratzas.
Knights, D. 2005. "The Disruptive Impact of new Epistemological Location for the Study of Management." In Critical
Management Studies: A Reader, edited by C. Gray, and H. Willmott, 60-106. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koerner, M. M. 2014. "Courage as Identity Work: Accounts of Workplace Courage." Academy of Management Journal 57 (1):
63-93.
Kostera, M. 2012. Organizations and Archetypes. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Kudesia, Ravi. Forthcoming. "Mindfulness as Metacognitive Practice." Academy of Management Review. doi:10.5465/amr.
2015.0333.
Langley, A., C. Smallman, H. Tsoukas, and H. A. Van de Ven. 2013. "Process Studies of Change in Organization
Management: Unveiling Temporality, Activity, and Flow." Academy of Management Journal 56 (1): 1-13.
Maskaleris, T. 2010. "The Terrestrial Gospel of Kazantzakis: Inspiration for Saving the Earth." Journal of Modern Greek
Studies 28 (1): 263-270.
McDonald, G. L., and P. Robinson. 2009. A Colossal Failure of Common Sense. New York: Crown.
Miceli, P. M., P. Near, and M. T. Dworkin. 2008. Whistle-blowing in Organizations. London: Routledge.
Michel, A. 2014. "The Mutual Constitution of Persons and Organizations: An Ontological Perspective on Organizational
Change." Organization Science 25 (4): 1082-1110.
Middleton, D. J. N. 1994. "Nikos Kazantzakis and Process Theology: Thinking Theologically in a Relational World." Journal
of Modern Greek Studies 12 (1): 57-74.
Middleton, D. J. N. 1998. "Apophatic Boldness: Kazantzakis's use of Negation and Silence to Emphasize Theological
Mystery." Midwest Quarterly 39 (4): 453-467.
Middleton, D. J. N. 2000. Novel Theology: Nikos Kazantzakis's Encounter with Whiteheadian Process Theism. Macon, Georgia:
Mercer University Press.
Middleton, D. J. N., ed. 2005. Scandalizing Jesus. Kazantzakis's The Last Temptation of Christ Fifty Years on. New York and
London: Continuum.
Middleton, D. J. N. 2007. Broken Hallelujah: Nikos Kazantzakis and Christian Theology. Plymouth, UK: Lexington Books.
Middleton, D. J. N. 2010. "Reading Kazantzakis in the United States: A Christian Theological Perspective." Journal of
Modern Greek Studies 28 (1): 51-67.
Morgan, G. 1980. "Paradigms, Metaphors and Puzzle Solving in Organizational Theory." Administrative Science Quarterly
25 (4): 605-622.
Morgan, G. 1983. "More on Metaphor: Why We Cannot Control Tropes in Administrative Science." Administrative Science
Quarterly 28 (4): 601-607.
Morgan, G. 1986. Images of Organization. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Morgan, G. 1989. Creative Organization Theory: A Resourcebook. London: Sage.
Morgan, G. 1993. Imaginization: New Mindsets for Seeing, Organizing and Managing. Newbury Park and San Francisco, CA:
Sage Publications.
Morgan, G. 1996. "Is There Anything More to be Said About Metaphor?" In Metaphor and Organizations, edited by D.
Grant, and C. Oswick, 227-240. London: Sage.
Morris, A. J., and C. D. Feldman. 1996. "The Dimensions, Antecedents, and Consequences of Emotional Labour." Academy
of Management Review 21 (4): 986-1010.
Nicotera, A. M. 2013. "Organizations as Entitative Beings: Some Ontological Implications of Communicative Constitution."
In Organization and Organizing: Materiality, Agency, and Discourse, edited by D. Robichaud, and F. Cooren, 66-89.
New York: Routledge.
Orlikowski, W. J. 2007. "Sociomaterial Practices: Exploring Technology at Work." Organization Studies 28 (9): 1435-1448.
Oswick, C., T. Keenoy, and D. Grant. 2002. "Metaphor and Analogical Reasoning in Organization Theory: Beyond
Orthodoxy." Academy of Management Review 27 (2): 294-303.
Owens, L. 1996. "Pontius Pilate. Modern man in Search of a Soul." In God's Struggler: Religion in the Writings of Nikos
Kazantzakis, edited by P. Bien, and D. J. N. Middleton, 35-46. Macon, GA: Mercer University Press.
266
S. AVAKIAN

Palmer, D. 2012. Normal Organizational Wrongdoing: A Critical Analysis of Theories of Misconduct in and by Organizations.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Paschalis, M. 2010. "The Relations of Kazantzakis's Kapetan Michalis to Homer's Iliad and Shakespeare's Othello." Journal
of Modern Greek Studies 28 (1): 143-172.
Petrakou, K. 2010. "The Ideological and Aesthetic Perspective in Kazantzakis's Dramas: Is It Still Valid?" Journal of Modern
Greek Studies 28 (1): 105-114.
Petrolle, E. J. 1993. "Nikos Kazantzakis and the Last Temptation: Irony and Dialectic in a Spiritual Ontology of Body."
Journal of Modern Greek Studies 11 (2): 271-291.
Pratt, G. M., and S. M. Kraatz. 2009. "E Pluribus Unum: Multiple Identities and the 'Organizational Self'." In Exploring Positive
Identities and Organizations: Building a Theoretical and Research Foundation, edited by M. L. Roberts, and E. J. Dutton,
385-410. New York: Routledge.
Putnam, L. L., and S. Boys. 2006. "Revisiting Metaphors of Organizational Communication." In SAGE Handbook of
Organization Studies, edited by S. R. Clegg, C. Hardy, T. B. Lawrence, and W. R. Nord, 541-576. London: Sage.
Racheotes, S. N. 1991. "Theogony and Theodicy: Nikos Kazantzakis and the Mortal Struggle for Salvation." East European
Quarterly XVII (3): 363-398.
Reissner, S. C., V. Pagan, and C. Smith. 2011. "'Our Iceberg is Melting': Story, Metaphor and the Management of
Organisational Change." Culture and Organization 17 (5): 417-433.
Schatzki, R. T. 2005. "The Sites of Organizations." Organization Studies 26 (3): 465-484.
Schoeneborn, D., C. Vásquez, and J. Cornerlissen. 2016. "Imagining Organization Through Metaphor and Metonymy:
Unpacking the Process-Entity Paradox." Human Relations 69 (4): 915-944.
Searle, J. R. 1979. "Metaphor." In Metaphor and Thought, edited by A. Ortony, 92-123. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Searle, J. R. 2008. "Language and Social Ontology." Theory and Society 37 (5): 443-459.
Shepherd, D. A., and K. M. Sutcliﬀe. 2015. "The Use of Anthropomorphizing as a Tool for Generating Organizational
Theories." Academy of Management Annals 9 (1): 97-142.
Sid, L. 2002. "The Cultural Shadows of Cross Cultural Research: Images of Culture." Culture and Organization 8 (1): 21-34.
Smith, E. D. 2001. "Texts and the Ontology of Organizations and Institutions." Studies in Cultures, Organizations and
Societies 7 (2): 159-198.
Strati, A. 1997. "Organization as Hypertext: A Metaphor from Visual Cultures." Studies in Cultures, Organizations and
Societies 3 (2): 307-324.
Tillich, P. 1956. Dynamics of Faith. New York, NY: Harper and Brothers.
Tsoukas, H., and R. Chia. 2002. "On Organizational Becoming: Rethinking Organizational Change." Organization Science
13 (5): 567-582.
Weick, K. E. 1979. The Social Psychology of Organizing. New York: Random House.
Weick, K. E. 1995. Sensemaking in Organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Weick, K. E. 2003. "Positive Organizing and Organizational Tragedy." In Positive Organizational Scholarship: Foundations of
a New Discipline, edited by K. S. Cameron, J. E. Dutton, and R. E. Quinn, 66-80. San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Weick, E. 2011. "In Deep Waters: Process Theory Between Scylla and Charybdis." Organization 18 (5): 655-672.
Weick, K. E., and K. M. Sutcliﬀe. 2001. Managing the Unexpected: Assuring High Performance in an Age of Complexity.
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Willmott, H. C. 1997. "Management and Organization Studies as Science? Methodologies of OR in Critical Perspective."
Organization 4 (3): 309-344.
CULTURE AND ORGANIZATION
267

