International Journal of Philosophy and Theology
ISSN: 2169-2327 (Print) 2169-2335 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjpt20
The state of servitude: Schleiermacher's
phenomenology of sin
Timo Helenius
To cite this article: Timo Helenius (2020) The state of servitude: Schleiermacher's
phenomenology of sin, International Journal of Philosophy and Theology, 81:2, 101-119, DOI:
10.1080/21692327.2020.1749872
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21692327.2020.1749872
Published online: 08 Apr 2020.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 250
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjpt20

ARTICLE
The state of servitude: Schleiermacher's phenomenology
of sin
Timo Helenius
Department of Practical Philosophy, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
ABSTRACT
In this essay Schleiermacher's recasting of sin is taken as a key to his
phenomenological analysis of self-consciousness. The notion of sin
is grossly misunderstood if read solely in the light of Christian self-
consciousness;
it
is
rather
a
phenomenological
descriptor.
Schleiermacher's phenomenology is not focused on or conﬁned
to that shape of self-consciousness whereas it is much more ele-
mentary. Sin is a living 'state of servitude' that is ubiquitously
manifested in human being at its individual and collective (social)
levels. Schleiermacher's notion of servitude is that the mediating
sensory self-consciousness - which is integrally linked with the
highest self-consciousness - generates a certain oscillation that
diverts the highest self-consciousness and continuously pushes
the self back to the lower level of sensory self-consciousness. The
intuitively given, the whole, is nevertheless taken as a felt revelation
that informs our conscious experience; on which we rely at all
subsequent or higher levels of consciousness, such as knowledge
and science. The human is exposed through the revealing feeling
that places the emerging subject to the whole within which the fall
into dichotomizing polarization takes place.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 23 March 2019
Accepted 28 March 2020
KEYWORDS
Schleiermacher; sin;
self-consciousness;
phenomenology;
anthropology
Introduction: sin, phenomenology, and self-consciousness
Kant, Hegel, and Nietzsche can be thought of as the main Lutheran representatives of the
post-reformation philosophical criticism of original sin. Friedrich Schleiermacher,
a Reformed Unionist in a Lutheran university, belongs to this same group of commenta-
tors, all of whom oﬀered a critical revision or an outright rejection of religion based on
their own respective understandings of it. However, as Nietzsche's criticism of Kant,
Hegel, and Schleiermacher demonstrates, these views at times diﬀer greatly from one
another. As is well known, Nietzsche developed a total disgust with Christian thought-
system and morality in particular. Therefore, Nietzsche's openly admitted hostility and
discontent toward thinkers such as Kant, Hegel, and Schleiermacher in Ecce Homo (1888)
is not surprising, as they cast or make a 'veil' - Schleier machen - by disguising theology
as a philosophy and, therefore, corrupting the very tool of radical freedom that Nietzsche
himself was concerned about1. For Nietzsche, Kant's natural theology that shallowly
disguised original sin in the form of radical evil, Hegel's appreciation of religion as
necessary for the self-formation of the spirit, and Schleiermacher's commitment to
CONTACT Timo Helenius
timo.s.helenius@gmail.com
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
2020, VOL. 81, NO. 2, 101-119
https://doi.org/10.1080/21692327.2020.1749872
© 2020 International Journal of Philosophy and Theology

Christianity-like piety - in spite of his full revision of religion in terms of Anschauung
and Gefühl - were all evidently too pretentious.
Aligning himself with Nietzsche on this particular issue, albeit from a diﬀerent vantage
point altogether, Thomas Lewis holds the view that Kant, Hegel, and Schleiermacher all
defended religion when facing the challenges of modernity. This essay complements
Lewis's reading by stressing that Kant, Hegel, and Schleiermacher's respective attempts at
defending religion do not, however, coincide with the pre-Enlightenment understanding
of religion that was not yet fully impacted by 'the growing conﬁdence in the power of
reason, historical study of the Bible, increasing awareness of other religious traditions,
and emerging forms of social and political life,' as Lewis summarizes2. For the reasons we
will see, their attempts at defending religion were - and they were also in many cases
perceived as - criticisms rather than anything else; Nietzsche's provocation therefore
does not fully hit its mark. In the words of Walter Wyman, 'Schleiermacher's revisionist
dogmatics, Christian Faith, is characterized by acute logical criticism of several tradi-
tional doctrines and by reformulation and reinterpretations of them.'3 Schleiermacher,
but also Kant and Hegel, most deﬁnitely also drew the ire of contemporary and sub-
sequent thinkers as well as religious believers because of radically reshaping religion4.
In their respective attempts at responding to the challenges set by the Enlightenment
and post-Enlightenment criticisms of religion - defending religion by criticizing it
themselves - a peculiarly interesting point is that all three thinkers demonstrate the
continued, albeit discredited value of the doctrine of original sin. In the wake of Wyman's
claims that the doctrine 'most trenchantly criticized and carefully and radically rethought
by Schleiermacher is the doctrine of sin,' and that Schleiermacher's 'critical [and more
Irenaean than Augustinian] reconstruction (. . .) ﬁnally shatters the Augustinian
framework,'5 I will argue that Schleiermacher's phenomenology nevertheless takes shape
in reference to sin in particular just as can be argued of Augustine himself. To make the
point quickly, Paul Rigby, for example, has insisted that in spite of both theological and
philosophical problems resulting from the doctrine of original sin, 'Augustine's answer to
the problem of evil is not just a theoretical answer but a testimony, a confessio.'6 What is
ultimately at stake in the concept of original sin is the radical and encountered human
experience of the non-coincidence of the self with the self, and the relating question of the
possibility of (anxious) human freedom.
To clarify the point, Augustine was trying to understand the nature of human being
through its experience as encountered in exercising the unquestionably deﬁcient and
weak human will. All the more, sin, concupiscence, and original sin - as Rigby argues -
was a personal question for him, relating to self-consciousness, as Augustine explains in
the Confessions. This has not gone unnoticed by later phenomenologists up to Jean-Luc
Marion7. Martin Heidegger, for example, is adamant that Augustine's text opens up at
this level of personal experience: 'Augustine wants to dare confess himself. And he will
only confess what he "knows" about himself. Augustine admits not knowing everything
about himself. He wants to confess that too.'8 Augustine's anti-Pelagian works later
systematized this phenomenologically attuned confession, and made it more conceptual
in the sense of defending the human experience at a theological level, but the underlying
phenomenality nevertheless remains the key for unlocking the doctrine itself.
It perhaps could be provocatively proposed that Schleiermacher capitalizes on this
phenomenological notion and oﬀers his revision of the doctrine that was facing the need
102
T. HELENIUS

of de-speculative unstiﬀening. Whether his redescription amounts to 'a radical deconstruc-
tion of the notion of original sin as it has been kept in the West,'9 as Vítor Westhelle argues,
is perhaps open to debate. In this essay Schleiermacher's recasting of original sin is,
nevertheless, taken as a key to his phenomenology, pushing Wyman's summation that
'the analysis of sin in Christian Faith is shaped by the conceptual framework provided by an
analysis of self-consciousness.'10 My stance, however, will be that it is a phenomenologically
and not merely a more reﬁned theologically attuned conceptualization of self-
consciousness that Schleiermacher provides; sin is 'the self-enclosed life of feeling within
a sensuous vital unity to which all sympathetic feeling for others and for the whole was
subordinated'11 as Wyman, citing Schleiermacher, also points out. The breadth of this
essay, I should emphasize, is in other words philosophical, but not in the sense of
speculative philosophy (turned into 'a rational theology') that Schleiermacher discussed
in his letters to Dr. Lücke, and of which also this essay would like to dissociate itself12. To
add a note relating to the obvious limitations regarding the scope of this brief inquiry,
Schleiermacher's views on hermeneutics, translation, the nature and plasticity of language,
and psychology will be set aside here even though all these, in the grand scheme of things,
would relate to our discussion; such expansions to this sin-focused phenomenological
exploration will have to be dealt with separately.
Original and actual sin
It may be warranted to begin with an overview of Schleiermacher's understanding of sin.
In spite of discarding the idea of historical-dialectical process, Schleiermacher held,
similar to Hegel, the notion of sin to function positively by determining self-
consciousness in the battle between the spirit and the ﬂesh. In other words, these two
cannot be kept phenomenally apart or dissociated from each other. In spite of such
challenge, however, the notion of original perfection is still available for, and advocated
by, Schleiermacher. There would not be any living presence of God-consciousness, nor
those of good or evil, were it not for some true inner nature, or something that is
'internally true regarding one's very being,'13 that lets it emerge and enables it in its
continuous existence. Arguing against Hegel as well as 'in contrast to the Pelagian
assertion,' which counter to Augustine's views on concupiscence held on to the idea of
acquired perfection, Schleiermacher assented to the view that there must have been an
original condition that 'could not have been one of sin.'14
As a result, Schleiermacher's notions of original perfection and original sin, terminolo-
gically distinct from but giving organic grounds for the unavoidable actual sin, strike as
surprisingly traditional. First of all, Schleiermacher not only describes his understanding of
original sin as reconcilable with the notion of 'turning away from God' (Abgewendetsein) as
well as with Adam's potency to sin, but also subscribes to traducianism in that human
nature 'repeats itself identically through heredity in every human being.'15 Sin is as much
a universal inherited common disease, defect, and susceptibility to evil 'already imparted to
every individual'16 that 'shows up in all human beings from birth'17 as it is a full personal
incapacity for good. It is a real and transgenerationally received human imperfection, an
'inherited constitution,' and an innate corruption and 'distortion of nature,'18 that is
manifested as an obstructive power in and of the ﬂesh that resists the free and just use of
the intelligence, thereby resulting in guilt, death, and the need of redemption. In its most
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
103

extreme form, this obstructive condition, stance, and power must be called Godlessness or
God-forgetfulness (Gottlosigkeit oder besser Gottvergessenheit).
It would be a mistake to understand such state as mere negativity or passivity; the very
Godlessness is the form of self-consciousness that is not idle - the new translation of
Christian Faith therefore renders it as 'ungodliness,' 'obliviousness as to God,' or 'being
oblivious of God.'19 In sum, original sin is the humanly unavoidable active - and there-
fore already an actual - state of self-consciousness that is shaped by its God-voidness and
God-avoidance, meaning self-satisfaction at the level of such natural consciousness: 'the
lack of something that lies outside nature would not be felt to be such a bad thing.'20 This
notion that original sin, or the Gottvergenssenheit-form of self-consciousness, is described
as nicht als ein übler Zustand gefühlt werden - not felt as a nasty or rotten state or status -
leads us therefore to address Schleiermacher's account of actual sin.
This overview results in a needed side step, propelled by the rather traditionally under-
stood notion of actual sin. That sin also produces evil is, without a question, also a stance
that Schleiermacher holds. To clarify this further, evil, in Schleiermacher's thought, while
being derivative of and secondary to sin, is active and external, and it cannot be treated
'purely internally'21 preceding action. Being dependent on God, however, good and evil
relate to each other, and no change or 'fall' has ever taken place in this regard - human
being has always already found itself through this tension. Rather unsurprisingly, this also
applies to sin and grace (or deliverance) that, in spite of their antithetic relation, are not
mutually incompatible for an immediate Christian self-consciousness: they both, and their
co-existence, is ordained by God. Such view was later, understandably, not taken well by
theologians such as Karl Barth, who charged Schleiermacher for bringing down
Reformation theology. According to Schleiermacher, a purely sinless state - even in the
state of sanctiﬁcation22 - is however wholly untenable for a Christian consciousness as
human nature has phenomenally never changed. Sinfulness, in the sense of potency to sin,
was already 'native to the ﬁrst human beings.'23 In ecclesiastical terminology that
Schleiermacher also uses, the 'visible church,' or the socially and historically manifesting
ﬁghting and struggling church, has always also found itself fallible and subject to error; this
is its sin24. Put diﬀerently, sin is so pervasive that it covers the whole of human existence
from an individual's level to the social evils of communal and even ecclesiastical life25.
These observations warrant a relating scholarly remark. In his analysis on
Schleiermacher's understanding of faith in Christ, Robert M. Adams proposes that for
Schleiermacher, sin is tied in with the feeling of absolute dependence negatively, by
'severely hindering (. . .) it from developing and from dominating one's mental life as it
should.'26 Even though Adams softens his position by admitting that 'the inward fact of
which faith in Christ is certain is rather the fact that in one's own case such sin has been
removed and displaced by a dramatically fuller development and dominance of the
feeling of absolute dependence'27 - my emphasis - I take issue with his implication
that sin is not reﬂective of or does not manifest Abhängigkeitsgefühl. On the contrary, sin
is already a feeling of being absolutely dependent in that it is a distinct form of
consciousness (viz. the sensible self-consciousness) without release from the living state
of one's bondage to oneself that, in turn, is tied in with the whole as datum. Following
Schleiermacher's thought, the release into the realm of pious consciousness -
Schleiermacher stresses 'the sensible feeling on which the spiritual feeling develops' in
his ﬁrst letter to Lücke28 - then takes place in living in a perpetually reaﬃrming
104
T. HELENIUS

communality upholding the religious self-consciousness of being related to God (viz.
God-consciousness) that also gives light to the full conscious extent of the feeling of
ultimate dependence as acknowledged and, consequently, also to sin that, again, was
already a form of consciousness bound to an actual experience. As Walter Wyman
notices by citing Schleiermacher, 'we are conscious of sin as the power and work of
a time when the disposition to the God-consciousness had not yet actively emerged in
us.'29 Not knowing 'sin' as sin, a sense of human existence is nevertheless formed within
that form of consciousness that thereby informs the whole sphere of existence.
My point about this remark is that the notion of actual sin as a phenomenology would
be grossly misunderstood if it were simply cast in the light of Christian self-
consciousness. Schleiermacher's phenomenology is not focused on or conﬁned to that
shape of self-consciousness whereas it is much more elementary. Because sin is self-
serfdom, slavery, bondage, and subjugation, Schleiermacher understands actual sin to be
organically intertwined with original sin; a clear distinction between the two - unlike in
the context of more traditional theological systematizations - is therefore diﬃcult to
make. Sin, according to Schleiermacher, is a living 'state of servitude'30 (ein Zustand der
Knechtschaft) that is, as mentioned, ubiquitously manifested in human being at its
individual and collective (social) levels. The domination by sinnliche Selbstbewußtsein -
sensory self-consciousness or 'world-consciousness'31 as Vance has it - is the human
mode of existence in its process of self-actualization. In this phenomenology, sin is a real
Zustand depicting active and deﬁnite human existence that does not have to have
consciousness of its own 'sinfulness' while it nevertheless continuously exercises its self-
interested activity of, as, and with the ﬂesh as a mode of consciousness. This is why
I argue against the strict necessity of theological validation as the philosophical analysis
already reveals the very phenomenology of human existence from within its own
incurvature and bondage.
Sin and Schleiermacher's phenomenology
These preparatory remarks lead us to the question of Schleiermacher's phenomenology
as portrayed by the notion of sin. In what follows, I have this phrase in mind in particular:
sin deﬁned as 'whatever turning away from God that might exist in the situations of our
lives (unsern Zuständen Abwendung von Gott) [and] a deed originating in ourselves
(unserer ursprünglichen Tat).'32 To explain more fully, Schleiermacher's initial descrip-
tion in Glaubenslehre §11 of 'the wretched state' (schlecht Zustand or the spoiled or ill
standing) is indicative of such comprehensive phenomenology that pertains to self-
consciousness as sense-consciousness:
The wretched state could consist only in the fact that the vitality of higher self-
consciousness [höhere Selbstbewußtsein; meaning God-consciousness] is blocked or
snuﬀed out, with the result that uniﬁcation of that higher self-consciousness with
various determinations of sensory self-consciousness (sinnliche Selbstbewußtsein), and
thus actual elements of religious life, would come into being very little of not at all.
(. . .) All that remains is to designate this wretched state as not having available the
readiness to introduce and establish God-consciousness into the interconnected process
of the real elements of life33.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
105

Sin, in sum, is a state of immediate self-consciousness that is natural for sensing human
beings as the Monologen also lets us infer34. This phenomenal state is already a living state
that, it is clear, does not depend on any reﬂective Christian (self-)consciousness of sin
that would result in an overhaul of human existence at the level of thought - this is
precisely why the shape of consciousness as God-voidness is not felt as a nasty or rotten
state at all35.
To succinctly explain our lack of religious concern as laid out above, we will have to
make a note about Schleiermacher's composition of Christian Faith and its argumentative
structure. Doing so, we might well begin with the issue of 'the interconnected process of the
real elements of life'36 that Schleiermacher, after having propaedeutically elaborated it in
§11, re-examines the theme in §65. The question is about the diﬃcultly translatable phrase
der Zusammenhang der wirklichen Lebensmomente. In Schleiermacher's words, 'in the state
of sin humans are indeed also placed within the interconnectedness of nature, and only in
proportion to that placement (. . .) can sin expand in them.'37 The dual supposition is that
sin is to 'exist only where an incapacity [sic. powerlessness; Unkräftigkeit] for God-
consciousness does,' and that sin becomes part of human existence 'only based on some
occasion of certain impressions (Eindrücke) that one would have received from the totality
of ﬁnite being (von der Gesammenheit des endlichen Seins empfängt).'38 The resulting
doctrinal 'vacillation' between Manicheism and Pelagianism is not of my interest, whereas
Schleiermacher's heavy conceptual reference to the named section in Part One of Christian
Faith is very much so. As Schleiermacher puts it himself, 'all propositions to be set forth in
the First Aspect of Part Two must be in accord with and refer to those of the same form in
Part One.'39 This explicit remark will be of key importance for the subsequent discussion
that will therefore ﬁnd it justiﬁed to bracket the notion of Christian self-consciousness
while keeping its focus on the phenomenology of sin.
To be clear, Schleiermacher holds that the notion of sin can only be explored in
reference to and in the context of 'an individual's own self-consciousness'40 that, in turn,
relates to what he describes as 'a living seed of sin (. . .) that is constantly at the point of
bursting forth.'41 In my reading of §67 of Christian Faith, this ever-present 'living seed' is
the condition of the receptive and self-focused activity of the ﬂesh that Schleiermacher
moves on to discuss. The phenomenological point here - throwing us back to subsections
from §4.1 to §4.3 and from §5.1 to §5.4 - is that the self experiences itself as absolutely
dependent of the 'other' (etwas anderes) that gives the datum for its existence deﬁned by
active or desiring receptivity; the subject is formed through this dynamics of its primor-
dial receptivity and the relating activity42. The key passage here, relating to terms 'being-
positioned-as-a-self' (sichselbssetzen) and 'not-having-been-positioned-as-a-self' (sich-
selbstnichsogesetzthaben), is Schleiermacher's summation in §4.3 that consciousness 'of
being in the world' or the consciousness 'of our coexistence with the world' that he
elaborates in §4.2 'is already in and of itself a consciousness of absolute dependence [ein
Bewußtsein schlechthiniger Abhängigkeit] (. . .) for it is the consciousness that our entire
self-initiated activity likewise issues from elsewhere.'43 The heavily receptive aspect of
'somehow-having-come-to-be' (Irgendwiegewordensein) results in the notion that Gefühl
(or the experiencing subject that underlies the knowing and doing subject, including the
theologizing subject) is constituted only in its lifeworld, of which it is wholly dependent
in its need of active receptivity.
106
T. HELENIUS

The condition of receptivity, in other words, demarcates the domain of experience
(Erfahrung) tied in with 'the temporal appearance of the feeling of absolute dependence.'44
This is clear in that 'somehow-having-come-to-be' is also coined as Irgendwohergetroﬀensein
der Empfändlichkeit - perhaps translatable as 'the having-been-encountered-from-
somewhere that belongs to receptivity.'45 Das Ich is not self-constituting as also exempliﬁed
by 'the sin-ridden self-reliance of orientation to the senses'46 that is, of course, self-reliance
only in an ironic sense as it is grounded (begründet) in the phenomenological given that, in
turn, is 'to be posited as a totality, or as one' - als Eines, das heißt als Welt - meaning the
oneness of one's lifeworld as Schleiermacher already argued in the Monologen or his
Soliloquies47. The key here is Schleiermacher's deﬁnition of self-consciousness as 'conscious-
ness of our being in the world or as a consciousness of our coexistence with the world (unseres
Zusammenseins mit der Welt).'48 As is also already clear in the initial 1799 edition of On
Religion, human consciousness only has a grasp of itself in the mode of eine Antwort or
a response49. This becomes very clear in light of sections §66 and §67 of Christian Faith.
These sections rely on the notion that 'we always ﬁnd ourselves to exist only in coexistence
with some other,'50 namely, only in coexistence with the given. As the self experiences itself as
absolutely dependent of the 'other,' the subject coexists with and as the lifeworld that is the
responding activity relating to the primordial receptivity as the subject's conditio sine qua non.
There is absolute or plain dependence of this datum that manifests as the feeling pertaining to
the very given that is desired for our own existence. This line of thought is made stronger by
the observation that Schleiermacher already develops this idea of the given and the relating
sensation in his early On the Highest Good (1789) that opens with a sketch outlining the self's
relation particularly to its 'objects of interest,'51 and deepens the analysis soon after in On
Freedom (1790-92) when discussing the faculty of desire (das Gebegehrungsvermögen) that
determines 'all the soul's particular activities.'52 In brief, 'The object appears and the faculty of
desire craves (Gelüstet) (. ..) The senses, fantasy, understanding, and reason allow [the
faculty] no rest. It craves, selects, desires, decides, and acts in every moment of its
existence.'53 Put diﬀerently, such active response can be summed up in an Augustinian
manner as the natural (consuming) desire, covetousness, or lust tied in with spatially and
temporally conditioning sensuous consciousness; in the words of Schleiermacher's Christian
Faith, 'Sünde sei, wenn wir begehren.'54
In short, Schleiermacher consistently presents an underlying phenomenology that
exposes the elementary level of human experience on the grounds of the actively received
given - preceding the consciousness of sin - by using the concept of sin as an explicatory
point of reference. In my reading, this is the angle from which to approach the discussion
of sin that follows the named passages in Christian Faith. In spite of the doctrinal casting
that he gives at the outset of §70, §71, and §73, Schleiermacher nevertheless radically
recasts the relating theology by making it rely on a more elementary phenomenology. To
be slightly provocative, the lengthy discussion concerning susceptibility to sin
(Sündhaftigkeit), pertaining to the lasting grip or gripping power of sensory functions,
would remain hollow and even useless if not viewed in light of the phenomenology that
was elaborated to serve as its grounding. In Schleiermacher's words:
the energy of God-consciousness is never at its absolutely greatest point, no more than its
formation within [sic. ﬁguration into] the stirrings of sensory self-consciousness (die
Hineinbildung [des Gottesbewußtseins] in die Errugungen des sinnlichen Selbstbewußtseins) is
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
107

at an absolutely constant state. Thus, a limiting weakness (sic. powerlessness; Unkräftigkeit) of
God-consciousness is also coposited. This lack of force is certainly sinful55.
Put diﬀerently, sin 'arises during life's course'56 - im Verlauf des Lebens eintritt - and
necessarily so because the given that is actively received as the subject's lifeworld is
constitutive for human experience depicted as sinful. The reason for this is that self-
consciousness, in its natural sensory drive, grasps the given world in a self-interested or
desiring or needy manner. As Schleiermacher put it in his ﬁrst letter to Lücke, he agrees
with Bretschneider's deﬁnition of consciousness 'as a knowledge of every actual mode of
determination of our being,' except that he 'would not like to use the term 'knowledge' in
this case'57; self-consciousness is naturally self-interested in its determinateness provided
by the given that allows for a cognizant feeling or 'sensing' the self. To be sure, any and all
advance in terms of God-consciousness still 'belongs to conditions of that stage of
existence (Existenzstufe) in which the human race[, gender, or "house"] (das menschliche
Geschlect) stands at any given time.'58 The point is that God-consciousness is a ﬁguration
into or an overlay on sensory self-consciousness that ever remains in the mode of active
receptivity within and as its lifeworld. As Paul Nimmo has noted, even in the case of
a justiﬁed individual, the 'new life' is therefore deﬁned as 'consciousness of forgiveness of
sins'59; the 'sinful' phenomenal mode of human existence, or Dasein60, itself is never
eradicated whereas it is taken as not counting against such Dasein. In Schleiermacher's
own words from his second letter to Lücke, 'the consciousness of sin is still an element of
the Christian's pious self-consciousness.'61 By itself, human existence - according to
Schleiermacher's
phenomenology
of
elementary
and
grounding
sinnliche
Selbstbewußtsein - is and remains, therefore, in the state of servitude that we humans,
perhaps even gladly, embrace. It is not felt as such a bad state at all.
Schleiermacher's phenomenology of 'religion'
I have argued that Schleiermacher's criticism of doctrines such as original sin grows out
from his recasting of religion that, in turn, rests on his phenomenology of sensory self-
consciousness. It is clear that Schleiermacher's notion of sin is distinct from the estab-
lished Christian doctrinal thought in that it is grounded in the notion of an individual's
plain dependence and yet replicates that tradition in a manifestly novel manner. Citing
Wyman - also as a modest reply to Lewis - Schleiermacher's 'discussion of sin and
redemption exhibits his dual commitment to revision and ﬁdelity to the Christian
(speciﬁcally Protestant) tradition.'62 One reason for such imbedded tension is
Schleiermacher's view on the human condition that is complex in that it also accounts
of sin as positive. Schleiermacher follows the thought that there is a revelatory and
therefore positing aspect in sin that 'becomes a speciﬁc deed only by virtue of that
capacity of human beings to step out with one's inner being, by virtue of which capacity
all that is good is actually brought about.'63 Sin, somewhat like in Hegel, is in the service
of (phenomenal) self-consciousness - this is its state of servitude. All this also indicates
that Schleiermacher's take on religion in its most fundamental sense stands miles apart
from any doctrinal understanding of any particular religious tradition. The point, in
short, is that the piety Schleiermacher discusses does not concern any institutional
108
T. HELENIUS

religion - that he refers to as 'theology' - whereas the 'religious' pertains to the ground-
less ground of consciousness or the commonest and the highest human activity.
A further point has to be made about this apparently phenomenological recasting of
religion as it also sheds further light to the question of sin that is the focal question in this
essay. That the proposed phenomenology cuts across Schleiermacher's work is apparent
in that this phenomenological reshaping also takes place in On Religion that calls for
'descending into the inmost sanctuary of life,' 'apprehending a living moment,' and
'listening to yourselves before your own consciousness.'64 With these phrases
Schleiermacher means the task of needing to notice 'the rise of your consciousness'
and even calls for - very phenomenologically - his readers 'to reconstruct from your own
consciousness your own state,'65 or disclosing 'the faintest trace of the original unity.'66
This could, provisionally, be done by paying attention to questions such as these:
Your whole life is such as existence for self in the Whole. How now are you in the Whole? By
your senses. And how are you for yourselves? By the unity of your self-consciousness, which
is given chieﬂy in the possibility of comparing the varying degrees of sensation67.
As these questions should be read alongside Schleiermacher's description of the three
spheres of consciousness - the self, the world, and their unity that all, in their respective
ways, lead to ﬁnding the totality of experience68 - we are called to provide an extended
review of Schleiermacher's phenomenology as described above.
I am thinking here of Schleiermacher's full revision of religion in terms of Anschauung
and Gefühl in particular. It is rather astounding that Nietzsche simply aligned
Schleiermacher's thought with Christian piety as Schleiermacher's notion of it is certainly
distinct from any conventional understanding. In light of Nietzsche's own thought it may
be slightly embarrassing that Schleiermacher deﬁnes religion as 'a kind of activity'69 or
'an original unity'70 that relates to life and the aesthetic imagination - there is an
immediate 'creative, productive embrace'71 in the core of Schleiermacher's thought.
Insofar as human apprehension of both the material and the spiritual world is in
question, Schleiermacher argues that the same aesthetic mechanism applies there as
well: 'You can only obtain what is original by producing it, as it were, by a second, an
artiﬁcial creation in yourselves, and even then it is but for the moment of its
production.'72 This means, as Schleiermacher lays out, that 'piety' is not only active but
also passive. It is active as a movement of becoming and understandable as 'an endeavor
to return into the Whole, and to exist for oneself at the same time,'73 but this already
indicates of its concomitant passivity. Piety is passive or receptive in its reliance of the
inexhaustible given; this is what the 1799 edition of On Religion stresses in particular in
its repeated insistence on 'the intuition of the inﬁnite' or 'of the universe.'74 In
Schleiermacher's later thinking, such 'contemplation of the pious' is nothing but 'the
immediate consciousness of the universal existence of all ﬁnite things, in and through the
Inﬁnite, and of all temporal things in and through the Eternal.'75 Put diﬀerently,
Schleiermacher's phenomenology is revelation-based in the sense that each 'moment of
conscious insight' or 'every original and new communication of the Universe to man is
a revelation.'76 The point though here is that, according to Schleiermacher, the revealed
should precisely be understood as revealed, that is, through a sense of the given that is, for
that reason, felt. His depiction of object-formation is exemplary of this duality in that
there is simultaneous 'stimulation and determination' that 'for one particular moment
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
109

forms your existence.'77 In this sense 'piety' is or also appears 'as a surrender,
a submission to be moved by the Whole that stands over against human being.'78 The
intuitively given, the whole, is taken as a felt revelation that informs conscious experience
on which we rely at all subsequent or higher levels of consciousness such as knowledge
and science.
Whatever Schleiermacher calls 'religion,' in other words, should therefore be under-
stood as such 'pious' receptivity and activity that indicates of 'the original relation of
intuition and feeling'79 which itself is the human sine qua non or 'the inmost sanctuary of
life'80 for consciousness and, subsequently, for all cognition and its explication:
I entreat you to become familiar with this concept: intuition of the universe. It is the hinge of
my whole speech; it is the highest and the most universal formula of religion on the basis of
which you should be able to ﬁnd every place in religion, from which you may determine its
essence and its limits. All intuition proceeds from an inﬂuence of the intuited on the one
who intuits, from an original and independent action of the former, which is then grasped,
apprehended, and conceived by the latter according to one's own nature. If the emanations
of light - which happen completely without your eﬀorts - did not aﬀect your sense, if the
smallest parts of the body, the tips of your ﬁngers, were not mechanically or chemically
aﬀected, if the pressure of weight did not reveal to you an opposition and a limit to your
power, you would intuit nothing and perceive nothing, and what you thus intuit and
perceive is not the nature of things, but their action upon you. What you know or believe
about the nature of things lies far beyond the realm of intuition81.
In light of this phenomenology, it is clear that Schleiermacher not only redescribed
Christian doctrinal thought as the science of religion, or 'theology,' but also the under-
lying concept of religion in a manifestly novel manner. The phenomenological 'feeling of
piety,' or the pre-conceptual aﬀective sense of being related to the whole intuited datum,
exposes 'the peculiar sphere which I would assign to religion - the whole of it, and
nothing more.'82 Put diﬀerently, 'religion' is that active domain of productivity 'where the
living contact of man with the world fashions itself as feeling.'83
To make the point even more strongly, Schleiermacher's notion of God is ﬁrmly tied in
with his notion of the Whole or those of the Inﬁnite and the Eternal; these are not to be
understood as divine attributes whereas they relate to the mode of consciousness that
Schleiermacher depicts as God-consciousness (Sich-seiner-selbst-als-in-Beziehung-mit-Gott
-bewußt-Sein). Such form of consciousness is, however, again distinct from any conven-
tional theological understandings of the conception of God. 'The usual conception of God
as one single being outside of the world and behind the world is not the beginning and the
end of religion,' Schleiermacher argues, whereas 'it is only one manner of expressing God,
seldom entirely pure and always inadequate.'84 God, in other words, is for Schleiermacher
not an idea whereas it denotes the acknowledged Whole or the Universe of which there,
however, has already been an 'immediate consciousness' as a felt presence:
Religion is to seek this and ﬁnd it in all that lives and moves, in all growth and change, in all
doing and suﬀering. It is to have life and to know life in immediate feeling, only as such an
existence in the Inﬁnite and Eternal. Where this is found religion is satisﬁed, where it hides
itself there is for her unrest and anguish, extremity and death. Wherefore it is a life in the
inﬁnite nature of the Whole, in the One and in the All, in God, having and possessing all
things in God, and God in all. Yet religion is not knowledge and science, either of the world
or of God. Without being knowledge, it recognizes knowledge and science. In itself it is an
aﬀection, a revelation of the Inﬁnite in the ﬁnite, God being seen in it and it in God85.
110
T. HELENIUS

Insofar as Schleiermacher's phenomenology pertains to God, this God most certainly is
not the theologico-metaphysically described God of any dogmatic religion. To the
contrary, Schleiermacher's notion of 'God' has from early on - as expressed in On the
Highest Good - not been constitutive but regulative instead in the Kantian sense as
formulated in the Critique of Pure Reason86. In the language of Christian Faith, 'God' is
simply the 'codeterminant' in the feeling of absolute dependence: was in diesem Gefühl
das mitbestimmende ist87. For Schleiermacher, 'God' serves as a shorthand - usable in the
context of faith-discourse - which denotes the acknowledged totality of givenness that is
received in intuition and given a personalizing response in 'feeling' or in the sense of it all.
Arguing against solipsistic and subjective idealisms, Schleiermacher's notions of
Anchauung and Gefühl make evident his conviction that there is - or has to be - an
originating reliance that is describable as 'religion' that, in turn, precedes any particular
religious formations. To fully understand that Schleiermacher is therefore not discussing
'religion' in any conventional sense - it is rather the originating sentience behind
cognition - it is good to keep in mind that his explanation takes its reference from the
aesthetically productive realm: 'Were I to compare religion in this respect with anything
it would be with music, which indeed is otherwise closely connected with it. Music is one
great whole; it is a special, a self-contained revelation of the world.'88 Moreover, the
domain of given experience is ever-present as the ground of sensed existence: 'unin-
terruptedly, like a sacred music, the religious feelings should accompany his active life.'89
Through feeling, or the grounding sense of consciousness, there takes place a certain
setting-in-place-a-framing-for-object-formation, likening to the workings of productive
and synthetizing aesthetic imagination, that also sets the experiencing subject in place.
Schleiermacher's point is plainly phenomenological:
You become sense and the Whole becomes object. Sense and object mingle and unite, then
each returns to its place, and the object rent from sense is a perception, and you rent from
the object are for yourselves, a feeling. It is this earlier moment I mean, which you always
experience, yet never experience. The phenomenon of your life is just the result of its
constant departure and return90.
The intuited is apprehended or felt in such manner that it not only constitutes experience
but also its conditions of possibility as well as gives a sense of having an experience; any
experience of anything relies on the enabling and facilitating workings of the active
imagination that personiﬁes or subjectiﬁes.
Here, though, we have to reconnect with our discussion of sin; the point about the
preceding exploration is that Schleiermacher's imbedded phenomenology of religion is
indicative of the particular phenomenology of human existence we are after. The con-
nection point between the two is that the fall or betrayal of the original unity is precisely
that 'the incoming of existence to us (. . .) at once stops as it reaches consciousness.'91 As
the consciousness is determined as either intuition or feeling, 'there remains nothing but
the knowledge'92 or a trace of their original unity that stands for the atemporal ground
for the produced temporal and - not only object-related but - objectifying human
existence. The inﬁnite, in Schleiermacher's words, pertains to 'something new ever
being produced in time.'93 Such simultaneous stimulation and determination constitutes
human experience as a strife; 'a peaceful existence (. . .) would not be your life.'94 In spite
of constantly being-related to datum, the Schleiermacherian incurvatus in se takes place
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
111

precisely as this productive and striving existence: 'Does not every other object whereto
man's thinking and striving are directed, draw around him a narrow circle, inside of
which all appears common and unworthy?'95 It is thereby also through the grounding
feeling that 'you discover in yourselves the outlines of the fairest and the basest, the
noblest and the most despicable (. . .) You are a compendium of humanity.'96 The human
is, therefore, encountered through the revealing feeling that places the emerging subject
to the whole within which the fall into dichotomizing polarization is set up.
Epilogue: Schleiermacher's phenomenology and the religious consciousness
The preceding review of Schleiermacher's phenomenology, as presented in On Religion,
will lead us lastly to explore the relation between such phenomenal consciousness and the
religious self-consciousness as set up in Christian Faith. That there is a distinction
between the two is clear in that '"objective consciousness" is given originatively only to
one who is aﬀected by nature, whereas Christian religious self-consciousness is given
only to one who is aﬀected by the Redeemer in the manner distinctive to those who
profess faith in him.'97 In spite of the obvious diﬀerences - but also strikingly deep
similarities in their contra-Hegelian philosophies that also include their respective under-
standings of sin - for Schleiermacher, as soon after for Kierkegaard, the consciousness of
sin (or, being conscious of a 'turning away from God' that is 'a deed originating in
ourselves') portrays the human, but especially by standing in contrast with the con-
sciousness of grace (or, being conscious of a 'communion with God' that is commu-
nicated by Christ)98. Redemption, as an act of the divine trinity, brings these two together
by overcoming their antithetic tension and thereby also reveals the needed dependence
on the Redeemer. In sum, in terms of faith everything is related to, understandable, and
revealed only by a speciﬁc God-consciousness. That it nevertheless does not have to be
the case that Schleiermacher's phenomenology is only graspable in the light of such
Christian self-consciousness - and that the Christian self-consciousness does not cancel
out the phenomenal consciousness - is the point this essay wants to make; this last
section focuses on this particular issue.
The key passage that deals with the question in Christian Faith unfolds in §4 and §5.
These introductory propositions provide the gist of what Schleiermacher calls 'a pre-
liminary orientation' to the whole of the work99. Somewhat echoing Kant's third anti-
nomy of freedom and necessity (as the feeling of absolute freedom is precluded from us
as being bound to temporal existence), in its ﬁrst phase Schleiermacher's exposition runs
from the feeling of freedom (§4.2) - that is tied in with the 'self-initiated activity' of
objectiﬁcation, meaning that 'something else is determined by us'100 - to the interde-
pendence of freedom and dependence (§4.3), and furthermore to the famous notion of
God as the feeling of absolute dependence (§4.4). Problematizing this account in
the second phase of the exposition, Schleiermacher then focuses on absolute dependence
and the inferred notion of partial freedom in light of being dependent (§5.1). The relating
developmental account from animal consciousness to the pre-conceptual consciousness
of children and furthermore to the mature and linguistically self-deﬁning consciousness
is of crucial importance; Schleiermacher's illustration addresses the question whether the
higher forms of consciousness somehow cancel out or dismiss the lower ones. In short,
they do not; the higher consciousness 'in its actual occurrence is still never disconnected
112
T. HELENIUS

from the immediately lower level.'101 Even though from the vantage point of mature
consciousness the elementary stage of its coming-to-be is clouded or masqueraded by the
conceptual cognitive schemas, thereby rendering the lowest level as 'dreamy' at best, it
nevertheless builds itself up from and relies on the elementary 'object-oriented'
(gegenständlich) and 'ever-originating-in-oneself' (in sich zurüﬀgehende) animal con-
sciousness that sets up the sensory self-consciousness on which, in turn, the highest self-
consciousness stands102.
The obviously crucial distinction between the mediating sensory self-consciousness
and that of the highest level is that at that level there not only is consciousness of ﬂeeting
particular temporal objects whereas there is a consciousness of the necessity of the whole
datum-manifold as that of which self-consciousness absolutely depends on:
In and of itself, the highest self-consciousness does not depend at all on externally given
objects that can stimulate us at one time and then not at another time, and as
a consciousness of absolute dependence it is also an entirely simple consciousness and
remains ever the same in all conditions that are otherwise changing103.
Given Schleiermacher's cited clariﬁcation that the highest level of self-consciousness is
'never disconnected from the immediately lower level,'104 however, it will be important to
note that even though the highest self-consciousness does not depend 'at all' on temporally
posited particular objects, this should not be read or understood as rendering the sensory
self-consciousness void or insigniﬁcant. In spite of the notion that any particular temporal
object of sensory self-consciousness is not necessary for the highest self-consciousness, or to
being conscious of one's absolute dependence, such 'entirely simple consciousness' that
'remains ever the same' still manifests itself in facing 'all conditions that are otherwise
changing.'105 Put diﬀerently, the unannullable sensory datum itself remains even though its
temporal sensory contents varies from any given moment to the next.
Now, the preceding summary of Schleiermacher's position could be taken as having again
shifted our gaze from the question of sin and God-consciousness to that of phenomenal
consciousness. These summaries nevertheless give grounds to exposing the view that
Schleiermacher's phenomenology underlies even his theologizing account of God-
consciousness. Besides what has already been discussed, this is cashed out in his clearly stated
stance in §5.3 that 'a claim of perseverance for highest self-consciousness can be set forth only
on the presupposition that sensory self-consciousness would also be posited with it at the
same time.'106 What Schleiermacher argues for is that even the religious self-consciousness is
'still an imperfect state' - that is, in spite of Redemption the elementary mechanisms of self-
consciousness will stand - due to the necessity of it 'being referred to the deﬁniteness of
sensory self-consciousness.'107 To be as clear as possible, Schleiermacher's conviction is that
'Our religious self-consciousness (...) is formed in a way that ﬁts the description we have
already oﬀered. That is, it becomes to be a particular religious stirring only in its being related
to a datum that is viewed as a co-constitutive element.'108 Even though the distinction
between the two would have to be kept in mind - sensory self-consciousness is not the
same as being conscious of the necessity of datum-manifold (or viewing this latter in light of
faith) - it is, again, not untenable to argue that the two are aspects of one and the same self-
consciousness. As a matter of fact, human experience exposes that such duality is indeed our
lot. This is why even for a religious consciousness, 'no determination of immediate sensory
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
113

self-consciousness is incompatible with that higher life.'109 The phenomenal self-
consciousness is contained within and sustains the religious self-consciousness.
Here we ﬁnally reach the point of commenting the continuous temptation of sin that
captures the essence of Schleiermacher's phenomenological account. The notion that
there is no 'pure' religious self-consciousness whereas it is always also a phenomenal self-
consciousness - otherwise it would succumb to excarnatory idealism - has prepared the
ground for us to understand what Schleiermacher means when stating that 'a regenerate
person is continually struggling against sin.'110 According to Schleiermacher, contrary to
what could be proposed in light of his anthropological theology, sin is not 'absolutely
extinguished' whereas it 'is still appearing' even after one's conversion into admitting the
reality of absolute dependence111. In short, Schleiermacher's position is that in spite of
the feeling of absolute dependence human existence is always, even when viewed as
redeemed and justiﬁed, tied in with the 'meaning-giving sensory-functions' that pose the
threat of continuously falling to 'sin.'112 Echoing Augustine's analysis of the mortifying
state of concupiscence in Book X of Confessions - concupiscentia carnis et concupiscentia
oculorum et ambitio saeculi113 - Schleiermacher seems to argue along Augustine's lines
that there is no innocence in human life whereas human existence froths and ﬂounders
'in the tumultuous sea of [sensible] fornications.'114 In other words, Schleiermacher's
notion of servitude is that the mediating sensory self-consciousness - which is integrally
linked in with the highest self-consciousness - generates a certain oscillation that diverts
the highest self-consciousness and continuously pushes the self back at the lower level of
sensible self-consciousness.
The unceasing sensory data with its exciting particular temporal objects in this sense
fulﬁlls the deﬁnition of sin as 'whatever turning away from God that might exist in the
situations of our lives (unsern Zuständen Abwendung von Gott) [and] a deed originating in
ourselves (unserer ursprünglichen Tat).'115 It is therefore not diﬃcult to understand why
Schleiermacher also calls the sensible realm tempting: 'Thus, this domain, within which
one's enticements lie, enticements against which it is always the hardest fully to mount
a resistance, is the domain of temptation for each person.'116 As this sensuous 'ungodliness'
or 'obliviousness as to God'117 is the active state of natural self-consciousness, it is now also
clear why the Gottvergenssenheit-form of self-consciousness is not felt as nasty or unto-
ward - it is our natural human standing. Insofar as the religious self-consciousness is then
our concern, 'the struggle consists solely in this: that we seek to fend oﬀor to overcome
temptations that emerge within our activity in the reign of God.'118 But to be convinced
that there is 'a reign of God' remains a struggling task itself.
Notes
1. Nietzsche, Basic Writings, 777.
2. Lewis, Religion, Modernity, and Politics in Hegel, 2.
3. Wyman, "Rethinking the Christian Doctrine of Sin: Friedrich Schleiermacher and Hick's
'Irenaean Type'," 199.
4. Wyman (1994) mentions, among others, Rosenkranz, Müller, Ritschl, Barth, Pröpper, and
Niebuhr.
5. Wyman, "ethinking the Christian Doctrine of Sin," 199, 201. - The link between
Schleiermacher's doctrine of sin and Irenaeus has originally been drawn by John Hick in
his widely read 1966 work Evil and the God of Love that focused on the problem of theodicy.
114
T. HELENIUS

In the work Hick puts forward an argument for Schleiermacher's revision of the doctrine of
sin; this makes Hick to stand out as a theologian favoring Schleiermacher's theological work.
In Hick's interpretation, however, Schleiermacher was more 'Irenaean' than 'Augustinian'
in that both Irenaeus and Schleiermacher portray the spiritual human not in a dichotomic
but
in
a
processual
manner.
Walter
Wyman
defends
the
Hickian
position
of
Schleiermacher's 'Irenaean' theology and argues that it is possible to construe 'a persuasive
case' for such interpretation.
6. Rigby, The Theology of Augustine's Confessions, 96.
7. Marion, In the Self's Place: The Approach of Saint Augustine.
8. Heidegger, The Phenomenology of Religious Life, 129-30.
9. Westhelle, "Original Sin Revisited: Schleiermacher's Contribution to the Hefnerian Project,"
389.
10. Wyman, "Rethinking the Christian Doctrine of Sin," 204.
11. Ibid., 205. - The passage in question is from §101.2 of Christian Faith.
12. Schleiermacher, On the Glaubenslehre, 42-3, 45, 48, 52-3, 56, 68-73, 80-3, 85-7.
13. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 356 (§60.1).
14. Ibid., 377 (§61.5). - Contrary to Schleiermacher's self-assessment, Reinhold Niebuhr 'con-
sidered Schleiermacher to be a Pelagian' because of having conﬂated actual sin with
consciousness of it, and also distinguished sin from the will in his description of the original
sin. Derek Nelson, who points out this criticism, does not share Niebuhr's view. Nelson,
What's Wrong with Sin, 15, 18.
15. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 361, 397, 404 (§60.3; §65.1; §66.2).
16. Ibid., 419 (§70.1).
17. Ibid., 426 (§71.1). - For a discussion concerning Schleiermacher's revision of the originated
and originating original sin, cf. Westhelle, "Original Sin Revisited," 389-91. Cf. also
Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 453-54 (§72.6).
18. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 412-13, 417, 430 (§69.3; §69.ps; §71.2).
19. Ibid., 82, 84 (§11.2).
20. Ibid., 82 (§11.2).
21. Ibid., 271 (§48.3).
22. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 2, 731-40 (§111.1-4).
23. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 499 (§72.5).
24. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 2, 937-45, 952-64 (§148.1-§149.3; §153.1-§156.3).
25. Derek Nelson, in his analysis of the points of convergence and dissonance between
Schleiermacher and
Ritschl,
oﬀers
an overwhelmingly
individualizing reading
of
Schleiermacher's notion of sin. At the same time, however, he attempts at opening a path
to the collective level of a living consciousness, and does so well, until then repeatedly
collapsing these attempts back to the pure individual; his analysis of Schleiermacher is
merely a preparation for his analysis of Ritschl. Nelson, What's Wrong with Sin, 22-8.
26. Adams, "Faith and Religious Knowledge," 45.
27. Ibid.
28. Schleiermacher, On the Glaubenslehre, 45.
29. Wyman, "Sin and Redemption," 130-32, 134.
30. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 504 (§81.2).
31. Vance, "Sin and Consciousness of Sin in Schleiermacher," 247.
32. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 385 (§63).
33. Ibid. 82-3 (§11.2).
34. Schleiermacher, Soliloquies, 30-4, 49-53, 62, 77-8, 81-3.
35. I am obviously referring to Schleiermacher's depiction, discussed above, that 'Denn alsdann
könnte der Mangel won etwas ausserhalb der Natur nicht als ein übler Zustand gefühlt
werden.'
36. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 82-3 (§11.2).
37. Ibid., 397 (§65.1).
38. Ibid., 398 (§65.1).
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
115

39. Ibid., 397 (§65.1).
40. Ibid., 402 (§66.1). Furthermore, Schleiermacher also holds that it is possible to 'trace the way
in which God-consciousness takes shape in and with stirred self-consciousness only to the
deed of an individual.' Ibid., 385 (§63).
41. Ibid., 403 (§66.1).
42. Ibid., 19, 24 (§4.1; §4.3).
43. Ibid., 24 (§4.3). - The point is echoed in Schleiermacher's ﬁrst letter to Lücke in that he
'wholeheartedly concedes to Dr. Steudel that in acknowledging our dependence we also
specify our view of the world.' Schleiermacher, On the Glaubenslehre, 44.
44. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 29, 36 (§5.1; §5.4). My emphasis concerning
receptivity is clearly diﬀerent from that of Nimmo; cf. Nimmo, "Schleiermacher on
Justiﬁcation: A Departure From the Reformation?" 65.
45. Cf. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 20 (§4.2).
46. Ibid., 416 (§69.3).
47. Ibid., 22 (§4.2); Schleiermacher, Soliloquies, 17. - I am thinking about, in particular, this
passage: 'All those feelings that seem to be forced upon me by the material world are in
reality my own free doing, nothing is a mere eﬀect of that world upon me, every real
inﬂuence is exerted by me upon it; that world is not, in fact, distinct from me, not antithetic
to me.' That Schleiermacher also uses the term 'external world' and refers to its physicality
does not do away with the thought that the experienced world coexists with the conscious-
ness of it.
48. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 22 (§4.2). Cf. Ibid., 473 (§75): 'die Welt als seinem
Ort.'
49. Schleiermacher, On Religion, trans. Crouter, 141-42. - Schleiermacher's language is rather
poetic: ' . . . von derselben Schwingung ergriﬀen zum Bewußtsein seines Daseins gelangend
durch einen antwortenden, verwandten Ton das harrende Ohr des Auﬀordernden erfreuen
werde.'
50. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 20 (§4.1).
51. Schleiermacher, On the Highest Good, 5-7.
52. Schleiermacher, On Freedom, 26.
53. Ibid., 10, 23. - The connection between the faculty of desire, sin, and a phenomenological
description of human experience is furthermore made plausible by Schleiermacher's con-
viction that 'Such a faculty of desire must absolutely be a choosing faculty. (. . .) What is
essential is that human beings can compare more than merely particular objects. As a result
we can say that the human faculty of desire is choice; that is, the human faculty of desire is
always determined through choice.' Ibid., 11. See ibid., 20-7, 70-3, 93-5, 128-29.
54. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 20, 404, 460, 474 (§4.1; §66.2; §74.2; §75.1).
55. Ibid., 388 (§63.3). Cf. also Ibid., 31-2, 385 (§5.3; §63). Schleiermacher's thesis in §5.3 is that,
in contrast to the disappearing animal consciousness, sensory self-consciousness 'would
have to continue undiminished even if the highest level would already have reached its full
development. (. . .) The being-referred of what is sensorially determined to higher self-
consciousness in the unity of the given element is the consummatory apex of self-
consciousness.'
56. Ibid., 498 (§81.1).
57. Schleiermacher, On the Glaubenslehre, 38.
58. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 510 (§81.4).
59. Nimmo, "Schleiermacher on Justiﬁcation," 57. The same phenomenological approach,
veriﬁed in his marginal notes referring back to Part One, leads Schleiermacher to also
discuss the divine attributes relating to the consciousness of sin; 'Wherever ecclesial doctrine
seeks to smooth over this contradiction by proposing that God is not the originator of sin
but that sin is grounded in human freedom, then that statement, nevertheless, needs to be
supplemented by this one: God has ordained that dominion by the Spirit that has not yet
come to pass in any given instance becomes sin for us.' Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol.
1, 497 (§81).
116
T. HELENIUS

60. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 24 (§4.3).
61. Schleiermacher, On the Glaubenslehre, 56.
62. Wyman, "Sin and Redemption," 129.
63. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 269 (§48.2).
64. Schleiermacher, On Religion, trans. Oman, 41.
65. Ibid., 41.
66. Ibid., 42.
67. Ibid., 43.
68. Ibid., 137-38.
69. Ibid., 27.
70. Ibid., 29.
71. Ibid., 43.
72. Ibid., 33.
73. Ibid., 42-3.
74. Schleiermacher, On Religion, trans. R. Crouter, 90, 102-09, 118-20, 126-27, 136-40, 182, 189,
195, 209-10, 216. - Richard Crouter oﬀers of concise discussion of the diﬀerences between
the 1799, 1806, and 1821 editions of On Religion. Cf. Crouter, 'Introduction,' 55-73.
75. Schleiermacher, On Religion, trans. J. Oman, p. 36.
76. Ibid., 89.
77. Ibid., 42.
78. Ibid., 37.
79. Ibid., 41.
80. Ibid., 41.
81. Ibid., 24-5.
82. Ibid., 45.
83. Ibid., 63.
84. Ibid., 101.
85. Ibid., 36.
86. Schleiermacher, On the Highest Good, 21-25, 30-31. Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason,
A619-20/B647-48.
87. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 26 (§4.4).
88. Schleiermacher, On Religion, trans. J. Oman, 51.
89. Ibid., 59.
90. Ibid., 43.
91. Ibid., 44.
92. Ibid., 44.
93. Ibid., 54.
94. Ibid., 45.
95. Ibid., 56.
96. Ibid., 79.
97. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 99-100 (§13.ps).
98. Ibid., 385 (§63). Cf. Pattison, Kierkegaard and the Theology of the Nineteenth Century, 5-29,
47-51, 127-30, 148-49.
99. Schleiermacher, On the Glaubenslehre, 56. - Schleiermacher discusses the various interpreta-
tions of the composition regarding his Christian Faith in his second letter to Lücke. The point
I would like to stress is that the essay at hand does not claim to overrule or undo the
theological content in Part II of CF in particular whereas the point is that the Introduction,
supported by the later material in Parts I and II, allows for a phenomenological reading of the
work. To be clear, our approach is manifestly diﬀerent from those philosophical approaches
directly and consistently criticized by Schleiermacher in his eﬀort of taking distance from any
natural theology that would seek support from what he calls speculative philosophy. This
essay, in other words, is not concerned about Schleiermacher's theology but about his
included phenomenology (of sin) - or Schleiermacher's 'philosophy of religion' in the
sense he would like to have used the term - that serves as a means for exploring the
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
117

elementary human experience, or in establishing 'a principle for determining what is valid in
all the modiﬁcations of Christian self-consciousness and what is not present except within
that consciousness.' As the reader of this essay may have observed, the particular exclusively
present in the Christian self-consciousness is not in the interest of this text whereas the
attention is drawn to those modiﬁcations Schleiermacher also explores under the notion of
sense-consciousness. Ibid., 56-60, 76-80.
100. Schleiermacher, Christian Faith, Vol. 1, 21 (§4.2).
101. Ibid., 27 (§5).
102. Ibid., 28 (§5.1).
103. Ibid., 31 (§5.3).
104. Ibid., 27 (§5).
105. Ibid., 31 (§5.3).
106. Ibid., 32 (§5.3).
107. Ibid., 32 (§5.3).
108. Ibid., 34 (§5.4).
109. Ibid., 37 (§5.5).
110. Ibid., 736 (§111.2).
111. Ibid., 737 (§111.3).
112. Ibid., 736 (§111.4).
113. Augustine, The Confessions, X.30.41-41.66.
114. Ibid., II.2.2.
115. See note 32 above.
116. Ibid., 739 (§111.4).
117. Ibid., 82, 84 (§11.2).
118. Ibid., 739 (§111.4).
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
Notes on contributor
Timo Helenius received his PhD in philosophy from Boston College in 2013, and he has been
a Visiting Scholar at the Department of Religious Studies at Brown University between 2016 and
2019. Helenius has taught philosophy and ethics at Boston College, Mount Ida College, and—most
recently—at the University of New Brunswick Saint John as a Visiting Assistant Professor of
Philosophy. Helenius's research has focused on contemporary Continental philosophy in general
and in Paul Ricoeur in particular. His work, Ricoeur, Culture, and Recognition: A Hermeneutic of
Cultural Subjectivity, was published by Lexington Books (Rowman & Littleﬁeld) in 2016.
Bibliography
Adams, R. M. "Faith and Religious Knowledge." In The Cambridge Companion to Friedrich
Schleiermacher, edited by J. Mariña, 35-51. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2005.
Augustine. The Confessions. Trans. Maria Boulding. Hyde Park, NY: New City Press, 1997.
Crouter, R. "Introduction." In On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultural Despisers, edited by R. Crouter,
1-73. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Heidegger, M. The Phenomenology of Religious Life, Translated by M. Fritsch and J. A. Gosetti-
Ferencei. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 2004.
Kant, I. Critique of Pure Reason, Translated by P. Guyer and A. W. Wood. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2009.
118
T. HELENIUS

Lewis, T. A. Religion, Modernity, and Politics in Hegel. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Marion, J.-L. In the Self's Place: The Approach of Saint Augustine, Translated by J. L. Kosky.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2012.
Nelson, D. R. What's Wrong with Sin: Sin in Individual and Social Perspective from Schleiermacher
to Theologies of Liberation. London: T&T Clark International, 2009.
Nietzsche, F. Basic Writings, Translated by W. Kauﬀman. New York: The Modern Library, 1992.
Nimmo, P. "Schleiermacher on Justiﬁcation: A Departure from the Reformation?" Scottish Journal
of Theology 66, no. 1 (2013): 50-73. doi:10.1017/S0036930612000257.
Pattison, G. Kierkegaard and the Theology of the Nineteenth Century: The Paradox and the "Point of
Contact". New York: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Rigby, P. The Theology of Augustine's Confessions. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Schleiermacher, F. On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultural Despisers, Translated by J. Oman.
New York: Harper & Row, 1958.
Schleiermacher, F. Schleiermacher's Soliloquies, Translated by H. L. Friess. Chicago: Open Court
Pub. Co., 1979.
Schleiermacher, F. On the Glaubenslehre: Two Letters to Dr. Lücke. Translated by J. Duke and
F. Fiorenza, American Academy of Religion Texts and Translations 3. Chico, CA: Scholars
Press, 1981.
Schleiermacher, F. On Religion: Speeches to Its Cultured Despisers, Translated by R. Crouter.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Schleiermacher, F. On Freedom, Translated by A. L. Blackwell. Lewinston, NY: The Edwin Mellen
Press, 1992a.
Schleiermacher, F. On the Highest Good, Translated by H. Viktor Froese. Lewinston, NY: The
Edwin Mellen Press, 1992b.
Schleiermacher, F. Christian Faith: A New Translation and Critical Edition. Vol. 1. Translated by
N. T. Terrence, C. L. Kelsey, and L. Edwina. Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox
Press, 2016a.
Schleiermacher, F. Christian Faith: A New Translation and Critical Edition. Vol. 2. Translated by
N. T. Terrence, C. L. Kelsey, and L. Edwina. Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox
Press, 2016b.
Vance, R. "Sin and Consciousness of Sin in Schleiermacher." Perspectives in Religious Studies 13
(1986): 241-262.
Westhelle, V. "Original Sin Revisited: Schleiermacher's Contribution to the Hefnerian Project."
Currents in Theology and Mission 28, no. 3-4 (2001): 385-393.
Wyman, W. "Rethinking the Christian Doctrine of Sin: Friedrich Schleiermacher and Hick's
'Irenaean Type'." The Journal of Religion 74, no. 2 (1994): 199-217. doi:10.1086/489352.
Wyman, W. "Sin and Redemption." In The Cambridge Companion to Friedrich Schleiermacher,
edited by J. Mariña, 129-149. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHY AND THEOLOGY
119

