Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
The Anticipation of the Present: Phenomenology of
déjà vu
Stefano Micali
To cite this article: Stefano Micali (2018) The Anticipation of the Present: Phenomenology
of déjà vu , Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 49:2, 156-170, DOI:
10.1080/00071773.2017.1403748
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2017.1403748
Published online: 22 Nov 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 761
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

The Anticipation of the Present: Phenomenology of déjà vu
Stefano Micali
Department of Philosophy, Husserl-Archives: Centre for Phenomenology and Continental Philosophy, Leuven,
Belgium
ABSTRACT
This paper analyses the déjà-vu experience in order to deepen the
understanding of the complex nature of time-consciousness from
a phenomenological point of view. The paper is divided into two
sections: the first section focuses on Bergson's research on déjà vu
in order to assess the validity of his position; the second section
describes
a
specific
form
of
déjà-vu
experience
from
a
phenomenological perspective. This investigation will question the
widespread assumption according to which déjà vu should be
conceived as a disturbance of the memory of the past. On the
contrary, the author shows that the disturbance primarily pertains
to the dimension of the future. In order to understand this
phenomenon,
it
is
necessary
to
focus
on
the
coherent
deformation of the immediate expectation of the imminent future.
KEYWORDS
Phenomenology; Déjà vu;
time-consciousness; memory
disturbance; time
disturbances
Philosophy is a notoriously complex activity. One of the reasons for this is due to its need to
combine lively expression of experience with conceptual thoroughness, inspired by a critical
and reflective attitude. Philosophical research becomes stringent insofar as it finds both the
most exhaustive exposition and the most accurate description of its subject. One must criti-
cally reflect on the notions used in the description by differentiating and contextualizing their
meanings in light of different perspectives and conceptual frameworks, by restricting the
scope of their validity, by questioning their presuppositions, by retracing the hidden genea-
logies that heavily influence their conceptual use. In his Negative Dialectics, Adorno affirms
that philosophical research in our times should focus on something marginal (and margin-
alized): it should start with the lived experience of phenomena considered as transient and
irrelevant within the tradition, in order to articulate them in a conceptually stringent and
compelling way. Today the door to philosophy is not only narrow; it is also "out of the way":
Philosophy has, at this historical moment, its true interest in what Hegel, in accordance with
tradition, proclaimed his disinterest: in the non-conceptual, the individual and the particular;
in what, ever since Plato, has been dismissed as transient and inconsequential and which
Hegel stamped with the label of lazy existence. Its theme would be the qualities which it
has degraded to the merely contingent, to quantité négligeable. What is urgent for the
concept is what it does not encompass, what its abstraction-mechanism eliminates, what is
not already an exemplar of the concept. Bergson as well as Husserl, the standard-bearers
of philosophical modernity, innervated this, but shrank away from it back into traditional
metaphysics. (Adorno, Negative Dialectics, 21)
© 2017 The British Society for Phenomenology
CONTACT Stefano Micali
stefano.micali@kuleuven.be
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY, 2018
VOL. 49, NO. 2, 156-170
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2017.1403748

It is not our intention here to discuss the legitimacy of Adorno's criticism, according to
which, respectively, Bergson's philosophy and Husserl's phenomenology fall into the
errors of traditional metaphysics. Yet, there is no doubt that Adorno is right regarding
the other aspect he emphasizes in the passage above: both authors are interested in appar-
ently "minor" and "marginal" phenomena. To be sure, they are interested in the philoso-
phical relevance that an inquiry into these minor phenomena can have. It is well known
that Husserl uses an "economic" metaphor for highlighting this point: phenomenology
shall focus on Kleingeld, on small change, on what is minor and not considered as valuable.
In this paper, we also propose to investigate a marginal experience. What experience
could be more irrelevant, contingent and marginal than déjà vu? It is perhaps not by
chance that Adorno refers to Bergson in the passage mentioned above. Bergson is the
author who has probably offered the most accurate analysis of déjà vu. Bodei compares
Freud's pivotal work on dreaming to Bergson's examination of déjà vu: both investigations
are almost indispensable for the understanding of their respective areas of research.1
The paper is divided into two sections. In the first section, we will focus on Bergson's
research on déjà vu in order to assess the validity of his position; in the second section, we
will develop a description of a specific form of déjà vu experience from a phenomenolo-
gical perspective. In our investigation, we will question the widespread assumption accord-
ing to which déjà vu should be conceived as a disturbance of the memory of the past. On
the contrary we will show that the disturbance primarily pertains to the dimension of the
future. In order to understand this phenomenon, it is necessary to focus on the coherent
deformation of the immediate expectation of the imminent future - what Husserl calls
protention.
I. Déjà vu as Memory of the Present
Bergson extensively studies the déjà-vu experience in his essay Memory of the Present and
False Recognition. Whereas the first part of the article summarizes with great clarity the
dominant positions regarding déjà vu in the research developed in the early twentieth
century, the second part offers an original interpretation of the phenomenon. Bergson's
essay still impresses the reader today with its accuracy, depth and elegance.
Bergson accepts two dominant assumptions in the research on déjà vu of his time:2
(1) Déjà vu entails the interplay of two images: one image is experienced as a reproduc-
tion of the other. The key problem is precisely to determine the relation between these
two images by doing justice to the complexity of the phenomenon. Usually, the
relation of the two images is conceived in temporal terms: the perceived image
comes first, and afterwards the second image is remembered. Within this framework
it is crucial to avoid any form of reductionism which would lead to undue simplifica-
tions. This is the case when one treats déjà vu as an error of memory. Bergson convin-
cingly shows the limits of this position. This is worth mentioning because this account
is still present in the current investigation of déjà vu in the field of cognitive sciences.
1 Bodei, Piramidi di Tempo, 64.
2 Bergson is characterizing, among others: Lalande, Des paramnésies; Dugas, Sur la fausse mémoire; Myers, "The Subliminal
Self"; Fouillée, La mémoire et la reconnaissance des souvenirs; and Lemaître, "Des phénomènes de paramnésie".
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
157

Here, one of the dominant perspectives considers déjà vu as a mistake concerning the
association between a past forgotten experience and a present one.3 Accordingly, the
feeling of familiarity depends on some kind of false or mistaken episodic memory
regarding one4 or more elements of the situation.5 The cause of the sense of familiarity
has been traced back to the affective aspects6 or to the Gestalt, i.e. the resemblance of
the general setting.7
Let us look at Bergson's example of attending a play to observe the difference between an
erroneous memory and déjà vu. Consider the distinction between the identity of the scene
implied in déjà vu and the experience of the same play on two different visits to the theatre:
If I am at a play which I have seen before, I recognize one by one each of the words and each
of the scenes; at last I recognize the whole piece and recall having seen it before; but I had
then a different seat, and other neighbors, and was taken up with other preoccupations; in
any case I could not have been then what I am today, since I have lived in the meanwhile.
If, then, the two images are the same, they are not presented in the same frame, and the
vague feeling of the difference of the frames surrounds, like a fringe, the consciousness I
have of the identity of the images, and allows me at every moment to distinguish them. In
false recognition, on the contrary, the frames are just as identical as the images themselves.
I am present at the same play with the same sensations, the same preoccupations, I am at this
very moment in the very same position, at the same date, at the same instant of my history
where and when I then was.8
(1) At this point we have to consider the second fundamental presupposition that
Bergson shares with the research of his time: consciousness is more certain and
focused, the more it turns to action.9 Correspondingly, consciousness becomes
more uncertain, insecure and its representations more protean, the more it withdraws
into itself, into an almost dream-like state. An increased detachment from the sur-
rounding environment (with a diminishment of a focused attention on the action)
is to be placed at the origin of déjà vu.
Let us now try to address the main aspects in Bergson's original contribution to the under-
standing of the phenomenon in question. Déjà vu is difficult to grasp due to its ambiguous
nature. This experience is qualified by two characteristics that seem to be incompatible: on
the one hand, déjà vu is a continuous and unique experience that registers a contingent
situation; on the other hand, one immediately tends to locate this unique "duration" in
the temporal horizon of the past. All attempts at explanation tend to affirm one of the
aspects at the cost of the other.
3 Brown, The Déjà Vu Experience.
4 Poetzl, "Zur Metapsychologie des 'déjà vu'" and "The Relationship Between Experimentally Induced Dream Images and
Indirect Vision".
5 Findler, "A Model-Based Theory for Déjà Vu and Related Psychological Phenomena"; and Fleminger, "The déjà vu experi-
ence: Remembrance of Things past? Comment".
6 Pagliaro, "The déjà vu experience: Remembrance of things past? Reply"; Siomopoulos, "Derealization and déjà vu: Formal
mechanisms".
7 Grasset, "La sensation du "déjà-vu""; Reed, The Psychology of Anomalous Experience: A Cognitive Approach; Cleary, "Rec-
ognition memory, familiarity, and déjà vu experiences".
8 Bergson, "Memory of the Present and False Recognition", 174.
9 This presupposition is especially shared with: Janet, "A propos du déjà vu" and Les obsessions et la psychasthénie; Léon-
Kindberg, "Le sentiment du déjà-vu et l'illusion de fausse reconnaissance".
158
S. MICALI

In order to properly apprehend it, déjà vu has to be understood as an anomalous action.
The "élan vital" is here disturbed, interrupted. The future no longer functions as the end
(always provisional) that allows one to direct his/her own actions. Rather, the future
becomes unmoored - it no longer orients our actions. Through this detachment from
the future, a peculiar overlapping between perception and memory takes place. In déjà
vu, therefore, the present is experienced as a past - hence the title of Bergson's essay
"Memory of the Present". The form of the experience is that of memory, whereas the
content belongs to the dimension of the present.
The present is twofold at every moment, its very up-rush being in two jets exactly sym-
metrical, one of which falls back towards the past whilst the other springs forward
towards the future. But the forward-springing one, which we call perception, is that
alone which interests us. We have no need of the memory of things whilst we hold the
things themselves. Practical consciousness throwing this memory aside as useless, theoreti-
cal reflection holds it to be non-existent. Thus the illusion arises that memory succeeds
perception.10
In other words, for pragmatic reasons, only one orientation of our experience of the
present attracts our attention - the one oriented toward the future, whereas the other
direction, the one oriented toward the past, is systematically ignored. As such, Bergson
calls into question a principle that, from the standpoint of common sense, we take to
be obvious but which turns out to be misleading. This basic assumption afﬁrms the tem-
poral anteriority of perception to memory.
Bergson investigates the phenomenon of déjà vu by identifying three key features:
(a) Memory of the present.
(b) Splitting of the ego.
(c) Sense of premonition.
These three moments are closely interwoven. Their interrelation becomes particularly
visible in the intense forms of déjà vu. Only in these cases does the intertwining of the
three moments come clearly to the fore. At the same time, the ﬁrst feature is the most
important one. It is even legitimate to consider the ego-splitting and the sense of premo-
nition as implications of the ﬁrst alteration, the memory of the present.
a. Memory of the Present
As we have already seen, Bergson affirms a simultaneity between perception and memory.
The relation between memory and perception is further articulated, according to him, in
terms of actuality and virtuality:
The memory seems to be to the perception what the image reflected in the mirror is to the
object in front of it. The object can be touched as well as seen; acts on us as well as we on it; is
pregnant with possible actions; it is actual. The image is virtual, and though it resembles the
object, it is incapable of doing what the object does.11
10 Bergson, "Memory of the Present and False Recognition", 160.
11 Ibid., 165.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
159

The present experience is split into an actual perception open to what is next and a
memory of the immediate past. This mobile edge is re-newed at every instant and involves
the totality of our experience:
Our actual existence, then, whilst it is unrolled in time, duplicates itself all along with a virtual
existence, a mirror-image. Every moment of our life presents two aspects, it is actual and
virtual, perception on the one side and memory on the other. Each moment of life is split
up as and when it is posited.12
In déjà vu, we have an abnormal awareness of a duplication of the enduring present. The
present is split into actuality and virtuality, into perception and memory. In déjà vu, we
turn our attention to what is not useful and is, therefore, usually systematically overlooked.
We live in the memory which retains (and repeats) the perception in forms of mirrored,
virtual images:
What is duplicating itself at each moment into perception and memory is the totality of
what we are seeing, hearing and experiencing, all that we are with all that surrounds us.
(...) We feel that we are confronted with a recollection: a recollection it must be, for it
bears the characteristic mark of states we usually call by this name and which only
appear when their object has disappeared. And yet it does not present to us something
which has been, but simply something which is; it advances pari passu with the percep-
tion which it reproduces. It is a recollection of the present moment in that actual moment
itself. It is of the past in its form and of the present in its matter. It is a memory of the
present.13
Thus Bergson considers déjà vu as an anomaly. This anomaly allows us to become aware of
the normal functioning of our consciousness of the present, which usually remains hidden.
In other words, déjà vu brings to the fore the double structure of experience, i.e. the sim-
ultaneous functioning of perception and memory.
b. Splitting of the Ego
As already said, among the above-mentioned three key features of déjà vu, one has,
according to Bergson, a clear priority. The memory of the present should be taken as a
starting point for the understanding of this phenomenon. The other two moments are
implications or consequences of the first. Perceiving what happens in the present as a
past leads to a duplication of standpoints, as if there were two selves: on the one hand
there is a self that acts freely and spontaneously in the present moment; on the other
hand, there is a self that feels itself being acted upon and determined: he/she (re)lives
his/her life like an automaton. In déjà vu, this second self comes to the fore: everything
seems already to have been decided. The feeling of inevitability becomes here particularly
invasive:
But the memory of this present, which is equally there, makes him believe that he is repeating
what has been said already, seeing again what has been seen already, and so transforms him
into an actor reciting his part. Thence two different selves, one of which, conscious of its
liberty, erects itself into an independent spectator of a scene which the other seems to be
playing in a mechanical way.14
12 Ibid., 165.
13 Ibid., 167.
14 Ibid., 169.
160
S. MICALI

In déjà vu, subjectivity continuously oscillates between these two points of view, which are
anchored to the two different functions of perception and memory. When subjectivity
experiences itself as a past through the memory, the feeling of inevitability is - ironically
- unavoidable.15
c. Premonition
To feel the present as a past has a profound impact on our relation to the future. The future
is always involved in our perception of the present. If I feel that I have already been
through that unique scene, I also feel that I am able to anticipate the future involved in
this scene, as if I were capable of looking at the situation from the future. Bergson stresses
this aspect very clearly:
Now, how could we have already lived a part of the situation if we had not lived the whole of
it? Could we recognize what is being unrolled if we did not know what is still rolled up? Are
we not able at each moment to anticipate at least the following moment? The instant which is
about to come is already broken into by the instant which now is; the content of the one is
inseparable from the content of the other: therefore, if the present instant belongs already to
my past, must not the coming instant belong to it equally? If I recognize the present instant,
am I not quite as surely going to recognize the coming one? So I am unceasingly, towards
what is on the point of happening, in the attitude of a person who will recognize and who
consequently knows. But this is only the attitude of knowledge, the form of it without the
matter.16
Therefore, the impact of perceiving the present as a past will also imperceptibly expand
into the dimension of the future. So it will create a strong feeling of familiarity with
respect to what is going to happen, as if one already knew it. Because I feel that I know
the present in its temporal extension, in its completeness, it is as natural as it is illegitimate
to relate the sense of familiarity to the future. William James holds a similar position when
he described the curious experience of déjà vu in terms of "the feeling that the present
moment in its completeness has been experienced before".17
A careful reading of Bergson's research on the premonitory character of the present
reveals that he articulates two different relations between the present and the future,
without adequately distinguishing between them. The first is what we have described so
far: a relationship between the present and the future is determined in terms of impli-
cation. The second form regards the doxastic aspect of certainty and has a proleptical char-
acter. The impression of knowing the future in its content is due to the attitude of someone
who is convinced that in the future he/she will have felt the current instant as already
known. The assumption of such an imminent certainty has a retroactive impact on the
experience of the present:
So I am unceasingly, towards what is on the point of happening, in the attitude of a person
who will recognize and who consequently knows. But this is only the attitude of knowledge,
15 "We act and yet 'are acted.' We feel that we choose and will, but that we are choosing what is imposed on us and willing
the inevitable. Thence a compenetration of states which melt into one another and even coincide in immediate con-
sciousness, but which are none the less logically incompatible. Because they are logically incompatible, reflective con-
sciousness will represent them by a duplication of the self into two different personages, one of which appropriates
freedom, the other necessity: the one, a free spectator, beholds the other automatically playing his part". Ibid., 169.
16 Ibid., 168.
17 James, The Principles of Psychology, 675.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
161

the form of it without the matter. As I cannot predict what is going to happen, I quite realize
that I do not know it; but I foresee that I am going to have known it, in the sense that I shall
recognize it when I shall perceive it; and this recognition to come, which I feel inevitable on
account of the rush of my faculty of recognizing, exercises in advance a retroactive effect on
my present, placing me in the strange position of a person who feels he knows what he knows
he does not know.18
By analysing the temporal structure of the Christian faith, Theunissen deﬁnes the prolep-
tical structure of the present in the following terms: "The present has a proleptical struc-
ture, provided that what occurs in it is determined by the event of the future in it (the
present)".19 In light of Theunissen's deﬁnition, it seems legitimate to consider Bergson's
deﬁnition concerning the relation between the present and the future as proleptical. It
would be interesting to determine the relation between these two different forms of refer-
ence to the future anchored in the present. Is it possible that the ﬁrst form, namely the
implication, presupposes the second one, namely the proleptical attitude? Because one
has the certainty that he/she will have known the present situation, his/her feeling of fam-
iliarity regards the totality of the instant in its temporal duration. A deeper investigation of
this topic is beyond the scope of the present paper. Before we move on and carry out a
phenomenological analysis of déjà vu, I would like to make some critical remarks concern-
ing Bergson's investigation on déjà vu:
(1) Bergson's interpretation is characterized by an ambiguity. It oscillates between two
distinct positions without thematizing their difference. Indeed, Bergson considers
these positions to be identical. On the one hand, déjà vu is interpreted as a conscious-
ness of a duplication inherent to each moment of life, which is split between memory
and perception. The anomaly consists in the simultaneous consciousness of the two
streams of experience, given that one of them is usually not an object of attention:
"We see at the same time our real existence and its virtual images".20 On the other
hand, déjà vu is understood as a single flow articulated in the form of memory
with the content of perception. The case of déjà vu "is a recollection of the present
moment in that actual moment itself. It is of the past in its form and of the present
in its matter".21 We do not have here an anomalous consciousness of two functioning
streams of experience, that is, memory and perception. Rather, we have a single flow
of consciousness with a very particular form. The questions here are: do we have the
consciousness of a duplication of flows in déjà vu? Or do we have one single temporal
flow characterized by a specific alteration? Or, alternatively, do we have the conscious-
ness of a duplication of the flow where one of the two "streams" has the form of the
memory with the matter of perception? The modality of the unity or duality of the
flow is not clear.
(2) If we focus on the description of the duplication, the structural analysis of the relation-
ship between the two streams is also problematic from a phenomenological point of
view. Bergson affirms that the two streams (memory and perception) flow simul-
taneously. However, our consciousness of the flow of the mirrored virtual image
18 Bergson, "Memory of the Present and False Recognition", 168.
19 Theunissen, Negative Theologie der Zeit, 326.
20 Bergson, "Memory of the Present and False Recognition", 165.
21 Ibid., 167.
162
S. MICALI

does not have the same temporal character as the consciousness of the stream of per-
ception. The modes of appearance of the two streams are different with regard to the
sense of continuity. As we will see, the stream of mirrored images (in Bergson's ter-
minology) does not proceed continuously. It has an intermittent character: this flow is
suddenly interrupted - we can no longer follow it - and then it returns. Therefore,
stating a complete simultaneity of the two flows is a simplification for those forms
of déjà vu that do not have an instantaneous form. Here it is appropriate to anticipate
a central aspect of our approach to déjà vu. In the second part, we will challenge one
major assumption in Bergson's investigation: the stream of mirrored images must, in
our view, not be understood in terms of a memory of the past.
(3) According to Bergson, déjà vu entails a premonitory feeling. This feeling is empty with
regard to content. His analysis is unequivocal in this regard.22 However, empirical
research contradicts such an assumption: cognitive scientists have recognized an
inherent reference to content in this premonitory feeling, and they of course avoid
any parapsychological tendency:
Although parapsychological interpretations of déjà vu are problematic, a sense of precogni-
tion is associated with a sufficiently large number of déjà vu reports that this needs to be
clearly addressed, rather than dismissed. Several scientific perspectives can potentially
demystify this subjective impression.23
Ernst Bloch also pointed out that an experience of déjà vu entails a reference to future
content and not the mere form of the future.
As a result, in déjà vu one has the impression of knowing exactly what will happen in the next
instant (but never beyond that); the event that is expected - indeed, awaited with positive
certainty - appears ineluctably to emerge - appears to emerge, thus heightening the shock
effect.24
In his text Images of Déjà Vu, Bloch questions the distinction that Bergson made between
the certain, empty premonitory feeling and the actual, content-related anticipation of the
scene down to its smallest details. In other words, Bergson's analysis does not do justice to
the most interesting and puzzling cases of déjà vu, where there is a feeling of being able to
predict the imminent future even with regard to its content. These cases will be the focus of
our analysis in the next section.
II. Déjà vu with Premonition
In the scholarly literature on déjà vu, Neppe's definition has established itself as a reference
point thanks to its precision: he defines déjà vu as "any subjectively inappropriate
impression of familiarity of a present experience, with an undefined past".25 This defi-
nition is sufficiently indeterminate to cover the majority of cases, while at the same
time providing a criterion for recognizing déjà vu: an unjustified familiarity with an inde-
finite past.
22 Ibid., 165.
23 Brown, The Déjà Vu Experience, 189.
24 Bloch, Literary Essays, 204.
25 Neppe, "The Concept of Déjà Vu", 3.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
163

In our view it would be more accurate to qualify not only the past as "indefinite", but
all the other temporal dimensions as well. Accordingly, we would have the following
definition: déjà vu is any subjectively inappropriate impression of familiarity with a
present experience whose place in a temporal context is not clearly localized. Perhaps
this definition is also problematic because it is not capable of addressing a key feature
of déjà vu: the point is here not the familiarity of the present as though it were past
or indeterminate in temporal terms, but rather familiarity with the imminent future -
with what comes next and must actually remain unpredictable, with what necessarily
surprises us. Déjà vu experiences are uncanny because what is new is experienced as
already known. This is the crux: the relation to the future bears a much greater relevance
than Bergson recognized.
According to Gaynard's surveys (1992), 38% of déjà-vu experiences involve some form
of pre-cognition.26 In order to understand a paradigmatic example of this form of déjà vu,
it is worth analysing an experience reported by the great psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin. In
fact, Ernst Bloch cites Kraepelin and puts his report to good use:
Emil Kraepelin, in his reliable solid Textbook of Psychiatry, reports the fantastic experience
he himself underwent: while on expedition through an unexplored region of Peru, he felt not
only that he had witnessed the entire scene before, but knew in the same moment that a
bridge was about to come into view around the bend in the road. This foreknowledge
seemed to have been included in the moment of déjà vu; and indeed, after passing the
bend of the road, the bridge stood before him just with all details that he had anticipated.
Such "prophetic" moments also occur in less exotic cases of déjà vu, albeit in less clearly
developed form.27
Why is this experience so destabilizing? While travelling in an unknown region Kraepelin
did not "guess" at the generic presence of a generic bridge around the bend of the road.
Rather he was capable of (re-)assuming a distinguished perspective he had inexplicably
taken before. He was able to re-see a unique scene: that bridge in that particular light,
in that speciﬁc environment with that particular colour etc. This impossible repetition
of what is contingent is accompanied by a speciﬁc anxiety.
Let us consider another case of déjà vu with premonition. We will analyse a personal
communication from a colleague, T.G., whom I recently met at a conference. After
having talked about my research on déjà vu, T.G. told me about a coherent deformation
of experience very similar to Kraepelin's:
I entered a pub in my town where I have never been before for the quite compelling reason
that the pub had just been opened. Suddenly I feel a strange sensation. I have the impression
that a certain scene is imminently next to come: I can already see how my friend Paul, whose
face in profile is illuminate by a suffused light, will tell me the following phrase: "So what will
you do this summer?" I feel strongly the imminence of that scene. I do not know how to
behave. The desire comes to my mind to leave the room in order to undermine the conditions
of possibility for the coming into being of those imminent words. But I cannot do it. I stay. It
seems to me to be in a dream. Slowly, all the conditions appear allowing the coming into
being of that scene I (incredibly, impossibly) have anticipated. As if it were a movie set
where all the actors are put in the right place. Suddenly the scene emerges and those
words occur: "So what will you do this summer?"
26 Gaynard, "Young People and the Paranormal".
27 Bloch, Literary Essays, 30.
164
S. MICALI

During this bizarre and intrusive experience, T.G. asks himself the following questions:
"Am I having déjà vu? Or am I freaking out? Is it all a dream? Or does all of this want
to say something to me?" In the experience of déjà vu, one becomes a passive spectator
of a modiﬁcation of the perceptual horizon, without being able to orient him/herself:
where does this modiﬁcation come from? Is it a projection of anxiety? Is it a consequence
of a weakness of nerves or a breakdown?
In this form of déjà vu there is not only the invasive sense of anticipating the imminent
future. Indeed, there is also the feeling that something important is being announced to
him/her right now. The sense that what is now happening could be a sign for the
future. We can take as an example the famous case reported by Freud regarding a
young woman who immediately experienced déjà vu as a sign of an important friendship.
Freud reported this case in Psychopathology of Every Day Life:
A lady who is now thirty-seven claimed to have a most distinct memory of having at the age
of twelve and a half paid her first visit to some school friends in the country. When she
entered the garden, she had an immediate feeling of having been there before. This feeling
was repeated when she went into the reception rooms, so that she felt she knew in
advance what room would be the next one, what view there would be from it, and so on.
But the possibility that this feeling of familiarity could have owed its origin to an earlier
visit to the house and garden, perhaps one in her earliest childhood, was absolutely ruled
out and was disproved as a result of her questioning her parents. The lady who reported
this was not in search of any psychological explanation, but saw the occurrence of this
feeling as a prophetic indication of the significance for her emotional life which these
same school friends later acquired.28
Freud is convinced that the cause of her déjà vu is to be found in the ambiguous relation-
ship with her brother. The girl experienced déjà vu while visiting a family whose situation
was very similar to her own. She also had a brother of the same age who had recently
recovered from a severe disease. According to Freud, during the illness of her brother
some desires for her brother's death had emerged in her. Instead of remembering her
experience, an interesting unconscious defence mechanism takes place: there is a displace-
ment of the memory of her past wishes into her present surroundings. Déjà vu is, there-
fore, a solution of compromise in order to avoid a direct confrontation with unconscious
drives.
It is not my intention to examine Freud's interpretation of this interesting case in detail.
Freud's analysis is particularly focused on detecting the underlying mechanisms that gen-
erate the anomalous experience. To the contrary, a phenomenological analysis aims at
describing the experiences by identifying their constitutive structure. In particular, our
analysis intends to show the specific alteration of time that occurs in this curious experi-
ence, which involves a conflictual overlapping between two different streams of conscious-
ness. Accordingly, we follow Bergson's assumption of an ego-split.29 However, we intend
to analyse this duplication of temporal streams within a different conceptual framework:
Husserl's phenomenology of time. In our view, the Husserlian notion of time-conscious-
ness is able to offer a more complex and articulated categorical framework for analysing
the déjà-vu experience. It is clearly not possible here to critically assess the differences
28 Freud, "Psychopathology of Everyday Life", 279.
29 It should be recalled that Freud also refers to the ego-split with regard to déjà vu especially in his later text about his
memory disturbance at the Acropolis. Freud, "Brief an Romain Rolland", 9-21.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
165

concerning the notion of subjective time in Bergson and Husserl, whose works neverthe-
less show profound similarities.30 However, it is also necessary to give an account of the
reasons why the categorical framework of Husserl's phenomenology of time is better
equipped for doing justice to the déjà vu experience. I will limit myself to pointing out
two major contributions that Husserl's understanding of time can make to our compre-
hension of déjà vu. On the one hand, there is a clear categorical distinction between reten-
tion and recollection.31 On the other hand, Husserl's notion of the lived present is not
articulated in two directions - as Bergson suggests in Memory of the Present and False Rec-
ognition by referring to perception and memory (Bergson, "Memory of the Present and
False Recognition", 176). Rather, the lived present has a triple impressional consciousness
in terms of primal impression, retention and protention. Regarding déjà vu, the difference
between primary impression and protention is of crucial importance. In the following we
will focus precisely on this second distinction.
At the outset we must note an important difference between our approach to time-con-
sciousness and Husserl's phenomenological account. Although he explores different forms
of the relation between primary impression, retention, and protention,32 Husserl's inves-
tigation of time-consciousness maintains a major presupposition: there is only one invar-
iant and unique form of time-consciousness. Is this presupposition plausible? Do we have
to assume an invariable structure of time-consciousness common to all experiences? Or is
it possible that the relation between primary impression, retention and protention mod-
ifies itself in the different forms of experience? Previous research has insisted on the poten-
tially revolutionary implications that Husserl's specific analyses of the temporalization of
concrete phenomena (such as the unclear phantasy) could have for rethinking the notion
of inner time-consciousness as such.33
A careful phenomenological analysis of different phenomena, such as schizophrenia,34
depression,35 Christian prayer,36 or insomnia,37 shows how problematic the presupposi-
tion of a universal necessity of an invariant form of time-consciousness is. This assump-
tion does not do justice to the diverse ways of appearing that belong to various temporal
phenomena. Our description of the temporalization of déjà vu must be understood within
the conceptual framework focusing on the investigation of the plurality of inner time-
consciousness.
As we have already mentioned, in déjà vu what is new is impossibly experienced as
being already known. What is new is the differential and surprising limit between the
30 Roman Ingarden reports an interesting anecdote in this regard: while he was reading aloud to Husserl some passages
excerpted from the Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience concerning the notion of "durée", Husserl thought
aloud: "It is so as if I were Bergson". Husserl, Briefen an Roman Ingarden, 121.
31 Husserl, Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins, §13.
32 It is well known that Husserl explores different possibilities for understanding the notion of time-consciousness by inves-
tigating the relation between protention, primary impression, and retention. In the 1905 Lectures, the dominant
assumption is that primary impression has to be seen as the source of the temporal process. In Bernau Manuscripts a
different description of the intertwining between primary impression, retention and protention is offered. The
primary impression is conceived as an outcome of the intertwining (Ineinander) between the retentional continuum
(with its double intentionality) and the protentional continuum (with its double intentionality).
33 Richir, Phénoménologie en esquisses. Nouvelles fondations, and Phantasia, Imagination, Affectivité; Micali, Überschüsse der
Erfahrung, and "The Temporalizations of the Absolute Flow of Time-Consciousness".
34 Blankenburg, Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit.
35 Binswanger, Melancholie und Manie; Maldiney, Penser l'homme et la folie; Fuchs, "Melancholia as a Desynchronisation:
Toward a Psychopathology of Interpersonal Time".
36 Theunissen, Negative Theologie der Zeit.
37 Levinas, Le temps et l'autre.
166
S. MICALI

present and the future. According to Husserl, this mobile limit, termed "primary
impression", is an originary creation.38 In déjà vu the irruption of the primary impression
is felt as already lived - as if one already knows which direction things will take. Here the
primary impression appears to be old. The whole subjective experience assumes the char-
acter of a mirage. Also, for this reason, déjà vu is most often associated with a phenom-
enon of derealization, such as in Walter Scott's text:
I cannot, I am sure, tell if it is worth marking down, that yesterday at dinner-time I was stran-
gely haunted by what I would call the sense of pre-existence, - videlicet, a confused idea that
nothing that passed was said for the first time, that the same topics had been discussed, and
the same persons had stated the same opinions on the same subjects. (...) But the sensation
was so strong as to resemble what is called a mirage in the desert, or a calenture on board
ship, when lakes are seen in the desert, and silvan landscapes in the sea.39
The feeling of pre-existence is linked to the "oldness" of the primary impression lived as a
repetition of what cannot be located in past time, but can be anticipated. A common and
fatal mistake in the investigation of déjà vu is that this vague anticipation is traced back to
memory. According both to common sense and to our metaphysical tradition there is a
necessary connection between the possibility of intuitively fulﬁlled anticipation and
memory. The general anticipation of a particular situation implies a previous experience.
The above-mentioned forms of déjà vu (reported by Kraepelin, by Freud, or by my col-
league) are uncanny because they contradict the "ground" of natural and psychological
regularities: the temporal order. How is it possible that one already knows the exact
phrase with the speciﬁc intonation that his interlocutor will pronounce?
In the Bernau Manuscripts Husserl understands temporal flowing in light of the inter-
twining of the retentional continuum and the protentional continuum. Retentions are
bound up with both the primal impressions and the protentional continuum. Conversely,
the now-phase does not appear as the moment of creation that emerges from nowhere; it is
rather a fulfilment of a previous protention with its empty horizon. The protentions are
not only directed both to the emergence of new primal presences and to the protentional
continuum, but they also focus on the future retentional modifications: the protentions
expect the retentional continuum which will hold what has already elapsed (Hua
XXXIII, 7).40 Accordingly, the protentional continuum relies on the past retentions for
their intentional fulfillment. In déjà vu we therefore have the following paradoxical situ-
ation: we have partially intuitively fulfilled protentions without having any reference to
past retentions. These protentions do not refer to the general style of the apparitions,
but they anticipate the unique contingent scene with regard to the content.
A thorough phenomenological analysis must also take the duplication of the stream of
consciousness into consideration. As Bergson shows, in déjà vu, attention oscillates
between two different and partially overlapping streams of consciousness. We are
especially interested in describing this process focusing on the protentional moment.
38 Husserl, Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins, 105.
39 Scott, Memoirs of the life of Sir Walter Scott, 163.
40 "Wir haben nicht nur eine Folge von Urdaten im Bewusstsein ihrer Folge, sondern darin auch im Bewusstsein der Folge
eine Folge von retentionalen Strecken. Auch diese Folge wird 'ins Protentionale projiziert', oder vielmehr im Urprozess
haben wir eine Folge von solchen retentionalen Strecken, deren jede in einem Urdatum terminiert. [...] Diese Urfolge
projiziert sich in die Zukunft in Form des protentionalen Bewusstseins, das jede Phase begleitet". Husserl, Die 'Bernauer
Manuskripte', 21.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
167

The situation is complex because we have two different protentional continua belonging to
two different streams involved in this process. In one stream of consciousness, the proten-
tions are directed at the actual perceptual horizon, which continuously evolves in our
intersubjective shared world. In the other stream, we have partially intuitively fulfilled pro-
tentions that suddenly appear and then abruptly disappear into nothingness. None of the
above-mentioned déjà-vu experiences have an instantaneous character. They all rather
have a temporal expanse. Even in a very short time period, the anticipated scene tends
to appear, disappear and intermittently return. It is important to emphasize the sense
of detachment from the common world felt during this alteration: one is confined to
his/her loneliness by anticipating the expected scene which does not fit with the temporal
order. The two forms of protentions belonging to the different streams sometimes appear
to be closer than at other times, but they never coincide. It is as if a transition from mon-
ocular vision to binocular vision occurs, a transition, which, however, never works per-
fectly well. Then at a certain moment, as was suspected, what we call déjà vu occurs:
the correspondence between the primary impression and our partially intuitively fulfilled
protentions takes place. There is a coincidence between the present situation and the fore-
seen scenario: we (re)-see in that light, in that perspective, the face of a person who says
something very specific to us, like "Then what will you do this summer?" as in our example
above. To sum up: this paper asserts that, against the major part of the research on the
topic of déjà vu, this phenomenon must be described with relation to the anticipation
of the future and not exclusively to the memory of the past. In order to do this, the refer-
ence to Husserl's notion of protention as a partially intuitively fulfilled intention allows a
better grasp of déjà vu: Having an experience of déjà vu implies an overlapping of proten-
tions and primary impression.
A final methodological remark: there are different approaches to déjà vu within cogni-
tive sciences for explaining this phenomenon. Brown and Marsh show in their informative
study (2010) that there are three main lines of research for understanding the mechanisms
behind the déjà vu experience: (1) an explanation through double perception; (2) an expla-
nation through implicit memory; (3) a neurological explanation.41 In any case, the starting
point of this explanation is lived experience. We hope that our analysis can help to clarify
the complex structure of this phenomenon. Only if the experience is articulated in a phe-
nomenologically precise way does it become possible to correctly identify the underlying
mechanisms.
Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor. Negative Dialectics. Trans. E. B. Ashton. New York: Seabury Press, 1973.
Bachelard, Gaston. La Poétique de l'espace. Paris: PUF, 1957.
Benjamin, Walter. Gesammelte Schriften, Bd. VI. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1985.
Benjamin, Walter. Selected Writings, Volume 2: Part 2, 1931-1934. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 2003.
Bergson, Henri. "Le souvenir du présent et la fausse reconnaissance", Revue Philosophique 66
(1908): 561-593.
Bergson, Henri. "Memory of the Present and False Recognition", in Mind and Energy, ed. Jan
Pilditch, 134-185. Westport: Greenwood Press, 1975.
41 Brown and Marsh, "Digging Into Déjà Vu", 33-62.
168
S. MICALI

Bernard-Leroy, Eugne. L'illusion de fausse reconnaissance. Paris: Alcan, 1898.
Bernet, Rudolf. Conscience et existence: perspectives phénoménologiques. Paris: PUF, 2004.
Binswanger, Ludwig. Melancholie und Manie. Pfullingen: Neske, 1960.
Blankenburg, Wolfgang. Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit. Ein Beitrag zur
Psychopathologie symptomarmer Schizophrenien. Stuttgart: Enke, 1971.
Bloch, Ernst. Literary Essays. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998.
Bodei, Remo. Piramidi di Tempo. Teoria e storie del deja vu. Bologna: Il Mulino, 2006.
Brown, Alan, S. The Déjà Vu Experience. New York: Psychology Press, 2004.
Brown, Alan S. and Marsh, Elizabeth J. "Digging Into Déjà Vu", The Psychology of Learning and
Motivation 53 (2010): 33-62.
Cleary, Anne M. "Recognition memory, familiarity, and déjà vu experiences", Current Directions in
Psychological Science 17 (2008): 353-357.
Dickens, Charles. David Copperfield. London: Harmondsworth, 1983.
Dugas, Ludovic. "Sur la fausse mémoire", Revue philosophique XXXVII (1894): 34-35.
Findler, Nicholas V. "A model-based theory for déjà vu and related psychological phenomena",
Computers in Human Behavior 14 (1998): 287-301.
Fleminger, Simon. "The déjà vu experience: Remembrance of things past?: Comment", American
Journal of Psychiatry 148 (1991): 1418-1419.
Fouillée, Albert. "La mémoire et la reconnaissance des souvenirs", Revue des Deux Mondes, LXX
(1885): 131-162.
Freud, Sigmund. "Brief an Romain Rolland: Eine Erinnerungsstörung auf der Akropolis", in
Almanach der Psychoanalyse. Vienna: Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag, 1937, 9-21.
Freud, Sigmund. A disturbance of memory on the Acropolis: An open letter to Romain Rolland on the
occasion of his seventieth birthday. Standard Edition 22. London: Hogarth Press, 1936.
Freud, Sigmund. Psychopathology of everyday life. Standard Edition 6. London: Hogarth Press, 1960.
Freud, Sigmund. Zur Psychopathologie des Alltagslebens. Berlin: S. Karger, 1904.
Fuchs, Thomas. "Melancholia as a desynchronisation: toward a psychopathology of interpersonal
time", Psychopathology 34 (2001): 179-186.
Gaynard, T. J. "Young people and the paranormal", Journal of the Society for Psychical Research 58
(1992): 165-180.
Grasset, Joseph. "La sensation du 'déjà-vu'", Journal de Psychologie 1 (1904): 17-27.
Husserl, Edmund. Briefen an Roman Ingarden. The Haag, Netherlands: Nijhoff, 1968.
Husserl, Edmund. Die 'Bernauer Manuskripte' über das Zeitbewusstsein (1917/1918). Hua XXXIII.
Ed. Rudolf Bernet und Dieter Lohmar. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie.
Hua III.1. Den Haag/Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff, 1912.
Husserl, Edmund. On the phenomenology of the consciousness of internal time (1893-1917).
Trans. J. Brough. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.
Husserl, Edmund. Phantasie, Bildbewusstsein, Erinnerung. Zur Phänomenologie der anschaulichen
Vergegenwärtigungen. Texte aus dem Nachlass (1898-1925). Hua XXIII. Ed. Eduard Marbach.
The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1980.
Husserl, Edmund. Phantasy, image consciousness, and memory (1898-1925). Trans. J. B. Brough.
Dordrecht: Springer, 2005.
Husserl, Edmund. Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins (1893-1917). HUA X. Ed.
Rudolf Boehm. The Hague, Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff, 1969.
James, William. The Principles of Psychology. New York: Henry Holt, 1890.
Janet, Pierre. "A propos du déjà vu", in Journal de psychologie II (1905): 289-307.
Janet, Pierre. Les obsessions et la psychasthénie. Paris: L'Harmattan, 2005.
Lalande, André. "Des paramnésies", Revue philosophique XXXVI (1893); 485-497.
Lemaître, A. "Des phénomènes de paramnésie", Archives de psychologie 1 (1903): 101-110.
Léon-Kindberg, Michel. "Le sentiment du déjà-vu et l'illusion de fausse reconnaissance", Revue de
psychiatrie VII (1903): 139-166.
Levinas, Emmanuel. Le temps et l'autre. Montpellier: Fata Morgana, 1979.
Maldiney, Henri. Penser l'homme et la folie. Grenoble: Jérome Millon, 1991.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
169

Micali,
S.
"The
Temporalizations
of
the
Absolute
Flow
of
Time-Consciousness",
in
Phaenomenologica, vol: 197, On Time - New Contributions to the Husserlian Phenomenology
of Time, ed. Dieter Lohmar and Yamaguchi Ichiro, 169-185. Dordrecht: Springer, 2010.
Micali, Stefano. Überschüsse der Erfahrung. Grenzdimensionen des Ich nach Husserl. Dordrecht:
Springer, 2008.
Myers, Frederic. "The subliminal self", Proceedings of the Society for psychical research XI (1895):
3-25.
Neppe, Vernon M. "The Concept of Déjà Vu". Parapsychological Journal of South Africa 4 (1983):
1-10.
Pagliaro, Louis. "The déjà vu experience: Remembrance of things past? Reply", American Journal of
Psychiatry 148 (1991): 14-18.
Poetzl, Otto. "The relationship between experimentally induced dream images and indirect vision",
Psychological Issues Monograph, 2, no. 3, VII, (1917/1960): 46-106.
Poetzl, Otto. "Zur Metapsychologie des 'déjà vu'", Imago 12 (1926): 393-402.
Reed, Graham. The Psychology of Anomalous Experience: A Cognitive Approach. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1974.
Richir, Marc. Phénoménologie en esquisses. Nouvelles fondations. Grenoble: Jérome Million, 2000.
Richir, Marc. Phantasia, Imagination, Affectivité. Grenoble: Jérome Million, 2004.
Scott, Walter. Memoirs of the life of Sir Walter Scott, Vol: 4. Paris: Baudry European Library, 1838.
Siomopoulos, V. "Derealization and déjà vu: Formal mechanisms", American Journal of
Psychotherapy 26 (1972): 84-89.
Theunissen, Michael. Negative Theologie der Zeit. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 1991.
170
S. MICALI

