Administrative Theory & Praxis
ISSN: 1084-1806 (Print) 1949-0461 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/madt20
Disturbance, Coping, and Innovation: A
Phenomenology of Terror
Nicholas Zingale & Ralph Hummel
To cite this article: Nicholas Zingale & Ralph Hummel (2008) Disturbance, Coping, and
Innovation: A Phenomenology of Terror, Administrative Theory & Praxis, 30:2, 207-224, DOI:
10.1080/10841806.2008.11029636
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10841806.2008.11029636
Published online: 09 Dec 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 80
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=madt20

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 1
11-JUN-08
14:38
Administrative Theory & Praxis
Vol. 30, No. 2, 2008: 207-224
R
DISTURBANCE, COPING, AND INNOVATION: A
PHENOMENOLOGY OF TERROR
Nicholas Zingale and Ralph Hummel
The University of Akron and The Institute of Applied
Phenomenology in Science and Technology
ABSTRACT
Is there an escape from terror? Beyond loss of life, terrorism aims to
undermine the meaning of life. Policy responses are based on flight,
paralysis, or fight—responses ranging from war to containment.
What, however, if even normal life already "contains" terror? If so,
how we deal with the small disturbances in everyday coping may tell
us something about what it takes to build a world beyond terror. For
this purpose we pay special attention to the concepts of coping, theo-
rizing, and contemplation used by Martin Heidegger and Hubert
Dreyfus to describe recovery from breaches of everyday life and
work.
Making life strange enough, through reflection,
so that we see it through new eyes.
Camilla Stivers, Governing in Dark Times,
on a point of Hannah Arendt.
What if terror is normal?1 Say a stranger attacks for reasons un-
known to us. The effect, though, is obvious: it is to shake our faith in the
very same structures that defended us against terror the last time. Do
we not—the survivors among us—think back to those values and those
practices that helped us repair such a breach the last time?
For there is always a "last" time. The time when terror broke
through. When previous outposts sprang to our defense. When we our-
selves erected new walls and hired agents to guard against the perennial
insecurity of being human. When we were last forced to face the incon-
venient fact that we are, as Heidegger and Sartre said, a being whose
own existence is always and again at issue.
What if what Thomas Hobbes said of war—that one is always either
coming or going (all other time being "peace")—is true also for terror?
A policy against terror, then, rests not on a simple striking back. We
live life forward. Yet we overlook the clues hidden in the terrorized
2008, Public Administration Theory Network

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 2
11-JUN-08
14:38
208
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
present: that at some level we know we have lost our cunning in using
the tools that helped us in the past. Perhaps we can paper over, once
again, the "panique terror" attributed by Hobbes' generation to Pan
"whereas in truth, there is always in him that so feareth, first, some
apprehension of the cause . . . " (Hobbes, 1651/1968, pp. 186). Maybe
nightfall can be put off—for a time. In the face of nothingness, hope
blooms alone (p. 124).
A country terrorized cannot rely on mere defense; it must blow away
the fog of terror war. That war seeps into our insecurities and breaches
structures that give meaning to our world. It makes us willing partners
through awakening our perennial fears and our groundless anxieties.
Against the established view of terror as trigger of a hardwired re-
sponse, we contrast the work of Hubert Dreyfus as based on Martin
Heidegger. What was merely reflexive becomes the subject of reflec-
tion. The phenomenological view suggests that the fear and anxiety of
terror are already present to some degree in everyday "normal" life and
that this can serve as a "model" for understanding terror writ large. We
propose a "normalcy theory" of terror.
Anxiety, Fear, and Hope
Terror gives birth to twins.2 Their names are familiar. They are anxi-
ety and fear. But there is also a godfather called hope. Anxiety and fear
are everywhere evident. Where can we find hope?
Fear and anxiety are normally treated as pathologies. Fear leaves us
afraid because some known source threatens us; anxiety weaves an un-
forgiving background tension because we cannot find its source. Phe-
nomenology, however, sees them as present at the creation. For a
human being is defined in phenomenology as the being for whom its
own existence is always and again at issue. Specifically, existential anxi-
ety is our unavoidable lot.
The disruption and uncertainty created by terror takes us back to the
determination of what makes us human. Terror, in exposing usually
tacit social norms, reminds us that no human-made reality—society,
culture, civilization—can claim priority or unchallengeable grounded-
ness. Thus, while existing norms must, in normal times, be adopted by
newcomers entering a culture, terror paradoxically creates a space to
confront our selves and our acts as inauthentic: that is, claiming an
ontological standing that cannot be upheld.
Exposing the essential emptiness of asserting a clear cut human na-
ture in foundationalism, terrorism may trigger an occasion in which we
understand existing norms as residues of unwarranted acts of building a

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 3
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
209
closed cultural architecture and imposing this on the next generation, a
barrier to authenticity. We now face how much we have invested and
are willing to sacrifice in keeping the world going in the same old taken-
for-granted way. Figure 1 depicts the movement from inauthentic dispo-
sition toward the routines of the everyday as against the opening to
authenticity (Zingale & Hummel, 2007, p. 2).
Coping
Mindless Everyday Coping
Living within the means of
societal norms.
Doesn't involve mental content
Disturbance
Anxiety
Situation Requires Attention
Authentic Coping
Worldliness obtrudes itself
Contemplation
Confront Absorbed Practices
Unsettled
Authenticity
(-, +)
(+, -)
(-, -)
(+, +)
Figure 1. Authenticity Change
It is an understatement to say that mindless everyday coping be-
comes disturbed by a terrorist act. The situation cannot wait for a re-
sponse; it seems to demand immediate attention to life and death issues
and conjures elevated levels of anxiety. The individual can choose to
respond by retracting to societal norms (calling 911 and hiding in a cor-
ner while others are killed) or can choose to confront existential anxie-
ties through what Heidegger calls "contemplation." In such a mode of
reorientation, we imagine, in looking at what we have wrought, that
things might be otherwise. A pragmatic phenomenologist draws an
overall parallel to work in speaking of anxiety and what it signals: "Just
as the breakdown (disturbance) of a piece of equipment reveals the na-
ture both of equipmentality and of the referential whole, so anxiety
serves as a breakdown that reveals the nature of human being [Dasein]
and its world" (Dreyfus, 1991, p. 177).
In short, a hammer that doesn't fit the work can be exchanged for a
more handy one. If the new tool causes anxiety because it exhibits a
persistent obstinacy in still refusing to function, we have to stop and
think, and eventually, contemplate.

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 4
11-JUN-08
14:38
210
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
Contemplation
Contemplation, according to Heidegger, can be a step toward re-
vealing our experience that human beings "have" a world, whose loss
must be made good. However, Heidegger is also critical of mere con-
templation. This mode of being has at times been perverted to a mere
staring at disconnected parts of a problem from which no sudden mira-
cle of reconfiguring reality can be expected. In fact, mere staring has
served science in the past as the basis for traditional ontology that treats
as normal the modern abyss between the individual and his or her
world (Heidegger, 1977; Dreyfus, 1991, p. 83).
But, in moments of insight, contemplation can be helpful, freeing our
view of the world as grasped by mere self-interest or mindless defense
of tradition. In terror attacks, we are brought face-to-face with the po-
tential loss of the world as we know it—"world" being defined as the
whole of meaning structures with which we surround ourselves. In that
world, we used to comfortably live. Now, its loss obtrudes into our daily
life, just as a missing tool by its absence obtrudes into our work. We
now may confront the fact that our world used to be a tool for hiding
our sense of nothingness—and therefore we now see the threatened
disappearance of that tool as a loss that "obtrudes" into world, blocking
our ability to get on with life and work (Heidegger, 1927/1962, pp. 233
& 189; Dreyfus, 1991, p. 179). "Worldliness [or worldedness] obtrudes
itself" (Dreyfus, 1991 p. 178).3 A challenge to our way of life and
work—whether by violent terror attacks or, more insidious, global-
ism—forces us to confront our absorption in routine coping practices of
our construction of reality.
An obvious question arises at this point: Is contemplation practical
under conditions of terror? Even considering this question as worthy of
being asked moves us out of the dead-end of passively enduring terror,
and opens us up to recovering human potential. Phenomenology not
only shows it can be practical and timely; the approach resists reflexive
knee-jerk response that prematurely defines the object: matters at
hand, states of affairs. We wait for the object to respond in its own
terms to our active felt sense for what it means in a larger context. Phe-
nomenology suggests that the more you surrender to the pressure for
instant action, the less you are allowing the situation to speak for itself.
Correcting an imbalance of making out of things what you want them to
be, phenomenology counterposes a letting things be what they can be.
Aiming to get clear on an object—or matter or state of affairs—by ad-
dressing it in its own terms, the possible turn toward contemplation

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 5
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
211
reveals an opportunity for a moment of clarity—resoluteness in a time
of chaos.
According to Heidegger, resoluteness is not a deliberate action. It is
our willingness to allow an opening of a situation into which we had
locked ourselves. The essence of resoluteness (Ent-schlossenheit) lies in
the opening (Ent-borgenheit) of human Dasein (being) into the clearing
of being, and not at all in the storing up of energy for "action" (Drey-
fus, 1991, p. 318).
Resoluteness leads to knowing, in a special felt sense, what you need
to do at the time it needs to be done. In Ent-schlossenheit (literally,
disclosure), there is a moment of transformation from fleeing to reso-
luteness. Heidegger, following Kierkegaard, calls it the Augenblick: see-
ing the whole at a glance or in the twinkling of an eye (Dreyfus, 1991, p.
321). For Heidegger it is a new kind of sight: We "see" or sense a total
Gestalt of how matters stand for us. We make a lightning jump from
inauthenticity, which copies the behavior of others, to authenticity
(Dreyfus, 1991, p. 321). We fully become ourselves in this moment, this
NOW between past and future. In the here and now, we take the situa-
tion for what it is: free of all personal interests, societal preferences, and
cultural norms. Human potential is optimized and solutions offer them-
selves without restrictions. Imagine freeing yourself of misconceptions
by allowing what you make of the situation to become true to the situa-
tion and true to your potential to act, and then acting—to be resolute,
to be authentic.
NORMALCY
Let us take seriously the possibility that war is the natural and per-
manent state since, just as in thunderstorms, one war is just receding as
another already thunders in the nearing. Conventional thinking would
call the period in between "peace," as Hobbes already derisively notes.
But peace implies a return to normalcy, forgetting that where one war
ends, another is already beginning, which leaves no space in the middle.
The relation between war and peace is reversed by Hobbes' experience:
War either coming or going is the norm. Peace is what we call our im-
mersion in routine that overlays our consciousness of thundering un-
pleasantness. Terror threatens outright death for some, but the real
targets are the many who observe others being killed. Terror threatens
our ability to continue mindlessly with routine practices in life and work
and to feel secure in our heretofore unquestioned beliefs.

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 6
11-JUN-08
14:38
212
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
Normal Terror
Anxiousness is a mood of discomfort in our culture. It is an uncom-
fortable-ness or "un-fittingness" with our environment—social norms.
We are all absorbed in maintaining a reality that is stable. When stabil-
ity is shaken, we come to terms with the finiteness of ourselves and our
world. Because a terrorist act unsettles our daily lives, we are forced to
confront both our socially contrived insecurities as well as our existen-
tial anxieties. According to Dreyfus' interpretation of Heidegger, anxi-
ety represents a total disturbance of the whole. It reveals the
groundlessness of the world (Dreyfus, 1991, p. 179). Terror sweeps away
normalcy.
The opposite of terror, we might say, is routine coping with the
world. But it would be even more precise to say that extreme terror is
simply an amplification or enlargement of daily disruptions and distur-
bances in the social force. Such terror threatens to disrupt all our ways
of dealing with life and work. It breaches our faith in the meaning of life
on the wide cultural stage. It exposes a nullity usually papered over by
science and convention, but now faced in contemplation.
Contemplation is the method described by Heidegger of revealing
new ways of being in the world. This process looks away from individ-
ual subjects and toward a state of being (Befindlichkeit). In this state,
we find ourselves inspired to insight into our own solutions without try-
ing to merely theorize what is seen, but instead contemplating the cur-
rent state of being in context. It is an opportunity for new knowledge
and know-how to emerge (Hummel, 2004, 2006; Zingale, 2007). Ac-
cording to Heidegger, contemplation is a process that allows an individ-
ual, though no longer involved, to become fully engaged in an
imaginative playing out of the problem by removing preconceived bar-
riers, such as axioms, while opening up spaces of opportunities (Drey-
fus, 1991). Providing references or pointers to a newly settled, authentic
self, terrorism actually provides an opportunity. It points to ways to
confront our inauthentic selves. This position is supported by Hubert
Dreyfus working with Jane Rubin: "Once one stops demanding mean-
ing and imposing stereotypes, one's facticity will always provide a Situa-
tion in which there are unique possibilities for action" (Dreyfus, 1991,
p. 323).
As such, terror requires our collaboration to complete its course by
disrupting coping. Whether willingly or involuntarily, consciously or un-
consciously, we sustain terrorism when we become locked into social
norms, even after everyday coping practices fail, and we are forced to
think or even contemplate the fragility of daily life. Contemplation not

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 7
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
213
only removes us from the acuity of the situation, it serves to create
openings for our sense of being in the world and a way of finding our
place in the world. It confronts an enabling of existing norms to "en-
frame" the meaning of a situation. So, even in the midst of such acts of
disruption eliciting anxiousness, we can give terror a turn from its inten-
tion and use it to reveal a path to authenticity. Understanding terror in
this sense reminds us that hope avoids foreclosure when we remain
open to our inexhaustible ability to freely create.
At that point we have a choice: We can take terrorism as evidence
that there is something terribly wrong with us and our world or, as the
being that knows it is here (Dasein), we can see terror as a call that
evokes our own nullity. In that case, through the anxiety it provokes,
we see ourselves as beings unwilling to face the threat laid bare by be-
ing anxious: namely, the threat of being nothing and nobody.
As one of the authors has put it to his staff: "Say you are in your
office and a guy walks in with a gun. The initial reaction is to flee. On
second thought, though, some people will choose to charge." What or
who makes the choice is not easily seen. The second stance is possible
on confrontation with the experience that, from birth on, to be myself is
always (partly) inauthentic because I live in the routines others have
designed before I ever came along. Charging is authentic in the sense of
not being hyper-individualistic. The fleeing person thinks only of him-
self or herself. The fighting person has concern for the future, for that is
where his possibilities lie; at the same time, he remains resolutely op-
posed to putting one commitment to one project before another (in a
values hierarchy). That stance would lead to a "lock-down" attitude to-
ward the world: Ge-schlossen-heit (in Heidegger's etymological call to
retrieving words whose origin is forgotten but live in the parts). But one
of Heidegger's main concerns is with how individual Dasein is able to
win access to the world, for which he has the term Ent-schlossenheit
(un-locked-ness, usually translated as resoluteness). Resoluteness in
this sense does not bind as duty did the Praetorian Guard of long lost
empires, but, in opening up some possibilities even as it forecloses
others, moves us closer to what Edmund Husserl (1954/1970) called be-
ing "functionaries of mankind" (p. 17).
In terms of confronting terrorism, this means that we understand the
world from a more fundamental ontological level than do the conven-
tional social sciences.

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 8
11-JUN-08
14:38
214
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
Movement in the Terror War
There is movement in the war on terror. We note that it is not only
our worldview that changes as our authentic self becomes settled in the
situation, we ourselves change. This is so because "being here" and
"world" are co-extensive. Our being is dispersed throughout our world.
And our world is the carrier of our being as dispersed. The terror dis-
turbance threatens to make us aware of the whole and the way our
actions fit into a practical context as a whole (Dreyfus 1991, p. 99).
A tendency to flee is there because of the anxiety of death. A ten-
dency to fight is there because of the fear of a meaningless death. The
two are thrown into malign imbalance, calling to question our response
to an external threat potentially undermined by interior spiritual col-
lapse. We collapse because we cannot see the whole through shifting
contextual frameworks of societal norms.
•
When Robert Dean Stetham, a Navy diver, was tortured and
executed aboard a hijacked airliner on June 1, 1985, what did
the other 39 Americans among 135 passengers do to help him?
Convention has it that the passengers, in fear of their lives, did
nothing. Does conscience not dictate that we help? Yet, there is
one thing worse than external aggression and possible death,
and that is loss of righteousness. In fear of our lives, but also in
dread of the hollowness of our lives about to be uncovered, well
might we tremble. (Postscript: One of his executioners was
killed by a missile in Syria in 2008.)
•
By September 11, 2001, with the crash of Flight 93 at Shank-
sville, Pennsylvania, action appeared to replace trembling as the
government-approved method of responding to terrorists.
Neither the testimony of Stetham's fellow passengers nor the
cellphone calls from Flight 93 reveal what was in the back of the
mind of passengers. (It has been suggested that the attack on all
things Western would not have any claim to success if it did not
induce fear and trembling—and this response is unlikely if some
fear about something greater than death were not suspected.
Another way of putting this: We are afraid that we will not mea-
sure up to what the situation demands, hence we tremble in in-
action; action being externally suppressed and its meaning
internally denied.)
•
Yet, in Blacksburg in 2007, a professor named Liviu Librescu
threw his body between his students and a killer. And Katelyn
Carney, a 21-year-old junior in International Relations from
Sterling, Virginia, was wounded in the hand while helping to
barricade the door to keep the killer from reentering a German
class. Derek O'Dell, 20-years-old, helped Carney and others
barricade the door and was shot through the arm. He showed

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 9
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
215
up in that German class, which used to be taught by Jamie
Bishop, when classes resumed a week later. O'Dell, a sopho-
more majoring in biological sciences from Roanoke County,
said it would almost be an insult to their slain professor not to
continue (Alvis-Banks, Chittum, & Raboteau, 2007).
What was once thought to be accepted behavior (paralysis) ceases to
exist and yields to what was once thought to be heroic, becoming com-
mon; uncommon valor becoming a common virtue. In essence, terror-
ism has disrupted societal norms by redefining the rules of the game not
only from how we know the situation to be (epistemology), but from
what the situation makes us (ontology). The righteous not only must
resist terror when they say, "Death, where is thy sting?" They now must
know how to apply this sense of being to the situation—any other type
of response is considered inauthentic.
From this perspective, the solution is not merely in to get rid of
would-be terrorists, but to get rid of the blank slate of inauthentic
norms on which they are allowed to write. We are that slate. What are
the tottering assumptions on this slate?
An Attack on Norms
We see ourselves as secular in politics, rational in economics, open in
culture, true believers in freedom. In short, the list begins with the
claims of modernity:
•
That reason is superior to unreason. (So that it will give us a
better life.)
•
That reason will drive out unreason.
•
That unreason—whatever that is, we can say it is other than
reason—can be driven out and therefore must and will be
driven out, just as evil can be replaced by goodness.
•
That "Man" can cultivate himself to rise above "primitive"
origins.
•
That Nature can be harnessed by technology and be completely
controlled.
•
That science is the end-all and be-all of human knowledge.
•
That modern economics deals effectively with scarcity and sus-
tains the global household.
•
That modern politics is what it says it is, an exercise of freedom,
even though the State is the institution that has a monopoly of
force in a given territory.
•
That human beings are free because they make their own law.
•
That bringing things to consciousness is the cure for unseen ills
buried in the unconscious.
•
Etc.

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 10
11-JUN-08
14:38
216
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
To us, what is at stake in an act of terror is our own world picture.
Like all pictures, it is not the reality it depicts. It is a re-presentation.
When someone can show, by invading and seizing technology—air-
craft—and demonstrating that it can actually be used to make us more
insecure, he leaves us in a bind. The insecurity of technology is demon-
strated by the power of several terrorists invading one of technology's
own products, bringing death as warning to others. At the same time,
exposure of this one weak spot in the technological system—the insecu-
rity of the securing power of technology—exposes other self-delusions.
The external threat is met and magnified in the victim or witness by a
further sense of inner dread. The latent function of exposing one's self-
delusion is the exposing of all those little lies we tell about ourselves—
to pretend that our God's in his heaven and all is well with the world.
But you can lie to yourself only if you know the truth. We know all is
not well. The paradoxes of modernity have caught up with us; they sit
on the fence like cackling hens. Terrorists have discovered this weak
spot. Their ultimate objective is to disconnect our civilization from its
founding assumptions. Dread heightens threat.
The victim is asked to deal with external threat and internal dread at
the same time. Result: He wants to get away (from his own dread). Yet,
he does not want to deal with the external threat which, the more it is
recognized, strengthens the sense of dread. The terror act aims to evoke
dread. Its appeal can work only in a society that already is on the verge
of doubting its own foundations. Behind the image that we control,
there is the reality we do not control. The picture we make ourselves of
it is pretty much like the picture all moderns make themselves of their
reality. Its theme is security; terrorism, however, understands that noth-
ing in this world is secure. (This is explicitly dealt with by promising
security to bombers or Jihad warriors, and an enjoyable security at that
in the next world.) Here the member of a modern society stands at a
disadvantage. Having delegitimated the ultimate meaning foundations
(religion), the modern society has taken it upon itself to provide utmost
structures of meaning for its members. This, it clearly cannot do. Nor
can the State, that monopoly of coercive force, use that force to sup-
press the smallest outbreak. Nor can politics any longer remain an exer-
cise of freedom. Terrorism is a Teflon paradox: Any the pointing finger
slips right off its surface. When we try to catch what is really going on
out of the corner of our eye, our glance acts like an arrow that at the
last moment swerves away off its target and, in doing so, obscures it.
In short, terrorism can terrorize only in that stage of a culture at
which members have already lost faith in themselves and question their

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 11
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
217
norms. If we think of terrorism exclusively as an attack on normalcy,
then our stance on terror exists outside of who we are or can be—anxi-
ety results. If, at the moment of a terrorist event, normalcy ceases to
exist and our authentic selves are revealed—hope ensues.
A METHODOLOGY FOR HOPE
Phenomenological Interpretation
We begin our phenomenological analysis with a concept borrowed
from emergency management and also suggested by culture analysis:
vulnerability. Vulnerability as a concept reflects the degree to which
any individual is capable of being wounded—body and soul. In conven-
tional sciences, it is conceptualized in terms of the capacity of individu-
als and social groups to respond to, that is, to cope with, recover from,
or adapt to, any external stress placed on their livelihoods and well-
being (Kelly & Adger, 2000).
There is nothing wrong with such conceptualization at the level of
social science, except for the fact that this concept obscures the axiom
behind it. Only if we assume health and security to be normally present,
can we speak of the possibility of falling ill or of being wounded as an
abnormal state. The definition prejudges as absurd the possibility that,
in our very foundations as human beings, we are insecure, in a constant
state of being wounded and determined to hide these states from
ourselves.
To emergency planners, wrestling with terrorism means objectively
identifying and measuring vulnerabilities and managing them accord-
ingly. So much so that emergency management is not talked about as
dealing with things or matters emerging and is not defined in terms of
emergencies at all, but rather as a very hardnosed and objective method
dealing with actualities to be managed (McEntire, 2005). This structure
has roots in psychology and sociology. But what if we conceptualize
vulnerability at a deeper level: in terms of our inability to discover the
foundations of our own existence and consequently reconsider how we
cope with terror?
Coping
A conventional psychological or sociological perspective sees indi-
viduals on a playing field of beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors, or as pairs
of individuals engaged in actions, social relationships, values, and mean-
ing relating to a society's core values (Folkman & Lazarus, 1988; Lee &
Holden, 1999; Weber, 1922/1968). When individuals find themselves in

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 12
11-JUN-08
14:38
218
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
difficult situations they are forced to think of contradictions of the as-
sumptions axiomatic to their disciplines. Consider the example of the
rescuers that went back into the World Trade Centers to assist others
after two Boeing 767s had crashed into the side of the buildings on Sep-
tember 11, 2001. Ordinary social science describes the events of the day
as fundamentally influenced by people's psychological mode of coping
in which the sudden appearance of mass altruism is an anomaly. For all
practical purposes altruism is discounted as an aberration from the
foundational picture of individualism, selfishness, and anomic igno-
rance of a social bond. Yet, such aberrations show themselves daily in
sometimes obscure and sometimes overwhelmingly obvious ways, as it
happened in this case. A feeling of groundless insecurity, expressed in
psychology as "anxiety," uncovers a contradiction or, at least limitation,
in a social science ontology that presumes security.
From a phenomenological perspective, Heidegger (1977) states that
when we encounter major disturbances, we not only change what we
do; we change who we are. He describes three modes of coping with
three kinds of disturbances when routine actions fail—conspicuousness,
obstinacy, and obtrusiveness—and he argues that such disturbances are
constant. Each mode is affected by the types of resources that are avail-
able, the degree of disturbance, the level of coping applied, and the
epistemological axioms evident to the individual. Figure 2 graphically
depicts this relationship.
Disturbing Coping Strategies—An Opening for Adaptation
Once a new way of encountering a situation emerges, our mode of
coping is either held up or changed in dramatic ways. This is often a
reflection on the existential distance from our concerns or kind of dis-
turbance experienced and the availability of resources to respond or act
out. At the level of practice, Heidegger can be used as a basis for this
discussion. The first mode of coping described by Heidegger (absorbed)
is the most basic and can be explained as the availability of simple alter-
natives. For example, if a hammer is too heavy, the person can cope
with the hammer or find another alternative, perhaps a lighter hammer.
In this mode, the person has a sense for alternatives without breaking
into mental operations that challenge the person to actively consider
more essential alternatives. The hammer exists in the background as
ready-to-hand but cannot, until it is used, be identified as "handy."
There is here an opening for change. Yet, it is minimal because the dis-
turbance is insignificant.

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 13
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
219
Conspicuousness
Obstinacy
Phenomenology
Contemplation 
Making 
Letting  
Mode of Being
Handy
Availableness
Unavailableness
Resources
Malfunction
Temporary
Breakdown
Disturbance
Absorbed
Deliberate-
Deliberation
Coping
Expert
Competence
Proficient
Obstinacy
Unhandy
Total Breakdown
Theoretical Reflection
Novice
Advanced Beginner
Epistemology
The Zone
Know How
Being-In
There
New Paradigm
Phenomenology
Science
Intentional
Psychological
Desire
Knowledge
Figure 2. Science and Phenomenology Diagram
The second mode of coping (deliberate-deliberation) develops when
the object brought to our attention resists with obstinacy. This requires
the person to confront the problem within the context of the situation
and his/her skills because the disturbance is greater, thereby bearing a
greater opening. As Dreyfus (1991) puts it, "mental content arises
whenever the situation requires deliberate attention" (p. 70). This mode
implies that a readily accessible alternative either is inadequate or is
approaching "unhandy," and calls on skills such as creativity, ingenuity,
and curiosity. Therefore, the user must independently deal with the
"unavailableness" of a ready alternative and, according to Searle, "in-
tentionally rise to the level of skill" (Dreyfus, 1991, p. 70).
In the third mode of coping (as the situation becomes marked by
obstinacy), the tool is not handy and a total breakdown occurs. This
mode results in detachment. A break occurs in a spectrum of dealing
with the world that begins with immersed coping. We encounter ever
more serious troubles that challenge our mode of involvement. Within
this break, we find detached theorizing. This aims at capturing what is
the same in many experiences (not particular experiences in all their
richness) and ends with detachment, while re-envisioning, as contem-

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 14
11-JUN-08
14:38
220
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
plation emerges. Mental content expands to theoretical reflection once
the physical characteristics of the object of discontent are no longer re-
lated to one another in concrete, everyday use. For example, if a ham-
mer is taken out of context and looked at "in a new way," with a focus
on its properties, we have the beginnings of science (Dreyfus, 1991).
This type of analysis, such as measuring the weight of the hammer, al-
lows the use identity of the object to be pushed back from merely deal-
ing with it in use. Other data aside from "what it's for" emerge. But the
tool user will again have to judge them not in terms of their internal
validity, but for their ability to improve the use for the sake of which
the tool was designed and redesigned.
In such an analysis, however, only properties that are uncovered be-
forehand and stem from an existing theoretically-laden process are dis-
covered to science and reduced to formulas using quantitatively
determinable factors.
Those who deal with the issue of terrorism, when conceptualized as
quantifiable and measurable vulnerabilities (one set of social scientists
reduces incident prediction to a formula), fall into this scientific trap by
effectively removing the individual from the situation. Instead, the indi-
vidual is understood as a "not handy" entity detached from the situa-
tion and incapable of drawing on his/her own resources which come
from involvement. If this is who we are by nature, what, if any, change
can occur?
Heidegger offers an answer in a fourth mode of coping—contempla-
tion. Heidegger describes this as "seeing, not in order to understand
what is seen . . . but just in order to see" (Dreyfus, 1991, p. 83). It is
within this contemplation stage that the methodology relies less on
making a quantitatively-laden assessment of factors and more on "let-
ting entities be encountered purely in the way they look" (Dreyfus,
1991, p. 83). Heidegger describes this method as pure contemplation
claiming that, by such seeing, "being"—as that which makes a phenom-
enon possible—gets discovered (Dreyfus, 1991).
CONCLUSIONS
A Theory of Change
What people do to change depends on how they read their circum-
stances. Phenomenology suggests action toward change depends more
on a feeling for my state of being—what Kant (1965) called aesthetic
and Eugene Gendlin (1981) calls "felt sense"—than a rationalistic
Hobbesian calculation of consequences. Coping modes are not catego-

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 15
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
221
ries; they overlap and constitute a process through which we confront
and integrate our own underlying assumptions.
Understanding coping as a process provides an opening. Change is
experienced within a specific contextual reference fraught with distur-
bances that, in turn, point to new options. How I "find myself" from
moment to moment depends on resoluteness in pursuing new ways of
being in the world. This gives me a sense of change by revealing imme-
diately what the task is: I discover first what is factically possible and I
then seize my future in my ability-to-be (Dreyfus, 1991, p. 320). As soon
as that moment of clarity arises—the twinkling of an eye of which
Heidegger and Søren Kierkegaard both speak—we are resolute and
open to the situation and we embark on authenticity.
All disturbances have the potential to terrify. But, caught up in initial
terror, we may easily neglect to search out hidden openings. Terror
threatens to disrupt the human way of adapting to change itself by mo-
bilizing the anxieties of anticipating premature death and unwonted de-
struction. Yet, terror may also serve as an indicator that society's ways
of coping have broken down; if they had not, they would function to
counter attempts at terror. Coping could diffuse the impact and its
spreading in attenuated form to deal with many different disruptions.
So it is not business as usual, if we are looking for a counterterrorism
policy.
How we choose to confront the change-oriented, typical functioning
of disturbances can now be treated as fundamental to society mainte-
nance and society formation. We can either reaffirm socially contrived
norms (such as those illuminated by proponents of vulnerability man-
agement) or serve to create space for an authentic self in a world with-
out end.
Openness to Normative Theory without Norms
Phenomenology requires an open stance toward all phenomena; "let-
ting be" is axiomatic in the discovery stage of acquainting ourselves
with the new. Kant thought science needed to assume an axiom without
which it could not operate, that Nature had a structure of formal pur-
posiveness without a substantive purpose. Heidegger took it as axio-
matic that human beings were condemned to anxiety without object:
The way we are in the world is that of a self-reflective being for whom
its own existence is always and again at issue. We suggest, as axiomatic
for a time without standards, not a hardening of the will and the clash of
arms, domestically or in foreign policy, but the freeing grace of a nor-
mative theory without norms: a complex process without purpose

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 16
11-JUN-08
14:38
222
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
As human beings, we are not born simply to take the world apart,
which can be deadening, but—Kant again—for looking to our own
spontaneity as the source of life and its quickening. At some point not
only must the thoughtful inquirer face up to the consequences of inquir-
ing thought but also must commit to the consequences of what we are,
what we must do, and what we dare hope.
ENDNOTES
1. This paper was delivered at the annual conference of the American Soci-
ety for Public Administration, March 8-11, 2008, in Dallas, Texas. An early ver-
sion of this paper was presented at the 2007 annual meeting of the Public
Administration Theory Network, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
2. The allusion is to what Hobbes is supposed to have said in Aubrey's
Lives about his own birth, which set the theme for his life: "In 1588, the year of
the Spanish Armada, my mother gave birth to twins: myself and fear."
3. Against this translation, we prefer the term "worldedness," suggesting
"having a world" rather than the this-worldly implications of "worldliness,"
used elsewhere by Max Weber to distinguish the secular from "other-
worldliness."
REFERENCES
Alvis-Banks, D., Chittum, M., & Raboteau, A. (2007, May 7). Tech shooting
victims: Moving forward. The Roanoke Times, 1 & 6.
Arendt, H. (1968). Men in dark times. San Diego: Harcourt Brace.
Berger, P. L., & Luckman, T. (1967) The social construction of reality: An essay
in the sociology of knowledge. Garden City, NY: Doubleday-Anchor.
Dreyfus, H., & Dreyfus, S. E. (1986). Mind over machine: The power of human
intuition and expertise in the era of the computer. New York: The Free
Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1991). Being-in-the-world: A commentary on Heidegger's Being
and Time, division I. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. L., & Rubin, J. (1991). Appendix: Kierkegaard, division II, and
later Heidegger to Being-in-the-world: A commentary on Heidegger's Being
and Time, division I, by H. L. Dreyfus. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1988). Ways of coping. Questionnaire review set
[Brochure]. Redwood City, CA: Author.
Gendlin, E. (1981). Focusing (Rev. ed.). New York: Bantam.
Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and time (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, Trans.).
New York: Harper & Row. (Original work published 1927)

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 17
11-JUN-08
14:38
Zingale and Hummel
223
Heidegger, M. (1977). The question concerning technology and other essays.
New York: Harper & Row.
Hobbes, T. (1968). Leviathan. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin. (Original work
published 1651)
Hummel, R. P. (2002). Back to the future: The twenty-first century and the loss
of sensibility. In J. S. Jun (Ed.), Rethinking administrative theory in the
twenty-first century (pp. 187-198). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Hummel, R. P. (2004, March). Judgment. Paper presented at the annual confer-
ence of the American Society for Public Administration, Portland, OR.
Hummel, R. P. (2006). The triumph of numbers: Knowledges and the mis-
measure of management. Administration & Society, 38, 58-78.
Hummel, R. P. (2006). Arendt, Kant, and the beauty of politics: A phenomeno-
logical view. Paper presented at conference on setting up a society of politi-
cal 
phenomenology, 
the 
Center 
for 
Advanced 
Research 
in
Phenomenology, Memphis, TN.
Husserl, E. (1970). The crisis in European sciences and transcendental phenome-
nology. (D. Carr, Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
(Original work published 1954)
Kant, I. (1965). The critique of pure reason. (N. Kemp-Smith, Trans.). New
York: St. Martin's Press.
Kelly, P. M., & Adger, W. N. (2000) Theory and practice in assessing vulnera-
bility to climate change and facilitating adaptation. Climate Change, 47,
325-352.
Lee, J. A., & Holden, J. S. (1999). Understanding the determinants of environ-
mentally conscious behavior. Psychology and Marketing, 16, 373-392.
McEntire, D. A. (2005). Why vulnerability matters: Exploring the merit of an
inclusive disaster reduction concept. Disaster Prevention Management, 14,
206-222.
Stivers, C. (2008). Governing in dark times: Political philosophy for public ser-
vice. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Weber, M. (1968). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology.
New York: Bedminster Press. (Original work published 1922)
Zingale, N. C. (2004). Self-regulation in environmental policy: Fact or chimera.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Akron.
Zingale, N. C. (2007).  From novice to expert: Operationalizing kinds of know-
ing in an environmental management setting. Public Voices, 10, 47-63.
Zingale, N. C., & Hummel, R. P. (2007, May). Disturbance, coping, and innova-
tion: A phenomenology of terror. Paper presented at the annual conference
of the American Society for Public Administration, Harrisburg, PA.

\\server05\productn\A\ATP\30-2\ATP204.txt
unknown
Seq: 18
11-JUN-08
14:38
224
Administrative Theory & Praxis
❖Vol. 30, No. 2
Nicholas Zingale teaches environmental finance, corporate change, and public
policy and administration at Cleveland State University and the University of
Akron. His writings have appeared in Administration & Society, Public Voices,
and environmental publications.
Ralph Hummel is working on a new book offering a theory of the relation of
knowledge and power in organizational success and failure. His most recent
book is the fifth edition of The Bureaucratic Experience, subtitled The Post-
Modern Challenge.
Both are founding members of a network of like-minded scholars renamed In-
stitute for Applied Phenomenology in Science and Technology, Canal Fulton,
Ohio, and Spruce Head Island, Maine.

