Philosophical Explorations
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
Kant's and Husserl's agentive and proprietary
accounts of cognitive phenomenology
Julia Jansen
To cite this article: Julia Jansen (2016) Kant's and Husserl's agentive and proprietary
accounts of cognitive phenomenology, Philosophical Explorations, 19:2, 161-172, DOI:
10.1080/13869795.2016.1176233
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176233
Published online: 11 Aug 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 460
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

This paper is part of the special issue "Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology"
guest edited by Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran
Kant's and Husserl's agentive and proprietary accounts of cognitive
phenomenology
Julia Jansen∗
Husserl Archives, Higher Institute of Philosophy, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
(Received 5 April 2016; ﬁnal version received 5 April 2016)
In this paper, I draw from Kantian and Husserlian reﬂections on the self-awareness of
thinking for a contribution to the cognitive phenomenology debate. In particular, I
draw from Kant's conceptions of inner sense and apperception, and from Husserl's
notions of lived experience (Erlebnis) and self-awareness for an inquiry into the
nature of our awareness of our own cognitive activity. With particular consideration
of activities of attention, I develop what I take to be Kant's and Husserl's "agentive"
and "proprietary" accounts. These, I believe, augment contemporary discussions in
interesting ways and further bolster the case for cognitive phenomenology. Moreover,
the historical comparison highlights a number of assumptions made today that were
not yet part of the framework at the time of Kant or at the time of Husserl. This helps
reﬂect on the legitimacy of these assumptions.
Keywords: Kant; Husserl; self-awareness; attention; agentive phenomenology;
proprietary phenomenology
1.
Introduction
The question whether such a thing as "cognitive phenomenology" exists is not a question
either Kant or Husserl would have pondered. For both, it is obvious that we are phenom-
enally aware of our thoughts and that there is "something-it-is-like to think" that is irredu-
cible to the phenomenal "feel" of what one may be thinking about - although they would
not have put it that way. To a certain extent, this simply reﬂects their common Cartesian
heritage, which also came to dominate much of modern empiricism, mainly through
Locke. Locke takes all thinking to be conscious and construes "being conscious" as
being "sensible":
But I do say, he cannot think at any time waking or sleeping, without being sensible of it. Our
being sensible of it is not necessary to anything, but to our thoughts; and to them it is; and to them
it will always be necessary, till we can think without being conscious of it. (Locke 1972, II.i.10)
Thinking thus has a "sensible"1 quality for Locke, or, as the current terminology goes, a
"phenomenal" quality. In fact, he believes it to be as essential as the phenomenal quality
of perceiving: "It being impossible for any one to perceive, without perceiving, that he
does perceive" (Locke 1972, II.xxvii.9). Of course, Locke, as well as Kant and even
Husserl, wrote long before functionalism took hold of much of philosophy of mind as an
extremely successful framework for advancing a materialist metaphysic of mind, a
# 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
∗Email: julia.jansen@kuleuven.be
Philosophical Explorations, 2016
Vol. 19, No. 2, 161-172, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176233

physicalism that abstracted intentionality from the conﬁnes of human psychology and was
thus able to expand the "mental" well into the domains of the non-human animal and of
artiﬁcial "intelligence". This also meant that the very distinction between phenomenal
consciousness and intentionality on which much of the debate on cognitive phenomenol-
ogy rests and which is largely motivated by functionalist concerns (Horgan 2011; Jansen
2013), would not have made sense to either Kant or Husserl. However, while these differ-
ences in approach, vocabulary, and background assumptions must be kept in mind, I
believe that some core Kantian and Husserlian insights can be brought to bear on the con-
temporary debate and indeed challenge some central claims precisely because of these
differences.
The orthodox assumption, within the functionalist framework, is that phenomenal
content is exhausted by sensory or quasi-sensory content. Consider, for example,
Michael Tye and Briggs Wright's "Quintet" of phenomenological states, an extension of
Eric Lormand's "Quartet" (Lormand 1996, 242 f.): perceptual experiences; conscious
bodily sensations; imagistic experiences; conscious linguistic imagery; primary emotional
experiences, such as feeling anger or fear (Tye and Wright 2012, 329). Given this "quintet",
the question indeed arises how we can speak of a genuinely cognitive phenomenology at
all, that is, of a phenomenal character of conscious thought that is not reducible to "the
sensory states with which is associated or embedded" (Bayne and Montague 2012, 29).
In fact, Lormand already makes this claim in his 1996 paper on "Nonphenomenal
Consciousness" where he formulates with regards to moods and propositional attitudes
what is still the position of most skeptics regarding cognitive phenomenology today:
. . . I think that at least in normal human beings, moods and propositional attitudes are never p-
conscious [i.e., phenomenally conscious; JJ], even when they are conscious. I concede that nor-
mally there seems to be something it's like to have a conscious mood or attitude. My conjec-
ture, however, is that whenever this seems so, "what it's like" is completely accounted for by
what it's like to be in Quartet states accompanying the mood or attitude. (1996, 243)
In what follows, I take issue with the constitutive challenge directly and argue, with the help
of Kant and Husserl, that there are features of the phenomenal character of conscious
thought that are not reducible to phenomenal features of sensory states. I draw from
what I call "agentive" and "proprietary" aspects of their respective accounts of cognition
in order to highlight important moments of cognitive phenomenology that, in my view,
deserve more attention than we have paid them so far.
2.
Kant on inner sense and transcendental apperception
One way to think about consciousness in terms of thought is to think about what Block
(1995, 2001, 2002) has called "reﬂexive (or monitoring) consciousness". Reﬂexive con-
sciousness refers to one's capacity to represent one's mind's to oneself, where "represent"
can mean to have thoughts about one's own mental states (see also Rosenthal 1986, 1991,
1993, 2002). There are not only ﬁrst-order contents of thinking, which may be merely
"access conscious" (Block 1995); there are also higher-order processes through which
we are aware that we are thinking. On this view, consciousness is not exhausted by
sensory or quasi-sensory contents, but also refers to a reﬂexive scanning of one's own
psychological states or processes, in other words - the contemporary terminology here
links with the vocabulary of modern philosophy - an "inner sense" (Armstrong 1968; Car-
ruthers 2000; Lycan 1995). However, it remains a contentious question whether explicit
162
Julia Jansen

consciousness, that is, awareness of one's mental contents, is more appropriately explained
by a higher-order-perception theory, or by a higher-order-thought theory (Carruthers 2004,
2011). Here, I believe, a look at Kant's views on inner sense may help.
Kant deﬁnes inner sense as a sense "by means of which the mind intuits itself, or its
inner state" (1996, A 22/ B 37; cf. A 33/ B 49). Inner sense is affected by our own
mental events, just as outer sense is affected by external events. As mentioned above,
Kant agrees with Leibniz and Christian Wolff2 that one need not be conscious of one's pre-
sentations,3 but if one is, he thinks it requires the "presentation that another presentation is
in me" (1992, § V, 33). This presentation, as the result of an affection of inner sense, is an
intuitive, non-conceptual awareness of the mind's own activity. Inner sense, "since it does
not represent anything except insofar as something is posited in the mind, can be nothing
other than the way in which the mind is affected by its own activity", and this activity
involves the "positing" of the mind's own presentation "in inner sense" (Kant 1996, B
67-68). In other words, inner sense is a mode of intuitive self-awareness in which we
become aware of our own presentations because we make an effort to become conscious
of them, because we "bring" them to our awareness. As Kant puts it, we "posit" them in
inner sense. This "effort", or "endeavour to become conscious of one's presentations"
(2006, § 3) is, for Kant, an intellectual effort, that is, an effort of the understanding (cf.
1996, B 153).
To this extent, Kant's view is very much in line with the empiricist views popularized
at his time by Johannes Nikolaus Tetens who believed that consciousness required an act
in which "the soul says as it were to itself internally: Look! (Siehe!)", an act which he
calls "becoming aware" (Gewahrwerden) (1979, 262) and which he links closely to
"noticing (Aufmerken)" and "being attentive (Aufmerksam Seyn)" (1979, 283; my trans-
lation). While Kant rejects Tetens' identiﬁcation of this act with "apperception (Apper-
zeption)" (1979, 262),4 he agrees with Tetens' characterization of the intellectual effort
required for one's consciousness of one's own presentations as an act of attention (1979,
267-294).
The attribution of attention to the understanding is commonplace in philosophical and
psychological debates at Kant's time. In Baumgarten's Metaphysics, for example, you ﬁnd
the entry for "attention" under the rubric "intellect" (2013, §§ 624-638). Kant's reason to
attribute attention to the intellect, that is, to the mind's spontaneity, and thereby to make it a
function of thought, is that it is independent from any speciﬁc given manifold. In other
words, it does not depend on sensory content.5 Although it may be applied to such
content, it can just as well be applied to conceptual content, emotions, or whatever else
comes "to mind".
Kant therefore describes attention as an "expense (Aufwand)" or an "effort (Anstren-
gung) of the understanding" (1992, AA 9, 55).6 Without that effort, I may also not
become aware of our own presentations. According to Kant, they may be, and often are,
"nothing to me" (1996, B 131-132). The point is simple. When we do not pay attention,
our own presentations can stay "under the radar".7 To put it differently, in order to be atten-
tive we have to be doing something.8 Attention is an act and as such, Kant infers, it must
also have an effect. If "the power to be conscious is to locate (apprehend) what lies in the
mind," he writes, "then it must affect the mind" (Kant 1996, B68; trans. modiﬁed). To cut a
long story short, according to Kant, attention's effect on sensory content is that sensations
are synthesized into perception as we know it: intentional consciousness of spatio-temporal,
or, in the case we are perceiving our own mental events, temporal objects.9
For our purposes here, I believe we can take at least two insights from Kant's discussion
of inner sense: ﬁrst, there is more to phenomenal consciousness than phenomenal content;
Cognitive Phenomenology: Kant and Husserl
163

and, second, the role of attention is inseparable from a proper account of phenomenal con-
sciousness. More speciﬁcally, according to Kant, attention is an intellectual rather than a
purely perceptual effort, although it can be directed at perceptual objects, and thus is right-
fully part of cognitive phenomenology. In contemporary debate, Block has written exten-
sively on how attention has a constitutive, rather than a merely causal effect on sensory
phenomenal consciousness. He cites plenty of empirical evidence that conﬁrms that atten-
tion actually changes phenomenal content (and does not simply select from it). For
example, an attended object may look "bigger, faster, earlier, more saturated, stripier"
(Block 2010).10 However, Kant's account of inner sense highlights yet another aspect of
attention. Like some more recent contributions to the cognitive phenomenology debate,
he stresses the difference made to phenomenal content by the "sense" of being actively,
attentively engaged not in just any activity, but in precisely the cognitive activity generating
that very phenomenal content. In contemporary language, and assuming a very general idea
of thinking that includes the intellectual effort of attention, this point can be summarized
thus: the "what it is like to do the thinking is essential to its content" (Klausen 2008,
485 f.).
Thinking in the narrower sense of the word, namely as conceptual and propositional
thinking, on the contrary, plays a different role, according to Kant, but a role nonetheless
that has an effect on phenomenal content. In fact, Kant even suggests that some thinking
may even constitute its own genuine content. In order to identify this idea in his account,
we have to turn to his notion of "transcendental unity of apperception". It involves the
famous claim that in order for presentations to become phenomenally aware (in "inner
sense"), it must be possible to "think" them, and to think them as one's own,11 even
though we in fact often do not - this is the implication - actually think of our presentations
in that self-attributing way. The point is that presentations that are impossible thus to self-
attribute may "either be impossible or at least nothing to me" (Kant 1996, B 131-132). In
other words, as was mentioned above, they play no cognitive role, and - although they
may, unbeknownst to us, affect our judgments - they cannot be part of them, nor be
made conscious.
The problem that presentations may be "nothing to us" in this strong sense, in which it is
in principle impossible to bring them to awareness, is, according to Kant's account, a
problem for intuitive presentations only. Conceptual presentations and propositional
thoughts are immune to the problem. This is trivial for Kant. It does not make sense to
say of thoughts that they are impossible to think, and for him this also means that it is
always possible to self-attribute one's own thoughts.12 The activity of thinking, then, is
for Kant always either tacitly (in inner sense)13 or explicitly (in self-attributing meta-reﬂec-
tion) phenomenally conscious. As such it is irreducible to an understanding of the content of
our thinking, which may or may not have phenomenal properties. Instead, we can become
aware of our own activity of thinking - not only in an implicit sense, as we have it when we
are paying attention to something else (thereby affecting our "inner sense"), but also in an
explicit sense. Conscious (explicit) thought is required for conscious (explicit) self-attribu-
tion of a presentation and thus for explicit awareness of my thinking as mine. In this way,
Kant links closely agentive and proprietary dimensions of thinking, both of which have a
phenomenal character and are thus, in the language of current debate, part of "cognitive
phenomenology".
Regarded abstractly and independently from its transcendental function in cognition,
then, thinking is reduced to "pure apperception", that is, to the mere presentation "I
think (Ich denke)" (Kant 1996, B 131). This presentation is "a thought, not an intuition"
(Kant 1996, B 157). It does not contain any other content than, to put it in Kantian
164
Julia Jansen

terms, my explicit awareness of "my own spontaneity", or my explicit awareness of myself
as a thinker. Through it I merely think that I am thinking, not what I am thinking (cf. Kant
1996, B 157). However, this awareness itself of my own spontaneity is a particular mode of
self-awareness with its own phenomenal content. Rather than being an inference, or a
logical conclusion from premises, it is, as Kant emphasizes several times, an "empirical
proposition", which expresses the sense that "I exist thinking" (1996, B 428) - "a
feeling", as he explains in the Prolegomena, "of an existence without the least concept"
(2004, 344n.).
To sum up, what I take Kant's account to contribute to the debate is that the "what it is
like" for me to be aware of myself as active thinker, independently of the contents of my
thinking, should be a proper part of cognitive phenomenology. This moves cognitive phe-
nomenology closely together with "agentive phenomenology", that is, "the what-it's-like-
ness of experiencing one's behaviors as one's own actions" (cf. Bayne 2008; Horgan 2011,
62). What's more, cognitive phenomenology, with Kant, has not only agentive, but also pro-
prietary aspects, and it does so in very speciﬁc ways. For in thinking we do not only experi-
ence our activity, but we also experience it as our own; we sense both our own existence and
our involvement in the constitution of the very contents of our thinking.
3.
Husserl on active and passive synthesis
The application of Husserl's ideas on thinking to the contemporary debate on cognitive phe-
nomenology is perhaps even more difﬁcult than the applications of Kant's. Husserl's, even
more than Kant's, cut across many of the very distinctions and assumptions on which this
debate is based. In this sense, contemporary discourse is more indebted still to models of
mind borrowed from modern philosophy, such as Locke's and Kant's, than it is inﬂuenced
by Husserl's, who is so much closer to us in time. Here too, the strength of functionalist
convictions is palpable. Also for this reason, Husserl's comprehensive "consciousness
talk" and his "idealism" are not generally met with great enthusiasm by contemporary
philosophers of mind.14 Moreover, doubts concerning the reliability of introspection
(cf. Chudnoff 2014, Chap. 1) also taint the method of phenomenological reﬂection and
thereby the very evidence on which Husserl's claims are based - even though the important
differences between introspection and phenomenological reﬂection have been repeatedly
pointed out (Thomasson 2003; Zahavi 2007; Cerbone 2012; Breyer and Gutland 2016).
Recently, however, there have been ﬁrst explicit references to Husserlian phenomenology
in contributions to the cognitive phenomenology debate. For example, it has been noted
(Jorba 2010) that Husserl's notion of intentional acts does not permit a "separatist" view,
which divorces phenomenal from intentional content. Different intentional acts - of perceiv-
ing, wishing, willing, thinking, etc. - are, for Husserl, differentiated not only in terms of their
"objects" (what in his early account of the Logical Investigations he calls "the matter" of an
act), but also in terms of an act's "quality", that is, by whether it is experienced as an act of
perceiving, wishing, willing, thinking, judging, supposing, etc. while the intentional object
may actually be the same across different such acts (Husserl 2001a, 5th Inv.).
This aspect of Husserl's phenomenology is ﬂeshed out by an account of "empty inten-
tions". Thoughts are, according to Husserl, "empty" intentions in the sense that they lack
intuitive "fulﬁllment". However, as that which remains constant in more or less fulﬁlled
intentions of the same intentional object15 such thoughts "can make a constitutive contri-
bution to the phenomenological character of one's experience" (Hopp 2016, 44). Thus,
again, Husserl's distinctions cut across those framing the cognitive phenomenology
debate. Rather than distinguishing different modes of consciousness - thinking, imagining,
Cognitive Phenomenology: Kant and Husserl
165

perceiving, etc. - in an absolute sense, Husserl identiﬁes a dynamic structure of empty
intentions and fulﬁllment that operates across the different modes. As a result, on the
one hand, cognitive phenomenology becomes more integrated into a phenomenology sim-
pliciter; on the other hand, it becomes much harder to isolate an exclusively cognitive phe-
nomenology even though its irreducibility becomes all the clearer.
While the dynamic of empty intentions and fulﬁllment runs across all modes of con-
sciousness, including those that do not require explicit recognition of any fulﬁllment
(such when earlier anticipatory empty intentions become fulﬁlled in the ongoing percep-
tion), such explicit recognition of fulﬁllment is possible. Husserl describes these experi-
ences as "experiences of truth". In an "'experience of truth', the conscious episode in
which my thought or judgment is not just experienced as fulﬁlled by a corresponding per-
ception but is understood to be fulﬁlled by it" (Crowell 2016, 183). In both tacit and explicit
cases of fulﬁllment, however, the fulﬁllment is experienced, or lived through (erlebt). In
tacit cases, the experience of fulﬁllment lends a sense of provisional conﬁrmation; in expli-
cit cases, it grants the experience of having achieved proper knowledge, of seeing things
properly. In both cases, this introduces a normative dimension into the phenomenal
content - at a minimum, the sense of conﬁrmation that might prompt further investigation
and compel us "to ﬁnd out more". However, according to Husserl, that normative dimen-
sion is an explicit phenomenal aspect only of explicit cases of fulﬁllment, that is, of experi-
ences of truth. It belongs intrinsically to the experience of truth that one understands that
one "got it right" although one could have "gotten it wrong". As Steven Crowell puts it,
whereas it is possible to function in accord with a norm while lacking any phenomenology at
all, acting in light of it - experiencing the speciﬁcally normative character of its force - is not
possible without a phenomenally distinctive concern for a (sufﬁciently) determinate sort of
success or failure. (2016, 188f.)
There is yet another distinction running through all of these aspects of Husserl's phenom-
enology that I would like to add to the debate here. It concerns speciﬁcally the agentive and
proprietary dimensions of cognitive phenomenology I already identiﬁed in Kant's account.
For Husserl replaces Kant's distinction between (tacitly or explicitly) conscious presenta-
tions and unconscious (sensible) presentations with a sophisticated differentiation
between "active" and "passive" modes of consciousness. He introduces this differentiation
using a broadly speaking Kantian vocabulary of "syntheses", and distinguishes "active"
from "passive" syntheses of consciousness. Whereas active syntheses refer to mental activi-
ties (typically judgments) in which the "I" (or Ego) is explicitly involved as their "doer", the
notion of passive syntheses is meant to capture activities (typically low-level perceptions) in
which consciousness is still participating, but without being "steered" by an "I".
On the one hand, Husserl considers attention an active performance, namely an active
"turning toward" an object (Husserl 1973, § 18, 80). This "turning toward" sets into a
motion an experienced "teleology", which he explicates, for example, in his writings published
in Experience and Judgment: "the inception of an act of turning-toward, of paying attention to
what exists, puts into play an activity with a tendency, a striving" (Husserl 1973, § 19, 82). This
experienced teleology is accompanied, much like attention in the Kantian account, by an
experience of one's own activity. "The turning-toward itself is characterized by an 'I do';
and the wandering of the rays of attentive regard, or regard in the mode of turning-toward,
is likewise an 'I do'" (Husserl 1973, § 19, 85). Moreover, attention can also be described
as an active "taking of an interest". For example, when we pay attention to one thing (and
thus not to other things), we, as Wayne Wu has recently argued, select something "to guide
166
Julia Jansen

performance of some experimental task"; we select "for action" (Wu 2014). This makes atten-
tion part of an agentive cognitive phenomenology, which for Husserl has its own phenomenal
character; for the striving towards greater "fulﬁllment" of the perceptual content attains a posi-
tive value with its own genuine "feel". Husserl here provides a description of an experience I
assume many of us are familiar with, although it is rarely ever mentioned in philosophical dis-
cussion. We might say it is the experience of the will to know more and the joy we take in its
satisfaction, which are, according to Husserl, irreducible to other emotional states. This is from
Experience and Judgment again:
The reason we speak of interest here is that a feeling goes hand in hand with this striving,
indeed a positive feeling, which however, is not to be confused with a pleasure taken in the
object . . . Linked with this is a speciﬁc feeling of satisfaction in this enrichment [of sense in
the ongoing perception] and, in relation to this horizon of expanding and heightening enrich-
ment, a striving "to come ever closer" to the object, to take possession of its "self" ever more
completely. On a higher level, this striving can also take the form of a true act of will, a will to
knowledge, with deliberate positing of goals, etc." (Husserl 1973, § 20, 85 f.)
However, attention also has "passive" moments. For example, my attention, rather than
being controlled by me, may be "caught" by something. In other words, we do not
merely select objects for inspection; objects affect us. They spark our interest and draw
attention to themselves. Attention, in this respect, is a response, not a spontaneous act.
Or better, attention lies at the very threshold between activity and passivity. As Husserl
explains in his Analyses of Passive Synthesis:
By affection we understand the allure given to consciousness [bewußtseinsma¨ßiger Reiz], the
peculiar pull that an object given to consciousness exercises on the ego; it is a pull that is
relaxed when the ego turns toward it attentively, and progresses from here, striving toward
self-giving intuition, disclosing more and more of the self of the object, thus, striving toward
an acquisition of knowledge, toward a more precise view of the object. (Husserl 2001b, 196)
Thus, according to Husserl, attention cannot without qualiﬁcation be identiﬁed as passive or
active. It can occur in either mode, and can display both modes in different degrees. In this
regard, Husserl's account very much resonates with some recent contributions to the contem-
porary debate, for example, with Sebastian Watzl's who, based on his own analysis, comes to
the conclusion that "routine forms of attention often cannot be described as clearly passive or
active" (Watzl 2011, 728). Husserl already insists that the distinction between activity and
passivity in general is not rigid but "must in each case be recreated originally with reference
to the concrete situation of analysis" (Husserl 1973, §23a). Moreover, even passive modes of
consciousness are activities. Even though they are not under the control of a conscious Ego, or
"I", they are also not simply devoid of activity. "On the contrary, receptivity must be regarded
as the lowest level of activity" (Husserl 1973, §17). One way to think about this is to consider
the high level complexity of consciousness in the Husserlian sense, that is, of all cognitive and
perceptual "goings on" in their entirety. It is hard to conceive of how we could be - this was
already Leibniz' und Kant's point - explicitly conscious of all of these different acts and pro-
cesses at the same time. Even if only for reasons of "mental economy", we thus either volun-
tary and actively select, or let ourselves passively be drawn to something that stands out for us
and demands our attention.16
Moreover, "passive" and "active" do not necessarily refer to two discrete acts but
instead may just describe different moments of one and the same episode of attending to
something - in thought, perception, or action. Episodes of thinking are thus not sequences
Cognitive Phenomenology: Kant and Husserl
167

of static "states", which can be explained by "mental ballistics" (Strawson 2003). In fact,
due to the complexity of the intricate web of overall reﬂexive world-consciousness corre-
lations,17 continuous experience is usually best characterized (and even, at least tacitly, phe-
nomenally conscious) as "pushmi-pullyu" (Millikan 1995) experience - in the sense that
purely "active", or purely "passive" states tend to be unstable, as they are constantly adapt-
ing to ongoing "objective", or environmental "pushmis" and egoic "pullyus". Both this
web's dynamics and its complexity are lost when we try to isolate and arrest mental
states, which we then take to be simple parts from which to build a model of mind.18 In
the case of cognitive phenomenology, it is perhaps most obvious that we have to look
for processes and activities of thinking, and not for their "ﬁnished" accomplishments, if
we want to get to cognitive phenomenology (Jorba 2015, 734). This also holds for pro-
cesses of self-awareness. According to Husserl, there is not only explicit, reﬂective (i.e.
active) self-consciousness, but also tacit, pre-reﬂective (i.e. passive) self-awareness,
which is intrinsic even to ﬁrst-order object-directed, intentional consciousness and enriches
its phenomenal content with a sense of "mine-ness" (Zahavi 2005, Zahavi and Kriegel
2015), that is, with agentive and proprietary phenomenal content.
4.
Conclusion
For Husserl, thought that does not "have any phenomenology" (an expression that he would
have never used, of course) simply is not thought, just as a camera does not actually per-
ceive anything but only records data. An artiﬁcial intelligence, or "cognitive zombie"
(Horgan 2011) only computes, or processes information. We may call this "thinking", if
we wish, but only metaphorically so. In other words, for Husserl as well as for Kant, inten-
tional and phenomenal content cannot be separated, which of course challenges function-
alist models of cognition and of perception. For it means that we cannot talk about
cognition as if it did not matter whether we were talking about a self-aware thinker or
not, as if it did not matter whether the respective cognitive system was capable of experi-
encing the act of thinking from a ﬁrst person point of view. According to Husserl, then, con-
scious thought is "cognitive-gap-able" in the sense in which Kriegel (2012) has afﬁrmed,
and Carruthers and Veillet (2012) have denied it.
By way of closing, I would like to draw attention to the fact that in the debate on cog-
nitive phenomenology we see yet another rarely challenged assumption playing out,
namely the assumption that by and large only perceptions and concepts matters in cogni-
tion. This tendency, long prevalent in philosophy of mind and cognitive science, has
now spread even into more historical and systematic approaches, not least due to inﬂuential
work by John McDowell. In fact, the cognitive phenomenology debate can be seen as an
inversion of the non-conceptual debate he initiated. Whereas McDowell's contentious
claim was that "receptivity does not make even a notionally separable contribution" to cog-
nition (McDowell 1994, 41), we can translate the skeptic's view on cognitive phenomen-
ology as maintaining that "thinking does not make even a notionally separable
contribution to phenomenal content".
What we can take from Kant and Husserl, then, is the observation that conscious think-
ing is an activity that has its own irreducible phenomenal qualities. However, their work
also questions the wisdom of referring to the phenomenology of conscious thought as "cog-
nitive phenomenology" as if conscious thought was a unitary phenomenon and as if, even if
it was unitary, it was the only cognitive experience there was. As David Woodruff Smith
points out, "cognitive phenomenology" should really be understood as "the phenomenol-
ogy of 'cognitive' experiences, including conscious thinking" but also "perceiving
168
Julia Jansen

(sensory-conceptual experience), judging (either self-evidential or inferential), etc." (Smith
2012, 345). If we concede this point, then the list of topics for 'cognitive' phenomenology
might get rather long: For example, we can add cognitively relevant modes of doubting,
questioning, conﬁrming, verifying, imagining, etc. This motivates a new skepticism
towards "cognitive phenomenology": a skepticism towards a narrow understanding of it
as phenomenology of thought, itself narrowly conceived.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author.
Notes
1.
The term "sensible" is not identical with "sensory", but refers to an immediate, intuitive aware-
ness of something.
2.
In the Nouveaux Essais (Leibniz 1996), his counter-work to Locke's New Essay, Leibniz intro-
duces the notion of the "petites perceptions", which are sensations that go unnoticed by the
subject, but which may be noted subsequently (e.g. by the subject's attention being drawn to
them in some way). Following Leibniz, Christian Wolff also makes a distinction between uncon-
scious and conscious presentations. Conscious presentations he calls thoughts (Gedancken).
When we are conscious, "we say that we think (gedencken), and accordingly call 'thoughts'
those modiﬁcations of the soul of which it is conscious" (Wolff 1747, § 194, 108; my translation).
Sometimes Kant still uses "thoughts" in this general sense, for example, when he states that "con-
sciousness alone is what turns all presentations into thoughts (A 350).
3.
I am consciously avoiding the term "mental states" because, as I argue later, this term actually
obstructs the agentive and proprietary dimension of Kant's and Husserl's accounts. I also avoid
the term "representations" because I want to avoid the misunderstanding that either Kant or
Husserl is committed to what is currently being called "representationalism".
4.
For Kant's explicit distinction between inner sense (empirical consciousness) and apperception
(logical consciousness) see Kant (2006; 142 and 1996, B 68).
5.
A similar point has recently been used to defend the view that differences in the phenomenology
of attention cannot be reduced to "corresponding differences in the properties or objects" in the
subject's surroundings (Watzl 2011, 725).
6.
Despite being "intellectual" for Kant, in the sense explained, attention is nonetheless distinct
from judgment. As Tetens already points out, if attention involved judgment, attention could
be true or false (Tetens 1979, 273 ff.).
7.
Subconscious presentations cannot, according to Kant, play an explicit cognitive role, that is,
they cannot become part of a judgment. This is not to say that they cannot affect our judgment.
They certainly can. For example, think of unconscious biases and selective attention
phenomena.
8.
This leaves undecided the issue whether such "effort" is voluntary or involuntary. I get back to
this below when I discuss Husserl's distinction between passive and active modes of consciousness.
9.
Kant calls the "effect" of the intellectual effort of attention, if it is applied to a sensible manifold
as such, the transcendental synthesis of the imagination (cf. 1996, B 152; see Dyck 2006,
esp. 41). The same "effect" at work on particular sensible manifolds is generated by empirical
syntheses, which however, depend on their conformity with the transcendental synthesis in the
sense that if they don't thus conform, they fail to generate perceptions that are consistently sus-
ceptible to judgment. Nature, to put it in a nutshell, would then have holes of scientiﬁc
unintelligibility.
10.
Harman (1990) and Block (2010) have referred to this somewhat vaguely as the "mental paint"
of consciousness. For an alternative view, which explains differences in phenomenal content on
the basis of "embodied cognition" instead of "mental paint", see Tanesini (2015). I cannot
explore this here but the agentive dimension of attention that I am exploiting is amenable
also to an "embodied" account.
11.
This is meant to be a translation into more contemporary English of Kant's claim that
Cognitive Phenomenology: Kant and Husserl
169

The I think must be capable of accompanying all my presentations. For otherwise some-
thing would be presented to me that could not be thought at all - which is equivalent to
saying that the presentation either would be impossible, or at least would be nothing to
me. (1996, B132)
12.
It is worth remembering here that Kant only speaks of thinking as part of cognition. The fact that
in certain pathological cases there is a failure of self-attribution of one's own thoughts to oneself,
or of alien thoughts not to oneself, only highlights how much non-pathological cognitive think-
ing relies on this kind of self-attribution.
13.
For example, dispositional beliefs may be tacitly conscious and thus still play a cognitive role
when one is not explicitly conscious of them.
14.
These antipathies are often based on misunderstandings of the technical Husserlian meanings of
these terms, but that's beside the point of this paper.
15.
Consider the differences between, for example, only ("emptily") thinking that the cat is on the
mat, imagining what the cat might look like sitting on the mat, and ﬁnally actually seeing it
sitting there.
16.
Pace Husserl, Wu does not think that attention has anything to do with consciousness (Wu
2014).
17.
As Eric Schwitzgebel puts it, consciousness is a "rich soup, full of experience in a wide variety
of modalities simultaneously" (2007, 728).
18.
For in-depth accounts of the complex range of acts and processes of attention from a broadly
phenomenological perspective, see (Breyer 2011 and Wehrle 2013).
Notes on contributor
Julia Jansen is professor of philosophy at the Husserl Archives, Higher Institute of Philosophy, KU
Leuven. She has published on Husserlian phenomenology and Kantian philosophy, on phenomenol-
ogy and cognitive science, on aesthetics and on the imagination.
References
Armstrong, David. 1968. A Materialist Theory of Mind. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Baumgarten, Alexander Gottlieb. 2013. Metaphysics (Translated and edited by Courtney D. Fugate,
and John Hymers). London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Bayne, Tim. 2008. "The Phenomenology of Agency." Philosophy Compass 3/1: 182-202.
Bayne, Tim, and Michelle Montague, eds. 2012. Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Block, Ned. 1995. "On a Confusion About the Function of Consciousness." Behavioral and Brain
Sciences 18: 227-247.
Block, Ned. 2001. "Paradox and Cross Purposes in Recent Work on Consciousness." In The Cognitive
Neuroscience of Consciousness, edited by Stanislas Dehaene, 197-220. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Block, Ned. 2002. "Concepts of Consciousness." In Philosophy of Mind: Classical and
Contemporary Readings, edited by David Chalmers, 206-218. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Block, Ned. 2010. "Attention and Mental Paint." Philosophical Issues 20: 23-63.
Breyer, Thiemo. 2011. Attentionalita¨t und Intentionalita¨t. Mu¨nchen: Fink.
Breyer, Thiemo, and Christopher Gutland. 2016. "Introduction." In Phenomenology of Thinking,
edited by T. Breyer, and C. Gutland, 1-24. London: Routledge.
Carruthers, Peter. 2000. Phenomenal Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carruthers, Peter. 2004. "HOP over FOR, HOT Theory." In Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness,
edited by R. Gennaro, 115-135. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Carruthers, Peter. 2011. "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness." In The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, edited by Edward N. Zalta. Accessed February 2, 2016. http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2011/entries/consciousness-higher/
Carruthers, Peter, and Be´ne´dicte Veillet. 2012. "The Case Against Cognitive Phenomenology." In
Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 35-56. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Cerbone, David R. 2012. "Phenomenological Method: Reﬂection, Introspection, and Skepticism." In
The Oxford Handbook of Contemporary Phenomenology, edited by Dan Zahavi, 7-24. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Chudnoff, Elijah. 2015. Cognitive Phenomenology. London: Routledge.
170
Julia Jansen

Crowell, Steven. 2016. "What is it to Think?" In Phenomenology of Thinking, edited by T. Breyer, and
C. Gutland, 183-206. London: Routledge.
Dyck, Corey. 2006. "Empirical Consciousness Explained: Self-affection, (Self-consciousness) and
Perception in the B Deduction." Kantian Review 11: 29-54.
Harman, Gilbert. 1990. "The Intrinsic Quality of Experience." Philosophical Perspectives 4: 31-52.
Hopp, Walter. 2016. "Empty Intentions and Phenomeologial Character: A Defense of Inclusivism." In
Phenomenology of Thinking, edited by T. Breyer, and C. Gutland, 44-61. London: Routledge.
Horgan, Terry. 2011. "From Agentive Phenomenology to Cognitive Phenomenology: A Guide for the
Perplexed." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 57-78.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Husserl, Edmund. 1973. Experience and Judgment (Rev. and edited by Ludwig Landgrebe, translated
by James S. Churchill and Karl Ameriks). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Husserl, Edmund. 2001a. Logical Investigations (Translated by J. N. Findlay, edited by Dermot
Moran, 2 vols). London: Routledge.
Husserl, Edmund. 2001b. Analyses Concerning Active and Passive Synthesis (Translated by Anthony
Steinbock). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Jansen, Julia. 2013. "Imagination, Embodiment and Situatedness: Using Husserl to Dispel (Some)
Notions of 'Off-Line Thinking'." In The Phenomenology of Embodied Subjectivity, edited by
Jensen Rasmus, and Dermot Moran, 63-79. Dordrecht: Springer.
Jorba, Marta. 2010. "Is There a Speciﬁc Experience of Thinking?" Theoria 68: 187-196.
Jorba, Marta. 2015. "Thoughts, Processive Character and the Stream of Consciousness." International
Journal of Philosophical Studies 23 (5): 730-753.
Kant, Immanuel. 1992. "Ja¨sche Logik." In Lectures on Logic (Translated and edited by J. Michael
Young), 521-640. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 1996. Critique of Pure Reason (Translated by Werner Pluhar). Indianapolis, IN:
Hackett [cited in the text with original German pagination].
Kant, Immanuel. 2004. Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (Translated and edited by Gary
Hatﬁeld, revised edition). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kant, Immanuel. 2006. Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View (Translated and edited by
Robert B. Louden). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Klausen, Søren H. 2008. "The Phenomenology of Propositional Attitudes." Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 7: 445-462.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2012. "Cognitive Phenomenology as the Basis of Unconscious Content." In Cognitive
Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 79-102. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. 1996. New Essays on Human Understanding (Translated and edited by
Peter Remnant, and Jonathan Bennett). Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press.
Locke, John. 1972. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding (Edited by Peter Nidditch). Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Lormand, Eric. 1996. "Nonphenomenal Consciousness." Nous 30: 242-261.
Lycan, William. 1995. Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge: MIT Press.
McDowell, John. 1994. Mind and World. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Millikan, Ruth G. 1995. "Pushmi-Pullyu Representations." Philosophical Perspectives 9: 185-200.
Rosenthal, David. 1986. "Two Concepts of Consciousness." In The Nature of Mind, edited by David
Rosenthal, 329-359. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rosenthal, David. 1991. "The Independence of Consciousness and Sensory Quality." In
Philosophical Issues, 1, edited by Enrique Villanueva (vol. 1, Consciousness), 15-36.
Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview.
Rosenthal, David. 1993. "Thinking that One Thinks." In Consciousness: Psychological and
Philosophical Essays, edited by Martub Davies and Glyn W. Humphreys, 197-223. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Rosenthal, David. 2002. "Explaining Consciousness." In Philosophy of Mind: Classical and
Contemporary Readings, edited by David Chalmers, 109-131. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schwitzgebel, Eric. 2007. "Do you have a Constant Tactile Experience of Your Feet in Your Shoes? Or
is Experience Limited to What's in Attention?" Journal of Consciousness Studies 14 (3): 5-35.
Smith, David Woodruff. 2012. "The Phenomenology of Consciously Thinking." In Cognitive
Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 345-372. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Cognitive Phenomenology: Kant and Husserl
171

Strawson, Galen. 2003. "Mental Ballistics or the Involuntariness of Spontaneity." Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, New Series 103: 227-256.
Tanesini,
Alessandra.
2015.
"Spatial
Attention
and
Perception:
Seeing
without
Paint."
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 14: 433-454.
Tetens, Johann Nicolas. 1979. Philosophische Versuche u¨ber die menschliche Natur und ihre
Entwicklung (2 vols). Hildesheim: Georg Olms.
Thomasson, Amie L. 2003. "Introspection and Phenomenological Method." Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 2: 239-254.
Tye, Michael, and Briggs Wright. 2012. "Is there a Phenomenology of Thought?" In Cognitive
Phenomenology, edited by Tim Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 326-344. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Watzl, Sebastian. 2011. "The Philosophical Signiﬁcance of Attention." Philosophy Compass 6/10:
722-733.
Wehrle, Maren. 2013. Horizonte der Aufmerksamkeit. Mu¨nchen: Fink.
Wolff, Christian. 1747. Vernu¨nfftige Gedancken von Gott, der Welt, und der Seele (¼Deutsche
Metaphysik). Halle: Renger.
Wu, Wayne. 2014. Attention. London: Routledge.
Zahavi, Dan. 2005. Subjectivity and Selfhood. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Zahavi, Dan. 2007. "Killing the Straw Man: Dennett and Phenomenology." Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 6 (1-2): 21-43.
Zahavi, Dan, and Uriah Kriegel. 2015. "For-Me-Ness: What it is and What it is Not." In Philosophy of
Mind and Phenomenology, edited by Daniel O. Dahlstrom, Andreas Elpidorou, and Walter Hopp,
36-53. London: Routledge.
172
Julia Jansen

