Physical Therapy Reviews
ISSN: 1083-3196 (Print) 1743-288X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/yptr20
Phenomenology: a powerful tool for patient-
centered rehabilitation
Bruce Greenﬁeld & Gail M Jensen
To cite this article: Bruce Greenﬁeld & Gail M Jensen (2012) Phenomenology: a powerful
tool for patient-centered rehabilitation, Physical Therapy Reviews, 17:6, 417-424, DOI:
10.1179/1743288X12Y.0000000046
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1179/1743288X12Y.0000000046
Published online: 12 Nov 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 522
View related articles 
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=yptr20

Special Issue Article
Phenomenology: a powerful tool for patient-
centered rehabilitation
Bruce Greenfield1, Gail M. Jensen2
1Department of Rehabilitation, Division of Physical Therapy, Emory University School of Medicine,
Affiliated Faculty, Center for Ethics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2Department of Physical Therapy,
Faculty Associate, Center for Health Policy and Ethics, Creighton University, Omaha, NE, USA
In this essay, we describe phenomenology as a philosophy and methodology that is uniquely suited to aid
healthcare professionals to explore and understand the meaning of disability from the perspectives of the
patient/client. Emerging in the beginning of the twentieth century as a philosophy for understanding the
nature of the world around us, phenomenology has gained traction over the last several years in healthcare
as a methodology in rehabilitation research and as a tool in patient-centered care. We explore the basic
concepts of phenomenology and provide conceptual links to the exigencies of patient-centered care.
Along the way, we discuss recent literature that provides evidence of the use of phenomenology to uncover
the lived experiences of individuals with disabilities. We conclude with concrete examples and suggestions
to clinicians for strategies to use phenomenology as a tool in patient-centered care.
Keywords: Disability, Rehabilitation, Research, Qualitative, Phenomenology
Neurological diseases and traumatic injuries such as
stroke and spinal cord injuries fundamentally alter
how individuals engage in the world, particularly
with respect to spatial and temporal relationships.
Imagine Tom, a young non-disabled man who
sustains a spinal cord injury and is no longer able
to walk. Tom must navigate his environment using a
wheelchair. Prior to injury, he physically (and
spatially) stood above his young son. How he
experienced himself in relationship to his son in the
world was partly defined by that spatially-oriented
interaction. Now, he is forced to physically face his
son more or less eye to eye.
What might Tom's new condition mean in terms of
how he experiences his relationship with his son? For
example, might he in fact feel less imposing, less
conﬁdent? More equal? Or, perhaps Tom feels more
vulnerable? Toombs describes that the value assigned
to upright posture should not be underestimated
when considering one's illness experience. She writes,
in contemporary society, 'Verticality is directly relat-
ed to autonomy.' (Ref. 1, p. 65). Other questions
include, how does Tom make sense of his identity as a
wheelchair user? What social barriers to work, and
community involvement, does he face now and in the
future? How might he feel about being disabled? How
might he perceive being socially stigmatized, discri-
minated, or perhaps rejected? What other psychoso-
cial issues related to his disability might he encounter
in the future? What constitutes quality of life to his
man? How best can rehabilitation specialists explore
these issues?
In this paper, we argue that phenomenology is a
useful tool for uncovering important concepts in the
lived experience of clients with acquired disabilities
that can help enrich practice. We will discuss key
concepts essential for understanding phenomenology
as a philosophy for research and clinical practice. This
discussion is followed by examples of phenomenolo-
gical research focused on patient care in rehabilitation
and a closing section that takes a critical reﬂective look
at the role of phenomenology in clinical practice.
Throughout, we will provide concrete examples for the
use of phenomenology in rehabilitation research and
clinical care.
Phenomenology
Our aim is not to provide a comprehensive review of
phenomenology but rather to highlight the key
theoretical
concepts
and
their
links
to
clinical
practice. As we work our way through this material,
the readers may refer to Fig. 1 illustrating the
theoretical concepts of phenomenology as we criss-
cross the horizon between philosophy and approach
to clinical practice.
Correspondence to: Bruce Greenfield, Department of Rehabilitation,
Division of Physical Therapy, Emory University School of Medicine,
Affiliated Faculty, Center for Ethics, Emory University, 1441 Clifton Road
NE, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. Email: bgreenf@emory.edu
 W. S. Maney & Son Ltd 2012
DOI 10.1179/1743288X12Y.0000000046
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6
417

The philosophical framework that informs this
article
is
drawn
primarily
from
the
works
of
Husserl.2-4 Phenomenologist Richard Zaner raised
the primary epistemic question that Husserl sought to
understand 'Given that there is no knower immedi-
ately
acquainted
with
anything
except
what
is
immanent in his own mind how is it possible to
know anything else?' (Ref. 5, p. 68). In other words,
how do individuals cross the abyss between their
own consciousness and the actual world? Husserlian
phenomenology is best understood as being moti-
vated to explain the enigma of cognition: How does
the human subject transcend itself in order to know a
world of entities that exist independently of it?6 These
are important and fundamental questions for health-
care professionals seeking to critically explore and
gain in-depth understandings of their patients living
with life-changing diseases or disabilities.
Human beings are meaning-making creatures con-
sciously interpreting their experiences in the world. In a
sense, phenomenologists are committed to an internal
view of reality, with consciousness (the mind) playing a
foundational role in constructing or (in phenomenolo-
gical terms) constituting the world around us. Because
phenomenologists describe human beings consciously
engaging the world through a process of constitutive
activities, through an ongoing process of interpreting
their experiences, they assert that individuals cannot
fully trust generalizable objective data. Rather, phe-
nomenologists argue that what we (as human beings)
can be most sure of is our own subjective interpretation
of the world around us, within our own sphere of 'own-
ness', and within our own embodied sense of ourselves
in the world.7 Therefore, it is subjective rather than
objective reality that is most meaningful. For those of
us who have been trained in positivist empirical
medicine,
these
sentiments
may
seem
odd.
Yet,
physiotherapists who approach patient-centered care
using narrative and ethical reasoning already embrace
the importance of subjective and contextual under-
standing of causal relationships between impairments
and limitations in activity levels, the same types of
understanding that phenomenologists seek to explore.
Because understanding of our place in the world (or
the meaning of our existence) is what most is at stake
here, some commentators refer to the clinical and
research application of phenomenology as an inter-
pretative ontology.8,9 Ontology is the Greek word for
the study of the nature of existence or reality.8
Therefore, phenomenology applied to clinical research
or care, seeks to understand the experiences of how
one
makes
meaning
of
living
with
disability.
Phenomenology in research is thus a method of
exploration and understanding of lived experiences.
Given that phenomenology provides a method for
patient-centered understanding, we can rightly ask,
how does it exactly work?
Theory of Consciousness, Intentionality and the
Lifeworld
In this section, we will try to bring phenomenology
into focus by describing its key elements including how
individuals make sense of experience through pro-
cesses of intentionality and constitution. Throughout,
we will ground these concepts to clinical care.
Husserl
approached
the
question
of
meaning-
making through his theory of consciousness. Con-
sciousness according to Husserl is a stream of ongoing
thoughts, images, beliefs, memories, and feelings
emanating from an individual's mind. We may think
of consciousness as containing the stuff of thought,
Figure 1
Phenomenology: bridging philosophy and practice.
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
418
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6

whereby it makes meaning, sense, order or coherence
of our experiences.3,4
One of the central tenets of phenomenology is that
consciousness is always intending toward something.
Intentionality
is
the
process
through
which
an
individual's consciousness is directed to a vast array
of objects (surroundings) that constitute his or her
reality (in phenomenological terms — a horizon of
meanings).5,6 With the risk of sounding tautological,
we should be mindful that consciousness is always
conscious of something. In other words, both acts of
consciousness and the objects of those acts — e.g. acts
of perceiving and along with them, things perceived,
acts of remembering and things remembered, and acts
of meaning and things meant, are examples of our
intentionality.10 When we observe, say, a tree, we do
not from a phenomenological perspective say, 'I see a
tree.' Rather, we refer to 'the tree as seen (by me)', to
reﬂect our conscious intentionality toward the tree.
From that perspective, the objective reality of the tree
is of less importance than our subjective experience of
that tree. In other words, by emphasizing an object
(the tree) as experienced (seen) by an individual (me),
we acknowledge the subjectivity of observation or an
experience (observing or experiencing the tree). Thus,
a clinician may measure the distance a patient/client
can ambulate without assistance at 20 feet, but from a
phenomenological perspective, would ask the patient/
client, what does ambulating 20 feet mean to you?
In phenomenology, it is the lifeworld or the
intentionally lived relation of the person in the world
that is most important to explore.3 The lifeworld
constitutes the meaning of one's experience in the
world. From a clinical perspective, we can refer to a
part of a patient's lifeworld as his/her lived experience
with a disabling condition. Consider especially the
patient's lifeworld as part of the dialectical process of
clinical reasoning that includes evaluating the body-
as-object and diagnosing the body-as-subject.7,11 In
the former case, the clinician uses technical reasoning
to diagnose and establish the causal relationships
between impairments and activity limitations. In the
latter case, the clinician phenomenologically probes
the lived experiences of a client to gain a holistic and
contextual understanding of their lifeworld.12 When
we ask a client what it like is to be a wheelchair user
in his/her everyday life, we are asking to describe his/
her lifeworld as body-as-subject. As mentioned, the
main focus of conscious intentionality is to constitute
or generate meaning about objects of experience. The
German word Husserl often used is 'aufbauen', which
literally means to build up or construct (Ref. 13, p.
25). Describing and analyzing the constitutive opera-
tions of a patient's consciousness is a major goal
in phenomenology for healthcare providers. Those
practicing phenomenology in healthcare have the job
of describing and analyzing how objects come to be
constituted within the sphere of consciousness as
synthesizing acts that occur in perception, judgment,
imagination, remembrances, inferences, etc.
The goal of phenomenology, writes Zaner is
to bring out or to make explicit those structures that
remains merely implicit and taken for granted, in
order to make possible a thorough critical under-
standing of them and permit their assessment.
(Ref. 5, p. 82)
Phenomenology can help clinicians develop aware-
ness of their patients' changed temporal and spatial
relationships, through probing with their patients
how they currently constitute their own experiences,
their embodied actions (including kinesthetic aware-
ness of their movements), their purposes or intentions
in action (more or less explicit), their awareness of
other persons (in empathy, intersubjectivity, and
collectivity),
their
linguistic
activities
(involving
meaning, communication, and understanding others),
their social interaction (including collective action),
and their everyday activities in their surrounding
lifeworld (in a particular culture).10
If clinicians question the clinical relevance of the
statement above, perhaps they might imagine how an
individual's sense of temporality is altered after a
spinal cord injury. Time frames that once were taken
for granted pre-injury (e.g. getting up out of bed to go
to the bathroom in the morning; walking to the bus
to go to work), have an entirely different meaning
from a phenomenological perspective. Kate Toombs
describes how a patient with illness often lives within
the context of his or her illness in inner time (lived
time), instead of outer time (objective time).1 She
describes the sensory experiences of patients with
intractable pain as not measured by the sufferer
according to traditional units of objective time.
Rather, she argues, illness-as-lived is experienced as
an ever-present consciousness of pain that overrides
the marking of temporal intervals and chronological
order. This idea is beautifully illustrated in Tolstoy's
novelette, 'The death of Ivan Illych'.14 In the scene
described below, the dying Ivan Illych poignantly
describes his lived experience of intractable pain.
It was morning. He knew it was morning because
Gerasim had gone, and Peter the footman had come
and put out the candles, drawn back one of the
curtains, and begun quietly to tidy up. Whether it
was morning or evening, Friday or Sunday, made no
difference, it was just the same...' (Ref. 14, p. 40)
The phenomenological attitude
To enter into a phenomenological discourse with
patients, we must help them develop a phenomen-
ological attitude. A phenomenological attitude can
best be understood in distinction to an individual's
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6
419

natural attitude. The latter can be thought of as the
disengaged or unreﬂective manner that characterizes
how most individuals habitually navigate the world.
Husserl suggested that the natural attitude is the
everyday default position of individuals' tacit under-
standing of the world. Perhaps this can best be
understood if we think about the routine of our daily
activities of getting up in the morning, getting ready
for work, and driving to work. Seldom do we think
about these habitual activities. In fact, many of us
who drive the same route to work are often surprised
how we got to point A to B because we were so deep
in our own thoughts about something else. Similarly,
when persons walk or run, they are not usually
consciously focusing on their body parts moving
synergistically in space. What occurs after a major
injury? Husserl would argue that a shift into a
phenomenological attitude occurs when we begin to
doubt the world, and that changing the way a person
relates to the world, affects a new awareness of
positing of the world.
Husserl writes
... experience might suddenly show itself to be
refractory to the demand that it carry on its positing
of physical things harmoniously, that its context
might lose it fixed regular organizations of adum-
brations, apprehensions, and appearance's - in
short, that there might no longer be any world.'
(Ref. 3, p. 109)
Perhaps this statement becomes clearer if we
imagine a person who is newly disabled. Certainly,
it is more than likely that this individual undergoes a
phenomenological shift in his/her natural attitude of
being in the world. What made sense a few days ago
to him does not currently make sense. He begins to
doubt himself and his place in the world. Instead of
positing things harmoniously, his lifeworld becomes
fragmented. This individual is likely experiencing
fear, confusion, biographical disruption, loss of self
(as previously constituted), and identity shift. How
can rehabilitation professionals explore these phe-
nomena that their patients are experiencing? How can
they recognize the signiﬁcance of their patient's
struggles? We will seek to address these questions
later in this paper.
Embodiment
Phenomenology
understands
the
importance
of
embodiment, of not seeing a mind-body split but
seeing human experience as embodied experience,
which has importance in working with individuals
with disability.1,7,11 Changes in kinesthetic sensation
after neurological insult can be phenomenologically
understood within a patient's lifeworld as a change in
his sense of embodiment. In some cases, after a
catastrophic injury or disease, an individual will
consciously experience his body as something foreign
— a phenomenon we will describe more fully later in
this paper as a sense of disembodiment.
Sufﬁce it now to point out that in circumstances of
wellness, that our bodies are 'invisible' to us during
everyday function (Ref. 15, pp. 429-430). As men-
tioned, under most circumstances, when we are well,
we pay little attention to our bodies and it is not
necessary for performance adequate to the typical
challenges of everyday life (unless we are walking
along a darkened and unfamiliar path, or learning a
new skill, or engaged in a physical or cognitive
activity that intentionally directs reﬂection toward
bodily sensory experience — e.g. Yoga, Tai chi,
meditation, etc.). That is because many of our
activities are 'automatic' products of habit, such that
at most times in our lives we take for granted our
embodiment. During normal everyday activity, the
body is not explicitly thematized as body, wherein
carrying out projects in the world, one's body is
'forgotten' or 'surpassed' (Ref. 15, pp. 429-430).
Sartre's example of using a pen to write illustrates
this meaning
I am not in relation to my hand in the same utilizing
attitude as I am in relation to the pen: I am my
hand]...] I can apprehend it — at least in so far as
it is acting — only as the perpetual, evanescent
reference of the whole series [...] my hand has
vanished; it is lost in the complex system of
instrumentality in order that the system may exist.
It is simply the meaning and orientation of the
system. (Ref. 15, p. 426)
For clinicians, these descriptions might seem odd
— such as the 'the body not thematized as body' —
but are phenomenologically important to under-
stand.
As
mentioned
many
patients
experience
disembodiment
resulting
from
disease
or
injury.
This sense of being disconnected, not only in relation
to oneself and the world, but within one self (consider
a patient with left-sided hemiplegia and with ano-
sognosia) becomes a potentially important outcome
to explore through the process of recovery. Because
measuring a patient's sense of changing embodiment
is not easy to quantify using standard outcome
measures after catastrophic injuries or diseases, we
should be capable of integrating phenomenological
approaches. But given that changes in the awareness
in one's sense of embodiment, not to mention
changes in temporal awareness and changes in self-
identity
are
constituted
(consciously
constructed)
elements of illness and recovery, clinicians who care
for patient/clients with life-changing impairments,
are ethically obligated to explore and address such
changes.
Phenomenology: a powerful tool
Phenomenology with its emphasis on the subjective
nature of experience provides physiotherapists with a
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
420
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6

powerful tool for gaining insight into the experience
of disability and illness. A phenomenological account
of disability is a ﬁrst person account of living
with disability. Clinicians who call attention to the
importance of attending to a patient's narrative
experience of illness are engaging in a phenomen-
ological approach to patient care. Banja writes that
because a person's life world as constituted by
consciousness means one thing pre and quite another
post stroke, the phenomenological question facing
rehabilitationists concerns what they must do to
assist persons with recent strokes to 're-mean' and
reconstitute their worlds in a satisfying and life
affirming way. (Ref. 13, p. 25)
What we are talking about is exploring the re-
constituted world of individuals and families living with
life-changing illnesses. Phenomenological exploration
can help us better uncover and understand the disabling
effects of life-changing illnesses from the lived experi-
ences of the patients and their families. Phenomenology
as a research methodology and approach to patient-
centered care can illuminate psychosocial issues such as
biographical disruptions and identity shifts, meaning of
stigma, barriers to recovery, changes in temporal and
spatial relationships, and the nature and scope of family
support.
Implications for Rehabilitation
Evidence from the literature
Recent phenomenology-based studies using methods
such as in-depth interviews, focus groups, analysis of
personal journals, and personal observations — have
added tremendous insights into the lived experiences
of individuals with disabilities. Examples of changes
in embodiment, such as those revealed by Sally
Gadow's large-scale phenomenological study inter-
viewing
patients
after
strokes
provide
clinicians
valuable insights into these patients' changing per-
ceptions of their sense of embodiment.16 Gadow
found that patients experienced a stage of 'disrupted
immediacy', in which they experienced their bodies
as physically disconnected. For many patients a sense
of 'disembodiment' (in which the self and body
were sensed as not only distinct but opposed), was a
normal variant toward an eventual re-cultivated, actively
re-constructed, and revised sense of embodiment.
Carpenter's phenomenological research on indivi-
duals' experience of spinal cord injury used in-depth
interviews to reveal that rediscovering self, redeﬁning
disability,
and
establishing
a
new
identity
were
key concepts in participants' rehabilitation.17 They
described a need to redeﬁne disability and challenge
the stereotypes and attitudes associated with disabil-
ity which were held by the health professionals. They
established new identities as they learned to see
disability as a part of the continuum of their lives not
as the whole of their lives. Carpenter remarks
This study clearly illustrated the need for rehabilita-
tion professionals to revisit the concept of successful
rehabilitation, not in terms of skill acquisition, but
in terms of what is relevant and important to
individuals in the context of their own lives.
(Ref. 17, p. 32)
In a more recent study, Papadimitriou explored the
lived experiences of 30 individuals who were wheel-
chair users after suffering traumatic spinal cord
injuries.18 She found that the participants underwent
a re-embodiment process what she described as
becoming 'en-wheeled', a concept that reﬂected their
experiences of being in the world that was not merely
'mechanical or practical but also existential and
embodied' (Ref. 18, p. 695). In other words, through
the stories and observations, the phenomenological
reconstruction of becoming en-wheeled made overt
the negotiating, reorganizing, and reconﬁguring of
their lives to achieve embodiment that may have
otherwise remained hidden.
Gibson et al. conducted a critical study that
nevertheless
used
phenomenological
concepts
to
explore the meaning of the use of assistive technol-
ogies in the social practices of ten men with muscular
dystrophy and their senses of embodiment and
emplacement (spatial re-orientation to the world
around
them).19
The
authors
noted
that
these
individuals were profoundly dependent on medical
and assistive technologies including electric wheel-
chairs and the use of long-term mechanical ventila-
tors. Each participant was interviewed twice and
provided a hands-free camera system over the course
of a week to allow him to create an independent video
of who he was and what life was like. This approach
was designed to capture the 'lifeworld' of these
individuals described previously as the world as lived.
The ﬁndings were rich in detail about the connected-
ness of humans and technology and its profound
implications for self-identity. For these participants,
technologies became a source of survival and enable-
ment,
but
also
a
source
of
estrangement
and
stigmatization. Although many of these participants
embraced their medical technologies as extensions of
their selves (the authors used the term 'techno-
bodies'), their internalizations of social norms that
devalue 'extraordinary bodies' (Ref. 19, p. 15) and
their social experiences of stigmatization or rejection
created a sense of their bodies as inferior.
Stigma and disability
An important ﬁnding uncovered from phenomeno-
logical
research
is
how
powerfully
participants
experienced stigma and its effects on their self-
identities — a phenomenon explored by sociologists
and others. Noted sociologist, Erving Goffman, for
example,
wrote
about
the
relationship
between
stigma
and
disability
in
his
classic
1963
book
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6
421

'Stigma:
notes
on
the
management
of
spoiled
identity'. He noted that ancient Greeks originated
the term stigma to refer to bodily signs designed to
expose something unusual that discredited the moral
status of the signiﬁer.20 Rabbi Judith Abrams, in her
book, 'Judaism and disability', argues that stigmati-
zation of persons with disabilities, which may stem in
part from this long association of disability with sin,
continues to this day. She writes,
When physical disability is culturally constructed
through concepts of stigma the physically impaired
individual is prone to various forms of discredit...
Discredit does not pertain only to individuals, but
also to material objects and, paradoxically, even to
the implements of aid that disabled persons use to
assist themselves. (Ref. 21, p. 203)
Goffman explained stigma in American society in
relation to deviance from prevalent or valued norms.
Importantly, deviance is not an inherent property but is
socially
constructed.
Consistent
with
present
day
models of disability, Goffman noted that it is not only
the impairment that contributes to disability but the
social
and
environmental
responses.
Narrative
accounts of persons with disabilities have found that
stigma serves to spoil the stigmatized person's social
identity, discrediting the person in society. Phillips22
documented the personal experiences of 33 persons
with visible, physical disabilities through oral narra-
tives. A compilation and analysis of the 33 narrative
indicated that three cultural notions about disability
dominated the individuals' perception of living with
disability.
These
were
that:
(1)
society
perceived
disabled persons as damaged goods; (2) society believes
that disabled persons must try harder to overcome
obstacles in culture and should strive to achieve
normality; and (3) society attributes to disabled persons
a preference to be with their own kind. Phillips also
shows metaphorically, how individuals with disabilities
described the meaning and symbolism of certain
artifacts used by persons with disabilities. For example,
dark glasses were described as symbols of shame to a
blind informant; a prosthetic hook became a symbol of
pride to a limb deﬁcient informant, who formerly wore
a cosmetic hand.
Thus the presence of disabled persons within
society and the material items that they create in
response to their disabilities continue to be powerful
symbols of negativity. Clinicians should fully appreci-
ate how their patients with disabilities may phenom-
enologically experience living with stigma and the
isolation that it provokes. DeSanto-Madeya explored
the phenomenological experiences of 20 spinal cord
injured persons and their family members 5-10 years
after the initial injury.23 Based on her in-depth
interviews with these participants, several phenom-
enological themes emerged. They were: (1) looking
for understanding to a life that is unknown; (2)
stumbling along on an unlit path; (3) viewing self
through a stained glass window; (4) challenging the
bonds of love being chained to the injury; and (5)
reaching a new normalcy.
One interviewer elaborates the theme of 'looking
for understanding for a life that is unknown'.
I could not explain to my family and friends how
alone I felt. They just never understood because
what people saw was a clean, shaven, well-dressed
young man sitting in a wheelchair that looked like
he had a beautiful life. But they didn't realize what
it took to get him to look like that. (Ref. 23, p. 280)
The studies described above provide just a small
sample of the number of studies that use phenomenol-
ogy to explore the lifeworld of individuals with
disabilities. For physiotherapists who routinely work
with persons with disabling conditions, the ﬁndings in
these studies have signiﬁcant implications in clinical
practice. Most prominently, what is often hidden from
physiotherapists, or at times tacitly sensed, is the
patient's sense of re-embodiment, changes in their
awareness of spatial and temporal relationships, the
meaning of identity, and the sense of isolation and
stigmatization. Through phenomenology, these become
overt, and powerfully compliment patient-centered care
and approaches to treatment. In the section that
follows, we describe some strategies to incorporate
phenomenology into patient-centered care.
Phenomenology as an Approach to Clinical
Practice
Some argue that phenomenological exploration of
the lived experiences of patients is not much different
than
other
patient-centered
approaches,
such
as
narrative medicine. Undoubtedly, there are simila-
rities in that these approaches seek to understand
patients' illness experiences and their personal per-
spectives on impairment and its meaning in their
lives. Attending to the patient's discourse, empathetic
listening, and providing opportunities for patients to
reﬂect upon and construct their illness stories are all
valued approaches to patient-centered care. What
phenomenology teaches is that patient accounts are
being constitutively woven by his or her conscious-
ness. The narrative of patients reﬂect their reality, not
ours. If we listen carefully enough, we can, along with
our patients, reconstruct their lifeworlds as they
grapple with who they were, who they are now, and
who they may become in the future. Papadimitriou
and Stone explored the temporal disconnection that
individuals with recent spinal cord injuries experi-
enced between their past, their present, and their
future.24 The nature of temporal disruption makes it
very difﬁcult for these individuals to make sense of
their impairments because past possibilities in many
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
422
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6

cases are no longer realistic, and possibilities for
future goals and plans are no longer viable, at least
from
their
current
perspectives.
How
then
can
clinicians help patients to better understand the
nature of human temporality and its relation to
meaning making; how can we work with patients
through their biographical and existential crises?
How
can
we
facilitate
re-embodiment?
Papadi-
mitriou and Stone suggest being very conscious and
vocal about what is being done in rehabilitation and
how therapeutic work connects with future abilities
to enhance life possibilities for patients. The use of
peer mentors, individuals with similar disabilities
including the use of support groups can help newly
disabled individuals see the possibilities of future
meaningful lives as newly abled individuals. The
physiotherapists' roles are to help newly disabled
patients make connections with the past and with
future possibilities, and to help them re-imagine
themselves in a lifeworld that is perhaps different
but meaningful.
Papadimitriou and Stone24 argue that we need to
expand
assessment
beyond
standardized
outcome
measures such as the FIMTM that use objective
measures of progress based on a linear timeline.
Patients' adjustments following traumatic life changing
injuries or diseases are often cyclical, and bi-directional
and a critical component of rehabilitation. Instead of
objective measures of time-based improvements based
on Likert scales that measure how much or how often
behaviors occur or are performed, we argue the need to
include
measures
that
capture
phenomenological
experiences and existential changes. Narratives can
help us understand how patients re-constitute their
identities as the struggle with making sense of their
lives. Phenomenological ﬁndings from Carpenter,17
Gadow,16 Gibson et al.,19 and Papadimitriou,18 of the
intersubjective experiences of individuals with disabil-
ities can be applied to explore changes in embodiment,
temporality, emplacement, and identity. This requires
the clinician to be fully present and engaged in mindful
practice.25 Mindful practice, as an extension of reﬂec-
tive practice, requires the clinician to be fully present
and able to facilitate the patient's ability to tell his story.
Clinicians should be especially attuned to patients' uses
of metaphors that illuminate the constitutive structure
of consciousness. Clinicians should also attend to body
language including how individuals seem to regard and
attend to their own bodies as manifestations of
embodiment.
Some researchers are developing alternative pat-
terns or rehabilitation approaches based on phenom-
enology. Stineman developed the recovery preference
model
(RPE)
as
a
therapeutic
tool
for
clinical
practice.26 The tool incorporates both quantitative
measures with qualitative understanding and meaning
from the perspectives of patient/clients. As described
by Stineman, the RPE asks patients with impairments
how they would be affected if they lost control of
certain fundamental aspects of their life's and func-
tioning's, and then asks how they would recover if they
could control the pattern of their recovery and why.
The aim is to 'yield both quantitative preference
weights' (that rank perceived importance of recovery
for different activity limitations) and narrative data
about meaning that can be analyzed thematically
(Ref. 24, p. 57). Stineman describes the RPE as an
emerging tool grounded in phenomenology that seeks
to uncover the meaning of disability as a lived
experience, and provides a more holistic perspective
of the illness experience.
Carel reports that she is developing clinical 'phe-
nomenological tools' to explore bodily changes that
patients with life-changing disabilities experience but
often have no opportunity to report or explore.11
Examples include videotaping bodily movement and
gestures. Patients can then interpret the meaning of
those gestures and bodily movements as reﬂections of
their senses of embodiment. This type of approach
would at the very least complement standard quanti-
tative performance outcome measures often based
more on reliability and validity parametric standards
than on the phenomenological experiences of patients.
Conclusions
In summary, if physical therapists are to practice
phenomenology with patients, we advocate for the
following two actions.
Mindful practice
Clinicians need to practice mindfully as it is central to
patient-centered care. The goals of mindful practice
are many, but the central is to have a critical curiosity
about the subjective experiences of our patients, and
a desire to emotionally and intellectually connect to
those experiences. In phenomenological terms, phy-
siotherapists should seek an intersubjective under-
standing with patients. Doing so requires a desire to
set aside our own assumptions and take time to
explore with patients, their lifeworlds of living with
disability.
Reflect on conscious experience
Once physiotherapists make a commitment to mind-
ful practice, the next step is to open up to the
possibilities of how patients make sense of their
experiences. That means that they need to hold in
abeyance their own assumptions. We note that
putting aside preconceived notions of what patients
are experiencing, what they value, and what are
appropriate treatment goals, takes a certain amount
of clinical courage and creativity. Physiotherapists
may think of phenomenological exploration as a type
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6
423

of 'letting go' or perhaps a willingness to give up
control or perhaps cede power to patients.
The language of phenomenology described in this
paper is likely unfamiliar to most physiotherapists.
Yet, if we take some time to unbundle the concepts of
consciousness, intentionality, constitution, temporal-
ity, spatiality, and others, we begin to understand what
many of us intuitively grasped about patient-centered
care, the importance of mindful practice, and critical
curiosity about patients' experiences and stories. After all,
human beings are story-telling creatures — most of us
have been telling each other stories all our lives. As the
role of the physiotherapists emerges in rehabilitation, we
will be counted on to develop additional skills to gain
a more holistic understanding of patient experiences.
Phenomenology provides a unique approach to that end.
References
1 Toombs KS. The meaning of illness: a phenomenological
account of the different perspectives of physician and patient.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 1993.
2 Husserl E. Logical investigations. Vol. 1. Trans. JN Findlay.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul; 1970.
3 Husserl E. Ideas I: ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology
and a phenomenological philosophy: general introduction to
pure phenomenology (First Book). Trans. Fred Kersten.
Dordrecht: Kluwer; 1982.
4 Husserl E. Ideas II: ideas pertaining to a pure phenomenology
and a phenomenological philosophy: studies in the phenomen-
ology of constitution (Second Book). Trans. Richard Rojcewicz
& Andre Schuwer. Dordrecht: Kluwer; 1989.
5 Zaner RM. The way of phenomenology: criticism as a
philosophic discipline. New York: Pegasus; 1970.
6 Russell M. Husserl: a guide for the perplexed. London:
Matheson Russell; 2006.
7 Merleau-Ponty M. Phenomenology of perception. Trans. C
Smith. London: Routledge; 1996.
8 Fuenmayor R. The self-referential structure of an everyday-
living situation: a phenomenological ontology for interpretative
systemology. Syst Pract Action Res. 1991;4:449-72.
9 Benner P. Interpretative phenomenology: embodiment, caring
and ethics in health and illness. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1994.
10 Smith DW. Phenomenology. [document on the Internet]. The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy [updated 2008 July 28]
cited 2003 Nov 16. Available from: http://plato.stanford.edu/
entries/phenomenology/
11 Carel H. Phenomenology and its application in medicine. Theor
Med Bioeth. 2011;32:33-46.
12 Edwards I, Jones MA. Clinical reasoning and expert practice.
In: Jensen GA, Gwyer J, Hack LM, Shepard KF, editors.
Expertise in physical therapy, 2nd edn. St Louis, MI: Saunders/
Elsevier; 2007. pp. 192-213.
13 Banja J. Stroke rehabilitation and the phenomenological
reconstitution of self. Top Stroke Rehab. 1001;18:24-9.
14 Tolstoy L. The death of Ivan Illych and other stories. Trans.
Louise Maude, Aylmer Maude. Ann Arbor, MI: Borders
Classic; 2007.
15 Sartre JP. Being and nothingness: a phenomenological essay on
ontology. Trans. HE Barnes. New York: Pocket Books; 1956.
16 Gadow S. Body and self: a dialectic. In: Kestenbaum V, editor.
The humanity of the ill: phenomenological perspectives.
Knoxville, TN: University of Knoxville Press; 1982. pp. 86-100.
17 Carpenter C. The experience of spinal cord injury: the
individual's perspective — implications for rehabilitation
practice. Phys Ther. 1994;74:614-29.
18 Papadimitriou C. Becoming en-wheeled: the situated accom-
plishment of re-embodiment as a wheelchair-user after spinal
cord injury. Disab Soc. 2008;23:691-701.
19 Gibson B, Upshur REG, Young NL, McKeever P. Disability,
technology, and place: social and ethical implications of long-
term dependency on medical devices. Ethics Place Environ.
2007;1:7-28.
20 Goffman I. Stigma. Notes on the management of spoiled
identity. New York: Simon and Schuster; 1963.
21 Abrams JZ. Judaism and disability: portrayals in ancient texts
from the
Tanach through
the Bavli.
Washington,
DC:
Gallaudet University Press; 1998.
22 Phillips MJ. Damaged goods: oral narratives of the experience
of disability in American culture. Soc Sci Med. 1990;30:849-57.
23 DeSanto-Madeya S. The meaning of living with spinal cord
injury 5 to 10 years after the injury. West J Nurs Res.
2000;28:265-89.
24 Papadimitriou C, Stone DA. Addressing existential disruption
in traumatic spinal cord injury: a new approach to human
temporality
in
inpatient
rehabilitation.
Disab
Rehabil.
2011;33:2121-33.
25 Epstein RN. Mindful practice. J Am Med Assoc. 1000;28:833-
9.
26 Stineman MG. The clinician's voice of brain and heart: a
biopsycho-ecological framework for merging the biomedical
and holistic. Top Stroke Rehab. 2011;1:55-9.
Greenfield and Jensen
Phenomenology
424
Physical Therapy Reviews
2012
VOL. 17
NO. 6

