Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Arendt, Améry, and the Phenomenology of Evil
Sidra Shahid
To cite this article: Sidra Shahid (2022) Arendt, Améry, and the Phenomenology of Evil, Journal
of the British Society for Phenomenology, 53:4, 469-487, DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2022.2101134
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2022.2101134
Published online: 20 Jul 2022.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 709
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Arendt, Améry, and the Phenomenology of Evil
Sidra Shahid
Amsterdam University College, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
ABSTRACT
Contemporary accounts of evil attempt to identify features or
properties that transform an act of wrongdoing into an act of
evil.
What
is
missing
from
the
discussion,
however,
is
a
phenomenology of evil that engages with the standpoint of the
subject that undergoes evil. This paper discusses basic themes for
a phenomenology of evil through a critical comparison between
Hannah Arendt and Jean Améry's respective conceptions of evil.
Central for this discussion is a claim Arendt and Améry share: evil
destroys
subjectivity
and
undermines
trust
in
the
world.
Furthermore, both argue that the perpetrators of evil inhabit a
distorted moral framework. They diﬀer, however, insofar as Améry
foregrounds the subject that undergoes evil, a standpoint that
remains tacit in Arendt's account. Recounting his torture by the
Gestapo, Améry reveals how embodied subjects experiences evil
and how it is in light of these experiences that perpetrators of
evil should be understood.
KEYWORDS
Phenomenology; Evil; Trust;
Torture; Jean Améry; Hannah
Arendt
*
"All evil relates back to suﬀering"1
Contemporary discussions of evil typically aim to identify features or properties by
virtue of which acts of evil can be distinguished from acts of wrongdoing. These accounts
argue for the view that evil acts are distinguished from acts of wrongdoing because of the
excessive harm they inﬂicton victims; some feature or property of the perpetrator's act or
character; the incomprehension or horror that such acts produce in spectators; or a com-
bination of these characteristics.2 In attempting to identify deﬁnitional criteria for a
conceptualization of evil, these accounts might tell us what the concept of evil requires,
but in so doing, they may leave behind the phenomenon of evil, that is, its experiential
dimension. To rectify this imbalance, this paper outlines a phenomenology of evil by
bringing into conversation Hannah Arendt and Jean Améry. I argue that despite impor-
tant diﬀerences in emphasis and orientation, and contrary to standard accounts,3 Améry
and Arendt's perspectives on evil are largely compatible. Both Améry and Arendt
© 2022 The British Society for Phenomenology
CONTACT Sidra Shahid
s.shahid@auc.nl
Amsterdam University College, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
1 Levinas, Entre Nous, 92.
2 Formosa, 'Diﬀerent Substantive Conceptions of Evil Actions'. Formosa's article gives a comprehensive overview of
standard positions on evil,
3 For example, Neiman, Evil in Modern Thought; Chignell, 'Evil, Unintelligibility, Radicality'; and Mahony, Hannah Arendt's
Ethics.
THE JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
2022, VOL. 53, NO. 4, 469-487
https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2022.2101134

characterize evil as radically destructive for the subjectivity of those who suﬀer evil; and
both believe that totalitarianism as well as its functionaries operate on a distorted
morality.
In her discussion of radical evil and banal evil, Arendt accounts for the brutality of
totalitarian regimes insofar as they destroy subjectivity and details the perpetrator's dis-
torted moral framework, respectively.4 How evil is experienced by those who are subject
to it, however, remains implicit in her account. For Améry, by contrast, the route into
understanding what is evil about totalitarianism and its perpetrators is the lived experi-
ence of the subject who undergoes evil; on his view, without considering this particular
experience, we may not understand what makes an act of violence an atrocity. As
Améry's account of torture reveals, the radical destruction of the subject's trust in the
world is at the heart of what makes torture an act of evil.5 It is in the context of this
destruction of subjectivity that the perpetrators of evil should be understood. On this
count, Améry conﬁrms many of Arendt's observations on evil, throwing into sharper
relief the suﬀering subject that remains tacit in Arendt's accounts of evil.
1. Radical Evil: Superﬂuity and Unfathomability.
This and the following section give a survey of themes from Arendt's work that are rel-
evant for my discussion. Arendt introduces the term "radical evil" in Origins of
Totalitarianism, in the context of the militarism and expansionism of the totalitarian
regimes of the twentieth century and the internal purges and mass murder that these
regimes committed.6 As distinguished from other kinds of evil, radical evil is unique
in its attempt to make human beings superﬂuous, a goal that is achieved through three
progressive stages. First, radical evil destroys the "juridical person" in the individual,7
that is, radical evil eliminates one's legal status and cancels associated rights and protec-
tions. This destruction of the juridical person corresponds to legislation such as the Nur-
emberg Laws, which deprived Jews of civic entitlements, economic and educational
opportunities, as well as protection from arbitrary state and vigilante violence.
In its second phase, radical evil degrades the "moral person" in the individual by ren-
dering the subject complicit in acts of evil and thereby impairing conditions for solidar-
ity. The Nazi invention of Judenräte, for instance, enlisted Jewish administrators in the
ghettos to execute Nazi policies while in concentration camps, similarly, inmates were
often forced to carry out tasks on behalf of their SS guards. Through these coercive
acts, radical evil served to compromise the moral standing of those subject to evil and
degrade moral relations between them.8
In its third and ﬁnal phase, radical evil destroys spontaneity. At the heart of Arendt's
conception of freedom, spontaneity is an individual's ability to act, that is, "to begin
something new ... out of [one's own] resources".9 Spontaneity is a faculty that dis-
tinguishes acts of freedom from passive reﬂex. This capacity for spontaneity belongs,
4 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism; Eichmann in Jerusalem.
5 Améry, At the Mind's Limits.
6 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism, 443 et passim; compare Birmingham, 'Hannah Arendt's Double Account of Evil', 149.
7 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism, 451.
8 Ibid., 451; compare Birmingham, 'Hannah Arendt's Double Account of Evil', 155.
9 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism, 455.
470
S. SHAHID

together with "plurality", to what Arendt calls action, the highest manifestation of vita
activa.10 Plurality refers to fact that human beings exist as a multiplicity of equals,
who distinguish themselves as unique in speech and action.11 Speech and action
which, for Arendt, are correlated, do not only diﬀerentiate individuals as singular but
also insert them into a common and objective world.12 In subjecting individuals to the
brutalities
of
concentration
camps
and
Gulags,
totalitarian
regimes
destroy
both spontaneity and plurality. Without spontaneity, and thereby plurality, inmates
are
reduced
to
reﬂexive
behavior,
to
"ghastly
marionettes
with
human
faces".13 Reduced to mere "bundle[s] of reactions", they are made superﬂuous insofar
as, being unable to distinguish themselves through speech and action from other brutal-
ized inmates, they "can always be liquidated and replaced by other bundles of reactions
that behave in exactly the same way".14 Furthermore, without plurality, which is consti-
tutive for a common sphere of intelligibility, radical evil destroys the possibility for resist-
ance, solidarity, and collective action.
On Arendt's view, though this point remains implicit, the excesses of the concen-
tration camps render the why of radical evil intractable. The incomprehension typically
associated with acts of evil often turns on the point that, owing to the extreme nature of
their acts, evil perpetrators are in some sense beyond our understanding.15 Similarly, the
brutal enterprises of totalitarian regimes, Arendt argues, have "an air of mad unreality"
- they cannot be understood even in light of "military expediency" which resorts to acts
of violence in order to serve utilitarian ends.16 Considerations of utility do not capture
the excesses of concentration camps. In light of these excesses, Arendt argues,
perpetrators of radical evil seem to lack "humanly comprehensible motives" such as
"greed, covetousness, resentment, lust for power and cowardice".17 The excesses of tota-
litarian regimes have consequences for our moral responses: acts of totalitarian regimes
are "unpunishable, unforgivable [...]", as "anger could not revenge, love could not
endure, friendship could not forgive" them.18 In other words, perpetrators - and
entire regimes - elude moral understanding and associated responses.
2. Banal Evil: Shallowness and the Reversal of the Moral Framework
In his well-known criticism, Karl Jaspers maintains that Arendt's conception of radical
evil unwittingly attributes a sense of "satanic greatness" to Nazi criminals.19 Jaspers
alerts Arendt to the moral problem of mythologizing the Nazis as elusive, transcendent,
or demonically unintelligible. Arendt responds to these criticisms in her discussion of the
10 Arendt, The Human Condition, 51.
11 Ibid., 339.
12 Ibid., 342.
13 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism, 455.
14 Ibid., 451, 456.
15 See de Wijze, 'Deﬁning Evil'; Russell, 'Evil and Incomprehensibility'. Russell is critical of the incomprehensibility
criterion.
16 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism, 445.
17 Ibid., ix,459.According to Kant, radical evil is the yield of our wayward inclinations and appetites, our fundamentally
"perverted attitude of mind" or a "perversity of the human heart" (Religion within the Boundaries of Mere Reason, 60,
54).
18 Arendt, Origins of Totalitarianism, 459.
19 Arendt and Jaspers, Correspondence, 62.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
471

banality of evil in Eichmann in Jerusalem. Discarding the language of transcendence that
characterized radical evil, Arendt argues that perpetrators commit their acts out of banal
motivations.
Whether banal evil marks a total departure from radical evil or whether the two are con-
tinuous remains contentious.20 Nevertheless, distinctions in terms of how Arendt frames
the two conceptions of evil are worth noting. While in Origins of Totalitarianism, Arendt
describes radical evil as an emergent feature of historical phenomena, such as imperialism,
that crystalized in the enterprises of totalitarian regimes, in Eichmann, Arendt focusses on
a particular type of perpetrator, the administrator or the bureaucrat.21 Her thesis on the
banality of evil centers on the idea that non-evil intentions can produce catastrophic
evils, challenging conventional wisdom according to which evil acts require evil
motivations.22 Instead of the unintelligible motives of radical evil, it is, in fact,
shallow, even familiar, pursuits that can pave the way to the concentration camp.Adolf
Eichmann, on whom Arendt's conception of the banality of evil is modelled, emerges as
a character that speaks in clichés,23 possesses a thin inner life, and is devoid not only of
genius24 but even ideological commitments to anti-Semitism.25 As the circumspect
bureaucrat, Eichmann possesses no trace of "diabolical or demonic profundity" and there-
fore nothing of the incomprehensibility implied in Arendt's account of radical evil.26 Far
from being unintelligible due to its excesses, banal evil is a distinct paradigm for evil, one
which is not the yield of demonic masterminds but dismal bureaucrats.27
Arendt's banality claim is, at ﬁrst glance, both striking and deeply unsettling. The
acuteness and profundity of suﬀering that moral evil produces in its victims jars with
the depthlessness of perpetrators. An emphasis on Arendt's banality claim, however,
which she may have employed for rhetorical ends, restricts her remarks to empirical
observations about the moral psychology of perpetrators, obscuring from view
Arendt's account of the moral framework in which these motivations are embedded. It
is this account that allows Arendt to explore the question of Eichmann's responsibility
and to reject his self-presentation as a mere cog in the machinery of fascism.
As Arendt reports in her book, Eichmann stated that he followed Kant's categorical
imperative up until he was charged with carrying out the "Final Solution." He speciﬁcally
cites Kant's categorical imperative, according to which our maxims (the rule or principle
of an act) must be in accordance with the universal laws of reason.28 Kant's categorical
imperative rests on a subject's use of her own practical reason, requiring that one exercise
20 See Bernstein, Radical Evil; Formosa, 'Is radical evil banal? Is banal evil radical?'; and Birmingham, 'Hannah Arendt's
Double Account of Evil'.
21 Birmingham, 'Hannah Arendt's Double Account of Evil'.
22 Arendt asks: "Is wickedness, however we may deﬁne it, this being 'determined to prove a villain,' not a necessary
condition for evil-doing?" (TheLife of the Mind, 4-5).
23 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, 33, 48-49, 55.
24 Ibid., 135.
25 Ibid., 26, 146; compare Stangneth, Eichmann Before Jerusalem. Stangneth shows that Eichmann was, in fact, a devoted
anti-Semite and Arendt's perspective was limited to the information available to her at the time that she wrote her
report on the Eichmann trial.
26 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, 288.
27 Arendt Eichmann in Jerusalem, 3-4; compare Burdman, 'Between Banality and Radically'. Burdman contrasts Eich-
mann's distorted moral and existential landscape with sadism. As we will see, however, for Améry, an inverted nor-
mative outlook is precisely a feature of existential sadism.
28 See Kant's famous formulation: "I ought never to act except in such a way that I can also will that my maxim should
become a universal law" (Groundwork, 67).
472
S. SHAHID

autonomy, or self-legislation, by acting in accordance with the moral (and rational) law
within oneself.29 At his trial, Eichmann explains that he was forced to give up self-legis-
lation or adherence to the moral law once he was given charge of the "Final Solution."
Then, like a cog in the machinery, Eichmann felt "he was no longer the master of his
deeds" and whatever would occur would do so inexorably.30
On Arendt's analysis, however, Eichmann did not reject the form of Kant's categorical
imperative but changed the ultimate normative source which governs it.31 For Kant, this
source is the moral law that reason gives itself. For Eichmann, by contrast, the ultimate
normative source is the Führerprinzip or "Hitler's law", a principle of leadership that calls
for total obedience to the leader's will on matters of law and morality. Rather than
abandoning the categorical imperative, Eichmann retains it in a perverted form as "the
categorical imperative of the Third Reich", according to which one should "[a]ct in
such a way that the Führer, if he knew your action, would approve it".32 With this intern-
alization of Hitler's law, critical distance between the imperatives of the state and his own
reﬂective capacities is annulled.33 Eichmann so identiﬁes with Hitler's law that "fascist
slogans and watchwords [are no longer] felt to be issued from above but instead
seemed
to
be
self-fabricated".34
Having
surrendered
his
own
capacities
for
thought, Eichmann's will is "carried away, caught up in the voice of another".35
The ethical, it is important to note, did not vanish altogether under the particular con-
ditions of the Third Reich but appeared as a temptation. The "content" of Hitler's law
consists of a fundamental reversal of the moral and the immoral. As Arendt remarks,
while we expect that the "the voice of conscience ... tells everybody "Thou shalt not
kill,' even though man's natural desires and inclinations may at times be murderous",
under Hitler's law, by contrast, one's conscience demands "thou shalt kill" and the
"thou shalt not kill" assumes the place of temptation or inclination.36 Hitler's proclama-
tions made it a citizen's duty to murder and condemned compassion for others as a form
of wrongdoing. Warped by one's adherence to Hitler's law, instead of providing ethical
instruction and resisting the temptation to commit murder, one's conscience obliges one
to kill. Even if Eichmann's motivations convey shallowness, this distortion is profound.
In other words, Eichmann's expressed motivations - to do his duty, etc. - are embedded
in a deeply distorted moral framework.
Eichmann's wholesale internalization of Hitler's law is a consequence of what Arendt
describes as thoughtlessness. In the Life of the Mind, Arendt asks "could this activity [of
thinking] be among the conditions that make men abstain from evil-doing or even actu-
ally "condition' them against it?".37 As the modal verb ("could") and her use of the inter-
rogative form suggests, while the activity of thinking may not immunize one from evil, it
creates grounds for moral reﬂection and self-critique. Arendt describes thought as a two-
29 "Reason must look upon itself as the author of its own principles independently of alien inﬂuences" (ibid., 109).
30 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, 136.
31 Ibid.
32 Ibid.
33 When Eichmann changes the normative grounds of his actions from his own reason to Hitler's law, he violates Kant's
categorical imperative in its most basic sense. For Kant, it is immoral to act on maxims that are external to one's own
reason (Groundwork, 66).
34 Birmingham, Hannah Arendt and Human Rights, 109.
35 Ibid.
36 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, 150.
37 Arendt, The Life of the Mind, 5.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
473

in-one
process
of
self-diﬀerentiation,
a
"soundless
dialogue ... with
me
and
myself".38 Because thought is dialectical (in the Socratic sense) it is open-ended and pro-
visional, giving one's standpoints consistent traction. This form of moral self-reﬂection is
akin to the categorical imperative in its general sense, since pivotal to both is the sign-
iﬁcation
typically
associated
with
the
conscience
-
"to
know
with
and
by
myself".39 Having internalized Hitler's law, Eichmann ceases to exercise his conscience.
In forfeiting his own reason and critical dialogue with himself, Eichmann abandons
the self-accountability that Arendt maintains is constitutive for thought. The failure of
thought has consequences for plurality. While thought is self-directed and solitary in
nature, insofar as it opens reﬂection to alternative possibilities, it contains the kernel
of plurality within itself - it can envisage a multiplicity of perspectives on the world. Eich-
mann's failure to think in terms of the plurality within himself (the two-in-one feature of
thought that Arendt describes) impairs his ability to think of others, to imagine their
standpoint, and to this extent, in failing to think, Eichmann also fails to recognize "the
inﬁnite plurality which is the law of the earth".40 Thought, then, is at least one of the
capacities that may have allowed Eichmann to properly recognize the moral saliences
of his situation. It is this failure to think, in the sense that Arendt describes it, that is
responsible for the shallowness that Eichmann displays during his trial.
Radical evil describes what evil consists of, how it is enabled, and why it occurs. Banal
evil, while in part addressing these questions as well, largely focuses on the who, deliver-
ing a study of the perpetrator, not only in terms of his psychological motivations but in
light of the broader moral outlook in which these motivations are embedded. Arendt's
account is also at times loosely phenomenological, insofar as it includes thick descrip-
tions of Eichmann's motivational set. There is, however, another who that remains
tacit in Arendt's accounts of evil. Radical evil, the rendering superﬂuous of human
beings,is experienced by those who are subject to evil. What appears to be a bundle of
reﬂexes to spectators is, in fact, a subjectivity, however diminished, with a view on the
world. Furthermore, it is in light of the excesses incurred upon this subject that the per-
petrator seems to defy our understanding, and classical narratives on evil seem unsatis-
factory. In the context of banal evil, too, the reversal of the moral outlook of Eichmann
and his ilk entails subjects who are at the receiving end of the "thou shalt kill" and suﬀer
through the moral reversals that Arendt describes. I develop an account of this subjectiv-
ity next by bringing into conversation Arendt's and Amery's distinctive and complemen-
tary perspectives on evil.
3. Arendt: Shared Commitments
Améry and Arendt were both German-speaking Jewish intellectuals whose philosophical
outlook was fundamentally inﬂuenced by the Nazi era and its atrocities. Both rejected the
generalizing tendencies of "theoretical systems, ideology, and faith";41 and both upheld a
commitment to Enlightenment humanism, seeking to restore its potential against what
they saw as its total betrayal during the Nazi era.42 Arendt and Améry, furthermore,
38 Ibid., 185.
39 Ibid., 5.
40 Ibid., 187.
41 Yeatman, 'Politics and Personal Responsibility', 65.
474
S. SHAHID

were both inﬂuenced by phenomenology, and Arendt, in particular, contributed to the
ﬁeld directly.43 Améry's At the Mind's Limits is in many ways a response to Arendt's per-
spective on evil.44 While many commentators have put Arendt and Améry into dialogue,
few of them have considered their phenomenological investments with respect to radical
and banal evil.45
Let me begin with a word on Améry's broader philosophical commitments in relation
to Arendt. In the 1977 Preface to At the Mind's Limits, Amery characterizes the Enlight-
enment as "the will and the ability to speculate phenomenologically, to empathize, to
approach the limits of reason".46 In line with this approach, Améry's reﬂections on the
Holocaust begin with a description of concrete events, his experiences in various concen-
tration camps, and, most notably, his experience of torture. These events are neither
"empiricized" as objective facts, related causally, nor subsumed under the "logical argu-
ment" of "shallow rationalism".47 As Amery sees it, both these tendencies - common tos-
tandard historical accounts - cancel the living relationship between subjects and
historical events.48 In this sense, Améry's Enlightenment should not be equated with a
kind of rational or empirical transparency but with the attempt towards deepening
our moral understanding of subjectivity under suﬀering. From this vantage point,
instead of a brute event that has empirical causes or rational explanations, evil is ﬁrst
and foremost a phenomenological experience, an experience lived through by a
subject, even though descriptions of this subject's experiences may run up against the
limits of comprehension and articulatability (Améry speaks of "areas of thought that
lie in an uncertain twilight").49 In sum, Améry's Enlightenment proceeds from the sub-
ject's concrete experiences in order to clarify them but does not reject or dismiss that
which remains opaque. This prioritizing of the subject's perspective does not preclude
other forms of understanding evil, but it does give precedence to evil's phenomenological
saliences.
Like his commitment to the Enlightenment, Améry's commitment to phenomenology
is far from theoretically or methodologically precise. In its general orientation, Améry's
critique of historical accounts mirrors paradigmatic phenomenological approaches. In
contrast to psychology, sociology, and political science, for instance, which explain
events "objectively" by reducing them to regularities or principles, phenomenology
endorses a non-reductive approach to ﬁrst-person experience.50 The model for this is
description as found in the work of phenomenologists such as Maurice Merleau-Ponty,
who maintains that phenomenology is "a direct description of our experience such as
42 Ibid., 67.
43 Loidolt, Phenomenology of Plurality.
44 Gilroy, 'Fanon and Améry', 24.
45 See Shuster, 'A Phenomenology of Home'; Ataria, 'Total Destruction'. Shuster and Ataria oﬀer exemplary phenomen-
ological readings of Améry's work, but they do not discuss his concept of evil. Améry's speciﬁcally phenomenological
standpoint on evil is not addressed in much detail in the literature.
46 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, xi.
47 Ibid.
48 Compare Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception. Merleau-Ponty contrasts phenomenological description with
an examination of phenomena as if they are wholly external, that is without regard for the perspective of lived experi-
ence (as in empiricism). Descriptive approaches also contrast with conceptual explanations that are disconnected
from their beginnings in lived experience (as in intellectualism).
49 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, xi.
50 Améry would ﬁrmly disagree with Jaspers's suggestion that "Nazi crime is properly a subject for psychology and soci-
ology, for psychopathology and jurisprudence only" (Arendt and Jaspers, Correspondence, 62).
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
475

it is" and rejects explanations that reduce phenomena to the causal or nomological.51
Against explanations of this kind, and in line with the general orientation of phenomen-
ological investigations, Améry puts the ﬁrst-person accounts, the "eye-witnesses" and the
"victims of the Third Reich", at the center of his analysis.52
Phenomenological saliences go hand in hand, for Améry, with moral saliences. Améry
maintains that "[t]he atrocity as atrocity has no objective character [since] mass murder,
torture, injury of every kind is objectively nothing but chains of physical events, describ-
able in the formalized language of the natural sciences".53 Amery's claim that atrocities
are non-objective might strike one as unwarranted. Atrocities are, at the very least, inter-
subjective facts and not merely subjective illusions. One way to elucidate Amery's remark
is to qualify it to read that while objective and subjective accounts of atrocities are not
mutually exclusive, we fail to bring into sharp relief the moral salience of an atrocity,
which constitutes the meaning of the term, if we disregard the experiences of the
victims who are at the center of the atrocity. If, however, atrocities are entirely abstracted
from subjectivity, they become "facts within a physical system, not deeds within a moral
system".54 To bring these reﬂections to bear on evil, to understand an event as evil, as a
moral phenomenon, an account of subjectivity is indispensable because it is precisely
subjectivity, the suﬀering of victims, that is at the heart of the phenomenon. For this
reason, Améry's commitment to retaining and foregrounding subjectivity, through
ﬁrst-person phenomenological description, is essential to preserving what is morally at
stake.
Like Améry, Arendt maintained that Nazism was profoundly antithetical to Enlight-
enment humanism. Arendt's position on the Enlightenment is, however, more ambiva-
lent than Améry's. As Seyla Benhabib points out, Arendt saw the Enlightenment as
caught between a dialectic of "equality and diﬀerence" - the Enlightenment's celebration
of human sameness elided the political reality of being Jewish.55 Arendt's biography of
Rahel Varnhagen similarly describes the uncertain position of Jews vis-à-vis the assim-
ilationist tendencies of the Enlightenment.56 Despite these criticisms and Arendt's
anti-modernist streak in works such as The Human Condition, Arendt nevertheless
remained committed to the Enlightenment's emphasis on "human dignity and the
right to a domination free existence".57 Arendt's sustained engagement with Kant, in par-
ticular, bespeaks her commitment to, and endorsement of, central themes of the Enlight-
enment; and, in fact, it is this engagement that is largely decisive for the development of
Arendt's work on evil, from her claim that totalitarianism destroys sensus communis to
the idea that Nazis, such as Eichmann, forfeited their use of practical reason.
Arendt's commitment to phenomenology is less idiosyncratic than Améry's, given the
latter's more literary than philosophical standpoint, even though her work does not
address classically phenomenological topics, for example, consciousness, embodiment,
or intentionality. This being said, Arendt remains a phenomenologist in her broader
orientation. For instance, the phenomenological triad of "world", "self", and "other"
51 Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception, lxx; Améry, At the Mind's Limits, vi-vii.
52 Améry,At the Mind's Limits, viii-ix, xiii, 64.
53 Ibid., 70.
54 Ibid.
55 Benhabib, The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah Arendt, 28.
56 Arendt, RahelVarnhagen.
57 Villa, 'Genealogies of Total Domination', 7.
476
S. SHAHID

and their reciprocity remains crucial to her work; furthermore, Arendt is attuned to the
embodied, somatic, and experiential dimensions of key concepts in her work such as
action;58 and, like Améry, Arendt rejects causal and teleological explanations. Origins
of Totalitarianism, for instance, does not treat the rise of totalitarianism as the inexorable
yield of historical processes but traces loose connections between a complex of contin-
gent historical events. In Eichmann, Arendt makes clear that her account of Eichmann's
banality is a "lesson" that elucidates a previously unrecognized manifestation of evil, and
neither an explanation nor a theory.59
4. Imagination and Primary Experience
Having brieﬂy sketched some shared core commitments in the work of Arendt and
Amery, let us now turn to Amery's disagreement with Arendt on evil. A key phenomen-
ological distinction that frames this disagreement is the contrast between imagination
and ﬁrst-hand or primary experience, which Améry describes as "coming face to face"
with an event.60 As we will see, this distinction plays an important role in explaining
why for Améry accounts of evil require the inclusion of ﬁrst-person experiences.
The distinction between imagination and primary experience comes up in the context
of Améry's account of his arrest by the Gestapo. Reﬂecting on his experience,
Améry remarks that there is a fundamental discrepancy between the event of his
arrest as he imagined it and the event as he actually lived through or experienced it. It
was likely that Améry would ﬁnd himself in Gestapo custody given his participation in
the resistance, and Améry knew of the existence of places where the Gestapo would
torture dissidents. The arrest as he imagined it, however, was incomparable to the
arrest as he experienced it. Améry makes clear that the diﬀerence in question is not quan-
titative, such that the primary experience goes "beyond the imagination" because it
is more ﬁne-grained than what the imagination could furnish, but that the two - the
imagination and the primary experience - are fundamentally distinct modalities of
experience.61 Even if the imagination tracks the facts and pictures an event vividly, it
remains incommensurable with primary experience. "One can", Améry remarks in
this vein, "devote an entire life to comparing the imagined and the real, and still never
accomplish anything by it".62
Due to this distinction between the imagination and primary experience, in his lived
experience of the arrest, nothing is as Améry imagined: "the auto is diﬀerent, and the
pressure of the shackles was not felt in advance, and the streets are strange, and although
you may previously have walked by the gate of the Gestapo headquarters countless times,
it has other perspectives, other ornaments, other ashlars when you cross its threshold as a
prisoner".63 The distinction between imagination and primary experience can be put in
58 Loidolt, Phenomenology of Plurality, 83.
59 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, 252.
60 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 25-26.Améry's phrase "coming face to face" is reminiscent of Husserl's manner of speak-
ing that, in simple intentional experiences, we encounter things themselves "in person" (Husserl, Ideas, 92).
61 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 25; Améry's position echoes Sartre's, one of his major inﬂuences, who argues that the
imagination gives us the "quasi-sensible", with the objects pictured in the imagination "like silhouettes drawn by chil-
dren" (Sartre, The Imaginary,125). The object of the imagination, for Sartre, is indeterminate, second-order, and
lacking in topographical depth (ibid., 127, 137). And for Sartre, like Améry, "the logical and existential priority
[belongs] ... to constituent elements", the objects of primary intentions encountered in lived experience (ibid., 137).
62 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 25.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
477

the following terms: while the imagination pictures an event, and thus modiﬁes the
content of primary experiences, primary experience consists of living through the
event itself, without modiﬁcation. From a strictly phenomenological standpoint, imagin-
ation and primary experience are two distinctive types of experiences; primary experi-
ence is distinct from imagination in that the latter represents the world while the
former intends the world.64 Like memory or reﬂection, imagination is phenomenologi-
cally secondary.
Having established this distinction between the imagination and primary experience,
let us now turn to its implications for radical and banal evil. Prior to his arrest,
Améry remarks he had conceived of the Gestapo oﬃcers as monstrous, "with twisted
noses, hypertrophied chins, pockmarks and knife scars".65 However, what he encounters
upon his arrest are people in coats bearing pistols, with "faces like anyone", "[p]lain,
ordinary faces".66 In his primary experiences the Gestapo men are not extraordinarily vil-
lainous but seem commonplace. However, later on, in the situation of torture, Améry
encounters "how the plain, ordinary faces become Gestapo faces after all, and how evil
overlays and exceeds banality".67 It is only in the primary experience of suﬀering evil
- torture- that the ordinariness of Gestapo oﬃcers gives way to something extraordinary.
Améry takes the primary experience (of torture) as paramount for understanding evil
and stakes out the putative banality of evil on the basis of this experience. It is, in
other words, neither the imagination nor the primary experience of the arrest, but speciﬁ-
cally the primary experience of acute suﬀering under torture that reveals that the evil of
Gestapo perpetrators exceeds the ordinary or banal.
Initially, Améry leaves open in which sense evil transcends banality. Rather than
oﬀering an answer of his own, he turns to Arendt's characterization of banal evil, criti-
cally declaring: "there is no "banality of evil,' and Hannah Arendt, who wrote about it in
her Eichmann book, knew the enemy of mankind only from hearsay, saw him only
through the glass cage".68 Arendt knows and sees Eichmann, Améry maintains, in a
courtroom setting and not in light of what Eichmann signiﬁes for the victim of evil.
For this reason, Arendt's perspective remains a step removed from considerations
of the primary experience of Eichmann's administrative choices. Coming face to face
with Eichmann is not, in Améry's view, seeing him in court, where he may well seem
banal and his motivations shallow but beginning with and reﬂecting on the primary
experience
of
those
who
underwent
the
consequences
of
his
administrative
choices in the concentration camps.69
At ﬁrst glance, Améry's criticisms of Arendt are misplaced. Arendt experienced the
horrors of the Holocaust ﬁrst hand - she faced displacement and exile from Germany;
she was arrested and interned in Gurs; and she experienced the life of a stateless
63 Ibid., 26.
64 According to Husserl, the traditional alignment of perception with imagination (both conceived as representation)
amounts to a "fundamental error" because imagination is a "founded apprehending", a second-order act, whereas
perception is an "immediately intuitive act" (Ideas, 92-93).
65 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 25.
66 Ibid.
67 Ibid.
68 Ibid.
69 Ibid., 70. For Améry, the ﬁrst-personal is indispensable part of what he elsewhere calls the "moral truth", of the vio-
lence of the Holocaust.
478
S. SHAHID

person for eighteen years. To this extent, having herself suﬀered through the Nazi era,
Arendt does not need to rely on the imagination to reﬂect on the evils of the Holo-
caust. One way of understanding Améry's criticism, however, would be to take him as
making a conceptual rather than a biographical point. On this reading, what is at
stake is not whether Arendt herself did or did not go through the consequences of
Eichmann's choices but whether she places the experiences of someone who did at
the center of her analysis. In order to recognize the sense in which a perpetrator is
evil, Améry maintains, we must begin in the concentration camps, foregrounding
the subjects who underwent evil rather than the perpetrators. And it is, he maintains,
by way of reﬂecting on the primary experience of evil that Eichmann and his
crimes should be approached.
This conceptual point is additionally overlooked when Améry's criticisms of Arendt
are cast along the lines of the customary objection to banal evil, namely, that Arendt
trivializes evil and that one simply "'ought not' to speak of banality in this
context".70 As the reconstruction above shows, however, Améry's criticism is based
on substantial phenomenological considerations. Overlooking the phenomenological
grounds of Améry's critique passes over his actual reasons for rejecting aspects of
Arendt's banality account.
This being said, it can be argued that Améry's characterization of the imagination is
partial and limited and thata richer conception of the imagination can be found in the
work of Arendt wherein the imagination is not merely a type of experience but a capacity
that serves vital political and moral functions. Like Améry, Arendt views imagination as
the representation of objects, but, for Arendt imagination is also integral to envisioning
perspectives that are not one's own as well as alternative moral and political possibilities.
For instance, in "The Crisis in Culture", Arendt describes the various imbrications of the
imagination with the faculty of judgement. Imagination is operative in what she, follow-
ing Kant, calls "enlarged thinking" (or enlarged mentality)71 that lies at the heart of judg-
ment: "the ability to see things not only from one's own point of view but in the
perspective of all those who happen to be present".72 Judging, for Arendt, cannot be con-
ducted in isolation: "it needs the presence of others 'in whose place' it must think, whose
perspectives it must take into consideration, and without whom it never has the oppor-
tunity to operate".73 These capacities, enabled by imagination, are constitutive of ethical
and political thought. In fact, Arendt's diagnosis of Eichmann's banal evil in terms of his
failure to think and to accommodate plurality is also grounded in the imagination.74 She
points out that Eichmann's thoughtlessness stems from his "lack of imagination", which
70 Mahony, Hannah Arendt's Ethics, 45.
71 According to Kant, the three "maxims of common human understanding" jointly constitute enlarged thinking: "1) To
think for oneself; 2) To think in the position of everyone else; 3) Always to think in accord with oneself"- each maxim
corresponds to thought that is unprejudiced, broad-minded, and consistent, respectively (Kant, Critique of Judgment,
174; for Kant's use of the term "enlarged thought" see ibid., 379, footnote 13).
72 Arendt, Between Past and Future, 220.
73 Ibid., 220-221.
74 Benhabib 1988; Schwartz, 2016.Benhabib and Schwartz note that the relationship between thinking and judging -
and the moral and political realm to which these capacities belong respectively - in Arendt's work remains conten-
tious.In TheLife of the Mind, Arendt describes thinking and judging as distinct but related: "If thinking-the two-in-one
of the soundless dialogue-actualizes the diﬀerence within our identity as given in consciousness and thereby results
in conscience as its byproduct then judging, the by-product of the liberating eﬀect of thinking, realizes thinking,
makes it manifest in the world of appearances" (Arendt, The Life of the Mind, 193).
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
479

manifests in an inability to "think from the standpoint of someone else", and thereby
from the standpoint of plurality.75 Moreover, our very moral evaluation of Eichmann
relies on the fact that his actions were expressions of freedom, that he had alternative pos-
sibilties, that is, we can imagine he could have acted otherwise, and to this extent,
the imagination has a distinctive role vis-à-vis our ability to make moral judgments in
the wake of evil.76
Améry, therefore, unduly restricts the role of imagination to a form of abstraction
or distantiation from primary experience and thereby also overlooks the broader sig-
niﬁcance of the imagination for reﬂections on evil. In a very basic sense, those who
are not themselves victims of evil must rely on their imagination in order to reﬂect
on evil and to empathize with those who have suﬀered under it. The essays that con-
stitute At the Minds Limits, including the Preface examined in the section above, are
precisely an invitation to the reader to imagine as a moral act, even if the events
described bring the reader to the very limits of the imagination. This broader critique
of the limited manner in which Améry characterizes the imagination, however, leaves
intact his claim that attention to ﬁrst-person perspectives on evil are necessary for
keeping in view what makes an atrocity an atrocity. In other words, the primary
experience of subjects who undergo suﬀering is crucial for retaining the moral sal-
iences that constitute our judgment of an act as an act of evil. This claim stands
even if the distinction between primary experience and imagination is less sharp
than Améry contends and the imagination has a broader role in moral reﬂection
than he envisages. The extent to which Arendt would still count as a target of his cri-
ticism, however, is questionable. After all, once contextualized, Arendt's banality claim
is not intended as a general account of evil but speciﬁcally geared towards reﬂecting
on the Eichmann trials.77 Therefore, while Amery's general claim that accounts of evil
should foreground suﬀering subjectivity is warranted, his criticism of Arendt on this
count is not entirely justiﬁed.
Where does Améry stand with respect to Arendt's radical evil? At ﬁrst glance, Améry's
perspectiveon evil bears striking resemblances with Arendt's account of radical evil: the
evil of the Third Reich is "radical", a "dark riddle" of "spontaneous generation".78 Like
Arendt, he sees evil as recalcitrant under analysis, "irreducible in its total inner
logic".79 Améry agrees that evil owes its radicality to the fact that it renders human
beings superﬂuous. Victims of concentration camps are reduced to a bundle of
reﬂexes - as Améry himself witnessed. But here, owing to the centrality he accords to
primary experience, Améry would ask us to reﬂect on what that experience is like for
these subjects, who are reduced to a "bundle of reﬂexes" - how it is that this destruction
of spontaneity is experienced by them. In the next section, I will ﬁrst develop Améry's
positive account, his phenomenology of evil, and then juxtapose it with Arendt's banal
and radical evil.
75 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, 287, 49.
76 Tyner, 'Action, Judgment, and Imagination', 526-528.
77 Geddes, 'Banal Evil and Useless Knowledge', 109-110.
78 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, viii.
79 Ibid.
480
S. SHAHID

5. Evil as a Primary Experience
Améry's phenomenological account of evil comes into sharp relief when he recounts his
experiences under Gestapo custody. He maintains that one of the main consequences of
torture is a loss of "trust in the world".80 Trust encompasses the metaphysical, logical,
epistemic, and intersubjective certainties that make our world reliable and intelligible.
First, in our lived experiences we do not typically harbor skeptical doubts regarding
basic logical, epistemic, or metaphysical assumptions as evidenced, for instance, in our
"belief in absolute causality" and "in the validity of the inductive inference".81 The
world is continuous, its laws (causality and induction, etc.) are constant, and even if it
may occasionally surprise us with an unexpected turn of events, our world is not funda-
mentally erratic or unpredictable.82 Second, trust is an intersubjective attitude. Owing to
both "written and unwritten codes", as Améry puts it, we trust the other will respect the
"boundaries of my body which are also boundaries of myself".83 While we may ordinarily
experience instances in which the other infringes on our boundaries, these transgressions
do not typically shatter our fundamental trust in other subjects. Third, trust is a self-
regarding attitude; we believe we have particular resources and capacities, including
our body's capacity to protect itself - I trust that "my skin surface shields me against
the external world".84
In outlining a phenomenology of trust, Fiona Utley describes the sense in which trust
is fundamental: "as phenomenologically basic [trust is] the ground for our perception of
others and things with which we engage".85 Typically, phenomenologically basic struc-
tures are transcendental in the sense that they are constitutive for our being in the
world. Because trust plays a basic and constitutive role for Améry, even in the absence
of a full-blown transcendental account, trust can be said to serve a transcendental role.
Why trust in the world is transcendental for Améry (as opposed to empirical) can be
clariﬁed through the following examples.86 If I ﬁnd reason to distrust a friend, my
trust in people in general need not be shaken. I may be doubtful of some facts, but I
am not doubtful of facts as such. In these instances, trust in empirical facts is impaired,
but transcendental trust in the world remains intact. I continue to turn to basic logical,
metaphysical, epistemic certainties, and intersubjective relations with an attitude of trust.
In this sense, the trust in the world Améry describes is an attitude that underwrites and
enables doxastic practices and agentic relations. I can only reason in concrete situations if
I do not doubt the yield of my rationality at each turn. I can only relate to
others intersubjectively if I trust they are not fundamentally my destroyers.
For Améry, the primary experience of evil - e.g., torture - destroys trust precisely at
this transcendental level. Améry describes how the ﬁrst acts of violence in custody breach
80 Ibid., 28.
81 Ibid.
82 The attitude of trust that Améry describes is akin to Wittgenstein's conception of "certainties" - those propositions
that are beyond doubt which, as hinges of a door, enable our actions, attitudes towards, and thoughts in and about
the world (Wittgenstein, On Certanity, 341). In both cases, these certainties are outside the traﬃc of doubt (or knowl-
edge) and, furthermore, enable/shape one's orientation in the world.
83 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 28.
84 Ibid.
85 Utley, 'A Phenomenology of Trust ', 206.
86 The contrast between transcendental and empirical is ultimately Kantian (see Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A27-28/
B44). In this context, I use this contrast purely heuristically: it is meant to highlight the relevant phenomenological
point about trust without incurring further commitments to transcendental idealism.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
481

the unspoken boundary between self and other when the "other forces his corporeality on
me".87 Furthermore, trust in one's own embodied subjectivity, as capable of self-protec-
tion, is destroyed by the other's violation: "you yourself suﬀer on your body the counter-
man that your fellow man became".88 In the torture situation, recourse to an unwritten
social contract, which Améry describes in terms of retributive justice, is foreclosed
since one cannot retaliate against the onslaught of violence.89 Typically, in situations
where self-defense is ruled out, calling out for aid is an alternative, which Améry
describes as a "constitutional psychic element" that underlies our personal, social, and
institutional relationships.90 The self is rendered doubly defenseless when the call for
aid, given the isolation of the torture situation, can receive no response: "[w]hoever
would rush to the prisoner's aid—a wife, a mother, a brother, or friend—he won't get
this far".91
The impossibility of aid has consequences for how we understand the primary experi-
ence of torture and the way it impairs transcendental trust between subjects. Arendt
describes pain as an experience, which, due to its radical privacy is the "least communic-
able of all" experiences and, for this reason, impairs participation in an intersubjective
(public) world, leaving the subject bereft of a sense of reality.92 According to Emanuel
Levinas, pain destroys the synthetic powers of consciousness, those powers that accord-
ing to Kant, give experience its intelligibility.93 Pain, in other words, undoes subjectivity
by undoing the conditions for meaning and sense. However, pain opens into an intersub-
jective world in which relief is promissory. As Levinas puts it, "pure suﬀering, which is
intrinsically senseless and condemned to itself with no way out, a beyond appears in the
form of the interhuman".94 Unlike Arendt, Levinas and Améry both emphasize the sig-
niﬁcance of the call, a wail or a cry, as opening up the privacy and unintelligibility of pain
to the other's aid or consolation. However, in the isolation of the torture situation, which
is without recourse to such aid, the subject's "ﬂesh becomes his total reality", removing
the subject from a common world in the sense that Arendt describes.95 The suﬀering
subject is reduced to her ﬂesh, to the privacy of her own sensations, because the pain
of torture saturates consciousness without the possibility of (ethical) alterity. Victims
of torture frequently describe this inability to transcend pain in terms of a perceptual nar-
rowing of space or claustrophobia.96 The alterity that is experienced is not the other who
rushes to one's aid, but the other as one's destroyer, as "the anti-man".97 The experience
of the other as bent on one's destruction as well as the absolute foreclosure of aid reduce
87 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 28.
88 Ibid. (my emphasis).
89 Améry quotes the biblical principle of reciprocal justice 'an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth' (ibid.).
90 Ibid.
91 Ibid., 27; compare Arendt, The Life of the Mind. It could be argued that Amery and Arendt disagree on their account of
intersubjectivity, the former endorsing the view that intersubjective relations are fundamentally reliable and the latter
arguing for their unpredictability. The unpredictability of action partly stems from the fact that spontaneous and free
agents like myself can thwart one's course of action. This being said, action occurs in a political realm - the torture
situation, by contrast, is not a realm within which subjects stand in reciprocal relations. Within this situation, the tor-
turer is the only free and spontaneous agent - the tortured is radically deprived of freedom and spontaneity.
92 Arendt, The Human Condition, 51, 114.
93 Levinas, 'Transcendence and Evil', 180; Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B131-136.
94 Levinas, Entre Nous, 93-94.
95 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 33.
96 See Doerr-Zegers et al, 'Torture: Psychiatric Sequelae and Phenomenology'.
97 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 40, 95.
482
S. SHAHID

subjectivity to the unintelligibility of pain. This fundamental series of distortions of the
(inter-)subjective domain destroys transcendental trust in the other, revealing the world
as erratic and unintelligible.
So far, we have seen that conditions of extreme violence destroy the subject at a fun-
damental or transcendental level. To this extent, Améry, like Arendt, describes a funda-
mental or radical destruction of subjectivity under evil. Arendt maintains, as we saw in
Section 1, that radical evil renders subjects superﬂuous through the destruction of spon-
taneity, by destroying the capacity of the subject to act out of her own resources and
reducing her to mere reﬂexes. Radical evil destroys plurality because it eﬀaces the singu-
larity of the individual - human beings are turned into a bundle of reactions that can be
expunged and replaced. Améry describes how, from the perspective of primary experi-
ence, reduced to ﬂesh, the subject under torture is diminished to mere reﬂexes, to
cries of pain.98 To state Améry's point in Arendt's idiom, torture destroys spontaneity
and plurality by reducing the subject to ﬂesh and cancelling the subject's ability to
inhabit or to act within a common world. The evil of torture from the perspective of
primary experience is radical in the original sense of the term, destructive down to the
"the roots" of subjectivity and its intentional relations with the self, other, and world.
Even though Améry, unlike Arendt, foregrounds the primary experience of evil
through granular descriptions, Améry and Arendt agree that subjectivity is not atomistic
but intersubjective and worldly. In fact, atomistic subjectivity is an aberration, the yield of
violence and terror. Amery's account of torture reveals that the onslaught of the torturer
impairs the senseof the world: "I staggered through the world whose signs remained as
inscrutable for me as Etruscan script", a "world full of riddles".99 For Arendt, similarly,
not only physical pain, but also social conditions can impair a person's sense of reality at
the phenomenological level. Take Arendt's account of sensus communis, which describes
the sense of veridicality that accompanies our perceptions.100 Just as the ﬁve senses have
their worldly correlates (the visual, the tactile, and so on) the corresponding property of
sensus communis, which Arendt calls the sixth sense, is the feeling of "realness" that
underwrites our experiences of the world. In The Origins of Totalitarianism, Arendt
describes how perceptual experience is not private but in fact, "depends upon my
being in contact with other men, upon our common sense which regulates and controls
all other senses and without which each of us would be enclosed in his own particularity
of sense data which in themselves are unreliable and treacherous".101 Maintaining a sense
of reality requires that we recognize others, each with a distinct perspective on the world,
and participate, as sense-endowed perceivers, in a world which we all share. The disrup-
tion of sensus communis under totalitarianism isolates the individual, destroying the
common world pivotal to a sense of reality. Thus, for both Arendt and Améry, funda-
mental disturbances of intersubjectivity yield a form of derealization that undercuts
the intelligibility of the world down to our perceptions. Arendt's account shows us
98 Ibid., 35.
99 Ibid., 47.
100 Kant describes sensus communis as "communal sense, i.e., a faculty of judging that in its reﬂection takes account (a
priori) of everyone else's way of representing in thought" (Critique of Judgment, 173). Aristotle's conception of sensus
communis in De Anima refers to the power which distinguishes between the ﬁve senses and unites various sense per-
ceptions as nevertheless belonging to the same object (Complete Works, 426b17-427a5). Arendt's phenomenological
account contains features of both the Kantian and the Aristotelean conception of sensus communis.
101 Arendt,Origins of Totalitarianism, 475-476.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
483

how the destruction of plurality through ideology isolates subjects and produces a terri-
fying state of derealization. Améry conﬁrms Arendt's conclusions from the angle of the
embodied subject that is tortured, torture being one of the key instruments of
totalitarian regimes.
Let us now turn to Améry's positive account of the perpetrators of evil. Here we will
see that despite his initial disagreement with Arendt on the issue of banal evil, Améry's
descriptions of the primary experience of the torturer bears striking aﬃnities with
Arendt's account. Améry engages closely with Arendt's banality thesis in his description
of his torturers, and,i n fact, does not reject the banality thesis wholesale. He aﬃrms that
his torturers were indeed "brutalized petty bourgeois and subordinate bureaucrats of
torture" but insists that insight into evil requires that one considers how "they were
also much more".102 This insight is revealed to Améry in the primary experience of
the torture situation: "I saw it in their serious, tense faces, which were not swelling, let
us
say,
with
sexual-sadistic
delight,
but
concentrated
in
murderous
self-
realization".103 Rather than sexual or psychological sadists, Améry describes his torturers
as existential sadists who inhabit "a dis-ordered view of the world".104 Existential
sadism describes a particular relationship with the other, one's own freedom, and the
world. One might be a sexual sadist, for instance, but not an existential sadist. In
taking pleasure in someone's pain, one might, in other words, neither forego their
consent nor attempt to nullify them. The existential sadist, by contrast, "wants to
nullify this world, and by negating his fellow man ... wants to realize his own total
sovereignty".105 Seen through the lens of existential sadism which wishes to destroy
the multiplicity that constitutes a common world, torture is a direct negation of
Arendt's conception of plurality - that "men, not Man, live on the earth and inhabit
the world".106 The torturer asserts his own ego as paramount, and in destroying the plur-
ality of subjects - Arendt and Améry would both agree - destroys conditions that enable
access to a common and intelligible world.
Améry describes existential sadism as a transposition of what social existence ordina-
rily requires. He states: "torture becomes the total inversion of the social world, in which
we can live only if we grant our fellow man life, ease his suﬀering, bridle the desire of our
ego to expand".107 Arendt's analysis of Eichmann's distorted moral framework similarly
reveals how, having internalized Hitler's law, Eichmann exchanges what morality
demands with what morality forbids. For Améry, ordinary social life is founded on a reci-
procal agreement - akin to a social contract - between subjects that they will curtail their
ego for the sake of the other and vice versa. "In the world of torture", by contrast, "man
exists only by ruining the other person who stands before him".108 For Améry, as for
Arendt, evil turns the law of social and moral life on its head. However, unlike
Arendt, who distinguishes between "willed evil", which she argues is rare, and banal
evil which is thoughtless, Améry argues that it is precisely the failure to recognize the
moral charge of one's actions that is monstrous: "The monster, who is not chained by
102 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 34, 35.
103 Ibid., 36.
104 Ibid., 34.
105 Ibid., 35.
106 Arendt, The Human Condition, 51.
107 Améry, At the Mind's Limits, 35 (my emphasis).
108 Ibid.
484
S. SHAHID

his conscience to his deed, sees it from his viewpoint only as an objectiﬁcation of his will,
not as a moral event".109
6. Conclusion
Torture, in Améry's view, is the essence of National Socialism. As an ideology, National
Socialism, was akin to the apparatus of torture insofar as it demanded that one "torture,
destroy, in order to be great in the suﬀering of others" and celebrated the negation of
feelings of mercy and compassion by disparaging these moral aﬀections as forms
of "sentimental humanity".110 It is not only torturers who embody sadism of this kind
but also bureaucrats and administrators who radically fail to take the other into
account. Eichmann's thoughtlessness - his failure to honor the plurality of the world,
as Arendt understands it - exempliﬁes the negation of others in an especially patent
way. In essence, the bureaucrat's existential stance, although detached from visceral
transgression, is that of the existential sadist. But it is not his existential stance by
itself that renders Eichmann evil. He could have continued living the life of a sales
clerk with precisely the same mentality. What transforms Eichmann into a perpetrator
of evil is the fact that his choices made others undergo primary experiences of
suﬀering and transcendental loss of trust in the world.
Acknowledgement
I would like to thank two anonymous reviewers as well as C. Skirke and J. Bendik-Keymer for their
thoughtful remarks and probing criticisms that helped me improve this paper.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
References
Améry, Jean. At the Mind's Limits. Trans.Sidney Rosenfeld and Stella P. Rosenfeld. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1980.
Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York: Viking Press,
1974.
Arendt, Hannah. The Life of the Mind. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1978.
Arendt, Hannah. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New York: Harcourt, 1979.
Arendt, Hannah. Between Past and Future: Eight Exercises in Political Thought. London and
New York: Penguin, 1993.
Arendt, Hannah. The Human Condition. Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1998.
Arendt, Hannah. RahelVarnhagen: The Life of a Jewish Woman. Trans. Clara Winston and Richard
Winston. New York: New York Review Books, 2022.
Arendt, Hannah, and Karl Jaspers. Correspondence 1926-1969. Ed. Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner.
Trans. Rita Kimber and Robert Kimber. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992., 1992.
Aristotle. The Complete Works of Aristotle. Ed. Jonathan Barnes. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1984.
109 Ibid., 70.
110 Ibid., 30-31.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
485

Ataria, Yochai. 'Total Destruction: The Case of Jean Améry'.In Jean Améry: Beyond the Mind's
Limits,ed. Yochai Ataria, Amit Kravitz, and Eli Pitcovski, 141-57. London: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2019.
Benhabib, Seyla. 'I. Judgment and the Moral Foundations of Politics in Arendt's Thought'. Political
Theory 16 (1988): 29-51.
Benhabib, Seyla. The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah Arendt. New York: Rowman and Littleﬁeld,
2003.
Bernstein, Richard J. Radical Evil: A Philosophical Interrogation. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers,
2002.
Birmingham, Peg. Hannah Arendt and Human Rights: The Predicament of Common Responsibility.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2006.
Birmingham, Peg.'Hannah Arendt's Double Account of Evil: Political Superﬂuousness and Moral
Thoughtlessness'.In Routledge Handbook of the Philosophy of Evil, ed. Thomas Nysand Stephen
de Wijze, 148-62. London: Routledge, 2019.
Burdman, Javier. 'Between banality and radicality: Arendt and Kant on evil and responsibility'.
European Journal of Political Theory 18 (2019): 174-94.
Chignell, Andrew P. 'Evil, Unintelligibility, Radicality: Footnotes to a Correspondence between
Hannah Arendt and Karl Jaspers'. In Evil: A History. ed. Andrew P. Chignell, 18-42. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2019.
de Wijze, Stephen. 'Deﬁning Evil'. Monist 85 (2002): 210-38.
Doerr-Zegers, Otto, Lawrence Hartmann, Elizabeth Lira, and Eugenia Weinstein. 'Torture:
Psychiatric Sequelae and Phenomenology'. Psychiatry 55, no. (1992): 177-84.
Formosa, Paul. 'Is radical evil banal? Is banal evil radical?'. Philosophy & Social Criticism 33 (2007):
717-35.
Formosa, Paul. 'Diﬀerent Substantive Conceptions of Evil Actions'. In Routledge Handbook of the
Philosophy of Evil. ed. Thomas Nysand Stephen de Wijze, 256-66. London: Routledge, 2019.
Geddes, Jennifer L. 'Banal Evil and Useless Knowledge: Hannah Arendt and Charlotte Delbo on
Evil after the Holocaust'. Hypatia 18 (2003): 104-15.
Gilroy, Paul. 'Fanon and Améry, Theory, Culture & Society 27 (2010): 16-32.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological
Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology. Trans. Fred Kersten.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1982.
Kant, Immanuel. The Moral Law: Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals.Trans. Herbert James
Paton. London and New York: Routledge, 1994.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of Pure Reason. Ed. and trans. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Kant, Immanuel. Religion within the Boundaries of Mere Reason: And Other Writings. Ed. and
trans. Allen W. Wood and George di Giovanni. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Kant, Immanuel. Critique of the Power of Judgment. Ed. Paul Guyer. Trans. Paul Guyer and Eric
Matthews. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Levinas, Emmanuel. Transcendence and Evil'. In Collected Philosophical Papers,175-86.
Trans.AlphonsoLingis. Dordrecht: MartinusNijhoﬀ, 1987., 1987.
Levinas, Emmanuel. Entre Nous: Essays on Thinking-of-the-Other. Trans.Michael B. Smith and
BarbaraHarshav. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998.
Loidolt, Sophie. Phenomenology of Plurality: Hannah Arendt on Political Intersubjectivity. London:
Routledge, 2018.
Mahony, Deirdre L. Hannah Arendt's Ethics. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2018.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception. Donald A. Landes. London: Routledge,
2012.
Neiman, Susan. Evil in Modern Thought: An Alternative History of Philosophy. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2015.
Russell, Luke. 'Evil and Incomprehensibility'. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 36 (2012): 62-73.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination. Trans.
Jonathan Webber. London: Routledge, 2004.
486
S. SHAHID

Schwartz, Jonathan P. Arendt's Judgment: Freedom, Responsibility, Citizenship. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2016.
Shuster, Martin. 'A Phenomenology of Home: Jean Améry on Homesickness'. Journal of French
and Francophone Philosophy 24, no. (2017): 117-27.
Stangneth, Bettina. Eichmann Before Jerusalem. The Unexamined Life of a Mass Murderer. Trans.
Ruth Martin. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2014.
Tyner, Andrew H. 'Action, Judgment, and Imagination in Hannah Arendt's Thought''. Political
Research Quarterly 70, no. (2017): 523-34.
Utley, Fiona. 'Considerations Towards A Phenomenology of Trust'. Symposium 18 (2014): 194-
214.
Villa, Dana. 'Genealogies of Total Domination: Arendt, Adorno, and Auschwitz'. New German
Critique 34 (2007): 1-45.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. On Certainty. Trans. Denis Paul and G.E.M. Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell,
1975.
Yeatman, Anna. 'Politics and Personal Responsibility: Reﬂections on Jean Améryand Hannah
Arendt'. In On Jean Améry: Philosophy of Catastrophe. ed. Magdalena Zolkos, 61-86.
New York: Lexington.
JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH SOCIETY FOR PHENOMENOLOGY
487

