Journal of the Philosophy of Sport
ISSN: 0094-8705 (Print) 1543-2939 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjps20
A phenomenology of competition
Scott Kretchmar
To cite this article: Scott Kretchmar (2014) A phenomenology of competition, Journal of the
Philosophy of Sport, 41:1, 21-37, DOI: 10.1080/00948705.2013.787365
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00948705.2013.787365
Published online: 01 May 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1133
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjps20

A PHENOMENOLOGY OF
COMPETITION
Scott Kretchmar
In this essay, I attempt to use Husserl's transcendental phenomenology for purposes
of describing central features of competition. While not accepting all theoretical
aspects of this methodology, I employ its central strategies to see how well (if at all)
it works. In carrying out the phenomenological analysis, I examine noetic and noe-
matic correlates of competitive projects including the factors of plurality, normativity,
disputation, temporality, and comparability. I finish by reviewing three forms of
pseudo or defective competition. I conclude that eidetic analyses like the one pro-
duced in this essay have utility in spite of their significant limitations.
KEYWORDS
sport; competition; phenomenology; Hegel
While Husserl spent more time developing phenomenology than actually
using it, this was not due to any doubts he had about its utility.1 In fact,
Husserl pictured phenomenology as a rigorous procedure that would produce
advances in philosophic knowledge similar to those expected of mathematics
and the sciences.2 In this essay, I attempt to put transcendental phenomenol-
ogy3 to the test by reflecting on a topic that is central to the philosophy of
sport - namely, the nature of competition, agon, or contest, as it is variously
identified.
To my knowledge Husserl never broached this subject, but I think he
would be comfortable with this choice. I say that because he was interested in
reducing confusion - such as that caused by identify seemingly disparate
things as competitions. We say, for instance, that we compete with other
teams in the game of baseball, with other individuals in tennis, with rival busi-
nesses in the marketplace, and against opposing armies when at war. We may
find ourselves in a contest when finding a mate, participating in spelling bees,
or playing in chess tournaments. Those who hunt might think they have
entered a competition of sorts with deer, bears, fish, or other bounty. Some-
times we even hear successful hikers and climbers say that they defeated a
mountain, implying thereby that they were in some kind of competition with
Journal of the Philosophy of Sport, 2014
Vol. 41, No. 1, 21-37, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00948705.2013.787365
 2013 IAPS

it. Darwin argued that human evolution itself occurred by means of competi-
tive mechanisms associated with natural and sexual selection. A few of my
own students who dislike keeping score for purposes of demonstrating superi-
ority over others, prefer activities designed to measure self-improvement. They
often describe this as competing against themselves. And a few years ago
(Howe 2008) it was argued that 'different voices in the heads of athletes' con-
stitutes a kind of internal competition.
This does not mean, of course, that all of these activities deserve to be
grouped together as members of a common species. Nor does it mean that all
of them can be accurately described as contests or competitions. Careful phe-
nomenological reflection might show important and specifiable differences
between and among some of these endeavors. Husserl argued that patient
scrutiny of the contents of consciousness would allow us to sort things out ...
messy things like competition ... and amend any related and misleading char-
acterizations or classifications.4
An important caveat is in order before laying out my plans for the
subsequent analysis. Husserl's phenomenological project was ambitious ... too
ambitious, in fact, for those who rejected the notion of a transcendental ego,
questioned his introduction of noemata, doubted the efficacy of his reductions,
and remained unconvinced by his overall portrayal of philosophy as an eidetic
science rather than an existential art.5 I too have difficulty with certain idealistic
elements in Husserl's program and will not try to defend them here. I agree
with the likes of Merleau-Ponty, Polanyi, and Dewey that philosophic investiga-
tion is an uncertain and progressive endeavor. But from this it does not follow,
in my judgment, that Husserl's method is ineffectual or that the products of
phenomenological scrutiny cannot be illuminating. In fact, this analysis will be
a kind of litmus test for the method's utility. So, rather that debate epistemo-
logical and metaphysical issues in abstract terms, I propose to try his method
(or at least major parts of it) and see how well it works.
I begin with a description of the broad outlines of competition from
Husserl's natural standpoint, that is, as something that is actually observed or
encountered in everyday experience. Once the general notion is under my
reflective microscope, I will attempt to suspend as many related assumptions,
attributions, biases, and other sources for contingent claims as I can. Husserl
effected this suspension through a series of reductions or modifications that
would transport the phenomenon under investigation from actuality (and its
related uncertainties) to potentiality (and its founding necessities). This would
put us, Husserl believed, in a position to identify elements that lie at the heart
of competition, that provide the very ground for its intelligibility.
In order to get at these features, I will attempt to employ-free variation.
In other words, I will add and subtract potentially interesting features related
to competition to see how these variations affect the phenomenon itself. In
22
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

other words, I will play with a group of variables and observe the resultant
effects on competition. These variables come, as Husserl put it, from den
sachen selbst, from 'the things themselves'. When important variables are
reflectively added or subtracted, a major impact on the intelligibility of compe-
tition should be evident. Lesser variables should, correspondingly, have lesser
impacts. Moreover, these impacts run in two directions for philosophers of
intentionality like Husserl - toward consciousness (what Husserl called the
noetic side, in this case the act of contesting) and toward the object of
consciousness (what Husserl called the noematic side, in this case the contest
itself.) Resultant findings should then help us better appreciate the unique
characteristics of competition, both as a way of addressing the world and as
an element in the world itself.
Competition from the Natural Standpoint
Reflection on everyday experiences of competitive activities leads to the
general observation that contesting acts, if nothing else, require comparison.
Those who contest, in other words, try to put two or more things side by side,
as it were, for purposes of evaluating their similarities and differences. For
example, when we contest concepts, we add one or more rival ideas to an
original understanding and see which one prevails. When we contest baking
ability, we compare two or more baked goods on those qualities that charac-
terize, for instance, particularly good pies or cakes. When we contest golfing
superiority, we search minimally for a second golfer who would also lay claim
to the higher position. The intentionality of seeking comparisons would be the
act or noetic element among Husserl's noetic-noematic correlates.
The contests themselves then stand as the object or noematic element
of all contesting acts. These are the settings or activities in which noetic acts
reach their target or, as Husserl put it, find satisfaction. The world-as-contested,
in short, is one in which comparisons can be made. We find such environments
in debates, bake-offs, tractor pulls, tournaments, games, war, love triangles,
persuasive essays, presidential elections, and any number of other places that
allow us to juxtapose one thing to another and evaluate their differences.
Competition and Plurality
These initial reflections on competition and comparisons would suggest
that competition is grounded in plurality. Competition, in other words, does
not work in isolation - that is, in the absence of at least some identifiable
other. We can test this idea by varying the number of contesting acts and their
noematic correlates. When we vary them in an upward direction from 2 to 3 to
4 and beyond, competition still remains intelligible. In a golfing contest,
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
23

competition remains intact whether we picture 2, 3, 4, or 100 golfers trying to
produce the best score. In fact, further upward variations make no difference
to the foundational intelligibility of contested comparisons. In principle, the
contest (as a species of comparative acts/objects) seems to have no upper
limit.
Variations in the other direction, however, do not show such flexibility.
When we reduce the number of elements below a minimal two parties, two
acts, and two products, we lose competition. A comparison between one, as it
were, makes no sense. A singular would-be comparative act (e.g., taking a
golfing test or trying to bake a cake successfully) that produces a singular
would-be comparative product (a golf score, a cake) cannot be fulfilled. There
is nothing to or against which it can be compared. As Husserl might put it, the
noetic act that invites comparison under such conditions is frustrated. Once
again, this is so because competition is grounded in plurality. Just as 'one in a
row' is unintelligible, a contest against nobody (i.e. a minimal second actor and
act) or a contested comparison with nothing (i.e. a minimal second product)
makes no sense.
In principle then, one foundation for the very possibility of competition
is located in the difference between singularity and plurality. Interestingly,
however, no similar limit is found in the other direction - that is, when we
expand plurality and imagine an increase in number of contesting agents and
products. Contesting, in short, would appear to be grounded in plurality per se,
not any specific number of comparisons. Competition, in other words, does
not inherently privilege any particular configuration of comparisons.
Of course, from the natural standpoint, we might prefer one-on-one
comparisons for their clarity and the potential drama they tend to promote.
Also, a variety of practical concerns emerge regarding the feasibility of very
large competitions. Time for judging is limited. Only so much space for displays
is available. Large numbers of comparisons may unduly limit opportunities for
victories if there is to be but one champion crowned from a large field of
competitors. But Husserl's phenomenological reductions require that we sus-
pend such everyday concerns. From our eidetic standpoint, contests among
any number of parties, including and beyond the requisite two, show them-
selves as comparable possibilities. Plurality, in this specific sense, is one of the
foundation stones of competition.
Comparisons and Normativity
Plurality simpliciter does not tell us very much about the nature of the
comparisons made in competitive situations. Our previous variations merely
informed us that successful comparisons require noetic/noematic or act/object
plurality. This requirement of plurality on the side of the object might be met
24
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

by comparing, say, a chair to a sunset, a sweet desert to a sour one, or the
game of baseball to football and basketball. In all cases we can describe their
features, note their differences, and leave it simply at that. Chairs are not sun-
sets; sweet and sour deserts are different; baseball is not the same game as
football or basketball. We might call these comparisons descriptive in nature.
Competition seems to go beyond this. While competition requires
comparison and thus assumes a descriptive identification of the things to be
compared, it requires more. This would suggest that contests are, in fact, a
species of comparison. In other words, one or more additional features are
needed to distinguish any agonistic progeny from their parents - that is, from
descriptive comparisons per se.
That 'something more' immediately shows itself when we reflect on a
clear exemplar of competition, for instance, a chess match between two indi-
viduals. The match is based not only on a simple comparison but also an eval-
uation, a normative ranking of better and worse. The issue at hand is not
simply whether and how the choices of player A are different from those of
player B but rather which set of moves is more successful in terms of the pur-
poses and requirements of the game.
Reflection on other exemplars reinforces this description of contests as
evaluated comparisons. Pie baking contests make no sense without measures
of superior and inferior culinary skills. Philosophic debates would be reduced
to simple conversations without judgments about better and worse ideas,
stronger and weaker logic, superior or inferior evidence. Competition, in short,
becomes unthinkable in the absence of the normative element. Competitive
comparisons, in contrast to their non-competitive counterparts, require the
move from an acknowledgment of differences to judgments about relative
worth. Thus, normativity, in this specific sense, can be identified as a second
cornerstone of competition.
Normative Comparisons and Disputation
It is possible that the notions of comparisons coupled with normative
evaluations still fail to capture all the central features of competition. Further
variations can be used to examine this possibility. We can, for instance, vary
the chess example in a particular way to see if comparative judgments of bet-
ter and worse still make sense in the absence of competition. If they do, we
would have to identify yet another element that would distinguish distinctly
competitive comparisons from evaluative comparisons, per se.
We can picture a woman chess master playing against her young daugh-
ter who is just learning the game. As in the previous example, this would
appear to be a clear case of competition. Both mother and daughter are partic-
ipating in the game, following most of its rules, and are trying to play well.
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
25

However, we notice that the mother helps her daughter periodically with her
moves and intentionally refrains from putting her child quickly in checkmate,
something that she (as a chess master) could do very easily. In fact, she regu-
larly interrupts play and tells her daughter why some moves are stronger than
others.
In this situation, we have the requisite two acts and two products. We
also have the required element of normative judgments. Both mother and
daughter are interested in which chess moves work better. However, we notice
that normative interests, at least for the mother, are related more to teaching
her daughter how to play the game well than beating her. Even if we picture
the daughter with competitive intentions, we wonder if this is sufficient to
make the activity a contest. If the daughter, in other words, believes she is
competing, and if she is behaving in ways designed to show superiority over
her mother, is she in fact in a contest?
It is hard to see how this could be so because mother and daughter are
involved in two different projects - one pedagogical, the other competitive.
The mother's intentions lack some element that is essential to competition.
This element may be so important that its possession by only one party (the
daughter) in any would-be, two-agent competitive activity is not sufficient to
rescue it. What then might this element be?
When we reflect on the earlier example of the two accomplished chess
players seeking victory, it becomes apparent what that missing element is.
Contesting includes a disputation, an argument, a commitment by two or
more parties to show superiority over the other(s). This very commitment is
missing in the mother's approach to playing chess with her daughter. Because
of this, the activity lacks the mutually experienced tension, drama, and uncer-
tainty that would accompany a genuine contest. Without a bilateral or multilat-
eral dispute, there can be no contest. Disputation then, must be added to
plurality and normativity as an essential element in competition.
Still more about the characteristics of disputation, however, can be
uncovered by first considering them in mathematical terms. We could picture a
chess match as an argument over how, say, 100 points will be shared. Each, of
a minimal two parties, commits to getting a plurality. This is what the dispute
is about, and this produces a zero-sum outcome. The more points gained by
chess player A (the number and quality of pieces taken, the number of moves
to which his opponent has difficulty reacting, the speed or ease with which he
achieves checkmate), the fewer points will be available for chess player B. No
matter what the outcome (90-10, 75-25, 51-49, 50-50) the difference in the
sum is always zero. Every game, in other words, involves a dispute or fight
over the same 100 points.
When we reflect on the mathematical possibilities here, it becomes clear
that game results can be interpreted in at least two generic ways. If simple
26
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

plurality is emphasized, we get binary results - that is, a winner and a loser
regardless of the degree of separation, if any, that exists between them. If
relative success is emphasized, we get a gradation of possible relationships
ranging from 50-50 (a tie game) to 100-0 (extreme blowouts) in two directions.
Were we to return to the natural standpoint, we might want to argue that
one or the other way of treating zero-sum results is preferable. In contemporary
American culture, we emphasize the former interpretation - the binary valuation
of winning over losing, often with little regard for how or by what degree the 'W'
was achieved. Simple plurality is all that is needed. In some other cultures, includ-
ing those influenced by Zen Buddhism for instance, more fine-grained, differ-
ence-by-degree interpretations of winning and losing seem to be more
meaningful. No two victories or defeats are ever the same. Winning and losing
should not be reduced to, or conceptualized as, two reified options.
Once again, however, Husserl was interested in foundational intelligibility.
By jettisoning preferences or biases, one can see that both methods for inter-
preting zero-sum disputations make sense. Both stand, in principle, as compa-
rable possibilities for the reporting of competitive outcomes. Both underline
the seriousness of the dispute because success by one party precludes compa-
rable success by the other. Either way, competitors lay claim to an outcome
that only one of them will be able to possess. Either way, contestation makes
sense only if both parties 'argue' for success in the direction of superiority.6
It should be clear that a tie game is a logical possibility when 'playing
for success in the direction of superiority'. A tie is simply one valid point
among others on a scale of potential comparisons. However, when we picture
a superior team playing to lose or tie, the presence of competition grows less
certain. This is the case because the disputation has been removed from the
activity. The lesser side is playing to win, and the superior side is not (seriously)
disputing that intention. Competition is no longer intelligible because the bi-
or multi-lateral dispute over superiority has been removed from the activity.7
To conclude, these preliminary reflections show that competitions are
grounded in comparisons and thus, more fundamentally in act/object plurality.
But a contest is not a comparison simpliciter. Rather it is one that is intended to
produce normative evaluations of better and worse. These evaluations moreover
are carried out in a unique setting, namely, a bilateral or multilateral disputation
or argument over superiority. Assuming this analysis has been on target so far,
the elimination of any one of these elements - plurality, comparison, normativity,
or disputation - renders competition unintelligible.
Disputation and Temporality
Husserl recommended that a tentative or preliminary conclusion like the
one generated above should be verified by conducting additional variations.
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
27

One such variation might focus on the issue of disputation and temporality.
For instance, we might examine the intelligibility of ex post facto disputations
where the commitment to superiority is made after testing acts have taken
place and testing products or scores are already in hand.
We can picture two golfers playing a round of golf independently, but
on the same course and under relatively similar playing conditions. Neither gol-
fer is aware that the other person is on the course and no bets or other
arrangements have been made beforehand. Nevertheless, comparisons of rela-
tive success are possible because each golfer is taking roughly the same test,8
albeit on his own and without knowledge of the other player's level of
achievement. One individual shoots an 80 and the other one an 82. After the
round they meet by chance in the parking lot and decide to compare scores.
One is clearly superior to the other. The individual who shot the better score -
the 80 - wonders if he would be justified in declaring victory. Would such a
claim make any sense?
Reasons for a negative answer to this question should not be hard to
find. Even though the criterion of plurality was satisfied with two acts and two
scores, and even though a normative ranking of greater and lesser success was
available, we fail to see any antecedent argument or disputation. The two golf-
ers contested nothing. They merely compared test scores after the fact and
noted that one was better than the other. Each shot their rounds without the
tension and additional uncertainties associated with mutual commitments to
display superiority. Each golfer merely experienced the uncertainties associated
with how well he would score on the golfing test. While the golfers produced
two test scores (just as competitors would have done), subsequent compari-
sons and evaluations were unable retroactively to produce a contest.
From this we can conclude that the commitment to superiority is
time-sensitive for purposes of generating a contest. It has to precede the test
taking, affect the way the test is confronted, inform the participants that the
test score per se will be inconclusive relative to the competitive outcome. Such
information is important because the dispute at hand is over better or best
test scores not just good ones.
Reflection on everyday competitive experiences reinforces these conclu-
sions. While higher scores correlate positively with chances for victory, all that
winning requires is better test scores ... whether they be low, high, or in
between. To take a test is not to enter a contest. To do well on a test does
not guarantee victory in any contest. But the test, nevertheless, is foundational.
While we can picture a person taking a test without also being in a contest (e.
g., a golfer playing alone), we cannot picture the reverse (two would-be golfing
competitors without the test of golf). Without the challenge and without test
score, there would be nothing to compare. Without the test, in other words,
there would be no way to show superiority.
28
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

These reflections suggest that competitive acts are inherently dual or
nested acts. The fundamental thrust (the foundational act) is aimed at solving
test problems - whether they be provided by Sudoku puzzles, the game of
baseball, or the challenges of love and war. Disputes over superiority are then
parasitic on those foundational problems.
Moreover, nested acts produce nested results. One set of results is
related to the quality of testing preformances. The other is related to the com-
parative ranking established by those results. Thus, there is no contradiction in
claiming two things about contest results - one related to testing success, the
other to contesting results. Likewise, there is no contradiction in principle in
showing pleasure and disappointment over a single contest result. A competi-
tor may have played well (a friendly test result and thus, reason for showing
pleasure) but still lost (an unfriendly contest outcome and a reason for show-
ing disappointment) or visa versa.
These nested acts and outcomes are missing in the ex post facto compar-
isons made by the two golfers. The comparison of the two scores is fully intelli-
gible in relationship to testing acts and products alone. In fact, better and
worse test scores are produced in any number of domains - on driver license
exams, in success at raising children, in finding a good job, in solving problems
at work, in being a good lover. But, in the absence of any antecedent dispute,
it would make little sense to claim victory over others who scored lower on
these challenging activities. In short, to compare test scores for measures of
superiority after the fact does not produce a contest. It is, in effect, to posit a
dispute where none, in fact, existed.
Disputation and Comparability
Further variations are needed to check previous conclusions about
disputes and comparisons. The examples we gave ourselves in previous reflec-
tions were limited to those in which two or more parties were taking the same
test whether it was chess, golf, a Sudoku puzzle, or the challenges involved in
business, love, and war. We assumed, in other words, that comparability was
dependent on sharing a common test. We never looked at a disputation where
superiority is claimed in different domains, for instance, where one party
argues that she is better at bowling than her friend is at golf. Can a bowler
sensibly take on a golfer in a contest?
It is difficult to conceptualize how this could be carried out. There seems
to be a kind of incommensurability between, say, sinking a long putt and pick-
ing up or converting a spare. In light of this incommensurability, we might
even want to argue that comparability requires more than testing similarity (a
golfer against another golfer) but testing identity ... at least in principle if not
also in fact.
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
29

If we picture golfer A playing by one set of rules and golfer B another, or
golfer A playing on one course under ideal weather conditions and golfer B
playing elsewhere in the rain, how (if at all) and under what conditions can
results from golf tests T1 and T2 be effectively compared and evaluated?
Wouldn't any contest under these conditions be inherently unfair and wouldn't
any claims of superiority (particularly if the scores were close) be unfounded
and thus open to criticism?
This thinking undergirds the well-known claims of formalism and its
related incompatibility thesis. As articulated by D'Agostino (1981) it reads, 'One
cannot (really) win the game unless he plays it, and one cannot (really) play
the game unless he obeys the rules of the game' (7). In terms of our previous
analysis, this formulation would suggest that both of a minimal two parties
need to be taking the same test G in order for both to be playing it, disputing
superiority at it, and generating convincing evidence that would settle the dis-
pute over it.
In order to raise doubts about this logic, we would need a variation that
includes (or even invites) participation in different tests, but one that would
still serve as a vehicle for showing superiority. Such a variation might be found
in handicapping situations in sport. A less-skilled golfer gets more shots than a
superior opponent; a faster horse is required to carry more weight than other
entries in the field; a younger participant is given a head start in a race. The
very process of handicapping would seem to produce two tests - a harder test
(G) and an easier one (G1).
However, when we reflect on these varieties of competition we have no
problem with comparability, at least in one sense. One golfer proved superior
by having the lower net score, whether that person took the harder test (He
gave up strokes.) or the easier one (She received extra strokes). One horse
proved fastest, whether that horse carried more or less weight. One runner
reached the finish line first, and so on.
This would indicate that comparability is not grounded in testing iden-
tity.9 Contested comparisons make sense, as these variations showed, even if
one party faces fewer or less severe challenges than the other. What seems to
be present in both the handicapped golfing, horse racing, and running exam-
ples is not test identity but rather project identity.
That is, the two golfers are committed to the same two-part intentional-
ity - namely, to meet the golfing challenge (test intentionality) and to meet it
better than one's opponent (contest intentionality). Testing intentionality
promotes comparability because it orients the golfers toward the same project
- finding ways to get a ball in a hole efficiently by means of a common set of
variously deployed techniques, skills, strategies, character traits, virtues, and the
like. Contesting intentionality promotes comparability because it points golfers
toward the same measure of overall success - using fewer strokes (stroke play)
30
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

or winning the most holes (match play) in golf or by reaching the finish line
first in horse or foot racing.
This helps us to see that contests need not be fair in order to be intelligi-
ble. From Husserl's natural standpoint it might even be argued that the testing
identity that would promote fairness and help determine who the better player
is, is an unrealistic ideal in most competitive settings. In golf, downhill skiing,
and even track and field, weather conditions, facility variations, and a host of
other factors make perfect test replication across competitors difficult, if not
impossible, to achieve.
In interactive contests like soccer, football, baseball, and basketball, it is
part of the competitive intentionality not to provide (or allow) testing identity.
One side not only tries more effectively to solve the test provided, in part, by
the other side but also tries to produce a test that is superior to theirs. To win
an interactive contest is, in part, to be more successful in generating test dis-
similarity in one's own favor. But, of course, this test-providing/test-solving
interplay in these games is shared. Thus, the requirement of project identity is
honored.
The disjunction of test and project identity carries with it interesting
implications for the meaning of competitive results. Because different com-
petitors cannot assume test identity, a victory does not necessarily mean
that the winning side is better (inherently more skilled or able) or even
that it played better (performed better on the test on that particular occa-
sion.) In fact, when we reflect on a lesser golfer with a high handicap, we
can see that a victory over a seasoned player is unlikely to indicate supe-
rior skill or a better performance. A victory means only that the person
scored better in terms of contesting intentionality and agreed upon sum-
mative measures of superiority. This insight seems to be supported by the
common acknowledgment that winners are not always those who are more
skilled or those who played better. But they must be those who scored
better on a common project.
Pseudo-Competition and Defective Contests
Husserl hoped, as noted previously, that careful phenomenological reflec-
tion would help us sort out the more valid from less valid claims about the
subject matter at hand. This kind of scrutiny is needed to test the veracity of
at least three controversial claims about competition - namely, that we can
compete with animals, oneself or imaginary others, and absentee opponents.
While sufficient space for a detailed analysis is not available, we may be able
to draw tentative conclusions or, at minimum, identify places where further
reflection is needed.
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
31

A contest with an animal.
Competition with animals can be evaluated against the previously iden-
tified features of intentionality. The criterion of a shared project, for instance,
would seem to disqualify the acts of hunting and being hunted as genuinely
competitive. In fact, each party is involved in a different project and thus, com-
parability of success would be frustrated. It would require comparisons
between hunting and eluding, tracking and being tracked, and so on. Each
party here is engaged in largely incommensurable projects. But what if we pic-
tured human and non-human agents in what would seem to be a common
project?
What if we pictured, for instance, a third party throwing a bone across
the yard while a dog and his master were standing side by side ... as if at a
starting line for a race. And what if both of them ran for the bone, each one
with the clear intention of getting to it first? Might not this be identified as a
valid competition?
Some might argue that it is hard to say. The answer might rest, in part,
on empirical evidence related to how animals think. Even if animals were only
hard-wired to intuit the nature of the problem and only subconsciously appre-
ciate the importance of solving that problem better than the nearby biped, we
would seem to have the framework in place for a contest. Husserl, however,
might not want us to entertain such questions, not because they are unimpor-
tant but rather because adjudications rest on empirical evidence. It is this kind
of evidence that Husserl's reductions were designed to bracket or put out of
play.
Decisions about competition between a human being and an animal or
between animals themselves run into problems related to anthropomorphism.
Can non-human animals conceptualize a problem and share it? Are animals
capable of entertaining nested intentionalities - that is, can they intend the
solution of a common test, and also intend a demonstration of superiority in
coming to that solution? While the actions of animals may appear to be com-
petitive, it is not clear that they are living that event with anything like the
consciousness required for comparative, evaluative, disputed, and nested activi-
ties. It might be safer to call activities in which it appears that animals are try-
ing to outperform humans, or even trying to outperform other animals,
pseudo-contests or activities that have the appearance of a contest.
A contest with oneself.
Competition against oneself is another form of contestation that has
generated different conclusions. To be sure, much of our literature rejects the
notion of self-self competition and regards any talk of contests with self
32
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

metaphorical at best.10 The argument might go something like this: While a
lone person could take the same or a comparable test at time 1 and again at
time 2, and while that individual could intend to show superiority at time 2
(and thus enter into a dispute of sorts), it is more accurate to call this self
improvement. The earlier test score simply served as a criterion point for a later
testing event. To identify a desire to improve as a dispute is misleading, at
best, and wrong at worst.
We might vary this situation, however, to one of imaginary competitors.
Many of us, when we were children, played the role of two or more athletes.
We might have had a home run hitting contest between 'Hank Aaron', 'Babe
Ruth', and 'Ted Williams' - each time mimicking the stance of these athletes,
each time living a vivid competitive intentionality that would prove that hitter
the greatest slugger of all time. If 'Ruth' hit more homers than 'Aaron' or 'Wil-
liams', he would win. This cannot be called self-improvement because there
are three individuals present, all of them competing for the crown.
In this scenario, it would seem that the basic requirements of competi-
tion have been met - two or more acts and two or more products, thus, plu-
rality; comparison per se and its offspring, normative evaluation; upfront
disputation; a common testing/contesting project intentionality shared by
'Aaron', 'Ruth', and 'Williams'. Of course this is an imaginary disputation, not a
real one. And the fact that one person is playing all three roles may raise ques-
tions about the validity of the dispute. This too then might best be identified
as a pseudo- or perhaps a play-acting kind of competition, not a real one.
Competition against an absentee opponent.
The play-acting scenario raises questions about another variety of pur-
portedly competitive situations - those in which the opponent is absent. This
'absence' can take two forms - temporal and spatial. One athlete can precede
another (temporal absence) or one athlete can be performing at a different
venue than another (spatial absence). In either case, knowledge of the oppo-
nent's progress on the test is either unknown or incomplete.
Initial reflections on these possibilities show that such absences are con-
ceivable only in what are commonly called closed or parallel kinds of competi-
tions, those activities like bowling, golf, and racing where the test is
independent of the opponent and thus, where taking the test alone is possi-
ble. In open games like football and basketball, there can be no question
about absentee opponents because opponents contribute to the nature and
quality of the test itself. If they were temporally or spatially absent, there
would be no game at all.
However, reflections on an activity like golf or bowling suggest that tem-
poral or spatial absenteeism may not be fatal to would-be competitive projects
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
33

in those settings. Comparative, evaluative, and disputational elements all seem
to be conceivable under such arrangements. Two bowlers, for instance, - one
in California and another one in New York - might agree to a contest, and
might even place a friendly bet on the outcome. They will go to their respec-
tive lanes on a given day, bowl three games, total the scores, and then share
results to see who won. Any declarations of victory or defeat would seem to
make sense in this unusual, but seemingly valid, contest. Once again, it
appears to be valid because it includes comparisons, evaluations, and impor-
tantly, an upfront, zero-sum disputation, the element that was missing from
the previously mentioned golfers' ex post facto comparison of independently
achieved scores.
However, when reflecting on such bowlers, we wonder if their behaviors
would have been different had they simply been bowling alone and trying to
achieve the best score possible. In other words, what would (or could) they
have done differently in this long-distance contest in contrast to a highly moti-
vated performance in a solo test.
An epistemological problem presents itself. The bowlers have no infor-
mation specific to the contest. This ignorance, of course, would affect their
behavior. For instance, they would not know whether to gamble on, say, pick-
ing up a low-probability spare. Such an action might be imprudent or even
foolish if one were trying to maximize a test score, but it might be absolutely
necessary in order to win a given contest.
These reflections show that absenteeism of this sort prevents athletes, at
least in part, from fulfilling the second aspect of a competitor's nested intention-
ality, the part that focuses on relative success, not just success per se. Because
such bowlers are at least partly blind to important competitive information, they
would be limited to the testing intentionality of doing very well ... and then
hoping that this is enough to win.11 The drama associated with relative positions,
reversals, last moment strategic adjustments, protecting safe leads, gambling to
gain the lead - none of this would be in play, at least not in any robust way.
We can vary the bowling example by placing both competitors on the
same lanes. We picture one completing her bowling event before the other
begins. In this scenario we seem to have an asymmetrical case of competitive
blindness. The bowler who goes first is analogous to both bowlers in the previ-
ous variation. He or she knows nothing of the success of the opponent. The
second bowler, of course, benefits by being able to play off her opponent's rel-
ative success and thus better fulfill both parts of a competitor's nested inten-
tionality - that of solving the bowling test, and solving it better than at least
one other individual.
So, what are we to make of these two varieties of absentee competition?
It would appear that they are intelligible. But it would also seem they are
defective in specifiable ways. With only general knowledge of an opponent's
34
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

abilities, there are degrees of intentional frustration that are encountered in
these settings. Such frustration is not experienced when athletes compete con-
currently and with an awareness of the others' progress.12
These speculations seem to be supported when we return to everyday
experience and Husserl's natural standpoint. Certain emotional and dramatic
qualities of contests are missing in these absentee gaming contexts. Certain
skills of nerve and determination are not fully tested in these settings. Accord-
ingly, athletes and fans alike prefer concurrent, face-to-face disputations. They
have voted, and continue to vote with their feet in favor of these more robust
competitions.
A Brief Postscript.
I indicated at the outset of this essay that this would be a kind of litmus
test for a Husserlian-inspired phenomenology of competition. I wondered if a
move toward the eidetic and away from the contingent would allow us to see
anything important about the underpinnings of competition. I wondered if
hard and fast claims about the nature of competition were even possible.
As a result of this discussion, I would conclude that eidetic analyses can
be carried out to some effect. How much effect is another question. There
seems to be a degree of sterility to this kind of analysis. It aims at identifying
neat and tidy foundational distinctions when the vagaries and varieties of
human experience urge us to pay attention to the more complex upper stories
of the edifice. The infinitely complex evolution of competitive experiences from
Merleau-Ponty's lived body would generate very different descriptions than the
ones produced here.
Perhaps, however, there is room for both approaches. My sense is that
this eidetic analysis pushes in the direction of analytic philosophy - toward
important distinctions, logical requirements, significant differences. A more
existential approach would do a better job of describing the textured varia-
tions of sport that populate the large spaces in between the more essential
competitive wall conditions described here.
I hold no delusions about having identified all the walls or even having
described the one's I found accurately. Complex phenomena present many
handles by which to grab them. Potentially fruitful descriptions seem almost
limitless. I found myself starting, starting over, and then starting over again. I
confess to feeling, even at this point, that I barely broached the subject. So
much more could have been reflected on. So many more variations might
have provided additional or even contrary illuminations. But perhaps that is
the way it must be when reflecting on such a rich phenomenon like
competition.
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
35

Notes
1.
Husserl would leave it largely to others like Eugen Fink (1960) and Nicolai
Hartmann (1932/1967) to put his methodology to the test. While Husserl
would spend his life 'saving human reason' and defending philosophy as a
'rigorous science', he would depend mostly on his students and others to
carry out phenomenological analyses (Lauer in Husserl 1965).
2.
In point of fact, Husserl saw phenomenology to be even more rigorous than
any empirical methodology. His series of reductions were designed to counter
a Human skepticism related to inferences drawn from experience or measure-
ment. Science, Husserl argued, was actually dependent on the meanings that
the eidetic science of phenomenology is designed to illuminate.
3.
This is the brand of phenomenology that Husserl developed later in his career
when he severed his ties with the work of Brentano. This is the later Husserl
of Ideas (1931/1967), not the author of Logical Investigations (1900/1970).
4.
This, of course, stands in contrast to Wittgenstein's far more modest hopes of
identifying what he called 'family resemblances'.
5.
Husserl has been called a closet idealist, a solipsist, and other bad names by
some of his critics - and not without reason. But such issues are complex and
have been treated at length elsewhere. My own analysis in this essay, I
believe, is not contingent on the acceptance of any contentious Husserlian
epistemological or metaphysical claims. Husserl rested his case on the power
of reason (intuition) to see how things are and must be. I will try to do the
same, albeit with muted expectations and no grand metaphysical claims or
pretensions about views from nowhere.
6.
I use the terms 'in the direction of superiority' intentionally. Otherwise a
dispute by an overmatched competitor would not make much sense. This
individual, by definition, has little or no chance to show superiority. But he or
she does have an opportunity to narrow the difference. The intent to 'narrow
the difference' - even if this ends up producing a tie - counts as agonistic as
much as the intent to 'show superiority'. It is interesting to note that some
leagues even award points for ties, thereby acknowledging their validity.
7.
In the 2012 London Olympic games this conclusion was supported when bad-
minton players from South Korea, China, and Indonesia were sent home for
not honoring what might be called their competitive obligations. While they
did not play for a tie, neither did they play for a win. Without an intent to
show difference in the direction of superiority, they did not (according to
Olympic officials) honor the values inherent in the games.
8.
It is 'only roughly the same test' because any number of variables might
intervene to prevent testing identity - wind, other weather conditions, faulty
equipment, a loud shout from a nearby fairway in the middle of one's
36
SCOTT KRETCHMAR

backswing, and so on. Test similarity, however, is an important issue if we are
to realize comparability between testing results.
9.
One common argument against formalism is that testing identity (either as
experienced by two participants or as found between the essence of the rule
book and the actuality of any particular game) is impossible, or at least unlikely
10.
Howe (2008), as noted, stands among those who argue that self-competition
is intelligible. Arguably, however, her notion of internal competition might be
better understood as a phenomenological struggle related to one's commit-
ments. Struggles occur in tests, in the fact of difficulties. Accordingly, the use
of competition by Howe is undoubtedly more metaphorical than literal.
11.
I say 'partly blind' because opponents may know the general characteristics
of a given opponent - how good they are, how well they have been playing
recently, how well they do in high pressure events, and so on. Thus, they still
have some information that might be relevant when making strategic, test-
specific decisions.
12.
It is interesting that professional golfers make this distinction between better
and worse contesting conditions. Match play is regarded by many as the best
form of competition because players know their competitive juxtaposition rel-
ative to one another hole by hole. They acknowledge that the alternative
called stroke play is an inferior substitute because the players do not have
the knowledge and enjoy the enriched atmosphere that goes with a person-
to-person disputation.
REFERENCES
D'AGOSTINO, F. 1981. The ethos of games. Journal of the Philosophy of Sport 8: 7-18.
FINK, E. 1960. The ontology of play. Philosophy Today 4: 95-110.
HARTMANN, N. 1932/1967. Ethics. 3 vols. Trans. S. Coit, with an introduction by J.H.
Muirhead. London/New York: Humanities Press.
HOWE, L. 2008. On competing against oneself, or 'I need to get a different voice in
my head'. Sport, Ethics and Philosophy 2, no. 3: 353-66.
HUSSERL, E. 1911/1965. Phenomenology and the crisis of philosophy: Philosophy as
rigorous science and philosophy and the crisis of European man. Trans. and an
introduction by Q. Lauer. New York: Harper & Row.
HUSSERL, E. 1931/1967. Ideas: General introduction to pure phenomenology. Trans. W.R.
Boyce Gibson. New York: Collier Books.
HUSSERL, E. 1900/1970. Logical investigations. Trans. J.N. Findlay. New York: Humani-
ties Press.
Scott Kretchmar is a Professor in the Department of Kinesiology at the
Pennsylvania State University, 268K Rec Bldg, University Park, 16802
USA. E-mail: rsk1@psu.edu
A PHENOMENOLOGY OF COMPETITION
37

