Journal of Aesthetics and Phenomenology
ISSN: 2053-9320 (Print) 2053-9339 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rfap20
Blumenberg and the Mythology of the
Lifeworld: A Deconstructive Reading of Husserl's
Phenomenology
Yutong Li
To cite this article: Yutong Li (2024) Blumenberg and the Mythology of the Lifeworld:
A Deconstructive Reading of Husserl's Phenomenology, Journal of Aesthetics and
Phenomenology, 11:1-2, 101-118, DOI: 10.1080/20539320.2024.2418893
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20539320.2024.2418893
Published online: 08 Jan 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 77
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rfap20

Blumenberg and the Mythology of the Lifeworld: 
A Deconstructive Reading of Husserl's Phenomenology
Yutong Li
KU Leuven
ABSTRACT
This paper argues that Hans Blumenberg's theory illuminates 
a novel interpretation of the phenomenological concept of the 
lifeworld—as a world sustained by myths and their receptions. 
This paper combines two central themes in Blumenberg's philoso­
phy: his interpretation of Edmund Husserl and his aesthetics, espe­
cially his theory of the novel and of myth. My claim to originality is 
to offer a mythology of the lifeworld with the help of one of 
Blumenberg's 
less-known 
texts, 
"Wirklichkeitsbegriff 
und 
Wirkungspotential des Mythos." In the first part, I will examine 
a crucial aspect in Blumenberg's reading of Husserl's notion of the 
lifeworld, namely the unorthodox view that the lifeworld, as the 
foundation for sciences and their logos, itself has no need to resort 
to language. To put it mythically: the lifeworld is an expressionless 
state of naivety. To support this deconstructive reading, I will then 
turn to Blumenberg's theory of the novel. As has been noticed by 
Blumenberg and his colleagues, the underlying meaning structure 
of the novel, or its "concept of reality," has a typically modern 
character, and largely overlaps with the phenomenological idea of 
the world and lifeworld. However, in the second part, I will radica­
lize Blumenberg's discussions about reality, and show that the 
novelistic reality can never fully supersede that of myth. 
Mythology has a persistent existence, and, in Blumenberg's argu­
ment, the history of mythical reception reveals a perpetual move­
ment of human struggle against terror. In this Blumenbergian 
philosophy of mythology, a new image of the lifeworld presents 
itself, a world made by the myth-telling humans, by their active and 
aesthetic use of words, instead of slumbers of naivety.
KEYWORDS 
Lifeworld; mythology; Hans 
Blumenberg; Edmund 
Husserl
Introduction: Aesthetics' inauthenticity
"To write poetry after Auschwitz is barbaric."1 This famous dictum of Adorno's talks 
about a crime of which Edmund Husserl was one of the victims. But writing poetry even 
before Auschwitz had never been completely acquitted of the charge of barbarism. The 
depreciation of this art follows a long tradition, and finds its earliest and most prominent 
advocate in Plato.2 The founder of phenomenology saw it his honour to fly the flag for the 
wisdom of the Greeks, whose "'theoretical' attitude" he "[s]harply distinguish[es] from 
this universal but mythical-practical attitude" of the oriental countries.3 Husserl's 
CONTACT Yutong Li 
yutong.li@kuleuven.be
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY 
2024, VOL. 11, NOS. 1-2, 101-118 
https://doi.org/10.1080/20539320.2024.2418893
© 2025 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 

Platonism makes it difficult to find in his phenomenology a place for aesthetics, at the 
very least a particular branch of it: rhetoric. "The phenomenology of the 'things them­
selves' itself prolongs the Platonic verdict on rhetoric as a mere science-of-appearance."4
In the post-war period, those would find themselves fighting on two sides who defend 
poetry, myth, rhetoric, or whatever name we name this aesthetics of words: Against, on 
the one side, the proximate accusation raised by the catastrophic caesura in the first half 
of the 20th century, and, on the other, the remote and time-honoured anti-rhetorical 
position of Platonism, whose most recent proxy is Husserlian phenomenology. Why still 
poetry after the Holocaust, and why still rhetoric after phenomenology? How could 
phenomenology, an exact science of consciousness responsible only for "things them­
selves," be reconciled with the ritualism and the guile of rhetoric, with what appears as 
lies and blindness to the truth?
Hans Blumenberg (1920-1996) is a central figure who, raised in the phenomenological 
tradition, offers praise of rhetoric at the expense of appearing as "inauthentic."5 In 
Blumenberg, the boundary between rhetoric and the more general subject of aesthetics 
is not very clear. In one place, it appears that he treats rhetoric as a particular application 
of aesthetics, as "[t]he aesthetic use of language." 6 In another, Blumenberg tends to locate 
the origin of aesthetics not in sensory experience but in linguistic 'superstructure' such as 
"the metaphoric and mythical substrate." Either way, this example or exemplar of 
aesthetics we call rhetoric plays a significant and, as we will see, subversive role in 
Blumenberg's reasoning.7 Parallel with his French contemporary, Jacques Derrida, but 
in his idiosyncratic way, Blumenberg comes up with a deconstructive idea of phenom­
enology. 8 His theory of literature in general, and myth (a supreme genre of rhetoric) in 
particular, will manifest a remarkable rereading, or even 'revisionism,' of phenomenol­
ogy, especially around the notion of the lifeworld.
Building on Blumenberg's aesthetic theory of rhetoric, literature, and mythology, this 
paper aims to lay out a very curious picture, where a post-Husserlian battle against the 
Husserlian is eventually a continuation of an intra-Husserlian struggle. Husserl's anti- 
rhetorical gesture is perhaps as highly performative and itself rhetorical as Plato's, who 
introduces his own myth to fight mythology. Yet unlike Plato, Husserl is most likely blind 
to the irony. 9 Blumenberg's merit is precisely to see into this paradox. To be specific, my 
intention in this paper is to develop à la Blumenberg an aesthetic subversion of phenom­
enology, a deconstruction of what has long been called the "Metaphysics of Present" in 
Husserl's anti-rhetorical gesture.10 I will elaborate on this Blumenbergian subversion 
twice. First (Part I) based on an immanent critique of Husserl's phenomenology of the 
lifeworld, and then (Part II) an aesthetic extrapolation of the lifeworld's self- 
contradictory consequence onto the field of mythology.
Part I: Blumenbergian phenomenology of lifeworld
Husserl proposes his famous notion of the lifeworld in his later work, The Crisis of 
European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, as the remedy for the titular 
crisis. In Husserl's opinion, the tradition of natural sciences prioritises mathematic 
formulas and, indulging in abstract theoretical constructions, overlooks the lived experi­
ence. As a reminder of the forgotten foundation of meanings of the scientists' practice, 
the lifeworld comes in as a "universe of which is intuitable in principle," "a realm of 
102
Y. LI

original self-evidences."11 This very brief picture summarises Husserl's sweeping narra­
tive throughout the book.
However, this basis that stands below the sciences has a peculiar feature: it is not some 
higher, more accurate science but, on the very contrary, a situation of thoughtless 
naivety. In Husserl's own words:
[The] proper return to the naïveté of life—but in a reflection which rises above this naïveté— 
is the only possible way to overcome the philosophical naïveté which lies in the [supposedly] 
'scientific' character of traditional objectivistic philosophy.12
His phenomenology confronts two kinds of naivety - of life and of science - and offers 
a solution that assumes the former ("returns" to it) and overcomes the latter. The notion 
of "naivety," a part of the mythical vocabulary Husserl uses, is closely related to another 
passage in Crisis, where Husserl defines the lifeworld as "the sole universe of what is 
pregiven as obvious."13 "Pregiven" and "obviousness" are two correlative notions and 
they describe a naive status of belief (as opposed to knowledge). If something is pregiven 
[vorgegeben] to be, it is present to me even before I realise it or reflect upon it. For 
example, at the first sight of a cup, when only its front is directly given to me, I am already 
co-aware of the back of this cup, such that I will not be surprised if I turn the object 
around and see my anticipation come true. In this sense, the back of this cup is implicitly 
pre-given before my thematical realisation. And since there is not yet any "realisation" 
that accounts for it, the existence of a backside remains merely emptily intended as a not- 
yet legitimised opinion that can always be disproven.
These opinions have an "obviousness" as their fundamental trait, despite or precisely 
because they are given and held in an unthematical manner. Opinions maintain their 
validity, however temporarily, because they are 'apparently' or 'obviously' true, just as the 
backside of the cup isx obviously existent. This side of the object exists in an unques­
tioned manner even though this co-intended rear side of the cup remains scientifically 
illegitimate - it is, after all, not given to the perceptions - and might, in fact, not survive 
closer scrutiny. It is the lifeworld that hosts its doxastic existence. It is the place, or 
perhaps the non-place, and the shelter for anything that has not yet been proven. In 
Husserl's words: "This lifeworld is nothing other than the world of the mere doxa [δόξα] 
that, traditionally, has been so contemptuously treated."14
Something odd is happening here. We know that "doxa" expresses the Platonistic 
complaint for the non-truth or untruthfulness, an anti-mythical gesture in a nutshell. Yet 
Blumenberg's Husserl, the present-day delegate of Platonism, betrays an unmistakably 
mythical undertone in his word choice, in his very last project to reinvigorate the long- 
suppressed "world of the mere doxa," which he christens as a worthy "lifeworld."
This is a mythical stance on Husserl's part, and the mythicality densifies when this 
lifeworld of the doxa transpires to be not just any ordinary man's quotidian life, but 
something deeper, something of, to use Goethe's word, the arcane Reich der "Mütter" 
[The Realm of "the Mothers"].15 This imagery of a subterranean matriarchy, which 
Husserl himself sometimes borrows,16 is invoked here to show a crucial feature of the 
lifeworld in a mythically pregnant way. And this feature is intrinsically related to 
Husserl's conception of a "genetic logic," as we shall see later.
This last word, "doxa," offers Blumenberg a peculiar approach to Husserlian phenom­
enology. Husserl uses this little but crucial word elsewhere, too, in Erfahrung und Urteil 
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
103

[Experience and Judgement], published posthumously in 1939 by Blumenberg's 
Doktorvater, Ludwig Landgrebe. Blumenberg finds this relatively less canonical book 
exceptionally important:
It was this work alone that kept the influence of phenomenology in its constant questions 
connected to the also rather obscure publication of the "Crisis" treatise by Arthur Liebert in 
Belgrade in 1936 and thus to the "lifeworld" theme.17
Experience and Judgement is indispensable for understanding Husserlian phenomenol­
ogy because it indicates the concealed relationship between the idea of the lifeworld and 
what Husserl calls the "genetic logic."18 This "genetic logic" aims to understand the pre- 
predicative cause or constitution of the predicative function of logical and judgmental 
operations, i.e., the genesis of logic in general. Replacing the "categorical intuition" with 
a thorough description of the formation of categories, this causal or genetic under­
standing reforms Husserl's phenomenological approach.
In Experience and Judgement, Husserl introduces the concept of genetic logic against 
a similar background as in Crisis: the oblivion of the natural sciences, and the accusation 
against the scientists means, here too, a rehabilitation of what has been taken as naive: "In 
opposition to this [exact-scientific] attitude, the retrogression to prepredicative experi­
ence and the insight into what is the deepest and ultimately original level of prepredica­
tive experience signifies a justification of doxa."19 It is thus the absence of "predications," 
ranging from language in general to theoretic constructions, that distinguishes the life­
world from whatever is built upon it. We need to reread Husserl's Crisis along this line as 
Blumenberg does. What matters now is not simply the lifeworld's foundational signifi­
cance but its 'negative foundationality,' as it were.
Husserl's genetic logic affirms that the lifeworld is indeed foundational because of its 
intuitive self-evidence, that it is the starting point of logic and theories. Yet this primal 
situation remains pre-predicative, pre-logical, speechless, uninformed, and necessarily 
so. It is a foundation that is ignorant of its foundationality. Only the genetic phenom­
enologist knows it as the foundation; he is equipped with "a reflection which rises above 
this naïveté."20
Because of its pre-predicativeness, the lifeworld, out of which all sciences come, is 
ultimately not to be reached by the sciences and their logos. It can be invented, thought, 
explained and analysed, esteemed as the foundation, but once thus conceptualised, it will 
never be experienced in its self-evidence again. Indeed, the inner tension of phenomen­
ological reality lies in the coinage of "phenomeno-logy". Logos requires language, while 
phenomena, which are by definition self-revealing, not only need no language but 
precisely provide the pre-predicative foundation for linguistic predication. A realistic 
theory in need of language seems unable to do justice to "things themselves" that need 
none. In short, phenomenology as a descriptive science faces the contradiction between 
concepts and phenomena, between description and "things themselves."
Only half seriously, Blumenberg defines the lifeworld "as a sphere of constant presence 
[Anwesenheit]." The succinctness of this formular, which is rare in Blumenberg's writings 
and which brings a touch of irony, contains an immanent critique of Husserl's 'meta­
physics of presence.' What Blumenberg eventually wants to say is that, in its constant 
presentness, the lifeworld becomes a pre-logical truth independent of or even opposite to 
the discursively established reality.
104
Y. LI

In Blumenberg's reading, the Husserlian notion of the lifeworld finds itself in 
an inborn struggle between presence and absence, i.e., between intuition and 
language: "The lifeworld is expressionless [ausdruckslos] for observers who neces­
sarily come from the outside."21 This enigmatic epithet ausdruckslos, "inexpres­
sive," no doubt mythical, brings to one's mind the image of a silent thing or 
a mute nature. Here, we have an unmatched figuration of the lifeworld as 
a wordless world with its many wordless beasts. If Husserl formulates the idea 
of "pre-predicativeness" as a foundation for predication, Blumenberg reads into it 
a deconstructive relation. The former has meant to bring the two titular notions 
into a relation, while the latter sets to reveal the negativity within it: logos signals 
the absence of presence. In so doing, Blumenberg turns the phenomenological 
concept of the lifeworld into a mythical status naturalis, "as the terminus a quo of 
history."22 Just like the Garden of Eden or the Hobbesian anarchical primaeval 
world, the lifeworld existed before human history and human logos came into 
shape, but as the liminal situation conditions them.
The lifeworld is, therefore, never the world we live in [. . .] But it is an indispensable liminal 
concept [Grenzbegriff] for the historical-philosophical self-consciousness of phenomenol­
ogy, through which the phenomenological reduction is legitimised as 'the other end' of 
history.23
Where does the lifeworld stand vis-à-vis the world, tout court, and vis-à-vis history? This 
is a much-debated question in Husserl scholarship. Iso Kern, for example, traces how 
Husserl himself changes the meaning of the lifeworld from an "unhistorical" world of 
pure intuitive experience to a world with "the experience of the actually present [aktuell], 
concrete, historical world, together with its cultural products and, hence, its concepts and 
sciences."24 However, if we consider Blumenberg's reading, there is in fact a third and 
equally sensible take on the lifeworld: it is temporally prior to our cultural world: 
a mythological world.
This possibility is implied in the book of Experience and Judgement itself, by 
whose mediation we access essential information, as Blumenberg notices: 
"Landgrebe's share in this advantage for authentic reception gives weight to his 
statement that Husserl carried out broad ethnological studies for his work on the 
'lifeworld' and corresponded with Lévy-Bruhl about this."25 On March 1st, 1935, 
Husserl sent a now famous letter to Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, a French anthropologist, 
where he relates his transcendental phenomenological project with the receiver's 
ethnographical research on the mythology of the primitives. The phenomenologist 
explains that he, too, aims to reveal "the universal taken-for-granted-ness [. . .] to be 
an obscurity [Unverständlichkeit], thus an enigma, a problem."26 Husserl under­
stands this universe of obviousness in its doxastic nature, naivety and lack of 
knowledge, and associating with his anthropologist colleague, Husserl finds 
a place for his lifeworld in the primitive world. It is perhaps an unintended 
message, but it, as we will see in Part II, will place Husserl's notion of the lifeworld 
upside down.
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
105

Excursion: The Novel, a not-yet mythical aesthetics of phenomenology
A decade before Crisis, the term "lifeworld" had appeared in one of Husserl's Kant 
lectures in 1924. "The world gained an infinite breadth as soon as the real lifeworld, 
the world in the How of experiential givenness was considered."27 "Infinity" is a crucial 
component of both the world and the lifeworld, as the definition is repeated later: 
"Observed in a purely transcendental manner, the world is [. . .] ultimately only an idea 
lying in infinity, which draws its purpose from the actuality of the life of consciousness."28 
This is still a transcendentalist's way of looking at the (life)world, before what Kern 
understands as Husserl's turn toward the cultural world. However, if one were to adopt 
a historicist position (one that Husserl would protest), Husserl's account itself appears to 
have a historical-cultural limitation: He is describing the world as it appears to 
a particular historical consciousness.
This manner of being conscious of the world will become less abstract and aestheti­
cally more tangible in Hans Blumenberg. In 1964, Blumenberg presented an essay on the 
literary genre of the novel, titled "The Concept of Reality and the Possibility of the 
Novel," at the first conference of the research group Poetik und Hermeneutik [Poetic and 
Hermeneutics]. Blumenberg's aim in this essay is to determine how the modern concept 
of reality makes the novel possible. This is at first an intellectual-historical study, but it 
gained a phenomenological touch when Dieter Henrich pointed out that the "reality" in 
Blumenberg's usage has much in common with Husserl's transcendental philosophy.29 
The remark was readily accepted by the author himself, who came to summarise his 
aesthetic theory of reality as a continuation of what he calls "historical 
phenomenology;"30 Its task is to reproduce the lifeworldly structure of the past epochs 
as expressed in the aesthetic language.
I will briefly present Blumenberg's account of reality: he provides a sweeping narrative 
that divides Western history into three major epochs, each of which has its own way of 
understanding reality, their "concept of reality" or Wirklichkeitsbegriff: Antiquity, the 
Middle Ages, and the Modern Age. The ancient Greeks have no doubt whatsoever when 
an appearance presents itself before them, or in any case, the appearance of an idea. 
"Plato unhesitatingly proceeds from the assumption that at the first sight of ideas, the 
human mind immediately and with total confidence realises that it is confronted with the 
ultimate and unsurpassable reality."31 The same undoubtedness also applies to the gods. 
The experience of self-evidence, which the modern science of phenomenology strives for, 
was within such a direct reach in antiquity that there seems to be a certain light- 
heartedness in the Greek notion of "belief."32 We shall return to this last point in the 
next section.
In contrast, Christians in the Middle Ages ground their reality and their world on 
the most secure foundation, namely God the ens realissimum (the most real thing). 
Although medieval believers seemed to inherit the concept of an unmistakable reality 
from the Greek gods, they now invested this status of realness in one single deity, 
namely God. This transition from polytheism to monotheism corresponds to 
a paradigmatic shift in the concept of reality. The easy and light-hearted access to 
reality gives way to a serious and, at times, painful verification process, whose final 
instance is God himself. Radically speaking, as Blumenberg points out, Descartes' 
method of the systematic doubt only 'secularise' the Christian concept of reality, 
106
Y. LI

where the cogito replaces God to reoccupy the same formal function of the latter as 
the guarantor, and, at the same time, harbingers the imminent invalidation of such 
a medieval concept of reality.33 However, Descartes was already standing on the 
threshold between the Middle Ages and modernity, where the "guaranteed" reality 
was on the brink of disappearing. Its final termination would force the human 
subjects to devise another new notion of realness.
This modern kind of reality is a horizon limitlessly open, "a progressive certainty 
which can never reach a total, final consistency."34 Blumenberg names this modern 
notion the "actualisation of a context in itself."35 Exploding both kinds of solidity in 
the ancient and medieval worlds, this reality assumes the contour of an open and 
inexhaustible context, with a meaning to be intersubjectively measured. Hence, it "has 
a sort of 'epic' structure, relating to the totality of a world that can never be completed or 
grasped in its entirety."36 After this third reality comes a fourth, but more on it shortly 
afterwards.
This third - and modern - notion of reality exhibits the same infinity that underlies the 
very idea of the world in Husserl's writings, and on it hinges the possibility of the novel.37 
"The concept of reality of the 'open' context legitimises the aesthetic quality of the novitas 
[novelty], the element of surprise and unfamiliarity, whereas 'guaranteed' reality does not 
allow anything new or unfamiliar to become real[. . .]"38 The novel claims reality by 
creating a context, a world, or at least an illusion of it: as "the most comprehensively 
'realistic' genre, representing a context which, though finite in itself, presumes and 
indicates infinity." However, since what the novel creates is only "indication" of infinity, 
it furnishes only the "formal proof of reality and not the material content."39 What the 
novelists create is not individual things down to their minutest details but rather 
a context, a 'formality,' that hosts a diversity of possible objects.
Blumenberg observes that 'perspective' is a handy tool to create novelistic reality in 
a formal sense. Blumenberg gives Honoré de Balzac as an example. "So far as I am aware, 
the novel first took on a perspective pattern with Balzac, whose cycle of novels creates the 
illusory reality of a whole human society through the recurrence of identical characters 
viewed from changing perspectives."40 The Human Comedy shows a mastery of the trick 
of such perspectivism: the protagonist of one story will appear again in another, only this 
time depicted from a different angle, as a minor role, for example. Reading these stories 
leaves a reader with an impression that she is actually moving around "the body of 
imaginary reality"41 in its opaque flesh. This was a vigorous and classic stage of the art of 
the novel. Yet simultaneously, it was already giving way to a yet newer kind of reality - 
although about this, Blumenberg only winks at us.
The last notion of reality, which follows the 'reality-as-context,' is 'reality-as- 
resistance.' In this understanding, only that appears real which offers the subject some 
obstructions or at least frictions, while a world where all wishes are granted seems a realm 
of dream and fantasy, thus unreality. Blumenberg does not assign a time to this notion, 
but presumably, it belongs to the modern or contemporary era because a number of 
figures from Jean le Rond D'Alembert to Werner Heisenberg are mentioned.42 Even 
though Blumenberg only proposes this fourth one en passant, one can notice 
a fascinating relation between it and 'reality-as-context.' There seems to be a self- 
deconstructive tendency lying within the idea of openness, which too easily disintegrates 
into a consciousness of fragmentariness.
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
107

This is because the openness of a context presents as many resources as obstacles. Its 
exclusively intersubjective measurability poses a challenge to intrasubjective capacities. 
Resistance appears when I become aware that my personal way of looking does not 
exhaust the possibility of an object; apart from the one side I have perceived, there are, at 
this very moment, others that stay at the rear side and out of my current reach. Even 
though I might have coherent contextual information about the world, this context is 
finite, just one of the many possible ways of looking at the world. The novelistic 
technique of perspectivism in Balzac and others hinges on the same trick: stories or 
characters appear real if a reader recognises that what she reads about them in written 
words does not exhaust them; they seem larger than mere words and fantasies but have 
their own independent life, part of which is hidden from view. The more they "defy total 
mastery,"43 the more they become real. The paradox lies in the fact that, if the ultimate 
goal of the novel is creating another world, then the very element of resistance, so very 
crucial for such a creation, already defeats that goal from the outset. The intimate - and 
inevitably dialectic - relation between reality-as-resistance and reality-as-context is 
confirmed by novelists' attempts to demonstrate the art of the novel by exhibiting its 
impossibility.44
Pushing Blumenberg's theory of the novel to its limit, one will notice an implied 
deconstruction on an aesthetic level: For a subject that stands before this every- 
actualizing context, the inexhaustible possibility implies as much expectation as resis­
tance. Making this point explicit has great bearing on the following discussions on 
mythology.
However, before we go any further, we should first recall the gist of Blumenberg's 
novel essay. He does not intend to supply a thorough 'theory of the novel.' Nor does he 
aim at a thorough historical account to explain how this modern genre of literature is 
related to other forms of narrative, such as lyric poetry, romance, or drama. And except 
for a few places, Blumenberg does not address other theories of the novel. His minimal 
purpose is to outline the condition of the possibility of the novel, in the sense of how it 
becomes "real" - i.e., compelling and convincing to its readers. What we have is 
a phenomenology of aesthetics at work behind what appears to be a historical account 
of the novel. The notion of reality itself is phenomenological, and its history amounts to, 
again, a "historical phenomenology."45 In the final analysis, this is a Blumenbergian 
phenomenology of the lifeworld:
My method to describe this elemental [notion of reality] seeks to become phenomenological, 
thus assuming the possibility of a historical phenomenology as an eidetic description. Such 
a would have as its object the same sustaining historical conditions, which, in Husserl's 
language, could be denoted as lifeworlds. And those conditions have a structural character 
which I bring out and preserve as the "concept of reality."46
Blumenberg substitutes the lifeworld with "reality". And if it is not mistaken to talk about 
a coincidentia oppositorum of reality-as-context and reality-as-resistance, by the same 
logic we will be able to find a similar deconstruction within the idea of the lifeworld as 
well. Here we will finally introduce the Blumenbergian concept of "myth," and again, it 
will be another pushing-to-the-limit of Blumenberg's mythological philosophy, 
a possibility that the author does not make explicit himself.
108
Y. LI

Part II: Myth and the Phenomenology of its Reception
One has an obvious reason to assign myths to antiquity, and to a certain degree, 
Blumenberg would agree with this common sense. However, if we look closer, there 
is much more to mythology than simply a past that has utterly passed. If it is 
a memory, it is a memory actively present in the human mind, and if it sounds 
untimely to contemporary ears, it is an untimeliness that recurs in the newest ages. 
There is an eloquent biographical fact: Blumenberg's intellectual life followed 
a movement against the grain; he 'returned' to myth after having treated modernity 
at length.47 His first systematic approach to the philosophy of myth occurred after 
the essay on the novel, in "Wirklichkeitsbegriff und Wirkungspotential des Mythos," 
a long essay that contains the embryo of Work on Myth. By the time Blumenberg 
wrote this piece, seven years had passed since the essay on the novel, and five since 
Legitimacy of Modern Age. This retrograde step toward the premodern age, to the 
ancient literary phenomenon of myth, can only appear subversive and genuinely 
deconstructive.
Although "myth" is perhaps indefinable, we can have a closer understanding by 
looking at three interconnected aspects in Blumenberg's philosophy of mythology. The 
one that sets the basic tone is Blumenberg's challenge of the conventional opposition 
between myth and reason, "Mythos" and "Logos," reevaluating the function and value of 
myth as indispensable to reason.48 Second, while Blumenberg takes down the dichotomy 
between myth and reason, a new distinction appears: with its light-heartedness and lack 
of univocity, mythos counters the dead weight of dogmas. Myths notoriously forgo the 
demand for technicality and fixed meanings, and their typical narrative structure allows 
for multiple interpretations.49 Third, such openness to interpretation will necessarily lead 
to a dynamic understanding of myth. For Blumenberg, the mythic undergoes a constant 
metamorphosis in its reception. Received and retold over time, myths undergo variations 
and transformations, a dynamic process of becoming - about this last point we are yet to 
discuss.
Myth is not merely one possibility among many to render the lifeworld in linguistic 
form but perhaps the very kind of language closest to the phenomenological notion of 
lifeworld. Myth seems particularly intimate with the state of prelogicity, the notion 
Lucien Lévy-Bruhl invented to describe the "mythology of the primitives."50 And it is 
with this ethnographic notion, Blumenberg reminds us, that Husserl aligns his ideas 
about the lifeworld. In a twofold sense, we can talk about a "lifeworldliness" of myth: 
myth as an aesthetic expression of lifeworld, and lifeworld itself as a mythic notion.
Blumenberg's reasoning seems to support the idea that myth belongs to the ancient 
past of human history: "Only myth can offer reality in such an inconsistency of self- 
evidence that is only instantaneous and not to be grasped in context."51 Mythology defies 
the modern principle of a coherent context and produces a sense of realness by resorting 
to the ancient notion of "instantaneous evidence." A pregnant appearance, such as 
a pattern or a godhead, satisfies one's quest for meaning and quiets the drive to ask 
further questions. Myth discourages or distracts any attempt to get to the bottom of its 
mysteries. If we were to hold this progressivist view, the conflicts between the novel and 
myth in their concepts of reality could be explained away by the natural process of 
historical transformation.
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
109

Nevertheless, even though there is an obvious gap between the two genres (if myth is 
a genre at all), this difference is, in fact, more subtle than it seems. Myth is perhaps not 
modern, but it has a quasi-modern character:
Myth is not a context but a framing [Rahmen], into which things can be interpolated; Herein 
consists its capability for integration, its function as 'pattern' [Muster] and outline, which it 
still possesses as a merely transparent remnant of familiarity.52
"Framing" or Rahmen is a somewhat arbitrary word choice, and it is only arbitrarily 
distinguished from a context. This difference hinges on the minimal need for coherence, 
or Einstimmigkeit, which is a fundamental trait of Husserl's phenomenological concept of 
world (and lifeworld) and Blumenberg's third kind of reality.53 A novelist is responsible 
for retaining coherence when using techniques such as perspectivism.
In contrast, the realness of mythology, premised on the structure of a frame, distin­
guishes itself by certain "inconsistency of self-evidence." A frame seems to be organised 
in a much looser way than in a context, and some contradictions between its constituents 
seem excusable. This is a minimalism that will afford a mythologist much narrative 
freedom for a greater number of distinctive, far-fetching and whimsical situations. For 
example, once the figure and the motive of Prometheus settle down - become an 
acknowledged setting - his image metamorphosises from a divine dissenter to a forger 
of the human race, a new despot (Goethe), a Parisian (Gide), or a stone (Kafka).54 For 
a framing to be effective, there is just one minimal criterion: familiarity. Mythic writings 
require nothing but a more or less clear and more or less accurate mental image of 
Prometheus and his deeds; On this basis alone, however inadequate, further develop­
ments proceed. But what is familiarity in this sense, if not a presupposed and potentially 
doxastic, pregivenness of validity? No question is posed, and no critical scrutiny is 
considered necessary before that which appears familiar - a thing, a person, or an idea. 
This is perhaps why there is trust [vertrauen], however innocent and naive, in the 
German word for familiarity [vertraut]. In this aspect, myth and the mechanism of its 
writing resemble the lifeworld in its unquestionability or "obviousness."
Granted, framing requires the act of writing just as a context does. However, unlike the 
framing, the context can be created ex nihilo in an artistic way - a realist like Balzac does 
not need to build his stories on any preexistent writings. In contrast, one cannot create 
a myth completely anew, straight out of the depth of subjectivity. New mythic accounts 
draw from older ones the stories' "significance" [Bedeutsamkeit], which means their 
credibility and the appearance of "reality." Myth writes upon the frame, which is not itself 
a readable text but becomes readable upon reception.
It is precisely by the act of reception that myth creates familiarity. When "interpolat­
ing," applying, manipulating - and fleshing out - the "pattern" and outline, the act of 
reception actualises the writing of a text. This mythic writing completes the potential of 
a mythic figure, which utilises this figure's familiarity and, in turn, increases it. Reception 
is not an act that follows the text of mythology but an integral part of its nature, the text 
itself. Myth is reception. "It is clear how the problems of genuine mythology, mytholo­
gical reception and ultimately the possibility of remythization are structurally related."55
Blumenberg's idea of 'myth-as-reception' implies a peculiar temporality: myth is 
neither utterly old nor utterly new, but rather a recurring progress, a present-through- 
retardation, a constant lapse, or to use Derrida's word, a "trace."56
110
Y. LI

The history does not proceed according to the diachronic sequences of what is not yet, what 
is and what is no more, but in synchronic parataxes and hypotaxes. There is no final triumph 
of consciousness over its abysses.57
Triumph over abysses is promised and attempted time and again, yet what humans can 
actually achieve is preventing of the terror from setting in, or deferring the coming-back 
of the primordial abysses. This echoes the Derridean notion of trace but reverses it 
simultaneously: While Derrida's protowriting "is at work at the origin of sense,"58 
Blumenberg's keeps this "original sense" away, and leaves it as a permanent trace. 
Blumenberg's mythology is not purely history, because myth is a past that keeps return­
ing to the present mind. Let us return to this quote: "Only myth can offer reality in such 
an inconsistency of self-evidence that is only instantaneous and not to be grasped in 
context."59 The way Blumenberg phrased it is peculiar. The notion of "context" is not 
formulated as a superior latecomer replacing the old reality concept. The latter seems to 
be claiming its own rights, values, and independence against the former. Mythology has 
a certain synchronicity that resists the diachronic account of the history of 
Wirklichkeitsbegriff neatly laid out in the novel essay. Even in an age where reality only 
consists in the context, there is a mythic production of self-evidence that breaches the 
framework: a credo quia absurdum that happens perpetually.
The title of the text before us is revealing. There is an eloquent symmetry between the 
title of this essay on myth and the one on the novel. With Wirklichkeitsbegriff as 
a common factor, the theory of the novel centres on the possibility of this literary 
genre, i.e., the condition of its historical emergence, while the philosophy of mythology 
thematises myth's "Wirkungspotential," its potential claim of validity and effect. Myths 
keep repeating and renewing themselves in modern times. They maintain their 
Wirkungspotential in an era when no longer seems possible. In the essay on myth, 
modern writers' reenactment of the significance of ancient myths by producing their 
own mythopoetic works was mentioned strategically, although en passant, and would 
soon be made into a significant topic in Work on Myth. The notion of "potential," which 
suggests myth's possibility of returning, undermines the neat diachronicity in the novel 
essay and replaces it with synchronicity.
The myth's synchronicity and persistence in human consciousness are to be rendered 
intelligible by a phenomenology of myth and its transmission. To comprehend myth's 
"potential," we must examine the experiential basis of this literary expression: how it is an 
offset against the consciousness of terror, or the "absolutism of reality," as Blumenberg 
calls it in Work on Myth. Here, the phenomenology of the lifeworld will again assist us in 
determining the ever-actual significance of mythos.
Although the phenomenological title of the "lifeworld" can describe an unquestioned 
basis of reality for both the novel and myth, it is bound much more closely with myth 
than any modern genre. It is interesting to notice how the lifeworld is mythologically 
explicated, such as with Plato's myth of the cave: The cave itself, namely the subterranean 
world of the shadows, is the proper representation of Husserl's lifeworld.60
Earlier we discussed the doxastic nature of the lifeworld. This feature centres on the 
contrast between the lifeworld as "the sole universe of what is pregiven as obvious" and 
predication or language in general. If, in this negative relation, the lifeworld is depicted as 
a situation prior to logos, we have before us a commonsensical mythic and primaeval 
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
111

scene. Blumenberg must also have this scene in mind, and his idea of the lifeworld is 
intimately related to that of mythology. However, if we take the term "myth" seriously, in 
a way Blumenberg does, this 'mythology of the lifeworld' will assume a different 
character.
The lifeworld to be taken on for the genetic phenomenology has always been a deserted 
situation, which is not only to be interpreted through an analogy with the myth of the lost 
paradise [. . .] It is also always the escape or the expulsion from one world-familiarity 
[Weltvertrautheit], which is probably untenable, into another, which is expected to be 
more tenable.61
What is intriguing here is that the lifeworld is "not only" mythical past but "also always" 
at the present - a presence which nonetheless has an essentially transient character, 
caught between the movement of "escape-expulsion," an incessant displacement from 
one lifeworld into another. This notion of lifeworld hides an ambivalent double attitude: 
a melancholic glance at a carefree world and a sober reorientation toward a new one.
The image of escape-expulsion complicates what we said about the inherently recep­
tive nature of mythology. Mythological reception is ultimately not a neutral continuation 
of a previous myth; it fulfils a more vital function. If human existence implies voluntary 
or involuntary flight, mythic writing serves to find such refuge and helps one orient in an 
exilic situation. Moreover, and more importantly, the new myth draws a closure to the 
old one, even though it is on the latter's basis that the latecomer develops itself. In other 
words, while developing a certain myth, reception also brings something to an end, be it 
the previous version, or the lifeworldly situation implied in this previous version. This 
"bring-to-the-end" or Zuendebringen is the hallmark Blumenberg assigns to mythology. 
It means the final completion of the implied significance contained in a myth.
I call it: bringing the myth to an end. That means not only renewing, accumulating and 
increasing its significance - or whatever you want to call its impact potential - but also 
presenting it purely.62
Such 'purification' amounts to a demythologisation. Blumenberg's concept of 
Zuendebringen gives a twist to his philosophy of mythology: There is a double act 
contained within the writing of myth: receiving and - simultaneously - terminating. 
The ultimate completion of a myth closes the case by exhausting all the potential in 
a story or summarising its core message most comprehensively. This happens when 
a mythologist looks back at a type of narrative, and examines and formulates its condition 
of possibility: it is when the story ceases and the theory begins. A preeminent example is 
Nietzsche's mythical denomination, "Eternal Return," with which a particular nature of 
mythology finds its apt formulation.63
The notion of "Zuendebringen" harbours two existential messages: one that invites 
rhetoric back to the lifeworld, and one that motivates us to reflect anew on Adorno's 
dictum. Both are premised on a genuine post-Husserlian (revisionist) phenomenology of 
Blumenberg's. "A phenomenology of the reception of myth must make the range 
between the extreme values terror and poetry understandable."64 These two poles, 
which Blumenberg pulls together, have been determined by the two significant directions 
that philosophy of mythology has taken since modern times: Myth was either demonised 
as an expression of fear and fright at the primaeval stages of human history or taken as 
112
Y. LI

a poetic-creative force of humanity. While Vico (the grounding father of philosophical 
mythology as a modern subject) and the Romantics such as Friedrich Schlegel opted for 
the latter, thinkers in the enlightened (or post-enlightened) and critical tradition, above 
all Cassirer and Adorno, are named as proponents for the former.65
Blumenberg's myth is the play between the two extremes, navigating between the 
gravest and the lightest without completely conforming with any of them. Myth is neither 
a pure expression of horror nor one of carefree imagination. The meaning and evidence 
that myth produces in an instantaneous manner will be lost as soon as myth stands still, 
forgoing its poetic creativity or losing sight of the terror as its reference point. 
A phenomenology of myth, which is simultaneously a phenomenology of its reception, 
needs to capture this very movement.
This midway philosophy of mythology starts from a straightforward anthropological 
premise: the primaeval humans were ill-adopted creatures surrounded by terror indeed, 
which Blumenberg would later call "absolutism of reality" in Work on Myth. To repeat, 
however, instead of themselves being the representation or portrayal of terror, myths are 
instead a device meant for one to distance oneself with such an overwhelming anxiety. By 
writing stories, human beings identify the obscure, name the unnameable, and hold the 
inhospitable divine powers in check. This therapeutic and apotropaic function comes to 
the aid of humanity that constantly finds itself in exilic situations, in either "escape or 
expulsion." Although not a real defence for physical dangers, mythology nonetheless 
offers a worthy consolation.
Projection of a process that has taken place over time [. . .] which has depotentiated the 
initial horrors of the overpowering and, by 'downplaying' the sanctions and constraints, has 
finally brought about the poetic itself, or at least the disposition to it.66
The consolation of mythology that works against the "initial horrors" of the overpower­
ing is built on a basic notion: humans need consolation due to lack of adaptability.67 The 
paleoanthropological premise in the first chapter of Work on Myth, is that primaeval 
humans, having migrated from the rain forest to the savanna, began to have before them 
a menacing empty horizon.68 The deprivation of a secure and enclosed environment 
invites possible dangers from all four corners of the world. Against this backdrop, myths, 
stories, and theories are all existential attempts to fill up the empty horizon, and 
anticipate or "downplay" the unknown dangers. They are symbolic achievements that 
establish an apparent order, a reference of meaning.
Unlike Isaiah Berlin's claim that myths (as well as other sweeping narratives) "may 
comfort us for a while, but will betray us cruelly in the end,"69 the Blumenbergian myth 
provides a lasting consolation. This endurance does not stem from such a myth being 
more solid and reliable as an explanatory framework, for myth provides no dogma. On 
the contrary, its worth lies in being the product of a particular type of human endeavour: 
as an expression of a certain freedom.
Blumenberg asks: "But couldn't the relation between chaos and fantasy also indicate 
a secondary freedom that is only realised through overcoming and sublation?"70 Poetry 
surfaced only as a confrontation of the terror, as an effort to bring it to an end. Men have 
at their disposal not any absolute freedom - something of that sort only belongs to the 
divine being - but a "secondary freedom," a freedom made possible by the act of reception 
as a hieroglyphic trace of the original.
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
113

The playfulness of myth not only eschews the seriousness that gets to the bottom of 
things but strives to terminate this seriousness altogether. Re-enacting the ancient 
experience of reality, myth satisfies itself with "instantaneous self-evidence" at some 
point and stops asking further questions. By this quasi-instantaneity, the mythic act of 
reception creates a distance that "does not present the unattainable as the real thing, the 
overpowering as something to be loved."71 And it is truly a mythical achievement that 
such self-evidence is produced not by perception, but by words.
In this sense, myth is an inauthenticity that attempts to restore a lifeworldly situation, 
at a time when people already forgot not only the existence of this lifeworld in the distant 
past, but the fact that it has long been ruined. It is a paradox of the myth that this kind of 
writing, precisely by transforming the "pattern" into a text, both actualises and conceals 
the figure it writes about. The received and rewritten mythological form exists no more, 
and its validity has lost its living self-evidence, turning into a mere word of imagination. 
The Blumenbergian work on myth is a work toward concealment and forgetfulness, or in 
Heideggerian parlance, toward inauthenticity. In analogy to the Heideggerian 
Seinsgeschichte, the distantiation is a procedure of forgetfulness, of moving away from 
the beginning:
The forgetting of the "original meanings" is the technique of myth constitution itself - and, 
at the same time, the reason why mythology is only ever encountered as 'transitioned into 
reception.' The phenomenology of reception absorbs what is supposedly "active" in this.72
This highly rhetorical device of mythology displays what seems a 'Promethean' under­
taking: the creation of a new world. Only that unlike in the novel, myth only borrows 
a world from before. The earliest mythical scenes, like that of the Garden of Eden, indeed 
provide the aptest prototype for the idea of the lifeworld, but they do not have the final 
words. Instead, the lifeworld has been time and again reinvented, "received," at the same 
time when myths were received and rewritten. The grandiose picture of a new world is 
the vanishing point and an unexpressed desideratum of this lifeworldly mythology, 
although never its actual project.
Contrary to what Adorno says about poetry, Blumenberg still holds onto the possibi­
lity of what can be called a 'mythological humanism,' and "the humanity of myth is 
something that comes later, and already a loss of the immediate proximity to the original 
horrors."73 Mythopoetry does not have to be barbaric after catastrophe because it is never 
its exact opposite: Even in its most cheerful expression, one can fathom a cruel under­
tone. And contrary to what Husserl says about naivety, the lifeworld has a language after 
all, its own myth and rhetoric. Mythical narratives and rhetoric are endeavours to 
rejuvenate and recapture the lifeworld when it seems no longer possible.
Notes
1. Adorno, "Cultural Criticism and Society," 34.
2. See, for example, Plato, Republic, 382d.
3. Husserl, Crisis, 285.
4. Hetzel, "Lob der Uneigentlichkeit," 40; All translation from German sources are mine.
5. Ibid.
6. "Anthropological Approach to Rhetoric," 222.
114
Y. LI

7. "Theory of Nonconceptuality," 269. The conflation of aesthetics and rhetoric appears in 
Gadamer, too: "But then we need to be aware that what was later called 'aesthetics' and what 
has been called 'poetry' since antiquity, were encompassed within rhetoric." ("Ritual und 
Sprache," 406.)
8. See Haverkamp's remark in Boden and Zill eds., Rückblick, 254.
9. Niehues-Pröbsting, "Phenomenology and Rhetoric."
10. Cf. Zambon, "Lebenswelt und Zeitlichkeit" and Bernet, "Differenz und Anwesenheit."
11. Husserl, Crisis, 127.
12. Ibid., 59.
13. Ibid., 180.
14. Husserl, Hua VI, 465. The appendix XVIII, to which this quotation belongs, is not incorpo­
rated in Carr's translation.
15. Goethe, MA 18.1, 155.
16. See, for example, Husserl's letter to Arnold Metzger on September 4th, 1919, in Briefwechsel 
4, 420.
17. Blumenberg, "Lebensweltmißverständnis," 42.
18. Ibid.
19. Husserl, Experience and Judgement, 46; Italic original.
20. Husserl, Crisis, 59.
21. Blumenberg "Lebensweltmißverständnis," 59-60.
22. Blumenberg, Theorie der Lebenswelt, 164.
23. Ibid., 165.
24. Kern, "The Lifeworld," 221-2. See also Zambon and Buch, "Vorwort," 10-11.
25. Blumenberg, "Lebensweltmißverständnis," 42.
26. Husserl, "Letter to Lévy-Bruhl," 353; Italics original. On Husserl's letter, see Moran and 
Steinacher, "Introduction."
27. Husserl, HUA VII, 232.
28. Ibid., 274; Emphasis original.
29. Jauss ed., Nachahmung und Illusion, 225.
30. Ibid., 226.
31. Blumenberg, "Possibility of the Novel," 501.
32. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 335.
33. Blumenberg, "Possibility of the Novel," 512.
34. Ibid., 504.
35. Ibid., 503.
36. Ibid., 504.
37. "It has rightly been pointed out that this 'reality-as-context' is the concept of reality of 
Husserl's phenomenology." Ibid., 503).
38. Ibid., 504.
39. Ibid., 516.
40. Ibid., 518.
41. Ibid., 519.
42. Ibid., 506.
43. Ibid., 519.
44. "[By] demonstrating the impossibility of the novel, a novel becomes possible." Blumenberg, 
"Possibility of the Novel," 518.
45. Jauss ed., Nachahmung und Illusion, 226.
46. Ibid.; Italics original.
47. Jürgen Habermas (one of Blumenberg's closest colleagues) still holds on to this view in his 
latest work: "Previsouly, Blumenberg had defended the legitimacy of the modern age [. . .] 
only himself to veer off into the rhetoric of 'work on myth[.]" Habermas, Also a History, 17.
48. See, for example, Blumenberg, Work on Myth, 27.
49. Ibid., 215-262.
50. Husserl, "Letter to Lévy-Bruhl," 356.
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
115

51. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 347.
52. Ibid., 383.
53. See note 34 above and Husserl, HUA VII, 273: "the World, the universe of possible coherent 
experience."
54. Blumenberg, Work on Myth, 627-637.
55. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 381.
56. Derrida, "The Voice," 85f.
57. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 345.
58. Derrida, "The Voice," 85.
59. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 347.
60. Blumenberg, Theorie der Lebenswelt, 165.
61. Blumenberg, "Lebensweltmißverstädnis," 54.
62. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 355-356.
63. Ibid.
64. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 392.
65. Ibid., 331-332.
66. Ibid., 392.
67. Moxter, "Trost."
68. Blumenberg, Work on Myth, 4.
69. "Historical Inevitability," 101.
70. Blumenberg, "Mythos," 333.
71. Ibid., 395.
72. Ibid., 382.
73. Ibid., 358.
Acknowledgements
The author is grateful to Professor Willem Styfhals and Professor Kirk Wetters for their support 
and feedback.
Disclosure Statement
The author declares that he has no relevant or material financial interests that relate to the research 
described in this paper.
Notes on contributor
Yutong Li is a PhD student at the Institute of Philosophy of KU Leuven, Belgium.
Bibliography
Adorno, Theodor W. "Cultural Criticism and Society." In Prisms, 17-34. Translated by 
Samuel Weber and Shierry Weber. Cambridge (Mass.): The MIT Press, 1967.
Berlin, Isaiah. "Historical Inevitability." In Liberty, 94-165. Edited by Henry Hardy. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2008.
Bernet, Rudolf. "Differenz und Anwesenheit. Derridas und Husserls Phänomenologie der Sprache, 
der Zeit, der Geschichte, der wissenschaftlichen Rationalität." Phänomenologische Forschungen. 
Phenomenological studies. Recherches phénoménologiques 18 (1986): 51-112.
Blumenberg, Hans. Work on Myth. Translated by Robert M. Wallace. Cambridge (Mass.): MIT 
Press, 1985.
116
Y. LI

Blumenberg, Hans. "Lebensweltmißverständnis." In Lebenszeit und Weltzeit, 7-68. Frankfurt am 
Main: Suhrkamp, 1986.
Blumenberg, Hans. The Legitimacy of the Modern Age. Translated by Robert M. Wallace. 
Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press, 1995.
Blumenberg, Hans. "Wirklichkeitsbegriff und Wirkungspotential des Mythos." In Ästhetische und 
metaphorologische Schriften, edited by Anselm Haverkamp. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 
2001.
Blumenberg, Hans. Theorie der Lebenswelt. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2010.
Blumenberg, Hans. "An Anthropological Approach to the Contemporary Significance of 
Rhetoric." In History, Metaphors, Fables: A Hans Blumenberg Reader, edited by 
Hannes Bajohr, Florian Fuchs and Joe Paul Kroll, 177-208. Ithaca (N.Y.): Cornell University 
Press, 2020.
Blumenberg, Hans. "The Concept of Reality and the Possibility of the Novel." In History, 
Metaphors, Fables: A Hans Blumenberg Reader, edited by Hannes Bajohr, Florian Fuchs and 
Joe Paul Kroll, 499-524. Ithaca (N.Y.): Cornell University Press, 2020.
Blumenberg, Hans. "Theory of Nonconceptuality." In History, Metaphors, Fables: A Hans 
Blumenberg Reader, edited by Hannes Bajohr, Florian Fuchs and Joe Paul Kroll, 259-297. 
Ithaca (N.Y.): Cornell University Press, 2020.
Boden, Petra, and Rüdiger Zill eds. Poetik und Hermeneutik im Rückblick. Interviews mit 
Beteiligten. Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink, 2017.
Derrida, Jacques. "The Voice that Keeps Silent." In Speech and Phenomena and Other Essays on 
Husserl's Theory of Signs. Translated by David B. Allison. Evanston: Northwestern University 
Press, 1973.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. "Zur Phänomenologie von Ritual und Sprache." In Gesammelte Werke. 
Band 8. Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 1999.
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang. Sämtliche Werke nach Epochen seines Schaffens. Müncher Ausgabe. 
Band 18.1 [Collected Works by Chronological Order. Munich Edition. Volume 18.1]. Edited by 
Karl Richter. Munich: Carl Hanser Verlag, 1997.
Habermas, Jürgen. Also a History of Philosophy. Volume 1: The Project of a Genealogy of 
Postmetaphysical Thinking. Translated by Ciaran Cronin. Cambridge: Polity Press, 2023.
Hetzel, Andreas. "Lob der Uneigentlichkeit. Blumenberg und die Rhetorik." Journal 
Phänomenologie 35 (2011): 36-51.
Husserl, Edmund. The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology: An 
Introduction to Phenomenological Philosophy. Translated by David Carr. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1970.
Husserl, Edmund. Experience and Judgement: Investigations in a Genealogy of Logic. Translated by 
James S. Churchill and Karl Ameriks. Edited by Ludwig Landgreben. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul, 1973.
Husserl, Edmund. Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die Transzendentale 
Phänomenologie. Eine Einleitung in die phänomenologische Philosophie [The Crisis of 
European 
Sciences 
and 
Transcendental 
Phenomenology: 
An 
Introduction 
to 
Phenomenological Philosophy]. Husserliana. Gesammelte Werke 6. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff, 1976.
Husserl, Edmund. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological 
Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure Phenomenology. Translated by 
F. Kersten. The Hague: Marginus Nijhoff Publishers, 1983.
Husserl, Edmund. Erste Philosophie 1923/24. Erster Teil [First Philosophy (1923/24). Part One]. 
Husserliana. Gesammelte Werke 7. The Hague: Nijhoff, 1987.
Husserl, Edmund. Briefwechsel. 4: Freiburger Schüler [Correspondence. Volume 4: Freiburg 
Students]. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993.
Husserl, Edmund. "Letter to Lévy-Bruhl (1935)." The New Yearbook for Phenomenology and 
Phenomenological Philosophy VIII (2008): 349-354.
Jauss, Hans Robert, ed. Nachahmung und Illusion. Munich: Fink, 1969.
JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY
117

Kern, Iso. "The Lifeworld, both as a Problem Concerning the Foundation of the Objective Sciences 
and as a Problem Concerning Universal Being and Truth." In Bernet, Rudolf, Iso Kern, and 
Eduard Marbach. An Introduction to Husserlian Phenomenology, 217-228, and Lester Embree. 
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1993.
Moran, Dermot, and Lukas Steinacher. "Husserl's Letter to Lévy-Bruhl: Introduction." The New 
Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy VIII (2008): 325-347.
Moxter, Michael. "Trost." In Blumenberg lesen, edited by Robert R. Buch and Daniel Weidner, 
337-349. Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2014.
Niehues-Pröbsting, Heinrich. "Phenomenology and Rhetoric." In Blumenberg's Rhetoric, edited by 
DS Mayfield, 3-26. Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter, 2023.
Plato, Republic. Translated by G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis/Cambridge: Hackett Publishing 
Company.
Vatter, Miguel. 2019. ""Only a God Can Resist a God." Political Theology between Polytheism and 
Gnosticism." Political Theology 20 (6): 472-497.
Zambon, Nicola. "Lebenswelt und Zeitlichkeit. Blumenbergs genetische Phänomenologie des 
Zeitbewusstseins in Auseinandersetzung mit Husserl." In Hans Blumenberg und die 
Phänomenologie, edited by Robert R. Buch and Nicola Zambon, 17-38. Hamburg: Meiner, 2024.
Zambon, Nicola, and Robert R. Buch, "Vorwort." In Hans Blumenberg und die Phänomenologie, 
edited by Robert R. Buch and Nicola Zambon, 5-16. Hamburg: Meiner, 2024.
118
Y. LI

