Philosophical Psychology
ISSN: 0951-5089 (Print) 1465-394X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cphp20
Experiencing timelessness and the
phenomenology of temporal ﬂow
Paweł Gładziejewski
To cite this article: Paweł Gładziejewski (19 Dec 2024): Experiencing timelessness
and the phenomenology of temporal ﬂow, Philosophical Psychology, DOI:
10.1080/09515089.2024.2444508
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2024.2444508
Published online: 19 Dec 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 161
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphp20

Experiencing timelessness and the phenomenology of 
temporal flow
Paweł Gładziejewski
Department of Cognitive Science, Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, Toruń, Poland
ABSTRACT
Our conscious experience seemingly involves the subjective 
sense or feeling of the passage of time. However, in recent 
years, several authors have denied that such an aspect or 
feature of experience can be found. If the experience of the 
flow of time exists, it remains elusive and intangible. My aim 
here is to try to pin it down. For this purpose, I will investigate 
acute disturbances of normal temporal experience that 
accompany deep meditative and psychedelic states. I will 
argue that these experiences of altered temporality provide 
phenomenal contrast cases to ordinary passage phenomen­
ology, allowing us to establish the existence of the latter and 
making it amenable to theorizing.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 26 July 2024  
Accepted 13 December 2024 
KEYWORDS 
Eternalism/presentism; 
global states of 
consciousness; flow of time; 
psychedelics; phenomenal 
contrast; meditation
1. Introduction
This paper centers on the idea that conscious experience involves, as part of 
its phenomenal character, the sense of the flow of time, of relentless move­
ment of becoming and fading. Recently, this seemingly platitudinous claim 
has become an object of critical scrutiny. A number of authors have 
attempted to establish whether the feeling of temporal passage can be 
identified with or reduced to a (subset of) intentional content of conscious 
perception. This body of work suggests a negative conclusion. For reasons 
that I will discuss later, the phenomenology of temporal passage resists the 
attempts to reduce it to an experience of continuous qualitative change, 
succession, motion, or to how people perceptually track the identities of 
objects across time (see Torrengo, 2017; for related discussions, see; Balcells,  
2019; Braddon-Mitchell, 2013; Deng, 2019; Frischhut, 2015; Hoerl, 2014; 
Prosser, 2016). Perhaps the experience of flow is something sui generis, 
separate from those intentional contents. If so, it remains intangible and 
elusive. Or maybe it is simply a mistake to think that there is such an 
experience in the first place.
CONTACT Paweł Gładziejewski 
pawel.gla@umk.pl 
Department of Cognitive Science, Nicolaus 
Copernicus University in Toruń, Gagarina 39, 87-100, Poland
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY                         
https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2024.2444508
© 2024 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 

Carefully reflecting upon my own experience, I am strongly inclined to 
think that it involves an admittedly elusive, dynamic aspect that constitutes 
the feeling of the passage of time. Of course, my personal introspection- 
based convictions can only go so far as evidence. Here, I will aim to try to 
put a pin on the relevant experience by employing a sort of phenomenal 
contrast argument. That is, I will try to establish plausible phenomenal 
contrast cases in which (1) the ordinary experience of temporal passage is 
radically altered to the point of altogether disappearing; (2) the relevant 
contrast to ordinary experience cannot be attributed to factors that we could 
mistake for the experience of temporal flow (for example, it cannot be 
accounted for by the changes to perceptual contents related to change or 
motion). Let us call such contrast cases "experiences of timelessness". 
Establishing the existence of such exotic experiences should indirectly 
demonstrate that ordinary phenomenology does involve a sense of flow. 
Perhaps this way, we could bring the ordinary flow phenomenology to 
a clearer view so that we may get on with the business of theorizing about 
what it is.
But how can we establish convincing cases of conscious states that lack 
the sense of the passage of time? Can we even comprehend what it would be 
like to undergo such states? I propose that plausible candidates for experi­
ences of timelessness can be found if we extend the search space to cover 
territories that have been largely uncharted by analytic philosophy,1 namely 
non-ordinary states of consciousness of the sort induced by long-term 
meditation practice or ingesting psychedelic compounds.
The plan is as follows. In section 2, I summarize why the flow phenom­
enology resists being reduced to perceptual content and use this as a guide 
for further discussion. In section 3, I discuss the notion of global states of 
consciousness and how they can be used in phenomenal contrast argu­
ments. Section 4 investigates experiences of timelessness associated with 
meditation and psychedelic use, arguing that they constitute plausible con­
trast cases to the ordinary experience of flow. In section 5, I sketch out how 
such considerations can (1) inform the debate over the source of the 
commonsense metaphysical beliefs about temporal passage and (2) guide 
hypotheses regarding the nature of the ordinary experience of flow.
2. The search for the phenomenology of temporal flow
The trickiness of the problem at hand stems from the fact that although it 
may seem self-evident that we experience temporal passage, the concrete 
nature of this experience tends to evade our attempts to catch it introspec­
tively and describe it. Here, I want to focus on a particular and recently 
influential strategy of specifying the experience of temporal flow.2 Following 
other authors, I will call this approach "reductive" (Hoerl, 2014; Torrengo,  
2
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

2017). The core idea is that we experience temporal passage because our 
conscious perception represents it or represents its intentional objects as 
undergoing such passage. Put differently, the experience of temporal pas­
sage constitutes a subset of the intentional content of conscious perception. 
Given this general assumption, the next step is to specify the relevant 
content, that is, content with which the experience of passage can be 
identified or to which it can reduced. The natural candidates include con­
tents related to qualitative change, motion, succession, duration or contents 
representing the objects of perception as persisting through change. In this 
section, I will summarize the main arguments that underlie the growing 
consensus that this content-reductive approach is a dead end. However, my 
overarching aim is positive. I want to treat the failure of the reductive 
strategy as instructive: by showing where not to look for passage, it can 
indirectly guide the search for a more plausible account.
The core problem with the reductive projects is that they seem descrip­
tively inaccurate. In particular, they fail to pick out the relevant contents in 
a way that accurately distinguishes between the experiences that involve the 
phenomenology of passage and ones that do not (see also Torrengo, 2017). 
If flow phenomenology is reducible to a particular kind of content, then an 
experience lacking this content (or appropriately modified with respect to 
this kind of content) should count as an experience that lacks the subjective 
flow of time (or one in which such flow is significantly altered). This is just 
not the case for the plausible candidate contents.
Take the classic slogan that we become acquainted with the passage of 
time when we focus on the visibly moving hand of the clock as opposed to 
the one that looks static. A straightforward rebuttal here is that despite not 
visibly moving, the latter hand is also experienced as undergoing temporal 
flow. Or, the experience of the static hand has the same dynamic temporal 
character as the experience of the moving hand. The relevant experiences 
simply do not differ in terms of the phenomenology of temporal passage.
This simple observation extends to other types of content to which one 
might want to reduce the phenomenal passage. Suppose one opts to claim 
that an experience lacks the sense of temporal flow if it represents change in 
a way that lacks smoothness or continuity of an appropriate kind. That is, an 
experience without subjective flow would consist of a succession of discrete 
snapshots abruptly following one another. However, the problem of 
descriptive inadequacy reappears, as experiencing a sequence of discontin­
uous snapshots can be easily thought of as involving phenomenal flow: time 
subjectively flows even when our visual world becomes disjointed under 
strobe lights. Yet another position might draw the relevant line by focusing 
on the different ways in which conscious perception tracks the identities of 
its intentional objects over time (this idea is inspired by Shardlow, 2023, 
although this author does not espouse it). For example, it might be claimed 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
3

that we perceive processes as perduring (i.e., as having temporal parts), 
while we perceive objects as enduring (i.e., as fully existing at each moment). 
However, again, the difference between experiential perdurance and endur­
ance is not equivalent to the difference between an experience that contains 
phenomenal passage and one that does not. Think of seeing a person kicking 
a ball (a process arguably represented as perduring) on a background con­
sisting of a solitary mountain (an object experienced as enduring). While 
you may perceptually track the identity of the kicking and the mountain 
differently, it would be inadequate to say that this amounts to some sig­
nificant difference in the temporal flow of the relevant parts of the 
experience.
Another way to state the problem with the reductive view is that relevant 
contents do not seem sufficient to capture the feeling of the passage. Take 
again the idea that one could reduce the sense of time flowing to (say) 
perceptually representing motion/change. Perception represents the world 
as containing objects that shift properties and spatial locations over time. 
For example, visual experience can represent an object as being red at 
location x1 at t1 and as being yellow at location x2 at t2. But characterized 
this way, the relevant content represents an "at-at" sort of change or move­
ment ("B-theoretic" change; see also the discussion in section 5 below). This 
intuitively misses precisely the "animated" or "flowy" aspect of the experi­
ence, which is present in addition to merely representing the object as 
having different features/positions at different times (see Prosser 2016, 
p. 185). Here, proponents of the content-reductive view might refine their 
position by claiming that, instead of simply representing successive states of 
the world (for example, representing an object as being at location x1 at t1, 
a then, at t2, representing this object as being in x2), the brain samples 
information over time and then creates an integrated representation of 
successive states, such the location of an object at t2 is represented as 
dependent on or resulting from its location at t1 (see the "filling in" view 
expressed in Paul, 2010). Still, insofar as we consider the conditions of 
accuracy (i.e., the intentional content) of such representations, they remain 
straightforwardly stateable in "at-at" terms. Hence, it seems that the elusive 
(and intuitively "A-theoretic", see section 5) temporal aspect of experience 
remains unaccounted for under the content-reductive view.
The lesson I take from all this is that instead of raising a white flag, 
a proponent of temporal flow phenomenology should continue the 
search by moving beyond content-reductive approaches. Consider 
a useful distinction, due to Hoerl (2023), between empiricist and ration­
alist approaches to understanding the phenomenology of temporal flow. 
The empiricist approach aims to identify subjective flow with "specific 
deliverances of our experiential faculties" (Hoerl, 2023, p. 2), among 
which are intentional contents related to change, motion, duration, 
4
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

persistence, or succession (hence, content-reductive approaches count as 
empiricist in this sense). In contrast, rationalism views the flow of time 
not as arising from experience, but instead as being integral to having 
a subjective perspective on reality (what this means in the present context 
will be clarified in section 5.2). My suggestion is that despite the apparent 
failure of content-reductive views, the rationalist route of understating 
passage phenomenology remains open.3
An analogy with the experience of selfhood can serve as a tentative guide 
here. It is plausible to say that the commitment to the existence of selves has its 
roots in ongoing conscious experience. People believe in the existence of 
selves (at least partly) because they experience themselves as subjects of 
conscious states. However, the relevant experience is notoriously hard to 
pin down introspectively and characterize. All we seem to be able to access 
are conscious states, but their experiencer eludes the attempts to make it 
a focal point of introspection. That is, the subject never manifests as part of 
the experienced world, including the mental world revealed when we turn our 
focus inward (Hume, 1739/2007; Sartre, 1936/2004; Wittgenstein, 1921/2001).
However, this does not have to amount to denying that there is a distinctly 
selfhood-related aspect of phenomenology that reliably gives rise to the belief 
in a self. Perhaps what we need is a more nuanced account of what this aspect 
is. For example, the self might be implicit in experience as its pre-reflective 
background: not an object experienced (or content represented) but a quality 
of for-me-ness attached to every experience through which the experience 
seemingly revolves around an (invisible) center point (see Sartre, 1936/2004; 
Zahavi, 2005).4 Another idea that has been developed is that the sense of self is 
implicit in the interpretative processes through which the experiential world is 
"constructed" out of sensory or cognitive building blocks. Buddhist philoso­
phers have claimed that subtle mental "contractions" or acts of craving create 
an illusory sense of persisting self (see Albahari, 2006; Prest & Berryman,  
2024). Another proposal is that the experience of selfhood is rooted in how the 
sensory and cognitive contents are integrated or bound together (see Hohwy 
& Michael, 2017; Ismael, 2016; Letheby, 2021). Regardless of which option one 
opts for, the history of theorizing about the experience of selfhood might be 
instructive in the present context. It shows that the spectrum of viable theories 
may be larger than it might initially seem. Perhaps, just like in the case of self, 
it is simply a mistake to treat the phenomenal passage of time as an object of 
experience, that is, something identifiable with a (subset of) the intentional 
content (this would be an empiricist view of subjective flow, in accordance to 
Hoerl's aforementioned distinction). Instead, the experience of temporal flow 
might be implicit in how contents are represented (but see note 4) or in the 
formal or interpretative operations through which the mind weaves together 
a representation of reality. This would count as an instance of a rationalist 
treatment of subjective flow.
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
5

3. Phenomenal contrast across global states of consciousness
Even if we grant that the spectrum of possible accounts of phenomenal flow 
has not been fully explored, the debate is currently stuck at an impasse. 
Some will claim that the feeling of time flowing is self-obviously ingrained in 
conscious experience. In response, skeptics will rightly notice the inability to 
single this feeling out and specify it. A natural way to achieve progress might 
lie in appealing to the method of phenomenal contrast. Take a conscious 
experience that involves the sense of temporal flow. Now, focus on an 
experience that is otherwise phenomenologically just like the first one, 
except it lacks the sense of temporal flow. If no example of the latter sort 
of experience can be easily found, then imaginatively modify the first 
experience in a way that yields a state that matches the phenomenal char­
acter of that first experience in all aspects except the feeling of passage. The 
existence of such contrast should count as evidence in favor of the claim that 
there is a phenomenology of passage. To characterize the latter, we might 
proceed by focusing on and carefully describing what it is that a passage- 
involving experience has but is lacking in the contrast case.
Alas, the deadlock over passage phenomenology arguably stems precisely 
from the fact that applying phenomenal contrast, in this case, borders on the 
impossible. It seems that the sense of time flowing is so pervasive in the 
everyday experience of a (neurotypical) person that a timeless conscious 
state is difficult even to conceive. As pointed out in the previous section, the 
sense of time as passing remains invariant under varying intentional con­
tents of perception: it is there regardless of whether we experience change or 
not, whether we experience a smooth or abrupt succession of events, or 
whether we perceive an unfolding process or an enduring object. But I think 
this pervasiveness goes much deeper, as subjective flow is arguably invariant 
under varying modes of consciousness. That is, we not only experience 
passage when consciously perceiving but also when we experience emotions 
and moods, when we engage in episodic remembering or acts of imagina­
tion, when we mind-wander, or when we experience thinking in a way that 
involves purely cognitive phenomenology (assuming, of course, that there is 
such phenomenology). Temporal flow only truly disappears in dreamless 
sleep, along with conscious experience itself.5 Furthermore, imaginatively 
simulating a conscious state that lacks flow phenomenology looks like an 
unfeasible task. As I type these words, I find myself utterly unable to imagine 
the same typing experience, only lacking the sense of unfolding in time.
Perhaps the lesson to take from this is that timeless experiences are 
impossible in a robust, metaphysical sense. This would amount to 
a broadly Kantian position that the sense of flowing time is 
a transcendental condition of the possibility of conscious experience as 
such. However, a skeptic might insist that a more parsimonious 
6
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

explanation of the apparent pervasiveness of flow phenomenology is that 
there is no such phenomenology in the first place. In fact, perhaps some 
readers of this paper, upon introspecting their own experience, would 
deny that they can discern anything like pervasive passage phenomenol­
ogy. How could we settle the question of who gets the experience right? 
Thus, we circle right back to the problem of the missing phenomenal 
contrast.
There is, however, a different route that one might take. It starts with 
a conjecture: the range of possible phenomenologies outstrips, perhaps 
drastically, what is ordinarily available to a human being (see James, 1902/ 
2008 for the first influential exposition of such a view in modern psychology 
and philosophy). Perhaps the sorts of timeless experiences we seek reside in 
regions of phenomenal "state space" that lie beyond those normally occu­
pied by humans. If so, we could accordingly extend the search for the 
relevant phenomenal contrast cases.
Now, how could we peer beyond ordinary human experience? We might 
speculate about conscious beings other than humans who enjoy timeless 
phenomenology as their default state. Perhaps sea sponges or oak trees have 
experiences that feel outside of the passage of time? The downside here, of 
course, lies in how problematic it is even to attribute conscious experiences 
to such systems (even if they cannot be ruled out a priori as subjects of 
experience; see Segundo-Ortin & Calvo, 2021 for an example of relevant 
discussion). And even under the assumption that they are conscious, we 
have no way of establishing that what it is like to be them has a timeless 
phenomenal character of the right sort.
Another option could be to employ a structural account of consciousness 
(see Kleiner, 2024; Lee, 2022). That is, we could opt to rely on a theory that 
describes 
the 
structural 
facts 
about 
conscious 
experience 
in 
a mathematically rigorous manner. Given such a theory, we might find 
that there is a possible phenomenal structure that corresponds to an experi­
ence with a timeless phenomenal character that could serve as an appro­
priate contrast case (even if humans cannot access this experience by having 
it). Currently, however, this sort of theory-driven inquiry remains a loose 
speculation, as we lack a sufficiently fleshed-out and evidentially supported 
structural theory of consciousness.
Luckily, there is another, more straightforward strategy to pursue. It 
only requires us to consider experiences that are accessible first-hand to 
human beings. This strategy involves widening the range of human phe­
nomenal states under consideration. The crux is to notice that ordinary 
waking consciousness is not the only way of being conscious. That is, in 
addition to wakefulness, there are other global states of consciousness (see 
Bayne & Carter, 2018; Fortier-Davy & Millière, 2020; McKilliam, 2020; 
Whitteley, 2021).
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
7

To a first approximation, the notion of a global state of consciousness 
(GSC) is meant to capture distinct systematic phenomenal "profiles" that 
one's overall experience can take. Shifting to a different global state feels like 
moving to a whole new phenomenal "paradigm" rather than experiencing 
a more local or incremental change. Examples of such global states, in 
addition to ordinary wakefulness itself, may involve lucid and non-lucid 
dreams, the vegetative state, psychedelic states (of the less intense, non- 
mystical variety), pure consciousness or mystical experiences (including 
more intense psychedelic states), depressive states or the experiences of 
psychosis.
A more technical way of characterizing GSCs is to say that they 
involve orchestrated shifts along different dimensions of conscious 
experience (Bayne & Carter, 2018; Whitteley, 2021). The relevant dimen­
sions include:
(i) attention and cognition - for example, endogenous control of atten­
tion that accompanies ordinary waking state can be increased (med­
itation-induced states of mindfulness), reduced (non-lucid dreams) 
or altogether absent (vegetative state) in other global states;
(ii) self, space, time - for example, the ordinary experience of self with 
an open future may shift in depression (the feeling of being 
estranged from oneself and not being able to imagine one's future) 
or be altogether absent in pure consciousness or mystical 
experiences;
(iii) opacity/transparency - for example, in a wakeful state, a person 
usually sees the world through conscious experience, but in 
a psychedelic state or a lucid dream, she can render an experience 
qua experience an object of awareness (see Lange & Grünbaum, 2023; 
Metzinger, 2014);
(iv) sense of reality - depending on a GSC, a person may experience her 
visual world as more or less real (for example, the world may feel 
unreal to a person experiencing depression) or may attach a sense of 
reality to different sorts of content (for example, paradoxical con­
tents can feel real or true in a dream or but not during waking);
(v) range of intentional contents - for example, some GSCs may involve 
an increase in the range of contents as compared to ordinary wake­
fulness (think of ever-changing, hallucinatory variations to percep­
tual content experienced on moderate doses of psychedelics) while 
others involve an impoverished range of contents (vegetative state) 
or have been described as contentless altogether (pure consciousness 
states - see Metzinger, 2024; Ramm, 2023).
8
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

Let us return to the problem at hand. The proposal is to find the relevant 
contrast to the normal experience of temporal flow by comparing experi­
ences across GSCs. This, I think, is what could break the deadlock and drive 
the discussion forward. In the next section, I will discuss altered states of 
consciousness that involve profound shifts in the sense of (the lack of) 
temporal passage. Before I proceed, let me stress how casting the debate in 
terms of GSCs comes with certain theoretical advantages. First, it highlights 
how we normally experience ourselves and the world through one particular 
GSC (i.e., the ordinary mode of consciousness), and how our capacity to 
imagine possible phenomenal states may be constrained by this GSC, limit­
ing us from appreciating other possible forms that experience may take. In 
other words, it helps to explain why the relevant phenomenal contrast is 
hard to conceive from the standpoint of the default mode of human 
experience.
Second, focusing on GSCs naturally leads us to expect the altered sense of 
time to be tangled up with other changes to phenomenology. That is, 
experiences of timelessness come as an aspect or facet of states that con­
stitute more holistic changes to experience, which also include, for example, 
changes to the sense of selfhood. This raises an interpretative difficulty, as it 
may be difficult to find a contrast case that specifically targets phenomenal 
flow (i.e., an altered global conscious state whose phenomenal character 
matches some ordinary state in all respects except the subjective flow of 
time). However, I think the altered-global-states route is one worth trying 
despite the noisiness possibly involved. In fact, such complications may be 
theoretically revealing, as they may suggest that phenomenal flow shares 
a common mechanism with other aspects of ordinary experience, such that 
one cannot be altered without altering the other (see section 5.2 for the 
possibility that the sense of time flowing may be related to the experience of 
being a self).
4. Experiences of timelessness
4.1. Preliminary remarks
The discussion to follow will focus on a particular kind of an altered GSC, 
usually referred to as a mystical experience (James, 1902/2008; Stace, 1960; 
Yaden & Newberg, 2022) or an experience of pure consciousness 
(Metzinger, 2024; Ramm, 2023).6 The experiences that belong to this cate­
gory are usually prompted by long-term meditation practice or exposure to 
large doses of psychedelic compounds (like LSD, mescalin, DMT or psilo­
cybin), but in rare instances occur spontaneously. A thorough discussion of 
the phenomenology of mystical experiences is beyond the scope of this 
paper, so a rough sketch will have to suffice. The core of mystical states is 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
9

that they are radically non-ordinary, breaking the core structures of normal 
human experience. Perhaps most strikingly, mystical experiences are uni­
tary states in which the subject-object structure of consciousness may 
diminish or completely disappear, giving rise to an experience of "center­
less" and boundless unity. Because of how different these sorts of experi­
ences are from everyday states of consciousness, they are often thought of as 
characteristically ineffable (see Lyon, 2023, Ch. 10 for an extensive discus­
sion). At the same time, they possess a "noetic" quality in that they sub­
jectively seem like self-verifying glimpses into the nature of reality or 
consciousness (or both).
Besides the subject-object division, another core structure of ordinary 
consciousness that becomes altered in mystical states pertains to temporal 
experience. In particular, these states can feel "timeless", "outside of time", 
or as though "transcending time". This is an aspect of non-ordinary phe­
nomenology that I will hone in on in the following subsections. Before 
I proceed with this, I want to make some preliminary remarks.
First, despite the general recognition of timelessness as an aspect of the 
phenomenology of mystical states, there are few psychometric or neurophe­
nomenological studies aiming to target it specifically (but see Berkovich- 
Ohana et al., 2013). For present purposes, I will have to rely on existing 
studies of mystical experience as such (that is, studies that do not focus 
specifically on timelessness) and especially on introspective reports of such 
states, insofar as they reveal converging patterns related to an altered 
experience of time. However, the problem of describing the phenomenology 
of timelessness stems from sources deeper than the scarcity of empirical 
studies. Remember how elusive, hard-to-describe ordinary sense of the flow 
of time is, granted there is such a thing. It is only natural to expect subjective 
timelessness to be at least equally hard to capture in words. Hence, my aim 
here is to gesture at something that can only really be fully recognized 
experientially. Nonetheless, I think that the existing intersubjectively acces­
sible material suffices to establish experiences of timelessness as plausible 
contrast cases to the ordinary experience of temporal flow.
Second, I will approach the introspective reports cited below charitably. 
The reports provided below are formulated after the relevant experience 
took place, so they are directly based on memories of such states and are 
thus accurate as long as relevant memories are accurate.7 Nonetheless, I will 
assume that they are what their authors intend them to be, namely reports 
that ultimately reveal the phenomenal character of ongoing experience that 
a person has had. Of course, it might turn out that such reports are best read 
as false memories, or as merely metaphorical or as expressing culturally 
biased cognitive or (mis)interpretations of the experience. However, the 
burden of proof considerations favor charitable interpretation until 
a convincing skeptical case is presented.
10
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

Third, before I present the relevant positive case, I want to start by 
mentioning aspects of altered states of consciousness that we should be 
careful not to confuse with the experience of timelessness. In particular, 
psychedelic-induced states sometimes involve significant alterations of sub­
jective temporality, which nonetheless should not count as experiences of 
timelessness. So, a person under the influence of psychedelics may experi­
ence events as elongated or contracted in duration (subjective time dilation), 
experience an altered perception of succession relations between events, or 
even experience an altered perception of the directionality of time (see 
Shannon, 2002, Ch. 14). Such experiences do not count as timeless in the 
present sense: although they involve modifications of the aspects of ordinary 
temporal experience, they do not amount to a complete cessation of sub­
jective flow of time as such.8 Another class of psychedelic experiences that 
should be distinguished from experiences of timelessness are states that 
involve changes with respect to the sorts of intentional contents that have 
been previously ruled out as grounding phenomenal passage (see section 2). 
Psychedelic states may be accompanied by experiences of illusory move­
ment, altered rate of change (i.e., objects being perceived as changing more 
or less rapidly than normal), or experience the morphing of objects into 
other objects, which may, in turn, affect how identities are tracked or 
represented in experience. Again, experiences of timelessness should not 
be confused with such alternations of perceptual content (see also the 
discussion in the following subsections).
4.2. No-passage experiences
My proposal is that existing evidence suggests that two types of experience 
of timelessness can be distinguished. The first type consists of experiences as 
of time not passing, or no-passage experiences for short. The second type 
includes experiences as of apprehending reality from an eternal or timeless 
vantage point, or eternity experiences for short. In this subsection, I will 
focus on no-passage experiences. One could say that when having a no- 
passage experience, a person no longer feels as if carried by the river of time: 
temporal passage comes to a halt, and the dynamic, "flowy" quality is lost 
from consciousness. That is, such experiences lack the sense of moving 
through an ever-changing series of subjective "nows" that can be juxtaposed 
with the past and future.
As the first clue that can help us make sense of no-passage experi­
ences, consider psychometric tools used for measuring mystical states. 
Inspired by theoretical work (especially Stace, 1960), the Mystical 
Experience Questionnaire includes items specifically related to an altered 
sense of time (Barrett et al., 2015). Thus, studies have revealed that 
subjects undergoing acute psychedelic experiences often score highly 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
11

when asked about the degree to which they agree that they had an 
"experience of timelessness" or had a "sense of being 'outside time', 
beyond past and future" (see, e.g., Griffiths et al., 2006). These results 
converge with a more recent study on long-time meditators that 
deployed the Minimal Phenomenal Experience questionnaire (Gamma 
et al., 2021; Metzinger, 2024). This questionnaire includes three questions 
directly related to the experience of time: "Did you experience the 
passage of time?", "Did you experience the duration of time as such?" 
and "Did you experience time?".
We can get a tighter grip on no-passage experiences by considering the 
following subjective reports (the first three quotes are from reports about 
psychedelic-induced states, and the remaining three are taken from reports 
of meditation-induced states):
It was an extraordinarily strong experience that touched me also intellectually. Among 
the strange phenomena was the sense of time stopping. Things were happening in my 
mind but the clock was not going ahead; the flow of time was not passing anymore. It 
was a total subversion of the structure of reality. (. . .). And I thought: "Well, it's 
a chemical that is changing things in my brain. But how do I know that the usual 
perception is right, and this is wrong? If these two ways of perceiving are so different, 
what does it mean that one is the correct one?" (Rovelli, from: Higgins, 2018)
Looking back, I was slipping into a natural and effortless meditative state that increased 
in depth. I was literally nailed into the moment. There was not even a chance of going off 
into the past/future or self-assuring thought patterns or any of these mind-made 
artifacts. I was experiencing true timelessness! The complete lack of mental noise (. . .) 
left nothing but the eternity of the present moment behind, which then (. . .) "opened 
up" and became immensely spacious and palpable. (. . .) Sitting on the ground, I became 
physically and mentally very very still. As if I was immovable, indisturbable, static, solid 
like a rock (. . .) The coming and going of the natural world was observed, but from 
a place that simultaneously saturates and transcends all of it, it seemed. (Erowid, report 
#114653 https://www.erowid.org/experiences/exp.php?ID=114653)
At this point in the trip I became something that I cannot put into words. . . I became 
atemporal. I existed without time. . . I existed through an infinite amount of time. This 
concept is impossible to comprehend without having actually perceived it. (Erowid, 
report #1979, https://erowid.org/experiences/exp.php?ID=1979)
First, self disappeared, then later time became all one, as in no present existing apart 
from past from future. Any sense of time disappeared; it was all here, now. 
(Metzinger, 2024, report #3132, p. 250)
I was standing at a window and looking out to a tall bunch of grasses. It was 
a windy day and the grass was moving a lot. Then for some period, I coincided 
with these grasses. Their movement showed (or maybe better: was) the nature of time, 
the complete ungraspability of the present while at the same time there is nothing else, 
no past, no future, just this ungraspable now. (. . .) later, in reflection, there came the 
thought "I saw into the nature of time." (Metzinger, 2024, report #2798, p. 251)
12
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

The mechanism that senses time was absent. There was a sense of immediateness, 
without a center aware of temporality. (subject report from: Berkovich-Ohana et al.,  
2013, p. 4)
Beyond the fact that subjects report the lack of subjective flow of time, two 
recurrent themes should be highlighted. First, subjects stress that the 
experience in question is radically different from the ordinary experience 
of time ("total subversion of reality") and is such that it cannot be grasped 
from the ordinary standpoint ("impossible to comprehend without having 
perceived it"). Such statements speak in favor of the claim that we are 
dealing with experiences that starkly contrast with ordinary consciousness 
in terms of subjective temporality, indirectly confirming the presence of 
a properly "flowy" element in ordinary experience. Second, note that 
although they are often described by explicitly negating the applicability of 
a tensed vocabulary ("not even a chance of going off into the past/future", 
"there is nothing else, no past, no future"), no-passage experiences are also 
sometimes expressed in terms of taking place "now" or "in the present 
moment". This creates a tension: how can an experience be "beyond past 
and future" while also being tensed in the sense of taking place "now"? The 
apparent inconsistency is resolved by noting that the subjects use terms like 
"now" or "present" to gesture at an experience that does not undergo 
temporal movement. Hence, the point is that it is a temporally "static" 
present moment ("an eternity of a present moment"), described as "immen­
sely spacious" or as not "existing apart from past or future".
There is one further aspect of reports of no-passage experiences that 
requires attention. Notice that some reported experiences involve both 
a sense of lack of temporal flow and a perception of change or movement. 
Consider the report cited above in which a person is undergoing (what 
seems to be) a no-passage experience while also perceiving the movement of 
grass. Even more strikingly, there are occasional paradoxical reports of no- 
passage experiences that are nonetheless described as accompanied by 
a sense of the flow of time:
I felt a timelessness while also being completely aware of the movement of time. 
(Metzinger, 2024, report #2303, p. 251)
Can such "timeless change" experiences (as Thomas Metzinger dubs them, 
see Metzinger, 2024) really count as no-passage experiences?
Of course, the paradoxical nature of such reports may stem from the 
inherent ineffability of the underlying experiences. Still, I think there are 
two possible ways to make (at least to some degree) a clearer sense of what 
such reports may reveal about temporal experience. On one interpretation, 
there is some remaining experience of temporal flow, even in experiences 
that are otherwise described as being subjectively "timeless". Perhaps tem­
poral phenomenology is multifaceted or layered in that one layer of 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
13

subjective flow can be peeled away while still leaving residual "deep time". 
This interpretation would be in line with the notion that some core under­
lying sense of passage is necessarily involved in any conscious experience. If 
this is right, it could weaken the case for no-passage experiences as con­
stituting a basis for phenomenal contrast of the sort we are seeking here. 
That is, although these states might differ from ordinary consciousness by 
lacking an important aspect of subjective temporality, there would be 
another, underlying sense of flowing time that is present in both types of 
experience. The problem that this construal of timeless change experiences 
faces is how to explain reports of experiences that do not report a deeper 
level of temporal flow. It would be rather ad hoc and presumptive to 
postulate that even those experiences involve "deep time", but subjects fail 
to notice it or report it.
However, there is an alternative interpretation which, if accurate, would 
be much more in line with the project at hand. On this construal, a person 
can have a full no-passage experience (that is, an experience altogether 
missing the sense of temporal flow) while retaining the capacity to percep­
tually represent change and motion. That is, a person can perceive change 
outside of the flow of time. Perhaps there is a pretheoretical tendency to think 
of perception of change as necessarily presupposing the experience of 
temporal flow (or even being identical to it). This tacit assumption might 
prompt some subjects to produce seemingly paradoxical descriptions of 
such experiences as both timeless and involving the sense of flowing time. 
However, the underlying phenomenology of such states, on this interpreta­
tion, actually lacks the phenomenal character of temporal passage.
The advantage of this second possible construal of "timeless change" 
experiences is that it is consistent with reports that do not mention any 
deep time. Also, this interpretation dovetails with the philosophical work 
discussed in section 2. There, I already noted the dissociation between 
the experience of temporal flow and the experience of motion or change, 
whereby the sense of temporal passage remains present in perceptual 
states representing unchanging objects. The present case would demon­
strate that there is a double dissociation at play, as a person can con­
sciously perceive change without experiencing the passage of time or 
without representing the respective change as taking place in flowing 
time. In other words, timeless change experiences would constitute cases 
of perceiving "at-at" ("B-theoretic") change as opposed to dynamic or 
flowing ("A-theoretic") change. Thus, we could think of a phenomenal 
contrast between experiences that are matched in terms of contents 
pertaining to change and movement (say, both experiences would involve 
perceiving blades of tall grass moving in the wind) but which differ in 
that one possesses a phenomenal character as of flowing in time while 
the other experience lacks this character. Although I think that general 
14
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

theoretical considerations favor this way of understanding the experi­
ences of timeless change, I concede that further empirical work is needed 
to settle the issue.
4.3. Eternity experiences
We turn to the second type of timeless experience, the eternity experience. 
Consider ordinary conscious experience as revealing the world from an 
egocentric temporal point of view (see Ismael, 2017). We ordinarily experi­
ence reality from the vantage point of subjective "now". This is a center 
point from which we apprehend two horizons of non-occurring events. One 
horizon recedes into the past and is given to us in memory, while the other 
horizon extends into the future and can be apprehended through prospec­
tion. In eternity experiences, this temporal vantage point is replaced by an 
experiential (as opposed to merely theoretical or conceptual) sub specie 
aeterniatis outlook on the temporal structure reality. In such a state, one 
feels as though apprehending temporally disparate events from a perspective 
(or a non-perspective, see below) that seemingly discloses those events as 
eternally, simultaneously co-existing outside of the passing time. In opposi­
tion to ordinary experience, there is no center point inside time from which 
reality is revealed. Thus, no individual event is singled out as unique by 
happening in a "present moment", as opposed to taking place in the past or 
future.
To get a handle and what it might be like to undergo an eternity 
experience, consider two following reports of psychedelic-induced states:
When we take off from an airport at night, we are aware of individual runway lights 
flashing past in succession. But when [we] look down a little later, we see them all 
existing together motionless. It is not self-contradictory to say that the lights flashed 
past in succession and also that they exist together motionless. Everything depends on 
the standpoint of the observer. (. . .) Or take an analogy from reading. When we read 
something, we are aware of one word coming after another. But when we detach our 
minds from the sense of the words and look at the page as a whole, this impression 
fades, and we are aware that the words all exist together at the same time. (. . .) 
I believe that my dose of mescalin detached me so far from the current of events (. . .) 
that I actually stood outside the stream of time, and was aware of events of two o'clock 
and three o'clock as things existing simultaneously. (. . .) (Mayhew, 1961, 
pp. 297-298)
It was revealed to me that everything which had ever happened or will ever happen 
across the entirety of this reality's timeline were all "me" and that I had existed for an 
eternity. (. . .) that human beings were trapped in an illusion of perspective which 
made it seem as if only the present physically existed. In actuality however, it was 
stated that all events past, present and future exist together and are continuously 
occurring within their individual time frames simultaneously. (Josie Kins, report 
available at: https://www.effectindex.com/reports/my-second-experience-with-unity)
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
15

It may be tempting to interpret eternity experiences as a particular kind of 
temporally perspectival experiences with uncanny intentional content. So, 
one might think of such states as (1) involving an egocentric temporal 
vantage point, (2) from this point, intentionally directed at content in 
which temporally distinct events are "squeezed" or superimposed, as though 
they all are happening "now". The analogies given in the first report cited 
above might suggest this reading: one switches from one perspective of 
individual lights flashing in succession to another perspective from which all 
the lights are perceived at once. However, I want to suggest that such visual 
analogies, albeit useful, are limited in conveying the truth about the phe­
nomenology of eternity experiences. On the reading I want to suggest, the 
striking thing about such experiences is that they feel altogether temporally 
aperspectival or centerless. That is, these states completely lack the ego­
centric vantage point of the present moment from which reality is appre­
hended. They possess a no-point-of-view phenomenology. For example, as 
I am typing these words, I have the sense of being embedded as in a center of 
time - in a moment that is uniquely real, unlike events I encounter retro­
spectively or prospectively. I might believe that this writing-right-now 
moment is neither less nor more real than occurrences unfolding at other 
points in time - yet I cannot experience the world that way. In the eternity 
experiences, this aspect of privileging one particular moment as real (per­
haps one might say: identifying with this moment) is absent. Instead, the 
sense of reality is evenly distributed across temporally distinct moments: 
there just no longer is a uniquely real temporal "center" to one's experience 
(or: there is no temporal center point with which one identifies).9
Now, it is fair to ask whether eternity experiences really differ from no- 
passage experiences. Existing psychometric tools seem too ambiguous to 
tease them apart. For example, both no-passage and eternity experiences 
could pass as involving the "sense of being 'outside time', beyond past and 
future", which is an item from the Mystical Experience Questionnaire 
mentioned before. In drawing the distinction, I follow other authors who 
have previously hinted that we are dealing with two distinct types of 
experience (see Shannon, 2002, Ch. 14 and the Subjective Effect Index 
available at https://www.effectindex.com10). I think the difference largely 
makes sense on the intuitive level. We can conceive of a no-passage experi­
ence that is not an eternity experience. Thus, a person may have an 
experience where subjective time stands still without having the experience 
of apprehending a temporal sequence of events as existing simultaneously 
outside of time. The opposite case of an eternity experience which fails to 
count as a no-passage experience may be harder to make sense of. However, 
it is not out of the question that one might undergo a conscious state that 
feels both sub specie aeternitatis in the relevant sense but nonetheless 
includes a temporally dynamic phenomenology. Anecdotal evidence 
16
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

suggests that in some eternity experiences, "while all moments are felt to be 
equally real, the directional flow of time is felt to be maintained, with the 
present always being the moment which is currently experienced" 
(Subjective Effect Index entry available at: https://www.effectindex.com/ 
effects/perception-of-eternalism). Still, it should be again conceded that 
more empirical work will be required to substantiate the view that no- 
passage experiences and eternity experiences are indeed distinct (even if 
perhaps often coinciding). Notice, however, that if this is the case, it might 
mean that the ordinary flow phenomenology is correspondingly multifa­
ceted, comprising multiple dissociable aspects or component parts (for 
example, a "flowy" aspect that goes missing in no-passage experiences and 
a "temporally perspectival" aspect that disappears in eternity experiences).
4.4. Timeless experiences and non-believers in the subjective passage
For those of us who tend to report having an all-encompassing experience of 
temporal flow, no-passage/eternity experiences, through providing relevant 
phenomenal contrast, can stand as further evidence for a view we already 
recognize as plausible. However, I mentioned that the impasse over the 
existence flow phenomenology stems, at least in part, from the fact that 
some subjects - perhaps including multiple readers of this paper - deny that 
they find the sense of passage when introspecting their own experience. 
Could the phenomenal contrast between ordinary experience and the 
experiences of timelessness convince those subjects that the ordinary experi­
ence includes a phenomenology of flow? Could it convince those subjects 
that they may have overlooked something about their own experience? 
Suppose that a person who normally denies, on introspective grounds, the 
existence of subjective flow undergoes an intensely altered state of con­
sciousness that involves no-passage or eternity experience (or both). There 
are three ways in which this may go.
First, upon encountering a no-passage/eternity experience, the individual 
might identify a clear phenomenal contrast to the ordinary experience with 
respect to the experience of temporal flow, thus acknowledging that passage 
phenomenology was present in their ordinary experience after all.
Second, it may be that there are significant individual differences in 
ordinary conscious experience, such that one part of the population experi­
ences temporal flow and the other part lacks it altogether (perhaps people in 
this latter group will tend to deny that the passage of time exists at the level 
of their beliefs; see (Latham et al., 2021) for empirical evidence that there 
indeed exists a minority of passage non-believers in the population). Hence, 
both groups are introspectively accurate with respect to their experience. 
The subject in our example belongs to the latter group. We may predict that 
a no-passage or eternity experience will feel consistent with how this person 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
17

usually experiences time - this person might even have trouble understand­
ing why some people describe this experience as deeply non-ordinary in the 
first place - thus providing no relevant phenomenal contrast.
Third, the person could recognize a contrast in temporal phenomenology 
between ordinary and no-passage/eternity experience, but deny that the 
relevant difference is accurately described in terms of the non-ordinary 
experience lacking the sense of temporal flow.
Now, I think there are reasons to be skeptical of the latter two scenarios, 
as they look to be at odds with how the relevant non-ordinary experiences 
are routinely described, that is, as radically different from ordinary temporal 
experience, with the relevant difference being related to lack of the experi­
ence of the passage of time (see preceding discussion). Hence, I think that 
the first scenario is the most likely at this stage of inquiry, provided we trust 
the relevant subjective reports.
Of course, it needs to be noted that the relevant phenomenal contrast 
hinges on an uncommon mode of consciousness unfamiliar to many, 
including phenomenal passage skeptics. However, I do not think that the 
fact that the relevant experience is uncommon could diminish its dialectical 
significance. For argumentative purposes, establishing the existence of phe­
nomenal contrasts suffices. And even in the absence of easy first-person 
access to the relevant contrast (I do not think it would be responsible to 
advise philosophers interested in temporal phenomenology to begin experi­
menting with large doses of psychedelics), I think that psychometric and 
report-based evidence cited above is sufficient.
5. Further issues: metaphysical beliefs about objective passage and 
hypotheses about mechanisms of phenomenal passage
5.1. Timeless experiences and metaphysical beliefs about the passage of 
time
In this remaining section of the paper, I will focus on what I think are two 
interesting applications of the preceding discussion. One application has to 
do with the debate over whether the ordinary phenomenology of temporal 
passage shapes our commonsense metaphysical view of time as undergoing 
flow. And the other one is related to how consideration of timeless experi­
ences helps us make sense of the mechanisms that underlie the ordinary 
sense of flow. I address commonsense metaphysics of flow here, and then 
turn to the issue of hypothesis development in the next subsection.
So, consider the seemingly plausible claim that the phenomenology of 
temporal passage comes with metaphysical commitments. Because of the 
flowing phenomenal time, our experience purports to acquaint us with 
a world that is undergoing a temporal passage. If so, it could explain why 
18
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

certain metaphysical views about the flow of time seem to fit our common 
sense much better than others. In particular, ordinary experience seems to 
favor (1) the A-theory over the B-theory and (2) presentism over eternalism.11
However, the idea that ordinary experience is metaphysically loaded 
in this sense has been recently contested by multiple authors. For 
example, it has been noted that if the base structure of reality is 
B-theoretic/eternalist, then the view of experience as metaphysically 
loaded would imply that experience contains a fundamental illusion 
about the nature of time. But this latter notion turns out hard to make 
sense of (see Balcells, 2019; Braddon-Mitchell, 2013; Deng, 2019; 
Frischhut, 2015; Hoerl, 2014). Perhaps experience is silent on the 
metaphysics of temporal flow after all. Perhaps the intuitive view of 
temporal passage originates from common misconceptions about 
experience or even from cognitive processes of a non-experiential 
kind (see Bardon, 2023; Miller et al., 2020).
Consider two interpretations of the claim that ordinary experience is 
metaphysically loaded with respect to temporal flow: (1) the claim that the 
sense of temporal flow comes with strict accuracy conditions such that this 
feeling can only count as accurate or true under an assumption that passage 
exists (i.e., the A-theory/presentism is true); (2) the claim that the sense of 
temporal flow is such that it explains people's psychological propensity to 
believe in the objective temporal passage. Note that the second claim is more 
modest than the first, as it leaves room for the possibility that people are 
wrong about the metaphysical accuracy conditions of their experience (it 
may turn out that the phenomenal flow is consistent with eternalism/ 
B-theory, such that the relevant experience cannot count as inaccurate 
even under such metaphysics; see e.g., Paul, 2010). Here, my aim is only 
to evaluate this weaker claim. I think that the consideration of timeless 
experiences favors the view that the sense of flow present in ordinary 
experience is responsible (perhaps in tandem with other factors) for the 
belief that time objectively flows.
Now, assume that, in line with the weaker claim, the ordinary sense of flow 
shapes the intuitive metaphysical beliefs about time. Further, assume that I am 
right in claiming that no-passage/eternity experiences contrast with ordinary 
experience by missing precisely the aspect of ordinary phenomenology which 
prompts people to espouse the intuitive metaphysics of temporal flow. Given 
this, we might predict that no-passage/eternity experiences would lead people 
to consider or even espouse alternative metaphysical views regarding tem­
poral passage (or at least tend to interpret the "meaning" of such experiences 
along such lines). That is, if normal experience - by virtue of involving the 
feeling of temporal flow - tends to subjectively align with A-theory and 
presentism, then the experiences that lack this feeling may be naturally 
expected to (seem to) fit less intuitive metaphysical views.
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
19

I think that there are strong reasons to think that this prediction is 
confirmed: with deeply non-ordinary temporal phenomenology comes non- 
common-sense (B-theoretic, eternalist) metaphysics of time. As mentioned 
earlier, mystical experiences possess a noetic force or a sense of reality. They 
are not merely experienced as exotic subjective feelings but as states that 
seem to disclose something about the nature of reality. I think that this 
general point applies to a new experiential orientation to time one may 
obtain in such a state. What I mean is that insofar as they involve no-passage 
or eternity experiences, such mystical states seemingly reveal something 
about the nature of time. Furthermore, what they seemingly reveal is revi­
sionary with respect to the ordinary view. In particular, such experiences 
seemingly unveil (1) a reality in which the time does not flow, as is the case 
in no-passage experiences (corresponding to a B-theoretic view of time) 
and/or (2) a reality in which all temporally distinct events are equally real, as 
is the case in eternity experiences (corresponding to eternalism).
Beyond general facts about the noetic force of mystical experiences, two 
considerations support the notion that no-passage and eternity experiences 
come with metaphysical upshots. First, multiple subjective reports suggest 
as much. So, looking at the reports cited in this paper, we find subjects using 
expressions such as "It was revealed to me that . . . " to describe the 
experience or stating "I saw into the nature of time" when reflecting on 
the experience subsequent to having it. Second, metaphysical systems rooted 
in mystical experiences tend to treat the ordinary view of passing time as 
illusory, and instead treat ground reality as timeless or eternal in some sense 
(see Russell, 1917/1986; Stace, 1960). This suggests a link between mystical 
experience and revisionary metaphysical beliefs about time. Recent empiri­
cal work shows that acute psychedelic states can affect metaphysical beliefs 
(Timmermann et al., 2021). Although the beliefs about time in particular 
were not tested, it is not implausible to think that they, too, are sometimes 
revised in light of deeply altered conscious states - and that the relevant 
doxastic shift exhibits the tendency to endorse B-theory/eternalism.12
5.2. Developing hypotheses about flow phenomenology
The discussion so far aimed to present contrast cases to the ordinary 
phenomenology of temporal flow, thus establishing the existence of the 
latter. However, doing this does not yet reveal what the ordinary phenom­
enology of flow consists in. I want to suggest that investigating timeless 
experiences can help us make progress on this question. I will sketch out 
a hypothesis about ordinary passage phenomenology. Importantly, my aim 
here is modest and promissory. I intend to establish a proof-of-concept of 
the fruitfulness of the present approach rather than lay out a definitive and 
fully fleshed-out theory.
20
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

Let us start by taking a wider view of how timeless experiences may fit 
into recent theoretical developments in the cognitive sciences. In particular, 
I want to thread the discussion so far with two strands of work done within 
the Predictive Processing/Active Inference (henceforth PP/AI) framework. 
One line of inquiry is related to temporal consciousness, and the other 
pertains to how meditation and psychedelics affect information processing 
in the brain.
Regarding temporal consciousness, existing PP/AI models align with 
a broadly Brentanian-Husserlian view. The crux of the Brentanian- 
Husserlian view is that each momentary experience has a tripartite structure 
comprising a primal impression (a part of momentary experience that feels 
as immediate "now"), a retention (a part of momentary experience repre­
sented as just-past), and a protention (a part of momentary experience that 
consists in an anticipatory openness to about-to-occur future). Given this 
scheme, the felt diachronic continuity or stream-like nature of conscious­
ness is accounted for in terms of an ongoing process in which primal 
impressions fade into retentions, and protentions become fulfilled by arising 
primal impressions.13 Now, PP/AI models cast perception and action as 
a process of predicting the sensory input, based on estimations of its 
(hidden) causes. This process is diachronically coherent because current 
estimates of the causes of the sensory signal are anchored in the estimates of 
immediately past causes and predictive estimates of the (most likely) causes 
that will come next. The core claim is that the brain does not process each 
moment as an isolated, discrete step but instead treats past and future 
elements as mutually informing (or "interpenetrating") each other at each 
moment. So, the "current moment" estimate is affected by an "empirical 
prior" carrying an estimate of the immediate past, thus preserving influence 
over the present Bayesian update cycle and ensuring that past states con­
tribute to the system's current estimates (corresponding to retention). At the 
same time, the current moment inference leans into the future by estimating 
probable future hidden states based on current and past inferences (corre­
sponding to protention). In this sense, the estimate of the current moment 
"reaches forward" by factoring in expectations about what is likely to occur, 
preparing the model to handle incoming sensory data. Regardless of differ­
ing technical details in how this story is phrased, the point is that it involves 
a computational analog to the retentional-protentional structure described 
by phenomenologists (see Albarracin et al., 2022; Bogotá & Debbara, 2023; 
Hohwy et al., 2016; Wiese, 2017; for a seminal predecessor of this work, see; 
Grush, 2005, 2008).
Another relevant strand of recent theorizing lies in PP/AI-based accounts 
of how psychedelics and meditation affect information processing in the 
brain. The PP/AI framework rests on a postulate that the brain stores (or: is) 
a generative hierarchical model of the causal structure that produces the 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
21

sensory states of the organism. Different levels of the generative model track 
causes that arise at different spatiotemporal scales. In recent years, a number 
of authors have converged on the view that both psychedelics (see Carhart- 
Harris et al., 2019; Letheby, 2021) and meditation (see Laukkonen & Slagter,  
2021; Lutz et al., 2019; Prest & Berryman, 2024) work by disrupting the 
generative model across multiple levels of the hierarchy. In essence, psyche­
delics and mediation can effectively attenuate the influence of top-down 
cognitive structures (that is, the generative model or the "priors" it contains) 
on interpreting the causes of incoming sensory signals.
Here, we arrive at a hypothesis: timeless experiences result from an acute 
disruption of the mechanism responsible for the capacity to temporally 
synthesize experience by integrating (the computational equivalents of) 
primal impressions, retentions, and protentions. That is, in a mystical 
state elicited by psychedelics or mediation, one's generative model can no 
longer integrate incoming information to form a diachronically coherent 
stream. The subjective time effectively becomes still, as one no longer feels 
as if the present is ongoingly fading into the past while keeping an open 
orientation toward the future (no-passage experiences). For a similar rea­
son, given that the cognitive horizon stretching to past and future collapses, 
one is no longer capable of keeping a temporally centered viewpoint on 
reality. Arguably, if one retains the capacity to represent temporally distinct 
events in such a state, these events will appear temporally static or as if 
"eternally co-existing" (eternity experiences).
Crucially, this would also suggest that the good old Brentanian- 
Husserlian model, in its PP-based incarnation, already explains - or stands 
as a crucial ingredient in such an explanation - the sense of temporal flow 
that normally accompanies conscious experience. We experience the flow of 
time because the retentional-protentional structure of consciousness imbues 
phenomenology with a diachronically coherent, "stream-like" quality, in 
which subsequent experiences get interlinked in appropriate ways (this 
overall approach is in many ways similar to ones developed in: Ismael,  
2017; Paul, 2010). In other words, when we perceive the world, we perceive 
it through the temporally synthesizing activity of an internal model - and 
end up believing what we see undergoes temporal passage. Notice also how 
such a view is a unified explanation of both the ordinary experience of 
temporal flow and, via the model-disruption accounts of mediative and 
psychedelic states, the experiences of timelessness.
This view of phenomenal flow has two other interesting corollaries. One 
has to do with the suggestion made in section 2. Instead of being represented 
as a part of the content of perception, the subjective flow of time should be 
construed as present in experience by acting as a "formal" principle through 
which the manifold contents get bound together. Subjective temporal flow is 
not found in the world but is rather implicit in how the world, as our brains 
22
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

model it, is constructed. In other words, this approach is an instance of what 
Hoerl (2023) calls a "rationalist" stance on the nature of subjective flow. This 
way, it may also explain why the sense of temporal passage seems so intro­
spectively inscrutable when one tries to make it an object of introspection.
The second corollary of the view is that it may explain why states of 
timelessness co-occur with other acute changes to experience, as a part of 
a global state of consciousness. This is presumably because, on the model- 
disruption accounts, mediation practice and psychedelics attenuate multiple 
high-level ("Kantian") priors at once, so the experiential shift is naturally 
expected not to be confined to the experience of time alone.
In fact, this simple observation could serve as a fertile ground for theorizing 
about possible connections between aspects of the overarching structure of 
ordinary conscious experience. Remember the analogy between the sense of 
time and the sense of self, briefly discussed in section 1. Recently, a number of 
authors working in the PP/AI framework have posited that the experience of 
selfhood results from a predictive binding process (see Hohwy & Michael, 2017; 
Letheby, 2021, Ch. 7; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017). Crudely put, the idea here is 
that the brain (1) integrates short-term body-related correlations in sensory 
signals to generate a "minimal" or "embodied" sense of self, and (2) integrates 
long-term sensory patterns by tying them under a "narrative" self. This process 
of imposing unity over a manifold of contents would break down in meditation 
or under psychedelics, giving rise to selfless or non-dual states of consciousness 
(see Letheby, 2021; Letheby & Gerrans, 2017). Now, note that such a proposal 
casts the minimal or embodied sense of self as a matter of attaining a synchronic 
unity - the sense of being an entity that has mental states at a time (see Letheby,  
2021, p. 52). One might now say that the present paper points to a process in 
which a series of such synchronic unities can be unified diachronically over 
short time spans (below the threshold in which a proper "narrative" or auto­
biographical emerges), giving rise to the sense of a temporally flowing minimal 
self. If so, this could explain why selfless and timeless experiences tend to go 
together as parts of a single global state: they both result from the breaking 
down of basic integrative cognitive processes (this notion may be seen as 
a particular variant of a view initially expressed in Velleman, 2006; for other 
relevant recent discussions, see also McKenna, 2023; Young, 2022). This may 
explain why many reports of experiences of timelessness highlight the changes 
to sense of self or identity ("I became atemporal", "I coincided with the 
grasses"). This also suggests that there are limits to a methodology based on 
drawing phenomenal contrasts between experiences across different global 
states of consciousness. Because the sense of self and the sense of flowing 
time are so tightly entangled, perhaps one cannot have a conscious experience 
that acts as a contrast case to a normal waking state solely in terms of the 
subjective flow of time, without also contrasting with it in terms of the sense of 
selfhood.14
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
23

6. Conclusion
The subjective sense of the passage of time is elusive to the point where it 
has been plausibly denied even to exist. In this paper, I argued that the 
feeling of passage is a part of ordinary experience and suggested a new 
strategy for pinning it down. I discussed radically altered states of con­
sciousness in which temporal flow is subjectively suspended - states that 
feel "outside of time". I argued that these alternations of subjective 
temporality constitute phenomenal contrast cases to ordinary phenom­
enology, establishing that the latter involves the sense of passing time. 
I also showed how this approach might help us characterize the ordinary 
phenomenology of temporal flow, its underpinning information- 
processing mechanisms, and its relation to commonsense beliefs about 
objective temporal passage.
Notes
1. There are some early but clear signs that this state of affairs may be changing. See 
(Letheby, 2021; Lyon, 2023; Metzinger, 2024). For emerging philosophical work on 
non-ordinary temporal phenomenology (of the "timeless" sort, in particular), see 
(Frischhut, 2024; Pan, 2023; Ch. 3; see also Wittmann, 2018).
2. Throughout this paper, I use expressions such as "phenomenal flow", "sense of 
temporal passage", "feeling of passage", "subjective flow" or "experience of temporal 
flow" interchangeably.
3. Proponents of the content-reductive account may still claim that there is some way, 
thus far overlooked, to make this position workable. Indeed, I do not think that what 
I have said here is sufficient to rule this out decisively. For example, one might claim 
that passage phenomenology can be reduced to several types of content, with no 
single type of content counting as the passage phenomenology (as suggested by an 
anonymous reviewer). I remain skeptical. Suppose we take the subjective flow to 
require a combination of different contents at once, i.e., we sense the flowing time 
insofar as our experience, at once, includes contents representing change, succession, 
motion, persistence and duration. But then we end up with an excessively restrictive 
account that is even more open to counterexamples than the ones that identify 
subjective flow with just one type of content. We might go in the opposite direction 
and explain subjective flow in terms of a disjunction of possible contents. The claim 
would be that we sense the flow of time insofar as our experience represents change, 
or succession, or motion, or persistence, or duration, etc. However, this raises the 
question of what is common between all states that possess either of those contents, 
such that we might identify it as the phenomenology of flow (see Torrengo, 2017, who 
discusses this problem in more detail). Because every disjunct, taken separately, is 
susceptible to criticisms raised in the main text, this presumed common element 
remains elusive. Furthermore, as will transpire in section 4.2, there are cases of 
conscious states that represent at least some contents that feature in the disjunct 
and yet plausibly count as states that lack the sense of the flow of time. To sum up, 
although I cannot fully rule that there is a viable content-reductive account, I think 
there are strong reasons to doubt it.
24
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

4. Importantly, the suggestion here is not that the problem is solvable just by categoriz­
ing the sense of temporal flow as an aspect of experience that contributes to its 
phenomenal character but does not consist in the (subset of) intentional content of 
this experience. Take the proposal that the feeling of temporal flow belongs to the 
category of a phenomenal modifier (Torrengo, 2017). A phenomenal modifier con­
stitutes an "adverbial" mode of experience. For example, the experiences of seeing an 
object vividly and seeing it blurrily may be equivalent in terms of content but differ in 
how this content is given in experience (i.e., vividly versus blurrily). Perhaps sub­
jective temporal flow is a kind of phenomenal modifier: it consists in a manner in 
which content is represented in experience, not in the content itself. This might be 
right. However, this sort of move cannot stand as a full, theoretically satisfying story. 
We can readily introspect and then conceptually state the difference between an 
object being perceived vividly and blurrily. But there is no obvious introspectively 
traceable modifier of experience that we could identify as phenomenal flow. What 
does it take exactly for an experience to be tainted or modified dynamically? What 
does such a temporal modification of an experience consists in? And what would it 
take for an experience not to be thus modified? A more concrete proposal about the 
relevant phenomenology seems to be required if we are to answer such questions.
5. It has been suggested that some residual form of conscious experience persists even 
during dreamless sleep (Thompson, 2015; Windt et al., 2016). Interestingly, this 
proposed dreamless sleep experience might involve a deeply altered phenomenal 
temporality (Windt, 2015), effectively constituting a potential contrast case of the 
sort I am searching for in the present paper. Nonetheless, I set the proposed dreamless 
sleep experiences aside here, as they remain an underexplored topic at this point, and 
instead focus on cases related to meditation and psychedelics.
6. Although mystical experiences and pure consciousness experiences may be phenom­
enologically distinct enough to warrant putting them in different categories, I will 
ignore this distinction here for simplicity. In the reminding part of the paper, I will 
refer to both as "mystical experiences".
7. There is a deep and general challenge to the very idea that (accurate) memories of this 
kind are even possible. If the relevant states really do feel subjectively timeless (and 
sometimes feel selfless as well), how could they be integrated into one's autobiogra­
phical memory and thus described as having occurred in oneself at some specific time 
(see Fink, 2020; Frischhut, 2024; Gamma et al., 2021; Millière & Newen, 2024)? One 
plausible way out of this problem may rely on distinguishing the gist of the relevant 
experience itself from a separate mechanism of autobiographical self-attribution that 
acts only post-factum (see Fink, 2020; Millière & Newen, 2024). This view would 
allow for the experience to count lack the sense of flowing time (as well as perhaps 
involving the sense of self), and yet be possible to integrate into one's autobiographi­
cal memory. For sake of space, I have to set this issue aside in this paper.
8. As noted by an anonymous reviewer, among multiple such types of altered 
experiences of time, one merits brief discussion here as being possibly tightly 
related to experiences of timelessness. These are the experiences of time slowing 
down or speeding up (see Droit-Volet et al., 2018; Shannon, 2002, Ch. 14). There 
are, I think, two possibilities here. On the one hand, such experiences might 
exist on a continuum with experiences of timelessness, where, say, a no-passage 
experience represents the culmination of a sensation of time gradually slowing 
down or speeding up (see Shannon, 2002, pp. 234-235). On the other hand, the 
experience of time slowing/speeding could stem from altered estimations or 
judgments of durations. Under psychedelics or during meditation, changes in 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
25

attentional processes and the rate at which mental contents shift might lead 
individuals to estimate events as lasting longer or shorter than usual (see Droit- 
Volet et al., 2018). This change would, in turn, be reported by subjects in terms 
of subjective time as either slowing down (if durations are rated as longer) or 
flowing faster (shorter durations). I think that this second interpretation, if true, 
would favor considering the slowing/speeding-time experiences as categorically 
distinct from experiences of timelessness. I will have to set this issue aside in the 
present paper.
9. In this way, they arguably resemble selfless or non-dual states of consciousness that 
lack the subject-object structure and thus do not feel as if they revolve around a center 
point of self (see Letheby, 2021; Metzinger, 2024; for a suggestion regarding a possible 
common mechanism underlying both experiences of timelessness and selflessness, see 
section 5.2).
10. The Subjective Effect Index catalogs types of subjective effects induced by psychedelic 
substances. It is a result of a "citizen" science project led by Josie Kins.
11. There are multiple ways in which those theories can be expressed. Here is a simplified 
take on each, which should suffice for present purposes. According to A-theory, the 
temporal structure of reality is tensed, such that events which happen now are 
distinguished from ones that have happened in the past or will happen in the future. 
According to B-theory, the temporal structure of reality is tenseless, and events are 
solely ordered by the relation of coming after or before one another. According to 
presentism, only those events are real that take place in the moving window of "now". 
According to eternalism, there is no metaphysically distinguished present moment, 
and all events are equally real regardless of where they are in the order of temporal 
succession.
12. Note that the point I am making here does not require that people always (or even 
often) shift their metaphysical outlooks on time in the face of timeless experiences. 
The claim is that such experiences would promote certain beliefs if they were 
espoused at face value by people who have them. But many subjects may opt not to 
align their beliefs with the face-value metaphysical content of their conscious experi­
ence. By analogy, consider a person who believes in B-theory/eternalism despite 
having ordinary conscious experiences that, when read at face value, purport to reveal 
reality as flowing in time.
13. Note that this applies even when no change is represented at the level of intentional 
content (for example, experience possesses a retentional-protentional structure as one 
perceives a static hand of the clock or hears a continuous, unchanging tone).
14. Again, what I have said here should be treated as an initial sketch, and open questions 
and potential problems should be noted. If both no-passage and eternity experiences 
stem from the breakdown of the same cognitive mechanism, how are we to account 
for the differences between them? If such experiences result from a disruption of such 
fundamental cognitive process required to attain diachronic coherence of one's 
representation of the world, how can people undergoing those states represent 
change? Questions like these may require inventive solutions, or they may point to 
fatal flows in the hypotheses laid out here. Here, I set them aside for future work.
Acknowledgments
I thank two anonymous reviewers for insightful feedback that helped me improve this paper.
26
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
ORCID
Paweł Gładziejewski 
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5639-0923
References
Albahari, M. (2006). Analytical Buddhism: A two-tiered illusion of self. Palgrave-Macmillan.
Albarracin, M., Riddhi, J., Pitliya, R. J., Ramstead, M. J. D., & Yoshimi, J. (2022). Mapping 
husserlian phenomenology onto active inference. Preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/2208. 
09058 
Balcells, M. (2019). The dynamic block universe and the illusion of passage. In V. Arstila, 
A. Bardon, S. E. Power, & A. Vatakis (Eds.), The illusions of time: Philosophical and 
psychological essays on timing and Time perception (pp. 35-51). Palgrave Macmillan.
Bardon, A. (2023). The passage of time is not an illusion: It's a projection. Philosophy, 98, 
485-506. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031819123000207query  
Barrett, F. S., Johnson, M. W., & Griffiths, R. R. (2015). Validation of the revised mystical 
experience questionnaire in experimental sessions with psilocybin. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 29(11), 1182-1190. https://doi.org/10.1177/0269881115609019  
Bayne, T., & Carter, O. (2018). Dimensions of consciousness and the psychedelic state. 
Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2018(1), niy008. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niy008  
Berkovich-Ohana, A., Dor-Ziderman, Y., Glickshohn, J., & Goldstein, A. (2013). Alterations 
in the sense of time, space, and body in the mindfulness-trained brain: A 
neurophenomenologically-guided MEG study. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 912. https:// 
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00912  
Bogotá, J. D., & Debbara, Z. (2023). Time-consciousness in computational phenomenology: 
A temporal analysis of active inference. Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2023(1), 1-12.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/niad004  
Braddon-Mitchell, D. (2013). Against the illusion theory of temporal phenomenology. in: 
T. Soto, S. Sugimoto, & T. Sakon (Eds). Proceedings of the CAPE International Workshops, 
CAPE Studies in Applied Philosophy and Ethics Series, Vol. II, CAPE Publications, Kyoto.
Carhart-Harris, R. L., Friston, K. J., & Barker, E. L. (2019). REBUS and the anarchic brain: 
Toward a unified model of the brain action of psychedelics. Pharmacological Reviews, 71 
(3), 316-344. https://doi.org/10.1124/pr.118.017160  
Deng, N. (2019). One thing after another: Why the passage of time is not an illusion. In 
V. Arstila, A. Bardon, S. E. Power, & A. Vatakis (Eds.), The illusions of time: Philosophical 
and psychological essays on timing and time perception (pp. 3-17). Palgrave Macmillan.
Droit-Volet, S., Chaulet, M., & Dambrun, M. (2018). Time and meditation: When does the 
perception of time change with mindfulness exercise? Mindfulness, 9(5), 1557-1570.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-018-0903-6  
Fink, S. B. (2020). Look who's talking! Varieties of ego-dissolution without paradox. 
Philosophy and the Mind Sciences, 1(1), 3. https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.I. 
40query  
Fortier-Davy, M., & Millière, R. (2020). The multi-dimensional approach to drug-induced 
states: A commentary on Bayne and Carter's "dimensions of consciousness and the 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
27

psychedelic state". Neuroscience of Consciousness, 2020(1), niaa004. https://doi.org/10. 
1093/nc/niaa004  
Frischhut, A. M. (2015). What experience cannot teach us about time. Topoi, 34(1), 143-155.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-013-9211-x  
Frischhut, A. M. (2024). Awareness without time. Philosophical Quarterly. https://doi.org/ 
10.1093/pq/pqae081/7718358  
Gamma, A., Metzinger, T., & Aspell, J. E. (2021). The minimal phenomenal experience 
questionnaire (MPE-92M): Towards a phenomenological profile of "pure awareness" 
experiences in meditators. PLoS One, 16(7), 1-39. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 
0253694  
Griffiths, R. R., Richards, W. A., McCann, U., & Jesse, R. (2006). Psilocybin can occasion 
mystical- type experiences having substantial and sustained personal meaning and spiri­
tual significance. Psychopharmacology, 187(3), 268-283. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00213- 
006-0457-5  
Grush, R. (2005). Internal models and the construction of time: Generalizing from state 
estimation to trajectory estimation to address temporal features of perception, including 
temporal illusions. Journal of Neural Engineering, 2(3), 209-218. https://doi.org/10.1088/ 
1741-2560/2/3/S05  
Grush, R. (2008). Temporal representation and dynamics. New Ideas in Psychology, 26(2), 
146-157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.newideapsych.2007.07.017  
Higgins, C. (2018). "There is no such thing as past or future": Physicist Carlo Rovelli on 
changing how we think about time. The guardian. https://www.theguardian.com/books/ 
2018/apr/14/carlo-rovelli-exploding-commonsense-notions-order-of-time-interview 
Hoerl, C. (2014). Do we (seem to) perceive passage? Philosophical Explorations, 17(2), 
188-202. https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2013.852615  
Hoerl, C. (2023). The flow of time: Rationalism vs. empiricism. Australasian Philosophical 
Review, 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1080/24740500.2022.2153069  
Hohwy, J., & Michael, J. (2017). Why should any body have a self? In F. de Vignemont & 
A. Alsmith (Eds.), The subject's matter: Self-consciousness and the body (pp. 363-392). The 
MIT Press.
Hohwy, J., Paton, B., & Palmer, C. (2016). Distrusting the present. Phenomenology and the 
Cognitive Sciences, 15(3), 315-335. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11097-015-9439-6  
Hume, D. (2007). A treatise of human nature: Volume 1 (D.F. Norton, & M.J. Norton. Eds.) 
Oxford University Press. (Original work published 1739)
Ismael, J. (2016). How physics makes Us free. Oxford University Press.
Ismael, J. (2017). Passage, flow, and the logic of temporal perspectives. In C. Bouton & 
P. Huneman (Eds.), Time of nature and the nature of time: Philosophical perspectives of 
time in natural sciences (pp. 23-38). University of Chicago Press.
James, W. (2008). The varieties of religious experience. Routledge. (Original work 
published 1902)
Kleiner, J. (2024). Towards a structural turn in consciousness science. Consciousness and 
Cognition, 119, 103653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2024.103653  
Lange, V., & Grünbaum, T. (2023). Transparency and the mindfulness opacity hypothesis. 
Philosophical Quarterly, 74(3), 822-843. https://doi.org/10.1093/pq/pqad098  
Latham, A. J., Miller, K., & Norton, J. (2021). Is our naïve theory of time dynamical? 
Synthese, 198(5), 4251-4271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-019-02340-4  
Laukkonen, R. E., & Slagter, H. A. (2021). From many to (n)one: Meditation and the 
plasticity of the predictive mind. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 128, 199-217.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.06.021  
28
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

Lee, A. (2022). Objective phenomenology. Erkenntnis, 89(3), 1197-1216. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s10670-022-00576-0  
Letheby, C. (2021). Philosophy of psychedelics. Oxford University Press.
Letheby, C., & Gerrans, P. (2017). Self unbound: Ego dissolution in psychedelic experience. 
Neuroscience of Consciousness, nix016. https://doi.org/10.1093/nc/nix016 
Lutz, A., Mattout, J., & Pagnoni, G. (2019). The epistemic and pragmatic value of 
non-action: A predictive coding perspective on meditation. Current Opinion in 
Psychology, 28, 166-171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.12.019  
Lyon, A. (2023). Psychedelic experience: Revealing the mind. Oxford University Press.
Mayhew, C. (1961). Untitled chapter. In D. Ebin (Ed.), The drug experience (pp. 293-300). 
Evergreen Black Cat.
McKenna, C. A. (2023). Agency and the successive structure of time-consciousness. 
Erkenntnis, 88(5), 2013-2034. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10670-021-00440-7  
McKilliam, A. (2020). What is a global state of consciousness? Philosophy and the Mind 
Sciences, 1(II), 7. https://doi.org/10.33735/phimisci.2020.II.58  
Metzinger, T. (2014). How does the brain encode epistemic reliability? Perceptual presence, 
phenomenal transparency, and counterfactual richness. Cognitive Neuroscience, 5(2), 
122-124. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2014.905519  
Metzinger, T. (2024). The elephant and the Blind: The experience of pure consciousness: 
Philosophy, science, and 500+ experiential reports. The MIT Press.
Miller, K., Holcombe, A., & Latham, A. J. (2020). Temporal phenomenology: 
Phenomenological illusion versus cognitive error. Synthese, 197(2), 751-771. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s11229-018-1730-y  
Millière, R., & Newen, A. (2024). Selfless memories. Erkenntnis, 89(3), 897-918. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10670-022-00562-6  
Pan, S. (2023). Memory, time, and temporal experience [Doctoral dissertation]. University of 
Maryland, College Park. https://drum.lib.umd.edu/items/e338d6c1-b33b-4d4e-bbbd- 
a3d5fea1660c 
Paul, L. A. (2010). Temporal experience. The Journal of Philosophy, 107(7), 333-359. https:// 
doi.org/10.5840/jphil2010107727  
Prest, S., & Berryman, K. (2024). Towards an active inference account of deep meditative 
deconstruction. Preprint: https://osf.io/preprints/psyarxiv/d3gpf 
Prosser, S. (2016). Experiencing time. Oxford University Press.
Ramm, B. J. (2023). Pure awareness experience. Inquiry, 66(3), 394-416. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/0020174X.2019.1592704  
Russell, B. (1917). Mysticism and logic. Allen & Unwin. (Original work published 1986)
Sartre, J.-P. (1936). The transcendence of the ego. A sketch for phenomenological description. 
Trans. R. Brown. Routledge. (Original work published 2004)
Segundo-Ortin, M., & Calvo, P. (2021). Consciousness and cognition in plants. WIREs 
Cognitive Science, 13(2), e1578. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcs.1578  
Shannon, B. (2002). The antipodes of the mind: Charting the phenomenology of Ayahuasca 
experience. Oxford University Press.
Shardlow, J. (2023). Experience, time, objects, and processes. Noûs, 58(3), 696-716. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/nous.12474  
Stace, W. T. (1960). Mysticism and philosophy. Macmillan.
Thompson, E. (2015). Waking, dreaming, being. Self and consciousness in neuroscience, 
meditation and philosophy. Columbia University Press.
Timmermann, C., Kettner, H., Letheby, C., Roseman, L., Rosas, F. E., & Carhart-Harris, R. L. 
(2021). Psychedelics alter metaphysical beliefs. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 22166. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-021-01209-2  
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
29

Torrengo, G. (2017). Feeling the passing of time. The Journal of Philosophy, 114(4), 165-188.  
https://doi.org/10.5840/jphil2017114415  
Velleman, J. D. (2006). So it goes. The Amherst Lecture in Philosophy. https://www.amhers 
tlecture.org/velleman2006/velleman2006_ALP.pdf 
Whitteley, C. (2021). Depression as a disorder of consciousness. British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science. https://doi.org/10.1086/716838  
Wiese, W. (2017). Predictive processing and the phenomenology of time consciousness. In 
T. Metzinger & W. Wiese (Eds.), Philosophy and predictive processing (pp. 1-21). MIND 
Group.
Windt, J. (2015). Just in time - dreamless sleep experience as pure subjective temporality. 
A commentary on Evan Thompson. In T. Metzinger & J. Windt (Eds.), OPEN mind (pp. 
1-34). MIND Group.
Windt, J., Nielsen, T., & Thompson, E. (2016). Does consciousness disappear in dreamless 
sleep? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(12), 871-882. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016. 
09.006  
Wittgenstein, L. (1921). Tractatus logico-philosophicus. (D. F. Pears, Trans.). (Original work 
published 2001)Routledge.
Wittmann, M. (2018). Altered states of consciousness: Experiences out of time and self. (P. 
Hurd, Trans.). The MIT Press.
Yaden, D., & Newberg, A. (2022). The varieties of spiritual experience. 21st century research 
and perspectives. Oxford University Press.
Young, N. (2022). Agents of change: Temporal flow and feeling oneself act. Philosophical 
Studies, 179(8), 2619-2637. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-022-01790-w  
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and selfhood: Investigating the first-person perspective. The 
MIT Press.
30
P. GŁADZIEJEWSKI

