Connection Science
ISSN: 0954-0091 (Print) 1360-0494 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ccos20
Theory, practice and performance
Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher (2017) Theory, practice and performance, Connection
Science, 29:1, 106-118, DOI: 10.1080/09540091.2016.1272098
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09540091.2016.1272098
Published online: 27 Dec 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1846
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ccos20

CONNECTION SCIENCE, 2017
VOL. 29, NO. 1, 106-118
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09540091.2016.1272098
Theory, practice and performance
Shaun Gallaghera,b
aPhilosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, USA; bFaculty of Law, Humanities and the Arts, University
of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia
ABSTRACT
I focus on the enactivist and extended mind approaches to embod-
ied cognition (EC), and specifically on the concepts of body schema,
affectivity, distributed cognition and intersubjectivity to show how
EC has relevance to questions about expert performance, and to the
theory and practice of performing arts.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 23 November 2016
Accepted 9 December 2016
KEYWORDS
Body schema; aﬀectivity;
intersubjectivity; embodied
cognition; music; dance
The notion of embodied cognition (EC) has had an increasing impact not only on our under-
standing of the mind in cognitive science, but also on our understanding of performance
in a variety of fields, including athletics (e.g. Ilundáin-Agurruza, 2016; Sutton & McIlwain,
2015; Sutton, McIlwain, Christensen, & Geeves, 2011) and the performing arts (Cook, 2010;
Montero, 2015). In this paper I will briefly review several different theoretical concepts that
come under the heading of EC. I will then show how different views of EC have sparked a
debate concerning the notion of expert practice. Finally, I will suggest some implications
for the study of performance in the context of performing arts.
Theory
Mind-body dualism has a long history in a variety of philosophical traditions. Within such
traditions one finds primacy given to ideational/intellectual processes where the body is
taken to be irrelevant except for sensory input and motor output. These traditional views
carry over into the (1950-1980s) "cognitive revolution", where computational and repre-
sentational processes "in the head" (mind or brain) are considered to be the only processes
that matter for cognition. Challenging this kind of internalism, the notion of the embodied
mind started to take shape in the 1990s (e.g. Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991), drawing
on phenomenology, and especially the work of Merleau-Ponty. On various views of EC,
the body, situated in the surrounding physical and social environment, plays a constitutive
role in cognition. Basic cognition and human intersubjectivity are deeply and inextricably
embodied, environmentally embedded (situated), closely tied to action and extended (dis-
tributed) into the use of tools, technologies and other aspects of the environment. Such
views have had an influence, not only in the cognitive sciences, but also in psychiatry
CONTACT Shaun Gallagher
s.gallagher@memphis.edu
© 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

CONNECTION SCIENCE
107
and psychological therapy (Gallagher & Payne, 2014; Gallagher & Væver, 2004; Röhricht,
Gallagher, Geuter, & Hutto, 2014), and more recently in the humanities, the arts and in
studies of performance (Anderson, 2015; Anderson et al., 2015; Høffding, 2015).
In most EC approaches there is general (although not unanimous) agreement opposing
internalism - the notion that cognition is entirely "in the head" or a matter of individual-
istic mechanisms. Beyond that, however, there are philosophical disputes within EC and
no overall consensus about some very basic concepts, including the concept of "mental
representation".
Consider,forexample,theconceptofbodyschema,whichwascentraltoMerleau-Ponty's
(2012)analysisofperceptionandcontinuestobeofrelevanceinavarietyoffields,including
medicine, psychiatry, sports science, etc. The body schema is the system of sensory-motor
processes that function without necessarily involving perceptual monitoring or awareness.
The body schema governs postural and motor control during action, much of which occurs
automatically and non-consciously. In learning a new movement, in the context of athletic
practice or dance, however, one may start by self-consciously attending to one's posture,
balance and limb position as one attempts to move them properly to the task. One's atten-
tion might also be directed to such bodily movement by the instructions of a trainer. With
practice, however, the formation of motor habits, and with gains in expertise in movement,
one's attention is typically directed elsewhere, away from the specifics of bodily movement,
and more towards elements of the world, including others. In such cases, practiced body-
schematic processes take over and at least some aspects of movement and action become
trained or automatic (Pereira, Abreu, & Castro-Caldas, 2013).
Oncognitivistmodels,thebodyschemaisreducedtostrictlyneuronalprocessesorbody
maps in the brain. Berlucchi and Aglioti (2010), for example, look in the brain to identify a
specific anatomical and functional neural system responsible for the immediate and auto-
matic guidance of action, centred in the posterior parietal cortex - a body representation
equivalent to the body schema. This "body-in-the-brain" strategy, however, runs into prob-
lems that derive in part from the complex ambiguities involved when it comes to mapping
out brain function (see Gallagher, 2012). Regardless of whether one can isolate a neural rep-
resentation corresponding to the body schema, however, on the EC, dynamical-embodied
conception, body-schematic processes involve extensive peripheral and extra-neural fac-
tors, including proprioceptors (which involve both neural and non-neural parts), joints
and muscles. Likewise, body-schematic processes are not reducible to simple motor pro-
grammes (e.g. Neilson & Neilson, 2005), equivalent to a computational pre-programming
of movement that is automatically and inflexibly exercised in a certain behavioural context.
Motor responses, for example, rather than fully determined at brain-level, are mediated by
the design of muscles and tendons, their degrees of flexibility, their geometric relation-
ships to other muscles and joints, and their prior history of activation. In terms of dynamical
systems theory, body-schematic processes involve ongoing adjustments made in response
to environmental changes, where parts of the environment can modulate body-schematic
processes (Gallagher, 2005a). In addition, however, such motor processes, no matter how
automatic, are modulated by the agent's intention. Reaching to pick up an apple may
involve many of the same motor processes in different instances, but if one reaches to pick
it up in order to take a bite of it, versus to offer it to someone, versus to throw it, the pre-
cise kinematic details of the movements are different (Becchio, Manera, Sartori, Cavallo, &
Castiello, 2012).

108
S. GALLAGHER
The body schema begins to form early in fetal development and is functional at birth
in a way that may explain phenomena such as early hand-mouth coordination, and the
possibility of neonate imitation (Gallagher & Meltzoff, 1996). Even if present at birth it con-
tinues to develop, along with body growth and development, throughout childhood. The
attunement of the body schema to specialised movements in athletics and other kinds of
performance is an important aspect of training and self-training.
Beyond that, it is important to note that the body schema is clearly affected by various
cultural and social factors, as pointed out by feminists and race theorists (e.g. Fanon, 2008;
Weiss, 2015; Young, 1980). It is also the case that the body schema can expand to include
clothes, tools and instruments. Merleau-Ponty (2012), following Head (1920), mentions the
case of the blind man's cane. Empirical studies have demonstrated the incorporation of var-
ious tools into the body schema (Maravita & Iriki, 2004; Maravita, Spence, Kennett, & Driver,
2002). This is often characterised, in part, as extending the range of peripersonal space to
encompass the reach of the tool during use. Tools and instruments, through habitual use,
become extensions of one's body, and any modification in the instrument involves a modu-
lation in the body schema. There is also evidence for the formation of a "joint body schema"
during a cooperative action scenario; peripersonal space extends to include the reachable
space of one's nearby action partner (Soliman, Ferguson, Dexheimer, & Glenberg, 2015;
Soliman & Glenberg, 2014).
The idea of a body schema that extends in order to incorporate tools and instruments
is consistent with one of the most significant theoretical developments in EC - the notion
of distributed cognition, or the "extended mind" (Clark, 2008). According to the extended
mind hypothesis the mechanisms (vehicles) of cognition include pieces of the environment
- the tools and technologies that we use to accomplish cognitive tasks (e.g. pencil and
paper to do math, notebooks or personal digital assistants for memory) - some of which
(e.g. prosthetics, cognitive enhancements, etc.), might be incorporated into the body, or
the body schema. The extended mind hypothesis develops an idea originally suggested by
pragmatist thinkers like John Dewey.
Hands and feet, apparatus and appliances of all kinds are as much a part of it [thinking] as
changes in the brain. Since these physical operations (including the cerebral events) and equip-
ment are a part of thinking, thinking is mental, not because of a peculiar stuff which enters into
it or of peculiar non-natural activities which constitute it, but because of what physical acts and
appliances do: the distinctive purpose for which they are employed and the distinctive results
which they accomplish. (Dewey, 1916, pp. 8-9)
Clark's (2008) conception of the extended mind builds on a functionalist view that down-
plays the role of the biological body - cognition could be instantiated in a robotic body, for
example. Moreover, he considers the notion of representation as important for an expla-
nation of both basic action-oriented behaviour and higher-order, "representation-hungry"
cognition. Higher representational processes of the cognitive system will provide "com-
pensatory adjustments" to even out differences in the experiential aspects (caused, for
example, by differences in bodily systems) accompanying cognition.
In contrast, enactivist approaches to EC reject the notion of internal, mental represen-
tation entirely. Building on the phenomenology of Merleau-Ponty, enactivism emphasises
the idea that perception is not just a passive sensory processing of information, it is rather
closely connected to action. Perception is action oriented, or "for action", and this action-
orientation shapes most cognitive processes. Perception is thus viewed as pragmatic and

CONNECTION SCIENCE
109
best explained in terms of body-relative affordances (Gibson, 1977). Affordances are rela-
tional insofar as they are constituted, not just by the objective features of the environment,
but also by the particular embodiment and skill level of the agent who is coupled with the
physical and social environment. Like the extended mind idea - the mind is not simply "in
the head" or reducible to brain processes; rather, it is distributed across body and environ-
ment, to the extent that body and environment are dynamically coupled. Accordingly, for
enactivism, the explanatory unit is brain-body-environment.
Unlike extended mind proponents, however, enactivists claim that biological and affec-
tive bodily processes, as well as environmental factors, shape and contribute to the con-
stitution of consciousness and cognition in an irreducible and irreplaceable way - i.e. the
human body as a whole is essential for human cognition. Biological aspects of bodily life,
including autonomic, peripheral, affective/emotion systems, have a permeating effect on
cognition, as do processes of dynamical sensory-motor coupling (body-schematic pro-
cesses) between organism and environment. For example, hormonal changes - changes
in body chemistry - as well as visceral and musculoskeletal processes, can bias perception,
memory, attention and decision-making. Regulation of body chemistry is not autonomous
from cognitive processes, and vice versa. "Body regulation, survival, and mind are intimately
interwoven" (Damasio, 1994, p. 123). Hunger and fatigue, as well as emotion, or affect
more generally, can have a significant impact on cognitive processes (e.g. Colombetti, 2013;
Danziger, Levav, & Avnaim-Pesso, 2011; Gallagher & Bower, 2014).
Enactivismalsoemphasisestheroleofintersubjectivityinregardtoactionandcognition.
The presence of others has been shown to affect perception, behavioural response, affec-
tive attunement and judgement (Bayliss, Paul, Cannon, & Tipper, 2006, 2007; Hayes, Paul,
Beuger, & Tipper, 2008; Sebanz, Knoblich, & Prinz, 2003). Our primary relations with others
involve embodied interactions, starting in early infancy, if not prenatally (Trevarthen, 1979).
Even in purely observational cases that involve little or no interaction, our motor systems
have been shown to resonate to the actions and emotions of others (Gallese, 2014). Such
motor resonance is part of what Merleau-Ponty (2012) calls "intercorporeity". Enactivists
interpret this type of resonance, not as an internal neural simulation or representation of
the other's actions, but as part of an action-preparatory process to respond to the other
agent (Gallagher, 2008).
To summarise, EC theory is still unsettled and a number of central issues are still under
debate, including disagreements about representation, how we should view embodiment
itself, and the nature of the body-environment coupling. Nonetheless, without having to
resolve these issues, one can still ask how EC theories might contribute to our understand-
ing of practice and performance. I note, importantly, however, that this is not a one-way
inquiry. That is, studies of practice and performance can inform EC theory, and in fact, may
contribute to clarifying some of the issues and perhaps settling some of the debates on the
theoretical side.
EC and expert practice
Notions of EC have been useful for defining expertise - and I think this is a good bridge
to help us cross over to issues that involve performance in areas such as music and
dance. Dreyfus (2005) and Dreyfus and Dreyfus (1980), for example, drawing on ideas from

110
S. GALLAGHER
Merleau-Ponty, defines a set of stages in accomplishing expertise modelled on embodied
coping (the body interacting with the environment).
(1) Novice practitioner - this stage is characterised by "rigid adherence to taught rules or
plans".
(2) Advanced beginner - marks improvement over the novice stage, but still lacks any
subtle discrimination.
(3) Competent practitioner - works with more information and starts to see different
applications; such practitioners can plan out a routine.
(4) Proficient practitioner - gains a holistic view of situations and prioritises important
features; such practitioners can adapt to the situation at hand.
(5) Expertpractitioner - transcends the rules and has an "intuitive grasp of situations based
on deep, tacit understanding".
On Dreyfus's account engagement in embodied practice leads to habit formation where
doing becomes automatic, without the necessity of reflection or thought. That is, the expert
practitioner, in any realm, from playing tennis, to playing chess, to doing mathematics, does
not have to think about what to do - she has an intuitive and automatic insight into how
to move or what needs to be done. For Dreyfus, this is so much the case that reflective con-
sciousness of one's doing may in fact disrupt the practice. As Beilock (2010) puts it, "highly
practiced skills become automatic, so performance may actually be damaged by introspec-
tion, which is characteristic of an earlier, consciously-mediated stage". For Dreyfus (2005),
expert performance is mindless, if we understand "mind" in the traditional way. To the
extent that the mind is embodied, it is non-representational. Thus, Dreyfus (2002) argues
that for practiced or skillful intentional action one does not require representation.
A phenomenology of skill acquisition confirms that, as one acquires expertise, the acquired
know-how is experienced as finer and finer discriminations of situations paired with the appro-
priate response to each. Maximal grip [a concept discussed by Merleau-Ponty] names the
body's tendency to refine its responses so as to bring the current situation closer to an optimal
gestalt. Thus, successful learning and action do not require propositional mental represen-
tations. They do not require semantically interpretable brain representations either. (2002,
p. 367)
Dreyfus associates the idea of representation, and the traditional concept of mind, with
a failed Cartesian philosophy - bound up with epistemic states of knowing-that (proposi-
tional knowledge), when everything about intelligent action and knowing-how depends
on being-in-the-world (rather than standing back and representing the world) and on con-
text - both background and immediate context. In this regard Dreyfus comes close to
the enactivist view of EC. For both Dreyfus and Merleau-Ponty, mind, understood as non-
representational embodied mind, is not excluded from movement, but redefined as the
expression of an embodied intelligence.
At the same time, Dreyfus over-emphasises the lack of reflection and thought in expert
performance. In this respect, he has been subject to a number of critiques based on the
study of sport-, dance- and music-performance. John Sutton, for example, taking his direc-
tion from sports performance, has proposed what he calls the "AIR" model: "applying
intelligence to the reflexes" (Sutton et al., 2011). On this model, expert performance is not
without some sort of reflection. A player of cricket, for example, with less than half a second

CONNECTION SCIENCE
111
to execute hitting a hard fast ball travelling at 140 km/h, draws not only on smoothly prac-
ticed batting, but also on context and conditions relevant to the game, in order to hit a shot
with extraordinary precision through a slim gap in the field. "It's fast enough to be a reflex,
yet it is perfectly context-sensitive. This kind of context-sensitivity, we suggest, requires
some forms of mindedness . . . [an] interpenetration of thought and action exemplified in
such open skills" (Sutton et al., 2011, p. 80). The expert cricket player is not on automatic
pilot - he has trained up his body-schematic control of movement, but what he needs to
do in the context of a game is not automatic.
Skill is not a matter of bypassing explicit thought, to let habitual actions run entirely on their
own, but of building and accessing flexible links between knowing and doing. The forms of
thinking and remembering which can, in some circumstances, reach in to animate the subtle
kinaesthetic mechanisms of skilled performance must themselves be redescribed as active and
dynamic. Thought, again, is not an inner realm behind practical skill, but an intrinsic and worldly
aspect of our real-time engagement in complex physical and cultural activities . . . . So expert
performers precisely counteract automaticity, because it limits their ability to make specific
adjustments on the fly . . . . Just because skillful action is usually pre-reflective, it does not have
to be mindless. (Sutton et al., 2011, p. 95)
Automatic control has limited ability to cope with variability; skill requires the flexibility pro-
vided by cognitive processes (Christensen, Sutton, & McIlwain, 2015, 2016). The cognitive
processes at stake, however, are not heavy reflective processes, but awareness of the situ-
ation and a performative awareness (see below) that mesh with a performative know-how.
This is not an awareness of detailed motoric processes (such processes are trained into the
body schema), but selective target control for features, such as the goal of the action, or
parameters of execution (timing, force, etc.) (Christensen et al., 2016). The consolidation
of fine motoric details in body-schematic processes allows for this type of minimal and
targeted reflective awareness.
Artistic performance
Montero (2012, 2016) offers a similar critique of Dreyfus, drawing on her own experience
as a former professional ballet-dancer. She rejects the idea that expert performance some-
how is effortless or thoughtless. She argues that although certain types of bodily awareness
may interfere with well-developed skills, it is typically not detrimental to the skills of expert
athletes or performing artists. A form of performance thinking is generally better than not
thinking. Montero examines a number of scientific studies that purport to show that paying
attention to certain bodily aspects of performance will interfere with performance. She con-
tends that the studies are not ecological - that is, they introduce types of cognitive efforts
that are simply not found in usual practice - e.g. one study asks a player to pay constant
attention to his feet as he dribbles a football (e.g. Ford, Hodges, & Williams, 2005). She also
cites qualitative studies that indicate that certain types ofconscious monitoring (different in
different performances) improve performance. Likewise, reports from experts confirm this.
Timothy Gallwey, a pro-tennis player observes that:
when you increase your stroke speed to normal and begin hitting, you may be particularly
aware of certain muscles. For instance, when I hit my backhands, I am aware that my shoul-
der muscle rather than my forearm is pulling my arm through . . . . Similarly, on my forehand
I am particularly aware of my triceps when my racket is below the ball. (cited in Montero,
2015, p. 135)

112
S. GALLAGHER
How precisely is one conscious of such things? I have argued that it involves a pre-
reflective pragmatic self-awareness that does not take the body as an intentional object;
a "performative awareness . . . that provides a sense that one is moving or doing some-
thing, not in terms that are explicitly about body parts, but in terms closer to the goal of the
action"(Gallagher,2005b,p.73).Legrand(2007),followinguponthenotionofperformative
awareness, distinguishes between three types of attention focused on the body:
Opaque: which is thematic, reflective and objectifying, and characterises a novice performance
when someone is learning to move in dance or music.
Transparent: when the body is experienced nonthematically, prereflectively and as an aspect
of the acting subject - as in everyday walking.
Performative: (as in expert dancers): "A dancer is very concerned with his body and while danc-
ing he is intensively attending to it. But he is not attending to it reflectively as an object. Rather,
his awareness of his body as subject is heightened" (Legrand, 2007, p. 512).
Expertise can put this subjective character of experience "at the front" of one's experience
without turning experience or action into a mere intentional object (see Toner, Montero, &
Moran, 2016).
With respect to musical performance, cellist Ingal Segev emphasises the importance of
keeping one's actions in the conscious mind: "my teacher [Bernard Greenhouse], would say,
'don't let the music lead you; you need to direct it'" (cited in Montero, 2015, p. 136). Montero
interprets this as follows:
Theideathatyoushouldgetlostinthemusicandsimplyletitleadyouwasmistaken,shethinks,
as it proscribes thought. If being in the zone for a musical performance means performing at
one's best, being in the zone according to Ingal means, it seems, extensive conscious thought
about what to do and when to do it. (2015, p. 136)
Montero allows for the possibility that high performers occasionally enter a mindless zone
when engaged in optimal performance. She also allows for the possibility that it is gen-
erally true that optimal performance coincides with thoughtful performance. This view is
reinforced by a recent study of expert music performance by Høffding (2015).
Høffding worked with the Danish String Quartet, conducting phenomenological inter-
views - interviews that focus on the precise experiences the musicians have while playing
their best. Each member of the quartet had different experiences while playing, but all of
them reported that they could be thinking of or experiencing different things.
[ . . . ] expert musicians can undergo a wide range of different experiences while playing, from
thinking about where to go for beers after the performance, to worrying whether one's facial
expression looks interesting to the audience, to enjoying the fact that the playing seems to
be unfolding smoothly, and finally to a deep absorption in which one experiences a profound
transformation of consciousness. (Høffding, 2015, pp. 11-12)
Høffding (2015, p. 129ff) distinguishes between four different states of awareness in expert
performance.Thefirsttwoareexperiencedinstandardexpertplaying(wheretheperformer
may be thinking of different things).
(1) Absent-minded playing (automatic performance; where the body carries on without
monitoring).

CONNECTION SCIENCE
113
(2) Playing under stress (e.g. after interruption) and striving to get back - "just barely
keeping up without missing the notes, yet coping nevertheless, managing to perform
without mistakes".
The second two are experienced while playing in deep absorption.
(1) Blackout: lack of self-awareness.
(2) Heightened awareness of self and surroundings.
The phenomenologically evidenced fact that there are different possible conscious states
while engaged in performance goes against Dreyfus's exclusion of awareness or thought.
The phenomenological details are telling in this respect. Focusing on deep absorption,
Høffding's musicians suggest modulations in the sense of agency: a diminished sense of
agency in blackout, and an increased sense of agency in heightened awareness. More pre-
cisely, in both states of absorption there is a certain letting go that involves passivity. Even
with increased sense of control in heightened awareness, the performer does not intervene
in the process, but lets it happen.
EC in performance: four factors
Høffding's analysis points to four factors that account for the performance being carried
along in a way that involves this kind of passivity: body-schematic processes; affect (emo-
tion); the music itself; the other players (Høffding, 2015, p. 177ff). I want to suggest that
these factors are not entirely reflective of passivity, but that there is a dynamical interrela-
tion among these factors that also reflect the centrality of bodily action that is involved
in the intentionality of the performance itself. I will try to show how these factors are,
in some important respects integrated, in ways that play off the first factor, the body
schema.
The body schema is attuned by practice so that one can simply play "from the body
schema" in a way that allows one to forget about many details of the performance, thereby
giving one freedom to focus on selective target control. Members of the quartet report:
"You let the body function on its own". "You're surprised about how much the fingers
remember themselves. Let the fingers play . . . . Let go and think about something else"
(Høffding, 2015, p. 180). As Bowman (2004, p. 44) suggests:
Developing skillful musical agency entails assuming and assimilating embodied stances, pos-
tures, and movements. In becoming skilled musicians, students assimilate the corporeal pos-
tures and gestures of teachers - making them their own, weaving them into the dense fabric
of their own embodied identity.
Body-schematic attunement alone, however, is not sufficient for expert performance. Affect
is also important, and as Høffding suggests, in some cases indicates a difference between
musical performance and athletic performance. "With . . . the emotions, prima facie, we
havereasontodifferentiatethephenomenologyofartisticabsorptionfromathleticabsorp-
tion" (Høffding, 2015, p. 191). As I understand this claim, Høffding does not think that
athletic performance lacks emotion (one only needs to play ice hockey once to understand
that emotion plays an important role), but rather that emotion (and the other factors - body

114
S. GALLAGHER
schema, the music, intersubjective interactions) work differently in musical performance.
In this respect, at least in part, the important differences may have to do with the way that
these factors interrelate with each other. With respect to emotion, for example, we may
want to distinguish between instrumental action (primarily under body-schematic control),
and expressive movement. Aspects of emotion in expressive movement, as found in acting,
dance and musical performance, can work like gesture and language in a way that goes
beyond simple motor control, but also requires it.1
Affect/emotion in relation to music goes in two directions. First, music allows us to
explore or develop or regulate emotion in a new way; second, we "offload" some of the
power of emotion in the playing of music (Krueger, 2014). If emotion in some cases drives
expressive movement during music performance, however, we should not think that it
does so independently of the body schema. It is not the case that the body schema car-
ries on independently, delivering technically proficient movement, to which we then add
an expressive style motivated by specific emotions relative to the occasion. The expressive
style is already integrated into the movement. One could also think that emotion may have
its effect directly on body-schematic processes - slowing down or speeding up such pro-
cesses, for example, or leading to the adoption of certain initial postures that may influence
the performance.
The music itself plays an important part in the performance process. We may think of this
aspect in terms of the extended mind idea, although music clearly ignores internal versus
external boundaries. As performers we can get caught up in the music itself. Many studies
show that we incorporate tools and instruments into our body schema, or that we extend
our body schema into such instruments (e.g. Maravita & Iriki, 2004). On the one hand, there-
fore, we may think that body-schematic processes add to the music itself as it is generated
in the musical instruments. On the other hand, it goes deeper than this: music moves us; it is
something that engages the body schema through its links to rhythm, material resonance,
muscle, movement and action.
The sounds of music enter the body and are sensed, felt, and experienced inside the body in
a way that, on the whole, the media of other artistic and cultural forms are not. And if one
accepts the notion of affordance, then it is not a big step to realizing that there is an element
of direct material leverage in the manner in which the sounds of music serve to construct and
position individuals in their embodied, everyday lives. (John Shepherd, 2002, cited in Bowman,
2004, p. 40)
Finally, the other players enter the performance. In the context of making music together,
Høffding takes music and intersubjectivity to be interrelated. To specify this in a way that
Høffding does not, we can explicate this relation in the light of the recent research that
shows while working (or playing) together (in joint action) we form "joint body schemas"
(Soliman & Glenberg, 2014), and that one's peripersonal space extends to include, not just
instruments, but other people we are playing with. Moreover, as we learn from develop-
mental studies, our body-schematic processes and our social interactions may involve what
Trevarthen calls intersubjective musicality. Intersubjective musicality is involved in our very
first way of communicating - as in infant-caregiver interactions.
Music moves us because we hear human intentions, thoughts and feelings moving in it, and
because we appreciate their urgency and harmony. It excites motives and thoughts that ani-
mate our conscious acting . . . . It appeals to emotions . . . . Evidently a feeling for music is
part of the adaptations of the human species for acting in a human-made world; part, too, of

CONNECTION SCIENCE
115
how cultural symbols and languages are fabricated and learned. (Trevarthen, Delafield-Butt, &
Schögler, 2011, p. 12)
Bowman (2004) makes a similar point, contending that this process starts even before birth.
It is important to begin, I think, with the sonorous roots of music and musical significance: with
the way the human body is hardwired for sound, and the potential relevance of such phenome-
nal facts for musical experience. The world of the ear is one we first inhabit three months before
birth. Well before we have begun to explore (or create?) the world with our eyes, imparting to
it the clarity and objectivity characteristic of visual experience, we experience and interpret our
world through the polyvalence of sound. (Bowman, 2004, p. 37)
Conclusion
In these previous paragraphs I have been emphasising a holistic interrelationship between
the four factors that Høffding identifies as involved in a kind of performative passivity. If it is
difficult to pull apart this passivity ("letting it happen") from the activity of the performance
itself, which involves, as suggested by Segev and her teacher Greenhouse, some form of
active direction, this simply reflects the dynamical process involved in embodied perfor-
mance, which in turn depends on an integration that is clearly mapped out in EC accounts
of body schematic, affective, extended and intersubjective aspects of perception, action
and cognition - all of which are involved in performance.
Note
1. The distinction between instrumental and expressive movement can be seen, for example, in
a subject who lacks proprioception and full body-schematic control, and who can accomplish
instrumental actions (e.g. picking up a glass) only by alternative use of vision and cognitive
effort, but who nonetheless is able to gesture in communicative/expressive action without body
schema, vision of gesture or cognitive effort (Cole, Gallagher, & McNeill, 2002).
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council grant [DP170102987].
References
Anderson, M. (2015). The renaissance extended mind. Berlin: Springer.
Anderson, M., Cairns, D., Czarnecki, B., Garratt, P., Rousseau, G., Sprevak, M., & Wheeler, M. (2015).
History of distributed cognition project. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University. Retrieved from http://
www.hdc.ed.ac.uk/
Bayliss, A. P., Frischen, A., Fenske, M. J., & Tipper, S. P. (2007). Affective evaluations of objects are
influenced by observed gaze direction and emotional expression. Cognition, 104(3), 644-653.
Bayliss, A. P., Paul, M. A., Cannon, P. R., & Tipper, S. P. (2006). Gaze cuing and affective judgments of
objects: I like what you look at. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13(6), 1061-1066.
Becchio, C., Manera, V., Sartori, L., Cavallo, A., & Castiello, U. (2012). Grasping intentions: From thought
experiments to empirical evidence. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 1-6.

116
S. GALLAGHER
Beilock, S. (2010). Choke:Whatthesecretsofthebrainrevealaboutgettingitrightwhenyouhaveto. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Berlucchi, G., & Aglioti, S. M. (2010). The body in the brain revisited. Experimental Brain Research, 200,
25-35.
Bowman, Q. (2004). Cognition and the body: Perspectives from music education. In L. Bresler (Ed.),
Knowing bodies, moving minds: Toward embodied teaching and learning (pp. 29-50). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Press.
Christensen, W., Sutton, J., & McIlwain, D. (2015). Putting pressure on theories of choking: Towards
an expanded perspective on breakdown in skilled performance. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 14(2), 253-293.
Christensen, W., Sutton, J., & McIlwain, D. J. (2016). Cognition in skilled action: Meshed control and the
varieties of skill experience. Mind & Language, 31(1), 37-66.
Clark, A. (2008). Supersizing the mind: Reflections on embodiment, action, and cognitive extension.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cole, J., Gallagher, S., & McNeill, D. (2002). Gesture following deafferentation: A phenomenologically
informed experimental study. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1(1), 49-67.
Colombetti, G. (2013). Thefeelingbody:Affectivesciencemeetstheenactivemind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cook, A. (2010). Shakespearean neuroplay: Reinvigorating the study of dramatic texts and performance
through cognitive science. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes error: Emotion, reason, and the human brain. New York, NY: G. P. Putnam.
Danziger, S., Levav, J., & Avnaim-Pesso, L. (2011). Extraneous factors in judicial decisions. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(17), 6889-6892.
Dewey, J. (1916). Essays in experimental logic. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2002). Intelligence without representation - Merleau-Ponty's critique of mental rep-
resentation the relevance of phenomenology to scientific explanation. Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 1(4), 367-383.
Dreyfus, H. L. (2005). Overcoming the myth of the mental: How philosophers can profit from the
phenomenology of everyday expertise. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical
Association, 79(2), 47-65.
Dreyfus, S. E., & Dreyfus, H. L. (1980). A five-stage model of the mental activities involved in directed skill
acquisition (No. ORC-80-2). Berkeley Operations Research Center, California University.
Fanon, F. (2008). Black skin, white masks. (R. Philcox, Trans.). New York, NY: Grove Press.
Ford, P., Hodges, N. J., & Williams, A. M. (2005). Online attentional-focus manipulations in a soccer
dribbling task: Implications for the proceduralization of motor skills. Journal of Motor Behavior, 37,
386-394.
Gallagher, S. (2005a). Dynamic models of body schematic processes. In H. De Preester & V. Knockaert
(Eds.), Body image and body schema (pp. 233-250). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gallagher, S. (2005b). How the body shapes the mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher, S. (2008). Neural simulation and social cognition. In J. A. Pineda (Ed.), Mirror neuron systems:
The role of mirroring processes in social cognition (pp. 355-371). Totowa, NJ: Humana Press.
Gallagher, S. (2012). The body in social context: Some qualifications on the "warmth and intimacy" of
bodily self-consciousness. Grazer Philosophische Studien, 84, 91-121.
Gallagher, S., & Bower, M. (2014). Making enactivism even more embodied. AVANT/Trends in Interdis-
ciplinary Studies (Poland), 5(2), 232-247.
Gallagher, S., & Meltzoff, A. (1996). The earliest sense of self and others: Merleau-Ponty and recent
developmental studies. Philosophical Psychology, 9, 211-233.
Gallagher, S., & Payne, H. (2014). The role of embodiment and intersubjectivity in clinical reasoning.
Body, Movement and Dance in Psychotherapy, 10(1), 68-78. doi:10.1080/17432979.2014.980320
Gallagher, S., & Væver, M. (2004). Disorders of embodiment. In J. Radden (Ed.), The philosophy of
psychiatry: A companion (pp. 118-132). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallese, V. (2014). Bodily selves in relation: Embodied simulation as second-person perspective on
intersubjectivity. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 369(177), 1-10.
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and
knowing (pp. 67-82). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

CONNECTION SCIENCE
117
Hayes, A. E., Paul, M. A., Beuger, B., & Tipper, S. P. (2008). Self produced and observed actions influence
emotion: The roles of action fluency and eye gaze. Psychological Research, 72(4), 461-472.
Head, H. (1920). Studies in neurology (Vol. 2). London: Oxford University Press.
Høffding, S. (2015). A phenomenology of expert musicianship (PhD thesis). Department of Philosophy,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen.
Ilundáin-Agurruza, J. (2016). Holismandthecultivationofexcellenceinsportsandperformance. London:
Routledge.
Krueger, J. (2014). Affordances and the musically extended mind. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 1003.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.01003
Legrand, D. P. M. (2007). Pre-reflective selfconsciousness: On being bodily in the world. Janus Head, 9,
493-519.
Maravita, A., & Iriki, A. (2004). Tools for the body (schema). Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(2), 79-86.
Maravita, A., Spence, C., Kennett, S., & Driver, J. (2002). Tool-use changes multimodal spatial interac-
tions between vision and touch in normal humans. Cognition, 83(2), B25-B34.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2012). Phenomenology of perception. (D. A. Landes, Trans.). London: Routledge.
Montero, B. (2012). Practice makes perfect: The effect of dance training on the aesthetic judge.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 11(1), 59-68.
Montero, B. G. (2015). Thinking in the zone: The expert mind in action. The Southern Journal of
Philosophy, 53(S1), 126-140.
Montero, B. G. (2016). Thought in action: Expertise and the conscious mind. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Neilson, P. D., & Neilson, M. (2005). An overview of adaptive model theory: Solving the problems of
redundancy, resources, and nonlinear interactions in human movement control. Journal of Neural
Engineering, 2, S279-S312.
Pereira, T., Abreu, A. M., & Castro-Caldas, A. (2013). Understanding task- and expertise-specific motor
acquisition and motor memory formation and consolidation. Perceptual & Motor Skills, 117(1),
1150-1171.
Röhricht, F., Gallagher, S., Geuter, U., & Hutto, D. D. (2014). Embodied cognition and body psychother-
apy: The construction of new therapeutic environments. Sensoria:AJournalofMind,Brain&Culture,
10, 11-20.
Sebanz,N.,Knoblich,G.,&Prinz,W.(2003).Representingothers'actions:Justlikeone'sown?Cognition,
88, B11-B21.
Soliman, T. M., Ferguson, R., Dexheimer, M. S., & Glenberg, A. M. (2015). Consequences of joint action:
Entanglement with your partner. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 144(4), 873-888.
Soliman, T. M., & Glenberg, A. M. (2014). The embodiment of culture. In L. Shapiro (Ed.), The Routledge
handbook of embodied cognition (pp. 207-220). London: Routledge.
Sutton, J., & McIlwain, D. J. (2015). Breadth and depth of knowledge in expert versus novice athletes.
In J. Baker & D. Farrow (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of sports expertise (pp. 95-105). London:
Routledge.
Sutton, J., McIlwain, D., Christensen, W., & Geeves, A. (2011). Applying intelligence to the reflexes:
Embodied skills and habits between Dreyfus and Descartes. Journal of the British Society for
Phenomenology, 42(1), 78-103.
Toner, J., Montero, B. G., & Moran, A. (2016). Reflective and prereflective bodily awareness in skilled
action.PsychologyofConsciousness:Theory,Research,andPractice.Retrievedfromhttp://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/cns0000090
Trevarthen, C. B. (1979). Communication and cooperation in early infancy: A description of primary
intersubjectivity. In M. Bullowa (Ed.), Before speech (pp. 321-348). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Trevarthen, C., Delafield-Butt, J., & Schögler, B. (2011). Psychobiology of musical gesture: Innate
rhythm, harmony and melody in movements of narration. In A. Gritten & E. Kind (Eds.), New
perspectives on music and gesture (pp. 11-44). London: Routledge.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The embodied mind: Cognitive science and human
experience. Cambridge: MIT Press.

118
S. GALLAGHER
Weiss, G. (2015). The normal, the natural, and the normative: A Merleau-Pontian legacy to feminist
theory, critical race theory, and disability studies. Continental Philosophy Review, 48, 77-93.
Young, I. M. (1980). Throwing like a girl: A phenomenology of feminine body comportment motility
and spatiality. Human Studies, 3(1), 137-156.

