Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Motivating Transcendental Phenomenology:
Husserl's Critique of Kant
Gregory Scott Moss
To cite this article: Gregory Scott Moss (2013) Motivating Transcendental Phenomenology:
Husserl's Critique of Kant, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 44:2, 163-180, DOI:
10.1080/00071773.2013.11006797
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2013.11006797
Published online: 21 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 283
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, Vol. 44, No. 2, May 2013
MOTIVATING TRANSCENDENTAL
PHENOMENOLOGY: HUSSERL'S CRITIQUE OF
KANT1
GREGORY SCOTT MOSS
Introduction 
Certainly, Husserl's charge that Kant commits the fallacy of psychologism,
and the arguments he invokes in support of this charge, have been thoroughly
investigated in the secondary literature.2 In this short essay, I dwell not on the
minutiae of Husserl's criticism of Kant, but on the implications of Husserl's
criticism for his phenomenology. More exactly, I propose that Husserl's critique
of Kant can be employed as a Leitfaden, or guiding thread, by which central
tenets of Husserl's phenomenology of reason may be elucidated. Accordingly,
I have entitled this short essay "Motivating Transcendental Phenomenology:
Husserl's Critique of Kant". As any purview of the secondary literature shows,
neither have philosophers explicitly drawn out the central tenets of the
phenomenology of reason from Husserl's criticism of Kant, nor have they
generally thought to employ Husserl's criticism of Kant in the way I propose.
I suspect that the relative lack of attention received by his Formal and
Transcendental Logic in comparison to his other works may be one reason, as
this work functions as the cardinal evidential base upon which I defend my
thesis.3 Since my main task is to illuminate Husserl's phenomenology of reason,
I shall not render judgment on the ultimate success of Husserl's criticism. 
The paper is divided into four sections, each of which contributes to the
demonstration of this thesis. Sections I-IV illuminate the strength of this
approach, by making plain the concrete potential of Husserl's criticism to
function as such a principle. Section I briefly lays bare Husserl's criticism of
Kant, as it discloses the motivating transcendental question of the
phenomenology of reason: 'what is the condition for the possibility of ideal
objects?' From the motivating question brought forth in section I, section II
draws out the central phenomenological tenets of ideal objectivity, categorial
intuition, the precedence of transcendental logic to formal logic, and descriptive
phenomenology. Section III argues that Husserl's attentiveness to the very
activity of the transcendental logician commits the phenomenologist to ideal
objectivity. In section IV, I reveal how these modifications of transcendental
philosophy motivate the paradoxical concept of Husserl's pre-predicative
judgment as well as his renovation of the meaning of truth as disclosure. Let me
be unequivocal: I do not expect to have exhausted the ways that Husserl's
criticism of Kant may be employed to motivate his phenomenology of reason.
Indeed, there are other features of Husserl's phenomenology of reason I do not
163

discuss. Still, I invite the reader to consider which of these may not also be
elucidated by the same principle. 
I. Husserl's Critique of Kant's Transcendental Logic 4
In this section I reconstruct Husserl's argument that Kant is guilty of
committing the fallacy of psychologism. For Husserl, Kant confines experience
within parameters that undermine his deduction of the categories. As will be
show in later sections, this problem results from a limitation of Kant's method.
One central aspect of Husserl's charge of psychologism lies in how Kant
conceives the relation between formal and transcendental logic.
In the transcendental deduction of the categories, Kant derives his twelve
categories from twelve forms of judgment. The categories constituting the
results of transcendental logic are discovered, according to Kant, in the forms
of judgment. But these judgments constitute the content of formal logic.5,6 Since
the categories that make experience possible are the 'logical functions' in the
twelve forms of judgment, formal logic functions as a clue for transcendental
logic and thereby as the condition for the possibility of experience.7 Since the
categories are discovered via the twelve forms of judgment, for Kant, the
transcendental logic is contingent upon the assumption of formal logic. In other
words, that the categories apply to experience, what the transcendental
deduction of the categories aims to demonstrate, is contingent upon the
assumption of formal logic. 
The assumption that the formal judgment is at work in making experience
possible implies that formal judgment is not an object of experience.8 They do
not constitute their own realm of objectivity, i.e. they do not constitute their own
domain of objects. Objectivity in Kant is limited to the objects of the spatial and
temporal world, and the self-identical forms contained in formal logic are not
themselves identical or reducible to any particular content in space or immanent9
time. Because formal apophantics,10 the study of formal judgment, is not itself
included in this restricted notion of 'experience', one cannot inquire into the
condition for its possibility. Hence, one never asks 'what is the condition for the
possibility of categories?' Since these are the logical functions in formal
judgment, one never asks: 'what is the condition for the possibility of formal
logic?' In other words, because transcendental philosophy inquires into the
condition for the possibility of the given, and formal logic is the condition for the
deduction of any given content, we are forever barred from inquiring into the
transcendental origins of formal logic [FTL 258]. From a Kantian perspective,
neither categories nor formal judgments require conditions for their possibility.
Because Kant does not recognize the ideal objectivity of logic, i.e. since he does
not recognize the formal judgment as an ideal, or non-temporal, object of
experience, he does not ask transcendental questions about it. But Husserl's goal
in the FTL just is the transcendental inquiry into the origin of formal logic.
164

The inability to experience categories and formal logic itself seems to be a
consequent of how Kant has characterized the conditions for empirical
knowing. The formalized indefinite manifold,11 the bare content of intuition, is
given to judgment in space and time. The content of thinking is given in forms
of intuition that deny experience of a distinct, self-identical thought form. For
example, the content of the category 'quality' does not alter on account of its
occurrence in many different passing moments of time, yet each experience-
content contains this moment of non-identity or difference. Defining the forms
of the givenness of the indefinite manifold in terms of the spatial and temporal
renders consciousness unable to accommodate distinct, self-identical logical
structures as objects of experience. Given that what is knowable is an object of
experience, and each object of experience is given in space and time, it follows
that no object is knowable if it is not spatial and temporal. But neither categories
nor the forms of judgment qua categories and judgments are spatial and
temporal.12 Hence, the categories that make experience possible cannot be
known, or if they are, then they are treated as though they were psychological
contents, not universals. But if categories cannot be known, then they cannot be
deduced. But this is absurd, for only through the categories of experience,
something unknowable, can we know an object of experience. Restricting
consciousness to empirical consciousness prevents consciousness from
knowing or deducing its own categories, and since knowing the categories is a
condition for knowing objectivity, there cannot be knowledge of objectivity.
The attempt to secure empirical knowledge by an appeal to a priori knowledge
is blocked by our inability even to experience the categories qua categories of
thought at all without psychologizing them. If we cannot experience the merely
conceptual forms of logical judgments as objects of thinking, then how can they
make possible empirically determined, spatial and temporal objects of thinking?
Each attempt we make to think a category of experience immediately infuses
that category with the spatial and temporal content of thinking. This spatial and
temporal content precludes the cognition of the self-identical thought form of
the logical object and replaces it with an ever changing thought form that
continually escapes our grasp.13
In order to inquire into the transcendental origins of formal logic, one would
be forced to recognize the ideal-objectivity of concepts, including formal logic.
In other words, one must admit the existence of an ideal objectivity. By 'ideal
objectivity' I mean that one must recognize that concepts qua concepts, are
objects of experience.14 Only when experience is broadened to include the ideal
objectivities, e.g. ideal objects such as judgments of the form 'S is P', would one
be able to inquire into the condition for their possibility. The vague delineation
of logic as a 'science of thinking'15 that one finds in Kant does not properly
discriminate between logic as something that happens in immanent time, and
logic as a self-identical objectivity that appears as such in the consciousness of
165

an individual. For Kant, although formal logic is a presupposition of experience,
the constituents of formal logic are not objects of experience qua spatial and
temporal contents. In this sense, Kant has not yet fully distinguished the sense
of logic as an ideal-object from the psychologizing tendency to view logic as a
phenomenon that occurs in the individual consciousness in immanent time or
inner intuition. There is an equivocation in the object of the 'science of
thinking': 'thinking' is of an object, but the logical object, the universal, does
not have the same form as the individual empirical object. The logician cannot
think the objects proper to his science if the conditions for the presentation of
a thought are restricted to the presentation of individual empirical objects.16
Just as Gottlob Frege critiques Husserl for providing a Franz Brentano-
inspired psychological account of mathematics and natural numbers in his
Philosophy of Arithmetic, so Husserl critiques Kant for committing
psychologism in his Critique of Pure Reason. As I made clear in the
Introduction, it is not a new insight for Husserl scholars that Husserl accuses
Kant of committing the fallacy of psychologism. Indeed, Husserl consistently
argues that Kant is guilty of psychologism throughout his career.17 What
concerns a philosophical enterprise beyond historical comparison is an
investigation into how Husserl's own phenomenology of logical reason is
motivated by Husserl's critique of Kant. This requires a proper interpretation of
Husserl's critique. Many unique aspects of how Husserl developed his own
phenomenology, which I shall discuss in section II, can be derived from the
faults he finds with the Kantian project.
II. The Notion of Ideal Objectivity
In this section the notion of ideal objectivity will be explicated. Moreover,
some entailments contained within the notion of ideal objectivity shall be
explored. The procedure for the explication of these entailments will be
developed from the perspective of Husserl's critique of Kant.18
Since formal logic is understood as the theory of science, Husserl's inquiry
into the condition for the possibility of science cannot begin from the
presupposition of formal logic but must take it as the object of inquiry.19 In
order to perform a transcendental inquiry into formal logic, one would be forced
to recognize that formal logic and its contents are themselves objects of
experience.20 Suzanne Bachelard agrees that the notion of the objectivity of the
formal-logical is central to understanding Husserl's FTL.21
If categories were objects of experience, then categories would not make the
object of experience possible, since the categories would be objects. But this
means that formal logic would not be a condition for the possibility of a
transcendental logic. Instead, the transcendental logic, that which uncovers the
condition for the possibility of experience, would make formal apophantics,
including the forms of judgment and the categories, possible. So, if formal
166

objects were admitted, then the formal cannot be a precondition for the
transcendental, but the transcendental must be a precondition for the formal. 
Husserl inverts the Kantian order. But why must phenomenology postulate
ideal objects? Moreover, how is transcendental logic a precondition of formal
logic? Since transcendental logic would make formal logic possible, the Kantian
critique of experience would be, as Husserl states, a 'naïve criticism of
experience' FTL 226], for it would have already presupposed a world in which
there are both ideal and material objects.22 For Husserl, there is an ideal world
that the Kantian critique of reason must presuppose. In a very broad sense, Kant
is working at a secondary, not a primordial level of what Husserl calls
'phenomenological' givenness. The chief reason logic does not satisfy the idea
of genuine science is that it cannot be a norm if its formal universality is itself
in need of criticism [FTL 200]. In other words, because experience functions in
original judgments, logic needs a theory of experience [FTL 211]. Moreover,
the critique of reason in Husserl cannot be inferential or 'metaphysical'.23 For
if it were, then it would presuppose that which it is attempting to clarify. To
assume forms of inference is to presuppose logic, but since the latter is the
object of inquiry, it cannot be presupposed. Hence, Husserl must provide a
description,24 not a deduction. The evidence one would provide for such an
object of experience would therefore not be of the same kind as the evidence
Kant provides. 
Given the transformation from deduction to description, Husserl's critique of
Kant must engender an alternation of the notion of transcendental 'evidence'.25
The transcendental logic can no longer consist of a concept necessarily
connected to an a priori intuition. The critique of reason must become a
phenomenology of reason.26
Because Kant does not recognize the ideal-objectivity of formal
apophantics, there is no need to posit an intuition in which these ideal objects
are given. For Husserl, ideal objects require a form of intuition [FTL 122].
The genesis of the categorial intuition in Husserl stems from the recognition
of an ideal objectivity as an object of experience. Since all objects are given
in some form of intuition, without an intuition of formal objects, the ideal-
object could not be given in experience. This intuition must be a 'categorial'
intuition, since it is the intuition in which the categories we think are given.27
Moreover, Husserl argues that with the expansion of experience to include
ideal objects, one cannot ignore another requirement for that view, namely the
intentionality of experience.28
Since the category cannot be the condition for the possibility of experience,
but must appear in experience, the category cannot precede the giving of the
object. Once the ideal is counted among the objects of experience, one condition
for experiencing an object is simply that in any awareness, logical or otherwise,
there must be 'the giving of the object'. Without 'the giving of the object', there
167

would be no experience or awareness of objects. 'The giving itself of an object'
is called 'intentionality'.29 Intentionality is directedness to an object. According
to Husserl, the basic condition for the experience of objects, either material or
ideal, is intentionality.30 So any descriptive evidence for an object must be
grounded in the intentionality of an object, since this is a condition for its
presentation to consciousness. What this condition for experience does not
explain is how categorial intuition is specifically connected to the intuition of
an object, but simply that to be aware of an object consciousness must be
directed to an object.31
Following Husserl's critique of Kant's psychologism, it becomes clear what
Husserl finds entailed in his transcendental account of logic. (I) A
transcendental phenomenology of reason is possible only under the assumption
of ideal objects, the latter including both formal and intensional universals. (II)
Ideal objectivity requires categorial intuition for its givenness as an object. With
the addition of ideal objects, experience is broadened to include the new
intuitions. (III) Since judgments are now a part of the experience to be
explained, the transcendental account must precede the formal logic, precluding
the possibility of a transcendental deduction. (IV) With this inversion, the notion
of transcendental 'evidence' alters, placing a descriptive account of
intentionality at the centre of the transcendental account of the formal object.32
III. Husserl's Account of the Constitution of Ideal Objects
Thus far, I have inquired into what would be the case if certain conditions
were satisfied. But why ought one accept that there are ideal objects that
constitute their own realm of objectivity? Husserl's phenomenological method,
explicated in the second part of Ideas: General Introduction to Pure
Phenomenology, provides the basis for applying phenomenology to ideal
objects. In this section I shall explicate why Husserl thinks phenomenology
commits the philosopher to accepting that there are ideal objects. The main line
of the argument focuses on Husserl's analysis of the practice of logic, and how
this unveils the constitution and mode of existence of logical objects in the
experience of that practice. 
As a conscious being, one finds oneself aware of a world external to oneself.
The immersion of consciousness in the world is the natural attitude of
consciousness. Insofar as consciousness is immersed in some object other than
itself, it is not aware of itself, but something other than itself, whether these are
spatial and temporal objects, psychological contents, numbers, or any other
object of one's consciousness.33,34 Phenomenology is concerned neither with
knowing these objects nor with doubting their existence. So, phenomenology
is not concerned with knowing the natural world correlated with the natural
attitude. Instead phenomenology suspends inquiry into these objects. By
suspending an inquiry into these objects in the natural world about-us,
168

Phenomenology brackets this natural attitude, or puts it aside. This is called
'epoché'. By bracketing the natural attitude, consciousness no longer looks at
an object external to itself, but is conscious of itself.35 What is left over after the
bracketing is the subject matter of phenomenology: the phenomenological
residuum. The residuum is consciousness and what is immanent in
consciousness.36
Unlike the sciences, e.g. physics and psychology,
phenomenology does not inquire into objects of consciousness, but inquires
into the consciousness of objects. More specifically, for Husserl it inquires into
the transcendental conditions for the possibility of consciousness of objects.37
Having taken up this new position, the conscious being finds itself aware of
many fields of its own awareness, e.g. perceptual, imaginative, and logical,
among others. Taking these as given modes of awareness, phenomenology
investigates how the objects of consciousness are given in those modes of
consciousness, and seeks a description of the objects in those modes. So if one
applies this method to the question concerning the existence of formal objects,
it becomes clear that phenomenology abstains from metaphysical debates about
whether formal objects exist as independent objects. Indeed, for
phenomenology, no object is possible if consciousness could not in principle be
aware of it. Instead, the phenomenologist asks, 'is there a form of consciousness
for which logical objects are given as independent objects?' 
If we apply the phenomenological method to logical cognition, then the
phenomenologist is committed to recognizing independent ideal objects. We
ought to qualify what we mean by 'independent' here. 'Independent' does not
signify any strong sense of metaphysical independence, as one might think if
one were still working within the natural attitude. Analogously to the real or
material object, one recognizes the transcendent or 'independent' sense of the
ideal object from the way in which the logician intends the object. Taking the
actuality of logical practice as a given, the fact that one can nominalize the
judgment points to one's own intentional treatment of the formal as an
independent self-identical object to which one can return [FTL 117]. For
example, when one makes a judgment about a judgment, one treats the
judgment as though it were an independent thing.38 'S is P' is a judgment, while
"'S is P' is a judgment" is a meta-judgment that nominalizes the judgment 'S
is P'. In the practice of logic, the practitioner treats the object as independent,
as illustrated in the nominalization of the judgment. By analyzing how the
practice of logic treats the object, the phenomenologist recognizes that in the
practice of logic the constituents of formal logic present themselves as
independent. But the object only has this sense of independence for
consciousness. This 'having of something itself', in this case, a formal object,
shows itself as the primary relation of the subject to its object in concrete logical
experience. Understanding the problem of the objectivity of the ideal seems to
require recognition of the intentional unity of consciousness, and evidence as
169

an intentional performance of consciousness.39 So, a condition for the practice
of logic40 is the cognition and recognition of the formal object.41
Consider the following. The content of the logical object is independent of
the thought of particular subjects at particular times, since multiple subjects can
think the same concept irrespective of the time when the concept is thought.
Moreover, the concept remains itself irrespective of when it is thought or who
is thinking it, allowing the logician to hold others responsible for drawing
erroneous inferences. These phenomenological facts indicate that the logical
constitution of a concept is to be a self-same entity. In this sense, the logical
object is a self-same object independent of particular subjects, even though it is
never independent of consciousness as such. The evidence for the logical object
consists in the intentional self-showing of the logical object in logical cognition.
Evidence employs intentionality, but is a self-showing of the intended object.42
These arguments establish that there is a distinct realm of objects constituted
as independent, self-same universals, distinct from individual empirical objects.
These universals are distinct from psychological contents, since they are
independent of psychological contents of particular thinkers. In addition, they
are distinct from empirical objects, since they are not temporal, but remain
themselves irrespective of the time of their consideration. 
On the one hand, Husserl is not committing himself to Platonism, since for
phenomenology universals are not independent of consciousness. On the other
hand, universals exist, since without universals there is no logical practice.
Universals exist as objects of intentional consciousness, presenting themselves
to logical consciousness as objects independent of the psyche of individuals.43
Since for Husserl phenomenology requires ideal and formal objects, the
implications engendered by that admission are no longer hypothetical, but are
real implications for phenomenology. If one applies these reflections to
Husserl's critique of Kant, one sees that Husserl's critique is aimed at Kant's
own activity as a transcendental logician, and Kant's failure to recognize the
phenomenological conditions for that practice.44
IV. The Transcendental Conditions for the Constitution of Ideal Objects 
In this section I shall explicate some necessary conditions for the possibility
of the givenness of ideal objects. In Husserl's terminology, these conditions
constitute the genesis of the sense of logic. In the FTL, Husserl begins with an
analysis of formal logic and proceeds therefrom to an analysis of the conditions
for the possibility of formal logic. Having established (i) what is entailed by a
transcendental inquiry into universal objects, and (ii) that for Husserl there are
universal objects of intentional consciousness, it remains to be determined (iii)
what the transcendental conditions for such objects are. In the following I shall
elucidate these conditions from Husserl's critique of Kant in order to show how
Husserl modifies Kant's use of judgment in transcendental logic. I wish to
170

emphasize that this exposition is only a sketch of the phenomenology of logical
reason.45
Claiming that intentionality is a condition for objectivity does not inform
the phenomenologist of the specific conditions for the possibility of ideal
objects. In this section, I shall begin to explore some specific conditions for the
possibility of ideal objects. In the FTL Husserl provides at least the following
condition for the possibility of ideal, universal objectivity: the disclosure of
individual, determinate objects. 
Kant's deduction of the categories commits him to the claim that there is
only an object if the object is judged, since judgments bring appearances to
objectivity. But since phenomenology must countenance universals as
intentional objects of consciousness, there must already be an object present
before a judgment about that object is rendered. In other words, it cannot be in
virtue of an act of predication that there are objects of experience.46
In the FTL, however, a new concept of judgment is introduced. Since
Husserl has incorporated the ideal-object into experience, Husserl introduces
a new meaning of 'judgment' that expresses the 'having of an object'. If the
ideal and the formal must be synthesized into the unity of experience, and
experience is characterized as the having of an object, how shall one
understand the judgment that correlates to this 'originary' having? One may
only judge an object on the condition that the object in its object-province is
already given. For example, one can only judge that 'S is P' given that 'S'.
This original having of an object is thus presupposed by ideal and formal
objectivity. Husserl calls this original having of the object evident judgments.
An 'evident' judgment is also called an 'experience'. So, employing
experience as evidence is using 'non-predicative' evidence. Evident judgments
are also 'experiential judgments' [FTL 211]. 
The intentional having of an object itself is the non-predicative evidence
upon which all predicative evidences are based [FTL 209f]. Each object is
constituted by various modes of the intentional performances of consciousness
that constitute it. Only once the object is constituted by such performances can
any ontological or formal-ontological work begin. For Husserl, the primordial
constitution of an object is expressed in terms of evident judging, which makes
possible any thematizing that takes place in a formal ontology. Husserl, like
Kant, grounds the possibility of science in judgment, but for Husserl, this
judgment is an 'evident', or 'pre-predicative' judgment. With the broadening of
experience to include the formal ontological, there is also a broadening of the
judgment from predicational to pre-predicational. The pre-predicational
judgment is at work in the constitution of any object of experience whatever. For
Husserl, the notion of judgment is extended to include unarticulated conceptual
contents, so 'S', as well as 'S is P' is considered a judgment, although in formal
analytics proper judgment is the distinct predicative judgment 'S is P'. As one
171

will see, this priority of the individual has great importance for the synthetic,
material a priori upon which the principles of logic are founded.47
At first glance, a 'non-predicative' judgment seems like a contradiction, since
a judgment just is an act of predication. What must be uncovered is what 'non-
predicative' judgment signifies. 'Non-predicative' judgment or evidence refers to
the use of an individual object as evidence for a universal object. It denotes an
individual object that contains an unarticulated categorical content. Formal logic
cannot establish whether or not a predicate belongs to a subject, or whether or not
some entailment obtains, since formal logic is void of content, and syntactical
forms in formal logic exhibit free variability. Formal logic cannot establish
whether or not it is true that 'Man is mortal', since it cannot establish
correspondence. Since formal logic cannot provide evidence for the truth or
falsehood of a judgment, formal logic cannot function as evidence for proper
conceptual relations. Hence, in order to establish evidence for judgments,
evidence must be taken from the intuition of individual objects, or pre-predicative
judgments, first given in intentions such as perception, memory, and imagination.
Evidence for the truth of judgments must be derived from the intuition of
individual objects, not from universal objects. The condition for the possibility of
an ideal object is the individual object. The intention of an individual object is the
condition for the possibility of any evidence for the universal. 
Since the evidence for universal objects is only possible on the presumption
of the individual object, and the universal object is determinate, the only way
that the individual could function as evidence for the universal object is if the
individual objects were themselves determinate. Hence, it is a condition for the
possibility of universal objects that the intentional performance of
consciousness discloses individual determinate objects to consciousness. When
an object is meant, it is this object, distinguished from others. Because the
evidential base is determinate,48 conceptualization of this evidential base is
possible. From this conceptualization of the base, formalization of this base is
possible. Moreover, it is clear that if the individuals were not categorial, then
they could not be used as evidence for synthesis in judgments. For this reason,
the determinate objects are always already conceptual.49 Underlying formal
logic is an intensional50 logic whose contents are originally culled from the
experience of determinate individuals. 
But what is non-predicative determinate evidence? In Logical Investigations,
Husserl provides a clue for what such evidence as 'functioning intentionality'
means. He claims that Kant neglects to draw four distinctions preventing him
from fully achieving a phenomenology of reason: intuition vs. signification,
sensuous vs. categorial intuition, inadequate vs. adequate intuition, and
individual vs. universal intuition.51
For an example of these distinctions, consider a very simple linguistic
example. Consider the word 'cat'. A meaning-conferring act gives meaning to
172

the word 'cat'. 'Cat' means an animal of a certain kind. If one perceives a cat,
then there is a meaning fulfilling intuition of a 'cat'. This means that the
meaning of the word 'cat' is fulfilled in one's experience, since one perceives
a cat. The meaning of the word 'cat' is an example of signification, while the
perception of the cat is an example of intuition. If, on the one hand, one
experiences a cat, then the meaning-intention is adequate, since there is a
meaning-fulfilling intuition. If, on the other hand, there is not really a cat there,
just the appearance of a cat, or no cat at all, then the meaning-fulfilling intuition
is not present, and the intuition is inadequate to fulfil the meaning-intending
act.52 Although the cat is an individual thing, when one attends to the presence
of the cat, one becomes aware of the unification of the meaning-intending act
and meaning-fulfilling act. The unification of these acts is adequation, while
their disparity is inadequation. When one has insight into the unity of these acts,
one has insight into the presence of the meaning 'cat' in the intuition. This
presence of the meaning 'cat' in the intuition is a determinate, unity of acts, but
is not yet an act of predication. In this case, one intuits a universal by taking the
unification of intentional acts, e.g. linguistic and perceptual acts, as the object
of one's awareness, and as such one's act is an intuition of a concept or
category. One could say that one intuits an 'abstract individual' in the intuition
of the unity of these acts. In having the unity of intentions as the object of one's
own intention, one experiences truth, or the disclosure of a determinate,
individual object.53 Without the presence of the category in the intuition, the
individual object would not be experienced. In this way, categorial intuition
gives us access to the cognition of individual objects, as indicated earlier. The
intuition of the concept is an intuition of a pre-predicative, evident judgment.
Given this disclosure of a unity of acts, one can take this unity of intentions as
the evidence for the use of the term 'cat' in judgments, so as to delineate the
proper and improper uses of the term in judgments.54
Assuming that there are proper and improper ways to apply concepts in
judgments, in order to know how one ought to apply concepts in judgments, one
must know how they are given in intuition. It should now be clearer how 'truth'
and 'evidence' are connected in Husserl's phenomenology. Truth is a disclosure
of the unity of intentional acts, yielding a categorial intuition, which functions
as transcendental evidence for the use of logical reason. These determinate, non-
predicate unifications must be described, not deduced, in order to employ them
in a critique of reason. 'Functioning intentionality' forms the evidential base
from which one can think ideal objects independently of the intuition in which
they are originally discovered. Unlike in Kant, the categories are discovered in
intuition and then posited as independent universal objects.55 For universal
intuition, i.e. cognition of universal objects, one requires categorial intuition.
For categorial intuition, one requires adequate and inadequate intuition. For
adequate and inadequate intuition, one must have significative and intuitive acts. 
173

Because the synthetic-intentional unity of the evidential base is a coherent
synthesis of modes of intentional performance, e.g. perception, memory, etc,
and the formal logical apophantics is phenomenologically grounded therein,
the content of the forms of judgment do not exhibit free variability. Following
our earlier example, one cannot use the term 'cat' however one wishes. One
must heed the intuition of that category in appropriating the term when one
makes judgments with that term.56
For this reason, truth logic,57 logic not indifferent to the content of judgments,
has its phenomenological basis in the intentional structure of consciousness. In
sum, the phenomenological investigation into the evidential base provides us
with standards by which reason should operate, and thereby function as a basis
for a phenomenological critique of reason. There is no genuine science without
the being-provinces given to the thematizer in intentionality, while the logical
norms that are present in formal apophantics are legitimized norms that have
their foundation in the intentional structure of consciousness [FTL 272].
Having traced truth logic to the evidential base, one is able, via categorical
acts, to think formal judgments from given intensional judgments. Having
traced the origin of intensional logic to the determinate evidential base, one is
now able to reduce the judgments in that logic to the forms of any object
whatever and empty the logic of its material content. So, the most formal logical
principles upon which the forms of judgment and the laws of judgment-
consequence and compatibility are based also have their phenomenological
founding in the evidential base, and most proximately in intensional judgments.
This shows that one can inquire into the synthetic unity of objects at different
levels, e.g. at the most universal or intermediately particular levels.58 This
original having of a determinate object itself in the evidential base is the truth
upon which the most universal logical principles of non-contradiction and
excluded middle are founded [FTL 196-8]. We can formulate the law that
'every judgment is either true or false' only on the presupposition of the
disclosure of truth logic, which is founded in a determinate evidential base
comprised of determinate and conceptual individuals.59
In Kant, objects only exist on the ground of predication, and truth is defined
as the correspondence of a concept to its object. But since the intention of an
object is the condition for the intention of an act of predication, for Husserl
truth is not simply correspondence of concept to object. The primary disclosure
of the individual object in the intentional having is a more primary notion of
truth than truth as correspondence, since the disclosure of the object precedes
the act of predication, or the correspondence of concept to object. Hence, only
with truth as an original disclosure of the object itself is truth as
correspondence possible. With this alteration of the relation of judgment to
object, there is not only a change to the meaning of 'evidence', but also to the
meaning of 'truth'.
174

In Kant, evidence is still functioning as an absolute security against
deception. The delineation of the a priori from the empirical in Kant seems to
re-confirm this. If we are at the mercy of further observation then no empirical
observation counts as knowledge, for we could always be mistaken. One might
speculate that Kant's assumption that formal logic is phenomenologically
unproblematic led him to the assumption that only evidence that is certain or
absolutely secure against any possible deception should really count as
'evidence'. But since the having of any object, including the ideal-object, is
founded in a prior object, 'evidence' has now become 'functioning
intentionality'.60
To summarize, the condition for the possibility of the quality of judgment,
an act of predication, is the giving of an intentional individual object, while the
condition for the possibility of the correspondence of a concept to an object is
the disclosure of the determinate object. These conditions for the possibility of
ideal objects are determinate non-predicative evidences upon which acts of
predication are founded. 
This presupposition of disclosure, of the determinate evidential base,
privileges certainty as the primary mode of givenness [FTL 218]. This certainty
is the certainty that I could bring into play synthetically connected sequences
of consciousness, whose unity results in the effect that I should continue to be
conscious of the same object [FTL 234]. Although Husserl alters the way that
we view evidence, his privilege of disclosure, the metaphysical correlate of
which is the determinate evidential base, raises questions concerning the degree
to which his notion of evidence has radically departed from the traditional form.
'That any judgment can be made distinct' seems to rely on the principle that
cognition aims at truth, and 'eschews indeterminacy' [FTL 62].
In the preceding I hope to have secured the reader's confidence that Husserl's
critique of Kant may be a fruitful guide to discovering central tenets of Husserl's
phenomenology of reason. Moreover, I am interested in investigating what other
inferences one could draw about the phenomenology of reason from Husserl's
criticism. Indeed, how much further this principle may be extended is a project
worth pursuing. 
University of Georgia
References
1. I would like to thank Dr. Bradley O Bassler for inspiring this paper, and Rene Jagnow for his
insightful comments throughout its composition. In addition, Eric Helleloid, Joseph P. Carter,
AJ Tiarsmith, and Jason Carter deserve thanks for many fruitful discussions of these matters
and their helpful comments. 
2. For example, see Rotenstreich, Nathan. Synthesis and Intentional Objectivity. On Kant and
Husserl. Dordrecht, Netherlands. Kluwer Academic Publishers.1998. For literature in German
on Husserl's relation to Kant see Kern, Iso. Husserl and Kant. Eine Untersuchung ueber
Husserl's Verhaeltnis zu Kant und zum Neukantianismus. Den Haag. Martinus Nijhoff. 1964.
Both provide a thorough account of Husserl's accusation of Kant's psychologism. In addition,
175

see Anderson, Lanier R., "Neo-Kantianism and the Roots of Anti-Psychologism". British
Journal for the History of Philosophy. Vol.13. Issue 2. 2005. 287-323, in which Anderson
distinguishes types of criticisms against psychologism: one is grounded in the objectivity of
logic, the other in its normativity. As we shall see, Husserl's criticism opts for the former. 
3. Concerning the secondary literature on Husserl's Formal and Transcendental Logic, I have
found the following most helpful in understanding the content and method of this work:
Bachelard, Suzanne. A Study of Husserl's Formal and Transcendental Logic. Trans. Lester E.
Embree. Northwestern UP. 1990.
4. I will mainly focus on Husserl, Edmund, Formal and Transcendental Logic. Trans. Dorion
Cairns. Hague, Netherlands. Martinus Hijhoff. 1969 and in particular pages 255-266, in which
he critiques Kant at length. For the remainder of this paper, I shall cite the Formal and
Transcendental Logic as FTL.
5. For Kant, logic is formal and not transcendental if the concepts do not have content. Kant,
Critique of Pure Reason, Trans. and Ed. Paul Guyer and Allen W. Wood. NY. Cambridge UP.
1998. A51-A62, B75-86. 193-199.
6. For Husserl, 'formal logic' generally has a different signification. For him, logic signifies the
general theory of science, whereas formal logic signifies an apriori theory of deductive
multiplicities. Note the difference between Husserl's Leibnizian influenced sense of formal
logic from Aristotle's logic, which has a necessary non-formal content, upon which Kant's
view is heavily reliant. Husserl's 'formal logic' contains the principles of logical compatibility
and rules of inference, e.g. principles of non-contradiction and modus ponens, and the results
that follow from their application.
7. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, 148. B96; A71, pp. 156. A80; B106. The forms of judgment
divide into four categories: Quantity, Quality, Relation, and Modality.
8. The hidden, but perhaps obvious, assumption generating this inference is that what makes an
object possible cannot itself be an object of experience. 
9. By 'immanent' I mean the temporal flux of the contents of consciousness. 
10. 'Apophantic' is a term Husserl employs often throughout the Formal and Transcendental
Logic, meaning 'judgment or science of judgment.' 'Formal apophanitcs', another of Husserl's
terms, denotes the study of judgments which hare merely formal in character, i.e. the form of
any possible judgment. The forms of any possible judgment are not necessarily connected to
any particular content. The study of formal apophantics can be distinguished from a study of
judgments which are not indifferent to their content.
11. Manifold' is a translation of the German 'Mannigfaltigkeit', which means 'many-folded-ness.'
The indefinite manifold is the content of intuition that is synthesized by the categories into an
object of experience.
12. Of course, in the schematism, a'pure image', each category corresponds to a time-
determination. But the assumption is that qua concepts they are not so given. 
13. In Husserl, Edmund, The Shorter Logical Investigations. Trans. J.N. Findlay. Ed. Dermot
Moran, Routledge UP: NY. 2001, Husserl claims that psychologism is a kind of relativism,
whether it is transcendental or empirical: "Every doctrine is ipso facto relativistic, a case of
specific relativism, if, with the empiricists, it treats the pure laws of logic as empirical,
psychological laws. It is likewise relativistic, if, with the apriorists, it deduces these laws, in
more or less mythic fashion, from certain 'original forms' or 'modes of functioning' of the
human understanding..." Husserl, Prolegomena to Pure Logic, Shorter Logical Investigations,
Paragraph 38, 52.
14. Note that the individuals in the ideal objectivity are universals. They may be merely formal,
in the sense that they represent the mere form of any conceptual content whatever, or they may
be necessarily connected to a particular content. This term denotes a region of ideal objects
which the transcendental phenomenologist investigates.
15. Kant, Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Hamburg. Felix Meiner Velag. 1998. 130, B76; A52. "Die
Logik kann nun wiederum in zwiefacher Absicht unternommen werden, entweder als Logik des
allgemeinen, oder des besonderen Verstandesgebrauchs. Die erste enthaelt die schlechthin
176

notwendigen Regeln des Denkens [...]" Here formal logic is defined as the 'rules of thinking',
i.e. Regeln des Denkens.
16. Clearly, Kant did not view himself as guilty of psycholgoism, since his own view of logic is
that logic is the study of how one ought to think, not how one actually does think. 
17. See Husserl, Edmund, Ideas. General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. Trans. W.R.
Boyce Gibson. NY. Collier Macmillian. 1975, Part 2, Chapter 6, 166. Also see Husserl,
Edmund, The Shorter Logical Investigations. Trans. J.N. Findlay. Ed. Dermot Moran.
Routledge UP: NY. 2001, Prolegomena to Pure Logic, paragraph 38, 51-55.
18. Whether there are formal objects is a question which shall be considered in the next section.
19. Husserl is inquiring into the sense or meaning of a genuine science. Since Husserl understands
logic as a theory of science, he is investigating the sense of logic. This clarification of the
idea of genuine science mirrors Kant's inquiry into the possibility of knowledge, only
Husserl's project is not an inquiry into the possibility of natural science but into the sense of
any genuine science whatever. In this sense, both philosophers are aiming at developing the
conditions for the proper application of reason. 
20. In Section III Husserl's argument for ideal objectivity is explicated.
21. She writes: "But now that we have come to the end of Husserl's reflection, we are in a position
to understand that the problem of the ideality of the judgment has been a guiding problem for
Formal and Transcendental Logic." Bachelard, Suzanne. A Study of Husserl's Formal and
Transcendental Logic, 201.
22. Here I wish to comment on some terms which may be helpful to some readers. In Husserl,
'ideal' and formal objects are conventionally referred to as 'irreal' objects, while material
objects are referred to as 'real' objects. These terms denote the ontological primacy of material,
non-formal objects to the formal objects. Nonetheless, one ought to tread lightly here, for
although the non-formal is a condition for the formal, the formal permeates every having of
the non-formal, as we shall discuss at greater length in what follows. This distinction I mention
here ought not be confused with the distinction between reell contents and irreell, or the
intentional content of an experience. 
23. Note here the connection that I am drawing between inference and metaphysics. It appears that
when we attempt to develop a metaphysics by assuming the forms of judgment and laws of
inference, we have either not yet illuminated the ontological status of the formal, which
underpins our ontology, or we have already illuminated its metaphysical structures. In Kant,
because the epistemological critique provides us with a body of metaphysics, Husserl's
critique of Kant's epistemology engenders a critique of that body of metaphysics. 
24. Proper phenomenological description, in contrast to mere empirical description, will be
discussed in section III. See the discussion of the constitution of logical objects. 
25. In sections III and IV I provide a fuller account of what this 'evidence' is. 
26. Although Husserl critiques Kant, he thinks that the synthesis of recognition in the deduction
of the categories in the first edition of the critique of pure reason comes very close to
discovering phenomenology. Nathan Rotenstreich recognizes this, in Synthesis and
Intentionality, 142. See Husserl, Ideas, part 2, pp.166. I speculate that this is the case since
Husserl's account of the distinction between the immanent and the transcendent in the Ideas
relies on seeing the self-same identical thing as adumbrations of the various temporal
variations of the object, and the synthesis of recognition in Kant is a recognition of the self-
same object in virtue of running through temporal and spatial variations of the object.
27. In section VI I explicate further how categorial intuition works. 
28. On pg. 45 of FTL Husserl writes: "One must not shun the indispensable broadening of the
object concept to cover not only the real but also the irreal ('ideal') objects; to it there
corresponds the broadening of the concept of experience, which, with this amplification,
retains precisely the essential property: seizing upon something itself (having of something
itself, giving of something itself)." 
29. Husserl discusses three different forms of consciousness in his Logical Investigations. For a
discussion of consciousness as the stream of psychological contents in internal time, self-
177

awareness, and intentionality, see Shorter Logical Investigations, Logical Investigation V,
ch.1-2, especially 201-223.
30. I should note that the Logical Investigations provides an in-depth analysis of intentionality
which is assumed in FTL. It is a term in the nomenclature of Husserl's phenomenology, and
does not have the usual meaning of 'intention' in English, as in the sentence, 'I intend to sit
down'. It does not mean 'purpose', but something closer to pointing. Consciousness points to
objects, and exhibits a vector toward objects. Although Husserl does not use 'vorhaben', a
translation of 'intend' into German, to discuss intentionality, the German 'vorhaben', 'having
before', is closer to this meaning in its literal translation. 
31. In section IV I show how categorial intuition implies a commitment to intentionality because
intentional structures ground the intuition of categories. 
32. Although I lack the space for a proper discussion of the topic here, I would like to suggest that
one could also show that the presupposition-less aspect of the transcendental subject in Husserl
follows from Husserl's rejection of formal logic as a condition of transcendental logic. 
33. Husserl, Ideas, Part 2, Ch. 3, Paragraphs 27-30.
34. Note that the natural attitude is not necessarily an immediate consciousness of external objects
in time and space, but includes an immersion in one's own mental contents. By immersion I
mean a non-critical, or unmediated relation to the content of one's experience. For example,
one could have an immediate relation to an external object, e.g. a tree, just as much as one can
have an immediate relation to a memory or image in one's imagination. This is important to
recognize, since phenomenology is not identical to psychological introspection. 
35. Husserl, Ideas, Part 2, Ch. 3, Paragraphs 31-32.
36. Husserl, Ideas, Part 2, Ch.4, Paragraph 33.
37. For a good introduction to Husserl, see Moran, Dermot. Edmund Husserl. Founder of
Phenomenology. Cambridge, UK. Polity Press, 2005 or Zahivi, Dan. Husserl's
Phenomenology. Stanford UP. 2003.
38. Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, makes a similar point about accidental categories when he argues
that when one studies numbers as numbers, one treats them as though they are independent,
even though, for him, they are not, properly speaking, independent things, such as planets
and people. 
39. For those more familiar with the analytic tradition, Moore's 'argument' for external things is
analogous to Husserl's argument for formal objects. Of course, Moore is not a
phenomenologist, but the analogy may be useful anyway. The way that one treats such objects
indicates one's primordial attitude towards them such that even if one explicitly denies their
objectivity one's actions indicates otherwise. In a certain mode of cognition, the hand shows
itself as something independent of consciousness, as the logical objects shows itself as
independent in a certain mode of cognition. 
40. In the Introduction to the Formal and Transcendental Logic, 10-12, Husserl presents his own
investigation into the phenomenology of logic as an investigation into the practice of logic.
41. Kant provides his Critique of Idealism by arguing that there is an external world. Husserl, on
the other hand, need only point out that I am always already committed to external objects,
for they are always already intended as 'transcendent' in consciousness. In the clarification of
genuine science, many epistemological problems that Kantian transcendental philosophy
sought to solve, e.g. the problem of the external world, the transcendental the phenomenology
resolves. 
42. Instead of assuming that there is a realm of objects about which one can ask transcendental
questions, as Kant does in his inquiry into the possibility of natural science, Husserl provides
a phenomenological ground for believing that there is a realm of formal objects about which
one can ask transcendental questions.
43. Nathan Rotenstreich notes that Kant's account of mind is one situated within a world, whereas
Husserl's method brackets those external conditions. This renders the latter without external
constraints, whereas Kant's critique is conditioned by nouminal constraints. Synthesis and
Intentional Objectivity, 7.
178

44. Kant is often referred to as a 'logician' since he is explicating what is necessarily entailed in
the notion of experience. For examples, see Sellars, Wilfred, "Toward a Theory of the
Categories." Essays in Philosophy and its History. Philosophical Studies Series. Vol.2.
Dortrecht, Holland. Reidel Pub. 1974. Husserl's critique of Kant is a critique of his uncritical
attitude toward logic and the practice of logic.
45. For a comparison of Husserl's account of ideal objects and the account of other
phenomenologists, especially Merleau Ponty, see Besner, Kirk M. Merleau Ponty's
Phenomenology: The Problem of Ideal Objects. NY. Continuum International Publishing
Group. 2007.
46. Acts of predication are described as a certain kind of 'quality' of intentional acts in the Logical
Investigations. A quality is a way of intending an object which does not individuate what is
intended. For example, one may judge 'that Napoleon is French' or judge 'that Bach is a
composer', but the 'judging' in these cases does not distinguish the individual whom is judged.
'French' and 'composer' perform this function. 'Matter' is that which individuates the object
of an intention, while quality is a way of intending that object. So for Husserl, matter and
quality are transcendental constituents of the having of any object whatever. Other examples
of 'qualities' of judgments are perception, memory, imagination, assertion, signification, etc.
So although concepts do not denote individuals, Husserl takes the position that the subject by
itself does not give us the marks by which the subject is identified; for this, one needs a 'sense'
or intentional matter.
47. On pg. 14 of FTL, Husserl writes: "When we add to this the fact that Kant's transcendental
investigation of cognition took effect afterwards in a manner that remained far removed from
any actually and concretely explicative analysis of cognition, the result is the immense defect
in modern theory of Objective science: It has not been able even to make understandable, even
as a problem, the deepest clarification and establishment of the possibility of genuine sciences." 
48. I note that what is intended is never fully determined in the sense that the performance is
infinitely re-iterable and I can never acquire a complete view on each and every view of any
particular empirical object or all objects of consciousness. 
49. I do not mean for this to exclude the possibility of a non-conceptual passive synthesis. For
example, in Husserl's phenomenology internal time consciousness is a synthesis of intuition
but is not conceptual. 
50. 'Intensional' here is opposed to 'extensional' where the members of a class are defined not
by the extension of the class, but by some meaning or standard which is determined by the
categorial intuition. 
51. Shorter Logical Investigations, 375
52. It is important to note that for Husserl there is already a unification of meaning and intuition
in perceptual awareness prior to language. I use language here only as a means of illustrating
via a simple concrete example, how phenomenological evidence works. 
53. That the intuition of the category gives the intuition of the individual is based on Husserl's
assumption that the object is individuated by meaning, or the matter of the intentional act. 
54. Kant's method, as Husserl notes, overlooks these components:cxx "How strongly we tend to
let these oppositions shade into one another would be shown by a criticism of Kant's theory
of knowledge, which throughout bears the impress of the failure to draw any clear distinction
among these oppositions. In Kant's thought categorial (logical) functions play a great role, but
he fails to achieve our fundamental extension of the concepts of perception and intuition over
the categorial realm, and this because he fails to appreciate the deep difference between
intuition and signification, their possible separation and usual commixture. And so he does not
complete his analysis of differentiating between inadequate and adequate adaptation of
meaning to intuition. He therefore also fails to distinguish between concepts, as universal
meanings of words and concepts as universal objects, as the intentional correlates of universal
presentations." Husserl, Shorter Logical Investigations, 374-375
55. This account is very cursory. For a fascinating and detailed account of how this works, see
Shorter Logical Investigations, Logical Investigation VI, Second Section. Unlike in Kant, the
179

conceptual unity in the intuition is passive, since the object is not produced in an act of a
priori predication, but is simply given in the awareness of the unity of acts. Still, the
production of the categorial object, as a result of an intellectualization of intuition, is active,
and not simply given in intuition, since the phenomenologist must focus on the correlation of
subjective acts and not simply on the object intended in order to achieve an insight into
categorial structures.
56. On pg. 218 of FTL, Husserl states this coherence of the determinate evidential base must be
respected when filling in the content of judgments: "In respect of its content, every original
judging and every judging that proceeds coherently, has coherence by virtue of the coherence
of the matters in the synthetic unity of the experience, which is the basis on which the judging
stands." 
57. Truth logic is not indifferent to its own content. Unlike formal logic it is not an inquiry into
the form of thinking as such, but it inquires into the proper relations between particular
concepts as is dictated by the content of the concepts themselves. The contents of judgments
in truth logic are derived from the evidential base. In such a logic, for example, one could not
define any concept as one wished by simply changing the extension denoted; concepts have
certain necessary entailments culled from intuition, and these must be respected when using
the concepts in judgments. For this reason, it would be better to think of truth logic as an
intensional logic whose meaning is culled from the evidential base.
58. Also, it seems that this determinate having is the condition for any vague having of an object.
59. For Husserl, the object is primordially a synthetic unity of intentional consciousness, although
it is not identical to any mode of synthetic unity. This pre-predicative judgment seems to
correspond to Kant's Transcendental Aesthetic, except in Husserl's case, the Aesthetic is the
transcendental condition for the possibility of the Analytic, since the object is prior to the
predicative judgment. Because immediate intentional having is characteristic of scientific and
pre-scientific experience, Husserl seems to have developed a Transcendental Aesthetic that
shows the possibility not only of scientific experience, as Kant intended, but to any experience
whatever. We can inquire into the possibility of scientific experience only once the intentional-
directedness is established. 
60. FTL 157; Unlike Kant, Husserl cannot, via deduction, infer that intentionality is the a priori
structure of consciousness which no longer requires another confirmation. He is unable to
make this inference because the argument for such structures depends on a description of
modes of consciousness accessed in phenomenological consciousness. It seems that the a
priori truth of the intentionality of consciousness, which functions as the basis of evidence,
must always be re-affirmed in the experience of each intentional having. In this sense,
phenomenology is never finished, for it can only maintain that intentionality is an a priori
structure via an infinite re-confirmation of the basic structures of consciousness. The a priori
is possessed by the theorizer in its infinite re-applicability, which the theorizer cannot ever
fully perform, but performs in each confirmation of the intentional having.
180

