International Journal of Audiology
ISSN: 1499-2027 (Print) 1708-8186 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iija20
Physiology and phenomenology of tinnitus:
Implications for treatment
William Noble & Richard Tyler
To cite this article: William Noble & Richard Tyler (2007) Physiology and phenomenology of
tinnitus: Implications for treatment, International Journal of Audiology, 46:10, 569-574, DOI:
10.1080/14992020701506296
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14992020701506296
Published online: 07 Jul 2009.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 506
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iija20

William Noble*,§
Richard Tyler§
*School of Psychology, University of
New England, Australia
§Department of Otolaryngology,
University of Iowa, USA
Key Words
Tinnitus
Physiology
Phenomenology
Treatment
Handicap
Psychology
Audiology
Original Article
International Journal of Audiology 2007; 46:569574
Physiology and phenomenology of tinnitus:
Implications for treatment
Abstract
We examine a contrast in understanding tinnitus and how
this impacts on treatment approaches. First, a physio-
logical account of tinnitus is described based on disin-
hibition and cortical remapping following injury at the
receptor level, the analog for tinnitus being the 'phantom
limb pain' phenomenon. Secondly, an experimental
model of tinnitus is reviewed that relies on inference
from conditioning animal behaviour. Arising from this, a
role for conditioning in people distressed by tinnitus has
been proposed, based on the unfounded premise that, for
humans, tinnitus is a neutral stimulus, the distress being
due to association with other stressful events. We critique
this because we believe it influences approaches to
tinnitus treatment. Finally, the phenomenology of tinni-
tus in the human case is analysed, with its nature
illuminated via a series of distinctions with hearing
impairment. Tinnitus can be intrinsically stressful for
some people. Understanding this emphasizes the need to
involve concepts and treatment in the area of clinical
psychology. A flexible coalition between clinical audiol-
ogists and clinical psychologists is proposed as fruitful for
tinnitus and related rehabilitation.
Sumario
Examinamos una comparacio´n para comprender el
acu´feno y co´mo esto impacta los acercamientos terape´u-
ticos. Inicialmente se describe un recuento fisiolo´gico,
basado en la desinhibicio´n y en la re-localizacio´n cortical
despue´s de una lesio´n a nivel del receptor, siendo la
analogı´a del acu´feno el feno´meno de ''dolor fantasma'' en
una extremidad. Posteriormente se revisa un modelo del
acu´feno que involucra la interferencia a partir del
condicionamiento de la conducta animal. A partir de
esto, se propone un papel para el condicionamiento de la
gente estresada por el acu´feno, basado en la premisa
infundada de que para los humanos el acu´feno es un
estı´mulo neutral y que el estre´s se debe a la asociacio´n con
otros eventos estresantes. Nosotros criticamos esto por-
que creemos que con ello se ejerce influencia sobre los
enfoques terape´uticos del acu´feno. Finalmente se analiza
la fenomenologı´a del acu´feno en los humanos, aclarando
su naturaleza por medio de una serie de distinciones con
respecto a la hipoacusia. El acu´feno puede ser intrı´nse-
camente estresante para algunas personas. Comprender
esto enfatiza la necesidad de involucrar conceptos y
tratamiento en el a´rea de la psicologı´a clı´nica. Se propone
una coalicio´n flexible entre audio´logos y psico´logos
clı´nicos en beneficio del acu´feno y lo relacionado con
su rehabilitacio´n.
The aim of this paper is to clarify the implications of a
behavioural animal model of tinnitus, and to discuss its
relevance for understanding and treating tinnitus. The position
we will argue is that physiological accounts of tinnitus are
supported by human and non-human investigation, but confu-
sion has arisen because of the use of classical conditioning
techniques to establish that tinnitus might be induced in non-
human animals. We believe there is no evidence that such
conditioning plays a role in the human response to tinnitus.
Rather, as we will discuss in detail, the phenomenology of
tinnitus needs to be better understood, including the problematic
status of the term 'phantom', which is often used in description
of tinnitus sounds. Gaining an understanding of the meaning of
tinnitus for the person who sustains it is a critical element in
treatment of its distressing effects.
Evidence for a cortical model of tinnitus, and the
analog with 'phantom limb' pain
Various models for the physiological basis of tinnitus have been
proposed, including change in cochlear output, increase in
spontaneous neural activity, reduction in lateral inhibition, and
eventual cortical remapping (e.g. Cacace, 2003; Moller et al,
1992; Shore, 2004; Tyler, 2006). Here, we give attention to a
lateral disinhibition account as one explanation for the immedi-
ate consequence of whatever has caused neural injury. In the
longer term, with ongoing injury or with incomplete recovery
from it, reduction or absence of output to associated brain
areas may lead to remapping at the level of the auditory cortex.
This chronic neurological condition can be understood as the
basis for the ongoing experience of the tinnitus sound. There
may be other plausible mechanisms to account for tinnitus;
the disinhibition/cortical remapping model conforms with a
related phenomenon ('phantom limb' pain) and with human and
animal experimental findings which we will review.
Breakdown of lateral inhibition is argued as the basis for the
finding that sometimes the tinnitus pitch occurs at the edge of
the frequency region affected by injury to cochlear hair cells,
such as from overstimulation by noise (Kral & Majernik, 1996;
Weisz et al 2004). Disinhibition allows greater cell activation in
regions adjacent to the region of injury, manifesting as a tinnitus
pitch. If injury is sustained, it is argued that ongoing effects at
the receptor level lead to reorganization of cell networks more
centrally (Lockwood et al, 2002; Salvi et al, 2000).
Lockwood et al (1998) reported observations using imaging of
cerebral blood flow changes in four patients with unilateral
narrowband tinnitus associated with high-frequency sensori-
neural hearing loss. The unusual feature of these patients was
their ability to alter the experienced loudness of the tinnitus by
clenching their jaws; in two cases this increased the tinnitus
ISSN 1499-2027 print/ISSN 1708-8186 online
DOI: 10.1080/14992020701506296
# 2007 British Society of Audiology, International
Society of Audiology, and Nordic Audiological Society
William Noble
School of Psychology, University of New England
Armidale, NSW, 2351, Australia
E-mail: wnoble@pobox.une.edu.au
Received:
January 17, 2007
Accepted:
June 6, 2007

loudness, in two cases tinnitus loudness decreased. It was
consistently observed that increased cerebral blood flow accom-
panied the jaw manoeuvre in patients reporting an increase in
tinnitus loudness; decreased flow accompanied the lowering of
tinnitus loudness (see also Cacace, 2003). Furthermore, the
blood flow changes occurred unilaterally and in the hemisphere
contralateral to the ear in which the tinnitus was reported as
experienced. When exposed to unilateral external auditory
signals, the patients exhibited the expected pattern of bilateral
cerebral blood flow. These findings support a picture of chronic
tinnitus as ultimately having a cortical site, while not ruling
out the prospect of sub-cortical activity also being involved in
the tinnitus phenomenon.
One reason this sort of model is appealing is that a similar
mechanism may be invoked to account for 'phantom limb' pain
experience (Flor et al, 1995; Salvi et al, 2000). Phantom limb
pain is the experience of irritation and pain apparently in a limb
or limb part that has nonetheless been lost or surgically
removed. Loss of lateral inhibition and (in this case, somato-
sensory) cortical remapping mechanisms can account for the
experience. And just as tinnitus is often localized to one or both
ear/s (yet may be due to altered neural activity in the auditory
cortex), so the phantom limb experience is attributed to the
missing body area, though its basis may be best explained by
changes in cortical activation. We mention this analog particu-
larly because the term 'phantom' figures in descriptions of both
missing limb and tinnitus experiences, with implications we
discuss later in the paper.
Tinnitus observed in non-human animals
Tinnitus necessarily has its historical origin, as a phenomenon,
in the complaints people make to others about this unusual,
unwelcome (for some, very distressing) experience. Thus, its
reality is effectively confined to the conscious experience and
reports of individuals, rather than having an evidently objective
existence. We expand on implications of this point in a later
section of the paper. To help support a case that tinnitus is a real
neural occurrence (not simply a 'subjective' experience), we
review evidence for its observation in relatively controlled
experimental contexts. We see it as important for tinnitus
management purposes that clinicians and researchers appreciate
this evidence.
Human experimental studies have established that tinnitus can
be induced with some regularity by temporarily injurious noise
levels (Atherley et al, 1968; Davis et al 1950; Loeb & Smith, 1967).
For example Atherley et al systematically varied the centre-
frequency of the narrowband noise used to induce tinnitus, and
observed tinnitus pitch matches that correlated with this physical
variable. Such findings are not inconsistent with a lateral
inhibition 'breakdown' basis for tinnitus, at least of the sort due
to injury from overstimulation of cochlear hair cells. These
findings also establish the reality of tinnitus in a more objective
way, because its occurrence is being reported by normally-hearing
listeners in systematically varied experimental conditions that
include temporary overstimulation of receptor cells. Experimen-
tal workof the above sort is no longer conducted, due to restraints
on the procedures sanctioned by institutional review boards. We
mention this point to highlight the fact that such research
findings, going back several decades, may become overlooked.
Even more telling, with regard to objectifying tinnitus as a
phenomenon, are observations in non-human laboratory animals
of behaviour elicited via techniques of conditioning (Klein &
Mowrer, 1989). Given the experimental arrangements in ques-
tion, the observed behaviours are consistent with the inducement
of tinnitus in those animals. Our purpose here is not to review all
the animal experimentation in the literature (see Moody, 2004, for
such a review). We pick out an early study, in which an induced
tinnitus was used as both an 'alarm' signal and as a 'protection'
signal; we pick out a recent study, based on a different approach,
as corroboration of the claim that behaviour consistent with
induced tinnitus can be observed in non-human animals.
In an early experiment (Jastreboff et al, 1988), laboratory rats
were trained to lick at a specific location, in order to gain a water
reward, using the technique of instrumental conditioning (Skinner,
1969). Throughout the course of acquisition of the licking
behaviour, the animals were exposed to a moderate level of
broadband noise. Once fully trained, the background noise was
turned off for several 30-second periods in a further acclimation
session. In subsequent aversive conditioning trials, a mild shock
was delivered to the animals' feet at the end of the 30-second silent
period. This had the immediate effect of suppressing the acquired
licking behaviour (an alarm response). Testing then proceeded
using the 30-second silent intervals but without the foot-shock.
The aim was to observe the rate of recovery of the previously
trained lick response (extinction of the alarm response).
The design in this experiment involved three groups of
animals: one, a control group, was injected with a saline solution
throughout the acclimation, aversive conditioning, and subse-
quent extinction sessions. A second group was injected with
sodium salicylate (a compound known to induce temporary
tinnitus in humans) after the acclimation and aversive condi-
tioning phases, and throughout the extinction phase. A third
group was injected with this compound before the aversive
conditioning phase, and prior to all but the final test in
the extinction phase. The outcome of this procedure was that
the animals injected after the aversive conditioning phase
showed rapid return to the licking response, whereas those
injected before that phase showed the same rate of (slower)
recovery as the control animals. The authors concluded that the
salicylate-induced tinnitus, introduced after exposure to silence
(noise offset) as an aversive cue, served to prevent those animals
detecting subsequent periods of silence, hence not expressing the
alarm response. By contrast, in the rats injected prior to the
aversive conditioning phase, sufficient discrimination between
tinnitus-plus-background noise versus tinnitus alone, meant that
tinnitus alone triggered the alarm response.
More recently (Heffner & Koay, 2005) an experiment was
conducted using laboratory-reared hamsters in which these
animals were trained to seek a water reward to their left or
right in response to tonal signals, mixed with low-level broad-
band noise, presented to the left or right of a 08 azimuth
centering signal. There were also a series of silent trials in which
the response of the animals was monitored to observe left/right-
turn response pattern when no acoustic cue was provided. After
becoming trained on the left-right acoustic cue discrimination
task, one subgroup of animals was exposed in the left ear to a
tone loud and long enough to ensure temporary hair cell injury
resulting in presumed left-ear tinnitus. Immediately subsequent
testing revealed that on silent trials these animals showed strong
570
International Journal of Audiology, Volume 46 Number 10

preference for turning to the left for an expected reward. This
finding is consistent with the animals perceiving a cueing tone
(i.e. tinnitus) in their left ear.
The role of conditioning in the experience of tinnitus
In the experiment by Jastreboff et al (1988) tinnitus was observed
to offer contrasting functions: it was conformed as an alarm
signal, in that it was paired with electric shock to cause
suppression of a previously trained appetitive response. It was
also conformed as a 'protective' signal, preventing animals in
one treatment group from detecting an aversive event (noise-
offset). In subsequent writing (e.g. Jastreboff & Hazell, 2004),
the argument is made (p. 22) that tinnitus is a neutral stimulus
(''The tinnitus signal itself is innocent and is not causing any
harm. The problem develops when tinnitus becomes associated
with something negative or unpleasant . . .''). Such reasoning is
no doubt prompted by the fact that in the earlier animal
experimentation tinnitus was readily conceivable in such terms.
The operating principle, in so-called 'classical' conditioning
(Pavlov, 1927), is that neutral stimuli are altered in their salience
by being associated with signals that carry high value, either as
threats or rewards. How tinnitus could come to be responded to
as a threat is described by M.M. Jastreboff (1999), who claims
that ''.. a majority of the patients can link their tinnitus to some
emotional stress or discomfort as a triggering factor. This
temporal association of an irrelevant distressing event (e.g.
divorce, retirement) with the noticed perception of tinnitus causes
very strong association, and create a conditioned reflex linking
tinnitus signal with distress . . .'' (p. 289, wording in original). The
plausibility of this argument has been commented on critically
(McKenna, 2004), who points out (p. 8) that the clinical literature
on individual histories does not indicate any consistent linkage
between tinnitus onset and stressful life events. McKenna also
questions the logic of the conditioning argument, showing that its
proponents offer conflicting accounts of the status of tinnitus,
either as a stimulus or as a response to other stimuli.
In addition to the concerns raised by McKenna, we ask the
following question: Is tinnitus really a neutral stimulus? To
approach an answer, we need to navigate through some possibly
unfamiliar psychological territory, including a phenomenologi-
cal analysis, i.e. tinnitus understood from the viewpoint of the
person experiencing it.
Tinnitus is usually thought of as a hearing disorder, and, of
course, this is obviously the case. But there is more to it than
that. The issue is grounded first of all in the fact that, in (likely)
contrast to laboratory rats, people who develop tinnitus will
necessarily reflect on its occurrence, and for some, that reflection
will be one of fear and alarm. This sort of reaction is not due to
the association of tinnitus with a negative life event; for people
reacting fearfully, tinnitus in and of itself constitutes a negative
life event. There is probably a range of reasons why it has such a
character; one may be due to the very site of tinnitus. The inside
of one's head is uniquely mysterious and dangerous. As knowl-
edge has expanded and become increasingly common about the
critical place of the brain in the control of everyday function
(hence dysfunction), anything that goes wrong and attributable
to inside the ears or head has the potential to cause alarm. The
tinnitus is not supposed to be there, and furthermore the
individual has no control over its presence.
The research literature suggests (Andersson & Vretblad, 2000;
Langenbach et al, 2005) that people who are more generally
sensitive to bodily symptomology, including anxiety-related
occurrences such as insomnia, are likelier to suffer greater
distress due to the presence of tinnitus. Thus, a fearful response
to tinnitus is likelier among people who are higher in fearfulness
in general with respect to their own physical and emotional self
(Hiller et al, 1997). Beyond that, there is a growing literature on
stress responses to diagnosis of physical illness (Chalfant et al,
2004; Kangas et al, 2002) that recognizes the potentially critical
role of such reaction in the very management of the illness itself.
We expand on the foregoing points using a series of contrasts
between tinnitus and hearing impairment; by doing that we hope
to clarify what is happening in the lives of people who react in
a distressed way to its advent and persistence. These contrasts
are not meant to imply that tinnitus and hearing impairment are
separate (very often they co-occur). The contrasts are described
here so as to offer better understanding of what is going on with
respect to these two maladies.
Hearing impairment contrasted with tinnitus
In Table 1, sets of descriptors express a series of contrasts under
three general headings: nature, effects, and treatment.
We
elaborate on these as follows:
Nature
As regards the nature of these two conditions, reduced hearing
ability is experienced as partial or complete loss of signals,
Table 1. Contrasts between hearing impairment and tinnitus in
terms of nature, effects, and treatment.
Contrasts
Nature * Hearing impairment
Nature * Tinnitus
1.
Reduction of wanted
signals
1.
Addition of unwanted
signals
2.
Partial loss of control
2.
Major loss of control
3.
Others' awareness
3.
Self-awareness
4.
Shared blame
4.
Self-blame
Effects * Hearing impairment
Effects * Tinnitus
1.
Social competence in
question
1.
Life threatened?
2.
Social connections
disrupted
2.
Sanity in question?
3.
Sign of 'getting old'
3.
Risk of 'being at war'
4.
Anxiety and fatigue
4.
Depression, fear, and
fatigue
Treatment * Hearing impairment Treatment * Tinnitus
1.
Hearing impairment
explicable
1.
Tinnitus explanations
difficult
2.
Mechanisms
comprehensible
2.
Mechanisms obscure
3.
Objective diagnosis/
assessment
3.
Subjective
assessments
4.
Disabilities reducible
4.
No effective
treatments
Physiology and phenomenology of tinnitus:
Implications for treatment
Noble/Tyler
571

including ones the person wants or needs to perceive readily;
tinnitus is experienced as the occurrence of sounds that are
distinctly not wanted. Hearing impairment represents loss of
personal control, but in most cases this is partial, because there
are contexts (e.g. one-to-one conversation, or quiet back-
grounds) in which hearing may be adequate, and there are
actions the person can take (e.g. getting closer to a source,
increasing the gain of electronic devices) to regain some control.
Tinnitus, typically, cannot be controlled. It can be totally or
partially masked using additional external sounds, but doing so
is often at the expense of being able to hear other signals,
introduces yet another sound, and is only a temporary respite.
Whereas hearing impairment is often noticed and complained
of at first by others, and often denied by the person with the
impairment (He´tu et al, 1990; O'Mahoney et al, 1996), tinnitus is
essentially personal and complained of to others by the sufferer,
and with no guarantee others will concur as to its claimed
severity (Erlandsson et al, 1992). Finally, problems of detection
and communication can be blamed partly on the context (others
who mumble; noisy surroundings); there is no one or no context
to share responsibility for the occurrence of tinnitus.
Effects
The interpersonal 'distribution' of hearing impairment means
that the primary effects are social as well as personal. Other
people, especially family members, call the person's social, even
moral competency into question (Anderson & Noble, 2005;
He´tu, 1996) because of miscommunications that take the form of
absence or incorrectness of conversational responses, leading to
accusations by others of neglectfulness, lack of caring. The
general effect of increasing hearing impairment is to disrupt
social and family connections. Tinnitus can have a disruptive
effect within the family (Erlandsson et al, 1992; Pugh et al, 2004)
but its primary effect is the fear that something is going on that is
serious and threatening to the person's life or sanity. This includes
the fear that it will be there forever, perhaps even worsening. And
whereas hearing impairment is undesired because it is seen as a
sign of aging, the fear induced by tinnitus promotes aroused and
vigilant attention, such as occurs in a dangerous environment.
Hearing impairment also generates anxiety as well as fatigue
(Eriksson-Mangold & Carlsson, 1991; Gatehouse & Noble,
2004); tinnitus is often associated, in addition, with depression
(Halford & Anderson, 1991; Scott & Lindberg, 2000).
Treatment
In principle, hearing loss can be explained to people seeking help
for disabilities due to such disorder. It is not usually a mysterious
condition. Furthermore, for the most part, the mechanisms of
hearing are sufficiently well understood by clinicians that the
nature of what is going wrong can be spelled out to the patient.
This in turn is due to the fact that objective techniques for
diagnosis and assessment help make the reality of the hearing
impairment evident to the clinician as well as the client (this is in
principle; it is not to claim that all clinicians are equally able to
make matters clear to patients, nor that all patients are equally
able to understand explanations). Finally, within limits, disabil-
ities due to hearing impairment can be reduced with suitable
acoustic and related management, and the benefits from use of
amplification are immediately apparent, even if not all problems
can be addressed.
Tinnitus is a more difficult phenomenon to explain to a
patient, because it calls on reference to abstruse mechanisms
associated with nerve cells, such as spontaneous firing and
lateral inhibition, and equally abstruse activity in the brain, such
as cortical remapping. Because there is no single, concise and
widely-agreed-upon scientific explanation for the mechanism(s)
of tinnitus, getting a feasible story across to the patient about
what may be going wrong is not so likely to make things clear,
hence reassuring. And while objective assessment can be made
(pitch and loudness matching, for example), the results of such
tests may not be able to explain, far less help to overcome, the
problems and distress the patient experiences. Finally, there is no
guarantee that whatever treatment is offered will resolve any of
the disabilities and handicaps being complained of.
Psychological models
As argued earlier, a reaction of fear and distress to persistent
tinnitus can be understood once it is appreciated that some people
witness the phenomenon as a sign of something that seriously
threatens, not just their hearing, but their sanity and their chances
of living a normal life. If such a response is not understood by the
clinician, the approach to treatment may well be unsatisfactory,
because the clinician is focused on reassuring the patient that
'there is nothing wrong with them', that the tinnitus is
a 'phantom' auditory experience (Salvi et al, 2000), or even a
'hallucination' (Cole et al, 2002). Furthermore, the counseling
and sound therapy treatments offered (e.g. Andersson & Kaldo,
2006; Hallam & McKenna, 2006; Jastreboff & Hazell, 1993,
2004; Mohr & Hedelund, 2006; Tyler & Bentler, 1987), do not
eliminate the tinnitus. Many patients expect their tinnitus to go
away. Additionally, it is likely that many patients hope that the
use of wearable sound generators will reduce their tinnitus
without any need for them to actively participate in the treat-
ment. This is clearly not the case (Goebel et al, 1999; Hiller &
Haerkotter, 2005). Other treatment options are also offered, such
as alternative medications, acupuncture, chiropractic services,
and others. Such approaches are typically unsuccessful. The
multitude of treatments, their inability to eliminate the tinnitus,
and unrealistic expectations of some tinnitus sufferers are often
quite unproductive and can even result in an increase in distress.
In such treatment contexts, use of the term 'phantom' signal
adds a further problem. Once again, insight can be derived
from phenomenological analysis. For clinicians and researchers
in the physical-physiological science tradition, the absence of an
external acoustic source makes the 'reality' of tinnitus a
paradox. If the best physiological analog for this dysfunction
in the auditory system is 'phantom limb' pain, then use of a
term like 'phantom auditory sensation' may seem logical. But
in the case of the missing limb phenomenon, there is an
objective element. Others to whom the person reports pain
attributable to the missing body part can immediately see the
missing body part, hence that something is wrong. The injured
or missing cochlear hair cells that are the likely point of origin
of tinnitus cannot be displayed, thus there is nothing to show
objectively about this experience. Given such a context, use of
the term 'phantom', and even more so the term 'hallucination',
creates doubt that there is anything real happening. This is
unlikely to help in calming the distressed patient's reaction to
their tinnitus.
572
International Journal of Audiology, Volume 46 Number 10

Implications for treatment
We have noted that at least one physiological model, based on
classical conditioning with an analog to the phantom limb pheno-
menon, might lead to a clinical treatment approach which could
be very unproductive in the case of very distressed patients. An
alternative conceptual framework to approaching tinnitus treat-
ment is that tinnitus, in and of itself, is distressing, without any
pairing with extraneous stressful events. This means that a deeper
understanding of a patient's thoughts and emotions are needed
for treatments, at least for more severe cases, potentially taking
the treatment arena beyond the typical audiological horizon.
In another analysis (Tyler et al, in press) we have distinguished
three broad patient groups: the curious, the concerned, and the
distressed. Reassurance, together with as clear an explanation of
the mechanism of tinnitus as possible, may well be sufficient to
resolve the problem of tinnitus for those who are merely curious
about its presence. The great majority of people who experience
even continual tinnitus adapt or come to accept it, and for them,
it diminishes as a significant issue in their lives (Hallam et al,
1984). A more extensive counseling program may be called for in
the case of the patient who continues to be worried or concerned,
and there are clinical protocols, including Tinnitus Activities
Therapy (Tyler, 2006), derived from extensive clinical contact,
that may effectively help resolution of the patient's problems.
When it comes to the seriously distressed patient, one for
whom the foregoing interventions achieve limited benefit, the
wiser course of action may be referral to professionals whose
skills are focused on management of substantial emotional and
personal disturbances. It has been shown that techniques
developed within clinical psychology to address problems of
chronic pain, depression, anxiety and the like, achieve traction in
the management of tinnitus-related distress. Independent studies
have established real and sustained reduction in distress,
experienced annoyance, and intrusiveness, through the use of
cognitive-behaviour therapy (Andersson & Lyttkens, 1999;
Henry & Wilson, 2001; Hiller & Haerkotter, 2005). A recent
meta-analysis (Martinez Devesa et al, 2007) indicated significant
improvement in overall quality of life due to cognitive-behaviour
therapy applied to tinnitus. It is not our purpose in the present
paper to offer any detailed account of the procedures of
cognitive-behaviour therapy in relation to tinnitus distress. A
general observation is that the aim of providing information,
reassurance, counseling, or more robust intervention such as
cognitive-behaviour therapy, is to transform tinnitus as a
negatively charged stimulus into a more neutral one.
As we have said elsewhere (Tyler et al, in press), the average
clinical audiologist is not likely to aspire to a parallel career as a
clinical psychologist. It may well be that the best option for the
seriously distressed patient is referral to such a service.
A main part of the foundation of clinical audiology is in
physical and biological science. Perhaps for this reason, some
audiologists have been attracted to intervention procedures that
stress the physiological mechanisms involved in tinnitus emer-
gence. Furthermore, most audiologists focus their practice on
diagnostics. Treatment emphasizes the provision of hearing aids.
Few emphasize aural rehabilitation that does not include
amplification or related devices. Psychology has also been part
of audiology's foundation, most prominently in the form of
psychoacoustics. Psychology has also played a role in child and
adult (re)habilitation, through application and development of
various psychosocial and related measures. And both audiology
and psychology have contributed significantly to the develop-
ment of auditory training treatments.
In our view, flexible coalitions between clinical audiologists
and appropriately informed clinical psychologists could work for
the benefit of the tinnitus patient, inasmuch as assessment,
diagnosis, and general aural rehabilitation form part of the skill-
set of audiology, and management of coping with chronic
stressors forms part of the skills of clinical psychology. By
'appropriately informed' we mean that any clinical psychologist
interested in becoming involved in management of tinnitus cases
would need to become familiar with the main currents of
literature about tinnitus. We also stress flexibility to address
the point in the previous section that more moderate levels of
patient concern about tinnitus may well be satisfactorily
managed and resolved within the typical workings of the
audiologist's practice, with only the more serious or intractable
cases being referred on to the psychologist. (We recognize that
optimal treatment solutions in some cases may call for combin-
ing the skills of a larger set of health professionals; our focus in
this paper is on a nexus of audiology and clinical psychology.)
Paramount roles in relation to tinnitus for which the
audiologist is trained are, in the first instance, history-taking,
assessment, and diagnosis. These are vital in trying to establish
possible cause, characteristics, and, very importantly, prognosis.
Ensuring accurate diagnosis * that the reported tinnitus is or is
not a sign of something needing closer, perhaps medical or
surgical attention * is a critical part of the audiologist's task. A
further critical role is in broader rehabilitation. Most cases of
tinnitus arise in association with impaired hearing. Tinnitus
may, thus, not be the only matter calling for the audiologist's
service. There is some evidence (Surr et al, 1985, 1999) that
hearing-aid fitting can reduce tinnitus annoyance, and this may
be expected inasmuch as amplifying environmental sound acts to
partially mask the tinnitus, at the same time helping the person
affected by tinnitus to reduce attention to its presence.
We see scope for growth in the kind of coalition outlined here.
Many of the issues the audiologist faces in general adult
rehabilitation turn upon family relations, emotional coping
with the stresses of a physical disability, acceptance of the need
for prosthetic assistance, providing assertiveness and disclosure
tactics, and so on. These are areas forming part of the training of
the clinical psychologist, hence there could be enlarging benefit
for patients through expansion of the rehabilitative toolkit.
Acknowledgements
The background to the present report was established while the
ﬁrst author held a Levitt Visiting Professorship at the University
of Iowa. Thanks to the Levitt family for the generosity of their
endowment to the University.
References
Anderson, D.L. & Noble, W. 2005. Couples' attributions about
behaviours modulated by hearing impairment: Links with relation-
ship satisfaction. Int J Audiol, 44, 197205.
Andersson, G. & Kaldo, V. 2006. Internet-based self-help treatment of
tinnitus. In R.S. Tyler (ed.), Tinnitus Treatment: Clinical Protocols.
New York: Thieme, pp. 2940.
Physiology and phenomenology of tinnitus:
Implications for treatment
Noble/Tyler
573

Andersson, G. & Lyttkens, L. 1999. A meta-analytic review of
psychological treatments for tinnitus. Br J Audiol, 33, 201210.
Andersson, G. & Vretblad, P. 2000. Anxiety sensitivity in patients with
chronic tinnitus. Scand J Behav Ther, 29(2), 5764.
Atherley, G.R.C., Hempstock, T.I. & Noble, W. 1968. Study of tinnitus
induced temporarily by noise. J Acoust Soc Am, 44(6), 15031506.
Cacace, A.T. 2003. Expanding the biological basis of tinnitus: Cross-
modal origins and the role of neuroplasticity. Hear Res, 175, 112
132.
Chalfant, A.M., Bryant, R.A. & Fulcher, G. 2004. Post-traumatic stress
disorder following diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. J Traum Stress,
17(5), 423428.
Cole, M.G., Dowson, L., Dendukuri, N. & Belzile, E. 2002. The
prevalence and phenomenology of auditory hallucinations among
elderly subjects attending an audiology clinic. Int J Geriatr
Psychiatry, 17, 444452.
Davis, H., Morgan, C.T., Hawkins Jr, J.E., Galambos, R. & Smith, F.W.
1950. Temporary deafness following exposure to loud tones and
noise. Acta Oto-Laryngol Suppl, 88, 157.
Eriksson-Mangold, M. & Carlsson, S.G. 1991. Psychological and
somatic distress in relation to perceived hearing disability, hearing
handicap, and hearing measurements. J Psychosom Res, 35(6), 729
740.
Erlandsson, S.I., Hallberg, L.R.-M. & Axelsson, A. 1992. Psychological
and audiological correlates of perceived tinnitus severity. Audiology,
31, 168179.
Flor, H., Elbert, T., Knecht, S., Wienbruch, C., Pantev, C., et al. 1995.
Phantom-limb pain as a perceptual correlate of cortical reorganiza-
tion following arm amputation. Nature, 375, 482484.
Gatehouse, S. & Noble, W. 2004. The speech, spatial and qualities of
hearing scale (SSQ). Int J Audiol, 43(1), 8599.
Goebel, G., Ru¨bler, D., Stepputat, F., Hiller, W., Heuser, J. et al. 1999.
Controlled prospective study of tinnitus retraining therapy com-
pared to tinnitus coping therapy and broad-band noise generator
therapy. Paper presented at the Sixth International Tinnitus
Seminar, Cambridge, UK.
Halford, J.B.S. & Anderson, S.D. 1991. Anxiety and depression in
tinnitus sufferers. J Psychosom Res, 35(4/5), 383390.
Hallam, R.S. & McKenna, L. 2006. Tinnitus habituation therapy. In R.S.
Tyler (ed.), Tinnitus Treatment: Clinical Protocols. New York:
Thieme, pp. 6580.
Hallam, R.S., Rachman, S. & Hinchcliffe, R. 1984. Psychological aspects
of tinnitus. In S. Rachman (ed.), Contributions to Medical Psychol-
ogy (Vol. 3). Oxford: Pergamon, pp. 3153.
Heffner, H.E. & Koay, G. 2005. Tinnitus and hearing loss in hamsters
(Mesocricetus auratus) exposed to loud sound. Behav Neurosci,
119(3), 734742.
Henry, J.L. & Wilson, P.H. 2001. The Psychological Management
of Chronic Tinnitus: A Cognitive-behavioural Approach. Boston:
Allyn & Bacon.
He´tu, R. 1996. The stigma attached to hearing impairment. Scand
Audiol, 25, Suppl. 43, 1224.
He´tu, R., Riverin, L., Getty, L., Lalande, N. & St. Cyr, C. 1990. The
reluctance to acknowledge hearing problems among noise-exposed
workers. Br J Audiol, 24, 265276.
Hiller, W. & Haerkotter, C. 2005. Does sound stimulation have additive
effects on cognitive-behavioural treatment of chronic tinnitus? Behav
Res Ther, 43(5), 595(518).
Hiller, W., Janka, A. & Burke, K.C. 1997. Association between tinnitus
and somatoform disorders. J Psychosom Res, 43(6), 613624.
Jastreboff, M.M. 1999. Controversies between cognitive therapies and
TRT counseling. Paper presented at the Sixth International Tinnitus
Seminar, Cambridge.
Jastreboff, P.J., Brennan, J.F., Coleman, J.K. & Sasaki, C.T. 1988.
Phantom auditory sensation in rats: An animal model for tinnitus.
Behav Neurosci, 102(6), 811822.
Jastreboff, P.J. & Hazell, J.W.P. 1993. A neurophysiological approach to
tinnitus: Clinical implications. Br J Audiol, 27, 717.
Jastreboff, P.J. & Hazell, J.W.P. 2004. Tinnitus Retraining Therapy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kangas, M., Henry, J.L. & Bryant, R.A. 2002. Post-traumatic stress
disorder following cancer: A conceptual and empirical review. Clin
Psychol Rev, 22, 499524.
Klein, S.B. & Mowrer, R.R. (eds.) 1989. Contemporary Learning
Theories. Pavlovian Conditioning and the Status of Traditional
Learning Theory. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Kral, A. & Majernik, V. 1996. On lateral inhibition in the auditory
system. Gen Physiol Biophys, 15, 109127.
Langenbach, M., Olderog, M., Michel, O., Albus, C. & Kohle, K. 2005.
Psychosocial and personality predictors of tinnitus-related distress.
Gen Hosp Psychiatry, 27, 7377.
Lockwood, A.H., Salvi, R.J. & Burkard, R.F. 2002. Tinnitus. New
England J Med, 347(12), 904910.
Lockwood, A.H., Salvi, R.J., Coad, M.L., Towsley, M.L., Wack, D.S., et
al. 1998. The functional neuroanatomy of tinnitus: Evidence for
limbic system links and neural plasticity. Neurology, 50(1), 114120.
Loeb, M. & Smith, R.P. 1967. Relation of induced tinnitus to physical
characteristics of the inducing stimuli. J Acoust Soc Am, 42, 453
455.
Martinez Devesa, P., Waddell, A., Perera, R. & Theodoulou, M. 2007.
Cognitive behavioural therapy for tinnitus. The Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews.
McKenna, L. 2004. Models of tinnitus suffering and treatment compared
and contrasted. Audiol Med, 2, 114.
Mohr, A. & Hedelund, U. 2006. Tinnitus person-centered therapy.
In: Tinnitus Treatment: Clinical Protocols. New York: Thieme,
pp. 198216.
Moller, A.R., Moller, M.B. & Yokota, M. 1992. Some forms of tinnitus
may involve the extralemniscal auditory pathway. Laryngoscope, 10,
11651171.
Moody, D.B. 2004. Animal models of tinnitus. In J. Snow (ed.), Tinnitus
Theory and Management. Hamilton: Decker.
O'Mahoney, C.F., Stephens, S.D.G. & Cadge, B.A. 1996. Who prompts
patients to consult about hearing loss? Br J Audiol, 30, 153158.
Pavlov, I.P. 1927. Conditioned Reﬂexes: An Investigation of the Physio-
logical Activity of the Cerebral Cortex (G.V. Anrep, trans.). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pugh, R.S., Stephens, D. & Budd, R. 2004. The contribution of spouse
responses and marital satisfaction to the experience of chronic
tinnitus. Audiol Med, 2, 6073.
Salvi, R.J., Lockwood, A.H. & Burkard, R.F. 2000. Neural plasticity and
tinnitus. In R.S. Tyler (ed.), Tinnitus Handbook. San Diego: Singular
Press.
Scott, B. & Lindberg, P. 2000. Psychological proﬁle and somatic
complaints between help-seeking and non-help-seeking tinnitus
subjects. Psychosomatics, 41(4), 347.
Shore, S.E. 2004. Sensory nuclei in tinnitus. In J. Snow (ed.), Tinnitus
Theory and Management. Hamilton: Decker.
Skinner, B.F. 1969. Contingencies of Reinforcement: A Theoretical
Analysis. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Surr, R.K., Kolb, J.A., Cord, M.T. & Garrus, N.P. 1999. Tinnitus
Handicap Inventory (THI) as a hearing aid outcome measure. J Am
Acad Audiol, 10, 489495.
Surr, R.K., Montgomery, A.A. & Mueller, H.G. 1985. Effect of
ampliﬁcation on tinnitus among new hearing aid users. Ear Hear,
6(2), 7175.
Tyler, R.S. 2006. Neurophysiological models, psychological models, and
treatments for tinnitus. In R.S. Tyler (ed.), Tinnitus Treatment:
Clinical Protocols. New York: Thieme, pp. 122.
Tyler, R.S. & Bentler, R.A. 1987. Tinnitus maskers and hearing aids for
tinnitus. Semin Hear, 8(1), 4961.
Tyler, R.S., Noble, W., Coelho, C., Haskell, G. & Bardia, A. (in press).
Tinnitus and hyperacusis. In J. Katz, R. Burkard, L. Medwetsky &
L. Hood (eds.). Handbook of Clinical Audiology (6th ed.). Baltimore:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Weisz, N., Voss, S., Berg, P. & Elbert, T. 2004. Abnormal auditory
mismatch response in tinnitus sufferers with high-frequency hearing
loss is associated with subjective distress level. BMC Neurosci, 5(8).
574
International Journal of Audiology, Volume 46 Number 10

