Physiotherapy Theory and Practice
An International Journal of Physical Therapy
ISSN: 0959-3985 (Print) 1532-5040 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iptp20
Space perception, movement, and insight:
attuning to the space of everyday life after major
weight loss
Eli Natvik, Karen Synne Groven, Målfrid Råheim, Eva Gjengedal & Shaun
Gallagher
To cite this article: Eli Natvik, Karen Synne Groven, Målfrid Råheim, Eva Gjengedal &
Shaun Gallagher (2019) Space perception, movement, and insight: attuning to the space of
everyday life after major weight loss, Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 35:2, 101-108, DOI:
10.1080/09593985.2018.1441934
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2018.1441934
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Taylor &
Francis.
Published online: 27 Feb 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3678
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iptp20

PROFESSIONAL THEORETICAL ARTICLE
Space perception, movement, and insight: attuning to the space of everyday life
after major weight loss
Eli Natvik, PhD, PT
a, Karen Synne Groven, PhD, PTb, Målfrid Råheim, PhD, PTc, Eva Gjengedal, PhD, RNc,
and Shaun Gallagher, PhDd,e
aFaculty of Health Studies, Department of Health and Caring Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Førde, Norway;
bFaculty of Health, Institute of Physiotherapy, Oslo Metropolitan University, Oslo, Norway; cFaculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Department of
Global Health and Primary Care, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; dDepartment of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN,
USA; eFaculty of Law, Humanities and the Arts, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia
ABSTRACT
Physiotherapists are well placed to help people adjust and engage meaningfully with the world
following major weight loss. Recent research indicates that the body size a patient has lived with
for years can continue to affect movement and perception even after largescale weight loss. This
article explores this discrepancy in depth from the perspective of phenomenology and space
perception and through the concepts of body image, body schema, and affordances. It draws on
an empirical example in which a nautical engineer described his lived experience of returning to
work following bariatric surgery and the discrepancies he experienced while adjusting to his new
situation, particularly when moving his smaller body around the ship's engine room, previously
inaccessible to him. Analysis of this empirical example suggests that transitions in weight and size
following bariatric surgery are both highly explicit in awareness (i.e., body image) and outside
awareness (i.e., body schema). Major weight loss can open up new affordances and possibilities of
being in the world, but only after adjustments in body image and body schema. The article
suggests ways in which such insights can contribute to physiotherapists' clinical development and
practice when working with patients undergoing major weight loss.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 19 December 2016
Accepted 13 July 2017
Revised 22 May 2017
KEYWORDS
Body Image; Body Schema;
Phenomenology; Space
Perception; Major Weight
Loss
Introduction
How our body moves in everyday life does not require
explicit awareness of the body or a specific language, and is
not easy to access experientially or to describe (Gallagher,
2005; Øberg, Normann, and Gallagher, 2015). As a result,
the relationship between body and environment may be
difficult to express and explore. However, research indi-
cates that major weight loss and a significantly changed
body may stimulate a state of wonder, an openness to
engage in reflective dialogues concerning the moving
body and its relation to the immediate surroundings
(Natvik, Gjengedal, Moltu, and Råheim, 2015; Natvik,
Gjengedal, and Råheim, 2013; Warholm, Øien, and
Råheim, 2014).
Empirical findings have shown that moving one's
body through the space of everyday life after rapid
and major weight loss can evoke a sense of ambivalence
connected to the changing body. A sense of discrepancy
between the large body now gone and the present
slimmed-down body seems to be experienced. An
example is that of the person who, after undergoing
major weight loss, encounters someone in the corridor
and reacts by pressing themselves to the wall, although
there is plenty of space for both to pass. What makes
such a person move and act as if he is still large?
Such empirical findings and questions have inspired
us to pursue a theoretical exploration of the relation-
ship between the body and the environment following
bariatric surgery. Given the complexity of this relation-
ship and the fact that it is not fully understood, the
current study draws on phenomenological concepts to
attempt a better understanding of the experienced spa-
tial meanings of the body.
Understanding spatial aspects related to a changing
body is particularly relevant for physiotherapy, with its
focus on the moving body as the core of health and
well-being (World Confederation for Physical Therapy,
1999). Physiotherapists are in position to help people
find ways to engage bodily and meaningfully in the
world (Nicholls et al., 2016). In the relatively novel
context of bariatric surgery and weight loss manage-
ment, however, physiotherapy thus far has been mainly
utilized
to
promote
lifestyle
changes
(Frerichs,
CONTACT Eli Natvik, PhD, PT
eli.natvik@hvl.no, eli.natvik@helse-forde.no
Faculty of Health and Social Sciences, Department of Health and Caring
Sciences, Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Førde, Norway.
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
2019, VOL. 35, NO. 2, 101-108
https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2018.1441934
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Taylor & Francis.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-
nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built
upon in any way.

Kaltenbacher, Van De Leur, and Dean, 2012; Groven,
Råheim, and Engelsrud, 2015; King and Bond, 2013;
Snodgrass et al., 2014).
By exploring the perceived sense of discrepancy
between the considerably changed and smaller body
and the environment of everyday life, the current article
seeks to stimulate fresh thinking and approaches within
physiotherapy about how to support patients who have
undergone major weight loss. We begin with a brief
overview of the relationship between body and environ-
ment as viewed from the perspective of phenomenology,
and introduce some key concepts. We move on to
explore existing studies which use a variety of theoretical
and methodological approaches to explore related phe-
nomena. Specifically, we present a rich example from an
in-depth interview with a participant in an empirical
study: a description of lived experience from an indivi-
dual who had lost large amounts of weight after bariatric
surgery (Natvik, Gjengedal, Moltu, and Råheim, 2015).
We then analyze and discuss this example through the
phenomenological
concepts
of
body
image,
body
schema, and affordances (Gallagher, 2005).
The phenomenology of body image, body
schema, and affordances
Phenomenology describes the complex content of body
image as "a system of perception, attitudes, and beliefs
pertaining to one's own body" (Gallagher, 2005). This
concept of body image focuses on perceptions of, and
beliefs and emotional attitudes about the body when for
example we perceive our own bodies and those of
others. Body image is sensitive to both culture and
personhood, and the emotional aspects surrounding it
seem to affect perceptions, and vice versa (Gallagher,
2005). For example, negative attitudes, prejudice, and
discrimination toward bodies that differ from the norm
in terms of size (weight stigma) are known to affect
large persons' health and well-being, including their
body image (Puhl and Heuer, 2009).
Body schema has been defined as "a system of sen-
sory-motor capacities that function without awareness
or perceptual monitoring" (Gallagher, 2005). Body
schema therefore involves the tacit, nearly implicit per-
formances and processes involved in maintaining or
changing posture, movement, and the lived body's
dynamic everyday interaction with the environment; it
embraces the processes that collectively attune the body
to its physical and cultural environment.
Body image and body schema, while two distinct
concepts, also interact and are coordinated on the
experiential level (Gallagher, 2005). One does not nor-
mally need continuous awareness of one's body, but in
some situations perceptual body awareness does occur.
For example, when a physiotherapist wants to observe
my posture, I intentionally direct my own awareness to
it, perhaps by trying to stand on the floor in a relaxed
and natural manner. When directing attention to my
body, this awareness contributes to the perceptual body
image and interacts with body schematic processes, but
the awareness itself is not the body schema (Gallagher,
2005). Merleau-Ponty (2012) emphasized the intercon-
nection between habits and body schema, arguing that
acquiring a habit implied a reworking and renewal of
the body schema, and not merely a change of cognitive
processes or product of consciousness.
Environment includes the experienced features of
the surroundings we perceive, such as substances, sur-
faces, objects, and places (Gibson, 2015). Gibson (2015)
stressed the mutuality of person and environment; an
environment is an environment for someone who per-
ceives it, and hence is different from mere physical
surroundings. He created the term affordances to
describe what the environment offers the acting person
and the complex interplay between environment and
person. He suggested that to perceive the environment
is to perceive what it affords; its possibilities for action.
Accordingly, affordances depend both on the: (1) skills
and the bodily capacity of the person who perceives
and acts; and (2) environment. Hence, perceived affor-
dances rely on the tacit features of the body schema
(Gallagher, 2005). The notions of body image, body
schema, and affordances are relevant to describing the
dynamic relation between person and environment,
and help dissolve artificial divides between physical
structures and human behaviors.
Person and environment, lived body and lived space
In phenomenology, the relationship between body
and environment and how this relationship plays
out in everyday experience is termed lived space.
Lived space refers to how we move, perceive, and
engage with things and structures in everyday life
and the meanings that attach to such movements,
perceptions, and engagements. According to Merleau-
Ponty (2012), the lived space of one's own body is
situational. As we inhabit space and time as lived
bodies, situational spatiality refers to the "hold my
body has on the world" (Merleau-Ponty, 2012). Our
experience of space is the pre-reflective intertwining
between the body and its immediate surroundings,
and hence the experience of being oriented in the
world (Landes, 2013). Our existence is spatial in the
sense that spaces or environments can be understood
in a taken-for-granted sense: As human beings, we
102
E. NATVIK ET AL.

are always and already located somewhere, always
connected to the world around us, a world that is
experienced as already there (Heidegger, 2007). This
means that interacting with the environment is some-
thing we do mostly without noticing. When we do
notice this interaction, there is often a connection to
an unexpected event that has somehow interrupted
our taken-for-granted being in the world.
Space as we live it involves distances, locations of
persons and things, and a seamless intertwining with
actions in everyday life as we depend on, all the while
trusting our bodily movements and skills. This means that
while the concept of space goes beyond what is mathe-
matically measurable it also concerns those dimensions
(Heidegger, 2007, 2013). People relate to relative distances
and depths, to what is in front of them, to the left of them,
and so forth. They also relate to compass directions,
grasping that, for instance, North remains north no mat-
ter which way one is facing (Gallagher and Zahavi, 2012).
Merleau-Ponty (2012) suggested that on classic cogni-
tivist conceptions of space perception, the size of objects
might help us to calculate the dimensions of our sur-
roundings, such as depths, distances, and changes of
place. A better starting point is to regard the body as
actively and intentionally directed toward its surround-
ings, as something that skillfully copes with things and
pragmatically "knows how" to encounter the environ-
ment. For instance, when visiting someone's house for
the first time we draw on lived experience. We embody a
repertoire of familiar and directed movements and
actions when entering new rooms "whose field and
scope I know in advance and my surroundings as the
collection of possible points for this power to be applied"
(Merleau-Ponty, 2012). When walking through a door in
the new house, we take it for granted that there is a floor
on the other side. The body knows how to encounter the
environment, and the intertwining between body and
environment is just always there. In the case of a house
under construction, however, there might be no floor on
the other side of the door, and its absence might result in
our tripping over or falling down. Here, the first sensation
of the absent floor and of falling would be a bodily
experience; the relationship between body and environ-
ment becomes extremely explicit. Typically, however,
action does not simply unfold in space; rather, space is
brought up through intentions and actions (Landes,
2013). Depending on my pragmatic interests, and my
intentions, an object that is located objectively 100 m
away may be far (my reading glasses) or near (the only
oasis in a very large desert).
Lived space relates to embodied meaning. In situa-
tions involving illness, high body weight, or breathless-
ness during activity, climbing stairs no longer seems just
a matter of getting from one level to the next; rather, it
involves careful planning and perhaps the search for
solutions (e.g., an elevator) to avoid discomfort, pain,
and sweat (Carel, 2008; Rugseth, 2011). If the illness
passes, climbing stairs probably will revert to being an
embodied activity of everyday life, one that does not
require planning, attention, and effort.
In the context of illness or bodily changes such as
major weight loss after surgery, everyday movements
and bodily sensations that were typically performed or
felt as a silent background for one's existence now seem
to come to the fore. Specifically, the lived experiences of
altered bodies following surgically induced weight loss
offer rich terrain for an exploration of the relationship
between body and environment.
Body size, body image, and body schema after
weight loss
Scientific research on the relationship between experi-
ences of moving one's body and encountering the
spaces of everyday life after weight loss remains thin
on the ground. However, some relevant insights are
offered by studies of related phenomena. Several studies
suggest that a negative body image may persist after
successful weight loss, with those who have lost weight
continuing to experience distress and emotional vulner-
ability connected to body weight and appearance
(Annis, Cash, and Hrabosky, 2004; Cash, Counts, and
Huffine, 1990). Coining the term phantom fat to
describe this phenomenon, Cash (1994) and Schwartz
and Brownell (2004) likens the concern people con-
tinue to feel about their weight and their ongoing dis-
satisfaction with their body after major weight loss to
body image experiences suffered by patients following
limb amputations. Cash (1993) defines body image as
primarily an attitudinal or affective concept: "one's
psychological experience of the appearance and func-
tioning of one's body." That body image may be cog-
nitive rather than physical is borne out by empirical
research, which suggests that people who have been
overweight are less likely to acquire a positive body
image than those who have never been overweight
(Schwartz and Brownell, 2004).
In a case study, Guardia et al. (2013) described issues
relating to body image and body schema (without
defining these concepts) in a woman who had lost
60 kg in one year during behavioral treatment for
binge eating disorder. Although aware of her major
weight loss, she expressed body image dissatisfaction
and disturbances in situations involving particular
movement tasks. During an experiment that involved
her passing through a narrow passage no wider than a
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
103

door, the woman moved as if she were still large.
Guardia et al. (2013) argued that this resulted from
her central nervous system lagging behind in the matter
of updating her body schema following weight loss;
when she moved, her body schema was not attuned to
her present weight situation.
Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson (2014) and Van Der
Hoort, Guterstam, and Ehrsson (2011) argue that one's
body size is very important for one's perception of the
environment. Based on variants of "full body illusion"
experiments,
they
have
explored
the
relationship
between perception of one's body and external space,
and suggest that altering body size may imply altering
perception of size and distance of objects in the envir-
onment (Van Der Hoort and Ehrsson, 2014; Van Der
Hoort, Guterstam, and Ehrsson, 2011). An individual's
body size and spatial experience of the environment
seem to relate to one another in specific ways.
Working in the engine room-an example of
lived experience
"Carl", a specialized nautical engineer, underwent bar-
iatric surgery and went on to lose more than 100 kg. It
was only when he returned to work that he became
aware of the changes he had undergone and the adjust-
ments his altered size now made necessary. When he
was interviewed as a participant in our empirical study
(Natvik, Gjengedal, Moltu, and Råheim, 2015), seven
years had passed since his surgery. Carl described the
problems he had experienced as he had moved his
altered body about in his working environment:
I work on a ship with small, narrow spaces and the
engine room is very cramped, which means, "I can't get
down there, I can't go through, I can't go under and I
can't pass. This doesn't work, and I can't make it. I
can't get down there..." I have these thoughts, and I
make clever shortcuts to work my way around the
problems. That's my way. I'm the boss, so I can send
one of the lads in. One day one of them says "I don't
know how the hell to fix this." I say to him, "Wait, I'll
come and help you out." Oh! What happens here? I
can just walk right in! I'm really startled! This has been
my job for 30 years, and I know when I can get in to do
my job and when I have to do things another way. I
know what works and what doesn't. Suddenly, none of
that counts anymore. What I know is now worthless to
me. My access problems are gone and I need to make
incredibly big adjustments to catch up with my present
situation. I must reinvent my ways of doing things and
start all over. I need to think very differently and set
aside my old ways of doing my job. I pull myself
together and try to forget all about me not getting in
or passing through this or that space. This is terribly
hard work. It's an enormous change and just small
details of everyday life. One day, we anchor on the
Ivory Coast. I'm alone, and have plenty of time to do
my job. I say to myself "OK, now I'll try this out.
Today, I'll find out where I can get in." I crawl about
everywhere; I try out every possible way of inspecting
the machinery, thinking "Oh! Does that work? Really?
What the hell!" Finally, I'm all the way down at the
bottom of the boat, right next to the engine. "I have no
hindrances anymore!" I am surprised, shocked, and
pleased with myself.
Analysis-connecting lived experience and
theoretical concepts
This section begins with a descriptive analysis of Carl's
experience as presented above. His account is then
explored through the theoretical lenses of body image,
body schema, and affordances.
For Carl, his large body was gone and the cramped
engine room had become accessible. In his everyday
activities, he experienced his new access to his immedi-
ate surroundings as a series of unused possibilities. A
typical working day involved navigating an environ-
ment of restricted, narrow spaces that large bodies
cannot enter. Carl's habitual movements and ways of
relating to the engine room had not adapted in line
with his weight loss, so that his embodied knowledge
and working skills appeared as restrictions. Carl had
therefore not fully experienced and made use of the
flexibility connected to moving his considerably smaller
body within the restricted spaces of his work environ-
ment. He had a continuing sense of not being able to
enter tight spaces. However, when he started experi-
menting by trying to move into spaces that were once
closed to him, he experienced success. When he moved,
his lived body could indeed respond.
No longer able to rely on his old work habits and
experience, Carl lacked central aspects of the experien-
tial foundation for his professional practice. Profound,
meaningful habits seem to have been lost along with his
large body, and incongruities in his professional prac-
tice became apparent. Once Carl became aware of this,
his embodied experiences underwent a new beginning.
He worked to mediate and change the interplay
between himself and his immediate surroundings by
experimenting and playing with his new body size in
tight places. He explored every new possibility, passing
through every narrow opening and moving wherever
he possibly could in the engine room. Through this
simultaneous search of the engine room and his own
body size, Carl discovered that old limits and restric-
tions had gone along with his weight loss. This insight
added new meanings to his habitual working practice,
and he became more explicitly aware of possibilities
and limitations related to his body in the environment.
104
E. NATVIK ET AL.

Carl's discovery of hindrances connected to his (now
gone) large body evoked surprise, confusion, frustra-
tion, and in the end satisfaction. His explorative, active
encounter with his old working environment seemed to
play a vital role in enabling him to incorporate the
absence of restrictions and re-situate his present body
in its immediate surroundings. For Carl, moving in and
through a meaningful space revealed the dynamic rela-
tionship between body and environment. As his body
altered, his lived space altered, as well. Through his
moving body, this meaningful interconnection became
accessible in experience, and played a part in establish-
ing his embodied self as considerably smaller.
After Carl's major weight loss, not performing cer-
tain actions and movements showed up as an irrelevant
and less useful strategy at work. His habitual way of
dealing with the cramped engine room suddenly under-
went a shift in meaning; from being a creative and
necessary solution it now appeared ineffective, unne-
cessary, and strange. Despite his major weight loss, he
continued to encounter the engine room in old, habi-
tual ways. Both his body image and his body schema
were still framed in terms of his large body. As the large
body could not get into the engine room, Carl had
found ways of dealing with problems that did not
involve him actually entering the room.
Both body image and body schema are actively
involved in shaping our spatial perceptions. In Carl's
case, these bodily aspects remained connected to his
(formerly) large body, leading him to avoid even
attempting to enter the engine room. However, once
Carl became aware of his actual (new) body size and
the fact that he had still not entered the engine room, a
reconstitution of the perceptual aspect of body image
was enabled. Furthermore, before this adjustment,
affordances connected to this specific environment
appeared as different, in the sense that Carl's skills
were required in the engine room but he could not
enter and do the job with his own hands; to use his
competence, he had depended on his colleagues' bodies
and capacities. Following the adjustment to Carl's body
image, however, the engine room, although not a new
environment, gained new value and meaning. New
affordances started to emerge.
Carl's large body had been out of line with cultural
ideals surrounding weight and also the capacity of
skilled workers. His lack of awareness of the new cap-
abilities opened up by his smaller body may be con-
nected with the capacities and incapacities associated
with his old, large body. In other words, body image
may have been both a result of experiences and a
starting point for experiences. Carl's habitual ways of
working had developed in relation to his large body and
its shortcomings. The absence of certain habits and
movements and the practice of not entering the engine
room had become part of Carl's working style. Hence,
he had not incorporated certain pragmatic affordances
connected to the engine room into his body schema.
Body schema typically allows active integration of
positions and actions that are purposeful when persons
interact with the environment. It also renders unneces-
sary any reflexive, conscious monitoring and awareness
of one's body in everyday life. However, perceptual
information from and about the environment, such as
its dimensions and the locations of things, is necessary
to deal appropriately with that environment (Gallagher,
2005). That is, both agency, and what the person can do
relate to body schema.
Carl had found ways to interact with the engine
room without entering it. Highly skilled and experi-
enced, he had put his knowledge to work through his
younger colleagues. Although the engine room had
never been incorporated into his practice, his work
mates' bodies had in a sense become extensions of
his. Lacking direct perceptual and embodied experience
of the engine room, Carl functioned with a body
schema expressed in terms of what he could not do.
As the body schema helps us to interact with the
environment in an appropriate way, body-schematic
problems can interrupt intentions of movement, dis-
turb motor control, and even create a sense of de-
personalization (Gallagher, 2005).
Carl's realization that he had not entered a tight
space despite now being able to do so startled him.
He passed through a state of confusion before begin-
ning his active exploration of the new affordances
offered by the engine room. This active exploration
seemed deeply meaningful and a way to incorporate
movement in this environment into his body schema.
In Gibson's words: "to perceive the world is to co-
perceive oneself" (2015).
When he at last entered the engine room, Carl did so
intentionally. His focus was on conscious, reflexive
monitoring of himself and his body in this new
encounter. It seemed necessary for him to make the
movements and change of positions involved in his
navigating the engine room the subject of his con-
sciousness. He entered the room to change movements
that had previously been impossible to real possibilities;
to switch from actions he did not intend to do to
actions he actually conducted. However, it was not
primarily thoughts and feelings about the engine
room and the own body that guided his positions and
movements or helped him encounter this environment.
Instead it was his active, intentional body. Awareness of
bodily action itself did not direct his actions; rather, his
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
105

actions were guided by a certain intentional project,
which was to enter and work in the engine room
(Gallagher, 2005). His body awareness when first enter-
ing the engine room and starting to move about was an
accessory to his pragmatic interests.
For a long time after his bariatric surgery, Carl needed to
engage in the world in a different way. His sense of what his
body now looked like and could do seemed to lag behind
the reality of his body. This meant that when he entered the
engine room he had to be attentive: he needed to focus on
moving his body about in that specific environment. The
sense of what we look like (including our body size), and
our beliefs about, and attitudes towards, the body can be
understood as long-term aspects of body image. Operating
silently, they affect not only our body percept but also our
movements and spatial perception of the world (Gallagher,
2005). By exploring the relation between himself and the
engine room through movement, Carl discovered tacit
aspects related to his body image and body schema, and
sought to make adjustments. In this practical context, body
image and body schema intertwined. The intertwining is
also evident from a theoretical perspective: to the extent
that a person becomes aware of what the body schema
silently accomplishes, this awareness becomes part of the
body image (Gallagher, 2005).
Insights and concluding remarks
The empirical example tells of one individual's struggle
to fully comprehend his own (changed) body size. His
experience suggests that while body size may undergo a
dramatic alteration following bariatric surgery, the new
body may not readily adapt to the lived environment or
to new affordances now available. The body size an
individual has lived with for years may continue to
affect their movements and perception of the world,
despite the weight loss they have undergone.
Carl's experience also shows how remaining attuned
to a prior body size when moving and acting, rather
than attuning to the new body size, reveals discrepan-
cies and evokes new feelings and thoughts in relation to
self, body, and environment. Transitions in weight and
size following bariatric surgery can be experienced with
explicit awareness; as it functions in the body image,
but also partially out of awareness, particularly in
regard to body schema. Major weight loss can open
up new affordances and fresh aspects of one's being
in the world, but only after adjustments have been
made to body image and body schema.
Viewed through the lens of phenomenology, Carl's
efforts in the engine room emerge as a simultaneous
process of incorporating new actions and movements
into his body schema and of reworking his body image.
The reworking of his body image is essential for the
process of updating his body schema, and vice versa.
For Carl, incorporating a dramatically changed body
size while handling a familiar environment demands an
active, intentional, and conscious approach that even-
tually leads to new body-schematic habit formation.
However, it does not follow that every individual will
be able to adapt immediately or even progressively to
their new situation, or that their interactions with the
environment will adjust automatically. Although major
weight loss provides access to new environments, enter-
ing
such
environments
requires
adjustments
that
involve both body image and body schema. Here, a
direct focus can be useful. As the example and analysis
reveal, moving an altered body through the spaces of
everyday life can give fresh insights into the relation-
ship between person and the environment, and help us
better understand the interplay of body image and body
schema and their connection to spatial perception.
Understanding issues related to movement, body
schema, body image, and the perception of space that
persons may encounter in everyday life after bariatric
surgery or major weight loss is important for several
reasons. First, such insights are useful for those who
have undergone substantial weight loss. Second, phy-
siotherapists who by profession are uniquely positioned
to initiate, support, and follow up such processes can
only benefit from a richer understanding of the issues.
With their expertise in rehabilitation, lifestyle changes,
and movement, physiotherapists
draw on human
beings' capacity for development and change (World
Confedereation for Physical Therapy, 1999).
Changes in the dynamic relationship between body
image, body schema, and perception of the environ-
ment intertwine with thoughts and emotions. In other
words, largescale weight loss involves emotions and
thoughts, although they are not necessarily explicit
and
may
express
themselves
in
various
ways.
Intended and major weight loss is strikingly visible,
attracts attention and raises positive expectations. As a
result, it is important for physiotherapists to be aware
of, and sensitive to, the ambivalence that often sur-
rounds such processes. On the basis of this knowledge,
physiotherapists can confirm that emotional reactions
and ambivalence are normal aspects of largescale
weight loss, ones that an individual has to live through
and process as part of embodying a new body size.
In other words, physiotherapy with patients follow-
ing bariatric surgery needs to go beyond simply facil-
itating lifestyle changes. It has a key role to play in
untangling the confused mass of discrepancies concern-
ing the changing body that individuals often experience
after major weight loss.
106
E. NATVIK ET AL.

By initiating the exploration of lived body size and
its connection with the immediate surroundings, phy-
siotherapists can facilitate the process of adjustment
between the "weight lost" person and their environ-
ment. In order to facilitate this process, physiothera-
pists need to ask open questions about the experience
of massive weight loss and own body in movement, and
encourage patients to explore movement across various
situations and contexts. Although lifestyle advice and
physical activity have an important role to play, issues
with body image and body schema require a different
approach. Exploring an individual's changed situation
through movement requires emphasis on their experi-
ential dimension, including thoughts, emotions, and
reflections, as well as their bodily functioning.
As health professionals engaged in a wide variety of
movement systems and practices, physiotherapists pos-
sess the necessary knowledge, experience, and creativity
to use and create appropriate exercises and interventions:
for example, exercises orienting to awareness about an
individual's own body in movement, its physical bound-
aries, heaviness and lightness, strength, stability, and
capacity. Theoretical insights derived from phenomenol-
ogy and the cognitive sciences have much to contribute to
physiotherapy's engagement with weight management
and adaptation issues following bariatric surgery or
major weight loss more generally. With their awareness
of the resourcefulness and development capabilities of
their patients, and with their rich experience of adjusting
movements and environments to different situations and
bodies, physiotherapists are particularly well placed to
apply new approaches, always in dialogue with patients,
colleagues, and researchers. By acknowledging the persis-
tence of embodied experience connected to a patient's
formerly large body, and by encouraging that patient to
explore their new body as it moves in different situations
of everyday life, physiotherapists have much to offer those
getting to grips with life after major weight loss.
Declaration of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ORCID
Eli Natvik
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5781-4254
References
Annis NM, Cash TF, Hrabosky JI 2004 Body image and
psychosocial differences among stable average weight, cur-
rently overweight, and formerly overweight women: the
role of stigmatizing experiences. Body Image 1: 155-167.
Carel H 2008 Illness: the Cry of the Flesh. Durham, England,
Acumen Publishing.
Cash TF 1993 Body-image attitudes among obese enrollees in
a commercial weight-loss program. Perceptual and Motor
Skills 77: 1099-1103.
Cash TF 1994 Body-image and weight changes in a multisite
comprehensive very-low calorie diet program. Behavior
Therapy 25: 239-254.
Cash TF, Counts B, Huffine CE 1990 Current and vestigial
effects of overweight among women: fear of fat, attitu-
dinal body image, and eating behaviors. Journal of
Psychopathology
and
Behavioral
Assessment
12:
157-167.
Frerichs W, Kaltenbacher E, Van De Leur JP, Dean E 2012
Can
physical
therapists
counsel
patients
with
lifestyle-related health conditions effectively? A systematic
review
and
implications.
Physiotherapy
Theory
and
Practice 28: 571-587.
Gallagher S 2005 How the Body Shapes the Mind, pp. 24.
Oxford, UK, Oxford University Press.
Gallagher S, Zahavi D 2012 The Phenomenological Mind,
2nd edn. New York, NY, Routledge.
Gibson J 2015 The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception,
pp. 133. New York, USA, Psychology Press.
Groven KS, Råheim M, Engelsrud G 2015 Changing bodies,
changing Habits: women's experiences of interval training
following gastric bypass surgery. Health Care for Women
International 36: 276-302.
Guardia D, Metral M, Pigeyre M, Bauwens I, Cottencin O,
Luyat M 2013 Body distortions after massive weight loss:
lack of updating of the body schema hypothesis. Eating
and Weight Disorders - Studies on Anorexia, Bulimia and
Obesity 18: 333-336.
Heidegger M 2007 Væren Og Tid [Being and Time]. Oslo,
Norway, Pax Forlag.
Heidegger M 2013 Poetry, Language, Thought, 3rd edn.
New York, USA, Harper Perennial Modern Thought.
King WC, Bond DS 2013 The importance of preoperative and
postoperative physical activity counseling in bariatric
surgery. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews 41: 26-35.
Landes
D
2013
Merleau-Ponty
and
the
Paradoxes
of
Expression. New York, NY, Bloomsbury Academic.
Merleau-Ponty M 2012 Phenomenology of Perception, P 108;
P 261. New York, NY, Routledge.
Natvik E, Gjengedal E, Moltu C, Råheim M 2015 Translating
weight loss into agency: men's experiences 5 years after
bariatric surgery. International Journal of Qualitative
Studies on Health and Well-Being 10: 27729.
Natvik E, Gjengedal E, Råheim M 2013 Totally changed, yet still
the same: patients' lived experiences 5 years beyond bariatric
surgery. Qualitative Health Research 23: 1202-1214.
Nicholls DA, Atkinson K, Bjorbækmo WS, Gibson BE,
Latchem J, Olesen J, Ralls J, Setchell J 2016 Connectivity:
an
emerging
concept
for
physiotherapy
practice.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 32: 159-170.
Øberg GK, Normann B, Gallagher S 2015 Embodied-enactive
clinical reasoning in physical therapy. Physiotherapy
Theory and Practice 31: 244-252.
Puhl RM, Heuer CA 2009 The stigma of obesity: a review and
update. Obesity 17: 941-964.
Rugseth G 2011 Overvekt Som Livserfaring. Et Empirisk-
Teoretisk
Kunnskapsbidrag
[Obesity
as
a
Lived
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
107

Experience. An Empirical-Theoretical Contribution]. Oslo,
University of Oslo.
Schwartz MB, Brownell KD 2004 Obesity and body image.
Body Image 1: 43-56.
Snodgrass SJ, Carter AE, Guest M, Collins CE, James C, Kable
AK, Ashby SE, Plotnikoff RC 2014 Weight management
including dietary and physical activity advice provided by
Australian physiotherapists: a pilot cross-sectional survey.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 30: 409-420.
Van Der Hoort B, Ehrsson HH 2014 Body ownership affects
visual perception of object size by rescaling the visual
representation of external space. Attention Perception
and Psychophysics 76: 1414-1428.
Van Der Hoort B, Guterstam A, Ehrsson HH 2011 Being
Barbie: the size of one's own body determines the per-
ceived size of the world. Plos One 6: e20195.
Warholm C, Øien AM, Råheim M 2014 The ambivalence of
losing weight after bariatric surgery. International Journal
of Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-Being 9: 22876.
World Confedereation for Physical Therapy 1999 Policy
statement: description of physical therapy. http://www.
wcpt.org/policy/ps-descriptionPT.
108
E. NATVIK ET AL.

