The European Journal of Psychotherapy, Counselling &
Health
ISSN: 1364-2537 (Print) 1469-5901 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rejp20
The role of constraints on descriptions in
phenomenology
George Berguno
To cite this article: George Berguno (1998) The role of constraints on descriptions in
phenomenology, The European Journal of Psychotherapy, Counselling & Health, 1:2, 271-279,
DOI: 10.1080/13642539808402313
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13642539808402313
Published online: 24 Oct 2007.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 72
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rejp20

The role of constraints on 
descriptions in phenomenology 
George Berguno 
City University 
Abstract 
This paper explores the role of descriptions in the human sciences. Three 
assumptions concerning descriptions are outlined and challenged, including: 
the view that descriptions are marginal to our professional activities, that 
descriptions are unreliable and that descriptions without explanations do not 
lead to insight. The author introduces the idea of constraints on descriptions 
as essential to the development of phenomenology, both as a psychological 
and as a philosophical activity. It is proposed that the phenomenologist has 
much to gain from examining the use of naive descriptions of experiences 
within the clinical setting. Since the idea of constraints on descriptions 
has clinical applications, practitioners should reflect on the implications of 
considering psychotherapy and counselling as descriptive practices. 
Keywords: phenomenology, descriptions, explanations, counselling, 
insight. 
Earlier this year, at the end of a lecture which I had presented as part of an 
introductory course in phenomenology, a student approached me after 
class and asked the following question: 
I understand that phenomenology is a presuppositionless philosophy 
that uses desciptions as a way of arriving at the very foundations of 
knowledge. I also understand that existentialism shares with pheno- 
menology in the search for descriptions of the world as we live it and 
experience it. But how are we to account for the differences in the 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
The European journal ofPsychotherapy, Counselling & Health 
@Routledge 1998 
1364-2537 
Vol I No 2 August I998 pp. 27 1-279 

272 George Berguno 
descriptions given by phenomenologists? Does this not demonstrate 
the very impossibility of developing a reliable phenomenological 
psychology? Furthermore, isn't this an indication that explanations 
are to be preferred over descriptions in both the natural and the 
social sciences? 
In this paper, I will attempt to answer this question and to propose that 
phenomenological psychology is indeed more than a possibility. First, I 
will introduce the key ideas of phenomenology. Second, I will expound 
the problematic concerning the role of descriptions in phenomenology 
and psychology. Then, by introducing the idea of 'constraints on 
descriptions', I will suggest a way by which phenomenological psychology 
can develop. Throughout this paper, I will be considering some of the 
implications of these ideas for professionals in health care, psychotherapy 
and counselling. 
Phenomenology has been described as the study of experiences with a 
view to uncovering their essences or underlying reason. It purports to be 
a method of philosophical analysis that is free of all presuppositions. 
But, since all knowledge rests on presuppositions, phenomenology seeks 
what is prior to knowledge and thus lays claim to be the most fundamental 
of all disciplines. That is, it seeks to describe how science or any body 
of knowledge came about and how that knowledge is sustained in a 
meaningful way. 
To make this idea clearer let us take the example of cognitive science. 
When we examine cognitive science, it readily becomes apparent that 
this discipline depends on knowledge gained from other disciplines. 
Indeed, cognitive science is founded on the idea that the combined 
research effort of psychology, philosophy, neuroscience, anthropology, 
artificial intelligence and linguistics is a fruitful one. Cognitive science, 
then, is an interdisciplinary project interested in uncovering how knowl- 
edge is acquired and organized. 
Phenomenology, on the other hand, would be interested in uncovering 
the very foundations that make the project of cognitive science possible. 
Thus, when we take a closer look at the interdisciplinary efforts of 
cognitive science, we discover that it is made possible by the sharing of 
certain assumptions. Of the various assumptions that cognitive scientists 
share, I will mention the two most important ones. The first assumption 
states that when speaking about human cognitive activities, it is necessary 
to speak about mental representations. The second assumption considers 
that the computer serves as the best model of how the human mind 
functions (Gardner 1985). 
Now, it is not my intention to enter here into a debate about the merits 
or demerits of these assumptions, but simply to point out that cognitive 

Constraints on descriptions 273 
science is neither free of presuppositions, nor free of assumptions. A much 
more important point would be that cognitive science cannot account 
for our everyday experiences of knowledge or mind. After all, we do not 
experience ourselves or our minds as computers, even though the 
metaphor is now widely disseminated. In order to understand our lived 
experience, we need a new method or way of seeing, and it is this that 
phenomenology offers. 
Returning to our example of cognitive science, and having uncovered 
some of the basic assumptions of this discipline, how do we proceed to 
account for our everyday experiences? The phenomenological attitude 
can be illustrated by examing the first two steps of the phenomenological 
method as developed by Husserl (1931). The first step in this method 
would be to put aside our assumptions and to attend to the phenomena of 
our experience as they appear. This setting aside of all prejudgements, 
biases and preconceptions is known in phenomenology as the epoch6 or 
bracketing. It sounds simple enough, but in practice it is very difficult to 
do. This is partly because in our everyday life we take much for granted, 
an attitude which Husserl referred to as the natural standpoint. And for the 
professional or practitioner, it is also difficult to do, because we forget that 
our theoretical assumptions are simply working hypotheses. 
Having performed the epoche and bracketed our assumptions about the 
phenomena in question, the next step in the phenomenological method 
requires that we also desist from constructing explanations. In place of 
explaining, we engage in describing. Now this also is very difficult to 
do. The fundamental difficulty in carrying out this step of the phenomen- 
ological method stems from yet another assumption: that explanations 
are of greater value than descriptions. This idea first took root in the 
natural sciences, was imported into the social sciences and eventually 
found its way into psychotherapy and counselling. On this point, it is 
probably sufficient to remind the reader of Freud's (1937) classic paper 
'Constructions in analysis'. 
So it would seem that both the natural and the social sciences hold 
explanations as the primary effort, with descriptions as somehow 
marginal to our professional activities. Nevertheless, it takes only a little 
reflection to realize that without descriptions there would be no expla- 
nations. Descriptions provide the primary materials for our explanations. 
Descriptions pervade the natural sciences and, since I am conscious of 
writing primarily to health professionals, including psychotherapists 
and counsellors, let me remind the reader of the rich descriptions of 
pathological behaviours that comprise Freud's case histories and which 
served as the foundation for his metapsychology. 
Another reason why working with descriptions of experiences has 
remained on the fringe of human science research, and has not been 

274 George Berguno 
considered as important as building theories or explanatory models, is 
that these kinds of descriptions have been considered to be unreliable as 
foundational material for science. This goes back to my student's point 
that individuals will differ in the descriptions that they give of the same 
phenomena. Now this is an important point which has preoccupied 
psychologists wishing to work with naive descriptions of experiences. Up 
to now, the solution has been to concentrate on the methods of gathering 
data (usually by interview) and on ways of classifying those data. The 
result, at least in psychology, has been to borrow aspects of research 
methods from other disciplines, such as Grounded Theory Research 
(Strauss and Corbin 1990). 
An example of this particular kind of development of phenomeno- 
logical psychology is Giorgi's ( 1985) empirical phenomenological method 
of working with naive descriptions. In brief, the aim of the method 
consists in determining what an experience means for the person who has 
undergone it. This is accomplished by listening to a full description of the 
experience in question, eliminating redundancies in the narrative and by 
uncovering the 'meaning units' contained therein. Finally, the researcher 
synthesizes and integrates the material into a new and more condensed 
description of the experience, which in turn would lead us to the essential 
aspects of that experience. 
It is here that I will propose two new ideas. First, while a phenomeno- 
logical research method such as Giorgi's (1985) certainly has wide 
applications, it is not the only way forwards for phenomenological 
psychology. Second, given that psychotherapists and counsellors contin- 
uously work with descriptions of experiences, the phenomenological 
psychologist has much to gain from examining what these professionals 
do in their practice. Similarly, the clinician or health practitioner would 
do well to reflect on the descriptive nature of their practice. Indeed, I 
would argue that if our clients achieve any insight into the situation that 
brought them to therapy, it is not primarily because of our interpretive 
work or the use of our theoretical models. Rather, it is the combined 
effort of client and practitioner to engage in redescription that is the 
primary healing factor. I am suggesting that, contrary to general opinion, 
it is not the search for explanations that leads to insight, but the very act 
of describing and redescribing our experiences. 
In order to illustrate an alternative route of development that 
phenomenological psychology may take, let us return once again to the 
example of cognitive science. If, having examined the assumptions 
of cognitive science and concluded that they do not account for our 
everyday experience of mind, we then bracket these assumptions, this 
means that we do not reintroduce them into our descriptions of our experiences. 
Having decided, for example, that we do not experience our minds as 

Constraints on descriptions 275 
computers, we abstain from using that metaphor once again. In fact, the 
metaphor of the mind as a computer carries with it a hidden assumption: 
that the mind is distinct from the body. Now this is a more widespread 
idea, but is one that phenomenology has challenged and it was Merleau- 
Ponty (1945) who suggested that, to account for the world as we live it, 
our descriptions of our everyday life must include the body. 
What I am proposing is the idea of constraints on descriptions. The 
introduction of a constraint on a description leads us to a redescription 
of a particular experience, and it is this in turn which leads to insight. I am 
also suggesting that this is in fact what psychotherapists and counsellors 
do. By way of illustration, I take an example from Boss's Existential 
Foundations of Medicine and Psychology (1979). In that work, Boss 
describes the case of a woman who had been pursued by a recurring dream 
since her childhood. In this dream, the woman found herself naked and 
alone, crouching and cowering in the corner of an empty railroad boxcar. 
She sat huddled up with her arms over her knees and in front of her face, 
as if trying to protect herself. The boxcar was situated at the bottom of 
an ice-cold ocean, where no life could be sustained. Even though she was 
underwater, an arctic wind blew through the doors of the boxcar and she 
was terribly cold. 
According to Boss, among the psychological interpretations that could 
be applied to this dream, is the Freudian idea of the dream as a disguised 
wish-fulfilment. For example, it might be that the ocean, as a manifest 
content, was a symbol for the womb; and that the dream represented 
a desire to return to the womb. Or, if we accept Jung's idea that one of the 
functions of a dream is to represent the relationship the dreamer has 
to her unconscious, it could be, for example, that the ocean represented 
the collective unconscious. One possible explanation would be that the 
ocean's coldness and the dreamer's sense of being lost represented the 
poor relationship she had to this aspect of her psyche. 
Instead of analysing the dream from a particular psychological 
perspective, Boss simply asked the woman to attend to the dream 
phenomena and to redescribe the dream with the following constraint: 
she was to describe all dream phenomena as if they were aspects of her 
existence to which she was particularly attuned. Using this method, the 
woman was able to realize that her whole being was permeated with 
feelings of anxiety, of total isolation, of abandonment and insecurity. 
This way of existing could only open her to a world that was dark and 
empty, cold and devoid of any relationships to human beings. She 
described herself as a forgotten piece of merchandise alone in a corner 
of a desolate boxcar, which had not yet reached its destination. This 
insight was the beginning of a therapeutic journey which led to rapid 
changes in the client's way of relating to her world and to significant 

276 George Berguno 
others. 
I will give one more illustration of the idea of constraints on 
descriptions as applied in psychotherapy practice, this time from the 
work of Victor Frankl (1959, the founder of Logotherapy. Frankl was 
a Viennese psychiatrist who made the observation that his clients were 
often troubled by the question of the meaning of life. When presented 
with a client who was grappling with this question, Frankl's approach was 
to ask them to describe their present situation as if the obstacles they were 
encountering represented a question that life was asking them. The task 
for the client was to uncover the 'question' that was being presented to 
them. By introducing this constraint on his clients' descriptions of their 
presenting problems, Frankl allowed his clients to focus on the concrete 
details of their existential dilemmas, as well as reminding them that they 
had a responsibility to act, whatever the obstacles. 
Thus, it happened once that a nurse who worked in the same hospital 
as Frankl was diagnosed as suffering from a tumour which could not be 
operated upon. In conversation with Frankl, she revealed that the cause 
of her despair was her incapacity to work. Posed in the following manner, 
the question 'Now that I am no longer able to work, what meaning can 
life have for me?' is indeed one that leads to despair. But by following the 
method described above, the nurse was able to come to the realization 
that the ability to work in itself did not constitute the meaning of her life. 
More important, she saw that to behave as if work was the whole meaning 
of life was to rob sick people of their dignity and of their right to live. The 
real challenge was, for this client, to be able to face her incapacity to work 
and yet not fall into despair. 
So far, I have been presenting the idea of constraints on descriptions 
as applied in psychology, but the idea should also be of interest to the 
philosopher. Since Descartes published his Meditations on First Philosophy 
in 1642, it has been customary to decribe the foundations of knowledge 
using a subject-object dichotomy. That is, to describe the fundamental 
human situation as consisting of a particular relationship between a 
knowing subject in a world of objects. This approach to the problem of 
knowledge persisted in philosophy right into the twentieth century and 
is also present in the work of Husserl. It was not until the publication 
in 1927 of Heidegger's Being and Xme that the subject-object dichotomy 
was challenged in a fundamental way, a challenge that has not been taken 
up by psychology, a x a n  be seen by the persistence of the subject-bject 
assumption in cognitive science. 
According to Heidegger, if we are careful to examine our everyday life, 
we will see that we do not as a rule experience ourselves as subjects in 
a world of objects. Indeed, we often act without needing to reflect on 
our behaviour and it was this observation that led Heidegger to suggest 

Constraints on descriptions 277 
that the relationship between ourselves and the world consisted of a 
'primordial understanding'. It was also what led him to conclude that 
terms such as 'mind' or 'consciousness' were inadequate when it came 
to describing fundamental human situations, because the assumptions 
ingrained in these words inevitably lead us to describe knowledge in a 
subject-object perspective. Instead, he chose the word 'Dasein', which 
means both 'being-there' and 'existence'; a word which implies that we do 
not need to infer the existence of the world, because we are already in it. 
These ideas were further developed by Merleau-Ponty (1945) in his 
Phenomenology of Perception. According to Merleau-Ponty, if we turn our 
attention to the way we learn a simple motor skill such as learning to 
play a musical instrument, we will be led to the conclusion that there is 
an irreducible bodily element of understanding, which is both 'original 
and primary'. By orignal, Merleau-Ponty meant irreducible. That is, the 
body's practical knowledge cannot be reduced to a more basic concept. 
By 'primary', he suggested that this bodily knowledge was the foundation 
for all other forms of knowledge. 
While Merleau-Ponty's ideas on the nature of bodily or pre-reflective 
knowledge represent a development of Heidegger's phenomenology, we 
face a problem when we come to Sartre's (1943) work. This philosopher, 
who claimed to have written his major philosophical work Being and 
Nothingness under the inspiration of Heidegger, wrote about existential 
themes in a way that was significantly different from the philosophers 
quoted above. For example, it was Sartre's belief that human beings are 
free in an absolute sense and that, as a result of this unconstrained 
freedom, the fundamental way of being between human beings is a 
relationship of conflict. 
Now this is a position that neither Heidegger nor Merleau-Ponty could 
have agreed with. Since Sartre claimed to be a phenomenologist, we 
wonder how we are ever to reconcile the differing descriptions that these 
philosophers produced concerning fundamental human situations. It was 
this philosophical dilemma that prompted my student to ask the question 
that I quoted at the beginning of this paper. My reply at the time, and 
which I reproduce here, was to remind the student that Sartre wrote from 
a subject-object perspective. This is most apparent in his distinction 
between the 'forsitself' and the 'in-itself'. While the in-itself is that which 
has no possibility of becoming other than what it is, the for-itself is the 
consciousness of the individual subject that gives meaning to the world by 
means of intentionality. Since, according to Sartre, the possibilities of the 
for-itself to give meaning to the world were unconstrained, the freedom of 
the for-itself was without boundaries. 
Either Sartre disagreed with Heidegger in a fundamental way on 
questions of being and time, or he failed to understand what was truly 

278 George Berguno 
radical about Heidegger's work. Heidegger offered an altogether new 
phenomenological analysis of our everyday experiences that dispensed 
altogether with mental state terms and ways of describing human 
situations that were full of assumptions. In my own view, Heidegger's 
method consisted in introducing constraints on his descriptions of 
fundamental human situations and it is this which makes Being and Tme 
a work that is rich in new insights into the question of being. Sartre, on 
the contrary, reintroduced the subject-object perspective into his own 
existential philosophy. In this respect, his philosophy shares in its basic 
assumptions with the work of Descartes and Husserl, but it cannot lay 
claim to be a development of Heidegger's thought. 
The idea of constraints on descriptions, then, is being presented as a 
tool for the development of both phenomenological philosophy and 
psychology. The illustrations given above suggest that it also has applica- 
tions in psychotherapy and counselling, and raises many interesting 
questions. By way of illustration, let me pose the following question: how 
are we to reconcile the description that human beings are fundamentally 
alone in a world where no predetermined meanings are to be found with 
the description of human beings as being born into a social world that is 
rich in meaning? The first description is one that has been advocated by 
Yalom (1980), while the latter was the view proposed by the sociologist 
and phenomenologist Schutz (1967). 
I leave the above question unanswered so that the reader may either 
reflect on it, or use the example to raise new questions of interest. It 
will be sufficient, for our purposes, to recapitulate on the method which 
I have described for settling such disputes. First, the assumptions behind 
the descriptions would need to be uncovered and identified. Once a 
consensus regarding these assumptions has been reached, there must 
also be an agreement to abstain from reintroducing them into our new 
descriptions of our lived experiences. I have referred to this process as 
a 'constraint on descriptions' and proposed that such a method can be 
found in the work of phenomenological philosophers such as Heidegger 
and Merleau-Ponty, as well as in the clinical practices of psychotherapists 
and counsellors. 
Department of Psychology 
City University 
Northampton Square 
London EC I V OHB 
Note 
I wish to dedicate this paper to the students who attended my course in 

Constraints on descriptions 279 
Phenomenological Psychology in the spring term of 1997 at Richmond, The 
American International University in London. If it had not been for the difficult 
questions that they raised in class, this paper would never have been written. 
References 
Boss, M. (1979) Existential Foundations of Medicine and Psychology, NJ: Jason 
Aronson. 
Descartes, R. (1642) Meditations on First Philosophy, in E. Anscombe and 
P.T. Geach (trans and eds) Descartes: Philosophical Writings, London: Nelson, 
1954. 
Frankl, V.E. ( 1955) From Psychotherapy to Logotherapy, Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 
Freud, S. (1937) 'Constructions in analysis', SE 23. 
Gardner, H. (1985) The Mind's New Science: A History of the Cognitive 
Giorgi, A. ( 1985) Phenomenology and Psychological Research, Pittsburgh, PA: 
Heidegger, M. (1927) Being and 'Time, trans. J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson, 
Husserl, E. (1931) Cartesian Meditations, trans. Dorian Cairns, The Hague: 
Merleau-Ponty, M. ( 1945) Phenomenology of Perception, trans. Colin Smith, 
Sartre, J.P. (1943) Being and Nothingness, trans. Hazel Barnes, London: Methuen, 
Schutz, A. (1932) The Phenomenology of the Social World, trans. G. Walsh and 
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1990) Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory, 
Yalom, I.D. (1980) Existential Psychotherapy, New York: Basic Books. 
Revolution, New York: Basic Books. 
Duquesne University Press. 
Oxford: Blackwell, 1962. 
Martinus Nijhoff, 1977. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul 1964. 
1958. 
E Lehnert, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1967. 
Procedures and Techniques, Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

