Journal of Aesthetics and Phenomenology
ISSN: 2053-9320 (Print) 2053-9339 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rfap20
When Poetry and Phenomenology Collide
Jeremy Page
To cite this article: Jeremy Page (2018) When Poetry and Phenomenology Collide, Journal of
Aesthetics and Phenomenology, 5:1, 31-51, DOI: 10.1080/20539320.2018.1460113
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20539320.2018.1460113
Published online: 31 May 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 684
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rfap20

Journal of Aesthetics and Phenomenology, 2018
VOL. 5, NO. 1, 31-51
https://doi.org/10.1080/20539320.2018.1460113
When Poetry and Phenomenology Collide
Jeremy Page
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
ABSTRACT
In recent years several scholars have wrestled with the term "poetic 
thought," suggesting in various ways there is something distinctive 
about the nature of meaning as it occurs/unfolds through poetry. In 
this paper I suggest, in part following the lead of Simon Jarvis, that 
one of the most fruitful lines of inquiry for exploring this idea lies 
in a consideration of poetic works through the lens of Heidegger's 
early phenomenology. Specifically, I argue that one of the keys to 
understanding poetic thought lies in a flaw within Heidegger's 
ontological divisions between substances, equipment and Dasein, 
as presented in Being and Time (1927). Through an analysis of three 
poems by Frank O'Hara, I argue poetry that examines and represents 
the physical world presents a problem for Heidegger when he suggests 
equipment in the world must necessarily "withdraw" in order for us to 
engage with it authentically. To address this, the term environment-at-
hand is introduced to describe the relationship between artists and 
the surrounding environments used for their work. Poetic thought 
is here conceived as the point where poetry and phenomenology 
collide; where poetry reflects and enacts the fact that humans are 
inherently engaged meaning-makers. In this way poetry does not only 
show us new ways of looking at the world, which it surely does, but it 
can help us understand the nature of being itself.
No matter how lofty and abstract our thoughts are or how complex our systems might be, all 
of it is rooted, finally, to the human body's mutual relationship with the physical environment.
—Andrew Hinton1
In the literature on poetics of the last decade, a wonderful phrase has popped up, in various forms and 
in the work of various theorists. The phrase is "poetic thinking" (or any number of slight variations 
on this theme),2 and Simon Jarvis, J.H. Prynne, Helen Vendler and John Wilkinson—among many 
others—have each wrestled with it, pinning the concept down variously on prosodic, cognitive and 
linguistic grounds.3 As Vendler writes, "the relation of poetry to thought is an uneasy one,"4 and I will 
not presume the ability to make it easy here. But for my part, I wish to suggest that a (re)emphasis 
on early Heideggerian phenomenology may offer the most fruitful avenue for understanding poetic 
thought.5 Not only can Heidegger assist our understanding of poetry, but poetry can and should assist 
in correcting core insights from phenomenology on the nature of being itself.
KEYWORDS
Martin Heidegger; 
Frank O'Hara; poetry; 
phenomenology; poetic 
thinking; Dasein; being
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT  Jeremy Page 
 jeremy.page1@hdr.mq.edu.au

32 
  ﻿J. PAGE
Poetries (and artworks more generally) that examine and represent the physical world 
present a problem for Heidegger when he suggests in his early work in Being and Time 
(1927) that equipment in the world must necessarily "withdraw" [zurückzuziehen]6 in order 
for us to engage with it authentically. To address this, I introduce and employ the term 
environment-at-hand to describe the relationship between artists and the surrounding envi-
ronments they use as fuel for their art. Creativity, and particularly literary creativity, should 
be understood as a propensity to ascertain and exploit artistic affordances in the world. 
Resulting poetic works should then be understood as linguistic crystallisations that simul-
taneously articulate and afford a certain kind of thought—that thought which underscores 
the self-definitive nature of our embedded, embodied creative nature.
Poetry plays a crucial role in Heidegger's later thinking and writings on art, particularly 
in The Origin of the Work of Art (1950)7 and Existence and Being (1949),8 where he considers 
the work of Friedrich Hölderlin. Though these texts play a supplementary role in this paper, 
I choose to examine Frank O'Hara's work for much the same reason Heidegger examines 
Hölderlin, whom he considers "the poet of the poets," namely because his work reflexively 
examines the nature of its own creation; poetry which is "borne on by the poetic vocation 
to write expressly of the essence of poetry."9 Though Heidegger expands and elaborates 
(and indeed revises) his early phenomenological work in later texts, aspects of his divisions 
of being as presented in Being and Time offer the most promising insights for examining 
poetry philosophically (and philosophy poetically). A consideration of these divisions along-
side contemporary poetic works may help us get to the heart of what distinguishes poetic 
thought, and may steer recent discussions in fruitful new directions.
***
Throughout Being and Time Heidegger attempts a dramatic reconceptualisation of meta-
physics since at least Descartes, putting the nature of being itself at the core of metaphysics. 
Briefly, Heidegger contends that in asking questions of the form "what is x?", traditional 
metaphysics has presupposed and failed to question the nature of Being (Sein) itself (i.e. 
what is is), and that in order to redress this (and following Husserl), we need to examine 
the phenomenon of being (Seiendes).10 Phenomenology cannot observe Being itself, for 
the simple reason that Being is only made manifest through beings—the isness of the table 
is only apprehendable through Dasein's apprehension of the table itself. Consequently, in 
order to ascertain the nature of Being we must examine the character and interaction of 
beings, and question what constitutes how it is that they are what they are.11
In Heidegger's phenomenology as presented in Being and Time, he distinguishes between 
three modes of being, which roughly correspond to self-sufficient entities; entities as they 
are in use; and the users of those entities, namely us.12 In the first instance, and partially 
in keeping with the philosophical tradition of Aristotle through to Descartes and Kant, 
Heidegger considers one mode of being as that of substances.13 This category includes any-
thing that is real and self-sufficient, and exists in the world as either a physical object or 
conceptual whole (such as words and numbers). Secondly, Heidegger points to the ways in 
which we interact with our environments, suggesting that the being of certain objects only 
reveals itself through our use of that thing. The pen only reveals what it is to be a pen, for 
instance, when we pick it up and begin to write with it. This mode of being Heidegger calls 
equipment. The final mode of being is the distinctly human mode of being-in-the-world, 
which Heidegger terms Dasein. We are, for Heidegger, uniquely beings whose Being is at 

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  33
issue for us, and it is through our purposive use of equipment, he suggests, that we partake 
in the distinctively creative, human mode of existence.14
Dividing the category of equipment further, Heidegger notes that equipment can either 
be inert, as when we are not using it—the hammer as it is in the toolbox—or it can be as it is 
in use—as when we are hammering. The distinction here is, respectively, between equipment 
present-at-hand (inert) and ready-to-hand (in use). The important characteristic of equip-
ment as ready-to-hand is that, according to Heidegger (and as highlighted by Dreyfus), it 
"withdraws" [zurückzuziehen].15 When one is skillfully using equipment, as a tennis player 
uses a racket, the physical properties of the object become increasingly unnoticeable. The 
more authentically one engages with equipment, according to Heidegger, the more such 
properties recede into the background as the object becomes like an extension of the user's 
body. As Heidegger writes, "the peculiarity of what is proximally ready-to-hand is that, in 
its readiness-to-hand, it must, as it were, withdraw [zurückzuziehen] in order to be ready-
to-hand quite authentically."16 This will be crucial to the arguments that follow.
As a final piece of necessary terminology, Heidegger suggests that all equipment, when 
it is in use, has a "towards-which," meaning that purpose which its use is directed toward 
achieving. The hammer has a "towards-which" of hanging an artwork, or building a house; 
the racket of hitting a ball, of playing tennis, of winning a match.
Taking stock, the three modes of being Heidegger distinguishes can be (somewhat 
crudely) summarised as follows:
•  substances objects, both real and abstract, which are within the world and are 
self- sufficient;
•  equipment objects in the world as they are in use. These can either be present-at-hand 
(not in use) or ready-to-hand (in use); and
•  Dasein the distinct human mode of existence, by which we define ourselves through 
our purposive use of equipment within the world.
Frank O'Hara's poetry expresses and enacts a mode of being-in-the-world that this early 
ontological picture cannot adequately account for, namely by engaging with equipment 
in a way that brings its properties to the foreground—precisely the opposite of making it 
withdraw. The three poems that I consider have been chosen with the intent of, respectively: 
(a) introducing what I term the environment-at-hand; (b) elucidating the potentiality of 
the environment-at-hand for creating (possible) meaning, and (c) exploring the environ-
ment-at-hand in reference to some of Heidegger's later thought.
Interior (With Jane)
Written in 1951, Interior (With Jane) is one of several poems written about or inspired by 
O'Hara's close friend Jane Freilicher, a popular representational painter who befriended 
several of The New York School poets, including Ashbery, Schuyler and Kenneth Koch 
(with whom she shared a kitchen in the same apartment building in the Lower East Side 
of Manhattan).17 Freilicher had painted O'Hara's portrait before his arrival in New York 
in 1951, the year this poem was written, and welcomed O'Hara (along with Ashbery and 
others) with a tour of his new home city.18 O'Hara had in turn written a number of poems 
inspired by and dedicated to Freilicher, including a concrete poem shaped to resemble her 
face.19 Freilicher remained O'Hara's muse for several years during O'Hara's time in New 

34 
  ﻿J. PAGE
York,20 and the resulting poems speak to a shared preoccupation with the physical environ-
ment as inspiration for their art. The example of concern here, in its entirety, is as follows:
Interior (With Jane)21
The eagerness of objects to
be what we are afraid to do
cannot help but move us Is
this willingness to be a motive
in us what we reject? The
really stupid things, I mean
a can of coffee, a 35¢ ear
ring, a handful of hair, what
do these things do to us? We
come into the room, the windows
are empty, the sun is weak
and slippery on the ice And a
sob comes, simply because it is
coldest of the things we know
We find in Interior a blurring of the distinction between subject and object that takes place 
through an inversion of the poetic subject and the physical environment, such that objects 
in their "eagerness" are willing to be motives for action—something the subjects afraid to 
do. The tautological structure of the third to the fifth line has a doubling, reiterative effect 
on the objects in the room as driving forces, since "the eagerness of objects to / be what we 
are afraid to do / cannot help but move us" amounts to saying, "the eagerness of objects to 
[move us] / cannot help but move us." Here the "us" is universalised beyond Freilicher and 
O'Hara to represent the human subject per se, suggesting that objects (and not subjects) 
are the affective (if not agential) half of the subject/object relation that the poem initially 
supposes and subsequently begins to dismantle.
The reification of subject/object continues, and is compounded in the rhetorical question 
"Is / this willingness to be a motive / in us what we reject?" There is in these lines consid-
erable ambiguity in the attribution of "this willingness," leaving it open to at least two (and 
conflicting) referents. The willingness could refer to, on the one hand, the object's willingness 
to be a motive in us (which is to say for us). Or, alternatively, it may refer to our willingness 
(in us) to be a motive (as reflected by the object). Here we have an instance of rhetorical 
polysemy, wherein agency becomes ambiguous and subject and object become reified; the 
process of artistic creation is brought under its own scrutiny.
Interior (With Jane) is at its most compelling in its final, slightly elusive lines:
do these things do to us? We
come into the room, the windows
are empty, the sun is weak
and slippery on the ice And a
sob comes, simply because it is
coldest of the things we know
To what does the last line of the poem refer? What is it that is the coldest of the things 
we know—the ice, presumably, or could it be the sob? Or both? Here again the lines are 
deliberately vague. Marjorie Perloff describes lines such as these as employing "syntactic 

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  35
ambiguity," points in O'Hara's poems that deliberately obfuscate (possible) meaning.22 For 
Perloff these points "destabilise the meaning," while for Hazel Smith they create multiple 
possibilities; "an overlaying of different meanings."23 Here coldness serves as a metaphor that 
overlays colour and touch with associations of insensitivity and melancholy. In cognitive 
linguistic terminology it serves, importantly, as a conceptual metaphor.
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson have written extensively on conceptual metaphors, 
suggesting that physical embodiment underpins all cognitive mapping of the world. In 
Philosophy in the Flesh (1999) Lakoff and Johnson produce a table of primary metaphors—
those metaphors that "pair subjective experience and judgement with sensorimotor experi-
ence," and which form the basis of complex metaphors via conceptual blending. In this table, 
Lakoff and Johnson's first listed primary metaphor is "affection and warmth," combining 
the subjective judgement of affection with the sensorimotor experience of temperature.24 
Conversely, of course, low temperature corresponds with a lack of affection (as when we say 
someone is being "cold" or gives an "icy" glance). One of the key progenitors of cognitive 
poetics, Reuven Tsur, has also drawn strong connections between metaphors of temperature 
relating to emotion and corresponding physiological changes. Citing research by various 
psychologists, Tsur notes that one of four core features of emotions is "deviation from 
normal energy level: increase of energy (gladness, anger), or decrease of energy (sadness, 
depression, calm)."25 In analysing Shelley's lyric "A Song," Tsur notes that "the verb 'freeze' 
denotes exceptionally low thermal energy," and straddles both the literal and the meta-
phoric.26 There is ultimately, these theorists argue, physiological grounding for all primary 
metaphors, and certainly those involving temperature.
Returning to the poem at hand, the coldness of the weak sun on icy windows, then, brings 
together the perceptual experience of coldness, the conceptual metaphor of a lack of emotion 
(insensitivity), the presence of emotion as melancholy (in both the sob and the conceptual 
metaphor of sadness as a lack of energy; as weakness) and the visual associations of coldness 
as shades of "cool" blues and greys. The poem thus blends, via conceptual metaphors, the 
somatic, the visual and the auditory with the physical environment as the source (and site) 
of emotional experience and artistic creativity. In so doing, O'Hara blurs the boundaries 
between subject and object, interior and exterior.
This an instance of what Hazel Smith has described as a prevalence of "hyperscapes" 
in O'Hara's work. Smith describes the hyperscape as "a postmodern site characterised by 
difference ... distinguished by the co-presence of opposites ... low and high culture, sex-
ual and racial difference, the local and global, modernist innovation and postmodernist 
appropriation."27 Interior (With Jane) constitutes what can be understood as a hyperscape 
of subjectivity, in which divisions between the physical and the mental, subject and object 
and interior and exterior are inverted, subverted and undermined. It is even unclear, for 
instance, from whom the sob of the penultimate line comes:
are empty, the sun is weak
and slippery on the ice And a
sob comes, simply because it is
coldest of the things we know
The division between O'Hara and Jane is blurred in the ambiguous attribution of sob in "a sob 
comes." Where does the sob come from? Jane? The speaker? Through the windows? If we read 
the sob as coming through the windows they are hardly "really stupid," but have an explicit role 

36 
  ﻿J. PAGE
as the source of agentive emotional response, inverting the subject/object dichotomy and so 
fracturing the poetic "I" between self and object. Yet, several lines later we get "it is the coldest 
of the things we know," which may suggest the sob comes from both Jane and the speaker. The 
result in this reading is simultaneously a fracturing of the self (again)—as the poetic "I" collapses 
under the weight of syntactic ambiguity—and a synthesis of selves, as both Jane and the speaker 
merge as potentially co-agentive in the penultimate line.
Moreover, the lack of attribution on the noun (rather than the verb) of "sob" not only 
detaches it from specific human agency, but abstracts the action altogether; it places the sob 
in the ether of subjective objects and objective subjects that the poem establishes, where 
a sob just is. All this works against a division of the internal and external worlds, placing 
intangible emotion on the same ontological plane as physical reality, as the objects in the 
room. Accordingly, any psychoanalytic interpretation that takes the exterior to be revealing 
O'Hara's (or the reader's) "interior" misses the point entirely. When Peter Schwenger, for 
instance, applies a Freudian interpretation on the poem and takes it to be presenting objects 
as "an outward projection of what is repressed in our own 'interior'," he takes the poem to 
articulate what it deliberately obscures.28
To bring this all back to Heideggerian terminology, in the above ways O'Hara's poem 
works to underscore the interrelation of Dasein and the physical world of objects. This 
amounts to far more than simply saying that the subject/object dichotomy is an oversim-
plification. Rather, echoing Heidegger, the poem suggests the interrelation of subject and 
object, to the point that our very mode of being not only depends upon but is constituted 
by those beings which we use for our purposive actions within the world. As Heidegger 
puts it in The Basic Problems of Phenomenology (1927):
World is a determination of the Dasein's being. This is expressed from the outset when we 
say that Dasein exists as being-in-the-world. The world belongs to the Dasein's existential 
constitution.29
When O'Hara thus uses the surrounding environment for the sake of writing a poem (with an 
ultimate purpose—what Heidegger calls a for-the-sake-of-which—of being a poet), the envi-
ronment is constitutive of his very mode of being. The answer to the question "what do these 
things do to us?", then, is that "these things" make up part of the very fabric of what it means 
to be "us." The objects in the poem are not merely external objects for O'Hara's subjective use, 
nor do they merely make up a part of his subjective experience. Insofar as "being a poet" (as a 
mode of Dasein) relies on their existence and skilled use, and insofar as "the world belongs to 
the Dasein's existential constitution," the objects must be understood as a part of that Dasein 
that engages with them creatively—which is to say as part of O'Hara himself.
***
Heidegger's profound rejection of Cartesian dualism (and all theories of mental representa-
tion that followed, including Husserl's intentionality)30 is based on his insistence that our 
way of being (Dasein) is as engaged users of equipment, wherein we experience the equip-
mentality of equipment in a dynamic process of disclosing spaces for action and creativity 
within the world. We are not separate (subjects or minds) for whom the world is a static set 
of things that we use to create or observe meaning. Rather, we are always-already thrown 
into a world of dynamic webs of meaning through the readiness-to-hand of equipment. As 
Heidegger writes in The Basic Problems of Phenomenology:

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  37
Intentionality belongs to the existence of Dasein. ... To exist then means, among other things, 
to be as relating to oneself by comporting with beings. It belongs to the nature of Dasein to 
exist in such a way that it is always already with other beings.31
And, in Being and Time:
Being-in-the-world ... amounts to a non-thematic circumspective absorption in references or 
assignments constitutive for the readiness-to-hand of a totality of equipment.32
Note that it is "the nature of Dasein" to exist in such relations, in which we are always 
"absorbed" in a world in which things matter to us and matter to us through their use. This 
rejection of the subject/object relation and emphasis on engaged action (later to become 
embodied engaged action in Merleau-Ponty) constitutes one of Heidegger's fundamental 
concerns throughout much of his early work, including in Being and Time. As Dreyfus 
notes, "Heidegger's attempt to break out of the tradition [of Descartes through to Husserl] is 
focused in his attempt to get beyond the subject/object distinction in all domains, including 
action."33 O'Hara's poetry likewise enacts a mode of being-in-the-world that demonstrates 
the insufficiency of the subject/object distinction (even as it engages with it), but also, as 
will be shown, the insufficiency of Heidegger's early revisionist ontology.
Affordances
O'Hara is questioning the place of physical objects as catalysts, both for artistic creation 
as well as cues for emotional response. In the field of ecological psychology this has been 
a central question, and one to which its founder James Gibson has offered the concept of 
affordances. An affordance is a property of an object or aspect of the world that opens itself 
to specific action, in a given context and to a particular organism or individual. As Gibson 
puts it, "it implies the complementarity of the animal and the environment."34 When we 
look at chairs we do not see, or do not only see, a set of physical properties—a curved piece 
of wood or plastic attached to four legs. Rather, we see something to sit on. We do not see 
the vase, we see something to put flowers in. An affordance is the organism-specific poten-
tiality of an aspect of the environment. This model stresses the inextricability of the subject 
and object in acts of perception, since perception is the confluence of an actor with their 
environment. As Joanna McGrenere and Wayne Ho write, "by cutting across the subjective/
objective barrier, Gibson's affordances introduce the idea of actor-environment mutuality; 
the actor and the environment make an inseparable pair."35
The environment-at-hand
The concept of affordances, combined with Heidegger's distinction between equipment 
and substances, begins to offer a lens through which we can understand the relationship 
between the poet and their external physical environment. Consider O'Hara entering the 
room, seeing weak light on the window, having an emotional response and experiencing the 
inspiration for a poem. In this instance the window instantiates an affordance for emotion 
and artistic creation, while language functions as equipment for Dasein's self-expression. 
The window is not withdrawing, but rather its artistic affordances as emotional resonance 
for the poet come to the fore, and so act as equipment ready-to-hand without withdrawal. 

38 
  ﻿J. PAGE
The interesting thing about this poem in particular is that it is doing all this while reflecting 
on the very process of poetic creativity itself. This requires a little further unpacking.
I take it to be the case that in most instances an emotional response entails, at least in part, 
some appraisal about its source. Those things that make us happy we judge as in some way 
beneficial or useful; those things we judge as frightening we also judge as things to avoid. 
As Magda Arnold and John Gasson put it, "emotion is a tendency towards an object based 
suitable, or away from an object judged unsuitable."36 The fact that emotions often involve 
appraisal, however, does not make such emotional responses affordances. This is because 
an affordance is not just an appraisal, but an appraisal of something as useful for specific 
action. In Heidegger's terms, affordances have a "towards-which," being that action they 
disclose as a context-specific possibility. When O'Hara has an emotional response to the 
interior and/or the physical items within it, the response is in part an appraisal, but it only 
becomes an affordance when the object is experienced as artistic inspiration—when it is 
seen as something to write about. The poem then becomes a linguistic crystallisation of an 
artistic affordance within equipment in the world.
As Dreyfus notes, "sometimes words are, indeed, used as equipment in the local situa-
tion and language functions transparently in a nonpropositional way."37 Accordingly, and 
returning to Heidegger's distinctions, here language and the external environment are both 
functioning as equipment that is ready-to-hand and has a "towards-which" of generating 
a poem. The surrounding physical environment as it is present-at-hand (inert; present 
but not in use) shifts to being ready-to-hand when it presents affordances that enable it to 
be used for the sake of art. Here, however, we run into a problem with Heidegger's caveat 
regarding "withdrawal."
Heidegger suggests that in order for us to authentically engage with equipment, that 
equipment's properties and characteristics must fall from view. What, then, are we to make 
of a process by which language operates as equipment while simultaneously bringing its own 
qualities and the latent emotional resonance of the external environment to the foreground, 
multiplying the potential properties of each (through polysemy and syntactic ambiguity)? 
If we are to follow a Heideggerian conception of being as presented in Being and Time, it 
would seem we must do one of two things: either we must reject that the objects in O'Hara's 
poetry (the window, the hair and so forth)—objects for the sake of art—are equipment 
(since they and the language that describes them do not withdraw), or we must change our 
conception of equipment as it functions for the sake of art.
Rejecting the status of objects as equipment in poetry is undesirable, since they resemble 
equipment in all other respects (having a towards-which, being part of a system (or totality, 
as we will see), and being ready-to-hand or present-at-hand). Accordingly, postulating an 
entirely separate mode of being would create a mode of being that is not entirely separate 
(and therefore both implausible and unhelpful). Consequently, I wish to suggest that what 
we might call the environment-at-hand (by which I mean the physical environment as 
artistic inspiration) represents a unique possibility of being-in-the-world that reverses the 
usual way in which we encounter equipment as ready-to-hand.
It will help to work through another of O'Hara's works in order to clarify what I have 
in mind.

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  39
Walking to Work38
It's going to be the sunny side
from now
on. Get out, all of you.
This is my traffic over the night
and how
should I range my pride
each oceanic morning like a cutter
if I
confuse the dark world is round
round who
in my eyes at morning saves
nothing from nobody? I'm becoming
the street.
Who are you in love with?
me?
Straight against the light I cross.
Walking to Work creates a tension between happiness and fear, immobility and motion. The 
poem begins with an ostensibly optimistic tone, using the image of sunshine and allusion to 
fried eggs ("sunny side") to symbolise life's improvement. The reference here is likely to the 
popular song On the Sunny Side of the Street recorded by various jazz musicians throughout 
the 1940s and 1950s,39 and the title to the 1951 film The Sunny Side of the Street, released 
less than a year before O'Hara wrote the poem.40 The lyrics of the song, which O'Hara 
likely would have known well, enact the metaphor of crossing a street—"grab your coat / 
get your hat / leave your worry on the doorstep / just direct your feet / on the sunny side of 
the street." O'Hara borrows this imagery to serve as the literal and metaphorical grounding 
for the work's sociopolitical undercurrent.
Since Walking to Work was written less than a year after O'Hara had arrived in New York 
and shortly after he had taken a job at the Museum of Modern Art (where, at this point, it 
is likely he was selling postcards),41 it is not surprising that the walk might elicit the mood 
of things "looking up." However, the remaining questions in the poem—particularly that 
spanning from lines 5 through to 13—betray a curious ambivalence, and a use of the envi-
ronment-at-hand that invokes sociopolitical themes of inclusion and exclusion:
and how
should I range my pride
each oceanic morning like a cutter
if I
confuse the dark world is round
round who
in my eyes at morning saves
nothing from nobody? I'm becoming
the street.
The street is personified as the lens through which O'Hara can highlight his relative insig-
nificance in a large new city: "a dark world." O'Hara sees the streets as cold and "dark," 
and yet defiantly asserts that although the morning street "saves / nothing from nobody," 
nevertheless it's going to be "the sunny side / from now on." As in Interior (With Jane), there 

40 
  ﻿J. PAGE
is here a blurring of subject/object, of environment and emotion, interior and exterior. But 
here the antagonism runs a sociopolitical course, and the environment-at-hand becomes 
the ground for enacting and subverting the status quo.
As Hazel Smith notes in Hyperscapes in the Poetry of Frank O'Hara: Difference, Homosexuality, 
Topography (2000), "the period in which O'Hara was writing was highly repressive, but it marked 
a turning point in the social position of homosexuals."42 Though not as explicitly political as 
some of Ginsberg's works, many of O'Hara's poems engage directly with his relationships, and 
are situated at this "turning point" in the marginalization of homosexuals. Smith suggests that 
O'Hara's poetics is often radical in this sense of openly exploring and describing sexuality in 
a time when homosexuality was still categorised by the medical profession as an illness, while 
homosexuality was considered a felony in all but two American states.43 Accordingly, she writes 
that O'Hara's work "was too radical for its time. ... The message, that homosexuality was a matter 
of pride rather than shame, needed to be spelt out loud and clear."44
Returning to the poem at hand, the question "and how / should I range my pride" may then be 
read as exploring O'Hara's conflict between his pride as a homosexual and the oppressive social 
environment in which he lived. Since "range" can mean "to run or extend in a line in a particular 
direction," "to place oneself in opposition to" or "to travel or wander over a wide area,"45 pride 
becomes not (or not only) an (internal) emotion but also, and more significantly, an (external) 
way of navigating the world—what Judith Butler calls a performative act.46 The further "each 
oceanic morning like a cutter" evokes an image of a boat traversing an ocean, making "the dark 
world" seem particularly perilous (though "cutter" may also reference a tailor, a further sense 
of having to "navigate" appropriate social spaces). In each of these deliberately slippery, poly-
semous lines, O'Hara sees the external environment as affording a choice between particular 
ways of navigating the "dark world" (physically and socially), a decision that is enacted in the 
final line. The environment-at-hand thus becomes the core means by which O'Hara establishes 
a sociopolitical undercurrent within the work.
Who or what is it that saves "nothing from nobody" in the lines "in my eyes at morning 
saves / nothing from nobody"? I suggest that "saves" here should be read as remembering 
(or forgetting) rather than as rescuing or sparing. This is because the syntax is ordered as 
saving "nothing from nobody," rather than saving "nobody from nothing." The difference 
here is between the world (or the speaker) saving something from people, as one saves a 
gift from a friend, rather than saving that friend from pain or hardship. Once again, this 
is slightly ambiguous, since the double negative can reverse the meaning (to save nothing 
from nobody can mean to save something from everybody). Colloquially, however, and par-
ticularly in New York vernacular, "nothing from nobody" would usually suggest to save no 
trace from any individual—making each day a fresh start. Though the lines can plausibly 
be read as either "the dark world" or the speaker being that which saves "nothing from 
nobody," in either case the emphasis is on relationships situated in a world that is difficult 
(for us and for the speaker) to navigate. The lines that follow—"I'm becoming / the street / 
Who are you in love with? / me?"—blur even further the lines between the physical world, 
the poetic self and the reader (is it us who are being address as "you"?). At this point in the 
poem the obfuscation of logical paths parallels O'Hara's struggle to "range [his] pride," the 
conflict between this pride (and his insistence that "it's going to be the sunny side / from 
now / on") with the "dark [social] world" that interrogates not only who he is in love with, 
but the nature of those relationships (is anything saved?).

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  41
Walking to Work creates a deliberate chaos of sorts that mimics both O'Hara's mind 
and the street itself, and this occurs not only syntactically and grammatically (as has been 
shown), but through uneven stanza breaks and indentation. No two indented lines are per-
fectly aligned, making the poem uneven and staggered in its visual form. All this serves to 
create a tension in the poem between a "showing up" and a retreat of the poetic self, which 
is brought home in the final lines:
Who are you in love with?
me?
Straight against the light I cross.
The walking "straight against the light" in the last line of the poem represents the final deci-
sive moment in which O'Hara "ranges his pride," and all ambiguities fall under the weight 
of a performative act. The crossing represents a flouting of convention, not only of road 
rules (against the direction of a street light) but also the refusal to accept the sociopolitical 
reality, as a departure to "the sunny side of the street" from the "straight," heteronormative 
and monogamous. It is thus simultaneously an arrival and a departure; an arrival at the met-
aphorical light of the "sunny side" and the literal light of work (at MoMA), while a departure 
from the metaphorical "dark world," the literal dark of the street and the interrogations of 
a society that questions who one loves (and what one saves). Just as in Interior (With Jane), 
the environment-at-hand in Walking to Work breaks down the subject/object divide and 
foregrounds the interrelationship of Dasein and world. In utilising affordances embedded 
in the external environment, the environment-at-hand becomes the means not only for 
O'Hara's (re)establishment as poet, but for (re)establishing personal and sexual identities.
***
In what way, we can now ask, are the street, the [traffic] light, the traffic and the "dark world" 
being employed by O'Hara in a philosophically significant way? The traditional subject/
object view fails to capture how the speaker is fundamentally engaged in a world of use, a 
world which presents affordances for action. Accordingly, we can use Heidegger's phenom-
enology to correct our view and see O'Hara not as a subject experiencing a world of objects, 
but as a Dasein enmeshed in a world of equipment and equipmental affordances. Using 
Heidegger's distinctions, however, again becomes problematic, given his caveat regarding 
withdrawal. Since the traffic light of the final line presents two alternative affordances—wait 
or walk—there is a sense in which the traffic light necessarily cannot "withdraw," since to 
use it as equipment ready-to-hand one must bring its properties—its lightness—to the fore. 
Moreover, in using it further as a metaphor, with a for-the-sake-of-which of writing a poem, 
O'Hara uses the light as equipment, while bringing its properties (the fact it was "against 
the light") to the foreground, rather than letting them recede into the background.
There are thus two levels—the level of reality, where O'Hara is actually crossing a street, 
and, later, the level of the poem—in which O'Hara demonstrates that, contrary to Heidegger's 
claim, properties needn't withdraw in order for things in the world to function as equipment, 
particularly when it comes to the creation of art. We should not say, as Heidegger does in 
Being and Time, that in order to use equipment authentically it necessarily withdraws into 
the background. Rather, there is a way of using the external environment, which I am calling 
the environment-at-hand, which crystallises in poetry the affordances that the environment 

42 
  ﻿J. PAGE
provides. In this way we can, and should, use O'Hara (and other poets that utilise such 
strategies) to correct our ontologies.
Some possible objections
One possible objection that Heidegger may raise is a stipulation that he makes that equip-
ment, in order to be equipment, has to be in a totality of supporting objects that serve as a 
scaffolding. One can use a hammer to open a paint tin, to borrow Dreyfus' example,47 but 
since it is not for that purpose (and does not have supporting conceptual structures), it is 
not functioning as equipment when being used for that purpose. In the same way, one can 
use a window for-the-sake-of writing a poem, but that does not, Heidegger may suggest, 
make it equipment. In order for it to function as equipment it must "belong to a totality,"48 
just as in order for the hammer to function as a hammer it must exist within a framework 
of other objects: nails, wood, buildings and so forth. If this is so, the window, the street, the 
objects discussed so far are not even equipment, so the issue of withdrawal is not an issue 
in the first place.
It could be argued, however, that such a totality does exist—that poets do have a totality 
of equipment, broadly defined, that constitute the objects that they write "with." For the sake 
of argument, however, let us suppose that such a totality does not exist, and that Heidegger's 
"totality" caveat is a reasonable rejection of our placing the environment-at-hand in the 
ontological realm of equipment. Doing so, it should be clear, would merely take us back 
to square one, left wondering the status of objects-for-art in Heidegger's ontology. If we 
accept the ontological divisions outlined at the outset of this paper (substances; equipment; 
Dasein), we need to seriously consider where objects used for the sake of art fit within this 
ontology. I suggest that, firstly, they must be considered equipment and that, secondly 
(and accordingly), we must reject that equipment necessarily withdraws when we use it 
authentically.
Heidegger argues that the peculiar role of the artist is to draw attention to the fact we 
are always-already engaged in a meaningful world. However, he does not then re-import 
the artist's creative use of the environment into the ontological schema constructed in 
Being and Time, so it is left sitting half-outside his ontological framework.49 If one uses the 
environment-at-hand as artistic affordances in the world for-the-sake-of art, it seems to 
me that our best option is to concede that one is using equipment. Since that equipment is 
both ready-to-hand and also not withdrawing (but rather having its emotional resonances 
brought to the fore), it seems we must revise Heidegger's early schema to include a category 
that allows such appropriation of the environment. In keeping with Heidegger's terminology, 
and in lieu of a more pertinent term, environment-at-hand seems to me as good as any.
It is important to note that in later works, particularly Existence and Being (1949), The 
Origin of the Work of Art (1950), The Question Concerning Technology (1954) and Discourse 
on Thinking (1959), Heidegger will expand and revise his earlier phenomenological thought, 
in ways that supersede much of what I have outlined here. Language will come to have a 
central position, and poetry in particular as that which safeguards the nature of Being (more 
of this will be considered shortly). Moreover, Heidegger comes to think of the environment 
as used for poetic appropriation in terms of technology, and objects in the world in this 
sense as Bestand—"standing-reserve"50—warning that imposing our use on the environment 
(enframing; Gestell)51 is antithetical to authentic artistic creation (that kind of art, as poiesis, 

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  43
that he sees as enacting the strife between earth and world).52 Accordingly, he jettisons much 
of his early terminology, no longer writing in terms of "equipment" in favour of a richer, 
more nuanced and more complex approach.53 The objection could be made, then, that it 
is unfair to critique early Heidegger without reference to later works in which he himself 
offered such corrections, though in different terms. But there are reasons to avoid merely 
"shifting" from the framework of Being and Time to later texts.
Heidegger laments in On the Way to Language (1959) that "the fundamental flaw of Being 
and Time is perhaps that I ventured forth too far too early."54 Indeed, there are important 
holes in Being and Time that require patching. Yet there is profound ontological insight and 
lucid terminology worth saving, particular for our discourses on poetic thought. The term 
environment-at-hand (and its grounding in affordance) is a step toward correcting early 
Heidegger with insights from his later texts but, more importantly, with insights that are 
performed poetically in O'Hara's great work.
Having seen how O'Hara can revise our understanding of (early) Heidegger, I can now 
progress to the final poem for consideration here, and a consideration of how (particularly 
later) Heidegger can aid our understanding of the nature of poetry.
***
Heroic Sculpture55
We join the animals
not when we fuck
or shit
not when tear falls
but when
staring into light
we think
Written in 1958, Heroic Sculpture in scarcely more than twenty words manages to evoke 
themes of art, death, morality and epistemology. The "heroic sculpture" of the title and the 
final line is, I will argue, The Thinker (1901) by Auguste Rodin, whose work O'Hara greatly 
admired (Heikki Kujansivu calls Rodin and Cézanne the two "major thinkers influencing 
his thing poems,"56 while the Museum of Modern Art archives feature a photo of O'Hara 
posing alongside—and playfully imitating—Rodin's St. John the Baptist Preaching (1880) 
in the museum's garden).57
At face value, the premise of the poem is that we find our strongest connection with 
animals not in our mutual capacity for basic, mechanistic actions, but our mutual capacity 
for inward, introspective contemplation. In this respect the poem can, quite plausibly, be 
read as a statement on animal rights. Alternatively, it is quite possible to read the last line 
of the poem as something of an addendum, so that we join the animals when staring into 
the light [or so] we think. On this reading "staring into the light" could symbolise death, 
and the poem could be foregrounding mortality as unifying universal (this is certainly the 
reading that Bob Perelman and Micah Mattix have taken, Perelman even imagining that 
"O'Hara inserted a thin pause '... we think'.")58 Or, even further, we could take the poem's 
title to refer to heroic nudity, that tradition of sculpture that depicts the mortal man as a 
divine being, and the poem then as undermining the elevation of man beyond corporeal 
bounds. These are plausible readings, yet I believe the poem is, or at least should be read 

44 
  ﻿J. PAGE
as, far deeper than this. This can be seen through a brief detour to consider more closely a 
possible reference to Rodin's artwork.
Rodin's The Thinker was originally conceived as a representation of Dante, the archetypal 
poet, staring into and contemplating his work The Divine Comedy (1472).59 The official 
website of Rodin Museum explains:
The Thinker was originally entitled The Poet. He represented Dante, author of The Divine 
Comedy which had inspired The Gates, leaning forward to observe the Circles of Hell, while 
meditating on his work.60
For O'Hara, this may be what makes the sculpture "heroic": that it shows us that we are 
at our most primal not in our base bodily actions, and not just (as Descartes might have 
it) when we think. Rather, our most fundamental nature is revealed when, like Dante, we 
create and contemplate art: "when staring into the light / we think." The emphasis here is 
thus on "when staring into the light" rather than "we think." But what does it mean to "join 
the animals"? It cannot mean to find a connection with animals, since all shared ways in 
which humans and non-human animals behave (including even displaying emotion) are 
rejected. Rather, "joining the animals" means to find connection with our most defining 
acts, with that which expresses the nature of our being. An animal defines itself as animal 
when it "fucks," "shits" and displays emotion. But our mode of being, and O'Hara's identity 
as poet, are defined via the act of artistic creation. In the act of creating and contemplating 
art [staring into the light] the thinker/poet "joins the animals," in the sense of doing that 
which (re)defines their essence.
Accordingly, "Heroic Sculpture" enacts its own meaning, since O'Hara, in staring into 
"the light" of the poem (which stares into Rodin, which stares into Dante) metaphorically 
joins the primal level of artistic expression. The sculpture is "heroic" because it reveals that 
the very act of creative contemplation—of thinking through art—is precisely that which 
defines us as us; it serves as a mirror through which we can apprehend the transcendent 
nature of our experiences of art. Yet, while the sculpture itself reflects the nature of our being, 
it is only by appropriating the artwork, as object, through the poem that O'Hara is able to 
define his nature as poet. Though the sculpture itself can instantiate the tension between 
what Heidegger calls "earth" and "world," it must be employed as environment-at-hand 
in order to not only reflect but enact the nature of Dasein. Only then (and only through 
language) can poetry "establish" being. As Heidegger writes in "Hölderlin and the Essence 
of Poetry" (1949):
Being is never an existent. But, because being and essence of things can never be calculated 
and derived from what is present, they must be freely created, laid down and given. Such a 
free act of giving is establishment.61
Since being and essence cannot be derived from what is present, the act of writing "Heroic 
Sculpture" becomes the means for O'Hara's establishment of being. Far from having the 
salient properties of the sculpture withdraw, then, O'Hara utilises the sculpture (as envi-
ronment-at-hand) to bring to the foreground the tension between earth and world that the 
sculpture instantiates. To clarify this further, it is necessary to return to Heidegger.
***
Heidegger, in "The Origins of the Work of Art" and elsewhere contends that art, and par-
ticularly poetry, does have a special place in human experience. For Heidegger art, and 

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  45
particularly great art, allows us to apprehend the ontological tension between "earth" and 
"world"; that is, between the physical world as it presents itself to us and the worlds that open 
up in contexts of use, meaning and understanding.62 Heidegger discusses at some length 
the philosophical import of Van Gogh's painting A Pair of Shoes (1886), and its capacity to 
elicit a phenomenological apprehension of our engaged ways of being.
The painting depicts a peasant worker's shoes, tattered and worn from years of work in 
the field. Their owner is not depicted explicitly, but retains an implicit place in the painting, 
since the shoes suggest the worker's ethic, their poverty, their being elsewhere, and hence their 
background absence is paradoxically foregrounded as a kind of presence.63 As Heidegger 
writes, "... from out of the dark opening of the worn insides of the shoes the toilsome tread 
of the worker stares forth. ... The shoes vibrate with the silent call of the earth ..."64
In A Pair of Shoes there is accordingly an inherent and irreconcilable tension between the 
foreground and the background. The foreground (the shoes) draw out the background of 
meaning and engaged use—and as we engage with the work and bring this background to 
the fore, we apprehend our own meaning-making engagement through the work, sending 
the foreground effectively into the background. The painting thus encapsulates the tension 
between earth and world into which we are always-already thrown in our day to day mean-
ing-making activities within the world.
This is one of the key reasons why, for Heidegger, the subject/object dichotomy of aes-
thetics fails to capture what is most crucial about our ways of experiencing the world, and 
in particular of experiencing art. The power and ontological import of art is that it allows 
us to move beyond a conception of objects in the world as inert matter that we subject to 
our experience, domination and control, and of artworks as treasure chests of meaning that 
we unpack, or containers that we fill with our ideas.
The phenomenological study of art reveals the tension between earth and world that 
underlies all creativity, not just of art but of meaning within the world. Iain D. Thomson 
puts this point most eloquently:
Our phenomenological encounter with Van Gogh's painting shows us that its meaning is neither 
located entirely in the object standing over against us nor simply projected by our subjectivity 
onto an inherently meaningless work; instead, the work's meaning must be inconspicuously 
accomplished in our own implicitly dynamic engagement with the work. Through our engage-
ment with Van Gogh's painting, Heidegger thus suggests, we can lucidly encounter the very 
process by which we are always-already making sense of our worlds.65
Similarly, when O'Hara collapses the subject/object distinction in Interior (With Jane), 
when he crystallises environmental affordances in Walking to Work, and when he shows 
us that art is what defines us at our most basic and primitive levels in Heroic Sculpture, he 
should be understood as achieving poetically what, for Heidegger, Van Gogh achieved in 
paint. O'Hara's is a poetics that at the very least lends itself to a Heideggerian, phenome-
nological interpretation. It is a poetics through which we might revise our understanding 
of Heidegger's work in Being and Time (via the concept of the environment-at-hand), and 
it poignantly gets at a fundamental truth about reality—about what it means to live in a 
world of engaged use.
What, then, of poetic thought?

46 
  ﻿J. PAGE
***
John Wilkinson acknowledges the limitations of the aesthetic approach that I have criticised 
in this paper, writing "to admire a poem as an object reduces its energy, situating reader 
and poem in a space already symbolic, rather than engaging them in creating meaning?"66 
Similarly, Simon Jarvis has in several illuminating papers urged against seeing poems as 
"'texts', containers for propositional intentions, or 'marks', sheer stuff."67 One alternative is 
to see the poem as a dynamic process of creation—what Jarvis calls a "cognitive artefact." 
On this view, the poem is an experience, and everything the poet "cares" about, according 
to Jarvis, can be brought to bear on the intricacies of that experience.68
One problem with regarding the poem as a process, an experience rather than an entity, 
however, is that it begins to look precisely like the aesthetics we are trying to avoid, par-
ticularly if we construe that experience as a process of merely subjectivising an "objective" 
text. What we need is a way of accounting for both the experiential nature of the poem and 
the link between the experience of the poem and the subjectivity that (re)establishes itself 
through and reflects itself in that experience.
This is exactly what Heideggerian phenomenology affords—it explains not only the pro-
cesses by which the poem comes into being, but how being is realised and reflected in and 
through that creative process, and the subsequent experience of the poem by a reader. In 
the writing of the poem, via the environment-at-hand, O'Hara becomes the poet, while in 
the creative process of reading the poem we engage self-reflexively with our mode of being 
as engaged meaning-makers within the world. The poem must accordingly be understood 
as an event of thought—a thinking-into-being of Dasein's self-reflexivity.
There is, however, a problem with pushing the point too far. If we wish to maintain that 
you and I have been examining the same poems in this paper, we cannot insist that the poem 
is all process or event, for the simple fact that every experience of a poem is necessarily 
unique. If we say "what all manifestations of O'Hara's Walking to Work have in common is the 
words on the page," we return to an aesthetics that misses the point of what the poem most 
importantly is and does. Yet if we say "it is all an experience" we lose the cohesion required 
to begin our discussion in the first place. And if we say "it is what all events of its reception 
hold in common" we attempt to reduce the irreducible—demarcating "the poem" arbitrarily 
around popular readings that are necessarily culturally and temporally contingent.
Accordingly, I think we have to settle for a dialectical definition of the poem that pulls 
in two directions at once. A poem has to be understood as a chimera that will always exist 
over and above any attempt to pin it down. As Adorno suggests, and as Jarvis reminds us, 
poetry has a "language-character," an infinite possibility of meanings and referents that 
change, develop and dissolve over time and across cultures.69 The poem is both the text 
and the cognitive event of its being read, as well as the infinite possibilities of its reception. 
It cannot be the sum total of these manifestations, as these are inexhaustible, so the poem 
itself necessarily expands and multiplies over time. Accordingly, the poem always resists its 
own walls, saying louder and louder, to rephrase Hegel,70 more than what it means.
As a summary of what I have in mind, I like to visualise the poem roughly as follows 
(Figure 1):

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  47
At (A) we have the text itself.71 The "text as experience" model conceives of the poem as 
existing at (B). Yet the poem itself must be seen as existing in the tension between the text 
and all of its possible (and expanding) readings, which is to say at (C). Poetic thought (not the 
poem) is that which occurs between (A) and (B), as a combination of text and experience.
Through "What Does Art Know?" Simon Jarvis has pushed so far as to claim that art, 
through thinking through technique, can know.72 He writes of poets forming "a new way 
altogether of thinking in verse: a new verse sentence, above all, in whose syntax, lexicon, 
punctuation, rhythms, tunes, pauses, echoes and clicks thoughts previously unimaginable 
may be called up."73 Here Jarvis is speaking of original poetic thoughts, where I am arguing 
(following Heidegger) that poetic thinking—at least one aspect of it—gets to something 
deeper. What we are getting at here is something more fundamental: something that poetry 
knows and reveals about reality—about Truth per se. In this respect I agree with Jarvis that 
"works of art know something we do not"74 (but can). Poetry knows, reflects and reveals the 
fact that we are inherently engaged meaning-makers, a fact (as Heidegger and other phe-
nomenologists point out) that we neglected or forgot throughout much of our philosophical 
history. In this way poetry does not only show us new ways of looking at the world, which 
it surely does, but it can help us understand the nature of being itself.
Notes
1.  Hinton, Understanding Context, 60.
2.  Jarvis, "Thinking in Verse."
3.  See Prynne, "Poetic Thought"; Wilkinson, "Repeatable Evanescence"; Jarvis, "Prosody as 
Cognition"; Jarvis, "Musical Thinking."
4.  Vendler, Poets Thinking, 2.
5.  This is a slight redirection of Jarvis in "What Does Art Know," Nuzzo in "What Are Poets For," 
and particularly Gosetti-Ferencei in Heidegger, Hölderlin, and the Subject of Poetic Language.
6.  Heidegger, Being and Time, 99.
Figure 1. The poem as entity, experience or dialectic possibility.

48 
  ﻿J. PAGE
7.  Heidegger, Basic Writings.
8.  Heidegger, Existence and Being.
9.  Ibid., 295.
10.  Heidegger, Being and Time, 25.
11.  Here I maintain the capitalisation of "Being" and "beings" in line with Macquarrie and 
Robinson's translation, as I believe it a helpful shortcut to outlining Heidegger's distinctions. 
In subsequent references I return to the common, lowercase rendering.
12.  Heidegger, Being and Time, 25.
13.  Heidegger variously refers to these as "substances," "objects" and "Things."
14.  Heidegger, Being and Time, 96.
15.  Dreyfus, Being-in-the-World, 64.
16.  Heidegger, Being and Time, 70.
17.  Quilter, "Explicit as a Star."
18.  Chiasson, "Fast Company."
19.  Quilter, "Explicit as a Star."
20.  Gray, Urban Pastoral, 111.
21.  O'Hara, Collected Poems, 55.
22.  Smith, Hyperscapes in the Poetry of Frank O'Hara, 11.
23.  Ibid., 11.
24.  Lakoff and Johnson, Philosophy in the Flesh, 130.
25.  Tsur, "The Poetic Function and Aesthetic Qualities," 5.
26.  Ibid., p. 6.
27.  Smith, Hyperscapes in the Poetry of Frank O'Hara, p. 1.
28.  Schwenger, The Tears of Things, p. 8.
29.  Heidegger, The Basic Problems of Phenomenology, pp. 296-7.
30.  Dreyfus, Being-in-the-World, p. 49.
31.  Ibid.
32.  Heidegger, Being and Time, p. 107.
33.  Dreyfus, Being-in-the-World, p. 48.
34.  Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, p. 191.
35.  Joanna McGrenere, "Affordances: Clarifying and Evolving a Concept."
36.  Quoted in Tsur, "The Poetic Function and Aesthetic Qualities," p. 5.
37.  Dreyfus, Malpas, & Wrathall, Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus, p. 317.
38.  O'Hara Collected Poems, 126.
39.  Winer, On the Sunny Side of the Street.
40.  Quine, On the Sunny Side of the Street (Film). Columbia Pictures.
41.  MoMA, Museum of Modern Art Official Website.
42.  Smith, Hyperscapes in the Poetry of Frank O'Hara, 109.
43.  Ibid., 112.
44.  Smith, Hyperscapes in the Poetry of Frank O'Hara, 112.
45.  Steveon, Oxford Dictionary of English.
46.  Butler, "Performative Acts and Gender Constitution."
47.  Dreyfus, Podcast in Philosophy, 185.
48.  Heidegger, Being and Time, 97.
49.  We should remember here that Being and Time was supposed to comprise three divisions, 
and Heidegger may have intended to address this in the third, unwritten division.
50.  Heidegger, Basic Writings, 322.
51.  Ibid., 325.
52.  Ibid., 326.
53.  An adequate consideration of such later works lies beyond the scope of the current paper.
54.  Heidegger, On the Way to Language, 7.
55.  O'Hara, Collected Poems, 311.
56.  Kujansivu, "Returning Thirds," 125.
57.  McDarrah, "Frank O'Hara at MoMA."

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  49
58.  Mattix, Frank O'Hara and the Poetics of Saying 'I', 138.
59.  Dante, The Divine Comedy.
60.  Rodin, "Musée Rodin Official Website."
61.  Heidegger, Existence and Being, 305.
62.  Heidegger, Basic Writings, 141.
63.  I am thinking here of Merleau-Ponty's insistence that there is an indeterminate being 
(ambiguity): "the being of the background, which is there in its absence." See Marshall, A 
Guide to Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception, 57.
64.  Heidegger, Basic Writings, 159.
65.  Thomson, Heidegger, Art and Postmodernity, 98.
66.  Wilkinson, "Repeatable Evanescence," 25.
67.  Jarvis, "What Does Art Know?," 60.
68.  Ibid.
69.  Jarvis, "Prosody as Cognition," 103.
70.  Hegel writes of how we can learn by experience that we "meant something other than we 
meant to mean." See Hegel and Baillie, The Phenomenology of Spirit, 39.
71.  Whether we want to include the ink, the typeface, the medium and so forth is a separate 
issue here.
72.  Jarvis, "What Does Art Know?"
73.  Jarvis, "Verse, Perversity, University," 102.
74.  Jarvis, "What Does Art Know?"
Acknowledgements
The Collected Poems of Frank O'Hara are reproduced with permission of University of California 
Press; permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. This work would not have been 
possible without the generous oversight and supervision of Associate Professor Marcelle Freiman 
(Macquarie University). Sincere thanks are also due to Professor Antonina Harbus (Macquarie 
University), Professor Robert Sinnerbrink (Macquarie University) and Professor Alexander Bergs 
(Osnabrück University), as well as the invaluable comments from the editors and blind reviewers 
for this issue.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Notes on contributor
Jeremy Page has a Master of Creative Writing from the University of Sydney, and a Master of Research 
(English) from Macquarie University. He is currently a PhD candidate at Macquarie University, 
completing a dissertation on rap music, philosophy and contemporary American poetry. He can be 
reached at jeremy.page1@hdr.mq.edu.au.
References
Butler, J. 2003. "Performative Acts and Gender Constitution: An Essay on Phenomenology and 
Feminist Theory." London: Routledge.
Chiasson, D. 2008. "Fast Company: The World of Frank O'Hara," The New Yorker, April 7.
Dante, A. 1996. The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri. Edited and translated by Robert M. Durling; 
introduction and notes, Ronald L. Martinez and Robert M. Durling; illustrations by Robert Turner. 
New York: Oxford University Press.

50 
  ﻿J. PAGE
De Bolla, P., and S. H. Uhlig. 2009 Aesthetics and the Work of Art: Adorno, Kafka, Richter. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Dreyfus, H. L. 1991. Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time, Division I. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. 2007. Podcast in Philosophy 185 - Fall 2007: Heidegger Introduction - Part 3. Berkeley: 
U.C. Berkeley.
Dreyfus, H., J. E. Malpas, and M. A. Wrathall. 2000. Essays in Honor of Hubert L. Dreyfus. Edited by 
Mark A. Wrathall and Jeff Malpas. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gibson, J. J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gosetti-Ferencei, J. A. 2004. Heidegger, Hölderlin, and the Subject of Poetic Language: Toward a New 
Poetics of Dasein. New York: Fordham University Press.
Gray, T. 2010. Urban Pastoral: Natural Currents in the New York School. Iowa City: University of 
Iowa Press.
Hegel, G. W. F., and J. B. Baillie. 2009. The Phenomenology of Spirit (The Phenomenology of Mind). 
Digireads.com.
Heidegger, M. 1982. On the Way to Language. Bloomington, IN: HarperCollins.
Heidegger, M. 1988. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Heidegger, M. 2008.  Being and Time. New York: HarperCollins.
Heidegger, M., and W. Brock.  1949. Existence and Being. With an introduction by Werner Brock. 
London: Vision Press, published 1968.
Heidegger, M., and D. F. Krell. 1993. Basic Writings. 2nd ed, revised and expanded. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Hinton, A. 2014. Understanding Context: Environment, Language, and Information Architecture. 
Beijing: O'Reilly Media.
Jarvis, S. 1998a. Adorno: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Jarvis, S. 1998b. "Prosody as Cognition," Critical Quarterly, 40(4): 3-15. doi:10.1111/1467-8705.00193.
Jarvis, S. 2005. "Musical Thinking: Hegel and the Phenomenology of Prosody," Paragraph, 28(2): 
57-71. doi:10.3366/para.2005.28.2.57.
Jarvis, S. 2014. "Verse, Perversity, University: Wallace Stevens and the Melodics of Crispin." Thinking 
Verse 4(2): 101-121.
Joanna McGrenere, W. H. 2000. "Affordances: Clarifying and Evolving a Concept." Proceedings of 
Graphics Interface 2000, Montreal, May 2000: 179-186.
Kujansivu, H. 2008. "Returning Thirds: On Reading Literature." Published dissertation, State 
University of New York.
Lakoff, G., and M. Johnson.  1999. Philosophy in the Flesh: The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to 
Western Thought. New York: Basic Books.
Marshall, G. J. 2008. A Guide to Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception. Milwaukee, WI: 
Marquette University Press.
Mattix, M. 2011. Frank O'Hara and the Poetics of Saying 'I'. Chicago: Fairleigh Dickinson University 
Press.
McDarrah, F. W. (Producer). 1960. "Frank O'Hara AT MOMA" [Photograph], accessed 7 January 
2017. https://www.gettyimages.com.au/license/83885825
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). "Museum of Modern Art Official Website," accessed 7 January 
2017. http://moma.org/explore/multimedia/audios/13/118
Nuzzo, A. 2015. "'What Are Poets For?': Renewing the Question with Hegel and Heidegger," Philosophy 
Today, 59(1): 37-60. doi:10.5840/philtoday2014112550.
O'Hara, F., and D. Allen (eds.). 1995. The Collected Poems of Frank O'Hara. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Prynne, J. H. 2010. "Poetic Thought." Textual Practice 24(4): 595-606. doi:10.1080/095023
6X.2010.499640.
Quilter, J. 2013. "Explicit as a Star. Jane Freilicher: Painter Among Poets," Poetry Foundation (Online). 
https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/articles/70081/explicit-as-a-star.
Quine, R. (Writer). 1951. The Sunny Side of the Street. J. Taps (Producer). Los Angeles: Columbia 
Pictures.

JOURNAL OF AESTHETICS AND PHENOMENOLOGY﻿ 
  51
Rodin, M. 2017. "Musée Rodin Official Website," accessed 7 January 2017. http://www.musee-rodin.
fr/en/collections/sculptures/thinker
Schwenger, P. 2006. The Tears of Things: Melancholy and Physical Objects. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press.
Smith, H. 2000. Hyperscapes in the Poetry of Frank O'Hara: Difference, Homosexuality, Topography. 
Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Stevenson, A. 2010. Oxford Dictionary of English. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thomson, I. D. 2011. Heidegger, Art, and Postmodernity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tsur, R. 2010. "The Poetic Function and Aesthetic Qualities: Cognitive Poetics and the Jakobsonian 
Model," Acta Linguistica Hafniensia, 42: 2-19. doi:10.1080/03740463.2010.482311.
Vendler, H. H. 2004. Poets Thinking: Pope, Whitman, Dickinson, Yeats. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Wilkinson, J. 2014. "Repeatable Evanescence," Thinking Verse, 4(1): 23-49.
Winer, D. G. 1997. On the Sunny Side of the Street: The Life and Lyrics of Dorothy Fields. New York: 
Schirmer Books.

