Physiotherapy Theory and Practice
An International Journal of Physical Therapy
ISSN: 0959-3985 (Print) 1532-5040 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iptp20
Group-based, individualized exercises can provide
perceived bodily changes and strengthen aspects
of self in individuals with MS: a qualitative
interview study
Ellen Christin Arntzen, Gunn Kristin Øberg, Shaun Gallagher & Britt
Normann
To cite this article: Ellen Christin Arntzen, Gunn Kristin Øberg, Shaun Gallagher & Britt
Normann (2021) Group-based, individualized exercises can provide perceived bodily
changes and strengthen aspects of self in individuals with MS: a qualitative interview study,
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 37:10, 1080-1095, DOI: 10.1080/09593985.2019.1683923
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2019.1683923
© 2019 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 26 Oct 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 4032
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 11 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iptp20

Group-based, individualized exercises can provide perceived bodily changes and
strengthen aspects of self in individuals with MS: a qualitative interview study
Ellen Christin Arntzena, Gunn Kristin Øbergb, Shaun Gallagherc, and Britt Normanna,b
aDepartment of Physiotherapy, Nordland Hospital Trust, Bodø, Norway; bUiT, The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway; cThe Lillian
and Morrie Moss Chair of Excellence in Philosophy, Department of Philosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, USA
ABSTRACT
Background: Group-based physiotherapy is effective for individuals with MS; nevertheless indivi-
dualization within groups is questioned and little is known regarding individuals´ experiences
with individualization in small groups.
Objective: We aimed to explore the short- and long-term experiences of individuals with MS
participating in a 6-week, group-based, individualized physiotherapy-intervention.
Methods: Within a randomized controlled trial (RCT), 25 in-depth interviews with a strategic
sample of 13 people (9 women; age 25-79 years old; European Disability Status Scale (EDSS)
1-6.5) were conducted at weeks 7 and 30 using systematic text condensation, with dynamic
systems theory and phenomenology as analytical frameworks.
Results: The main categories were: 1) movement control, orientation and insights: Bodily improvements
were associated with targeted exercises, specific adjustments by the physiotherapist, emotional engage-
ment and re-access to activities; and 2) the individual within the group: Equal distributions of one-to-one
interactions and attention were important for experiencing success. Less attention and improvements
turned attention toward own disability. Physical changes felt particularly emotional short term, implying
that individuals' feelings of ownership and control of body and movement, new views of themselves
and changed affordances in daily life were involved.
Conclusion: Equally distributed attention and engagement, targeted exercises and hands-on
adjustments resulting in visible and perceived bodily changes were experienced as key factors
of individualization in small groups.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 10 October 2018
Revised 3 July 2019
Accepted 21 September 2019
KEYWORDS
Multiple sclerosis;
group-based; physiotherapy;
core stability; balance
Introduction
Individuals with multiple sclerosis (MS) often have
balance problems in both the initial and later phases
of the disease (Aruin, Kanekar, and Lee, 2015; Huisinga
et al., 2014; Kalron et al., 2016) due to a variety of
somatosensory, motor, postural control and vision
impairments (Cameron and Lord, 2010; Krishnan,
Kanekar, and Aruin, 2012). Balance dysfunctions are
associated with an increased risk of falling (Comber,
Sosnoff, Galvin, and Coote, 2018) and less participation
in daily activities (Cameron and Lord, 2010; Cattaneo
et
al.,
2017),
and
can
influence
aspects
of
self
(Normann,
Sørgaard,
Salvesen,
and
Moe,
2013).
Individual exercise therapy is associated with improve-
ments in walking (Dalgas, Stenager, and Ingemann-
Hansen, 2008; Hogan and Coote, 2009; Snook and
Motl, 2009) and balance (Gunn et al., 2015; Paltamaa,
Sjogren,
Peurala,
and
Heinonen,
2012;
Rietberg,
Brooks, Uitdehaag, and Kwakkel, 2005); and the same
association
has
been
reported
for
group-based
interventions for individuals with MS (Arntzen et al.,
2019; Forsberg, von Koch, and Nilsagård, 2016; Tarakci
et al., 2013).
Studies on users' experiences from group-based exercise
programs for individuals with MS have reported social ben-
efits (Dodd, Taylor, Denisenko, and Prasad, 2006), improve-
ments in daily activities, and increased body confidence
(Carling, Nilsagård, and Forsberg, 2018; Van Der Linden
et al., 2014). Training in groups is a motivational factor for
empowerment, improved energy, reduced fatigue, and the
gaining of knowledge in self-assisted training (Clarke and
Coote, 2015). A review of qualitative studies of individual
interventions revealed similar positive findings; however,
commonly perceived adverse consequences were increased
fatigue and feelings of frustration and lost control
(Learmonth and Motl, 2016).
Although the prevailing principle of individualiza-
tion (European Multiple Sclerosis Platform, 2012) has
been questioned in group settings (Kalron et al., 2019;
Plow, Mathiowetz, and Lowe, 2009), an individualized
intervention conducted in small groups was recently
CONTACT Ellen Christin Arntzen PT, MSc
ellenarntzen@me.com
Department of Physiotherapy, Nordland Hospital Trust, Bodø, Norway
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
2021, VOL. 37, NO. 10, 1080-1095
https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2019.1683923
© 2019 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/),
which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.

introduced and found feasible and effective on trunk
control, balance and walking in individuals with MS
(Arntzen et al., 2019; Dybesland and Normann, 2018;
Normann,
Salvesen,
and
Arntzen,
2016)
From
a
professional
perspective
individualization
within
small groups is dependent on an initial individual
assessment (Lahelle, Øberg, and Normann, 2018b),
ongoing movement analyzes and adaptations through
hands-on interactions (Lahelle, Øberg, and Normann,
2018a). Knowledge gained from the participant´s per-
spective regarding small groups is however limited.
The interest in new theoretical conceptualizations
for more diverse and inclusive views of the body has
increased among physiotherapist (Nicholls and Gibson,
2010; Nicholls and Holmes, 2012). Conceptions of body
and movement that emphasize physical interaction as
communication and allow integration of neuro- and
movement science and embodiment, have previously
been introduced in regard to one-to-one neurological
physiotherapy (Normann, 2018; Normann, Fikke, and
Berg, 2015; Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen, and Moe,
2013; Øberg, Normann, and Gallagher, 2015; Sivertsen
and Normann, 2015). No prior studies have used such
comprehensive conceptions in order to investigate and
analyze individualization within groups. In order to
generate new insights regarding this topic, we turned
to a combination of dynamic systems theory (DST)
(Shumway-Cook and Woollacott, 2017) and phenom-
enology (Gallagher, 2012; Merleau-Ponty, 2013), with
a particular focus on Gallagher (2013) "Pattern Theory
of Self", to emphasize both physical aspects and deeper
meaning of the participant´s bodily experiences.
DST is a commonly used model for understanding
motor
control
and
learning
(Shumway-Cook
and
Woollacott, 2017), and it involves adopting a third-
person perspective on the body (Normann, 2018). DST
comprehends movement as self-regulated due to three
factors: 1) constraints for movement in the individual; 2)
task;
and
3)
environment
(Shumway-Cook
and
Woollacott, 2017). Each factor contains subsystems that
are open for manipulation, for instance, by the phy-
siotherapist's specific handling (individual), choice of exer-
cise (task) and training equipment within the situation
(environment). Through manipulations of the subsystems,
a new, more effective movement pattern can develop,
resulting in a new attractor status or preferred movement
strategy (Thelen, 2005), which is often a goal of neurologi-
cal physiotherapy. DST provides an analytical tool to dee-
pen our understanding of the participants' individual
actions and experiences concerning individualization or
lack thereof, as well as potentially perceived positive or
negative changes in constraints regarding bodily impair-
ments, activities and participation. Such a third-person
view of the physical body is fundamental to physiotherapy
in order to understand movement control, biological and
biomechanical aspects of the body (Normann, 2018).
However, this view might also imply that the body is
separated from the mind (Nicholls and Gibson, 2010)
and thereby also from subjectivity (which according to
DST
is
associated
with
the
cognitive
subsystems)
(Normann, 2018). In order to explore what individualiza-
tion within a group and potential positive or negative
bodily changes mean to a participant, a first-person per-
spective on bodily experience is justified and may be
emphasized by phenomenological and more existential
theoretical aspects (Normann, 2018).
The key to the possibility for combining such quite
different theories lies foremost in one of phenomenology
´s core element; the ambiguity of the body. That is the fact
that the body is the centre of experience and expression,
and simultaneously is a biological and biomechanical
organism (Merleau-Ponty, 2013). The "lived body" or the
body-as-subject, experiences the world from a first-person
perspective,andconcurrentlymaybeperceivedorobserved
from a third person perspective (the body-as-object) for
instance in a clinical examination (Merleau-Ponty, 2013;
Normann, 2018; Øberg, Normann, and Gallagher, 2015).
Phenomenology gives primacy to the lived body, which
incorporates and is modulated by movements (both pre-
and post disease and therapy) and is characterized by
intentionality or an outward orientation in processes of
perception, sensation and movement/motility (Merleau-
Ponty, 2013). Since intentionality is primarily motor, this
affords the possibility for integrating the participant´s sub-
jective phenomenological experiences of the body with the
DST´ objective analyses the body. We note that some pre-
cedent for combining DST and phenomenology can be
found in enactivist approaches to cognition especially in
the work of Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991).
In instances of physical interaction and communication
between individuals (e.g. therapist and patient) the body-as
-subject involves 'inter-corporeity' an experiential and phy-
sical coupling (Merleau-Ponty, 2013), previously empha-
sized in relation to hands-on interactions in neurological
physiotherapy (Normann, 2018). Impairments and symp-
toms due to MS can disturb the lived body, with the result
that one's outward orientation is also affected for instance
in a decline of the quality and quantity of one's affordances
(Gibson, 1986), and in the feeling of the "I can" (the sense
that I can engage in some action) becoming the "I cannot"
(Gallagher, 2017; Gibson, 1986). This change involves
a loss of autonomy and one's sense of agency (Gallagher
and Daly, 2018).
To explicate a deeper meaning of the participants'
feelings of self in regard to body and movement, or the
embodied self, we turned to the "Pattern Theory of Self"
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1081

(Gallagher, 2013; Gallagher and Daly, 2018) and focused
on the following factors: A) The experiential factors
which imply: 1) bodily experiences related to body-
schematic and somatosensory functions; 2) sense of
ownership for body and movement, which has strong
somatosensory components; and 3) sense of agency or
control of one´s movement, with strong motor compo-
nents (Gallagher, 2012, 2013; Merleau-Ponty, 2013).
Since these body functions and structures are often
addressed in physiotherapy for individuals with MS,
these insights could enlighten bodily experiences from
the training. B) The reflective factors, which include
body image are defined as a reflective awareness of one
´s body,involve how I perceive myself and the stories or
narratives that I and others tell about me (Gallagher,
2013). Changes in bodily experiences; both in regard to
increasing disability or improved possibilities for move-
ment may shape the individual's stories and reflections
of what they can ("I can") or can not do ("I cannot"). C)
The intersubjective factors involve the way I see myself
in relation to others. This statement reflects the fact that
all group members and the physiotherapist are embo-
died selves and will perceive and express meaning
through their physical interactions, gazes, gestures and
words, constituting "intercorporeity" (Merleau-Ponty,
2013). These interactions may provide other viewpoints
compared to when being alone (Sokolowski, 2000). D)
The extended factors include how I identify myself by,
for instance, the activities in which I participate. Such
extended factors are directly relevant for individuals
with MS, in which disability can gradually change
opportunities or the range of affordances in daily life.
Combining analytic tools of DST and phenomenology
may reflect the complexity of neurological clinical practice
and can help us gain knowledge about all of these factors in
regard to individuals with MS´ experiences from group-
based physiotherapy. With this background, the aim of the
study was to investigate the users' experiences of indivi-
dualized physiotherapy (GroupCoreDIST) in group-based
settings. We ask the following research question: What are
the short- and long-term experiences and reflections of
ambulant individuals with MS regarding participation in
an individualized, group-based intervention, particularly
regarding individualization and potential bodily changes?
Methods
Design and choice of method
Based on the research question and the theoretical frame-
work, a qualitative in-depth interview study (Brinkmann
and Kvale, 2015; Malterud, 2016) was chosen to target the
phenomenological experiences of individuals with MS
concerning their short-term insights and long-term reflec-
tions regarding their experiences from participation in
a 6-week, group-based physiotherapy-intervention.
Context of the study
The interview study was nested within a randomized,
controlled trial (RCT) with 80 ambulant participants
(EDSS-level of 1-6.5; 1 = minor disability, 6.5 = being
able to walk 20 meters with or without a walking aid)
and was conducted in six municipalities in Norway
between 1200 and 51,000 inhabitants, examining the
effects of a new, individualized, group-based interven-
tion called GroupCoreDIST compared to those of stan-
dard care with respect to trunk control, balance,
walking, activity level and health-related quality of life
(Normann, Zanaboni, Arntzen & Øberg, 2016). Six
physical therapists (who had 7-25 years of experience,
three as specialists in neurological physiotherapy and
three as generalists) conducted the intervention after
being trained in GroupCoreDIST for five days and
receiving a booklet with descriptions and photos of
the 33 exercises, all having 5 levels of difficulty.
GroupCoreDIST-intervention
GroupCoreDIST emphasizes the multifaceted aspects of
balance. CoreDIST stands for the coordinated interplay
between proximal and distal parts of the body, and DIST
stands for D = dose (high), dual task; I = individualization,
insights; S = stability, specificity, somatosensory activation;
and T = training, teaching. The intervention includes an
initial individual clinical examination performed by the
physiotherapist (group leader). The group sessions con-
sisted of three participants for pragmatic reasons having
diverse or similar EDSS values and lasted for 60 minutes,
three times per week for six weeks. All of the group mem-
bers performed the same exercise concurrently, however
with difficulty tailored by the physiotherapist to each indi-
vidual. Table 1 describes the GroupCoreDIST intervention,
and the protocol article provides details of the exercises
(Normann, Zanaboni, Arntzen, and Øberg, 2016).
Participants and sample
One of the MS nurses at the hospital sent invitation letters
with a consent form concerning both the RCT and the
interview study. The participants signed the written
informed consent form and were informed that they
could withdraw at any point. The study was approved by
the Regional Committee for Medical and Health Research
Ethics in Norway (REK South-East: 2014/1715-7) and
complied with the Declaration of Helsinki.
1082
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

Table 1. Description of the GroupCoreDIST intervention.
GroupCoreDIST
Dose and equipment
GroupCoreDIST
Content and examples
Individual clinical examination
60-minute session before the start of the group sessions
History: Medical, social and patient history; symptoms; main issues from the patient's perspective
Analysis: Observation and hands-on interaction. Consider the patient's resources and constraints for movements.
Posture analysis: Various postural sets; for example, standing, sitting and lying down. Consider the alignment
throughout the body and for each body area, adaptation to the base of support and interaction with the
environment.
Activities/movement analysis: For instance; walking, standing on the toes or heels, squats, one-leg standing and
other balance challenges. Consider the body's relation to the base of support, movement patterns of the body as
a whole, and specific body parts and their relation to each other, the task and the environment. Consider the
ability to perform selective movements (to move one part of the body while stabilizing other parts) to provide
coordination.
Specific tests: Muscle length, muscle activation and strength, tonus, somatosensory function, pain, reflexes.
Introduction to GroupCoreDIST exercises: Choose and try out a few exercises in relation to the individual's
movement problems. Hands-on adjustments to improve alignment, adaptation to the base of support and
movement quality. Explore the participant's ability for improved performance in the exercises.
Conclusion: Consider the patient's resources and issues, hypothesis of causation and the main problem related to
movement and balance and potential for improved movement control.
Group sessions
Duration: 60 minutes, 3 times per week for 6 weeks
Equipment: Large therapy balls, small mobilization balls as well as rolled towels, bolsters, plinths
and rubber bands for optimal alignment.
Planning the group sessions: Consider each participant's main problem and which underlying impairments are
related to it. Choose exercises that suit the three participants and choose the appropriate postural set and
variation of exercises (5 variations for each of the 33 exercises, 6 different exercise categories) for each participant
to be able to perform the exercise with optimal movement quality.
Goal: Teaching the participants specific exercises that can be performed both together with a physical therapist and
at home. It is a goal that participants should perceive improvements in balance and movement control.
Beginning and end of all group sessions
The physiotherapist asks how everyone is doing that day and for experiences regarding the performance of home
exercises.
Individual balance challenges are performed simultaneously for all participants at the beginning and end of each
session, to perceive and reflect on their own balance that day, compare their own balance before and after each
session, and provide an opportunity for the physical therapist to interlink the individual's balance challenges with
the choice of exercises.
Exercises
Perform up to 3 × 10 repetitions according to the individual's capacity and quality of performance.
As the quality of movement in the exercise improves, the physiotherapist may adjust the dose by
increasing the number of repetitions, using a more difficult variation of the exercise or
adding dual task challenges.
Group members concurrently conduct the same exercise but with different variations according to symptoms and
quality of performance. All six exercise categories should be used at every group session. All exercises target
optimal adjustment to the base of support and activation of the core while performing the exercise.
The 6 exercise categories are:
1) Somatosensory stimulation/activation of the hands or feet: exercises 1-2, somatosensory activation of the feet or
hands to enhance adaptation to the base of support, for instance, by rolling a mobilization ball with the hands or
feet.
2) Muscle length: exercises 3-9, addressing concentric and eccentric activity in muscles of the neck, upper and lower
limbs.
3) Selective movement and coordination: exercises 10-21, selectively moving the arms and legs or particular parts
of the core. Focus on dynamic stability, keeping one part of the body stable while moving another.
4) Training larger muscle groups: exercises 22-27, recruiting larger muscle groups in various standing positions for
instance rolling the ball up and down toward the wall with your back.
5) Advanced challenges for balance and postural control: exercises 28-32, giving advanced challenges for postural
control and balance for instance jumping while bouncing the therapy ball.
6) Relaxation: exercise 33, systematically performing contraction/relaxation of other parts of the body.
(Continued)
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1083

From the 40 participants in the GroupCoreDIST-group,
ECA and BN chose a strategic sample for the interview
study with the following criteria: variation in age (24--
77 years); gender (9 women and 4 men); EDSS-values (1
and 6.5); and time since diagnosis (0.5-24 years) (Table 2).
The selected participants were from training groups led by
all the PTs. We also purposely selected participants
reported by the physiotherapists to be dissatisfied, satisfied
or neutral regarding the intervention. For pragmatic rea-
sons, and because many similar experiences were repeated
by different participants (Malterud, Siersma, and Guassora,
2016) we ended up with a sample of 13 patients who were
interviewed twice, for a total of 25 interviews (one person
died of natural causes before the second interview).
Data collection
The audio-recorded, face-to-face interviews were con-
ducted by the first author (ECA) at study-week 7 and 30
(from December 2015-September 2016); they took place in
a quiet room at the hospital (23 interviews) or in one
participant's own home (2 interviews) and lasted for
46-126 minutes (altogether 1927 minutes). The interviews
were anonymized, and sensitive personal information was
omitted. A theme-based interview guide with open-ended
questions was used to explore the participants' experiences
and reflections, actively asking also for negative experiences
(Tables 3 and 4). The interview guide was tested on two
individuals with MS prior to the study, and adjustments
were made to meet specific ethical standards. In the first
interview, the participants were invited to describe and
reflect on their experiences from the GroupCoreDIST-
assessment and exercises, the group setting, tailoring,
impairments, and potential changes within the body and
daily activities. The second interviews addressed retrospec-
tive reflections regarding the same themes and the impact
on their daily lives after the intervention was completed.
During the interviews, the participants' answers were
rephrased for communicative validation (Brinkmann and
Kvale, 2015). For ethical reasons, the interviewer was sen-
sitive regarding the participants' stories and attempted to
capture what was said in a way that correlated with what
was meant (Brinkmann and Kvale, 2015). All interviews
Table 1. (Continued).
GroupCoreDIST
Dose and equipment
GroupCoreDIST
Content and examples
Additional challenges and adaptations
Motor-motor dual tasks are performed in all exercises while performing more than one motor task at once for
instance as keeping the back in contact with the therapy ball while rolling it from side to side. Advanced motor-
motor dual tasks such as throwing a towel or a ball to the other group members could be added.
Motor-cognitive dual tasks may be added, for instance, singing, rhyming or calculating while performing exercises.
All dual task activities may also enhance group dynamics, engagement and having fun.
Both instructions and hands-on facilitation are allowed to improve movement quality, make movement possible or
easier, decrease inexpedient compensatory movement patterns and optimize the movement experience
(Vaughan-Graham and Cott, 2016).
Home training
Unsupervised
GroupCoreDIST exercises for 30 minutes, 2 times per week during the six weeks of the intervention
The physical therapist cooperates with each participant to identify exercises for home training. The exercises are
individualized and mirror what is highlighted during group trainings. Home training contains all six exercise
categories. The training progresses in line with the exercises performed in the group sessions.
Equipment: The same as for the group sessions
Table 2. Participants' demographic background data. The mean
or % and (min-max) are presented.
Variable
Total (n = 13)
Age
Mean 46 (25-78)
Gender
9 women/4 men, 69%/31%
Type of MS
Relapsing remitting 9/69%
Primary progressive 2/15.5%
Secondary progressive 2/15.5%
EDSS
Mean, 3.5 (1-6.5) years
Time since diagnosis
Mean, 10.8 (0.5-23) years
1084
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

ended with an opportunity for the participant to express
his or her feelings about being interviewed, which revealed
no negative utterances.
Data analysis
The data were transcribed and systematized using NVIVO-
11.0/12.0 (QSR International) by ECA, and were analyzed
by systematic text condensation, a thorough process of
decontextualization and recontextualization (Malterud,
2001, 2012). All of the transcribed material was read in
an open-minded way by ECA and BN, and most parts were
read by GKØ to obtain an overall impression of the mate-
rial, followed by discussions of provisional themes.
Subsequently and guided by the research question, ECA
identified meaning units, which were coded in accordance
with their meaning, followed by organization of the coded
meaning units into groups based on their content and
finally into subgroups (decontextualization) organized by
an active search in the material for both negative and
positive findings. Following negotiations between ECA
and BN on every step in the process and regular workshops
between ECA, BN and GKØ, regarding the organization
and interpretation of findings, the meaning units in each
subgroup were agreed on and rewritten by ECA in
a condensed 1st-person form. ECA transformed the con-
densates to analytic texts in 3rd-person format, which was
compared with the transcripts to validate the original con-
text (recontextualized) (Malterud, 2017). SG joined regular
e-mail correspondence and one workshop regarding inter-
pretation of the theoretical framework in relation to the
findings. All the authors verified each analyzing step and
critically reviewed the manuscript. In line with guidance
from the Northern Norway Regional Health Authority two
user representatives participated in the project group, con-
tributed in both the planning of the study and a workshop
where the findings and what these could mean to indivi-
duals with MS were discussed. The analysis yielded two
main categories, each containing two subgroups. An exam-
ple of the analysis process is shown in Table 5.
Table 3. Interview guide: 7-week interviews.
Theme
Possible questions
Background information
Could you tell me a little bit about yourself, please?
Time of diagnosis, type of MS, EDSS status, where you live, are you employed, your social
status, physical activity, and have you been seeing a physiotherapist before the study?
Opening question
Is there anything you would like to point out and tell me about your participation in the
GroupCoreDIST training?
Experiences from the first meeting with the physical
therapist and the individual clinical examination
How did you experience the first meeting with the physiotherapist and the individual clinical
examination?
What did the individual clinical examination before the group training started mean to you?
Experiences from the 6 weeks of group-based training
How did you experience the GroupCoreDIST training?
How did you perceive and respond to the training?
How did you perceive the group?; the content of the training?; individualization?; hands on
interactions and and instructions?
How did you experience the physiotherapist`s role and competence?
How did you perceive the dose and intensity of the training?
What did the training mean to you?
Did you learn anything from the training period?
Were there any challenges during the training? Could you tell me what happened in these
challenging situations?
Did you experience some things that went really well? Some things than did not work out so
well?; Or some things that you would like to change?
Could you tell me if there were any episodes in particular that made a special impression on
you?
Was there anything you did not like, something that made you feel uncomfortable or was not
as expected?
Have you reflected on the group-based training compared to previous experiences with
physical therapy?
Experiences from home training
How did you experience the obligation for home training?
Can you describe one of your regular home-training sessions, how you experienced this and
what it meant to you?
Were there any challenges? Things that went well or not so well? Are there things you would
like to change?
How did you experience performing the exercise on your own?
Experiences of impairments, daily function, activities and
participation
Can you describe how you experience your function, impairments and disability? Can you
describe daily activities you normally participate in? Did you experience any changes?
How was family life and life in general during the period?
Experience of quality of life
Is there anything you would like to pinpoint concerning your daily life? Did you experience the
training as having a negative or positive influence in your daily life?
Closing question
Are there any experiences from the group-based training that you would like to share that
other individuals with MS or physiotherapists could learn from?
How did you experience being interviewed?
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1085

Reflexivity
The research team included different competencies: ECA
and BN are clinical specialists in neurological physiother-
apy for adults and the creators of GroupCoreDIST, GKØ
is a specialist in pediatric physiotherapy, and SG
a philosopher and an expert in phenomenology. The
two patient representatives both participated in the RCT
part of the study, but were not interviewed. They provided
important insights, for example as they spontaneously
reported similar experiences to what was extracted from
the material of that feelings of improvements in strength
or sensibility meant that they felt more in control and had
lead to easier access to daily life activities, and expressed
a congruency of group settings sometimes being hard.
Experience and knowledge regarding neurological phy-
siotherapy, GroupCoreDIST and individuals with MS gave
the interviewer (ECA) and the last author (BN) positioned
insight (Paulgaard, 1997). This background, combined
with the research team´s insights in DST, phenomenology
and
experience
from
performing
interview
studies
enforced the team to create a targeted interview-guide,
which through discussions served to illuminate our pre-
conceptions regarding the phenomenon in advance.
Moreover, the interview guide was prior to the study
adjusted through two test interviews with individuals
with MS. These were transcribed and discussed in order
to increase the quality of the interview guide and the
interview competency of ECA, including to ask adequate
open-ended questions and follow-up questions allowing
for surprises to occur, such as the unexpected strong emo-
tional feelings related to positive bodily changes in indivi-
duals with minor disability as well as others who
experienced less improvements. The research team further-
more discussed the interview guide and verbalized what we
thought could be potential answers, what would be relevant
to ask for and how to ask in a way that opened for stories
and reflections that we haven't thought of before. We
considered the interview guide to be balanced, allowing
the participants to lead the direction of their answers. Since
the participants mostly highlighted positive situations, they
were also asked directly for negative experiences (Tables 3
and 4).
During the interviews the first author tried to under-
stand the meaning of the participants´ statements and to
ask adequate follow-up questions to capture each person´s
uniqueness; for example: could you tell more about that?
could you describe what you and the PT did in the situa-
tion? What do such experiences mean to you? Was there
anything you did not like, something that made you feel
uncomfortable or was not as expected?
The risk of being too close to the material and over-
look blind spots was addressed by the systematic ana-
lytic approach to the material in line with Malterud
(2001), which included the discussions to develop the
Table 4. Interview guide: 30-week interviews.
Theme
Possible questions
Opening question
Is there anything you would like to point out and tell me about your participation in the GroupCoreDIST? Do
you have any reflections of the period after the training was completed?
Experiences of impairments, daily function,
activities and participation
Can you describe how you experience your function, impairments and disability?
What daily activities do you normally participate in? Did you experience any changes in daily activities
during or after the training period? Were there any challenges?
How did you experience family life and life in general after the training period was completed?
Experiences from home training
Did you perform home training after the intervention was completed? How did you experience this?
Were there any challenges? Things that went well or not so well? Or things you would like to be different?
Retrospective reflections from the 6 weeks
of group-based training
How did you experience the training?
How did you respond to the training?
How did you experience the group? The content of the training? Individualization? Hands on adaptations
and instructions?
How did you experience the physiotherapist`s role and competence?
How did you perceive the dose and intensity of the training?
What did the training mean to you?
Did you learn anything from the training period?
Were there any challenges during the training? Could you tell me what happened in these situations?
Did you experience some things that went really well? Or not work out so well? Would you like to change
something?
Could you tell me if there were any episodes in particular that made a special impression on you (positive
or negative)?
Have you reflected on the group-based training versus previous experiences with physical therapy?
Experience of quality of life
Is there anything you would like to pinpoint concerning your daily life/life quality in the period after the
training finished?
Did you experience the training to have any influence in your daily life long term (positive or negative)?
Thoughts about the future
Do you have any thoughts concerning future physical therapy, group-based training, or activity in the
future? Any challenges?
Closing question
Are there any experiences from the group-based training or the period after the intervention was completed
that you would like to share that other individuals with MS or physiotherapists could learn from?
Do you have anything else you would like to share?
How did you experience being interviewed?
1086
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

interview guide, the presented literature review and the
applied theoretical framework. This enabled us as
a research team to be more conscious of our pre-
understandings, which we actively strived to set aside
throughout the study.
Throughout the analyses the authors tried to be open
and attentive, and had discussions where alternative inter-
pretations of the material were considered, for instance was
the participants´ strong focus on their own performance
emphasized in relation to the fact that this was a group
setting, and the high focus on positive improvements dis-
cussed in relation to the small amount of negative experi-
ences. We discussed if there could be aspects of the few
challenging situations that still needed to be highlighted in
order
to
understand
significant
elements
of
GroupCoreDIST, and continually challenged the interpre-
tation of the material by asking: what does this mean? what
else could it mean?
The four researchers had different competencies,
experiences and tasks in the research process, which
enriched the discussions and interpretations of the mate-
rial and provided adequate distance. For instance, two of
the authors read all and another read much of the tran-
scribed material in order to discuss and validate that the
content of the categories and subgroups were in line with
the themes that the majority highlighted. Furthermore,
the consistent use of theoretical perspectives throughout
the whole process was validated by all authors, with
special insights from the third author who has an exten-
sive overview of the literature in this area.
None of the authors were involved in the group train-
ings or assessments in the RCT, which was an advantage in
that it did not exert pressure on the participants to empha-
size only positive experiences. The interviews were con-
ducted before the testing sequences at both 7- and 30-week
interviews, to avoid the participants being influenced by
their perceptions of success or nonsuccess in the balance
and walking tests. Being a part of the intervention group
may though in it self have strengthened the feeling of
success as participants received a new treatment offer,
more attention and additional structure to the week.
Results
The findings are presented as analytic text condensed from
the interviews (Table 6, overview of categories and sub-
groups) and are supported by illustrative quotations invol-
ving most of the participants and marked with informant
identification (number), gender (M/W), age (years) and
EDSS value (EDSS).
Table 5. Description and examples of the analytical process.
Preliminary themes
Feeling a change
Changes in everyday life and activity
Confirmation of change
The examination
The physiotherapist's one-to-one interactions, adaptations and engagement
Theory: Dynamic systems
theory
Manipulation of constraints in the individual, the task and the environment. Changes in the individual´s subsystems make
the whole movement pattern change which leads to improved movement control.
Theory: Phenomenology
of the body
Changes influence the self-pattern: both pre-reflective and reflective aspects, how each individual looks at themselves and
becomes attached to own movement possibilities: body schema, sense of ownership and agency. Body image and
narrative self. "I can" or, in some cases, "I can't."
Meaningful units
"The changes feel fantastic; it makes me feel like there is hope,
that it is actually possible to improve something that has
been totally pacified and to move easier."
"Suddenly, I experienced myself walking up the stairs without
holding the handrail."
Code group
Changes in bodily impairments and activities are meaningful for the participant
Sub-groups
Bodily changes and engagement
Reaccessing opportunities
Condensates (short
summaries)
The participants reported the intervention to have a major
impact, both immediately and in the long term, involving
the absence of headaches, improved sensation in the
hands and feet, improved activation of core muscles and
better balance, as well as a faster gait with longer steps,
more power and propulsion, and more endurance. They
highlighted the importance of specific and engaged verbal
instructions for exercises combined with hands-on
facilitations by the physiotherapist during the group
sessions.
The participants highlighted that living with a progressive
disease such as MS meant gradually giving up activities.
They were therefore astonished by the way the
improvements in impairments and movement control
had enhanced daily life activities and the performance of
domestic obligations such as doing laundry without
taking breaks and being able to stand on one's toes to
reach the upper kitchen cabinets and to carry two cups
of coffee while walking. The participants expressed
emotionally that increased energy allowed them to
spend more time with their children and other family
members.
Category
Movement control, orientation and insights
Table 6. Overview of the categories and subgroups.
Category
Movement control, orientation and insights
The individual within the group
Subgroup Bodily changes, and engagement Re-access to opportunities Acceptance and interactions Adjustments and attentiveness to the individual
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1087

Movement control, orientation and insights
Overall, the participants' provided strong and emotional
short term experiences from the GroupCoreDIST regard-
ing improvements in bodily impairments and movement
control, which enhanced positive views of themselves,
strengthened outward orientation and allowed them to
join new activities. New accomplishments were continued
in the long term but reported with less emotional excite-
ment. Absence of improvements was associated with
increased awareness of their own impairments by two
participants.
Bodily changes and engagement
... Even during the examination, I felt that it became
easier to walk! And then I looked forward to what was
coming; I felt something happen. (ID 3, M (65),
EDSS 5.5)
The participants emphasized that the individual assess-
ment prior to the group sessions was important for the
physiotherapist to choose suitable variants of exercises.
Both participants with high and low EDSS-values were
surprised that even their minor but perceptible symptoms
were detected. Seven individuals reported perceiving
immediate changes in performance in the initial exami-
nation, which created positive expectations for the train-
ing. All participants reported that the high dose of
training was well tolerated; however, eight participants
said that getting there, organizing their travel from
home or work and finding a parking space, was a bit
energy consuming.
All participants emphasized that the GroupCoreDIST-
intervention addressed their movement problems more
specifically than prior experiences from physiotherapy,
where many described being offered a general training
program and insufficient adjustments. Twelve individuals
described perceiving varied bodily improvements during
and immediately after the intervention such as: cessation of
headache; improved sensation in the hands and feet;
improved activation of core muscles and balance; faster
gait with longer steps; and more power, propulsion, and
endurance. These short-term experiences were described as
feeling fantastic, being emotional and meaningful.
The
participants,
furthermore,
highlighted
the
importance of specific and engaged verbal instructions
combined with hands-on facilitations by the phy-
siotherapist. Although all participants reported some-
times struggling in the start of a new exercise, most
reported that one-to-one situations with the phy-
siotherapist during a group session including fine-
tuned hands-on adjustments, enabled them to move
easier and to feel and understand how to perform an
exercise adequately. One such one-on-one situation was
described like this:
"I noticed the changes, yes, and she [the physiotherapist]
noticed the changes, and she became so excited! I mean,
it was so exciting!" " ... She mobilized, massaged and
moved my foot at the same time ... ." "Suddenly,
I managed to move my toes, and I was not able to do
that in the beginning." "So it seems to pay off, even in
a leg that you think is of no value." (ID2, W (70),
EDSS 6)
Two participants reported that the physiotherapist
sometimes did not tailor the exercises according to
their perceived needs, which led to experiencing diffi-
culties in performing, not noticing any changes, and an
increased focus on their own disability. Nevertheless, all
but one participant reported that their active contribu-
tion and bodily improvements made them feel proud
and in control. This outcome generated hope and less
concern regarding the future. One participant used
these words:
" ... This is the best thing that has happened since I got
the diagnosis! Yes! I get so emotional when thinking
about it [tears in her eyes] ... ." "Ever since I got the
diagnosis, I have had a huge M-S on my shoulders; it
has unintentionally dragged me down." " ... . Can you
imagine! It [the training] had such an effect! If I had
only known ... " " ... When I perceived how good it was
for my entire system, for my body, I got so motivated!"
(ID 4, W (49), EDSS 1.5)
Reaccessing opportunities
Suddenly, I experienced myself walking up the stairs
without holding the handrail.
(ID 12, W (40), EDSS 1.5
All participants highlighted that living with a progressive
disease such as MS felt unpredictable in regard to future
mobility, and many had gradually given up activities.
They were therefore astonished by the way their bodily
improvements enhanced their daily life activities and
domestic obligations, such as doing the laundry without
taking breaks, being able to stand on their toes to reach
the upper kitchen cabinets and being able to carry two
cups of coffee while walking. Those who had kids or
grandkids emotionally expressed having more energy to
play with them. Employed individuals reported that job
tasks had become easier both during and after the inter-
vention was completed (as expressed both at the 7- and
30-week interviews). They stated that working made
them feel healthier and more normal. One participant
(a teacher) said:
I have especially struggled with keeping my balance at
my job. When I walk in the hallways, I have to step over
1088
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

like 100 backpacks along the way. However, now I have
noticed that if something is on the floor, I don't think
about how to walk. I actually manage to walk over or
beside it, without taking sidesteps or having to stop and
think about how to get past this area and without losing
my balance completely, and that feels so great! (ID 12,
W (40), EDSS 1.5)
All but two participants reported at the 30-weeks
interviews,
performing
unsupervised
home-based
GroupCoreDIST exercises during and up to three
months after the intervention. All stated that unsu-
pervised exercises felt less meaningful because, with-
out the physiotherapist's hands-on adjustments and
instructions, fewer immediate changes appeared and
the training got boring. Five participants added, with
sorrow,
that
some
of
the
bodily
improvements
achieved during the training-period reversed after
some months. Eight participants though reported,
both at 7 and at 30 weeks, to have started new
activities or activities they had once quit, such as
aerobic training, hiking, cycling and jogging. Earlier,
even minor impairments had caused them to quit
exercising together with others because they were
afraid that their deficiencies would show. One parti-
cipant, who previously loved to exercise, said that he
had once again started going to the gym with friends,
and believed that he could "accomplish anything"
when experiencing such meaningful bodily improve-
ments from only six weeks of training. He said:
"As I felt my body started functioning again, and
I managed to do things again, I wanted to try once
more the things I couldn't manage previously. So my
self-confidence has improved, along with my bodily
improvements." ... "Previously, I didn't dare to try any-
thing because I was afraid to fail, but now, I have
decided to go for it - no matter what!" (ID 6, M (25),
EDSS 1)
The individual within the group
Overall, the group setting was reported as safe and
fruitful at both the 7- and 30-week interviews, espe-
cially when the participants experienced tailored
adjustments by the physiotherapist, perceived posi-
tive bodily changes, and experienced appropriate
attention
from
the
group
and
physiotherapist.
These factors enriched the experience of being in
a group and strengthened the feeling of individual
success. When attention and adjustments were not
obtained, the group setting became challenging, and
the focus turned toward their own disability com-
pared to the others in the group.
Acceptance and interactions
"We are in the same boat." ... . "It felt safe. We didn't
judge each other - what I can do and what you can't
do." (ID 7, M (78) EDSS 6)
The majority emphasized the value of meeting other
individuals with MS and reported that the group's
expectations for them to show up made it easier for
them to attend. Even if they had the same diagnoses,
they noted each other's different impairments during
group sessions and highlighted the importance of per-
forming tailored variants of the same exercise. Sharing
a diagnosis meant gaining acceptance and understand-
ing when having bad days and not being embarrassed
about balance difficulties, being misunderstood as
drunk, or blamed for being lazy when becoming tired.
One individual described the group atmosphere as
follows:
... It is just something about the unity in a way, and
well, we got to know each other, and we all understand.
We all have MS, and we understand what it is like to
have MS.(ID 4, W (49), EDSS 1.5)
The balance checkpoints at the beginning and end of
every session, where the aim was to explore one's own
balance, were particular situations when the partici-
pants reported observing each other's performance.
These parts of the session were described with excite-
ment and interest, particularly when focusing on their
own performance and if the group verbalized observa-
ble improvements. Seeing others perform better than
oneself was, however, described as frustrating. Both
those with severe and mild disabilities, emphasized
that noticing other group members struggle with exer-
cises at their level, increased the perception of one's
own success. One severely disabled woman expressed
this as follows:
He [another participant] was one of those guys who
woke up at 7 in the morning three times a week to go
to the gym and exercise, exercise, exercise ... but when
he was set to do these small movements that the phy-
siotherapist instructed, then he didn't perform them any
better than me. This was difficult for him, even though
he could walk perfectly [compared to me]. (ID 9w,
W (72), EDSS 6.5)
Adjustments and attentiveness to the individual
"It is very individual what each and every one can
accomplish." ... "She [the physiotherapist] was con-
stantly ensuring that we all performed correctly." (ID
3, M (65), EDSS 5.5)
The physiotherapists were described in various ways;
some as skillful and enthusiastic, others as strict but
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1089

firm or as warm. Three participants reported that the
physiotherapist looked in the manual to remember the
exercises, which led to less attention toward each parti-
cipant and slower progression in the session. All but
two participants described excitement when someone
improved at their individual level, and that sufficient
attention to everyone in the group and hands-on tailor-
ing to enhance each individual´s problems were impor-
tant for their perception of success within the group.
One participant described this as follows:
There were several exercises where all three of us were
struggling, and then she [the physiotherapist] came
around and adjusted us in different ways, and suddenly,
we all succeeded! I am truly aware of that interaction,
how good it feels, the group, that we succeeded - all of
us - and that felt so great. (ID 5, W (26), EDSS 4.5)
The group setting was, however, sometimes challen-
ging. The same two participants who said that the
physiotherapist did not tailor the exercises sufficiently
also thought that the physiotherapist seemed to be
more interested in the group member who performed
"best," which made them feel like outsiders in the
group. One participant described how skewed attention
and fewer adjustments provided negative experiences:
"I couldn't do it because my body doesn't listen. I don't
have the skill and balance and strength to perform the
exercises from instructions, and I had to give up, and
I felt like watching the ship go down." " ... When you are
invited to do the same as the group and you can't do it,
you just cannot do it! Then, I moved backwards in time
and remembered so strongly when I had that functional
level." (ID 13, M (64), EDSS 5.5)
Discussion
Specificity provides bodily changes and new
opportunities
The participants' perceptions of improved symptoms,
movement control and easier access to daily activities are
not surprising and in line with significant effects on balance
in the RCT, in which this interview study is nested
(Arntzen et al., 2019). It is also in agreement with previous
reviews of effects in balance and walking (Byrnes, Wu, and
Whillier, 2018; Gunn et al., 2015; Hogan and Coote, 2009;
Paltamaa, Sjogren, Peurala, and Heinonen, 2012; Rietberg,
Brooks, Uitdehaag, and Kwakkel, 2005; Snook and Motl,
2009) and qualitative studies of group-based training in
individuals with MS (Carling, Nilsagård, and Forsberg,
2018; Clarke and Coote, 2015). Targeted hands-on adjust-
ments, combined with instructions and engagement, were
emphasized as essential for experiencing bodily improve-
ments. One example is a participant who described that the
physiotherapist's mobilization combined with active move-
ment of her foot suddenly enabled her to move her toes. In
line with DST, these interactions could be associated with
manipulations of constraints in the individual´s biomecha-
nical, motor and somatosensory subsystems, which also
seemed to influence the emotional and cognitive systems,
as the participants enthusiastically noticed the changes.
According to DST, all the reported improvements in sen-
sibility, core stability, balance, walking, motivation, etc.,
could be linked to effected changes in the individual's
constraints for movement.
Improvements in walking and daily activities were
reported both in the short and long term. Since gait train-
ing was not part of the intervention, these changes may be
due to changed constraints in individual subsystems, that
influenced the whole self-regulated system, indicating new
attractor statuses regarding these activities (Shumway-
Cook and Woollacott, 2017; Thelen, 2005). Specificity in
tasks and optimizing the individual's constraints are
required in neurological physiotherapy (Frykeberg and
Vasa, 2015), and are important for recovering optimal
movement strategies following lesions in the CNS (Kleim
and Jones, 2008; Levin, Kleim, and Wolf, 2009; Lipp and
Tomassini, 2015). A focus on movement control and
movement quality has traditionally stood in contrast to
task orientation (Carr and Shepherd, 2010). Our findings
suggest that specificity in the therapeutic approach addres-
sing the prerequisites for an activity, for instance hands-on
mobilization, was meaningful to the participants and cre-
ated improvements. Even if gait training as such was not
conducted, partial tasks were introduced, such as instruc-
tions of rolling the ball from side to side, addressing lateral
weight transfer, which is an important prerequisite for
walking (Gjelsvik and Syre, 2016). This suggests that
a detailed focus on prerequisites and tasks simultaneously
may be important elements for successful individualization
within a group setting. This fruitful mixing of movement
and task has previously been emphasized in regard to
individual settings (Normann, Sørgaard, Salvesen, and
Moe, 2013).
For the few participants who did not experience
bodily changes and adequate adjustments regarding
specific hands-on interactions or exercises, the total
system might have remained unchanged, with the result
that the individual's movement strategies remained the
same. Experiencing their own failure in performance
compared to the others´ success may have lead to
a verification of own disability and a negative influence
on the cognitive and emotional subsystems. Such feel-
ings of frustration and lost control has also been accen-
tuated in a review study (Learmonth and Motl, 2016).
In our study, participants with both high and low
EDSS values claimed that another essential element of
1090
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

individualization was the physiotherapist's choice of
adequate exercises for the group, with different variants
for each individual. We consider these actions as
manipulations of constraints in the tasks (Shumway-
Cook and Woollacott, 2017). The specificity in the
choice of actions for each individual´s within the
group was furthermore highlighted as possible due to
the initial clinical assessment. This finding is in line
with studies examining the physiotherapist's perspec-
tive regarding GroupCoreDIST (Lahelle, Øberg, and
Normann, 2018a, 2018b). Individualization has been
questioned within group settings both in regard to
feasibility and effects (Kalron et al., 2019; Plow,
Mathiowetz, and Lowe, 2009). In strength and endur-
ance training individualization is often emphasized in
relation to intensity, duration, diverse number of repe-
titions or load (Dalgas, Stenager, and Ingemann-
Hansen, 2008). The current study of participants in
small groups points out that in addition to these
aspects, addressing the individual`s underlying con-
straints for movement by choosing from the 33 exer-
cises,
levels
of
difficulty,
the
use
of
hands-on
adjustments
and
exploring
immediate
changes
(Normann, Zanaboni, Arntzen, and Øberg, 2016) cre-
ates both physical improvements and deeper meaning.
Turning to phenomenology, the one-to-one situa-
tions where the physiotherapist and a participant
worked together to improve sensory-motor function
and performance through a mix of instructions and
hands-on interactions, may be seen as a form of bodily
communication mediated through inter-corporeity and
an establishment of a shared agency (Merleau-Ponty,
2013) Such interactions made possible both a pre-
reflective, subjective awareness of their lived body and
a reflective awareness on their own possibilities and
sometimes
a
deviation
and
lack
of
possibilities
(Gallagher,
2012).
For
instance,
might
both
the
improvements regarding sensibility in the feet, core
activation or feelings of increased movement control
be considered a strengthening of "I can" and intention-
ality, as their outward directedness generated more
affordances in daily life, while the lack of such changes
affirmed the status quo. Specific bodily changes were
emotional and meaningful. This stands in contrast to
other approaches in neurological physiotherapy, in
which the achievement of whole activities and not
impairments or the quality of the task is considered
meaningful (Carr and Shepherd, 2010). In this study,
bodily improvements were emphasized as becoming
incorporated into daily activities, for instance, by
being able to walk past backpacks at work and to
balance on one's toes to reach the upper kitchen cabi-
nets. These findings suggest that the participants' body
schemas, sense of ownership and agency regarding
body and movement the prereflective experiential
aspects of the self-pattern (Gallagher, 2005, 2012,
2013)
were
updated,
giving
individuals
improved
opportunities to regulate movement and posture in
daily life. This interpretation implies that bodily
changes are meaningful, and are not only about neuro-
physiological processes but also about the pre-reflective
aspects of self-experience.
Since what we can or cannot do helps to shape our
thoughts (Gallagher, 2005), the short- and long-term
reports of new activities, such as cycling or carrying
coffee-cups while walking, generated among the parti-
cipants a "new look" at themselves and gave insights
into future possibilities and affordances (Gallagher and
Daly, 2018). These experiences indicate that the reflec-
tive aspects of the individuals' self-pattern (including
the narrative aspect) were updated and might have
influenced how they identified themselves, which is in
line
with
descriptions
from
individual
settings
(Gallagher,
2013;
Normann,
2018;
Normann,
Sørgaard, Salvesen, and Moe, 2013). The extended fac-
tors of the self-pattern seem also to be in play, since the
participants managed daily activities more easily, such
as having energy to play with their children. The
increased focus on own disability reported by two indi-
viduals could be due to fewer perceived improvements
generating lower expectations of possibilities which
may explain the distress among these individuals, and
also among those who felt impairments returning some
months after the intervention. Such return of symp-
toms are highlighted by Leder (2016) to possibly
increase the feeling of loss and lack of control that
comes with a chronic disease, and would be important
to have in mind in physiotherapy in regard to content
and timing of future follow-up.
The group setting reinforced the participants' self-
reflections
The participants highlighted that training together with
others who had MS made the training situations feel
safe, motivated them and gave them a perception of
accomplishment, in line with other studies (Clarke and
Coote, 2015; Dodd, Taylor, Denisenko, and Prasad,
2006; Learmonth and Motl, 2016). As emphasized by
our findings, the interactions between the physiothera-
pist and a group member made new possibilities for
movement visible to all the group members. When
such interactions with a shared sense of agency were
equally distributed among all participants, it strength-
ened the individuals' feelings of being acknowledged
within the group. The interactions between other
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1091

group-members especially involved positive comments
during the balance checkpoints and awareness of the
others struggling. These situations created a shared
agency between all members of the group and thereby
strengthened each single person´s sense of agency, as
well as the reflective factors of the self-pattern, includ-
ing the individual's body image (Gallagher, 2013;
Merleau-Ponty, 2013). This implies that the multimo-
dal communication between all embodied subjects of
the group co-constructed insights that were incorpo-
rated in their lived bodies and brought forward "pre-
MS" experiences and self-narratives, and oriented them
toward a focus on activities that they could accomplish
(increasing the feeling of "I can"). In contrast, when
skewed
attention,
inappropriate
tailoring,
fewer
changes and task accomplishment were experienced
there was an increase in the feeling of "I cannot",
including recollection of previous experiences of giving
up
activities
and
losing
control,
which
often
is
described in relation to having a chronic disease, in
which bodily restrictions gradually appear (Carel,
2008; Toombs, 1987). This underscores vulnerability
regarding group situations, and that together with
others we also compare ourselves with others and cre-
ate meaning through the others (Sokolowski, 2000).
Conversely, identifying your own specific symptoms
and addressing them in relevance to function can
demonstrate your specific needs and uniqueness within
the group, which might be of relevance for motivation
and meaningfulness during the training period- at least
if improvements in performance are pinpointed simul-
taneously. Seeing the other participants' performances
might furthermore be linked to identifying oneself in
relation to one's own and other participants' abilities,
associated with both the intersubjective and extended
factors of the self-pattern (Gallagher, 2013). Positive or
negative
attitudes
in
therapeutic
situations
might
extend to the perceived opportunities and affordances
in daily life, for instance, the participants' descriptions
of feeling more normal due to managing their jobs
better or,
in
contrast,
avoidance
of
participating
because the "body doesn't listen." These aspects of
physiotherapy involving an individual's sense of self
are important, although rarely emphasized in clinical
practice or prior studies within the field.
Methodological considerations
This study involved a strategic sample of thirteen par-
ticipants, which might be considered a small number.
A strategic sample is essential in qualitative depth-
interview studies, and has its strengths in the search
for participants´ nuanced experiences, including both
positive, neutral and negative experiences, in order to
answer the research question. Limitations may be that
some of those who were not selected might have been
able to add additional aspects to the phenomenon.
Considering a population of 40 individuals in the
GroupCoreDIST intervention-group, 33% (13/40) par-
ticipated in two interviews, for a total of 25 extensive
interviews that produced a large amount of nuanced
data of the investigated phenomenon, which is in line
with Malterud's (2016) characteristics of sample sizes in
qualitative studies (Malterud, Siersma, and Guassora,
2016). The interview study being nested in an RCT
makes the study context special, involving repeated
measures, which might have influenced participants'
experiences and expectations. The fact that one of the
creators of GroupCoreDIST conducted the interviews
may have stressed the participants and influenced the
large amount of positive expressions. Negative experi-
ences were therefore also highlighted in the findings
even if they were emphasized by only a few individuals.
The study was conducted in six different municipalities,
involving
different clinical
physiotherapists,
which
improved the relevance and transferability of the results
(Malterud, 2001). Different physiotherapists conducted
interviews,
RCT
assessments
and
interventions.
A detailed protocol was used (Normann, Zanaboni,
Arntzen, and Øberg, 2016) with thorough descriptions
of the methods and reports of all of the items of the
Consolidated
Criteria
for
Reporting
Qualitative
Research
(COREQ)
(Tong,
Sainsbury,
and
Craig,
2007) and Standards Reporting Qualitative Research
(SRQR) (O'Brien et al., 2014) checklists, all of which
improved the trustworthiness of the study. The partici-
pants had EDSS scores of 1-6.5, and the groups con-
sisted of only three participants, which would limit the
transferability to ambulant individuals with MS and
small groups.
Implications for clinical practice
The findings support integration of elements known
from individual physiotherapy with social elements
known from group settings. This indicate that group
interventions aiming for improved balance should con-
sider including an initial individual examination, spe-
cific one-on-one adaptations and exercises that allow
for individualization in order to address the indivi-
duals' specific symptoms and positive verbalization of
improvements among the group-members.
By the use of a mix of analytical tools we have gained
a deeper understanding of the participants bodily
experiences and why these were so important to the
them- it was not just about the body as biomechanics,
1092
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

neurophysiological processes, muscle strength or bal-
ance, but how it mattered to them as individuals, how
they experienced themselves and their opportunities.
These aspects may be important and general features
in physiotherapy, because the way you perceive your
own body is closely related to how you experience
yourself and own possibilities in the world. Studies
are warranted of the possibilities for individualization
and experiences of bodily changes within larger train-
ing groups containing participants with equal EDSS.
Conclusion
Most of the participants in GroupCoreDIST experienced
physical improvements in body functions and structures,
activities and participation in the short and long terms. The
changes felt emotional and meaningful, involving increased
feelings of ownership and control of body and movement.
This changed how they looked at themselves, at their
opportunities and affordances in daily life, implying that
both pre-reflexive and reflexive aspects of the self-pattern
were influenced. Changes and success were linked to dif-
ferent elements of individualization: detailed exercises that
targeted each individuals' constraints for movements; one-
to-one situations with the physiotherapist including hands
on adjustments and; the group setting, as long as there was
equal amount of on-to-one interactions, and positive atten-
tion from the physiotherapist and the other group mem-
bers occurred. Skewed attention, inadequate choices of
exercise variance or lack of adjustments were associated
with less changes and an increased focus on own disability.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the individuals with MS who parti-
cipated in this study, the contributing physiotherapists and
the administrations of the participating municipalities. We
also
express
our
appreciation
to
the
Department
of
Physiotherapy at the Nordland Hospital Trust. The study
was financed by the Northern Norway Regional Health
Authority.
The current workplace of the last author Britt Normann is
Nord University, Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences,
Bodø, Norway.
Funding
This work was supported by the Helse Nord RHF [1240].
Disclosure Statement
The authors report no conflict of interest.
References
Arntzen EC, Straume BK, Odeh F, Feys P, Zanaboni P,
Normann B 2019 Group-based individualized comprehen-
sive core stability intervention improves balance in persons
with multiple sclerosis: A randomized controlled trial.
Physical Therapy 99: 1027-1038.
Aruin AS, Kanekar N, Lee YJ 2015 Anticipatory and com-
pensatory postural adjustments in individuals with multi-
ple
sclerosis
in
response
to
external
perturbations.
Neuroscience Letters 591: 182-186.
Brinkmann S, Kvale S 2015 InterViews: Learning the Craft of
Qualitative Research Interviewing (3rd ed). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Byrnes K, Wu PJ, Whillier S 2018 Is Pilates an effective
rehabilitation
tool?
A
systematic
review.
Journal
of
Bodywork and Movement Therapies 22: 192-202.
Cameron MH, Lord S 2010 Postural control in multiple
sclerosis:
Implications
for
fall
prevention.
Current
Neurology and Neuroscience Reports 10: 407-412.
Carel H 2008 Illness: The Cry of the Flesh. London and
New York: Routledge.
Carling A, Nilsagård Y, Forsberg A 2018 Balance exercise
facilitates everyday life for people with multiple sclerosis:
A qualitative study. Physiotherapy Research International
23: e1728.
Carr JH, Shepherd RB 2010 Neurological Rehabilitation:
Optimizing Motor Performance (2nd ed). Edinburgh:
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier.
Cattaneo D, Lamers I, Bertoni R, Feys P, Jonsdottir J 2017
Participation restriction in people with multiple sclerosis:
Prevalence and correlations with cognitive, walking, bal-
ance, and upper limb impairments. Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation 98: 1308-1315.
Clarke R, Coote S 2015 Perceptions of Participants in
a Group, Community, Exercise Programme for People
with
Multiple
Sclerosis.
Rehabilitation
Research
and
Practice 2015: 123494.
Comber L, Sosnoff JJ, Galvin R, Coote S 2018 Postural
control
deficits
in
people
with
multiple
sclerosis:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Gait and Posture
61: 445-452.
Dalgas U, Stenager E, Ingemann-Hansen T 2008 Review:
Multiple sclerosis and physical exercise: Recommendations
for the application of resistance, endurance and combined
training. Multiple Sclerosis Journal 14: 35-53.
Dodd
KJ,
Taylor
NF,
Denisenko
S,
Prasad
D
2006
A qualitative analysis of a progressive resistance exercise
programme for people with multiple sclerosis. Disability
and Rehabilitation 28: 1127-1134.
Dybesland A, Normann B 2018 Group treatment targeting
core stability and balance for persons with multiple sclero-
sis; an observational study. Physiotherapy 101: e337.
European Multiple Sclerosis Platform 2012 Recommendations
on rehabilitation services for persons with multiple sclerosis
in Europe. https://www.eurims.org/images/stories/docu
ments/Brochures/Recommendations on MSRehabiltation
RIMS EMSP 2012.pdf
Forsberg A, von Koch L, Nilsagård Y 2016 Effects on balance and
walking with the CoDuSe balance exercise program in people
with multiple sclerosis: A multicenter randomized controlled
trial. Multiple Sclerosis International 2016: 7076265.
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1093

Frykeberg GE, Vasa R 2015 Neuroplasticity in action
post-stroke: Challenges for physio-therapists. European
Journal of Physiotherapy 17: 56-65.
Gallagher S 2005 How the Body Shapes the Mind. Oxford,
UK: Clarendon Press.
Gallagher S 2012 Phenomenology. Basingstoke: Palgrave
MacMillan.
Gallagher S 2013 A pattern theory of self. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience 7: 443.
Gallagher S 2017 Enactivist Interventions: Rethinking the
Mind. Oxford University Press. Oxford: United Kingdom.
Gallagher S, Daly A 2018 Dynamical relations in the
self-pattern. Frontiers in Psychology 9: 664.
Gibson
JJ
1986
The
Ecological
Approach
to
Visual
Perception. Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gjelsvik B, Syre L 2016 The Bobath Concept in Adult
Neurology (2nd ed). Beaverton: Ringgold Inc.
Gunn H, Markevics S, Haas B, Marsden J, Freeman J 2015
Systematic review: The effectiveness of interventions to
reduce falls and improve balance in adults with multiple
sclerosis. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
96: 1898-1912.
Hogan N, Coote S 2009 Therapeutic interventions in the
treatment of people with multiple sclerosis with mobility
problems: A literature review. Physical Therapy Reviews
14: 160-168.
Huisinga JM, St George RJ, Spain R, Overs S, Horak FB 2014
Postural response latencies are related to balance control
during standing and walking in patients with multiple
sclerosis.
Archives
of
Physical
Medicine
and
Rehabilitation 95: 1390-1397.
Kalron A, Feys P, Dalgas U, Smedal T, Freeman J, Romberg A,
Conyers H, Elorriaga I, Gebara B, Merilainen J, et al. 2019
Searching for the "Active Ingredients" in physical rehabilita-
tion programs across Europe, necessary to improve mobility in
people
with
multiple
sclerosis:
A
Multicenter
Study.
Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 33: 260-270.
Kalron A, Fonkatz I, Frid L, Baransi H, Achiron A 2016 The
effect of balance training on postural control in people
with multiple sclerosis using the CAREN virtual reality
system: A pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of
Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation 13: 13.
Kleim JA, Jones TA 2008 Principles of experience-dependent
neural plasticity: Implications for rehabilitation after brain
damage.
Journal
of
Speech,
Language,
and
Hearing
Research 51: S225-S239.
Krishnan V, Kanekar N, Aruin AS 2012 Anticipatory postural
adjustments
in
individuals
with
multiple
sclerosis.
Neuroscience Letters 506: 256-260.
Lahelle AF, Øberg GK, Normann B 2018a A group-based,
individualized physiotherapy intervention for people with
multiple sclerosis - A qualitative study. Physiotherapy
Research International 23: e1734.
Lahelle AF, Øberg GK, Normann B 2018b Physiotherapy
assessment of individuals with multiple sclerosis prior to
a group intervention - A qualitative observational and
interview
study.
Physiotherapy
Theory
and
Practice.
Epub ahead of print. doi:10.1080/09593985.2018.1488022.
Learmonth YC, Motl RW 2016 Physical activity and exercise
training in multiple sclerosis: A review and content analysis
of qualitative research identifying perceived determinants and
consequences. Disability and Rehabilitation 13: 1227-1242.
Leder D 2016 The Distressed Body: Rethinking Illness,
Imprisonment, and Healing. University of Chicago Press.
Chicago: The United States of America
Levin MF, Kleim JA, Wolf SL 2009 What do motor "recovery"
and "compensation" mean in patients following stroke?
Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 23: 313-319.
Lipp I, Tomassini V 2015 Neuroplasticity and motor rehabi-
litation in multiple sclerosis. Frontiers in Neurology 6: 59.
Malterud K 2001 Qualitative research: Standards challenges,
and guidelines. Lancet 358: 483-488.
Malterud K 2012 Systematic text condensation: A strategy for
qualitative analysis. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health
40: 795-805.
Malterud K 2016 Theory and interpretation in qualitative
studies
from
general
practice:
Why
and
how?
Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 44: 120-129.
Malterud K 2017 Kvalitative Forskningsmetoder for Medisin
og Helsefag [Qualitative Research Methods for Medicine
and Health Care]. Oslo: Universitetsforl.
Malterud K, Siersma VD, Guassora AD 2016 Sample size in
qualitative interview studies: Guidedby information power.
Qualitative Health Research 26: 1753-1760.
Merleau-Ponty
M
2013
Phenomenology
of
Perception.
London, United Kingdom: Taylor and Francis Ltd.
Nicholls DA, Gibson BE 2010 The body and physiotherapy.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 26: 497-509.
Nicholls DA, Holmes D 2012 Discipline, desire, and trans-
gression in physiotherapy practice. Physiotherapy Theory
and Practice 28: 454-465.
Normann B 2018 Facilitation of movement: New perspectives
provide expanded insights to guide clinical practice.
Physiotherapy Theory and Practice. Epub ahead of print.
doi:10.1080/09593985.2018.1493165.
Normann B, Fikke HK, Berg GK 2015 Somatosensory impair-
ments and upper limb function following stroke: Extending
the framework guiding neurological physiotherapy. European
Journal of Physiotherapy 17: 81-88.
Normann B, Salvesen R, Arntzen EC 2016 Group-based
individualized core stability and balance training in ambu-
lant people with multiple sclerosis: A pilot feasibility test-
retest study. European Journal of Physiotherapy 18: 173-
178.
Normann B, Sørgaard KW, Salvesen R, Moe S 2013
Contextualized perceptions of movement as a source of
expanded insight: People with multiple sclerosis' experi-
ence
with
physiotherapy.
Physiotherapy
Theory
and
Practice 29: 19-30.
Normann B, Zanaboni P, Arntzen EC, Øberg GK 2016
Innovative physiotherapy and continuity of care in people
with multiple sclerosis: A randomized controlled trial and
a qualitative study. Journal of Clinical Trials 6: 282.
Øberg GK, Normann B, Gallagher S 2015 Embodied-enactive
clinical reasoning in physical therapy. Physiotherapy
Theory and Practice 31: 244-252.
O'Brien BC, Harris IB, Beckman TJ, Reed DA, Cook DA 2014
Standards for reporting qualitative research: A synthesis of
recommendations. Academic Medicine 89: 1245-1251.
Paltamaa J, Sjogren T, Peurala S, Heinonen A 2012 Effects of
physiotherapy interventions on balance in multiple sclero-
sis: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 44:
811-823.
1094
E. C. ARNTZEN ET AL.

Paulgaard G 1997 Feltarbeid i egen Kultur: Innenfra, utefra
eller begge deler? [Fieldwork in their Own Culture: From
within or Both?], pp. 70-93. Oslo: Universitetsforl.
Plow MA, Mathiowetz V, Lowe DA 2009 Comparing indivi-
dualized rehabilitation to a group wellness intervention for
persons with multiple sclerosis. American Journal of
Health Promotion 24: 23-26.
Rietberg MB, Brooks D, Uitdehaag BM, Kwakkel G 2005
Exercise
therapy
for
multiple
sclerosis.
Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 1: CD003980.
Shumway-Cook A, Woollacott MH 2017 Motor Control:
Translating Research into Clinical Practice (5th ed).
Philadelphia: Wolters Kluwer.
Sivertsen M, Normann B 2015 Embodiment and self in reor-
ientation to everyday life following severe traumatic brain
injury. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 31: 153-159.
Snook EM, Motl RW 2009 Effect of exercise training on
walking mobility in multiple sclerosis: A meta-analysis.
Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 23: 108-116.
Sokolowski
R
2000
Introduction
to
Phenomenology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tarakci E, Yeldan I, Huseyinsinoglu BE, Zenginler Y,
Eraksoy M 2013 Group exercise training for balance,
functional status, spasticity, fatigue and quality of life in
multiple sclerosis: A randomized controlled trial. Clinical
Rehabilitation 27: 813-822.
Thelen E 2005 Dynamic systems theory and the complexity
of change. Psychoanalytic Dialogues 15: 255-283.
Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J 2007 Consolidated criteria for
reporting qualitative research (COREQ): A 32-item check-
list for interviews and focus groups. International Journal
for Quality in Health Care 19: 349-357.
Toombs SK 1987 The meaning of illness: A phenomenological
approach to the patient-physician relationship. Journal of
Medicine and Philosophy 12: 219-240.
Van Der Linden ML, Bulley C, Geneen LJ, Hooper JE,
Cowan P, Mercer TH 2014 Pilates for people with multiple
sclerosis who use a wheelchair: Feasibility, efficacy and
participant experiences. Disability and Rehabilitation 36:
932-939.
Varela FJ, Thompson E, Rosch E 1991 The Embodied Mind:
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press.
Vaughan-Graham J, Cott C 2016 Defining a Bobath clinical
framework - A modified e-Delphi study. Physiotherapy
Theory and Practice 32: 612-627.
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1095

