Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology
ISSN: 0007-1773 (Print) 2332-0486 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rbsp20
Incorporation and Individuation: On Nietzsche's
use of Phenomenology for Life
Keith Ansell Pearson
To cite this article: Keith Ansell Pearson (2007) Incorporation and Individuation: On Nietzsche's
use of Phenomenology for Life, Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, 38:1, 61-89,
DOI: 10.1080/00071773.2007.11006602
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00071773.2007.11006602
Published online: 21 Oct 2014.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 156
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rbsp20

Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology, Vol. 38, No. 1, January 2007
INCORPORATION AND INDIVIDUATION: ON
NIETZSCHE'S USE OF PHENOMENOLOGY FOR LIFE
KEITH ANSELL PEARSON
Even now, most philosophers have no inkling of the real critique of concepts or (as I once
called it) a real "history of the genesis of thinking".
Nietzsche
Introduction
An encounter with Nietzsche, including one that will enable us to relate his
work to phenomenology in an incisive and pertinent manner, is not possible
until we have identified some essential aspects of his thinking and unfolded
them. Paul Ricœur argues that one has to orient oneself within Husserl's work,
which is to be approached as "a labyrinth with several entries and perhaps
several centres, each relative to different perspectives on the total work".1 In
spite of the labyrinthine character of the work, we know that Husserl is
working towards the ends of a unique and novel philosophical project -
transcendental phenomenology with its search for "transcendentally purified"
phenomena and experiences.2 This project creates original concepts,3 and has
distinctive methods and modes of philosophizing, such as the epoché. Can we
say the same of Nietzsche? Although it is fashionable to assume in the wake
of Foucault that there is no single, core Nietzscheanism, this grossly
underestimates the extent to which a definite project unfolds in Nietzsche's
writings, one that renders his thinking unique and distinctive. 
Husserl is concerned with a special kind of consciousness - the
consciousness of - which is accorded transcendental status, and which he
notes is at one and the same time something quite obvious and highly obscure.4
For Husserl, there is always a limit to naturalizing simply because, "Subjects
cannot be dissolved into nature, for in that case what gives nature its sense
would be missing".5 The world of the subject is not a physicalistic one, but a
surrounding world, a "thematic world of ... intentional life".6 Nietzsche's
approach to consciousness is different, focused on a specific set of issues and
problems, and, as a result, his conception of phenomenology is also different.
In contrast to Husserl, Nietzsche seeks a different purification; it is one that he
himself conceives as a naturalistic purification. Nietzsche's naturalism, it is
necessary to note, is not the naturalism that is subject to Husserl's criticism,
which is a physicalism and objectivism that Nietzsche too would not be
content with (see GS 3737). Nietzsche's naturalism is bound up with his theory
of life, which is ultimately conceived by him in terms of the will to power and
denotes growth and expansion and supposes processes of assimilation and
61

incorporation. Life is a matter of sense and interpretation; in each event it is
the will to power that interprets. Nietzsche's conception of life is very specific:
Life is an "ordering, overwhelming, simplifying, abbreviating power" (KSA
12, 6 [14], WLN, p. 125). The insights he develops about all kinds of things
on the basis of this conception of life, including the human being and its fate,
about truth and error, about knowledge and knowing, will strike the reader as
enigmatic at best and absurd at worst unless they are given an adequate
demonstration. As has been noted by various commentators, Nietzsche's
transcendentalist commitments take the form of a transcendental
psychologism and naturalism. However, the critical relation between
Nietzsche and Husserlian phenomenology is best approached not in terms of
the contest between naturalism and its critique, but in terms of different
phenomenologies of life.8 For Nietzsche, life is 'will to power', which, on the
one hand denotes a pre-form of life (pure potentiality or virtuality) (BGE 36),
and which, on the other, is knowable only as 'Schein'. In a note of 1885
Nietzsche writes that Schein "is the actual and sole reality of things".
Moreover, Schein is "the reality that resists transformation into an imaginary
'truth-world'" - it is our best bet against metaphysics - and a "determinate
name" for it is "will to power", which can only be "characterized from inside
and not from its ungraspable, flowing Proteus-nature" (KSA 11, 40 [53]; see
also BGE 36). 
I think we can most productively relate Nietzsche's thinking to
phenomenology through exploring two core and related issues: consciousness
and individuation. For Husserl, what is uniquely and originally individual is
consciousness taken concretely with its Ego. All other individuality is
appearance and has the principle of its individuation in actual and possible
appearing that must refer back to an individual consciousness. Absolute
individuation enters into the personal Ego.9 That which is given to us, qua
human subject and one with the human Body in immediate experiential
apprehension, is the human person that has its spiritual individuality, its
intellectual and practical abilities and skills, its character, and its sensibility.10
For Husserl, individuation is the fundamental transcendental, and it is
necessary to carry out the reduction to demonstrate this. For Nietzsche, by
contrast, the sovereign individual - the rational and autonomous agent
supposed as the transcendental ego11 - is the aim and goal of culture, conceived
as the training of the human animal as a being of time and that produces a
creature that can calculate and compute, in short, that is sanctioned to promise
and has earned the prerogative to say 'I' (On the Genealogy of Morality, essay
two): "Culture precisely means learning to calculate, learning to think
causally, learning to act preventively, learning to believe in regularity" (KSA
12, 10 [21], WLN p. 179). For Husserl, individuation, properly understood, is,
and can only be, spiritual and personal; it involves a subjectifying of the world.
62

Nietzsche is not as distanced from this as one might suppose; when he
translates the human being back into nature he finds a spiritual animal (BGE
230, which is entitled "The fundamental will of the spirit"). However, his call
for a naturalistic purification entails approaching our affects and drives, our
inclinations and disinclinations, our pros and cons, free from the fateful
beautifications and curse of morality (KSA 12, 1 [90], WLN p. 61).12 Spirit for
Nietzsche, one might say, is not to be entrusted with transcendental
prominence. What is typically conceived as existing "without nature" must be
given back to nature, that is, back to "natural immorality" (KSA 12, 9 [86],
WLN p. 153). For Nietzsche, however, true individuation is to come in the
future; it is bound up with a fateful history of the human animal and the
overcoming of humanity into a superior form and the coming into existence of
superior individuals (see D164, GS 335, but especially BGE 262). The specific
accomplishment of Nietzsche's philosophy is a superior humanization of the
world. Only with this insight - which we owe to Heidegger - is it at all
possible effectively and intelligently to engage Nietzsche. 
Various logoi are put to work in Nietzsche's writings, such as semiology
and genealogy. As far as I have been able to ascertain, there is only one
occurrence of the word 'phenomenology' in his writings, which we will
encounter presently. This passage has features that are typical of Nietzsche's
thought in the 1880s: consciousness is a late development and a falsifying,
error-prone 'organ'. As he puts it in Daybreak 119, "our moral judgments and
evaluations ... are only images and fantasies based on a physiological process
unknown to us ... all our so-called consciousness is a more or less fantastic
commentary on an unknown, perhaps unknowable, but felt text ... ". In his
Nietzsche and Philosophy of 1962 Deleuze correctly noted that we find a new
sense of the phenomenon in Nietzsche: "A phenomenon is not an appearance
or even an apparition, but a sign, a symptom ... The whole of philosophy is a
symptomatology, and a semiology ...".13
In this essay I can only make a modest contribution to the task of securing
an adequate comprehension of Nietzsche's project and its possible relation to
(Husserlian) phenomenology. Nietzsche's transcendental naturalism can only
be effectively grasped and engaged with by understanding it in the context of
the specific problematic that informs his most essential thinking. This is what
I would call his focus on life's incorporation, and this is where I shall begin. 
The Incorporation of Truth and Knowledge
The sketch I shall focus my attention on in this section, and as a way of
opening up the essential character of his philosophical project, is the very first
sketch of the eternal recurrence of the same that we find in Nietzsche's corpus.
Its recent appearance in The Nietzsche Reader is the first time it has appeared
in English in its entirety.14 Nietzsche composed it in Sils-Maria at the
63

beginning of August, 1881. This is his first summer of assuming residency in
Sils, where he will reside every summer up to 1888. He has recently
discovered he has a precursor in Spinoza, and indeed a Spinozist inspiration
hovers over the sketch, which, like the Ethics, is a plan for a book in five parts,
culminating in a meditation on 'blessedness' or beatitude. In a letter to his
friend Franz Overbeck, postmarked July 30, 1881, Nietzsche enumerates the
points of doctrine he shares with Spinoza, such as the denial of free will, of a
moral world order, and of evil, and also mentions the task of "making
knowledge the most powerful passion".15 The challenge presented to us in
reading the sketch is one of understanding Nietzsche's questions and aiming
to get the measure of them. This is very difficult. Nietzsche's question, one he
will eventually publish in The Gay Science under aphorism 110, is a seemingly
straightforward one: to what extent can truth stand or endure incorporation?
We need to attend to two main issues: first, what does Nietzsche have in mind
when he speaks of truth?; and, second, why is truth to be conceived as a matter
of incorporation? 
When we reflect on these questions and attempt to provide answers to them,
we need to take into account some key points. First, much of what Nietzsche
says about truth with respect to our categories of thought and habits of
representation supposes a Kantian background. Kant's transcendental 'truths',
which seek to establish an agreement between cognition and its objects
(Critique of Pure Reason A 58/B 82), are errors for Nietzsche, though this
does not warrant a negative assessment of them. Secondly, Nietzsche's
positive estimation of error, semblance, and apparentness has to be seen in the
context of his critical reception of Schopenhauer (to say nothing of Plato), for
whom there is a metaphysical truth and for whom existence can be judged not
only to be an error but a guilty one. When Nietzsche writes that the best
science (Wissenschaft) loves error because, being alive, it loves life (BGE 24)
his target is, I think, obvious: it is directed against any metaphysical and
'moral' evaluation of truth and error. When Nietzsche stipulates that the
question to ask of a judgment, such as a synthetic a priori one, is to what
extent it has preserved and furthered life and the species, which is what it
means to place oneself 'beyond good and evil', I take him to be assuming a
position outside metaphysics and morality, so admitting "untruth as a
condition of life" (BGE 4). Belief in the truth of transcendental judgments
gains its necessity "as one of the foreground beliefs and appearances that
constitute the perspective-optics of life" (BGE 11). 
The sketch appears as note 141 of a notebook ("M III, 1") made up of 348
notes, and contains many notes and drafts of material that will eventually be
published in The Gay Science, and in radically different form. It is also fair to
say that in this sketch we find, in embryonic form, almost all the matters of
thought that will occupy Nietzsche throughout the 1880s. The sketch as
64

projected is as follows. Part 1 will be on the incorporation of the fundamental
errors; part 2 will be on the incorporation of the passions; part 3 will cover the
incorporation of knowledge and of renunciatory knowledge (Nietzsche calls
this the "passion of knowledge"); part 4 will be on "the innocent one" and "the
individual as experiment" (Nietzsche refers to "the alleviation of life,
abasement, enfeeblement," and speaks of a point of transition (Übergang); part
5 will be on "the heavy new burden [Schwergewicht]: the eternal recurrence
(Wiederkunft) of the same." The task, Nietzsche says, is to demonstrate the
"infinite importance of our knowing, erring, habits, ways of living for all that
is to come." The question is then asked: "What shall we do with the rest of our
lives - we who have spent the majority of our lives in the most profound
ignorance? We shall teach the teaching - it is the most powerful means of
incorporating [einzuverleiben] it in ourselves. Our kind of blessedness
[Seligkeit], as teachers of the greatest teaching." There then follows the
sublime signature, "Early August 1881 in Sils-Maria, 6,000 feet above sea
level and much higher above all human things!"
In the sketch only part 4 of the projected book is given an extended
treatment by Nietzsche, and this forms the bulk of the rest of the sketch. Let
me cite it in full:
On 4) Philosophy of Indifference [Gleichgültigkeit]. What used to be the strongest stimulus
now has a quite different effect: it is seen as just a game and accepted (the passions and
labours), rejected on principle as a life of untruth, but aesthetically enjoyed and cultivated as
form and stimulus; we adopt a child's attitude towards what used to constitute the seriousness
of existence. The seriousness of our striving, though, is to understand everything as becoming,
to deny ourselves as individuals, to look into the world through as many eyes as possible, to
live in drives and activities so as to create eyes for ourselves, temporarily abandoning
ourselves to life so as to rest our eye on it temporarily afterwards: to maintain the drives as the
foundation of all knowing, but to know at what point they become the enemies of knowing: in
sum, to wait and see how far knowledge [Wissen] and truth can be incorporated - and to what
extent a transformation of man occurs when he finally lives only so as to know [erkennen]. -
This is a consequence of the passion of knowledge [Erkenntnis]: there is no way of ensuring
its existence except by preserving as well the sources and powers of knowledge, the errors and
passions; from the conflict between them it draws its sustaining strength. - What will this life
look like from the point of view of its sum total of well-being? A children's game under the
gaze of the wise man, with power over the latter and the former conditions - and over death,
if such a thing is not possible. - But now comes the weightiest knowledge [Erkenntnis], one
which prompts the terrible reconsideration of all forms of life: an absolute surplus of pleasure
must be demonstrable, or else we must choose to destroy ourselves with regard to humanity
as a means of destroying humanity. Just this: we have to put the past - our past and that of all
humanity - on the scales and also outweigh it - no! this piece of human history will and must
repeat [wiederholen] itself eternally; we can leave that out of account, we have no influence
over it: even if it afflicts our fellow-feeling and biases us against life in general. If we are not
to be overwhelmed by it, our compassion must not be great. Indifference needs to have worked
away deep inside us, and enjoyment in contemplation, too. Even the misery of future humanity
must not concern us. But the question is whether we still want to live: and how! 
This first sketch shows that Nietzsche conceived the eternal recurrence or
return of the same - whatever the object of this thought is and what kind of
65

thought it is - in the context of a much wider set of problems than is
commonly supposed. At the centre of these problems is the task of
incorporating truth and knowledge.16 The only engagement with it I have been
able to find in the great readings of Nietzsche takes place in Heidegger's
remarkable second lecture course of 1937, where he deals only with the book's
projected five parts. For Heidegger, we have no 'schema' available to us that
might enable us to 'pigeonhole' the project of incorporation outlined in the
sketch, and so make it familiar to us.17 Instead, he proposes that we must be on
the lookout for the project itself and for its own schema. This is an important
point that I concur with. However, it is also the case that the project is one that
is well underway by the time Nietzsche composes his sketch, and is deeply
rooted in the project of the 'free-spirit trilogy'. This concerns various tasks
Nietzsche assigns to us moderns, including the renunciation of the first and
last things of metaphysics (see especially The Wanderer and His Shadow 16
on 'Where Indifference is needed'), the passion of knowledge (D 429), the
purification of our valuations and opinions (D 33, GS 335), and the
incorporation of truth and knowledge (GS 110). Let us also simply note that
the sketch clearly anticipates the well-known perspectivism Nietzsche puts
forward in GM III, 12: "the more affects we allow to speak about a thing, the
more eyes, various eyes we are able to use for the same thing, the more
complete will be our 'concept' of the thing". Moreover, the motif of
'incorporation' is one that Nietzsche is preoccupied with from the time of his
early writings: it plays an important role, for example, in the thinking on
memory and forgetting he conducts in his unfashionable meditation of history
of 1874, where it is conceived as a plastic power (Kraft), and appearances of
the term can be found in his work even earlier than this. Although a term of
physiology, its appearance in Nietzsche is not, as David Krell has argued, the
result of Nietzsche suddenly having read in 1881 Wilhelm Roux's book on
embryology, The Struggle of Parts in the Organism.18
Questions concerning 'incorporation' do not, of course, originate with
Nietzsche in modern thought. We find interesting remarks on incorporation in
Novalis, for example, for whom incorporation is bound up with the future: if
conceptions of times past draw us toward disintegration, then conceptions of
the future "drive us toward living forms - to incorporation, the action of
assimilation".19 We can also go right back to the beginnings of philosophy, to
the Greeks and Roman Stoics, as does Foucault for example in his lecture
course of 1981-2 on 'The Hermeneutics of the Subject'.20 The term has an
interesting history after Nietzsche. In 'Overcoming Metaphysics' Heidegger
considers the significance of "the preliminary sign of the primal incorporation
of the oblivion of Being" for the history of Being, and argues that
"Overcoming is worthy of thought only when we think about incorporation".21
In his lecture course Foucault makes central the idea of the 'incorporation of
66

truth' in his attempt to recover a lost ancient care of truth, and without any
awareness of Nietzsche's prior concern with this very question;22 and the great
Czech phenomenologist Jan Patocˇka makes 'incorporation' a central concept
in his development of the project of phenomenology.23 In addition, it is worth
noting its appearance in Husserl, for example, in his treatment of how the
subject constitutes nature in terms of "a Body, within an open horizon of
possible experience ... " Husserl argues that the primary constitution is a
'normal' one that gives us "the first reality of the world and of the Body". This
is because it is only on the basis of a 'normal' or typical constitution that there
can then take place "the constitution of apperceptive transformations precisely
as transformations, as incorporating 'anomalous' experiential circumstances"
(Ideas 2, section 18c). 
In this essay I shall have to restrict myself to dealing with some basic
questions of incorporation as the notion figures in Nietzsche's project. It could
be claimed that the project of 'the gay science' is Nietzsche's attempt to work
out the ancient tasks of 'truth' under peculiarly and specifically modern
conditions of existence (see GS 11). The modern knowers that Nietzsche
addresses in his writings are knowers who are, in fact, unknown to themselves
(GM Preface 1), ones who remain "idealists of knowledge" and godless anti-
metaphysicians (GM III, 24). Once again, Heidegger proves incisive here: "...
Nietzsche thinks in a thoroughly modern way ... we must emphasize again
and again that for modern thought the essence of truth is determined on the
basis of the essence of knowledge; for incipient Greek thought the essence of
knowledge is determined on the basis of the essence of truth, albeit for a brief
historical moment and only at the outset".24
We should not be surprised that running throughout Nietzsche's corpus is a
concern with incorporation and allied notions such as assimilation, digestion,
rumination, repetition, interpretation, and so on; he was, after all, trained as a
philologist and although he became a severe critic of its scholasticism and
pedantry, the emphasis philology places on the arts of reading and
interpretation deeply inform Nietzsche's philosophical practice. On one level,
it is a question of knowing the speeds and rhythms of our thinking and learning
about the way we digest life. We can think too fast, or we can encounter truth
in a premature fashion, which is what Nietzsche finds in Schopenhauer. In
Schopenhauer existence is judged to be a guilty error (individuation of
necessity bears for him the 'guilt of existence'), to will life is always to will in
vain, and nothingness is posited as the ultimate truth, at once both moral and
metaphysical. For Nietzsche these insights come too early to Schopenhauer;
his solution to the problem of existence, advocating a denial of the will to life,
is hasty and youthful, and also a compromise (see D 481 & GM III, 6). 
Nietzsche seems to anticipate an important phenomenological insight when
he notes that we do not normally think about thinking when we are thinking
67

(KSA 11, 38 [1], WLN p. 34). However, by this he means not so much our
ignorance of the sources of thinking and positing in a transcendental
subjectivity, but rather the origins of our knowing in 'life'. Nevertheless the
sketch of 1881 does allow for postulating a possible correspondence between
Nietzsche and phenomenology. In it, for example, something close to a
suspension of, and withdrawal from, the natural attitude could be said to be at
work, as well as recognition of the need to move to a superior standpoint of
reflection.25 To attain this superior from and practice of knowledge, the kind
that will challenge us and put us to the test, we need to contemplate, stand
back, and produce a reduction of some kind. However, Nietzsche does not
make it clear in the sketch just what his conception of this superior form is and
what it amounts to. 
Whatever form it is to assume, we still need to ask why he conceives its
development in terms of a task of incorporation (the German word
Einverleibung means literally a taking into the body). John Richardson has
recently clarified this issue, arguing that as Nietzsche sees it we need to give
our distancing insights a causal presence within us, embodying them in our
behavioural dispositions (in effect, creating new habits).26 Indeed, in GS 11
Nietzsche writes of the task of incorporating knowledge (Wissen) as one in
which it is made instinctive. Heidegger fully appreciated this insight when he
described eternal recurrence, conceived as an incorporating thought par
excellence, as "the juice that will now feed all our energies (Kräfte)".27
Nietzsche himself conceived the cultivation of the thought in terms of a slow
sinking in: "whole generations must build upon it and become fruitful, so that
it will become a large tree which would overshadow all humanity to come"
(KSA 9, 11 [158]). In number 220 of this notebook from 1881 Nietzsche
writes that "the most powerful thought" uses the energy that has hitherto been
at the command of other goals (Zielen). It thus has a "transforming effect" not
through the creation of any new energy but simply by creating "new laws of
movement for energy." It is in this sense that it holds "the possibility of
determining and ordering individual human beings and their affects
differently." In short, eternal recurrence is a new thought of culture (selection,
training, and discipline). 
In The Gay Science Nietzsche makes significant usage of incorporation in
a long aphorism devoted to truth and knowledge (GS 110). This aphorism
helps to clarify what Nietzsche has in mind with regard to the incorporation of
truth and knowledge. However, as we shall see, Nietzsche leaves it to his
readers to work out his meaning and to negotiate the most difficult questions.
Although we exist today in a situation where knowledge itself has now
become a part of life, a preoccupation with truth actually appeared late in the
evolution of human life and was for a long time held to be "the weakest form
of knowledge" on account of the fact that humans found it hard to endure it as
68

a practice of living. In the story Nietzsche is telling in this aphorism, this was
owing to the fact that for the greater part of its evolutionary history the human
animal has survived, prospered even, by incorporating a set of "basic errors"
which became for it a set of "erroneous articles of faith," such as that there are
equal things, enduring things, indeed that there are things such as substances
and bodies, that things are what we immediately take them to be, that the will
is free, and so on. All the higher functions of our organism, including sense
perception, have worked with these basic errors and incorporated them.
Moreover, these propositions concerning self and world established
themselves as the norm according to which "true" and "untrue" could be
determined. Truth, then, at least initially and during this highly formative
period of human evolution, operates in the context of the incorporated errors.
In the section that immediately comes after GS 110 he presents a quasi-
Darwinian account of the origins and development of our basic ways of
thinking. For example, to be able to think all the time in terms of identity
proves helpful in the struggle for survival since it means things in the
environment can be recognized and acted upon with speed and quickness. To
see only a perpetual becoming everywhere would be disastrous for the
evolution of a species of animal. As Nietzsche points out, "the beings who did
not see exactly had a head start over those who saw everything 'in a flux'" (GS
111). What has so far determined the strength or power of knowledge is not its
degree of truth, as we might suppose, but rather its "character as a condition
of life" (the conditions of life include error). Wherever life and knowledge
came into conflict, denial and doubt were taken to be expressions of madness.
Where a more truthful humanity has sought to come into being - Nietzsche
mentions the school of the Eleatics (Parmenides and his disciples, such as
Zeno) - it has arrived at "truth" only by deceiving itself about its own states,
for example positing a fictitious impersonality and an unchanging duration. In
the process it misunderstood the nature of the knower and lived in denial of the
impulses that inform knowledge. Although these human beings cultivated
honesty and scepticism, it was these which led to their downfall since their
ways of living and judging were seen to be also dependent on the primeval
impulses and basic errors of sentient existence. 
A subtle kind of scepticism comes into being when two opposing
propositions about the world appeared to be applicable to life, simply because
both proved compatible with the basic errors and an argument could be put
forward about the degrees of utility for life. The same was true, Nietzsche
notes, where new propositions came into being that were neither useful nor
harmful to life. Such a situation creates room for the expression of an
intellectual play impulse. Gradually the human brain becomes full of
antinomical judgments and convictions to the point where a "lust for power"
manifests itself in this tangle of knowledge. It is in this context that knowledge
69

and a striving for truth come to inform what we take to be our innermost needs
and desires: "all 'evil' instincts were subordinated to knowledge, employed in
her service, and acquired the splendour of what is permitted, honoured, and
useful" (GS 110). With this stage in our evolution we find ourselves in a new
situation in which the quest for knowledge and the striving for the true have
taken their rightful place among others as being considered among the most
fundamental needs, to the point where we now have techniques and disciplines
of scrutiny, of denial, and of suspicion. Nietzsche brings the aphorism to a
close by saying that the thinker today is "the being in whom the drive to truth
and those life-preserving errors are fighting their first battle." Such a battle is
now taking place because the striving for the true has also shown itself to be a
life-preserving and life-enhancing power. In order to make further progress
with truth it is necessary to conduct an experiment. Nietzsche's question is: "to
what extent can truth stand [verträgt] incorporation?"28
The precise meaning of Nietzsche's questioning is not self-evident. He
appears to leave open the result of the experiment that is to be conducted, as
well as the precise nature of the fundamental question he has posed. As
Heidegger asks, what kind of 'truth' is it that stands outside incorporation and
that now challenges us in the manner of incorporation? What is the precise
nature and status of this 'truth'?29 We can see the difficulty of what Nietzsche
is trying to think, as well as the complex character of the challenge he is laying
down for us: if incorporation conforms to the logic of identity, making the
unequal equal, subjugating difference to resemblance, and so on, then, the
correct question to be posed of 'truth' is whether it can stand or endure
incorporation. Nietzsche's question is thus a fundamental one. Now, it might
be that in posing the question in the way he has, Nietzsche also wants us to
reflect on the kind of 'truth' that can be made the subject of a practice of
incorporation. 
Although we can say that the truth Nietzsche has in mind is neither the
articles of faith of primeval humanity nor the knowledge sought by refined
truth-seekers such as the Eleatics, it is very difficult to determine exactly what
he does have in mind. Trying to work this out becomes a complicated task
when we take into account other notes from the MIII, 1 notebook of 1881. In
note 156, for example, he indicates that a fundamental rethinking of the
individual is required, and away from the coarse "error" of the species; the
individual struggles for its existence, for its new taste, and for its relative
singular position in relation to all things. It despises the general taste and
wants to rule supreme. But the notion of the individual also has its error, a
more refined one to be sure, and its nature must be intensified: it discovers that
it itself is something wandering and has a taste that changes; in the smallest
moment it is something other than in the next and its conditions of existence
are that of a host of individuals. Nietzsche declares: "the infinitely small
70

moment is the highest reality and truth, a lightning-image that emerges from
the eternal river [ein Blitzbild aus dem ewigen Flusse]" (KSA 9, 11[156]). In
note 162 Nietzsche states that the organs of a living system work in favour of
error, and, therefore, the "ultimate truth" (die letzte Wahrheit) of the flux of
things cannot stand incorporation. 
In what way(s), then, is truth to be made the subject of incorporation? It
seems clear that we need to look elsewhere than the "ultimate truth", simply
because such a truth is literally (physically and spiritually) impossible to
incorporate for a finite organic life-form. We could suggest that what
Nietzsche has in mind is truth conceived as a set of practices of truthfulness
that is now part and parcel of our passion of knowledge, such as doubt,
suspicion, critical distance, subjecting all things to scrutiny, and so on. Here
we might want to phrase the question of incorporation in the following terms:
can there be a diet of knowledge? How will our commitment to truth work
itself out in the context of an appreciation of the general economy of life,
including our recognition of the need to will illusion, appearance, and
semblance? This, I think, is one important part of what Nietzsche intends. We
also need to strive to be more just in our evaluations of life and the living, for
example, thinking "beyond good and evil" in order to develop a more complex
appreciation of the economy of life. For Nietzsche it is largely the prejudices
of "morality" that stand in the way of this since morality presumes a
knowledge it does not in fact have. As Nietzsche writes in Daybreak, "We
must rid the world from the many types of false grandeur, since they go against
the justice that all things are entitled to demand of us!" (D 4)
In note 162 Nietzsche argues that "life is the condition of knowing", whilst
"error is the condition of the living" at its deepest level. It is thus necessary to
love and cultivate error as it is the womb (Mutterschoss) of our knowing. We
are to advance life for the sake of knowledge and promote illusion for the sake
of life. Nietzsche then states that the "fundamental condition" of the whole
passion of knowledge is to grant existence an "aesthetic meaning," that is, to
"increase our taste for it." What we discover in this play of life is a night and
a day, the ebb and flow of our desiring knowledge and our desiring error.
Ruled absolutely by one of these desires, the human and its capacities would
perish. In note number 229 Nietzsche states that only by adapting to the living
errors can the "initially dead truth" be brought to life. In note 325 he spells out
what is to be the task of science (Wissenschaft): "Not to ask the question how
error is possible, but how a kind of truth is at all possible in spite of the
fundamental untruth in knowing." To contemplate the possible incorporation
of truth and knowledge is, for Nietzsche, to consider something radical. If we
are not designed for truth and knowledge, then to learn how to incorporate
them involves something significant, something that will have a transformative
effect on human life - even though, of course, truth and knowledge could not
71

appear without the error of life and the great erring creature that is the human
animal. Heidegger is absolutely correct, I believe, when he argues that
Nietzsche's entire project, so in evidence in this sketch from 1881, albeit in
cryptic form, is best conceived in terms of a "humanisation" taken to a higher
power.30 This is what the overman essentially names in Nietzsche. 
The challenge Nietzsche presents is that of learning "to live in drives," as
that through which we come to see, and to uphold this mode of living as a
foundation of all our knowing; but then to cultivate at the same time the
superior knowledge that will enable us to discern at what point the drives
become the enemies of knowing. Our drive to knowledge has its
presuppositions in the conditions of life and these conditions include error
(KSA 9, 11[162]). Humanity has been cultivated on the basis of a set of
fundamental errors, and this has involved the development of certain kinds of
sensation and perception in which the changes in things go unperceived and
all kinds of influences are not felt. In addition, a certain mode of judging and
valuing has been cultivated, one that affirms rather than suspends judgment,
that errs and fabricates things rather than waits, and that passes judgment
rather than strives to be just (GS 111). Nietzsche argues that our knowledge
amounts to a humanization of things; we perfect an image of becoming for
ourselves but do not see beyond or behind this image. We have done this, for
example, by diagramming reality in a specific manner, such as through "lines,
planes, bodies, atoms, divisible time spans, divisible spaces" (GS 112). In GS
121 he writes: "We have arranged for ourselves a world in which we are able
to live - by positing bodies, lines, planes, causes and effects, motion and rest,
form and content; without these articles of faith no one could endure living!
But that does not prove them." Our fundamental schemas of thought and habits
of representation are imprecise and make us reliant on perceptions that are too
coarse. Moreover, man's errors have led him to endow himself with so many
fictitious attributes, to place himself in false rank in relation to animals and
nature, and to invent ever new tables of the good that are held to be eternal and
unconditionally binding (GS 115). Man's errors are the vehicles of his
education, but once the effects of these errors are removed we remove at the
same time "humanity". 
Nietzsche will continue to refine the insights at work in the sketch of 1881
throughout the rest of the decade. He will seek to account for the emergence
of error, he will clarify the question of truth, and he will come to define life as
will to power, and he will leave his readers to come with the task of pondering
strange, difficult questions (I shall indicate the nature of some of these towards
the end of the essay). In 1881 Nietzsche envisages a new singularity for a
historical humanity, which Heidegger describes as a matter of making a
decision - in effect, an in-cision - in the evolution of human life.31 Eternal
recurrence names this singularity conceived by Nietzsche as 'the new life',
72

which Heidegger interprets as "... a new way of standing in the midst of
beings as a whole; it is a new kind of truth and thereby a metamorphosis of
beings".32 Eternal recurrence addresses modern atheistic and immoral knowers
in the singularity of their historical moment; it does so, however, by inviting
them to assume responsibility for a specific and curious task, that of
incorporating truth and knowledge, which will add weight to their existence.
What are the truth and knowledge that Nietzsche has in mind when he writes
of this experiment in a new incorporation? On a straightforward level,
Nietzsche is simply asking whether we are able to make room for truth now
that our own becoming is so deeply tied up with the passion of knowledge.
Subsequent texts and notebooks make it clear that he is also asking whether
we can incorporate a set of ungodly and immoral truths that show us that we
are not what we take ourselves to be either as knowing subjects or as moral
agents. Moreover, can we practise the superior knowledge that will enable us
to develop better descriptions of ourselves? (GS 112) 
We still have not got proper sense of Nietzsche's thinking on life, truth, and
error; neither have I explained how Nietzsche develops his own conception of
phenomenology. I will now attempt this by focusing on two core issues:
Nietzsche on consciousness, and his attempt to develop a new thinking of
individuation. 
Nietzsche on Consciousness
For phenomenology, 'consciousness' is a self-validating source or origin of
truth (conceived as manifestation or the being of showing). For Nietzsche,
consciousness is implicated in error and the realm of the superficial; it must,
therefore, be approached in terms of a hermeneutics of suspicion, and it cannot
be regarded as the most important domain of life. However, we cannot simply
deduce from this that his critical conception of consciousness automatically
applies to what Husserl was attempting to open up with his new thinking of
consciousness. Furthermore, it is mistaken to suppose that Nietzsche can
dispense with consciousness - the execution of the tasks he sets a new
humanity require that consciousness assumes new efficacious powers. 
For Nietzsche, the problem of consciousness - what it does, how it comes
about - confronts us once when we appreciate that it would be possible to
dispense with it; now that they have caught up with Leibniz's suspicion,
"physiology and the history of animals place us at the beginning of such
comprehension". In GS 357 Nietzsche refers to Leibniz's "incomparable
insight ... that consciousness is merely an accidens of experience and not its
necessary and essential attribute". What we call consciousness is but merely
one state of our spiritual and psychical world, not the whole of it; it is "perhaps
a pathological state" (the harmful character of excessive self-consciousness,
for example). When viewed in the context of the economy of life as a whole,
73

consciousness - the becoming-conscious of something - is superfluous and
vastly over-estimated in importance: "For we could think, feel, will, and
remember, and we could also 'act' ... and yet none of all this would have to
'enter our consciousness'(as one says metaphorically)" (ibid). The widespread
supposition is that consciousness provides a mirror of life, but for Nietzsche
nothing necessitates this view: "Even now, for that matter, by far the greatest
portion of our life actually takes place without this mirror effect" (ibid). When
we reflect on ourselves through self-consciousness we are not, as we suppose,
coming to know ourselves; rather, we come to know only that which is
superficial and general, that which has been structured and shaped in
accordance with concepts that have historically evolved and gained their
raison d'être from the needs of life (adaptation, survival, etc.). This is why
consciousness needs to be subjected to a critique for Nietzsche, and cannot
constitute an uncritical starting-point for philosophy. If our aspiration is now
towards new life then new methods and modes of knowledge are called for. 
Nietzsche reflects on the possible reasons for consciousness' coming into
existence: if it is superfluous (not necessary), why do we have it? His suggestion
is that consciousness evolves under the pressure of the need for communication.
The subtlety and strength of consciousness is, when viewed through the lens of
evolutionary thinking, proportionate to a capacity for communication; in turn,
this capacity is proportionate to the need for communication. Nietzsche proffers
the hypothesis that consciousness is, in essence, a net of communication
between human beings. This means that thoughts, feelings, and movements
enter our individual consciousness as the result of a social categorical
imperative, one that "for a terribly long time lorded it over man". Man became
an animal that needed assistance from others and social protection: "he needed
his peers, he had to learn to express his distress and to make himself understood;
and for all of this he needed 'consciousness' first of all, he needed to 'know'
himself what distressed him, he needed to 'know' how he felt, he needed to
'know' what he thought". Therefore, thinking can take place without our
knowing that we are thinking: "the thinking that rises to consciousness is only
the smallest part of all this - the most superficial and worst part". It is so because
it takes the form of words conceived as signs of communication: " ... the
development of language and the development of consciousness (not of reason
but merely of the way reason enters consciousness) go hand in hand". Language
not only serves as a bridge between human beings but also works as "a mien, a
pressure, a gesture".33 In Daybreak Nietzsche had noted that words exist only for
superlative degrees of inner processes and drives (D 115). With a single crude
word language assaults "so polyphonic an essence" (D 133; the example
Nietzsche treats in this aphorism is Mitleid). 
What we receive from the external world through sense impressions is
codified in consciousness, including the ability to fix meanings and the
74

external exhibition of these meanings. All of this takes place through the
invention of signs: "The human being inventing signs is at the same time the
human being who becomes ever more keenly conscious of himself" (GS 354).
Nietzsche makes it clear that consciousness is social by nature and the kind of
consciousness he is describing is, in effect, what we would call self-
consciousness conceived as a monitoring consciousness.34 Man becomes a sign
animal at the same as he becomes a social animal, and the thinking that is
expressed in consciousness constitutes the smallest part and most superficial
part of life's intelligence. The solitary human being that lives like a beast of
prey would have no need of consciousness in this sense. When man becomes
a sign animal he thinks in accordance with customs and conventions, he speaks
in clichés and accepted opinions, and he employs all the categories that are
abbreviating and simplifying signs: "Our thoughts themselves are continually
governed by the character of consciousness - by the 'genius of the species'
that commands it". 
Nietzsche puts forward the claim that consciousness belongs to our social
or herd nature, not our "individual existence". In our efforts at self-knowledge,
where we attempt with the best will in the world to understand ourselves as
individually as possible, we misrecognise ourselves, constantly and
necessarily; we only become aware of what is average: "Fundamentally, all
our actions are altogether incomparably personal, unique, and infinitely
individual ... But as soon as we translate them into consciousness they no
longer seem to be". This, Nietzsche says, constitutes the essence of
phenomenalism and perspectivism, both of which he understands critically.
The word of which we become conscious and reflect in it is a surface and sign-
world, one that is by definition common and mean. The implication is clear:
through consciousness we deal only with what is shallow, stupid, general,
"sign, herd signal". Moreover, our dependency on this consciousness means
we are stuck in falsification, generalization and a reduction to superficialities. 
Nietzsche's key claims regarding 'consciousness' can be enumerated as
follows:
1. Consciousness, its intuitions and categories, have their ground in a specific
set of selective drives, such as the drive to exclude and the drive to chase
away,
which ensure that only certain information reaches it:
"Consciousness is the hand with which the organism reaches out furthest:
it must be a firm hand. Our logic, our sense of time, our sense of space are
prodigious capacities to abbreviate, for the purpose of commanding. A
concept is an invention which nothing corresponds to wholly but many
things slightly ... " (KSA 11, 34 [131], WLN p.9). All organic life is
involved in this activity of sense-making and interpreting; what
distinguishes the animal man from the rest of interpreting nature is his
apparatus of signs and the translation of experience into signs. 
75

2. Conscious states are terminal states, "the last link in a chain, a closure"
(KSA 12, 1 [61], WLN p.60). It is not the case that there is a pure realm of
thought, in which one thought would cause another; rather, the "events
which are actually connected are played out below our consciousness ...
Below every thought lies an affect" (ibid.). In this scenario of our activity
every thought and every feeling has to be seen as a total state and not simply
born of one particular drive. This means that a new or subsequent thought
is "a sign of how the total power situation has now shifted again". In short,
thought is rooted in a complex assemblage of affects and drives: "Man as a
multiplicity of 'wills to power': each one with a multiplicity of means of
expression and forms" (KSA 12, 1 [58], WLN p.60). What we take to be
individual supposed passions are fictitious unities, as is self-consciousness,
in which what enters consciousness from the different fundamental drives
becomes, through a synthesizing fiction, a being or faculty. 
3. It is thus ludicrous to posit a single entity, be it the will, the soul, or self-
consciousness as the cause of all these phenomena. The illusion is to
conceive of a "single plane of consciousness" and to subjugate everything
to it (KSA 12, 7 [1], WLN p.128). Because knowledge relies on these
fictitious entities, conceived as metaphysical unities, it produces only error.
Hence Nietzsche claims that knowledge is possible only as "error about
itself, as will to power, as will to deception" (KSA 12, 7 [54], WLN p.138).
Knowledge conceived in these terms can necessarily only be credited with
an anthropological and biological sense (KSA 13, 14 [122], WLN p.258).
It would be idealism to claim any other status for knowledge. Our
valuations must stand in relation to actual conditions of existence, and what
is essential about them is their inexactitude and indeterminacy; this gives
rise to a simplification of the external world, denoting an intelligence that
favours survival. Also in this context truth designates not error's antithesis
but rather, "the status of certain errors vis-à-vis others, such as being older,
more deeply assimilated, our not knowing how to live without them, and so
on" (KSA 12, 34 [247], WLN p.15). 
4. In Nietzsche's reduction a critique of consciousness must be attempted
since the "degeneration of life is essentially conditioned" by its
"extraordinary capacity for error". Because consciousness is not kept under
control by the instincts, and is marked by a drive for reified total
independence, it errs "longest and most thoroughly" (KSA 13, 11 [83],
WLN p.215). It is consciousness that gives rise to the pathologies that have
characterized human life on earth, including the "bold insanities of
metaphysics" (GS preface 2) and nihilism (which Nietzsche conceives as
the result of our idealism and a pathological transitional stage). Nietzsche's
naturalistic purification is an attempt to see the world and ourselves free of
the prejudices and fears of "morality", which is the greatest system of errors
76

ever devised and that has made of the earth "a madhouse" (GM II, 22). It is
morality which has created the most fictitious entities (the soul, free will
conceived as a faculty or entity, guilt, sin, punishment, and so on), and
whose sublimity is dangerous and menacing. 
Nietzsche does not, of course, put forward this (self-)overcoming of
morality in glib terms, and neither does he envisage it as an easy task. Once
we no longer see the world and ourselves through the lens of morality we run
the risk of making ourselves blind and may no longer see at all. In the course
of time we will develop new eyes. 
Nietzsche's Critique of Consciousness
Nietzsche has a specific conception in mind when he proposes that
consciousness be made the subject of a critique. Failure to appreciate this point
has led many commentators astray, supposing that Nietzsche is proposing
consciousness be got rid of, or that he adheres to the position that it is
something merely epiphenomenal without causal efficacy. Epiphenomenalism
rests on the thesis that only the physical is causally potent, whilst the mental
or psychological is devoid of potency. As recent commentators have pointed
out, if this is Nietzsche's view then many of his most important critical
analyses, as well as his conceptions for the future development of human
beings, would make little sense. For example, if mental events are to be
regarded as purely epiphenomenal then Nietzsche's analysis of the dreadful
consequences of ressentiment would be false and without critical purchase: "if
ressentiment were caused by some perceived insult, it would be an end state
that has no subsequent consequences, so there would be no consequences for
the psychology of the person suffering from ressentiment, and no subsequent
intentional action motivated by it".35 Furthermore, Nietzsche posits the
doctrine of eternal recurrence as an ethics on the supposition that this new
"thought of thoughts",36 as he calls it, can guide and steer an individual's task
of becoming the one (the singular) that it is. In a note from 1881 Nietzsche
asks, if all is necessity, how can I attain a degree of power over my actions?
He answers as follows: "Thought and belief are a weight pressing down on me
as much as and even more than any other weight. You say that food, a location,
air, society transform and condition you: well your opinions do so even more,
since it is they that determine your choice of food, dwelling, air, society. If you
incorporate this thought within you, amongst your other thoughts, it will
transform you. The question in everything that you will: 'am I certain I want
to do to an infinite number of times?'will become for you the heaviest weight"
(KSA 9, 11[143]). 
Nietzsche's critique of consciousness, like his critiques of morality and the
will to truth, proposes a refining and limiting task. Consciousness, including
the categories it posits, has evolved in terms of the needs of adaptation and
77

survival; it produces an elaborate system of signs that necessarily amount to a
system of simplification and abbreviation. On one level there is nothing wrong
or at fault in this for Nietzsche; there is a need simply to be careful when we
speak of truth and knowledge in this domain. On the other hand, he does want
to propose new methods and modes of knowledge as a way of moving human
life in the direction of new possibilities of existence. The question here, of
course, is the extent to which this is possible since we cannot miraculously
overcome the errors we have inherited or the sentient conditions of our
existence (see GS 374). Nietzsche is acutely aware of this, hence his insistence
on the free spirit devoting itself to questionable tasks and working its way
through the "enigma of liberation" (Human, All Too Human, volume one,
preface). 
When we speak of substances and faculties - the Ego, the Will, etc - we are
engaged in fabrication. We are distorting and simplifying processes and events
that are much more complex than our categories and established modes of
thinking enable us to appreciate. Nietzsche wishes us to be on guard against
this tendency to substantialise entities, including ourselves, in this way. On
one level he is sympathetic to Kant's critique of the paralogisms of pure reason
- the positing of the transcendental unity of apperception does not allow us to
make any knowledge claims about the subject as a substance. However, this
transcendental consciousness cannot remain immune from critical thinking
since it too is fictitious. Philosophy takes consciousness for a determinate
magnitude, and when this happens we deny its growth and intermittences, we
posit it uncritically for the unity of the organism (GS 11). Nietzsche proposes
we make the body and physiology the starting-point instead: "Essential to start
from the body and use it as a guiding thread. It is the far richer phenomenon,
and can be observed more distinctly" (KSA 11, 40 [15], WLN p. 43).
Nietzsche's critical point is not that consciousness is merely epiphenomenal,
but that we over-value it37: "We find it ill-considered that human consciousness
has for so long been regarded as the highest stage of organic development"
(KSA 11, 37 [4], WLN p. 29). What is astonishing is the human body and how
it has evolved in terms of "a prodigious alliance of living beings". In a
modification of Leibnizian doctrine, Nietzsche writes:
For this "miracle of miracles", consciousness is just a "tool" and nothing more - a tool in the
sense that the stomach is a tool. The magnificent binding together of the most diverse life, the
ordering and arrangement of the higher and lower activities, the thousand-fold obedience
which is not blind, even less mechanical, but a shrewd, selecting, considerate, even resistant
obedience - measured by intellectual standards, this whole phenomenon "body" is as superior
to our consciousness, our "mind", our conscious thinking, feeling, willing, as algebra is
superior to the times tables ... Nowadays we've forbidden ourselves to spin yarns about
"unity", the "soul", the "person": hypotheses like these make one's problem more difficult, that
much is clear. And for us, even the smallest living beings which constitute our body (more
correctly: for whose interaction the thing we call "body" is the best simile - ) are not soul-
atoms, but rather something growing, struggling, reproducing and dying off again: so that their
78

number alters unsteadily, and our living, like all living, is at once incessant dying. There are
thus in man as many "consciousnesses" as - at every moment of his existence - there are
beings which constitute his body (ibid., p. 30).
Nietzsche does not propose that we simply jettison our concepts, such as
the soul or the ego. There are many instances in Nietzsche's writings where he
claims the right to re-work and deploy anew these concepts. When viewed in
terms of a faculty or entity "free will" is a total fiction. This does not stop
Nietzsche, however, from conceiving the value and validity of this concept in
a different fashion: for example, as the accomplishment of the morality of
custom where it serves to denote the proud subject of responsibility (GM II, 2,
D 112), or "the emotion of superiority felt towards one who must obey: 'I am
free, he must obey'" (BGE 19). Any act of willing is complicated and enjoys
a unity only as a word. Willing is a matter of commanding and obeying and
comes into existence in the material context of social relations: "a philosopher
should claim the right to comprehend willing from within the sphere of morals
- morals understood as the doctrine of relations of mastery under which the
phenomenon 'life' arises" (ibid.). The idea of free will reveals its "cloddish
simplicity" when it is posited in "the superlative metaphysical sense" (BGE
21; for Nietzsche's positive retention of freedom of the will see HH preface
and GS 347). 
For Nietzsche, this critique has implications for our two main modes and
methods of knowledge, science and phenomenology. We 'know' what proves
to be useful for our interests as a species and this knowledge may simply be
belief or imagination, and we then confuse 'truth' with them. In GS 355
Nietzsche makes it clear that he is taking knowledge (Erkenntnis) in this
context to be an evolved social practice that aims to reduce something strange
to the familiar. The knowledge that philosophy hitherto has sought is the kind
that will provide the species with a sense of security and make it feel at home
in the world. We approach the entire riddle of the world with some rule in
which we are stuck and in terms of accustomed perspectives. This explains
philosophy's preference for starting with the "inner world," with so-called
"facts of consciousness." Nietzsche pronounces this to be the "Error of
errors!" (GS 355). He then argues that that which we are used to is what is
most difficult to know, simply because we lack the distance that would enable
us to see it as a problem and as something strange. He concludes by noting,
first, that the natural sciences acquire their surety (Sicherheit) by taking as the
object of their inquiries what is strange and unfamiliar and, second, that for
common sense it is contradictory to want to take the non-strange as an object
of inquiry. The "gay science" has a major investment in the development of
new techniques and sciences of knowing and inquiry: "We ourselves wish to
be our experiments and guinea pigs" (GS 319). This is a task that is at one and
the same time "scientific" and phenomenological: focusing on the strange and
79

paying attention to what lies closest to us but which we simply do not see
adequately or properly. It is in a note of 1886-7 that Nietzsche makes use of a
conception of phenomenology:
Methodologically: the value of internal and external phenomenology.
A. Consciousness late, poorly developed, exposed to external purposes and the grossest errors,
even essentially something falsifying, coarsening, synoptic
B. by contrast the phenomenon of the sensory world a hundred times more complex, subtler
and more precisely observable. External phenomenology gives us by far the richest material
and permits greater strictness in observation, whereas internal phenomena are difficult to grasp
and more allied to error (the internal processes are essentially error-generating, because life is
only possible under the leadership of such constraining, perspective-creating forces)
NB. All movement as a sign of an internal event: - i.e. by far the majority of all internal
events are given to us only as signs. (KSA 12, 7 [9]).38
For Nietzsche, then, 'phenomenology' is to work as a mode of observation
in the new tasks of knowledge that are devoted to securing a more refined
appreciation of ourselves and the world, and that amounts to overcoming
metaphysical realism and moral realism (D 116). We are to forego imaginary
entities and dangerous fictions, the innocence of our knowing, and to enable
us to do this we shall have recourse to those sciences of life and of spirit or
soul which do not take our valuations and claims to knowledge at face-value,
such as physiology and psychology. Henceforth we shall have to be suspicious
of philosophers:
... I point my finger at the prodigious perspectival falsification which allows the human
species to assert itself. It is a condition of the species' life to take pleasure in itself on this
account ... In all this the will to power expresses itself, reaching unscrupulously for the means
of deception: one can imagine a malicious enjoyment that a God might feel at the sight of man
admiring himself. 
Thus: the will to power. 
Consequence: if this idea is hostile to us, why do we acquiesce in it? Give us those lovely
phantasms! Let's be swindlers and beautifiers of humanity! Fact of what a philosopher
actually is. (KSA 11 43 [1], WLN p.51). 
Nietzsche's New Individual
In GS 335, entitled "Long Live Physics!", Nietzsche addresses the issue of
self-knowledge that bothers him so much. By the term 'physics' Nietzsche
means knowledge conceived as a practice of refined observation and self-
observation. He begins the aphorism by asking some basic questions: "How
many people know how to observe something? Of the few who do, how many
observe themselves?" Do we really know who we are? The aphorism is a
meditation on individuation, and reflects a concern which lies deep in
Nietzsche's thinking and marks its character from first to last. As a way of
demonstrating how desperate the situation is with respect to self-observation,
Nietzsche selects an example, that of morality (moral actions, moral
judgments). Why is it that we are so quick, eager, and garrulous in our chatter
80

about our moral actions and the value of them? Might not our pathetic
rationalizations and justifications of our actions conceal a deep ignorance of
ourselves? If so, how might this be corrected? And what would the correction
consist of and amount to? 
Nietzsche considers various modes of thinking for justifying our actions.
First, he considers conscience: "this is what my conscience tells me is right
and this voice is never immoral". Our appeal to conscience rests on a faith that
cannot withstand serious scrutiny. Our judgment that "this is right" has a
prehistory in our instincts, our likes and dislikes, our experiences and the lack
of them. One can listen to the commands of a conscience in numerous ways:
"like a good soldier who hears his officer's command. Or like a woman who
loves the man who commands. Or like a flatterer and coward who is afraid of
the commander". Moreover, our reliance on conscience might reveal that we
have never thought deeply about ourselves and blindly accepted what we have
been told since childhood concerning what is right, or it may be little more
than maintaining ourselves within the conditions of existence that we regard
as our own. In short, what one takes to be the firmness of one's moral
judgment might be evidence only of our personal abjectness and our so-called
"moral strength" might have its source in our stubbornness and inability to
envisage new ideals. Our grand words, such as conscience and duty, need to
be spoiled by knowledge of their actual sources, as opposed to what we like to
believe of ourselves and how we like to idealize ourselves to ourselves. 
Nietzsche then considers Kant's categorical imperative as a possible
candidate of moral vindication, and he locates in it another deceit. Nietzsche
misreads Kant on a fundamental point, interpreting the universalising of one's
own judgment into a law as an act of selfishness.39 Here, Nietzsche says, one
should only admire one's blindness, pettiness, and frugality. To posit the
categorical imperative is only to expose the fact that one has neither
discovered nor created an ideal of one's own for oneself. In spite of this
misreading, Nietzsche's point is a serious one: how can we think of a
sovereign law once we appreciate the extent to which actions can never be the
same and that every action is a singular one, "done in an altogether unique and
irretrievable way"? Like consciousness, moral conscience relates only to a
coarse exterior. Even the most inward and subtle regulations of all moralities
so far have produced only a semblance of sameness. Nietzsche then stresses
his fundamental point, namely, that although our opinions, valuations, and
tables of what is good belong among the most powerful levers in the involved
mechanism of our actions, in any particular case the law of their mechanism is
indemonstrable. It is at this point that his treatment of the problem moves from
a negative mode to a positive one. The difficulty is one of physics - of securing
the most adequate conception of it (e.g. phenomenological). All that is open to
us is to refine our methods and powers of self-observation and for Nietzsche
81

this entails imposing a new limit on ourselves. We can claim no credit for
ourselves where we think we can (I am right). So, how is one to distinguish
oneself, individuate oneself, and become the singular one that one is?40
This new limit concerns purifying our opinions and values - recognizing
that they only come into contact with something real in a highly superficial
manner - and creating our own new tables of what is good. When we do this
we shall stop brooding over the so-called moral value of our actions and come
to regard the moral chatter of some about others as something highly
distasteful: "Sitting in moral judgment should offend our taste". Nietzsche
writes in praise of a "physics" of morals by appealing to the supra-moral virtue
that compels (zwingt) us to it, namely, probity (Redlichkeit), and which gains
its voice from the superior form of conscience that he names the "intellectual
conscience." It is superior to the moral conscience simply because it
acknowledges that we do not have an adequate knowledge of our actions and
valuations; rather, "all regulations about actions relate only to their coarse
exterior." It is this honesty about ourselves that compels us to physics. 
What is the 'law' of individuation? Is it a transcendent fate hidden from us,
like Schopenhauer's intelligible character, or is it a monstrous freedom we can
assume for ourselves and give to ourselves as a task? Eternal recurrence
provides the ultimate eternal confirmation and seal of this fateful and free
nature: fateful because it is implicated in a past (all that has been and the 'es
war' of time's pastness) and free because it will influence everything that is to
come. What we need to respect is not so much the moral law but our dual
nature as creatures and creators: "In the human being, creature and creator are
united: the human being is matter, fragment, excess, filth, nonsense, chaos; but
the human being is also creator, sculptor, hammer-hardness, observer-divinity,
and the Seventh Day - do you understand this opposition?" (BGE 225). This
is the "opposition" Nietzsche is working through in many of his writings, and
it informs the demonic voice that inspires the thought of eternal recurrence in
GS 341: "do you desire this once more and innumerable times more?", in
which we are not sure whether the "this" refers to what has happened and will
happen again and again (fate), or whether it refers to what we will make
happen, transforming fate into a task (freedom), willing it to return again and
again as the object of a desire. Nietzsche seeks a strictly non-metaphysical and
immanent, conception of fate: "The individual is a piece of fate from top to
bottom, one more law, one more necessity for all that is to come and will be"
(TI 'Morality as Anti-Nature', 6). 
Nietzsche is, of course, dealing with a paradox: how can I regularize my
irregularity? How can I assume responsibility for my irresponsible nature?
How can I create a stable ground - a centre of gravity - where none is simply
given to me? How can I become what I am when what I am is a singularity
that is repeated at every moment and never the same? In part, solving this
82

problem is the work of culture (the labour of prehistory), and it is this labour
which has been ruined for Nietzsche by Christian-moral civilization. The
morality of custom aims to fulfil the paradoxical task nature sets itself in the
case of the human animal, that of cultivating an autonomous and supra-moral
(übersittlich) sovereign individual. The task facing Nietzsche's new individual
is that of becoming a new nature from out of nature. My nature must be
uniquely my own. 
Are we to suppose that eternal recurrence is one more error, or is it the
correction of error by a superior error, say a more refined one? Nietzsche
writes: "There would be no suffering [Leiden] if there were nothing organic;
that is, without belief in the same [Gleiches], that is, without this error, there
would be no pain in the world!" (KSA 9, 11[254]). What is this "same"? On
the one hand, it refers to the logic of incorporation, which is a making-equal
and identical (only in the inorganic world do we find an absence of error and
narrowness of perspective, KSA 12, 1 [105], WLN p.62). On the other hand,
it refers to the "play of life", the play of incorporated errors and the attempt to
incorporate truth and knowledge (which is to speak of a superior
incorporation). This is why, I think, Nietzsche says that that to endure the
thought of eternal recurrence one needs freedom from "morality" (Moral),
new means against the fact of pain, enjoyment of all kinds of uncertainty, and
experimentalism. It is the "greatest elevation (Erhöhung) of the consciousness
of strength (Kraft) of human beings" that comes into being as the over-human
is created (KSA 11, 26 [283]). In one note Nietzsche poses the question: "did
error originate as a property of being?" If this is the case, he says, then "to err
is continuous becoming and transformation?" (KSA 9, 11, 321). This
complicates our understanding of the presentation of eternal recurrence as a
doctrine of becoming, as when Nietzsche famously declares, "That everything
recurs is the closest approximation of a world of becoming to a world of
being" (KSA 12, 7 [54], WLN p.138). The way I read this is by interpreting
Nietzsche as saying that eternal recurrence is, in fact, a thought of 'being' (it
is an error), but as a thought of being (life) in its constant renewal and re-vision
it is a thought of 'becoming' (it names the becoming 'of' being caught up in
the play and contest of the powers of life). 
Nietzsche calls for a new justice (GS 382) that involves allowing for new
individualities and new experiments of life and at living. He insists that we
need "to grasp the necessary injustice in every For and Against ... life itself is
conditioned by the sense of perspective and its injustice" (HH preface). The
greatest injustice is to be found in a state "where life has developed at its
smallest, narrowest, neediest ..." If our desire is for "higher, greater, and
richer" life, then we can come to appreciate "how power and right and
spaciousness of perspective grow into the heights together". It is the uniquely
"personal" in each of us that has been most neglected (HH 95), and that now
83

needs discovering and inventing. To date the individual has been trained by its
educators as if it ought to become a mere repetition of a pre-existing norm or
concept and unlearn its newness (HH 228). In a note of 1880 Nietzsche signals
his intent to invert our ordinary conception of morality (as that which makes
us recognizable to others):
Should not each individual be an attempt to achieve a higher species than man through its most
individual things? My morality would be to take the general character of man more and more
away from him ... to make him to a degree non-understandable to others (and with it an object
of experiences, of astonishment, of instruction for them) (KSA 9, 6 [158]). 
As a doctrine of individuation, eternal recurrence aims to work as a culture
and technology, and is to be placed, then, in the service of cultivating new
individualities. As Karl Jaspers noted, like Kant's categorical imperative it is a
mere form capable of receiving a potentially limitless number of contents.41
Unlike Kant's practical rule - a rule of incorporation for Kant - Nietzsche's
new rule does not envisage our positing of it as an unattainable ideal that
supposes a radical split between autonomy (law) and heteronomy (desire or
inclination). For this reason, Nietzsche expects it to be practiced in terms other
than that of a sublimely cruel asceticism;42 the task of becoming the singular
one that one is, is an experimental one that needs to be focused on that which
has a nature and can be given a nature ("long live physics"). The new
imperative demands only this one thing: the need to impress or stamp the
image of eternity on our lives. For Nietzsche, it is not a matter of hoping for
"unknown felicities", abiding by an incomprehensible moral law whose
incomprehensibility is to be comprehended (D 142, GM III, 24), or of
"blessing and bestowals of grace"; rather, "we should live in such a way that
we want to live again and to live thus into eternity" (KSA 9, 11 [161]). 
Nietzsche stresses that it is a matter of our becoming well disposed towards
life and ourselves. When he says this he is, in fact, inviting us to freely
undertake a monstrous - and truthful - testing and recognition of ourselves. 
Conclusion
It has to be emphasized that nothing in Nietzsche refutes Husserl's
conception of the intentionality of consciousness.43 Rather, Nietzsche's
analysis of consciousness focuses on a specific set of questions and problems
which, taken together, constitute his attempt at a naturalistic purification and
reduction. Nietzsche approaches consciousness in the context of his
appreciation of the strange history of life and the evolution of the human
animal, as well as through the lens of the new 'gay' science and a reformed
genealogy of morality. It seems to me necessary to grasp the critical aspects
of Nietzsche's project. Nietzsche's project of a new incorporation has to be
understood in terms of its fundamental ambition: the critique of morality. It is
this critique that philosophy has found it hard to catch up with, let alone be
84

equal to (we should never pretend that this is easy). The attempt to do so is
what inspired Deleuze in Nietzsche and Philosophy to combat the
phenomenological appropriation of Nietzsche's work. On the very opening
page of the book Deleuze wrote:
... what has happened in modern philosophy is that the theory of values has given rise to a new
conformism and new forms of submission. Even the phenomenological apparatus has
contributed to placing the Nietzschean inspiration, which is often present in phenomenology,
at the service of modern conformism. 
In part, the work of both Nietzsche and Husserl responds to the problem of
individuation as defined by Leibniz.44 However, Nietzsche's stress on the new
law of individuality (GS 335, BGE 262) means that his theory of individuation
cannot establish itself on the basis of the personalistic consciousness of the
transcendental ego; it must seek a new and different personalism. Nietzsche
conceives the sovereignty of this ego as the fundamental goal of culture; the
superior culture of the future - the new life that is to come - will transcend
even this achievement of the human animal and give birth to radically new
individualities. 
Nietzsche cannot readily be enlisted for the phenomenological cause (in
Husserl's founding sense), in spite of some very fine efforts to do so.45
However, although a Nietzschean-inspired philosophy necessarily has specific
worries over phenomenology - for example, does it retain too much belief in
grammar? Does it still believe too much in 'morality'? Is it a genuinely
'critical'project? - it is evident that there are fundamental philosophical issues
and problems, such as incorporation and individuation, that both Nietzschean
philosophy and phenomenology concerns themselves with, and at a very deep
level. In large part it is the 'prejudices' of contemporary philosophy (our
prejudices), as well as the neglect of 'life' within philosophy, that stand in the
way of staging a dialogue between Nietzsche and developments in
phenomenology that has the potential to be genuinely productive, fruitful, and
full of surprises. When it comes to ourselves we 'knowers' are quite simply
unknown to ourselves. 
University of Warwick
References
1. Paul Ricœur, Husserl: An Analysis of His Phenomenology, trans. Edward G. Ballard &
Lester E. Embree. Evanston: Northwestern University Press 1967, p.29.
2. Edmund Husserl, Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology, trans. W. R. Boyce
Gibson. London: Allen & Unwin 1931, pp.44-5. 
3. On phenomenology's creation of concepts see ibid., p.27. 
4. Ibid., p.256. 
5. Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy
(Ideas 2), section 64, trans. R. Rojcewicz & A. Schuwer. Dordrecht: Kluwer 1989.
6. Ibid., section 55. 
7. I have used the following editions and translations of Nietzsche's work, often with
modifications: Beyond Good and Evil (BGE), trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Random
85

House 1966; Daybreak (D), trans. R. J. Hollingdale. Cambridge & New York: Cambridge
University Press 1982; The Gay Science (GS), trans. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Random
House 1974; Human, All too Human (two volumes) (HH), trans. R. J. Hollingdale.
Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press 1986; On the Genealogy of Morality
(GM), trans. Carol Diethe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (second, revised edition)
2006; Twilight of the Idols (TI), trans. Duncan Large. Oxford & New York: Oxford
University Press 1998; Writings from the Late Notebooks (WLN), ed. Rüdiger Bittner, trans.
Kate Sturge. Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press 2003. References to the
German are to the following edition: Sämtliche Werke. Kritische Studienausgabe, ed. Giorgio
Colli & Mazzino Montinari. Berlin & New York: Walter de Gruyter 1988. 
8. On phenomenology as a philosophy of life, see Renaud Barbaras, 'A Phenomenology of
Life', in Taylor Carmen & Mark B. N. Hansen (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to
Merleau-Ponty, Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press 2005, pp.206-31: "...
the question of life, the question concerning the status, the meaning of the being of life, as
that which comprises the natural and the transcendental, is the main question of
phenomenology" (p. 208). 
9. Husserl, Ideas 2, section 64. 
10. Ibid., section 34. 
11. Ibid., section 59. 
12. Nietzsche has something quite specific in mind when he analyses 'morality' and subjects it
to 'critique'. Simplifying somewhat, we can say that he is concerned with how the world
becomes subject to a 'metaphysics' of morality, a moralization, with the creation of a range
of fictitious entities and beings. Nietzsche understands ancient societies and prehistory (the
morality of custom, basic human animal psychology, and so on) as free of this moralization
which comes later with the advent of Christian culture, a culture that we moderns remain
very much in the grip of. A good example of his approach can be found in the analysis of
bad conscience and its fate (Verhängnis) conducted in the second essay of the Genealogy of
Morality. Nietzsche outlines a remarkable story about the origins and emergence of feelings
of responsibility and debt (personal obligation). He is concerned with nothing less than the
evolution of the human mind and how its basic ways of thinking have come into being, such
as inferring, calculating, weighing, and anticipating. Indeed, he points out that our word
"man" (manas) denotes a being that values, measures, and weighs. Already in The Wanderer
and His Shadow Nietzsche had noted: "Perhaps all the morality of mankind has its origin in
the tremendous inner excitement which seized on primeval men when they discovered
measure and measuring, scales and weighing (the word 'Mensch', indeed, means the
measurer, he desired to name himself after his great discovery!). With these conceptions they
climbed into realms that are quite unmeasurable and unweighable but originally did not seem
to be" (WS 21). Nietzsche is concerned with how a Christian-moral culture has cultivated a
type of bad conscience in which the feeling of debt can never be relieved. This is because it
becomes attached to a set of sublime metaphysical fictions, such as eternal punishment and
original sin, in which release is inconceivable. For Nietzsche, the sense of "guilt" has
evolved through several momentous and fateful events in history. In the earliest societies a
person is answerable for their deeds and there is an obligation to honouring debts. In the
course of history this material sense of obligation has been subject to increasing moralization
and reaches its summit with guilt before the Christian God. Now a person is answerable for
their very existence, regardless of any of its actual conditions. Nietzsche is keen to draw the
reader's attention to what he regards as an important historical insight: the principal moral
concept of "guilt" (Schuld) descends from the material concept of "debts" (Schulden). In this
sphere of legal obligations, he stresses, we find the breeding-ground of the "moral
conceptual world" of guilt, conscience, and duty (GM II, 6). See also D 78. "Morality" for
Nietzsche is that which involves the positing of imaginary causes and imaginary entities. 
13. Gilles Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy, trans. Hugh Tomlinson, London: Athlone Press
1983 p.3. 
86

14. The Nietzsche Reader, ed. Keith Ansell Pearson & Duncan Large, Malden MA & Oxford:
Basil Blackwell 2006, pp.238-9. 
15. Selected Letters of Friedrich Nietzsche, trans. and ed. Christopher Middleton, Indianapolis:
Hackett,1996, p.177. 
16. I have hitherto attempted to subject this sketch to a treatment in my contribution to Ansell
Pearson (ed.), A Nietzsche Companion (Oxford and Malden MA, Basil Blackwell 2006),
pp.230-50. I draw on some of this material in this contribution. 
17. Martin Heidegger, Nietzsche I, Pfullingen: Günther Neske,1961, p.332; Nietzsche. Volume
Two: The Eternal Recurrence of the Same, trans. David Farrell Krell, New York: Harper &
Row 1984, p.76. 
18. Nietzsche. Volume Two, p.75 note. 
19. Novalis, 'Miscellaneous Observations' 124 in Philosophical Writings, trans. Margaret
Mohoney Stoljar, Albany: SUNY Press 1997. 
20. Michel Foucault, The Hermeneutics of the Subject, trans. Graham Burchell, New York:
Palgrave Macmillan 2005. 
21. Martin Heidegger, 'Overcoming Metaphysics', section IX, in The End of Philosophy, trans.
Joan Stambaugh, Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2003, pp.84-110, pp.91-2. 
22. Foucault contrasts the ancients and the moderns, arguing that the oracular task of 'knowing
oneself' was not conceived as an epistemological task of abstract theoretical knowledge, but
rather as a care of the self in which the incorporation of discourses of the 'true' was directed
towards "preparation for life", that is, a statement or a discourse is not of value for its own
theoretical content, even when what is at stake is the theory of the world or the theory of the
subject. Here it is not a matter of learning the truth either about the world or about oneself,
but of assimilating, in the physiological sense of the term, discourses of the true that are aids
for confronting external events and internal passions. Foucault says that the point is not to
discover the truth of oneself, but rather of knowing with what true principles one is equipped,
to what extent one is in a position to have them available when necessary. This entails
disciplines of purification and transfiguration, involving techniques of meditation, uses of
memory and forgetting, and the examination of conscience - regards the latter, the task is not
to track down latent truths and buried secrets but to gauge how far one has got in one's
appropriation of truth as a principle of conduct. 
23. Jan Patocˇka, 'Phenomenology and Gnoseology' in Plato and Europe, trans. Petr Lom,
Stanford: Stanford University Press 2002, pp.38-51, pp.42ff. 
24. Heidegger, Nietzsche I, p.551; Nietzsche. Volume Three: The Will to Power as Truth and
Knowledge, trans. Joan Stambaugh, David Farrell Krell, Frank A. Capuzzi, San Francisco:
Harper & Row 1987, p.67. In Daybreak 550 Nietzsche suggests that in spite of the enormous
differences between them, both Plato and Aristotle took supreme happiness to reside in
knowledge (Erkennen), "in the activity of a well-trained and inquisitive mind" (as opposed
to finding it in visionary and mystical intuition). With his reference to the 'ancients'
Heidegger seems to have in mind pre-Platonic thinkers. 
25. In the sketch of 1881 Nietzsche uses the two main words in German for knowledge, Wissen
and Erkenntnis. Incorporating knowledge refers to Wissen, whilst the passion of knowledge
and the weightiest knowledge refer to Erkenntnis. Although there is a difference between
them as forms of knowing - Erkennen involves a process of coming to know, it is a form of
re-cognition or realization, as when we come to know a truth by knowing we have made an
error or were mistaken about something, whilst Wissen denotes epistemic certainty ('truth'
in this sense) - it is difficult to determine whether Nietzsche attaches any great significance
to this. In GS 11 he uses Wissen for incorporating knowledge, but in GS 110, entitled 'Origin
of Knowledge', the word he uses throughout in discussing this topic, including the forms of
knowledge humankind has incorporated to date, is Erkenntnis. 
26. John Richardson, Nietzsche's New Darwinism, Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press 2004, p.102. 
27. Heidegger, Nietzsche I, p.332; Nietzsche. Volume Two, p.76. 
87

28. Nietzsche is indebted to Schopenhauer for aspects of his appreciation of the evolution of
knowledge and his understanding of the chief function of the intellect (it is a tool of self-
preservation and self-enhancement, not something that can help us solve metaphysical
riddles). Schopenhauer does speak of the assimilation or incorporation of knowledge (The
World as Will and Representation II, chapter VII), but when he does so it is in the context of
distinguishing between intuitive perception (Anschauung), which is to be regarded as the
source of all knowledge (Erkenntnis) and the mode that is fully worthy of the name, and
which can be assimilated, and concepts which merely 'cling' to us. Nietzsche's question in
GS 110 leaves open what kind of knowledge and truth it is that we are now being asked and
challenged to incorporate and does not simply refer to or name the truth and knowledge
which we think we can assimilate or that we already know is possible for us to do so. In
short, his question is meant to work as a genuine question.
29. Heidegger, Nietzsche Seminare 1937 und 1944, Frankfurt am Main: Vittorio Klosterman
2004, p.28. 
30. Heidegger, Nietzsche I, p.359; Nietzsche: Volume Two, p.100. 
31. Ibid., p.331; p.75. 
32. Ibid., p.337; p.80. 
33. In a note of 1885-6 Nietzsche writes: " - all movements are to be taken as gestures, as a kind
of language through which the forces understand each other. In the inorganic world
misunderstanding is absent, and communication seems perfect. It's in the organic world that
error begins. 'Things', 'substances', 'qualities', 'activities'... They are the specific errors that
enable organisms to live. Problem of the possibility of 'error'? The opposition is not between
'false' and 'true' but between the 'abbreviation of signs' and the signs themselves..." For
further insight into this important aspect of Nietzsche's thinking, see Werner Stegmaier,
'Nietzsche's Doctrines, Nietzsche's Signs', Journal of Nietzsche Studies, 31, 2006, pp.20-42
(originally published in German in Nietzsche-Studien, Band 29, 2000, pp.41-70). 
34. A very good account of Nietzsche on consciousness, which helpfully distinguishes between
kinds or types of consciousness, is to be found in, Steven D. Hales & Rex Welshon,
Nietzsche's Perspectivism, Urbana & Chicago: University of Illinois Press 2000, pp.130-57,
especially pp.133ff. 
35. See Hales & Welshon, Nietzsche's Perspectivism, p.145. For instructive insights into the
issue of epiphenomenalism in Nietzsche see also, Paul Katsafanas, 'Nietzsche's Theory of
Mind: Consciousness and Conceptualisation', European Journal of Philosophy, 13: 1, 2005,
pp.1-32. 
36. Nietzsche identifies Saint Paul as the inventor of the original "thought of thoughts". See D
68, 72. 
37. For insight into the way in which Nietzsche legitimately holds conscious states to be
epiphenomenal, see Hales & Welshon, Nietzsche's Perspectivism, pp.145ff. They note that
for Nietzsche: "... psychological events, whether conscious or not, whether cognitive or not,
are all refined drives and affects, and drives and affects are causally efficacious" (p.148). 
38. I am grateful to Duncan Large for assisting me with the translation of this and other notes
from Nietzsche's notebooks used in this essay. 
39. For instructive insight into Nietzsche's relation to Kant on questions of probity and
sovereignty see Jean-Luc Nancy, '"Our Probity!" On Truth in the Moral Sense in Nietzsche',
in Laurence A. Rickels (ed.), Looking After Nietzsche, New York: SUNY Press 1990, pp.67-
89; and, Werner Hamacher, 'The Promise of Interpretation: Remarks on the Hermeneutic
Imperative in Kant and Nietzsche', in Premises: Essays on Philosophy and Literature from
Kant to Celan, trans. Peter Fenves, Stanford: Stanford University Press 1996, pp.81-143. 
40. I am unable to probe the nature and extent of Nietzsche's commitment to this issue in this
essay. For further insight see Hamacher, '"Disgregation of the Will": Nietzsche on the
Individual and Individuality' in his Premises, pp.143-81. 
41. Karl Jaspers, Nietzsche: An Introduction to his Philosophical Activity, trans. Charles F.
Wallraff and Frederick J. Schmitz, Chicago: Henry Regnery 1965, pp.359-60. The first
88

commentator to see a connection between the categorical imperative and Nietzsche's
articulation of eternal recurrence as an ethical maxim was Georg Simmel in his study
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche of 1907. Most contemporary readers of Nietzsche are perhaps
familiar with this way of approaching Nietzsche's thought from the way Deleuze construes
it in Nietzsche et la philosophie.
42. See Nietzsche, Daybreak 339, where he writes: "To demand that duty must always be
something of a burden - as Kant does - means to demand that it should never become habit
and custom: in this demand there is concealed a remnant of ascetic cruelty". It is not one of
my tasks in this essay to deliberate over the correctness or adequacy of Nietzsche's
interpretation of Kant.
43. For further insight here see Peter Pöllner, 'Phenomenology and Science in Nietzsche', in
Ansell Pearson (ed.), A Companion to Nietzsche, pp.297-314. 
44. For Husserl on the significance of Leibniz see Ideas 2 section 26 and, of course, the fifth
Cartesian Mediation. See also Ricoeur, Husserl, p.78. On Nietzsche's relation to Leibniz see
Hamacher, '"Disgregation of the Will"', pp.151 ff. 
45. Ricoeur, for example, suggests that Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morality - the text that many,
in the wake of Foucault's influential essay of 1971 'Nietzsche, Genealogy, History', regard
as an anti-phenomenological work - can be read as an exercise in a critical phenomenology:
"The Genealogy of Morals ... is a genuine phenomenology, at once reductive and genetic,
applied to the totality of moral phenomena...long before the Husserlian phenomenology
issued from the technique of reduction, the philosopher of 'suspicion'followed the path from
the derived to the originary. It matters little to us that he mixed in with this technique of truth
a dogmatism of instinct and an evolutionistic scientism which are antiquated today. It even
matters little that Nietzsche should have lost himself in his destructive passion... The genesis
of the spirit of humility from the will to power and the demonic form from the project of
saintliness are the most remarkable, and in certain respects the most frightening, examples,
of this critical phenomenology, a phenomenology noticeably more inclusive than the
phenomenology of cognition to which the greatest part of Husserl's work had to be limited",
Husserl, pp.207-8. 
89

