Shakespeare
ISSN: 1745-0918 (Print) 1745-0926 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rshk20
Shakespeare's Phenomenology of Time in Macbeth
Daniel Johnston
To cite this article: Daniel Johnston (2021) Shakespeare's Phenomenology of Time in Macbeth,
Shakespeare, 17:4, 379-399, DOI: 10.1080/17450918.2021.1965648
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17450918.2021.1965648
Published online: 25 Aug 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1674
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rshk20

Shakespeare's Phenomenology of Time in Macbeth
Daniel Johnston
Department of Theatre and Performance Studies, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
ABSTRACT
There is an essential 'doubleness' of time in Macbeth. The
witches play with equivocation and dissonance through
their foreshadowing of events while the ﬁctional world of
the drama folds into the early modern English stage in
performance. The future seeps into the present and past by
disrupting
the
structure
of
time
and
corrupting
the
protagonist's moral action and conscience. This article
investigates
Shakespeare's
phenomenology
of
time
in
Macbeth. As a philosophical lens, phenomenology rejects
the idea of time as a 'series of nows' and instead examines
the rich, lived experience of Being-in-the-world by 'letting
things show themselves in their manner of appearing'.
Drawing on phenomenology, Matthew Wagner outlines
several qualities of time in performance, including temporal
'thickness', 'dissonance' and 'materiality' that are explored
in this article. The character of Macbeth believes that he no
longer has freedom over his destiny and that his choices -
and more importantly, those of others - will ultimately have
no eﬀect. He is presented with possibilities for action in the
future, changing his relationship to others as he encounters
a crisis of authenticity: he resolutely seizes power, but he
fails to take temporality into account - or rather has it
handed over to him - thus making his present a kind of
past.
In
this
way,
Shakespeare
dramatises
Macbeth's
rejection of 'shared time', resulting in discord and duplicity,
enabling time to show itself from itself in performance.
KEYWORDS
Phenomenology; time;
Macbeth
Introduction
The elaborate 'initial' or 'drop cap' letter 'W' in the 1623 ﬁrst folio edition of
Macbeth epitomises the central motif of doubleness in the text. Two Vs are
intertwined, one on top of the other, with a ﬂourish of ﬁendish foliage
behind. The 'fogge and ﬁlthie ayre' described in the opening scene establish
an atmosphere for the strange and weird sisters to hover in performance
(either in the imagination or possibly even by stagecraft). A thrilling danger
would have been present for at least some early modern English audiences
who believed that even by imitating these evil spirits, real evil might appear
onstage as the ﬁction begins to take possession of reality. One double might
© 2021 Daniel Johnston
CONTACT Daniel Johnston
Daniel.Johnston@sydney.edu.au
SHAKESPEARE
2021, VOL. 17, NO. 4, 379-399
https://doi.org/10.1080/17450918.2021.1965648

seep into the other as the witches stir up dissonance and chaos over harmony
and balance: they disrupt the structure of temporality by allowing the future to
become entangled with the present and past. The witches' gathering may have
brought on 'ontological queasiness' in early modern English spectators in 1.1
partly because the scene repeats a disturbing event: the coven has met before
and will meet again (Barish 3). Such metaphysical nausea triggered by perform-
ance may challenge not only the stability of 'what is' and 'what is not' but also
the experience of time itself in 'what has been' and 'what is yet to be'. Each
meeting draws attention to the act of theatrical representation - bringing the
absent past and yet -to-come future into the present through embodied
action and physical materiality. The actors playing the witches on stage have
met before and will meet again. In this article, I suggest that Shakespeare's
text explores a phenomenology of time as 'shared time', allowing time to
show itself in performance by weaving the temporality of the ﬁctional world
into the theatrical experience.
Shakespeare's Sense of Time
Shakespeare paints a rich portrait of the Renaissance concept of time in his
works - with a sense of temporality very diﬀerent from today.1 Yet he also
seems to transcend his historical perspective, as Kevin Curran suggests:
Like all of Shakespeare's plays, Macbeth is a product of its time and has important
things to tell us about the religious, legal, political, and social topography of Renais-
sance England. But the portrayal of murder in the play shows us that Macbeth also
belongs to a history of ideas that extends far beyond the boundaries of early moder-
nity. (398)
The playwright seems to travel past contemporary social perspectives on tem-
porality in Macbeth while exploring both the internal and external experience of
time-consciousness more generally.2
There has been a considerable amount of scholarship examining time in
Shakespeare, especially from the 1970s onwards.3 Following Louisa Guj, Julia
Macdonald investigates three modes of temporality in Macbeth: 'sequential
time', 'cyclical time', and 'providential time' in both form and content.
Roughly, these are the linear experience of time; repeated patterns or events
1Tiﬀany Stern, for example, examines time through the material elements of temporality that inﬂect the meaning
of Shakespeare's texts including hourglasses, sundials, and early modern clocks. The instruments of chronology
in Jacobean England would have produced a very diﬀerent perception of time.
2This thought follows from Lauren Shohet who suggests that '[a]gainst the challenges of interiority and potential
solipsism, staging temporality can make subjective time available for shared consideration' (3).
3For example, see David Kastan's Shakespeare and the Shapes of Time; Wylie Sypher's, The Ethic of Time: Structures
of Experience in Shakespeare; and Gary Waller's The Strong Necessity of Time: The Philosophy of Time in Shakes-
peare and Elizabethan Literature. For an overview of the scholarship on Shakespeare, time and temporality, see
Sarah Lewis's 'Shakespeare, Time, Theory'.
380
D. JOHNSTON

in time; and transcendent or eternal time.4 Achtner, Kunz, and Walter argue
that there is an interlacing of three modes of self, other, and eternity concerning
time while suggesting that Shakespeare's tragedies investigate temporality as the
sensuous responsiveness to the right moment (167). More broadly in 'Views of
Time in Shakespeare', Ricardo Quinones suggests that meaningful action con-
cerning time and historical values based on nationhood, marriage, children,
and fame emerged in the Renaissance.5 Quinones also identiﬁes three
diﬀerent aspects of temporality in Shakespeare: 'augmentative time', 'con-
tracted time' and 'extended time'. Roughly, these equate to the ﬁght against
time (such as extending one's life through one's children); the futility of resist-
ing time's unstoppable march; and the harmonisation of action and
inevitability.
Macbeth is also the product of a shift in religious and political values at the
beginning of the seventeenth century. Donald W. Foster argues that Macbeth rep-
resents the playwright's victory over recorded time because his plays endured for
so long. Time is a tyrant - as Macbeth comes to be by the end of the play.6
Phenomenology and Shared Time
Phenomenology - a philosophical movement that emerged at the beginning of
the twentieth century - is guided by Edmund Husserl's catch-cry: 'return to the
things themselves!' (i.e., rather than rely on theoretical abstraction) (168).
Husserl refused to accept unchallenged dogma or blind tradition as simply
given and aimed to base philosophical description on experience. Phenomen-
ology is an account of the way that the world appears in all its rich lived experi-
ences. From this perspective, time is not a series of 'nows' that discretely pass -
one after the other. Husserl borrowed from Henri Bergson who suggested that
temporality does not comprise a set of ﬁxed moments experienced in sequence.
Nor is it possible to conceive of an experience of time separate from the world
in which we live and the activities that we undertake. Rather, we experience
time in terms of the tasks, matters, and business that we undertake in life
with the result that our perception of time can be stretched out or slowed
4Macdonald suggests that diﬀerent characters encapsulate diﬀerent forms of time in the play: Macbeth's time is
linear, Duncan and his heirs' is cyclical, and Malcolm's is providential. She also notes Frederick Turner's explora-
tion of temporality in terms of 'human moral purposes' set against the entropic and deterministic 'physical
time'. McDonald identiﬁes 'tempestive events' as 'psychological weather' central to Shakespeare's depiction
of time in the drama, perhaps eliding 'tempus' and 'tempestas' (Stern 6). Peter Moore investigates religion
and time, together with English Epicureanism, its rejection of soothsaying and omens, and yearning for crea-
ture-comforts in campaigns of war.
5In a similar vein, Agnes Heller suggests that Shakespeare's understanding of time represents a transition from
Renaissance and modern conceptions and marks a shift from mythical time to historical time - eternal to lived
transience and ﬁxed ﬁnitude (373).
6Foster suggests that the 'end of expectation' for Macbeth (the character) is what drives the play in that truth
never arrives in the ﬁctional world depicted. According to Foster, the plot ending is not as reassuring as we
might think since Scotland still has a troubled history ahead. He notes Malcolm's ﬁnal monologue in which
'the grace of Grace' has both theological signiﬁcance and points to the contemporary Stuart monarch,
James I. 'Grace' is also what Macbeth refused to accept.
SHAKESPEARE
381

down. As such, we encounter the past in the present as well as the future,
depending on our disposition at any given moment (in 'thick time').
Martin Heidegger - Husserl's student - is the phenomenologist most closely
associated with the philosophy of time (which forms the central theme of his
magnum opus, Being and Time). Heidegger claims that we have misunderstood
what 'Being' (Sein) is: it is not a 'thing' to be apprehended separately from enti-
ties in the world. On the contrary, Being can only be apprehended by a special
kind of entity that can inquire into itself: Dasein ('being there'). Yet most of the
time, we go about our daily business, forgetful of Being (generally) and our own
being (speciﬁcally). Similarly, time is never experienced primarily in and of
itself as a 'thing', an object, or an exterior measure of the clock, but rather
only ever in the context of Being-in-the-world. In a phenomenological sense,
temporality is that which allows speciﬁc beings to experience time. However,
one can apprehend both one's own being and time 'authentically' by choosing
from available possibilities at any given moment rather than shrinking back and
having our choices handed over to us by the world. 'Authentic resoluteness' (in
Heidegger's view) is a truthful response to being by owning one's existential
situation honestly and seizing one's choices within one's ﬁnite existence. Auth-
enticity is entwined with temporality because it entails facing up to the fact that
one's own time will end - and that this may well be at any moment. This
ﬁnitude of temporality gives meaning to each moment.
Previous studies have also drawn on phenomenology to understand tempor-
ality in Shakespeare. Susan Sachon, for example, conducts a broad investigation
of phenomenology and materiality in Shakespeare's texts through various case
studies, including Macbeth. She notes how an onlooker perceiving materiality
onstage is aﬀected by language and dialogue in the text. These elements alter
the perceptual experience itself by a process of 'blending'. She explores how
rhythm, sound, and linguistic texture create an atmosphere and mood that
ﬁlters objects and bodies perceived by the audience. In similar approach to
Marguerite Tassi, Sachon notes the creative interplay between the visible and
the invisible in phenomenological terms. Both point towards the holistic
context of Being-in-the-world in theatrical representation and perception.
In 'Tragedy and Temporality', Rebecca Bushnell examines the idea of 'folded
time' where the past presses into the present, following Michael Serres and
Edmund Husserl's 'thick time' which can be experienced in objects that draw
in both the past and future:
While tragedy thus evokes the anxiety of experiencing an onrushing present, one can
say that we are anxious precisely because that present embeds both the weight of the
past and the future it brings into being. (784)
For Bushnell, time is the object of a struggle of mastery in tragedy and this
can be experienced in diﬀerent ways in diﬀerent media: text, performance, and
382
D. JOHNSTON

ﬁlm.7 In Tragic Time in Drama, Film, and Videogames, Bushnell further
explores the construction of narrative in limiting choice in time for character
and consequences, including the experience of the viewer / player, to keep pos-
sibilities in the past tense, thereby exposing the temporal structure of tragic fate
with speciﬁc examples from Macbeth.
Focusing on time in performance, Matthew Wagner notes how the stage is a
nodal point for this duality:
The time of the theatre, in other words, is an anchor for the time of the character, and
it is the material, experiential buoy for the concepts or views of time that may emerge
in the staging of a play. (3)
Wagner examines theatricality and performance more broadly in Shakespeare's
representation of time. He argues that in order to understand time in Shakes-
peare, one needs to take performance into account rather than simply approach
his plays as literary texts. Wagner notes how the open stage never truly disappears
for the audience and performers (6). Indeed, metatheatrical references through-
out Macbeth constantly draw attention to a disjunction between the ﬁctional
world of the play and the presentation of performance. This disjunction is charac-
teristic of The Globe itself as a performance venue that can play with diﬀerent
layers of reality. Wagner further examines three aspects in Shakespeare's plays:
Accordingly, three temporal phenomena dominate the book—temporal dissonance, or
as Hamlet puts it so succinctly, time which is 'out of joint' (I.v.189); temporal 'thick-
ness', or that understanding of the present as being heavily weighted by the past and
the future; and temporal materiality, the sense, especially prominent in Elizabethan
England, of time being material, having a bodily presence in varying forms. (2)
'Temporal thickness' in this sense describes not only the past and future of the
character in the ﬁctional world but also the actor in performance viewed by the
audience. Our concept of collective time is imbued with nature, sensation, skill,
ﬁnitude, and debt. Time is palpable.
One way of drawing together diﬀerent phenomenological aspects of time in
Macbeth - as I attempt to here - is to explore the 'shared time' of characters,
actors, and audiences. In phenomenological terms, 'shared time' indicates an
intersubjective temporality within which humans exist which is fundamental
to being-with one another and collective cognition (Pokropski). The term
brings together the subjective, existential, and relational experiences of time
in terms of authentic being with others. In the ﬁctional world, Macbeth
appears to reject shared time when he decides that his actions have been pre-
ordained, although undertaken freely. The belief has a parallel in the tempor-
ality of the 'real' presentational space that is ﬁxed by the playwright but
7Bushnell sketches an essential link between tragedy as a genre and time as 'now' (following Northrop Frye)
because tragic protagonists suﬀer and move towards catastrophe without the hope of future. Tragedy is a
'present without a time to come', a state that induces anxiety and horror.
SHAKESPEARE
383

experienced for the ﬁrst time by characters within the ﬁction and ﬁrst-time
audience members looking on. Macbeth retreats 'inwards' throughout the
action and refuses to share his time with others, whereas the role can also
reach 'outwards' to materialise the subjective experience in the act of creative
communication. He fails to apprehend his being and time authentically
because he holds the false belief that his continued grasp on power is certain.
From this point, I will explore how Macbeth presents a phenomenology of
time, made visible by the shared experience of performance.8 Shakespeare
introduces a range of metaphors for time including organic growth (nature);
volume (chronicle); mastering time (skill); the end of time (ﬁnitude and
meaning), and time's reckoning (a moral economy). While modern adaptations
and productions might bring out diﬀerent experiences of time with diﬀerent
historical contexts and staging conventions, the text itself has an embedded
theatrical sense of temporality. This sequential analysis highlights the increas-
ing pace of internal time consciousness represented externally in Macbeth and
its eﬀect on the spectator's experience of time.
The Seeds of Time
The text of Macbeth (from the First Folio - with no other contemporary Quarto
version extant) is remarkably economical and quick-paced in performance.9 It
embraces time as an explicit theme, with more than 59 direct references to the
word.10 Signiﬁcantly, the text begins with a question of time as one witch asks,
'When shall we three meet again?'.11 In fact, each of the ﬁve acts begins with a
reference to time in one form or another. The insinuation is that these three
witches have met before and that there is a pattern and iteration in their
coming together.12 The storm's approaching tempest is either caused by
these three weird sisters or perhaps forms an atmospheric cover to conceal
their actions, allowing them to contrive and consort. The three sisters will
meet after the sun has set, out on the heath - a marginal, vacant, uninhabited
space away from the prying eyes of the castle.13
The incantation, 'Fair is foul and foul is fair', signals doubleness from the
play's opening: that which we see as fair has turned into its opposite or that
8For further exploration of phenomenology in relation to theatre, see Daniel Johnston, Phenomenology for Actors:
Theatre-Making and the Question of Being; Theatre and Phenomenology: Manual Philosophy; 'Toward A Workshop
in Theatre Phenomenology'; and ''Theatre Phenomenology' and Ibsen's The Master Builder'.
9Howard Marchitello draws on Paul Virilio's theory to analyse the speed of the play itself, noting critical obser-
vations of the frenetic pace of the text. He suggests that the compressed temporality of the present and
future creates a new 'now' in the text, together with the specter of the past in a 'nihilism of pure nothingness'
(448).
10Frank Kermode notes that Macbeth has the highest frequency of the word time in any of Shakespeare's works.
11See Donald Foster 322.
12For a discussion of inverted causality in Macbeth, see Brian Richardson.
13Signiﬁcantly, time was diﬃcult to tell reliably at night and in thick fog in early modern England because a
sundial can't function and other instruments such as hourglasses and clocks are unreliable and diﬃcult to syn-
chronise with the hours of the day (Stern).
384
D. JOHNSTON

value is purely perspectival. For the evildoer, good things are evil.14 The idea of
various states aﬀecting perception returns later when Macbeth refers to the
intoxicated guards outside the king's door. Lady Macbeth comments on the
dual eﬀect before the king's murder: 'That which hath made them drunk
hath made me bold; What hath quench'd them hath given me ﬁre' (2.2.47-
48). In part, truth-seeking with respect to time is in recognising the right
action at the right time and reading the environment in the context of
present events.
Yet as the spectator soon discovers, there are moments when the truth erupts
and shows itself inadvertently regardless of the character's intention. Upon ﬁrst
hearing the witches' prophecies, Banquo remarks upon Macbeth's countenance:
Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair? I' the name of truth,
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly ye show? (1.3.152-55)
This is one of the multiple references in the text to Macbeth's face betraying his
inward emotion at the wrong time.15 The actors playing these women were not
women at all (in Jacobean performance), thus marking metatheatricality:
Macbeth himself draws attention to the actor/character incongruity in perform-
ance when he notes the three sisters' beards. As we come to see, Shakespeare
frequently returns to the idea of suiting one's actions and appearances to the
time - which is also crucial to performance.16
There are other moments in Macbeth where time seemingly stands still
through the description in the dialogue. In 1.2, for example, we are rapidly
ﬂung into the main action of the play as a bloody sergeant appears to report
back on the conﬂict he has been ﬁghting as part of the king's forces against
the rebellious Macdonald. In his account of the battle, it is as though time is
suspended as Macbeth is ﬁrst mentioned: 'Doubtful it stood; / As two spent
swimmers, that do cling together /And choke their art' (1.2.26-28). From the
spectator's perspective, the two imagined combatants are frozen in the
moment - as if in some painted classical depiction of heroic battle. According
to the sergeant, it seemed in battle as though everything had been against
Macbeth with the swarming rebels approaching, yet 'disdaining fortune', he
fought his way through the forces and vanquished the treasonous enemy
'smoked with bloody execution'. Mixed in with this poetic rendering of
14Such a notion of seeing truth and the right thing to do, echoing Aristotle's view in his ethics that only the vir-
tuous person is able to discern what is good through a balanced practical knowledge of appropriate reaction to
a situation (McDonald).
15Of course, for the Puritans - who despised all forms of play and deception as evil duplicity, including the
wearing of make-up (which would make foul skin seem fair, for example) - all theatrical entertainments are
guilty of sin, deception, and falsehood. It is doubtful, however, that this is an example of what J.L Austin
calls an 'infelicitous speech act' because the spectator is 'in on the game' of performance.
16The thought mirrors the task of the actor, of course, as Hamlet puts it: 'suit the action to the word, the word to
the action' (3.2).
SHAKESPEARE
385

kairos (the subjective experience of time) and chronos (processual, sequential,
and objective time) - the tenuous balance of the combat doubles with the
experience of the Scottish King's soldiers watching on with bated breath - mir-
rored by the audience watching the play (Baumlin and Baumlin; also see Sachon
67-69). According to the Messenger's report in 1.2, Macbeth seized his oppor-
tunity in the battle through bravery and determination. Even still, such heroism
becomes relative to the time (as is signalled later in the text) when we ﬁnd that
murder during a war is the mark of a hero, while the same in peace against the
king is treachery: the same act is a double in altered context since the right
moment needs to be suited to the right action. After the sergeant has recounted
these deeds, he goes on to describe how the battle turned as he was departing:
Norway gained the upper hand, leaving Macbeth's fate doubtful once again.
Only upon Ross' arrival does the audience discover Duncan's forces have
been victorious and the King quickly bestows the title of Thane of Cawdor
on the valiant Macbeth: the vital piece of information that the protagonist is
yet to know.
The perceived instability in time ripples in performance with the recurring
imagery of the sea with its shifting fortunes and futures - connected themati-
cally to the storm in the opening of the play. In 1.3, when the witches meet
with the future king, nothing is ﬁxed, and everything is in motion as this
ﬂuidity seems to reﬂect something about the way that we experience time,
especially in moments of crisis.17 If the sea represents chaos and instability,
Shakespeare also draws in metaphors from natural (or unnatural) growth in
time is indicated in the atmosphere in this scene: on such a foul day as they
have never seen before, Macbeth and Banquo encounter the witches '[s]o
wither'd and so wild in their attire,/ That look not like the inhabitants o' the
earth,/ And yet are on't (1.3.140-42)'.18 Macbeth is not even sure if these crea-
tures will be able to speak yet is astounded when they proclaim him Thane of
Glamis, Cawdor, and future king. In a precise philosophy of time, Banquo
entreats the sisters:
If you can look into the seeds of time,
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favours nor your hate (1.3.159-62).
Banquo is not seduced by the implications of the prophecy as Macbeth, at least
initially. In the following scene, the King laments the deceptive Cawdor who has
just been executed after admitting to his disloyalty and throws his favour to
Macbeth for whom he feels indebted, saying, 'I have begun to plant thee, and
17Indeed, such an instability in time inﬂects our judgement of action and events - perhaps echoing the ancient
Greek historian Herodotus' warning, 'count no man happy until the end is known'. The situation of the present
changes in relation to the occurring events of the future.
18Again, it is noteworthy that many audience members standing in the yard may well have been sailors with an
intimate knowledge of the sea, thus bringing signiﬁcance to the metaphor.
386
D. JOHNSTON

will labour / To make thee full of growing' (1.4.308-9). The seeds of time are
here sown by the King in reward for loyalty. Duncan embraces Banquo too,
who replies, 'There if I grow, / The harvest is your own' (1.4.313-14). For
the ﬁrst time, Macbeth articulates his wish (in an aside) to overleap the
newly named Prince of Cumberland (Malcolm, the King's son), hoping that
light will not shine on his true desires and noting the connection between
the eye and the hand in carrying out dreadful deeds.
A mixture of past and future frames the ﬁrst appearance of Lady Macbeth as
she reads her husband's letter - reviewing what the audience already knows to
this point. She describes Macbeth's meeting with the witches and their predic-
tions, referring him 'to the coming on of time, with "Hail, king that / shalt be!"'
The text of the letter itself is an account for the audience of events that have
already taken place but also signals to the future and a shared promise with
its author's wife. Lady Macbeth explicitly notes the temporal signiﬁcance of
the communication: 'Thy letters have transported me beyond / This ignorant
present, and I feel now / The future in the instant' (1.5, 54-56). The scene
has a textual double later in the play in the 'Sleepwalking Scene' where the
past catches up with her. For now, Lady Macbeth fears that the 'milk of
human kindness' in her husband will hinder action towards his ambition,
but at this point, she learns that the King is on his way and fate seems to indicate
that this is their opportunity to grab the throne. She greets Macbeth and
immediately proposes that the King will not see tomorrow. Again, his face
must here betray fear at the thought like a book's cover, while his wife
demands his mastery of emotional appearance to suit the occasion:
To beguile the time,
Look like the time; bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent ﬂower,
But be the serpent under't (1.5.418-21).
The burden of deception in this case entails displaying kindness and love out-
wardly while planning evil - like a snake hidden - to play against present
circumstances.
When Duncan arrives, we hear that it is warm in this pleasant location and
even nature and the air around seem sweet, as Lady Macbeth greets him. After a
banquet is laid out on the stage, and in contrast to this present setting, Macbeth
reﬂects on his wish for swiftness in time in his monologue:
If it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well
It were done quickly: if the assassination
Could trammel up the consequence, and catch
With his surcease success; that but this blow
Might be the be-all and the end-all here,
But here, upon this bank and shoal of time,
We'ld jump the life to come (1.7.474-80).
SHAKESPEARE
387

What Macbeth fears most is the sequence of action, responsibility, and con-
sequence in his murder plan. He realises that this is not merely objective time
passing, but rather time relative to his own moral experience of action and
ethical behaviour. The future king hopes to jump over time in this next step
to the enjoyment of his riches and desires the outcome without the action in
a kind of deliberate forgetting.19
After wavering in his conversation with Lady Macbeth, she presses back,
making her respect contingent upon his actions at this moment: 'From this
time / Such I account thy love'. Macbeth regains his composure and resolve,
accepting that he must suppress his inner motives and control his outward
appearance once more:
I am settled, and bend up
Each corporal agent to this terrible feat.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show:
False face must hide what the false heart doth know. (1.7.563-66)
The Volume of Time
As Act II begins, time is signalled for the spectator when Banquo asks, 'How
goes the night, boy?'20 The moon has set (presumably meaning that the night
is even darker) and it is the witching hour (having gone past twelve). Banquo
has dreamt of the strange sisters and their prophecies, although Macbeth
puts this conversation oﬀfor another time. In the 'dagger' soliloquy that
follows, a similar 'dreamlike' experience of temporal thickness is signalled as
the future seeps into the present for the onlooker and Macbeth is ushered
onwards by a knife which is mentioned but not seen (i.e., the object of percep-
tion is not material). Future time is impinging on the present by drawing him
forward as he doubts even his senses. Macbeth here fears the ﬁrmness of the
earth as it might betray his actions with the sounds of his footsteps:
Thou sure and ﬁrm-set earth,
Hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear
Thy very stones prate of my whereabout,
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now suits with it (2.1.635-39).
This temporal atmosphere now matches the terrifying deeds, yet he hopes
not to be reminded of his presence in this space and claims that silence suits
the horror.
19'[T]his bank and shaol of time' might include a gesture by the actor to the stage, drawing attention to the
playing out of the action.
20Again, this is an example of 'nomination' as discussed in dramaturgical terms by Fitzpatrick - establishing the
setting and time through dialogue. Echoing the opening of Hamlet, in this scene, two characters meet upon
entering, in a tense atmosphere in the middle of the night where they cannot see each other (as Macbeth
comes on in this case).
388
D. JOHNSTON

When the murder is ﬁnally committed in 2.2, again questions of time and
timing are foregrounded when Macbeth believes he hears a voice. The
inward experience of guilt is externalised as he and his wife are unsure as to
whether they truly hear sounds around them and the jagged monosyllabic
exchange at points (as in the rapid-ﬁre 'when?'/ 'now' sequence in the scene).
The audience is also unsure as to whether the noises are real or imagined
and Macbeth begins to ruminate on his actions, while his wife urges him not
to think of them after for fear of madness - something like an echo in the per-
formance space. The dreamlike action ironically signals an end to Macbeth's
sleep from this point on after he claims to have heard a voice saying, 'sleep
no more!' The fact that the audience does not hear this brings his internal
mental state outwards. And yet, when Macbeth returns with the daggers that
he should have planted to incriminate the murdered guards, he follows
through with his promise not to think any more about his deeds, thus requiring
Lady Macbeth to take the bloodied instruments and complete the task. The
daggers that led Macbeth to the brink of action, appear stained once used in
murder, and remain haunting after with the blood they left. The interplay
between the daggers being shown and not shown (in Macbeth's monologue
and their later appearance onstage) encourages the audience to doubt their
own sense of sight in this twisted ﬁctional world. A knocking at the south
entrance brings fear: the sea is now represented in their blood-smeared
hands, turning entire bodies of water red in an attempt to wash them ('The mul-
titudinous seas in incarnadine, / Making the green one red') (2.2.726-27). This
frozen moment haunts the rest of the action. By contrast, the Porter scene that
follows borrows its comedy from the slowness of response in answering the
urgent knocking at the gate: the Porter's humour is out of joint with the time.21
When MacDuﬀreturns to announce the discovered regicide, the bells ring to
sound an alarm (again embodying the materiality of time and its dissonant
horror), as Macbeth realises that the moment of his innocence has now passed:
Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had lived a blessed time; for, from this instant,
There's nothing serious in mortality:
All is but toys: renown and grace is dead;
The wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees
Is left this vault to brag of (2.3.874-79).
Outside the castle, Ross talks to an Old Man who comments:
Threescore and ten I can remember well:
Within the volume of which time I have seen
21It is possible that the actor playing the Porter may have been the same as he who played Duncan with the eﬀect
that the audience may well have been uncertain whether they were seeing the ghost of the murdered king at
the beginning of 2.3. The brief moment of uncertainty reinforces the doubt in one's senses that the spectator
experiences in the preceding scene.
SHAKESPEARE
389

Hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night
Hath triﬂed former knowings (2.4.948-51).
It is telling that the man refers to 'time' in terms of 'volume' at this point. The late
middle English meaning of 'volume' was a roll of written parchment or book.
Volume in this sense contains the wealth of experiences that the man has witnessed
in his seventy years, forming the storehouse of his memory. To the modern ear,
volume might also echo the geometric volume of an hourglass that empties sand
from one side into the other, with the inevitable gravitational pull that draws
time on with an implacable necessity. Yet again, volume in a sense indicates the
intensity of a sound's perception and it is this harrowing night that is 'sore'.22
In reply, Ross draws attention to the doubleness of the stage and its duality in
time:
Thou seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act,
Threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, 'tis day,
And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp:
Is't night's predominance, or the day's shame,
That darkness does the face of earth entomb,
When living light should kiss it? (2.4.953-58).
On the one hand, he draws attention to the brightness of the day in the open-air
theatre in which the performance is taking place and the painted heavens of the
canopy above the Globe stage as mentioned above. On the other hand, the
ﬁctional action of the scene takes place at night as darkness buries the earth
and even animals begin to behave unnaturally - highlighting the dissonance
between the ﬁctional and material worlds. Characters in the scene might well
carry a lamp demonstrating the point - signalling the temporal 'materiality'
of the moment.
Let Every Man Be Master of His Time
Time is again invoked at the beginning of Act III when Banquo muses on the
witches' prophecies:
Thou hast it now: king, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
As the weird women promised, and, I fear,
Thou play'dst most foully for't: yet it was said
It should not stand in thy posterity,
But that myself should be the root and father
Of many kings (3.1.1002-7).
While he marvels at the fortunes of his friend, Banquo also suppresses hopes
that his own children's fortunes might also be fulﬁlled. A twisted temporality
22The metaphor of a volume draws attention to the pre-ordained order of the theatrical action itself - and
perhaps even the historical record of the historical Macbeth from Holinshed's chronicles.
390
D. JOHNSTON

is signalled in the fulﬁlment of the witches' words as the seeds of time ﬁnd their
form. What is missing from Banquo's understanding is how what is yet to come
will play out. When Macbeth and Lady Macbeth enter to greet him as their
'chief guest', Banquo says that he must go but will be back sometime in the
evening, as he is to ride:
As far, my lord, as will ﬁll up the time
'Twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night
For a dark hour or twain (3.1.1030-33).
In this speech, time is expressed in terms of action and human activities -
journey and meals - forms of everyday involvement rather than the objective
time of clocks - which ﬁnds a modern corollary in Bergson's theory of time.
In this case, night becomes an object to be borrowed as if it were a commodity.
Banquo takes his leave of Macbeth: 'Ay, my good lord: our time does call
upon's'. Indeed, his time does call. And Macbeth wishes him well:
Let every man be master of his time
Till seven at night: to make society
The sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
Till supper-time alone: while then, God be with you! (3.1.1046-50)
This sense of time rests in freedom and control, as time is something to be ruled
over and mastered. Macbeth vows to remain alone in waiting for the return of
his friend so that his arrival will be all the sweeter in contrast. There is, of
course, duplicity in this blessing. Immediately, he goes back on his word, as
an attendant announces the arrival of men we subsequently ﬁnd are commis-
sioned murderers, as Macbeth expresses his fears about the threat from 'the
seed of Banquo kings'. In addressing the pair, he reminds them of 'the times
past which held you / So under fortune'. Macbeth is drawing upon time past
for their loyalty when they thought that he was a good and innocent master.
Here he declares of Banquo '[t]hat every minute of his being thrusts /
Against my near'st of life'. He lends urgency to his instructions to the killers
as he pushes them on to their deed:
Your spirits shine through you. Within this hour at most
I will advise you where to plant yourselves;
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time,
The moment on't; for't must be done to-night,
And something from the palace (3.1.1150-53)
Shakespeare articulates the right action for the right time once more here, but
this time for ill deeds in 'this dark hour'. Alluding to providential time, Macbeth
vows that Banquo's soul must ﬁnd heaven tonight. In the following scene, Lady
Macbeth urges her husband to steel himself and be bright and jovial amongst
his guests at the banquet that night (again, out of joint with the dark events
SHAKESPEARE
391

that are unfolding at that time). The murderers await their moment and oppor-
tunity at twilight which '[n]ow spurs the lated traveller [i.e., Banquo] apace / To
gain the timely inn' (3.3.1241-42).
In the 'Banquet Scene', Macbeth bids his guest welcome and invites his wife
'in best time' to welcome as she 'keeps her state'. The First Murderer appears at
the door and gives the news of Banquo's death and Fleance's escape. The new
king berates his fortune but sees no immediate threat: 'There the grown serpent
lies; the worm that's ﬂed / Hath nature that in time will venom breed, / No teeth
for the present' (3.4.1306-8). Immediately upon returning to the feast, he sees
the ghost of his slain friend sitting in his place. Again, it is as if time has stood
still at this moment when Lady Macbeth comments, 'This is the very painting of
your fear' (3.4.1348). The appearance of Banquo's ghost is the paradigm of past
folding into the present, making Macbeth's internal fears exterior:
Blood hath been shed ere now, i' the olden time,
Ere human statute purged the gentle weal;
Ay, and since too, murders have been perform'd
Too terrible for the ear: the times have been,
That, when the brains were out, the man would die,
And there an end; but now they rise again,
With twenty mortal murders on their crowns,
And push us from our stools: this is more strange
Than such a murder is (3.4.1366-74).
These strange present times have seemingly caused nature to turn on its head
such that those with their brains dashed out rise again to attend the company of
the court, possibly alluding to the days of the Final Judgement in eschatological
time in 'the rapture', as Marguerite Tassi suggests.23 Upon the third appearance
of the ghost, the guests make a hasty exit to allow the King to recover as the
night is coming to an end 'Almost at odds with morning, which is which',
once more expressing the doubleness of the presentational space in the scene.
'Tis Time
As Act IV begins, the witches add their grizzly ingredients to the boiling caul-
dron (although it is widely held that parts of this scene were revised and interp-
olated by Thomas Middleton). They claim that a harpy (possibly referring to
Hecate) calls, "'tis time, 'tis time" as they commence their incantation. Again,
the spell references the 'double' - a refrain that returns three times (as the
ghost of Banquo did in the previous act). The witches announce the arrival
of Macbeth as 'something wicked' and to 'Open, locks, whoever knocks'. This
time it is the new king at the door - possibly in a parallel to the Porter
23In a similar way, Macdonald also investigates the notion of 'spectre' visiting from the past, drawing on Derrida
(83).
392
D. JOHNSTON

scene, emphasising spatial patterns in performance with repeated temporal
meaning. Macbeth describes the frightening tempest that has arisen once
again with waves that '[c]onfound and swallow navigation up' as he is meta-
phorically lost at sea. At this moment, the future invades the present: there is
an apparition of an armed head that commands that Macbeth beware
Macduﬀand then descends beneath the stage. A second apparition - a
bloody child - prophesies that 'none of woman born shall harm Macbeth'
and then goes down. The third vision is a child wearing a crown and with a
tree in its hand, predicting that Macbeth's downfall will not happen until
Birnam Wood comes against Dunsinane Hill. Eight kings parade across the
stage, the last of which has a mirror, followed by Banquo. The witches vanish
and Macbeth cries, 'Let this pernicious hour / Stand aye accursed in the calen-
dar!' This is a historical event to be remembered for all time in the future.24
Soon after, Lennox arrives to relate that MacDuﬀhas ﬂed to England, where-
upon Macbeth exclaims,
Time, thou anticipatest my dread exploits:
The ﬂighty purpose never is o'ertook
Unless the deed go with it; from this moment
The very ﬁrstlings of my heart shall be
The ﬁrstlings of my hand (4.1.1724-28).
Time is always a step ahead of Macbeth as he begins to feel boxed in. He
launches into evil from this point, vowing to kill MacDuﬀ's wife and children,
leaving no separation between thought and deed.
When Ross arrives, he bears the bad news: 'That of an hour's age doth hiss
the speaker: / Each minute teems a new one' (4.3.2044-45). He withholds expli-
cit articulation of the news in his disbelief: 'Time is hissing and teeming'.
Macbeth is now unmasked as a tyrant and Malcolm urges MacDuﬀto use
this as 'the whetstone of your sword'. The aggrieved man hopes that time
will rush on quickly so that he might be satisﬁed: 'Cut short all intermission;
front to front / Bring thou this ﬁend of Scotland and myself'. The hope is
that Macbeth's time will soon come to an end: 'Receive what cheer you may:
/The night is long that never ﬁnds the day' (4.32124-25). The rapidly approach-
ing end of the performance is signalled to the audience.
Time's Reckoning
In Act V, we witness the sleepwalking Lady Macbeth who lays out a psychologi-
cal and temporal dreamscape of guilt that refuses to cleanse the blood on her
hands. The temporality that she had refused to share with others has begun
to seep out in her unconscious actions. The Doctor has not yet witnessed the
24For a discussion of this sequence regarding temporality, see Bushnell's Tragic Time in Drama, Film and Video-
games, 14.
SHAKESPEARE
393

Queen's somnambulance, as he issues doubts: 'I have two nights watched with
you, but can perceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?
(5.1.2128-29)' The Gentlewoman indicates that Macbeth has gone out to
battle while his wife has been rising while still asleep each night, writing on a
piece of paper, and returning to bed. During these episodes she speaks,
although of what, the Gentlewoman is reticent to say. Lady Macbeth's eyes
are open, yet she cannot see what is in front of her - another doubleness of
her consciousness. At this point, she speaks the famous 'Out, damned spot!'
speech and confession of murder. The Gentlewoman and Doctor are hearing
'what heaven knows' - invoking providential time. We hear of Banquo's
death once more, and the knocking of the gate in her account - more examples
of diﬀerent temporalities folded onto one another. The pair watching on are
astounded by what they see and hear and agree to retire, with the Gentlewoman
commissioned to take care of the Queen. This troubled soul has taken on a tem-
poral debt in a moral economy that she is unable to fulﬁl. Macbeth realises that
the only way to cure his wife's illness would be to 'Pluck from the memory a
rooted sorrow, / [and] Raze out the written troubles of the brain' (5.3.2296-
96). But to take such a memory is in a way to take the person, it seems.
In the country near Dunsinane, Malcolm and Macduﬀhave rallied forces with
the support of England. Macbeth has fortiﬁed Dunsinane Castle, and some say
that he is mad. He is beginning to lose a grip on his power, as 'His secret
murders sticking on his hands; Now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach'
(5.2.2226-27). Lennox promises to pour his obedience into where it is truly
owed, '[t]o dew the sovereign ﬂower and drown the weeds'. Now we ﬁnd that
time although has sown its seeds, not all the growth is good: Macbeth is ultimately
identiﬁed as a noxious wild plant corrupting the environment with poison.
Back in Birnam Wood, Siward comments,
The time approaches
That will with due decision make us know
What we shall say we have and what we owe (5.4.2345-47).
The seeds of time have now grown into a forest. The reckoning is approaching
whereby time will call in its debt and balance the moral order. Indeed, Macbeth
does scorn any attempt of siege upon his castle with conﬁdence, asking Seyton
to hang out the banners. At this moment, we hear a woman's cry although
Macbeth is unaﬀected:
I have almost forgot the taste of fears;
The time has been, my senses would have cool'd
To hear a night-shriek (5.5.2364-66)
Throughout the play, so great are the horrors Macbeth has committed
and witnessed that he is no longer aﬀected by what would ordinarily be
394
D. JOHNSTON

feared. Macbeth is now unable to perceive shared time. When he hears from
Seyton that the Queen is dead, he utters the famous sentiments:
She should have died hereafter;
There would have been a time for such a word.
To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace from day to day
To the last syllable of recorded time,
And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusty death. Out, out, brief candle!
Life's but a walking shadow, a poor player
That struts and frets his hour upon the stage
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing (5.5.2374-85).
Immediately, Macbeth recognises that he has squandered his shared time with
those that he loved. Now time is a monotonous and ﬂattened stretch until the end.
The past has simply shown fools their way to the grave whereupon they will
become nothing but dust. Life itself to him is now a pointless performance
poorly acted - all show but no meaning. The description ﬁts with the experience
of grief, loss, and draining of external motivation as well as a nihilistic worldview
that sees human actions as lacking any intrinsic value as Bloom discusses (523).
The scene is a double of that in which Macduﬀlearns the fate of his family, but
here Seyton is blunt in his news. The moment is compounded when another mes-
senger appears from outside and announces a 'moving grove'.
When Macduﬀﬁnally meets Macbeth, he reveals that he was 'untimely ripped'
from his mother's womb. In contrast to others who have left this world too soon
in death, Macduﬀarrived too early by caesarean section, and thus was not born of
a woman. Macbeth's spell is thus broken, and his enemy wishes that he may 'live
to be the show and gaze o' the time' - a sentiment recognisable to audiences who
regularly saw tarred heads of traitors displayed on spikes above the entrance of
London Bridge. Yet still, Macbeth does not yield.
In the ﬁnal scenes of the play, the action of the text gathers speed for the spec-
tator as Malcolm and Siward mourn the loss of soldiers so cheaply on this day, and
Ross delivers the news of Young Siward's death. Macbeth's head is brought in,
fulﬁlling Macduﬀ's sentiments just before such that 'the time is free'. All the
events foretold by the witches' prophecies have been fulﬁlled and now the time
returns to a balance of sorts. Scotland is now free of a tyrant which had enveloped
it and the audience is free to leave and continue everyday life once more.
Conclusion: Restoring Shared Time
An experience of temporal queasiness in Macbeth arises precisely because the
central character refuses shared time with his countrymen and instead
SHAKESPEARE
395

resorts to external performance in his dealings with them. Yet for the audience,
each monologue exteriorises his internal consciousness for the audience, as we
see his downfall and demise approaching for having been led on by the witches
in the ﬁrst place. Macbeth had refused all along to suit the right action to the
time by neglecting to regard shared time, resulting in his inauthentic relation-
ship to others (in phenomenological terms).
The audience is given a clue that the play is about to end 'without a large
expense of time'. But there is also the acceptance of divine (and kingly) grace
whereupon evil can be forgiven and reckoned. The double of the witches at
the beginning is closed by the double of the divine on earth in the body of
the King (Malcolm and James I) through parallel times. Recalibrating the dou-
bleness of Macbeth's world, the spectators' own time in performance re-estab-
lishes temporal harmony. We are brought back to the present through
Malcolm's words:
We shall not spend a large expense of time
Before we reckon with your several loves,
And make us even with you. My thanes and kinsmen,
Henceforth be earls, the ﬁrst that ever Scotland
In such an honour named. What's more to do,
Which would be planted newly with the time,
As calling home our exiled friends abroad
That ﬂed the snares of watchful tyranny;
Producing forth the cruel ministers
Of this dead butcher and his ﬁend-like queen,
Who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands
Took off her life; this, and what needful else
That calls upon us, by the grace of Grace,
We will perform in measure, time and place:
So, thanks to all at once and to each one,
Whom we invite to see us crown'd at Scone (5.8.2550-65).
Shakespeare's temporal dramaturgy draws attention to the performance space
through language and materiality onstage with reference to time. Various pos-
sibilities for staging might highlight the 'folding of time' from one moment to
another, as parts of the stage become inscribed with the action that appears on
it: Duncan's murder and Lady Macbeth's sleepwalking are two obvious
examples. The mise-en-scene, objects and design choices might also emphasise
'providential time' symbolically to indicate time's march towards Macbeth's
end: perhaps one might explore the sense of his world 'closing in' as his
choices and possibilities become limited. Similarly, costume design might
help to set diﬀerent temporalities experienced by each character apart - in
colour, texture, and the way that they limit or enable the movement of the
actor. Finally, speciﬁc props might demonstrate the passing of time symboli-
cally and indexically - a lamp that is swallowed by the surrounding darkness
396
D. JOHNSTON

of night, for example, or an hourglass, which seems to encapsulate a doubleness
of time that can be turned on itself and become out of synchronisation (i.e.,
time's inevitable march). Each moment exploits 'temporal thickness' whereby
the past and future are experienced in the present together with 'shared time'
in the theatre event. In modern performance (as opposed to its Jacobean
context) another layer of time presents a challenge for staging, of course:
how can we ﬁnd resonance with this temporality in today's world?
Strangely, Macbeth does demonstrate something like phenomenological
'resoluteness' towards his being and time. He chooses and accepts his fate
ﬁrmly but fails to achieve 'authenticity' because he treats others as mere
objects in the pursuit of his own ends and refuses to take responsibility for
his actions. Ultimately, he sees no other possibilities to choose and sees the
witches' prophecy as unchangeable. Having murdered the King, he is not
able to say 'Amen' to the blessing he is oﬀered by the servants he is about to
kill and refuses to accept Grace. One might say that he is always ahead of
himself, seeing his present as a kind of past. In this sense, he has given up all
hope from the moment of his murder of Duncan when his fate was sealed. Con-
versely, he also believes that the witches' prophecies make his own downfall
impossible which he only realises was a mistake at the last moment. The air
has cleared to make the truth of time visible to once again 'perform in
measure, time and place'.
Acknowledgements
Sincere thanks to Tim Fitzpatrick for his generous feedback on this paper. Many thanks also
to members of the Department of Theatre and Performance Studies, The University of
Sydney, for support and response to the ideas presented here.
Disclosure Statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
ORCID
Daniel Johnston
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3672-433X
References
Achtner, Wolfgang, Stefan Kunz, and Walter Thomas. Dimensions of Time: The Structures of
the Time of Humans, of the World, and of God. Translated by Arthur H. Williams, Jr.
W. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, 2002.
Austin, J. L. How to Do Things with Words: The William James Lectures, Delivered at
Harvard University in 1955. Clarendon P, 1975.
SHAKESPEARE
397

Aristotle. Physics, Volume I: Books 1-4. Translated by P. H. Wicksteed and F. M. Cornford.
Loeb Classical Library 228. Harvard UP, 1957.
Barish, Jonas. The Antitheatrical Prejudice. U of California P, 1981.
Baumlin, Sipiora, and James S. Baumlin. Rhetoric and Kairos: Essays in History, Theory, and
Praxis. State U of New York P, 2002.
Bergson, Henri. Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness.
Translated by F.L. Pogson. Dover Publications, 2001.
Bloom, Harold. Shakespeare and the Invention of the Human. Riverhead, 1998.
Bushnell, Rebecca. 'Tragedy and Temporality'. PMLA 129, no. 4 (2014): 783-789.
Bushnell, Rebeca, Tragic Time in Drama, Film and Videogames: The Future in the Instant.
Palgrave, 2016.
Curran, Kevin. 'Phenomenology and Law: Feeling Criminal in Macbeth'. Criticism 54, no. 3
(Shakespeare and Phenomenology, 2012): 391-401.
Derrida, Jacques. Specters of Marx: The State of the Debt, the Work of Mourning, and the New
International. Translated by Peggy Kamuf. Routledge, 1994.
Foster, Donald W. 'Macbeth's War on Time'. English Literary Renaissance 16, no. 2 (1986):
319-342.
Fitzpatrick, Tim. Playwright, Space and Place in Early Modern Performance: Shakespeare and
Company. Routledge, 2016.
Frye, Northrop. The Great Code. Harcourt, Brace and Jovanovich, 1982.
Frye, Northrop. Fools of Time: Studies in Shakespearean Tragedy. U of Toronto P, 1967.
Guj, Luisa. 'Macbeth and the Seeds of Time'. Shakespeare Studies 18 (1986): 175-188.
Heller, Agnes. The Time Is out of Joint: Shakespeare as a Philosopher of History. Rowman and
Littleﬁeld, 2002.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Translated by J. Macquarrie and E. Robinson,
Blackwell, 1962.
Husserl, Edmund. Logical Investigations, 2 vols. Translated by J. N. Findlay. Routledge, 2001.
Johnston, Daniel. Phenomenology for Actors: Theatre-Making and the Question of Being.
Intellect, 2021.
Johnston, Daniel. Theatre and Phenomenology: Manual Philosophy. Palgrave, 2017.
Johnston, Daniel. 'Toward A Workshop in Theatre Phenomenology'. PARtake 2, no. 1
(2018): article 7, 1-22.
Johnston, Daniel. '"Theatre Phenomenology" and Ibsen's The Master Builder'. Nordic
Theatre Studies 31, no. 1 (2019): 124-140.
Kastan, David. Shakespeare and the Shapes of Time. Palgrave, 1982.
Kermode, Frank. Shakespeare's Language. Penguin, 2001.
Lewis, Sarah. 'Shakespeare, Time, Theory'. Literature Compass 11, no. 4 (2014): 246-257.
Macdonald, Julia. 'Demonic Time in Macbeth'. Ben Johnson Journal 17, no. 1 (2010):
76-96.
Marchitello, Howard. 'Speed and the Problem of Real Time in Macbeth'. Shakespeare
Quarterly 64, no. 4 (2013): 425-448.
Moore, Peter R. 'Epicurean Time in Macbeth'. Brief Chronicles 1 (2009): 141-154.
Pokropski, Marek. 'Timing Together, Acting Together. Phenomenology of Intersubjective
Temporality and Social Cognition'. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 14
(2015): 897-909.
Quinones, Ricardo. The Renaissance Discovery of Time. Harvard UP, 1972.
Quinones, Ricardo. 'Views of Time in Shakespeare'. Journal of the History of Ideas 26, no. 3
(1965): 327-352.
Richardson, Brian. '"Hours Dreadful and Things Strange": Inversions of Chronology and
Causality in Macbeth'. Philological Quarterly 68, no. 3 (1989): 283-294.
398
D. JOHNSTON

Rosenfeld, Nancy. The Human Satan in Seventeenth-Century English Literature: From
Milton to Rochester. Routledge, 2016.
Shohet, Lauren, ed. Temporality, Genre and Experience in the Age of Shakespeare: Forms of
Time. Bloomsbury, 2018.
Stern, Tiﬀany. 'Time for Shakespeare: Hourglasses, Sundials, Clocks, and Early Modern
Theatre'. Journal of the British Academy 3 (2015): 1-33. doi:10.5871/jba/003.001.
Sypher, Wylie. The Ethic of Time: Structures of Experience in Shakespeare. Seabury P, 1976.
Tassi, Marguerite. 'Rapture and Horror: A Phenomenology of Theatrical Invisibility in
Macbeth'. Explorations in Renaissance Culture 44 (2018): 1-26.
Turner, Frederick. Shakespeare and the Nature of Time: Moral and Philosophical Themes in
Some Plays and Poems of William Shakespeare. Clarendon P, 1971.
Wagner, Matthew D. Shakespeare, Theatre, and Time. Routledge, 2012.
Waller, Garry. The Strong Necessity of Time: The Philosophy of Time in Shakespeare and
Elizabethan Literature. Mouton, 1976.
SHAKESPEARE
399

