Philosophical Psychology
ISSN: 0951-5089 (Print) 1465-394X (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/cphp20
Husserl's phenomenology of empathy: revisiting
core insights and addressing contemporary
critiques
Junguo Zhang
To cite this article: Junguo Zhang (19 May 2025): Husserl's phenomenology of empathy:
revisiting core insights and addressing contemporary critiques, Philosophical Psychology, DOI:
10.1080/09515089.2025.2508412
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2025.2508412
Published online: 19 May 2025.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 108
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphp20

Husserl's phenomenology of empathy: revisiting core 
insights and addressing contemporary critiques
Junguo Zhang
College of Philosophy, Nankai University, Tianjin, China
ABSTRACT
C. Jason Throop and Dan Zahavi attempted to clarify the 
fundamental issues surrounding phenomenological empa­
thy, including its meaning, boundaries, and characteristics. 
However, their work has been met with significant criticism 
from numerous scholars. These critiques primarily focus on 
three aspects: (1) the scope of phenomenological empathy is 
too narrow to explain the motivations and causes of others' 
behavior; (2) empathy relies on reasoning and other cogni­
tive tools, thus failing to guarantee its directness; (3) difficul­
ties persist in maintaining the asymmetry of empathy. This 
paper engages with the ongoing debate on empathy, 
addressing Husserl's phenomenology of empathy from 
three key points: the goal and boundaries of empathy, empa­
thy as direct perception, and the asymmetry of empathy. In 
doing so, this paper responds to the critics' objections and 
offers a clearer understanding of Husserl's phenomenology 
of empathy. The paper demonstrates: (1) that Husserl's phe­
nomenology of empathy is, in its primary sense, a theory of 
the constitution of intersubjectivity and the objective world 
that transcends the individual subject; (2) that Husserl's the­
ories of embodied expression and horizon support the pos­
sibility of empathy as direct perception; (3) that empathy 
involves a mutual understanding while adhering to the irre­
ducibility of the self and the other.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 26 March 2025  
Accepted 14 May 2025 
KEYWORDS 
Asymmetry; direct 
perception; empathy; 
Husserl; phenomenology
1. Introduction
Empathy (Einfühlung) is a multifaceted concept that has been explored 
across multiple disciplines, often leading to different interpretations. In 
the phenomenological tradition, particularly through the works of early 
phenomenologists such as Edmund Husserl, Edith Stein, and Max Scheler, 
empathy is regarded as a fundamental aspect of human experience. In recent 
years, scholars have revisited phenomenological empathy, with significant 
contributions from authors such as C. Jason Throop and Dan Zahavi.
CONTACT Junguo Zhang 
zjgcass@163.com 
College of Philosophy, Nankai University, 38 Tongyan Road, 
Jinnan District, Tianjin 300350, P.R. China
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY                         
https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2025.2508412
© 2025 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group 

Throop and Zahavi, in their article Dark and Bright Empathy: 
Phenomenological and Anthropological Reflections (2020), explore what 
empathy is and what it is not. As a target article, their work sparked heated 
debates, with several scholars responding critically, including Joanneliese de 
Lucas Freitas, Kevin P. Groark, Heidi Maibom, Glenda Lucila Satne, Karsten 
R. Stueber, and Susanna Trnka, among others.
This paper critically examines the ongoing debate between Throop and 
Zahavi and their critics concerning phenomenological empathy, with 
a focus on the unresolved issues that persist in defining the nature of 
empathy. While significant progress has been made in exploring the concept 
of empathy, a clear and widely accepted definition remains elusive, present­
ing an ongoing challenge in contemporary discussions on phenomenologi­
cal empathy and social cognition. Throop and Zahavi have provided precise 
responses to many of these criticisms; however, their rebuttals, though 
important, fail to fully address the deeper, more fundamental aspects of 
phenomenological empathy theory, leaving key concepts insufficiently 
explained.
The primary objective of this paper is twofold: (1) to offer comprehensive 
and detailed responses to the criticisms of phenomenological empathy, 
clarifying the ambiguities that remain in the existing discourse; and (2) to 
provide a more robust and nuanced illustration of the various interrelated 
issues surrounding empathy within the framework of Husserl's phenomen­
ological theory.
In engaging with the ongoing debate, this paper aims to achieve the 
following key goals: (1) to position Husserl's theory of empathy within the 
context of contemporary social cognition theories, demonstrating its con­
tinued relevance and offering insights into how it intersects with modern 
psychological and philosophical understandings of empathy; (2) to address 
the criticisms of phenomenological empathy raised by Throop and Zahavi's 
critics, offering fresh responses that not only defend Husserl's framework 
but also highlight the distinctiveness of his approach in contrast to other 
models of social cognition; and (3) to provide a detailed exploration of core 
issues related to empathy, such as its goals, boundaries, directness, and 
asymmetry. By engaging in this comprehensive analysis, the paper seeks to 
clarify common misunderstandings of Husserl's phenomenological theory 
of empathy, and in doing so, refine our understanding of its role in human 
experience and intersubjectivity.
What distinguishes this paper is its attempt to fill the gaps left in the 
existing debate by offering a systematic response to the criticisms while 
advancing a clearer understanding of key phenomenological concepts. In 
addressing the criticisms of phenomenological empathy, I will provide 
a fresh perspective on how Husserl's theory offers not just a psychological 
account of empathy but a fundamental rethinking of how we understand 
2
J. ZHANG

intersubjective experience. This paper contends that Husserl's theory, when 
placed within contemporary discussions of social cognition, provides 
a unique contribution to both philosophical and psychological approaches 
to empathy, which other models often overlook or misunderstand.
By engaging critically with these debates and offering innovative 
responses, this paper aims to clarify Husserl's original contributions to 
phenomenological empathy, highlighting its importance for both contem­
porary phenomenology and the broader field of social cognition. Ultimately, 
this work seeks to contribute to the advancement of the conversation on 
empathy, providing new insights into its structure, boundaries, and signifi­
cance, and reaffirming Husserl's place in shaping contemporary under­
standings of human intersubjectivity.
To achieve this, the first section of the paper discusses the debate between 
Throop and Zahavi and their critics, explaining how the critics challenge 
phenomenological empathy and introducing the issues to be discussed. The 
paper then proceeds to explore Husserl's phenomenology of empathy in 
light of these debates, focusing on the goal and boundaries of empathy 
(Section II), empathy as direct perception (Section III), and the asymmetry 
of empathy (Section IV). In doing so, it responds to the critics' objections, 
further clarifying Husserl's phenomenological theory of empathy.
2. The debate between Throop and Zahavi and their critics
In their article Dark and Bright Empathy: Phenomenological and 
Anthropological Reflections, Throop and Zahavi focus on issues such as the 
boundaries of empathy, empathy as direct perception, and the asymmetry of 
empathy, while defending the essential characteristics and scope of phe­
nomenological empathy.
Specifically, Throop and Zahavi argue that, according to early phenom­
enologists, empathy should not be simply defined as a common form of all 
social cognition, but rather as a basic form of perceiving and understanding 
others. It serves as the foundation for all complex, indirect social cognitive 
processes (Cf. Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 285). Empathy is a form of 
perceiving others in face-to-face encounters, and does not engage with the 
complexities of social relationships. The phenomenologists were clearly 
aware of the boundaries of empathy: what it can do and what it cannot 
do. This distinction is particularly evident in Throop and Zahavi's differ­
entiation between "that" (the fact that someone is an experiencing subject), 
"what" (what the other person's experience is), and "why" (why the other 
person has such an experience) (Cf. Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 286).
The term "that" refers to our ability to know whether the other person 
is an experiencing subject like us. "What" refers to what the other person 
is experiencing. "Why" refers to why the other person has that 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
3

experience. They maintain that, through empathy, even if we can ascer­
tain that the other person is an experiencing subject like ourselves, and 
even if we can know what the other person's experience is based on our 
perception of their speech or actions, we would still find it difficult to 
answer why the other person has that experience. This question goes 
beyond the scope of empathy. For example, when we see someone laugh­
ing heartily, we may recognize that this person is an experiencing subject 
like us and that they are laughing in a similar or identical way, but 
accurately determining why they are laughing is a challenging task. 
According to Throop and Zahavi, this is no longer a social cognitive 
issue that can be addressed by empathy as a basic form of perception. 
They note that "But although we should recognize its importance, we 
also need to recognize its limitations" (Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 286). If 
we want to understand "Why" - why the other person has a particular 
perceptual experience or behaves in a certain way - we must consider 
factors such as society, culture, customs, history, and habits, which fall 
outside the scope of empathy (Cf. Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 286).
According to Throop and Zahavi, as well as classical phenomenologists 
like Husserl and Scheler, empathy emphasizes its experiential and direct 
characteristics (Cf. Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 285). Empathy is a direct and 
immediate experience of the other. (Hua. 4, 1952 S. 375) We certainly 
believe that we directly perceive the joy in someone's laughter, the sadness 
and pain in their tears. . . If someone were to tell me that this is not direct 
perception, they should pay attention to the phenomenological facts (Cf. 
Scheler, 2008, p. 260). The empathy between the self and the other is not 
mediated by a screen or an imagined conversation, but emerges in face-to- 
face encounters. In other words, we meet in experience. We understand 
each other's embodied expressions in particular contexts, such as laughter, 
speaking, knocking, and touching. These activities are not purely physical or 
biological behaviors; they are meaningful actions performed by a subject 
through their body. When we see someone crying uncontrollably, we not 
only observe their crying, but also perceive their sadness and pain. These 
inner emotions are displayed through their crying and directly perceived by 
me. My direct experience of their crying and the emotional pain and sadness 
it conveys does not involve any intermediary processes or means. That is to 
say, in this process, I do not gain my perception of the other through 
mediatory activities like reflection, reasoning, or imitation.
Moreover, the experiential and direct nature of empathy is a key reason 
why it cannot answer the question of "why." We can only understand the 
other's mental state, emotional feelings, and will through the experiential 
information directly conveyed by their embodied activities. We do not rely 
on other non-direct, non-experiential means, such as inference or imitation, 
to grasp the reasons and motivations behind their activities and behaviors.
4
J. ZHANG

Furthermore, Throop and Zahavi emphasize the difference between 
the self and the other, as well as the asymmetry of empathy. Husserl 
believed that the similarity between the self and the other is the trigger­
ing mechanism and foundation of empathy. However, empathy does not 
involve obtaining the other's experience in an ordinary way. We engage 
in empathic understanding on the premise of acknowledging the alterity 
of the other, which requires us to consistently maintain the difference 
between the self and the other throughout the process of empathy. 
Therefore, "Empathy is not about me having the same mental state, 
feeling, sensation, or embodied response as another, but rather about 
me being experientially acquainted with an experience that is not my 
own." (Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 289)
Throop and Zahavi emphasize the difference between the self and the 
other. In their view, empathy does not imply the identity, sameness, or 
fusion of the self and the other, as such concepts blur the distinction and 
difference between the self and the other. Based on this understanding, we 
can distinguish empathy from other social cognitive forms, such as emo­
tional contagion or representational empathy (including imagining oneself 
in the other's situation or reconstituting the other's perspective in imagina­
tion) (Cf. Stueber, 2020, p. 297). The empathic understanding between the 
self and the other is not realized on the basis of mutual recognition or 
fusion, but through experiential interaction. Therefore, empathy is directed 
at unfamiliar experiences, not those that belong to or are of the self (Cf. 
Throop & Zahavi, 2020, pp. 287, 289).
Throop and Zahavi's understanding and discussion of empathy have 
sparked numerous responses and criticisms, which include at least the 
following aspects:
First, critics argue that the scope of phenomenological empathy is too 
narrow and cannot account for the complexities of empathy phenomena 
and interpersonal relationships. It also fails to explain the motives and 
reasons behind the behaviors of others (Cf. Satne, 2020, pp. 296,297). In 
comparison with psychoanalytic theories of empathy, phenomenological 
empathy lacks explanatory power both conceptually and practically. 
Psychoanalytic theory is an indirect way of understanding others, empha­
sizing the identity between the self and the other through imitation theory, 
aiming to cultivate a cognitively accurate and emotionally attuned under­
standing of the other. This understanding can be seen as a bridge for 
interpersonal communication and social cognition (Groark, 2020, 
pp. 294,295).
Second, there is opposition to the idea of empathy as direct perception. In 
everyday life, not everyone exhibits normal verbal behavior, and some 
embodied 
expressions 
are 
deceptive, 
ambiguous, 
or 
unclear. 
Phenomenological empathy relies on the perception of normal, clear, and 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
5

unambiguous embodied behaviors, which makes it difficult to function in 
more complex or ambiguous situations (Cf. Maibom, 2020, pp. 295-296).
Third, critics argue that the insistence on the distinction between the self 
and the other, and the asymmetry of empathy, presents difficulties because 
empathy relies on the self having or sharing the other's experience. Only 
then can the self possess the other's experience (Cf. Stueber, 2020, p. 298). 
Even acknowledging the difference between the self and the other, empathy 
still retains a solipsistic nature (Cf. Maibom, 2020, pp. 295-296; Stueber,  
2020, p. 298).
These criticisms not only target Throop and Zahavi's concept of empathy 
but also challenge phenomenological empathy theory as a whole. However, 
Husserl's phenomenological account of empathy suggests that these criti­
cisms are, to some extent, unwarranted.
3. The goal and limits of empathy phenomenology
Phenomenological empathy is experienced in a perceptual or quasi- 
perceptual manner, possessing characteristics of perception itself (Cf. 
Jardine & Szanto, 2017, p. 92; Ratcliffe, 2017, p. 197). In this sense, it has 
cognitive significance and function. However, unlike other forms of social 
cognition, the cognitive function of empathy is not its primary function; we 
cannot understand it primarily as a form of social cognition. Compared to 
its cognitive function, Husserl places greater emphasis on the transcendental 
significance and constructive function of phenomenological empathy. (Cf. 
Hua. 1, S. 124) Empathy phenomenology is not just a theory of mutual 
understanding between the self and the other; more importantly, it is 
a transcendental theory that constructs intersubjectivity and the objectivity 
of the world.
The understanding of empathy between the self and the other refers not 
only to the experiential relationship between different subjects but also 
serves as the foundation for constituting the objective world. While 
Husserl begins with the self-constituting stage of transcendental subjectiv­
ity, this self-constituting phase inevitably transitions into the stage of con­
stituting intersubjectivity. In the experiential horizon of intersubjectivity, 
the world not only appears to me but also to others. In our constitution of 
"we-subjectivity," the world acquires objective meaning. Therefore, the 
constitution of the objective world cannot rely solely on the self as the 
constituting subject; it also depends on the shared contribution of the 
other. The essential alterity of the other is the first non-I attribute of 
existence, and the disclosure of the meaning of the other opens up an 
infinite non-I realm - an infinitely new domain characterized by alterity: 
an objective essence and a total objective world. (Hua. 1, S. 137) The world is 
formed through the shared horizons of both I and non-I, in which all 
6
J. ZHANG

existence gains objective determinacy. In this sense, empathy phenomenol­
ogy takes on a more fundamental transcendental significance than merely 
interpersonal communication, as it pertains to the possibilities and condi­
tions for the objective world and its objective essences.
Thus, this issue is initially framed as a special problem, that is, the "for- 
me" existence of the other, and therefore the transcendental theory of the 
experience of the other, known as the "transcendental theory of empathy." 
However, it soon becomes evident that the scope of this theory is much 
broader than initially thought. It helps establish a transcendental theory of 
the objective world and, in various aspects, particularly in terms of objective 
essences. Thus, this question was originally framed as a unique one - the 
"for-me" presence of the other - thereby positioning it within the context of 
the transcendental theory of the experience of the other, often referred to as 
the transcendental theory of empathy. However, it soon becomes clear that 
the reach of this theory extends far beyond its initial conception. In fact, for 
Husserl, it plays a crucial role in shaping the transcendental theory of the 
objective world, especially in relation to the understanding of objective 
essences. (Hua. 1, S. 123-124) In this sense, Husserl's theoretical motivation 
is not to answer the fundamental question of the "other's" existence. Rather, 
his goal is to find transcendental methods and principles that allow us to 
meaningfully understand the objective world (Cf. Ioannidis, 2019, p. 206).
Husserl's theory, therefore, presents a unique transcendental framework 
that extends beyond interpersonal empathy, contributing to our under­
standing of how intersubjectivity plays a fundamental role in the constitu­
tion of both the objective world and its essences. This approach positions 
empathy not merely as a form of social cognition but as a foundational 
element in the structure of objective knowledge and experience.
Additionally, for phenomenologists, empathy has its own characteristics 
and limits. The critique of the phenomenological theory of empathy by 
psychoanalytic theories, which argues that empathy cannot effectively and 
accurately explain complex interpersonal relationships and thus lacks expla­
natory power in both concept and practice, is unreasonable. Throop and 
Zahavi view phenomenological empathy as the basic form of various types 
of empathy, acknowledging that it cannot explain all social relationships or 
the reasons and motivations behind individual behaviors. In other words, 
empathy as direct perception cannot explain the "why" behind actions. 
While this may appear to be a limitation of basic empathy, at its core, it is 
an inherent specification of phenomenologists' understanding of basic 
empathy - a delineation of the limits of empathy, and thus it is defined by 
phenomenology itself.
In Husserl's phenomenology, empathy is a process of perception, not 
a process of explanation or interpretation. Its goal is not to accurately 
uncover the reasons and motivations behind behavior or to explain the 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
7

"why." Throop and Zahavi distinguish between "that," "what," and "why," 
pointing out that empathy cannot explain the "why," thus maintaining the 
intrinsic uniqueness and essential specification of phenomenological empa­
thy, distinguishing it from other forms of social cognition. "Thus, we may 
understand empathy as this basic form of experience while keeping it 
distinct from resonance" (Walsh, 2014, p. 222).
Additionally, Satne argues that the "that," "what," and "why" are insepar­
able and criticizes Throop and Zahavi for their distinction (Cf. Satne, 2020, 
pp. 296-297). To some extent, these three aspects may indeed permeate each 
other and be inseparable, and Satne's point has some merit in this regard. 
However, Throop and Zahavi emphasize that phenomenological empathy, 
as a form of face-to-face direct perception, is foundational and basic, and 
Husserl's phenomenology of empathy adheres to the same view (Cf. Zahavi 
& Throop, 2020, p. 301).
This distinction is important because it underscores the phenomenolo­
gical understanding of empathy as a primary, direct perceptual experience 
that is not meant to be an exhaustive explanation of all social behaviors and 
motivations but serves a more foundational role in understanding the world 
through intersubjective experiences.
Phenomenological empathy, as the basic form of empathy, is the founda­
tion for more complex social cognition forms and empathy theories. A core 
issue addressed by Husserl's transcendental phenomenology is the experi­
ence of consciousness. For something to be meaningful, it must always 
appear to either the self or to others, and it is only through the subject's 
constitutive experience that the meaning of this thing can be revealed. 
Similarly, the consciousness of the other cannot directly appear; it must be 
manifested through embodied activities, which I then perceive. Empathy, as 
a face-to-face perceptual form, means that both the self and the other are 
present, and the other's actions and behaviors can be directly perceived by 
me. This is a precise and reliable perceptual experience, one that is beyond 
doubt. Indirect cognitive activities like imagination, speculation, and imita­
tion are all based on this direct perceptual experience, which is why basic 
empathy serves as the foundation for all other forms of social cognition.
Without direct experience, all indirect cognitive activities could fail 
because they lack a reliable experiential basis. Therefore, psychoanalytic 
empathy, which is an indirect way of understanding others, must rely on 
phenomenological empathy as its foundation. As Zahavi and Throop state, 
"in the empathic face-to-face encounter one can obtain an acquaintance 
with the other's experiential life that has a directness and immediacy to it 
that is not possessed by whatever beliefs one might have about the other in 
his or her absence." (Zahavi & Throop, 2020, p. 300)
Thus, while the scope of phenomenological empathy might be seen as 
limited and even criticized for being narrow, it is the fundamental 
8
J. ZHANG

experiential source through which we understand unfamiliar subjects and 
their experiences, and it is upon this that more complex social cognition is 
dependent and presupposed (Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 287). This empha­
sis on direct, face-to-face perception reinforces the central role of phenom­
enological empathy in understanding human experience.
4. Empathy as direct perception
Maibom criticizes the idea of empathy as direct perception, asserting that 
"talking about direct perception is tricky" (Maibom, 2020, p. 295). He 
provides several examples to argue that empathy as direct perception is 
fraught with difficulties. For instance, if a person's facial expressions change 
too quickly for us to capture and perceive them, the facial expressions, 
which serve as a source of information for empathy, would not become 
readily available for direct perception. In such cases, how would empathy 
take place? Moreover, children with autism not only face challenges in 
certain forms of conceptual expression but also in facial expression recogni­
tion. For such individuals, is empathy possible? Therefore, before we acquire 
perceptual information from others, we must be cautious about considering 
empathy as direct perception (Cf. Maibom, 2020, p. 295). In other words, 
basic empathy is about understanding others through their linguistic beha­
vior or facial expressions, but there are difficulties here that require infer­
ential cognitive mechanisms (Maibom, 2020, p. 295).
Maibom's concerns are certainly valid. He acknowledges the opacity of 
consciousness and the complexity of human relationships, noting that 
people's behaviors and expressions can be ambiguous and unclear, which 
complicates understanding their inner experiences. However, his criticism 
of empathy as a direct form of perception does not hold up in the context of 
phenomenological theory.
First, Husserl rejects the fundamental divide between the body and mind 
of the subject, asserting that the subject is a unique unity of body and mind. 
He introduces the phenomenological theory of expression. Maibom's criti­
cism of empathy as direct perception is, to some extent, based on a mind- 
body dualism. Maria Chiara Bruttomesso points out that dualism between 
mind and body is an obstacle to empathy theory. Dualism assumes that the 
inner mind and the outer body cannot mutually communicate or interact, 
leading to a separation between external appearances and internal states (Cf. 
Bruttomesso, 2016, p. 352). Maibom separates the unity of mind and body, 
suggesting that they cannot achieve mutual accessibility, thereby preventing 
the self from understanding the inner world of the other through direct 
perception of their bodily expressions.
However, this criticism overlooks Husserl's view that the relationship 
between mind and body is not a causal one between two independent 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
9

entities but an expressive relationship. Based on this, phenomenological 
empathy theory avoids this opposition (primarily referring to Maibom's 
criticism) (Jardine, 2022, p. 77). Empathy, as a direct perceptual process, 
arises from the embodied unity of the subject, where expressions - whether 
linguistic, facial, or gestural - serve as the means through which we access 
another's lived experience. It is this unity of body and mind that allows 
empathy to function as direct perception, despite the ambiguities and 
complexities that Maibom raises.
In this sense, while challenges do exist in recognizing others' emotions or 
understanding their inner states, these difficulties do not invalidate the 
possibility of empathy as direct perception. Instead, they highlight the 
nuanced nature of human interaction and the need for careful attention in 
interpreting others' embodied expressions.
Specifically, first, the body and consciousness are uniquely unified and 
fused. The body and consciousness are not two independent entities, and 
the subject is not a unified entity formed by the connection or combination 
of these two entities. The way in which the body and consciousness are 
unified is fundamentally different from how different things or parts of 
things are connected. For example, a pen placed in a box or a table consist­
ing of four legs and a tabletop. The way the pen and box, or the table legs 
and tabletop are connected does not apply to the unity of the body and 
consciousness. Husserl directly denies that the spiritual aspect of a person is 
connected to the physical body in the same way that two physical objects are 
connected. He points out, "No, it is obvious that the state of affairs as 
regards the spiritual is totally different" (Hua. 4, 1952 S. 237). He rejects 
the understanding of the unity of body and consciousness as an external 
connection because this is not a connection; a connection means that the 
parts can be independent of one another and can be abstracted from the 
whole they are connected to (Cf. Hua. 4, 1952 S. 237). In other words, 
consciousness is not something added to or attached to the body, nor is the 
body something externally added to consciousness.
Furthermore, on one hand, Husserl believes that the spirit of a person 
gives life to a lifeless physical body, imbuing the body with meaning. The 
assignment of meaning distinguishes the body from all other physical 
existence in a fundamental sense. The assignment of meaning makes the 
body a site of meaning or a unity of spirit. The spirit of a person imbues the 
body with vitality and meaning in various, yet closely related, ways (Cf. Hua. 
4, 1952 S. 237). Therefore, when I see a body beside me, I do not perceive it 
as a purely physical entity like a stone; I perceive it as a living person, present 
as a person in their own right. When I see another person on the street, 
I perceive not just their body, but a living, breathing other. Their conscious­
ness is embodied through their body, presenting its "presence" to me (Cf. 
Hua. 4, 1952 S. 375). On the other hand, the body makes consciousness 
10
J. ZHANG

a functional constituting subject. The body is the only sensory organ that the 
self can directly control, and it is the center of the self's perceptual horizon 
(Cf. Hua. 1, S. 128). From this center, the self uses the body as a means to 
perceive other objects and constructs them according to its purpose. Thus, 
the body is the medium and means by which I experientially occupy the 
external world and its existence (Cf. Hua. 14, S. 58-59). Moreover, Husserl 
points out that the body and its perceptual experience constitute the most 
original experience of the self, which is entirely mine and exclusive because 
no one can possess my body and experience in this original way. The body is 
not imposed externally on me; it is inherent to the self, with the most 
original characteristics (Cf. Hua. 14, S. 58).
In summary, both the body and consciousness are inseparable, unified, 
and fused. Consciousness gives meaning to the body, making it no longer 
a mere physical existence; the body makes consciousness embodied, real, 
and specific, thus enabling the self to have a transcendental constructive 
function. Therefore, the body is a spiritualized body, and the spirit is an 
embodied spirit, both of which fuse in the original experience of the self.
Additionally, according to Husserl's theory of the dynamic aspect of 
empathy, the body is a freely moving organ of perception, a center of 
orientation, and a zero point (Hua. 4, 1952 S. 158). My body possesses the 
"here" in my authentic domain, which is the way my body is revealed to me 
(Cf. Hua. 1, S. 146). All other things relative to my "here" are perceived as 
"there." However, I can change my spatial position through movement, 
from one place to another, and thus perceive things from different angles. 
For example, when I stand on the east side of a house, I can move to the west 
side, allowing me to perceive the house from different perspectives.
When we empathize with others, we perceive their bodies as "there," in 
contrast to our "here." We can move from our "here" to their "there," 
although this does not need to occur physically. Through movement, we 
can occupy their position and perspective, empathizing with their percep­
tual experience. However, this is not done in an original and authentic way. 
Empathy with others means perceiving their free movement. At this point, 
we cannot understand their bodily movements as mere physical mechanical 
movements of objects, but as purposeful, conscious actions and activities.
Second, based on the primordial unity of body and consciousness, 
Husserl proposed a phenomenological theory of embodied expression. 
Gallagher and Zahavi argue that expression is "a bridge that closes the gap 
between internal mental states and external bodily actions" (Gallagher & 
Zahavi, 2008, p. 185). Bodily actions are the constructive and functional 
expressions of consciousness. The subject is an inseparable unity of body, 
kinesthetic sensation, and spirit, which makes direct face-to-face empathy 
possible (Cf. Bruttomesso, 2016, p. 355). Husserl clearly states that every­
thing subjective and self-related belongs to the spiritual aspect of the 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
11

personality, and this spiritual aspect is expressed through the body (Hua. 4,  
1952 S. 96). Therefore, empathizing with another's conscious experience is 
the direct perception of their bodily expression. In this sense, the conscious­
ness of the other is not completely hidden or invisible. When I see someone 
laughing heartily, although I perceive the laughter and the accompanying 
facial expressions and body movements, these perceptual experiences 
directly indicate their joy and happiness. Their inner feelings are directly 
manifested in the bodily expression, such as dancing or gesturing. 
Therefore, the act of expression and the meaning expressed are fused and 
inseparable. When I observe another's expressive actions and movements, 
I have already "seen" the meaning they wish to convey (Cf. Gallagher & 
Zahavi, 2008, p. 185). Another person's sensations, emotions, and states are 
embodied through their bodily behaviors and movements. A person's 
thoughts, ideas, and feelings cannot be expressed solely by the mind itself 
but must be understood through external bodily expressions. Therefore, the 
body is the organ of expression for the spirit (Cf. Hua. 4, 1952 S. 204). The 
subject's body and its expressive actions carry and express its spiritual 
meaning, indicating the subject's consciousness. In this sense, Maibom's 
emphasis on the opacity of consciousness does not fully account for how 
consciousness depends on embodied expression. Consciousness can be 
directly perceived through the bodily behaviors and actions in specific 
contexts. This partially explains why, when someone laughs heartily, 
I "see" their joy and happiness.
According to Gallagher and Zahavi, "The view that behavior, in itself, has 
neither expressiveness nor meaning is unacceptable. Similarly, the view that 
behavior is merely the observable outcome of mental states is also unac­
ceptable" (Gallagher & Zahavi, 2008, p. 186). On the one hand, we cannot 
sever the unity of consciousness and body, nor can we neglect or under­
estimate the expressive role of behavior, as this might lead us, like Maibom, 
into the dilemma of the inaccessibility of consciousness. On the other hand, 
we must not adopt a reductionist approach, reducing consciousness solely to 
bodily actions, thereby exaggerating the role of behavior. We should not 
attempt to gain another person's experience in an original way. It is impor­
tant to note that we should not devalue the role of the second (and third) 
person perspective just because the way we acquire another person's experi­
ence differs from the first-person perspective. These two modes of experi­
ence certainly differ, but this does not necessarily imply that the first-person 
perspective has superiority and advantage, while the second (and third) 
person perspective is inferior and limited. Both modes have their own 
characteristics and should not be ranked in terms of superiority or infer­
iority (Cf. Gallagher & Zahavi, 2008, pp. 185-186). This is determined by 
the irreducibility of consciousness and the uniqueness of empathy. In 
empathy, we must fully respect the alterity of the other, maintaining the 
12
J. ZHANG

difference between self and other, without confusing or reducing the other 
to the self.
Furthermore, Husserl's phenomenology of empathy shows that empathy, 
as direct perception, is possible. Maibom points out the difficulties that 
might arise in basic empathy, such as some individuals having language 
barriers or difficulties in understanding, which make it hard to obtain 
effective information and ensure the smooth process of direct perception. 
However, if we fully understand Husserl's theory of empathy, these diffi­
culties may not be as concerning.
First, for Husserl, the experience of empathy is open, changeable, and 
ongoing, making it difficult to fully acquire another's complete and accurate 
perceptual experience all at once. Empathy is not something that happens in 
a single moment; it is a continuous process of verification. For example, 
during a conversation, a newly acquainted friend shares how she is kind and 
helpful to others. Based on the information I have received, I initially 
understand her as a friendly and helpful person, but this needs further 
verification. On one occasion, I see her ignore an elderly person struggling 
with heavy luggage. Her behavior contradicts my understanding of her as 
a helpful person. In other words, her subsequent actions do not validate my 
empathetic experience of her. In this regard, Husserl believes that each 
experience points to further experiences, and new experiences will enrich 
and verify the co-occurring horizon. In other words, my empathetic experi­
ence of the other must be further validated. If the other's subsequent 
behavior aligns harmoniously with my previous empathetic experience, 
then my intuition about her is temporarily valid, but this does not mean 
the end of the empathetic process. If her subsequent behavior contradicts 
my experience of her, my previous empathetic experience will be corrected 
and updated, forming a new intuitive experience that requires further 
verification. In this ongoing but coordinated process of behavior, my empa­
thetic experience of the other continuously updates and enriches (Cf. Hua. 
1, S. 144).
Second, our empathy for others depends on the collaborative and coor­
dinated action of multiple bodily organs. What the self can directly perceive 
is the bodily expression of the other, not the original consciousness experi­
ence of the other. The self cannot perceive the other in the same way as the 
other's self-perception; non-original ways cannot access the other's original, 
authentic experience. Therefore, Husserl argues that we need to perceive the 
other through a unifying process of synthesis. My process of unification 
with the other depends on the simultaneous involvement of multiple sen­
sory organs; it is not just one bodily organ contributing. The perceptual 
experiences we obtain complement, correct, and permeate each other, and 
are passively synthesized to present themselves to me. Regarding examples 
listed by Maibom, such as a person speaking unclearly, where I cannot 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
13

acquire linguistic information through hearing, this does not necessarily 
mean that my empathy for her has failed. Although I do not receive effective 
linguistic information from her, I can still observe her facial expressions and 
bodily movements through vision, which convey her thoughts, feelings, and 
emotions. Furthermore, my sense of touch will also participate in my 
perception of her. When I approach her, touch her forehead, and feel that 
it is hot, indicating a fever, I realize that she may not have a language barrier, 
but rather, a sore throat caused by a high fever, which makes it difficult for 
her to speak clearly. In this case, I can communicate with her through 
writing or other non-verbal means. From this, it is clear that in the process 
of empathizing with the other, multiple sensory organs and their functions 
interact, collaborate, and complement each other, allowing us to obtain 
a more comprehensive and synthesized perceptual experience. Thus, var­
ious forms of expression coexist to manifest the embodied existence of the 
spirit (Cf. Hua. 4, 1952 S. 166).
Third, the self's empathy for the other occurs in specific horizons and 
contexts and depends on type-experience. The self's perception of the other 
depends on a concrete subjective horizon - the self's original environment 
(Hua. 14, S. 216). Before encountering the other, the self already possesses 
past experiences, which form the foundation and premise for both the self's 
current perception and future potential perceptions. According to Husserl, 
our perceptual activities necessarily presuppose certain things that are 
passively given in advance (Cf. Hua. 1, 1973 S. 112). In the moment of 
conversing with the other, my past empathetic experiences are involved in 
my current perception. Since previous experiences permeate the ongoing 
unification, I have a more comprehensive and synthesized intuitive experi­
ence of her. Even if this is the first time I am speaking with her directly, and 
I do not know her beforehand, I am not entirely unfamiliar or unaware of 
her. According to type-experience, she has a certain "familiarity" to me 
(Hua. 11, 1966 S. 190). In other words, I can understand her as a certain 
type; at the very least, I can categorize her as human and attribute to her the 
universal characteristics of humanity. My type-experience belongs to the 
realm of pre-perception or pre-empathy, serving as the basis for perceiving 
a person within this type. Based on the pre-given type-experience, I already 
possess a sense of familiarity with her in a pre-perceptual way. Through 
direct perception of her bodily expressions, I gain the specificity and 
particularity of the type-experience. In other words, my empathetic experi­
ence of her depends on type-experience, and at the same time, my percep­
tion of her individual experience enriches the type-experience, giving it 
concrete determinacy.
Moreover, the horizonality of empathy not only gives it a unique situa­
tional meaning but also helps to achieve reliable experience. Husserl argues 
that every subjective experience depends on background and horizon. The 
14
J. ZHANG

self's empathy for the other takes place in a specific background, context, 
and horizon (Cf. Hua. 14, S. 34). The self encounters the other in the 
surrounding world, which is the domain in which we engage in face-to- 
face empathy. For example, when a teacher notices a student singing loudly 
in class, she might ask the reason and stop the student from singing, because 
the student's singing directly impacts the normal teaching process and 
distracts other students. In this case, the teacher-student empathy relation­
ship needs to refer to and point to a specific context - namely, the classroom 
setting. However, if the same situation occurs at a welcoming party, every­
one (including the teacher) might be drawn to the student's loud and clear 
singing and express appreciation. Therefore, different scenarios and con­
texts determine different understandings of empathy.
Maibom points out that the language or bodily expressions of the other 
can be ambiguous or vague, but specific contexts can help us understand the 
meanings conveyed by the other's language and actions. Additionally, 
history, culture, customs, and language all constitute the situational horizon 
of the empathy relationship between the self and the other. The self's 
perception of the other cannot be entirely separate from the socio-cultural 
context. Critics have interpreted phenomenological subjectivity as an 
abstract existence, not in the world, and based on this, they accuse phenom­
enological empathy methods of being "too dry, rationalized, and abstract" 
(Groark, 2020, p. 295). However, the self and the other in the lifeworld are 
concrete, real, and living personalities. The understanding of the self's and 
the other's empathy takes place in the lifeworld, which serves as a universal 
horizon. This makes the empathy relationship not a dry, abstract, rational 
cognitive relationship. Instead, the self and the other achieve intersubjectiv­
ity through embodied, direct interaction. In our actions, we become a unity, 
forming a reciprocal influence and mutual determination through empa­
thetic understanding, moving from you to me and from me to you (Cf. Hua. 
14, S. 276). Moreover, we find that we are not only coexisting in the "I-you" 
relationship, but also in a more general socio-cultural intersubjective 
horizon.
5. The asymmetry of empathy
The asymmetry between the self and the other in the relationship of 
empathy is a key point repeatedly emphasized by Throop and Zahavi in 
their influential paper, and it is also a principle that Husserl upholds. 
Throop and Zahavi define the asymmetry of empathy as the irreducible 
alterity of the other. Thus, there is an inevitable asymmetry between the 
experiencing subject and the experienced subject. In short, the other has an 
irreducible alterity (Throop & Zahavi, 2020, p. 289). They oppose viewing 
empathy as involving the "identity, fusion, or similarity" between the self 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
15

and the other, asserting instead that empathy must be understood as an 
experiential encounter with the other, one that acknowledges and maintains 
the difference between the self and the other (Throop & Zahavi, 2020, 
p. 289).
Their view has been criticized: if the self and the other's similarity and 
fusion are not emphasized, how can the self resonate emotionally with the 
other? (Cf. Groark, 2020, p. 295). Imagining the other's situation does 
indeed generate empathy, such as empathizing with pain. Therefore, assum­
ing that the core of empathy is partially the dissolution of interpersonal 
barriers is not implausible. When I empathize with you, I feel that your 
situation is my own (Maibom, 2020, p. 296). In other words, if there is 
distance, barriers, and difference between the self and the other, how can the 
self empathetically experience the other's situation as if it were its own?
Why do phenomenologists insist on the asymmetry of empathy? Husserl 
provides reasons for this, at least including the following:
(1) Overcoming Solipsism Criticism: Transcendental phenomenology 
has been accused of solipsism (cf. Stueber, 2020, p. 298), but 
Husserl emphasizes the non-originality of empathy, insisting on the 
irreducibility and alterity of the other, thereby showing that such 
criticism is unreasonable. In the Cartesian Meditations, through 
epoché and reduction, Husserl establishes the transcendental self as 
the starting point for construction, and empathy for the other takes 
place within the self's authentic field. In this pure, authentic field, 
how can the self constitute another transcendental subjectivity as the 
other? This kind of solipsistic constitution could be criticized by 
detractors. To overcome this potential problem, Husserl proposes 
the theory of transcendental intersubjectivity and suggests that we 
should understand the theory of empathy within the framework of 
intersubjective phenomenology. The words and actions of the other 
are directly presented to me, becoming objects of my perception. 
However, I cannot perceive the other in an original manner, just as 
the other cannot perceive themselves in an original way. I cannot 
obtain the other's complete experiential life, and this fact shows that 
my experience of the other differs from my experience of myself; at 
the same time, this is the basis for the alterity of the other in my 
empathy (Cf. Gallagher, 2017, p. 162). When the other's body appears 
in my field of consciousness, it becomes an object of my perception. 
The other's conscious experience must co-occur with my perception 
of the other's body. Without my direct perception of the other's body, 
the other's consciousness cannot be presented to me in a co-present 
manner. In this sense, empathy is a "synthesized perception," a co- 
occurrence (Cf. Hua. 13, 1973 S. 224). As two subjects, there is 
16
J. ZHANG

a distance between the self and the other, and this distance signifies 
their difference and the asymmetry of empathy. The difference 
between the self and the other requires that they cannot merge into 
one. Therefore, empathy occurs under the premise of maintaining the 
distance or difference between the self and the other.
(2) Empathy and Transcendental Theory in Constituting the Objective 
World: The alterity of the other is the guarantee of objectivity. It is 
the precondition for the world's accessibility, shareability, and the 
possibility of intersubjectivity. Without the other, I cannot refer to 
alterity when constituting the world, and my constructed world 
would remain a completely private world, not a world shared by 
all. In other words, in this sense, the world would only have 
subjectivity, not objectivity. Thus, for both Throop and Zahavi, 
as well as for Husserl, maintaining the difference between the self 
and the other is crucial (cf. Zahavi, 2011, p. 548).
In summary, the irreducible alterity of the other and the asymmetry of 
empathy are essential for understanding how the self and the other interact 
and relate, ensuring both a shared, objective world and the preservation of 
each subject's unique experience.
In Husserl's theory of empathy, especially in constituting the intersub­
jectivity of the other, he insists on the difference between the self and the 
other and the irreducibility of the other's alterity.
5.1. Constitutive fusion of the self and the other in distance through 
empathy
For Husserl, the similarity between the self and the other is 
a condition for empathy, but this similarity carries a "gap" or distance. 
To clarify this, Husserl distinguishes between "similarity" and "like­
ness" (Cf. Husserl, 1939, p. 225). Likeness refers to the complete 
overlap between A and B without any "gap" - they are not externally 
separated elements but are entirely unified. In contrast, similarity 
means that A and B are not fully united but retain a gap or distance, 
making them distinct entities that cannot merge into one. In other 
words, similarity indicates not just a kind of merging, but also 
a separation. A and B are paired in their "similar but different" state 
(Cf. Husserl, 1939, p. 225).
Based on this distinction, the self and the other are both similar and 
different. While they are similar, they are not unified into a single 
whole, but rather form an intersubjective community in direct 
interaction.
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
17

5.2. Criticism of Empathy as Fusion of the Self and the other
Critics of Throop and Zahavi emphasize the fusion of the self and the other. 
In this fusion, the self, through imitation or imagination, envisions itself in 
the other's situation, sharing the same thoughts, feelings, and experiences. 
However, this is not true empathy for the other; it is simply the self's 
perception of itself in a different context. Maibom's view, that to empathize 
with another is to feel their situation as though it were our own, is rejected 
by Zahavi and Throop, who disagree with these accounts. The experience of 
empathy for the other and the shared experience of the other are clearly 
different (Zahavi & Throop, 2020, p. 300).
5.3. The danger of psychodynamic approaches to empathy
In this regard, psychological theories of empathy that attempt to achieve the 
sharing and ownership of the other's experiences and situations are criti­
cized. This approach essentially reduces empathy for the other to self- 
experience. It interprets empathy as an understanding of the self, thus 
negating the alterity and transcendence of the other. This is essentially 
a form of reductionism, where the experience of the other is reduced to 
the self's experience, denying the difference between the self and the other. 
Therefore, empathy is not a projection of imagination or a way of placing 
oneself in the other's situation (Cf. Moran, 2022, p. 24).
In summary, Husserl's view of empathy maintains a balance between 
similarity and difference. Empathy does not involve merging the self with 
the other but rather acknowledging the gap and maintaining the alterity of 
the other while also recognizing the shared, intersubjective experience. This 
understanding preserves the distinctiveness of the other while still enabling 
a meaningful connection through empathy.
Husserl emphasizes the reciprocity and bidirectionality of empathy in his 
phenomenology of intersubjectivity. In this view, the relationship between 
the self and the other in the constitution of empathy is not a one-way 
process where the self constitutes and the other is constituted or empathized 
with. Instead, it is a mutual constitution and reciprocal empathy process (Cf. 
Hua. 13, S. 230, 367-377; Hua. 15, 1973 S. 44, 608; Zahavi, 2001).
5.4. The reciprocity in empathy
In empathy, on the one hand, the self is the constituting subject, and the 
other is the object being constructed. On the other hand, the self is the object 
being constructed, and the other is the constituting subject. The meaning of 
the other cannot appear solely within or through the other itself but must 
emerge through the self's constitution. In this sense, the self is the revealer 
18
J. ZHANG

and constitutor of meaning, but not the creator of existence - the other is not 
created by the self. Similarly, the other is also a constructor of meaning, 
revealing the conditions of possibility for the self's transcendental 
subjectivity.
Thus, Husserl asserts that the self is constituted by the other, just as the 
other is constituted by the self (Cf. Hua. 14, S. 276). This implies that self and 
other are mutually interdependent in the constitution of meaning and 
experience.
5.5. Simultaneous constitution without hierarchical order
The bidirectionality of empathy constitution is simultaneous, without an 
order of precedence. The self does not first construct the other, and then the 
other constructs the self. Instead, the process of the self constituting the 
other and the other constituting the self occurs in tandem, without any 
ontological priority (Cf. Hua. 13, S. 230). This means that neither the self 
nor the other has absolute priority in the constitution of their relationship. If 
there were a hierarchical order, it might suggest that the self is the absolute 
source of construction, and the other is merely a relative, constructed object, 
which would deny the irreducibility and alterity of the other. Therefore, the 
transcendental self is a methodological starting point for the constitution 
process but does not imply that the self holds ontological primacy.
5.6. Interchangeability and mutual alterity
The relationship between the self and the other, as a mutual construction, 
affirms their difference and irreducibility as subjects. When the other is 
considered the starting point of construction, the other becomes the self's 
alter ego or "other" in the constitution process, and the self becomes the 
other's "other." Hence, all individuals are simultaneously both the other to 
others and others to themselves (Cf. Hua. 14, S. 421; Zahavi, 2001). This 
mutual constitution confirms the equality of self and other in their ontolo­
gical status. Neither the self nor the other holds an absolute ontological 
priority, and the other is not a reducible, secondary constructed object.
5.7. Equality and Non-hierarchical Status
The reciprocity and bidirectionality of empathy demonstrate that, ontolo­
gically, the self and the other are equal. The self does not possess an absolute 
privilege over the other, and the other is not a relative, reducible object of 
construction. This mutual constitution affirms the irreducibility of both the 
self and the other and their ontological equality.
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
19

In summary, Husserl's phenomenology emphasizes that empathy is not 
a one-directional or hierarchical process but a mutual, simultaneous con­
stitution of self and other. This mutuality affirms the alterity of both and 
ensures that neither the self nor the other has absolute priority, preserving 
their equal ontological status and irreducibility.
Third, the self and the other achieve a balanced constitution structure 
within the asymmetry of empathy. The similarity and difference between the 
self and the other make their pairing possible. Pairing means that the two 
elements are not identical and without "gaps"; only different things, things 
with distance, can allow pairing to occur (Cf. Costello, 2012, p. 159). On the 
one hand, the distance between the self and the other makes pairing 
possible, while on the other hand, pairing further ensures their irreduci­
bility. Therefore, Husserl emphasizes that the two elements pair up or even 
merge due to similarity or homogeneity; however, this merging is accom­
panied by distance because heterogeneity always exists (Cf. Hua. 11, 
S. 130-131). In a certain sense, empathy not only "seeks similarity" but 
also "seeks difference." The similarity between the self and the other deter­
mines that the two cannot be completely unrelated, while similarity is 
always accompanied by difference, and they must be a "distant fusion" 
(Hua. 11, S. 139). Thus, on the one hand, we cannot exaggerate the differ­
ence between the self's experience and the other's experience, as this would 
make it difficult to empathize with the other; on the other hand, we also 
cannot underestimate the difference, as this would make it hard to guaran­
tee the other's alterity. Therefore, we need to maintain a balance in the 
constitution structure of the self-other empathy relationship (Cf. Gallagher 
& Zahavi, 2008, p. 187). In this sense, the difference between the self and the 
other is the premise of empathy, their similarity is the condition of empathy, 
and the balance of their constructive relationship is the guarantee of 
empathy.
It can thus be seen that the critique of the difference between the self and 
the other having solipsistic properties is incorrect. On the contrary, the 
empathy theory based on imitation has the potential to be criticized for 
solipsism. Psychoanalytic empathy theory relies on the self's imitation of the 
other. A problem with the imitation theory is that it can be solipsistic. In 
other words, the experience gained through imitation is not an empathic 
experience of the other, but rather a form of self-perception. If one can only 
"imagine" themself, how can they be sure that the simulated emotion 
corresponds to the emotion experienced by the other? (Bruttomesso, 2016, 
p. 352). Essentially, this is a form of reductionism. If the other is reduced to 
the self, and the self and the other are entirely identical, then the experience 
of empathy becomes a self-perception, which is the true solipsistic dilemma. 
Moreover, unlike psychoanalytic theory, which emphasizes the role of 
empathy in interpersonal relationships, for Husserl, the function of empathy 
20
J. ZHANG

is not merely mutual understanding between individuals. More importantly, 
the experiences of the self and the other intertwine, complement each other, 
and permeate each other within empathy, forming a community of inter­
subjective experience that makes the constitution of the world possible. In 
this sense, Empathy is the prerequisite for our common, intersubjective, and 
spatial world of experience (Thompson, 2001, p. 19). In the world, the self's 
experience becomes part of the other's, and similarly, the other's experience 
becomes part of the self's. In this way, the self and the other achieve the 
constitution of themselves through mutual construction, while also giving 
the self and the other characteristics of community, objectivity, and 
intersubjectivity.
6. Conclusion
The debate between Throop and Zahavi and their critics highlights what 
phenomenological empathy is and what it is not. Phenomenological empa­
thy has its own objectives, scope, function, and characteristics, which are 
defined by the uniqueness of phenomenology's methodology and theory. 
Husserl's phenomenology of empathy is primarily not concerned with social 
cognition; its ultimate goal is not to solve the barriers in interpersonal 
relationships but to address the question of how the world, with its inter­
subjectivity and objectivity, is made possible. In this sense, the theory of 
empathy serves as a transcendental path for constituting the objective world, 
possessing a constructive phenomenological significance.
For Husserl, on the one hand, we must uphold the foundational role of 
phenomenological empathy within the theory of social cognition; on the 
other hand, we need to recognize the limits and, in some sense, the limita­
tions of phenomenological empathy, and avoid confusing it with other 
forms of social cognition. Phenomenological empathy, as Husserl envi­
sioned it, cannot be reduced to a psychological or interpersonal phenom­
enon aimed solely at understanding others or resolving social issues. Rather, 
it is a transcendental process that reveals the structural foundation of 
intersubjectivity in the constitution of the world. In this sense, phenomen­
ological empathy is a profound exploration of how we come to share a world 
with others, grounded in the recognition of both the similarity and irredu­
cible otherness of the self and the other.
Furthermore, phenomenological empathy is not about merging or fully 
identifying with the other, but about recognizing the fundamental distance 
and difference between the self and the other, even as we acknowledge their 
shared presence in the world. This distinction ensures that the self and the 
other retain their autonomy and irreducibility, while simultaneously 
enabling a shared experience of the world. Thus, empathy, in this phenom­
enological context, is not merely about mutual understanding or emotional 
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
21

resonance; it is about a deeper, transcendental constitution of intersubjec­
tivity that allows for the existence of a world that is both objective and 
shared.
In light of these points, the debate surrounding phenomenological 
empathy underscores the importance of maintaining a clear distinction 
between phenomenological approaches to empathy and other social cog­
nitive theories. By understanding the phenomenological nature of empa­
thy, we can appreciate its role in the broader project of constituting an 
intersubjective, objective world, while also recognizing the boundaries 
that prevent it from being conflated with other forms of social under­
standing. This approach not only enriches our understanding of empathy 
but also solidifies the place of phenomenology within the broader philo­
sophical and cognitive sciences.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
References
Bruttomesso, M. C. (2016). Experiencing the other. How expressivity and value-based 
perception provide a non-solipsistic account of empathy. Rivista Internazionale di 
Filosofia e Psicologia 7(3), 350-364. https://doi.org/10.4453/rifp.2016.0036 .
Costello, P. (2012). Layers in Husserl's phenomenology: On meaning and intersubjectivity. 
University of Toronto Press.
Gallagher, S. (2017). Empathy and theories of direct perception. In H. L. Maibom (Ed.), The 
Routledge handbook of philosophy of empathy (pp. 158-168). Routledge.
Gallagher, S., & Zahavi, D. (2008). The phenomenological mind: An introduction to philoso­
phy of mind and cognitive science. Routledge.
Groark, K. P. (2020). Comment on Throop and Zahavi, 'dark and bright empathy: 
Phenomenological and anthropological reflections'. Current Anthropology 61(3), 294- 
295. https://doi.org/10.1086/708844 
Husserl, E. (1939). Erfahrung und Urteil: Untersuchungen zur Genealogie der Logik, edited by 
Ludwig Landgrebe, Academia Verlagsbuchhandlung Prag.
Hua 11:, & Husserl, E. (1966). Analysen zur passiven Synthesis: Aus Vorlesungs- und 
Forschungsmanuskripten 1918-1926. Martinus Nijhoff.
Hua 1:, & Husserl, E. (1973). Cartesianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge, edited by 
S. Strasser, Martinus Nijhoff.
Hua 4: Husserl, Edmund. (1952). Ideen zu einer reinen Phänomenologie und 
phänomenologischen 
Philosophie 
II: 
Phänomenologische 
Untersuchungen 
zur 
Konstitution. Martinus Nijhoff.
Hua 13: Husserl, Edmund. (1973). Zur Phänomenlogie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem 
Nachlass. Erster Teil. 1905-20, I. Kern (Ed.), Martinus Nijhoff.
Hua 14: Husserl, Edmund. (1973). Zur Phänomenlogie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem 
Nachlass. Zweiter Teil. 1921-28 I. Kern (Ed.), Martinus Nijhoff.
22
J. ZHANG

Hua 15: Husserl, Edmund. (1973). Zur Phänomenologie der Intersubjektivität. Texte aus dem 
Nachlass. Dritter Teil. 1929-35. I. Kern (Ed.). Martinus Nijhoff.
Ioannidis, I. (2019). No empathy for empathy: An existential reading of Husserl's forgotten 
question. International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 27(2), 201-223. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/09672559.2019.1602320  
Jardine, J. (2022). Empathy, embodiment, and the person: Husserlian investigations of social 
experience and the self. Springer.
Jardine, J., & Szanto, T. (2017). Empathy in the phenomenological tradition. In 
H. L. Maibom (Ed.), The Routledge handbook of philosophy of empathy (pp. 86-97). 
Routledge.
Maibom, H. (2020). Is 'empathy' empathy?': Comment on Throop and Zahavi, 'dark and 
bright empathy: Phenomenological and anthropological reflections'. Current 
Anthropology 61(3), 295-296. https://doi.org/10.1086/708844 
Moran, D. (2022). From empathy to intersubjectivity: The phenomenological approach. In 
A. Bortolan & E. Magri (Eds.), Empathy, intersubjectivity, and the social world: The 
continued relevance of phenomenology. Essays in honour of Dermot Moran (pp. 23-43). 
De Gruyter.
Ratcliffe, M. (2017). Empathy and psychiatric illness. In H. L. Maibom (Ed.), The Routledge 
handbook of philosophy of empathy (pp. 190-200). Routledge.
Satne, G. L. (2020). Empathy and cultural permeation: Comment on Throop and Zahavi, 
'dark and bright empathy: Phenomenological and anthropological reflections'. Current 
Anthropology, 296-297.
Scheler, M. (2008). The nature of sympathy, Trans.P. Heath, Transaction.
Stueber, K. R. (2020). Elucidating the brighter and darker sides of empathy: Comments on 
Throop and Zahavi. Current Anthropology, 297-298.
Thompson, E. (2001). Empathy and consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies 8(5-7), 
1-32.
Throop, C. J., & Zahavi, D. (2020). Dark and bright empathy: Phenomenological and 
anthropological reflections. Current Anthropology, 61(3), 283-292. https://doi.org/10. 
1086/708844  
Walsh, P. J. (2014). Empathy, embodiment, and the unity of expression. Topoi, 33(1), 
215-226. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-013-9201-z  
Zahavi, D. (2001). Husserl and transcendental intersubjectivity: A response to the linguistic- 
pragmatic critique, Trans.Elizabeth Behnke. Ohio University Press.
Zahavi, D. (2011). Empathy and direct social perception: A phenomenological proposal. 
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 2(3), 541-558. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13164-011- 
0070-3  
Zahavi, D., & Throop, C. J. (2020). Reply: Empathy reconsidered? Current Anthropology, 
299-302.
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
23

