Physiotherapy Theory and Practice
An International Journal of Physical Therapy
ISSN: 0959-3985 (Print) 1532-5040 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/iptp20
In search of the pleasure of moving through
bodily re-explorations and interactions with the
surroundings: a qualitative study on changed
perceptions of physical activity in people with
mild multiple sclerosis
Stine Susanne Haakonsen Dahl, Ellen Christin Arntzen, Shaun Gallagher &
Britt Normann
To cite this article: Stine Susanne Haakonsen Dahl, Ellen Christin Arntzen, Shaun Gallagher
& Britt Normann (2025) In search of the pleasure of moving through bodily re-explorations and
interactions with the surroundings: a qualitative study on changed perceptions of physical
activity in people with mild multiple sclerosis, Physiotherapy Theory and Practice, 41:5,
1008-1021, DOI: 10.1080/09593985.2024.2392183
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2024.2392183
© 2024 The Author(s). Published with
license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
Published online: 19 Aug 2024.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 945
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iptp20

QUALITATIVE RESEARCH REPORT
In search of the pleasure of moving through bodily re-explorations and 
interactions with the surroundings: a qualitative study on changed perceptions 
of physical activity in people with mild multiple sclerosis
Stine Susanne Haakonsen Dahla, Ellen Christin Arntzena, Shaun Gallagherb,c, and Britt Normanna,d
aFaculty of Nursing and Health Sciences, Nord University, Bodø, Norway; bPhilosophy, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN, USA; cSOLA, 
Department of the Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, Australia; dDepartment of Physiotherapy, 
Nordland Hospital Trust, Bodø, Norway
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Reduced physical activity (PA) among people with multiple sclerosis (pwMS) with 
low disability is a significant concern. Developing healthcare to promote PA requires 
a comprehensive understanding of pwMS's perspectives.
Purpose: To explore how pwMS with mild disability perceive PA and the impact of individual, 
professional, social, and environmental aspects on their PA engagement.
Methods: Qualitative, in-depth interviews with 27 pwMS (21 women, 6 men; aged 31-66; EDSS ≤  
3.5) were analyzed via systematic text condensation and informed by enactive theory.
Results: Three categories were formed: Perception Shifts after Diagnosis: Participants adapted their 
perceptions to PA throughout their disease journey. Initial uncertainty concerning bodily capa­
cities, prospects and safety reduced PA. Moving "correctly" during activities was emphasized to 
facilitate PA levels. Affective Experiences Drive Behavior: Pleasure associated with movement was 
a highlighted motivator, however, some experienced PA less rewarding after diagnosis. Discomfort 
and fear were barriers to PA engagement. The Surroundings Influence Perceptions: Participants 
sought social interactions and outdoor-environments to improve PA. Healthcare professionals 
were trusted to provide possibilities for PA, but early-stage and tailored follow-up was often 
lacking.
Conclusion: This study illuminates changed PA perceptions after MS diagnosis and how affect, 
shaped by personal, interpersonal, and environmental aspects, drive PA engagement. Moreover, it 
calls for early follow-up and the implementation of tailored healthcare throughout the disease 
course to promote PA engagement. Considering these findings, we have put forth a model aimed 
at fostering a nuanced comprehension of PA in pwMS with mild disabilities. Further development 
and exploration of this model is needed.
ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 29 March 2024  
Revised 23 July 2024  
Accepted 8 August 2024 
KEYWORDS 
Physical activity; exercise; 
affect; multiple sclerosis; 
enactive theory
Introduction
Physical activity (PA) has numerous benefits for health, 
symptom management and well-being in people with 
multiple sclerosis (pwMS), and regular PA is recom­
mended throughout the course of this neurodegenera­
tive disease (Hoang, Lord, Gandevia, and Menant, 2022; 
Kalb et al., 2020). Despite this, even pwMS with mild 
disabilities are less physically active than the general 
population (Casey, Coote, Galvin, and Donnelly,  
2018). This is also found in pwMS with a pre-morbid 
history of being physically active and engagement in PA 
typically declines with disease duration and progression 
(Goverover et al., 2020).
A need for earlier healthcare follow-up aimed at 
improving PA in pwMS is required (Thrue et al.,  
2021). Targeting PA from early on and when disability 
is low can help people stay active after diagnosis (Kalb 
et al., 2020), maintain essential sensorimotor functions 
(Kleim and Jones, 2008), and enhance the potential 
disease-modifying effects of exercise (Riemenschneider 
et al., 2022). Moreover, the early phases of MS are 
important for individuals' adaptation to their diagnosis 
and shape their future perspectives and involvement 
(Tindall et al., 2023).
Several aspects influence engagement in regular PA 
in people with MS. Aspects particular to the individual 
subject, such as MS symptom impact, motivations, 
knowledge and beliefs, as well as external aspects, such 
as professional and social support and exercise facility 
accessibility, have been reported (Chan and Garikipati,  
2023; Christensen, Brincks, Schnieber, and Soerensen,  
CONTACT Stine Susanne Haakonsen Dahl 
stine.s.dahl@nord.no 
Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences, Nord University, P. O. Box 1490, Bodø 8049, 
Norway
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE           
2025, VOL. 41, NO. 5, 1008-1021 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09593985.2024.2392183
© 2024 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.  
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The terms on which this article has been published allow the posting of the Accepted 
Manuscript in a repository by the author(s) or with their consent.

2016). However, little is known specifically about indi­
viduals with low disability (Learmonth and Motl, 2021), 
which are typically in an active phase of their social and 
working life (Walton et al., 2020). This group presum­
ably faces other challenges compared to people with 
increased disability, and has unique experiences and 
reflections of PA. In-depth insights are essential to 
comprehend the perceptions of PA among pwMS who 
exhibit low disability levels because this understanding 
can inform the refinement and enhancement of health 
services tailored to the needs of this particular subgroup 
of pwMS (Florio-Smith et al., 2023).
Physical activity is commonly defined as "any bodily 
movements produced by contraction of skeletal muscle 
that results in a substantial increase in energy expendi­
ture" (Caspersen, Powell, and Christenson, 1985 p.126). 
Exercise is defined as a subcategory of PA that is 
planned, structured, repetitive and goal-oriented 
(Caspersen, Powell, and Christenson, 1985). To under­
stand pwMS's perceptions of engaging in PA and exer­
cise, we argue that a comprehensive perspective that 
acknowledges both physical, cognitive and affective 
aspects of PA, and how these are interlinked in social, 
historical and physical contexts, is needed.
Enactive theory offers such a perspective and is 
used in this study to enhance our understanding of 
pwMS's perceptions of PA. Enactive approaches to 
embodied cognition emphasize action-oriented (sen­
sorimotor) processes, the roles of affect, and the phy­
sical and social environment (Gallagher, 2017; 
Thompson, 2007). In the context of MS, impairments 
in sensorimotor, cognitive, and affective functions can 
influence these processes (Normann, 2021). These are 
processes and aspects that are considered to be dyna­
mically integrated so that changes to one aspect will 
lead to changes in the others. Accordingly, on this 
view, the body and the mind are essentially intercon­
nected and are expressed in the individuals' sense- 
making (Gallagher, 2017; Thompson, 2007). Enactive 
theory also incorporates the notion of "affordance" 
from Gibson's ecological psychology (Gibson, 1979). 
Affordances are possibilities for action (and social 
interaction), constituted relationally as what an envir­
onment offers to a specific individual with a specific 
skill set (Gibson, 1979). Sensorimotor and cognitive 
skills thus provide possibilities for perception and 
action. In addition, affect is central to why people 
perceive or act in a certain way because affect moti­
vates a sense of interest or investment (Gallagher,  
2017 p. 153). This highlights the significant and argu­
ably overlooked role of "affective movements:" the 
ways in which emotions, feelings (including the feel­
ing of pleasure or pain), and moods are intertwined 
with the experience of physical movements and activ­
ities (Cole and Montero, 2006; Colombetti, 2014). 
Furthermore, situated interactions with the physical 
environment and other people modify affective states, 
and can contribute to a form of "affective scaffold" for 
the individual (Colombetti and Krueger, 2014). By 
integrating the enactive perspective and exploring 
the interlinking of affectivity and bodily movements, 
we can achieve a nuanced and innovative understand­
ing of PA behavior in pwMS with low disability.
The aim of this study was to explore perceptions of 
PA in pwMS and low disability, with the goal of inform­
ing the development of healthcare services. Using an 
enactive perspective to inform our interpretation, the 
study focused on the complex aspects that influence 
pwMS's sense-making processes related to engagement 
in PA. We sought to answer the following research 
questions: How do pwMS with low disability experience 
PA, and how do individual, professional, social and 
environmental aspects influence their engagement 
in PA?
Methods
Design
A qualitative design was chosen that used individual 
in-depth interviews. This approach is suitable for 
exploring the meaning of pwMS's experiences and 
reflections on the phenomenon in question (DiCicco- 
Bloom and Crabtree, 2006; Malterud, 2001). This 
research was informed by an embodied-enactive 
approach to cognitive and action-related processes. 
This includes ontological assumptions that emphasize 
process and dynamical relations rather than final 
states, and epistemological assumptions that acknowl­
edge the importance of first-person experience and the 
co-construction of knowledge through interaction. 
Accordingly, the results were analyzed within the 
interpretative tradition (Malterud, 2012) framed by 
enactive theory, which understands actions as sense- 
making from the unique perspectives of each partici­
pant. The enactive approach draws on phenomenol­
ogy, dynamic systems theory and neuroscience and 
bridges the gap between the biological (living) body 
and the phenomenological (lived or experienced) body 
(Gallagher, 2017). It emphasizes first-person experi­
ences and argues that our world and mind are enacted 
based on our actions (Thompson, 2007). This theore­
tical framework can offer a comprehensive under­
standing of the results and suggestions for further 
research and clinical practice (Halak and Kriz, 2022; 
Øberg, Normann, and Gallagher, 2015). The enactive 
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1009

approach has been successfully applied in other stu­
dies of first-person perspectives in physiotherapy 
(Dahl, Arntzen, and Normann, 2024; Lahelle, Øberg, 
and Normann, 2020; Sivertsen et al., 2022)
Ethical considerations
The study adhered to the principles outlined in the 
Declaration of Helsinki and received approval from 
the Regional Committee for Medical Research Ethics 
in North Norway (REK North: 174837). Before con­
ducting the interviews, participants provided written 
informed consent, which was also verbally confirmed 
during the interview scheduling. Additionally, we 
explained comprehensively the research purpose and 
privacy considerations, and obtained permission to 
record the interviews. The Consolidated Criteria for 
Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) approach 
was used to optimize the transparency and reporting 
of the study (Tong, Sainsbury, and Craig, 2007).
Context
This interview study took place in a northern region 
of Norway, including a regional hospital (Nordland 
Hospital Trust) and two municipalities. It was 
affiliated to a randomized controlled trial (RCT) 
investigating the feasibility of a new intervention, 
CoreDISTparticipation (Appendix 1), compared to 
usual care (Arntzen, Braaten, Fikke, and Normann,  
2024) and a qualitative study investigating partici­
pants' experiences with the outdoor-group of the 
new intervention (Dahl, Arntzen, and Normann,  
2024). CoreDISTparticipation is a comprehensive 
healthcare intervention that addresses sensorimotor 
function, PA and employment in pwMS with low 
disability (Fikke et al., 2023). Participants from both 
the 
intervention 
and 
the 
control 
groups 
of 
CoreDISTparticipation were included in the present 
study, which explored participants' perspectives on PA 
in general (not limited to this intervention).
Recruitment and participants
Written information about this interview study (and the 
RCT) was sent through the MS Outpatient clinic to all 
eligible individuals registered at the regional hospital. 
Individuals were invited to participate if they fitted the 
following inclusion criteria: (1) diagnosis of MS 
(McDonald diagnostic criteria), (2) a score ≤ 3.5 on the 
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) (Kurtzke,  
1983), (3) ≥18 years, (4) employed (10-100%), and (5) 
a residential address in two predefined municipalities. 
The following were the exclusion criteria: pregnancy; 
exacerbation of symptoms within two weeks prior to 
enrollment; and other serious conditions compromising 
balance, walking or work capacity. All individuals who 
fitted these criteria and consented to participate were 
included in this study (n = 29). Two individuals with­
drew when contacted to arrange the time for the inter­
views because of illness (n = 1) or an unknown cause (n  
= 1). Twenty-seven individuals with MS (21 women, 6 
men; age 31-66; EDSS score 0-3.5) were interviewed. 
The demographic information of the sample is pre­
sented in Table 1.
Data production
The participants were individually interviewed by the 
first author (SSHD) between March and May 2022. 
The interviews were scheduled to suit the partici­
pants' preferences for time and place and were held 
either in a quiet office (n = 24) or at the participant's 
home (n = 3). The interviews lasted between 36 and 
70 minutes (mean = 50, total = 1356). The interview 
guide (Appendix 2) was developed by leveraging 
insights from literature reviews, clinical experience, 
and discussions within the research group and with 
user representatives from the local MS society. Two 
test interviews were conducted with pwMS to validate 
the guide. The guide was refined to concentrate on 
the following themes: perceptions and experiences of 
PA, facilitators of and barriers to PA, long-term self- 
management of PA, and experience with follow-up 
related to PA from health care. The questions were 
Table 1. Participants' characteristics measured by means, 
standard deviation, median and minimum-maximum or 
frequencies and percentage.
Characteristics
Participants (n = 27)
Age
48.3 (SD 8.1) min 31 - max 66
Gender
21 (78%) woman, 6 (22%) men
Type of MS 
Relapsing remitting 
Primary progressive
26 (96.3%) 
1 (3.7%)
EDSS score
Median 2, min 0 - max 3.5
Years since diagnosis
11.5 (SD 8.7) min 1 - max 39
1010
S. S. H. DAHL ET AL.

open-ended and asked about both negative and posi­
tive experiences. Follow-up questions were applied, 
and answers were rephrased to clarify and confirm 
a common understanding between the interviewer 
and 
the 
participants, 
as 
recommended 
by 
Brinkmann & Kvale (Brinkmann and Kvale, 2015). 
The 27 interviews yielded rich and in-depth reflec­
tions on the participants' experiences, which we 
regarded of substantial power to address the research 
question (Malterud, Siersma, and Guassora, 2016). 
The interviews were audio-recorded and then tran­
scribed verbatim by the interviewer (n = 10) and 
a research assistant (n = 17). The interviewer read 
through all the transcripts while listening to the 
audio-recorded interviews and made some minor 
clarifications in the text to ensure that everything 
was captured accurately.
Analysis
The transcribed material was analyzed using systematic 
text condensation (STC) (Malterud, 2012) and orga­
nized 
with 
NVivo 
(version 
14.ink). 
STC 
is 
a descriptive and explorative procedure for cross-case 
analysis that involves a process of decontextualizing the 
empirical material into themes and meaning units fol­
lowed by recontextualizing the material into categories 
presented as analytical texts (Table 2). The process 
involves iteration, leading to ongoing transitions 
between transcripts and the various analysis steps. 
Enactive theory was used to interpret the results (in 
the discussion) and allowed new insight into the reports 
from the informants (Malterud, 2016).
The research team and reflexivity
Three of the authors (SSHD, ECN & BN) were research­
ers and physiotherapists with several years of clinical 
experience working with pwMS, which implies close­
ness to the research and clinical field. This knowledge of 
the field is positive but may contribute to blind spots in 
the interpretation of the results (Malterud, 2016). SG, as 
an expert in enactive theory, provided critical distance 
meant to identify and address hermeneutical blind 
spots. In this respect, the use of an enactive approach 
as a theoretical perspective provided a critical perspec­
tive for interpreting the interviews. The results were 
discussed with colleagues from other research area & 
clinical professions and through meetings with three 
user representatives in which we argue adds to the 
validity and trustworthiness of the study (DiCicco- 
Bloom and Crabtree, 2006). The interviewer had for­
merly provided physiotherapy to some of the 
participants. All participants were informed that the 
interviewer 
held 
the 
professional 
role 
of 
a physiotherapist but was now working as a researcher. 
The participants were also ensured that their responses 
during the interviews would not impact their subse­
quent healthcare follow-up.
Results
The three categories that were generated are presented 
as an overview in Table 3 and below as analytical texts 
supplemented by participants' quotes.
Perception shifts after diagnosis
Perceptions of PA changed after MS diagnosis and tran­
sitions of attitudes was evident trough the varied course 
of the disease. Typically reports ranged from the "uncer­
tainty" of being newly diagnosed to the more "settled" 
experience of living with the diagnosis. Changes in 
bodily capacities influenced participants' perceptions 
of PA engagement in terms of the type of PA that was 
prioritized and the ability to structure PA to influence 
adherence.
After their MS diagnosis, the participants' views of 
their own PA shifted due to attitudes about MS, reduced 
capabilities and heightened insecurity about safety and 
how to be active. Despite engaging in regular exercise 
before the diagnosis, many participants reduced their 
participation or anticipated future reduced activity 
levels due to impacts of MS. One participant reported:
What you've learned about MS is pitch black [. . .]. It 
was important for me to stay active. To realize and 
experience that it doesn't have to be like this, at least 
not to begin with. (ID 10)
Uncertainty or fear of the future made the purpose of 
exercise unclear and goal-setting difficult. Thus, several 
reported their goals were to participate "as much as 
possible," in daily activities such as playing with their 
children, maintaining housework, going for hikes or 
simply being social or remaining employed. Others 
were constantly searching for new challenges, new 
directions or motivations for PA adherence.
The perspectives of pwMS were adapted through 
experience living with MS. "The first couple of years 
were the worst ones [. . .] gradually I learned to be posi­
tive" (ID 22), which were widely followed by being less 
stressed about the safety and amount of PA performed. 
However, many expressed heightened dedication to PA 
after their diagnosis to improve function or to fortify 
themselves in case of another MS attack. Some attributed 
beliefs of "I am relatively mildly affected by MS years after 
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1011

Table 2. Analysis process.
Analytic step
Analytic process
Performed by
Examples leading to the category Affective experiences drive behaviour:
1 Total 
impression
Recognize preliminary themes
SSHD and BN read all transcripts while ECN read 1/3). Preliminary themes 
were discussed and agreed on in workshop attended by all authors 
(SSHD, ECN, SG and BN)
Preliminary themes: 
1) Physical activity and affectivity 
2) Perspectives on bodily capacity 
3) Purpose and beliefs 
4) Being active together with others  
5) Influence of healthcare professionals 
6) Environment for activity
2 Decon 
textualization
Identify meaning units and code into groups 
and subgroups
SSHD identified meaning units in the transcripts and coded them into 
groups and subgroups. Coding was initially performed according to the 
preliminary themes but discussed and redefined in collaboration with 
ECN and BN
Meaning unit (one of several): I do it because it is simply a comfortable way 
to exercise and I feel like I'm fixing it. Because I can, I've been through it 
enough that I know how to do those exercises. Also, maybe I can 
immediately feel that I get something in return for it. Once I've done that 
yoga session, I feel that now the breath is flowing through my entire back. 
So maybe that's kind of it. Also, it may simply be that I'm too lazy for that 
strength training. That I think it's heavy. I don't really know. But I go out 
and jog, and it's going great when I have an audiobook on my ear to focus 
on.
3 Condensation
Condensation of meaning units within each 
subgroup to an artificial quote, which 
represented all the different views found in 
the subgroup
SSHD wrote the condensates of the subgroups, and these were discussed 
with BN. During this step SSHD re-read the transcripts to ensure correct 
interpretations
Condensate (excerpt from): I participate in PA because it is a pleasure to 
move and be active. It is an awesome feeling when you feel the body 
working. It gives me a pure sense of happiness. Nothing beats that feeling. 
All physical activity feels better than nothing. Exercise can also be fun, and 
it improves my mood, my self-confidence and my day . . . .
4 Reconte 
xtualization
Recontextualization of the material based on the 
central meaning content of the condensates
Three distinct categories described as analytical texts supplemented by 
quotes were formed by SSHD that was discussed and revised several 
times by SSHD, ECN and BN
Described in the results chapter, including Table 3
1012
S. S. H. DAHL ET AL.

diagnosis because I continued to stay physically active." 
(ID 27). One individual described the following:
In the beginning, I felt unsure. When I got warmed up, 
I sometimes could not feel my legs because of numb­
ness. But the neurologist told me it is not dangerous, so 
now I try not to panic and continue my day [. . .]. My 
ambitions are perhaps lower. Previously, exercise was 
more about becoming stronger and "my look," while 
now it is more about the feeling I get from it. (ID 19)
A characteristic of the interview material was the parti­
cipants' stories of re-exploring their own body by navi­
gating altered or fluctuating levels of sensorimotor 
function, balance, mobility, or energy. Some individuals 
noted that "[. . .] it may not be visible for others, but my 
body feels different" (ID 19), and subsequently reduced 
their exercise-intensity and modified the type of PA. 
Notably, even individuals with longstanding bodily 
challenges experienced unanticipated improvements in 
function if actively exploring their capacity to improve, 
exemplified by moving "correctly" during daily activ­
ities. For instance, some found that "rolling the foot" 
increased both walking distance and safety. However, 
fatigue sometimes made it challenging to maintain this 
focus. In such cases, "my foot feels stiff, it is difficult to 
walk [. . .] I sometimes stumble and fall" (ID 7) or 
ultimately leading to omitting activities. Several partici­
pants reported having commenced detailed exercises to 
facilitate overall activities after their MS diagnosis: 
What drives me is the pleasure of outdoor activity, and 
then there are those exercises - if I don't do them, I may 
not be able to be outside [. . .]. I got frightened from these 
foot and knee problems. So, I have to do something about 
it. I "watch my steps." That's just how it is. (ID 1)
The importance of a routine for PA adherence was 
heightened after diagnosis, but it was difficult to main­
tain because many pwMS struggled to balance family, 
social, and work activities when their capacities are 
reduced or fluctuating. Initiating or "meeting up for 
activities is often the hardest part of staying active" 
(ID14). Consequently, PA was adjusted to day-to-day 
capacity:
When I experience bad periods, I go into hibernation in 
a way. I don't get depressed, but I just accept that I take 
one day at the time. I need more rest, and I try to focus 
on something else that gives me a positive feeling. (ID 5)
Affective experiences drive behavior
Participants highlighted emotions and mood experi­
ences as significant effects of PA. Positive affect pro­
moted motivation, performance and adherence, while 
negative emotions occurred in some cases and reduced 
adherence to PA. Regular PA boosted self-confidence. 
Fears, such as neglect of self-care by not following PA 
advice or fear of becoming a burden, acted as both 
barriers and drivers of activity.
All participants reported experiences of pleasure 
while moving or a kind of reward from using their 
body which were emphasized as the most important 
drivers for engaging in PA. "Exercise consistently uplifts 
my mood" (ID 4), which was associated with percep­
tions of having a good day and readiness to engage in 
other activities because they felt more prepared. 
Challenging themselves by extending their physical cap­
abilities or engaging in new activities raised the partici­
pants' awareness of using their body and often made 
them feel happy, even described as "a heightened feeling 
of being alive" (ID 1). One informant regularly engaging 
in high-intensity PA experienced this as follows:
When you feel your own heart and blood pumping, and 
your body just "flows," it is a superb feeling! It is a bit 
difficult to describe it with words. But it is an unbea­
table feeling to be able to do exactly what you wish to do 
physically. To reach a peak, follow a track, go for a ride, 
or simply the experience of sweating and using your 
energy. (ID 1)
Feeling good during PA was also tied to performance, 
with participants noting that it felt different when they 
moved in a preferred, smoother, or more comfortable 
manner. This could be described during detailed exer­
cises as a "local comfortable warm sensation, increased 
breath-control [. . .] the activation of core muscles leads 
to a feeling of greater balance and easier movements" 
(ID 11). Such positive experiences were emphasized as 
motivating regular exercise targeting impaired or pain­
ful body parts.
In contrast, many participants reported not adhering 
to detailed exercises or high-intensity training because 
these activities were perceived as boring or painful, even 
if they knew it would do them well in the long run. "I 
experience less pleasure in movement and it makes me 
less active" (ID 27). One person described:
Table 3. An overview of the categories and their subgroups.
Category
Perception shifts after diagnosis
Affective experiences drive behavior
The surroundings influence perceptions
Subgroups
●Transition of attitudes
●Re-exploring bodily capacities
●Pleasure or discomfort
●Confidence and fear
●Social and environmental interactions
●Health professionals as providers of possibilities
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1013

It is very easy to fall into this and give up because it (MS) 
affects your psyche, your motivation, what you can do! So, 
if you don't have any positive experiences with exercise, if 
it's just painful and difficult and doesn't give you anything, 
you opt out of it - because it's very easy to just stay still and 
maybe take a painkiller instead. (ID 27)
Activities that felt more like an adventure than an exercise 
were emphasized as enjoyable, which was important for 
PA adherence. Typically, this included activities described 
as attending to something outside their body, such as 
hiking, mountain climbing, or activities involving social 
interaction. However, many emphasized less mastery or 
less pleasure from their usual PA after MS, which caused 
them to search for alternatives even if they considered 
themselves physically able to do their usual activity.
Experiences with regular PA had positive effects on 
self-confidence and were linked to feeling "more con­
fident in myself and in handling the future [. . .] more 
'normal' person [. . .]" (ID 8). Even if they were not 
pleased with their performance or how far or fast they 
moved, they felt proud of themselves for doing some­
thing beneficial. The worst thing for many participants 
was when they had not even attempted PA, which pre­
cipitated irritability and a low mood, and fear that they 
are not taking good care of themselves. One described:
I am terrified of the wheelchair! And if it happens, I will 
regret it for the rest of my life if I did not go on that 
hiking trip. It is even more important for me, being 
diagnosed with MS, to be active. No one can tell me if it 
will happen or when. But if I keep active, at least I have 
done the most I can do. I am very happy that I did go on 
that hike as it was pure happiness. It sticks in my head 
and gives me something. (ID 25)
Fear was central to the participants' stories and influ­
enced their PA in multiple ways. The participants 
expressed fear of the inability to perform as well in 
activities as before, the inability to follow others on 
hikes or in exercise groups and being a burden to others. 
While most perceived PA as safe, a few feared that high- 
intensity PA would cause symptoms such as dizziness, 
numbness, weakness or pain to exacerbate. Fear of los­
ing their functions was reported from observing other 
people who did worse than themselves because of MS or 
through awareness of their own impairments:
I feel that I have to take my time when I do exercises [. . .] 
in a way, daring to recognize differences and work with 
them [. . .]. If you have impaired function, it is not just easy 
to exercise and to be consciously aware of your body. As it 
becomes very real and intimate, comparing your feet, 
comparing your hands and noticing that there actually is 
a difference. And sometimes even huge differences! That's 
what I am most scared about - to be deprived of these 
physical functions. Because it does not just mean depriva­
tion of the physical but also the mental - all of me. (ID 3)
The surroundings influence perceptions
The participants sought both social and professional inter­
actions and appropriate environments to positively shape 
their perception of PA. Negative experiences of interactions 
with others and the environment were described as barriers 
to PA. Several described a need for increased and more 
individualized professional follow-up to optimize their PA.
Being physically active together with other people 
was significant in supporting enjoyment and for mak­
ing strenuous activity easier. Barriers to routine PA 
were reduced if the participants committed to some­
one about the time, place, activity or "I even some­
times wish that someone commanded me to exercise" 
(ID 2). Most of the participants had experience from 
exercise groups for pwMS (CoreDIST and others). 
Highlighted advantages of these groups were a sense 
of belonging or "an implicit understanding if some­
one stumbles or struggles" (ID 9). However, a few 
participants experienced MS groups as too focused 
on disease. Some preferred PA together with family, 
friends or colleagues, while others experienced chal­
lenges fitting in with their usual exercise group or 
sports team after their diagnosis. Some felt stigma­
tized from other people's belief about MS, as one 
person commented:
I restrict myself from being active because of the diag­
nosis but also because of what others say to me, such as, 
"Why are you not just at home enjoying your life when 
you can, instead of pushing yourself?" or "Why do you 
go for a run? It looks like you are healthy." (ID 17)
The physical environment for activity also mattered to 
the participants' perceptions of PA. A natural and varied 
outdoor environment was overall preferred. Such envir­
onment provided mental benefits such as a clear mind 
and rest from negative thoughts about MS and added 
meaning:
Outdoor activity is solely positive for me [. . .]. 
I prioritize going for a hike to a "local hill" every day. 
I breathe in another way. I concentrate in another 
way. . .it is meaningful to observe my dog sniffing things 
and to suddenly meet other people on the trail. (ID 4)
Environmental barriers to PA were described as dark, 
windy, wet, or cold weather conditions. Low tempera­
tures caused stiffness and performance issues, and some 
people faced reduced function in excessive heat. Fear of 
falls deterred outdoor activities, described as "reducing 
one's world." Exercise in own home were described to 
1014
S. S. H. DAHL ET AL.

interfere with their family-life or "my place to unplug 
from MS" (ID 4).
The participants reported that PA was not on the 
agenda in their regular MS follow-ups (at hospital or 
general practitioners), except for general advice on "try­
ing to stay as active as possible" (ID 18). Most partici­
pants felt the need for closer follow-up from 
professionals to direct PA to conquer their insecurity 
early after diagnosis, and more readily available follow- 
up throughout the disease course if they experienced 
changes in physical functioning. Many participants 
experienced challenges but were left alone to find appro­
priate professionals for follow-up on PA, as described by 
one individual:
I suffered a lot prior to getting a more personalized 
exercise follow-up. Before I met someone that set 
aside time to get to know me and had a long-term 
perspective. I learned that specificity is important and 
that it is not just about doing what I always have done. 
It is important to have follow-up for improvement so 
that I don't exercise in a bad way or spend more time 
than I must. (ID 27)
The participants expressed trust in healthcare profes­
sionals as general practitioners, MS nurses, neurologists 
and physiotherapists, exemplified by the many people 
who felt guilty or feared "I am causing my own pro­
blems when not complying" (ID 16) with their advice. 
Interactions that were perceived to be individually tai­
lored were highlighted as beneficial, including experi­
ences of being seen as a "whole person," trying out PA 
under professional supervision where pwMS recognized 
new possibilities for movement, or activities and gui­
dance on how to continue activity on their own or 
"integrate these small bodily movements into my day" 
(ID 8). Benefits from such interventions were described, 
as exemplified by one person:
It is safe to try out exercise within those frames. I did 
not have to worry, and it felt so good to push myself 
further than I thought I could manage. It is not the same 
just being told; you need to experience it! Simply how 
your body responds to it. (ID 13)
Discussion
The main findings of this study are: 1) the MS diagnosis 
was followed by a shift in attitudes to PA and a need for 
re-exploration of bodily capacities in PA; 2) affective 
experiences, during and as a result of PA such as plea­
sure or discomfort, confidence or fear were important 
drivers or barriers to engagement in PA; 3) perceptions 
of PA were intricately linked with professional, social 
and environmental interactions. These results illumi­
nate a need for a comprehensive understanding of how 
these aspects contribute to PA engagement in pwMS 
with mild disability.
Perception of PA changes after an MS diagnosis
This study highlights that even pwMS with no or minor 
mobility restrictions exhibit changed perceptions of PA 
and limited range of affordances for PA engagement. 
This is in concordance with studies of pwMS that have 
more severe disability (Arntzen, Øberg, Gallagher, and 
Normann, 2019). Though, importantly, based on the par­
ticipants' narratives in this current study, it appears that 
even minor sensorimotor impairments have an impact on 
their beliefs about, or emotional attitude toward one's own 
body. Such changes in body image can restrict affordances 
to action (Gallagher, 2020), including maintaining prior 
PA level. Furthermore, the time around the diagnosis of 
MS was emphasized as a particularly vulnerable period. 
Participants faced uncertainties about how to be active 
and prospects of PA with MS, and consistent with findings 
in previous studies of pwMS acted as barriers to PA parti­
cipation (Crank et al., 2017; Topcu et al., 2023). For indi­
viduals who reported learning over time to find satisfaction 
in being less active, this phenomenon can be interpreted in 
two ways. Firstly, it may represent an adaptation to reduced 
capacity and affordances for being active. Secondly, it could 
serve as a strategic approach to balance their emotional 
well-being (Colombetti, 2017), especially considering that 
being active with MS persisted to be perceived as more 
strenuous and unpredictable than before their diagnosis. 
However, both this current study and previous studies 
(Arntzen, Øberg, Gallagher, and Normann, 2019; Dahl, 
Arntzen, and Normann, 2024) revealed that actively re- 
exploring one's own physical capabilities within secure 
frames, were reported to increase individuals' affordances 
for PA. It is thus argued that even minor sensorimotor 
impairments need to be accounted for, and from early on 
after diagnosis, to optimize pwMS's capacities and beliefs 
for PA engagement. However, even if individuals feel more 
prepared for increasing their PA after participation in an 
intervention (Arntzen, Øberg, Gallagher, and Normann,  
2019; Dahl, Arntzen, and Normann, 2024), they do not 
necessary engage in more PA (Arntzen et al., 2020; 
Arntzen, Braaten, Fikke, and Normann, 2024). This is in 
line with other studies (Casey, Coote, Hayes, and Gallagher,  
2018) and reinforce a need to further explore what drives 
engagement in PA in pwMS.
The crucial intertwining of affectivity and bodily 
movements in PA
Positive affect experienced during or after PA was 
reported as the main driver for PA. This finding aligns 
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1015

with recent research showing that positive affective 
experiences of PA was associated with participation in 
PA among pwMS (Chan and Garikipati, 2023) and in 
elderly (Jackman et al., 2023) and the general population 
(Teixeira, Rodrigues, Cid, and Monteiro, 2022). 
However, neither these research reviews nor PA recom­
mendations for pwMS (Kalb et al., 2020) do explore how 
to address affective experience of PA, nor how move­
ment and affectivity are interlinked.
Participants' experiences of pleasure while moving 
and positive mood changes following exercise are typi­
cally attributed to increased release of endorphins 
caused by PA, but this has mainly been demonstrated 
for PA of long duration or high intensity (Saanijoki 
et al., 2018). The mechanism for the pleasure experi­
enced during the detailed exercises of lower intensity is 
less clear. Since pleasure was reported by some when 
moving the spine or a foot and described as local 
warmth and comfort, it is plausible that the peripheral 
nervous system has a role in these bodily feelings, in line 
with the suggestion of the presence of an affective pro­
prioceptive pathway (Cole and Montero, 2006). 
However, the participants experienced both positive 
and negative affect associated with PA, which varied 
between and within individuals. MS symptoms of pain 
and fatigue as reported by some are well documented as 
barriers for PA in pwMS (Chan and Garikipati, 2023). 
Discomfort during exercise was particularly linked to 
strenuous PA. This is likely associated with being less 
active, consistent with findings in the general popula­
tion that individuals who are more accustomed to push­
ing themselves physically tend to report less discomfort 
during high-intensity PA (Sala, Rosenfield, and 
Baldwin, 2023). Importantly, this suggests that the posi­
tive affects linked to PA may be acquired through 
practice.
From the enactive perspective, bodily affect, whether 
as pleasure or discomfort, is not solely a physiological 
response. It encompasses individuals' lived bodily 
experiences, shaped by how they perceive and interact 
through their bodies (Colombetti, 2014). On the one 
hand, perceptual experience during PA can be directed 
toward a goal or the surroundings, rather than toward 
the agent's own body or its movements (Gallagher,  
2020). Some participants described strong positive 
affect, particularly when they experienced a kind of 
"flow" during PA. These descriptions are in line with 
"being in the flow" as a state characterized by skillful 
performance and deep involvement in an activity 
(Dreyfus, 2013). On the other hand, participants' plea­
sure and discomfort can involve the body entering the 
perceptual foreground as the subject of experience, as 
when the affect is strong (Colombetti, 2014). Moreover, 
sensorimotor, cognitive, and affective impairments 
from MS can reduce PA performance, and in this per­
spective disrupt the flow of movements (Colombetti,  
2014). Such disruptions of movement flow were 
reported by all participants, although of variable 
degrees, and can account for the participants' experi­
ences of less satisfaction from PA after being diagnosed 
with MS, and subsequent reduced PA engagement. 
Importantly, this applied even to pwMS who had high 
mobility levels, implying that individuals' perceptions of 
how they performed were linked to their affective 
experience of the activity.
Engaging in PA boosted self-confidence for having 
a good day, participation in future activities and in 
living with the disease. Conversely, when this positive 
affect is threatened or feared to be compromised, as 
described by many, it can also impact individuals' posi­
tive self-regulation mechanisms (Colombetti, 2017). 
Thus, disruptions in PA were not only reducing indivi­
duals' engagement in PA but could also be understood 
as posing challenges to their trusted, habitual and idea­
lized ways of affectively scaffolding their mind 
(Colombetti and Krueger, 2014). This was exemplified 
by how participants engaged in PA to reduce fear of the 
future, and how not engaging in PA precipitated fear 
about not being able to deal with their own problems. 
This supports the emerging evidence of exercise as 
a means for reducing anxiety in pwMS (Šilić, Motl, 
and Duffecy, 2023). Importantly, it shows that the rela­
tionship between physical movement and affective state 
is dynamic and bidirectional.
This study proposes that affective experiences signif­
icantly influence engagement in PA in pwMS with low 
disabilities, similar to research findings in the general 
population (Ekkekakis and Brand, 2019). However, the 
diagnosis and related impairments appear to augment 
the intricacy of these affective responses. We contend 
that understanding these multifaceted experiences, 
which encompass both the neurobiological and phe­
nomenological aspects of the body, constitutes crucial 
knowledge for health professionals' clinical reasoning 
process in promoting PA in pwMS.
Interactions with the surroundings shape 
engagement in PA
The participants' stories of how their interactions with 
their surroundings shaped their perceptions of PA can 
be understood on enactive principles that we actively 
engage with our world in the generation of shared 
meaning-making (Gallagher, 2017), that our actions 
and social interactions modify our affective states and 
our affordances, and that they also scaffold our 
1016
S. S. H. DAHL ET AL.

cognitive processes (Colombetti, 2017; Colombetti and 
Krueger, 2014).
Thus, the participants' requests for professional sup­
port in directing and in pushing or even demanding PA 
seems plausible to counteract the negative affect of 
uncertainty, fear or discomfort associated with partici­
pation in PA. However, being trusted as providers of 
possibilities for PA involves a large responsibility. This 
is illustrated by participants' narratives that showed that 
not adhering to prescribed exercise could induce fear of 
causing one's own problems, which was also stressed in 
another study as a reason for PA to be promoted care­
fully (Adamson, Adamson, Littlefield, and Motl, 2018). 
The participants indicate that tailoring PA promotion to 
the needs of the individual is important to overcome the 
negative effect of non-adherence and is in line with 
other studies in the MS population (Lahelle, Øberg, 
and Normann, 2020; Learmonth and Motl, 2021). 
Importantly, for those who successfully received such 
services, actively trying PA together with a professional 
was emphasized. This was explained by the importance 
of feeling in their own body that they were able to do the 
activity and that it was safe, in addition to the profes­
sionals' role in optimizing physical performance. The 
important roles played by the body as the experiencing 
and feeling subject (Merleau-Ponty, 2002) were thus 
underscored by the participants, and implies, as also 
expressed by some, that solely verbal instructions are 
not sufficient for PA promotion.
In particular, if PA was perceived as challenging, 
participants sought social support or an outdoor natural 
environment. The enjoyment of exercise when it 
involved interactions with others is consistent with the 
findings of other studies on MS (Chan and Garikipati,  
2023). Other peoples' expectations of living with MS 
also influenced PA. This was reported as a barrier if 
individuals were not able to adapt to others' views or 
keep up with them when exercising, illustrating how 
bodily movements serve as a gateway to interactions 
with other people (Thompson, 2007). Similarly, being 
active outdoors was reported to increase positive affect 
by helping individuals shift their attention away from 
themselves when they experienced a low mood. In con­
trast, however, when challenges and disruptions from 
MS resulted in negative affect associated with outdoor 
PA, it was perceived in terms of both restricting their 
access to the world (restricting affordances) and com­
promising their affective self-regulatory strategies. 
Overall participants' experiences of PA were enabled 
or hindered, supported and/or regulated by social and 
professional interactions with others and their sur­
roundings, in line with the enactive view (Gallagher,  
2017). Accordingly, a comprehensive understanding of 
individuals' surroundings as significantly shaping their 
PA engagement should be included in healthcare fol­
low-ups in pwMS with low disabilities.
Methodological consideration
All participants in this study self-referred to an exer­
cise intervention and were arguably motivated to 
engage in PA. Additionally, participants were 
employed, which correlates with higher PA levels in 
pwMS (Anens et al., 2017). Thus, our results should 
be applied with caution to less motivated or active 
individuals with MS. To reduce the impact of the 
CoreDISTparticipation on individuals' views on PA, 
the participants were interviewed leaving at least 4 
(ranges 4-6) months after the intervention ended, 
and both intervention- and control group were 
included in this study. As the study was conducted 
in the northern Norway, the local climate including 
dark, cold and snowy winters presumably influenced 
the environmental aspects described. The results 
Individuals'
capacities, attitudes & 
impact of MS
interacting with social, 
professional and 
evironmental aspects
Percieved affordances
& affect associated 
with PA
Engagement in PA in 
pwMS
Figure 1. A model of the results: the interplay between pwMS' 
perceived bodily capacities and attitudes toward PA including 
impact of MS, and the dynamics of their social, professional, and 
environmental contexts influences their perception of opportu­
nities for PA (affordances) and affective experience with PA. 
These perceptions of PA ultimately drive engagement in PA in 
pwMS with mild disability.
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1017

should be interpreted with caution in other environ­
mental or cultural contexts. It may be a limitation of 
the study that the transcripts were not returned to 
participants for comments, as this can ensure that 
participants' unique viewpoints and understandings 
are accurately portrayed (Tong, Sainsbury, and 
Craig, 2007). The enactive framework allowed for 
nuanced understanding of PA in individuals with 
mild disabilities, emphasizing the importance of the 
multifaceted pleasure of moving as a potential game 
changer for improving PA in this population, and 
serves as theoretical generalization to other popula­
tions (Malterud, 2016). However, alternative theoreti­
cal frameworks may generate other perspectives on 
these results.
Implications for practice and further studies
Based on the results we have proposed a model for 
a complex understanding of PA engagement in 
pwMS with low disability (Figure 1). This model 
emphasizes how affectivity, derived from interactions 
of personal, interpersonal and environmental aspects, 
drive PA engagement and that the participants' 
restricted affordances for PA after their diagnosis 
accentuates the need for early, tailored professional 
follow-up. Enactive accounts of how movement and 
affectivity are interlinked adds knowledge that can 
aid implementation of affective experiences in PA 
promotion. Furthermore, participants' narratives 
highlight that the professional follow-up should 
include explorations of both: (1) movements and 
activities together with a professional to build trust, 
optimize performance and affective experience of 
PA, and (2) affordances of the relevant social and 
physical environments that contribute to PA engage­
ment. Studies developing and examining the pro­
posed model in the follow-up of pwMS are 
warranted.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the participants in this study and the 
user representatives from the Nordland MS association for 
their valuable contributions.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
The work was supported by the Nord University.
References
Adamson BC, Adamson MD, Littlefield MM, Motl RW 2018 
'Move it or lose it': Perceptions of the impact of physical 
activity on multiple sclerosis symptoms, relapse and dis­
ability identity. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise & 
Health 10: 457-475.
Anens E, Zetterberg L, Urell C, Emtner M, Hellström K 2017 
Self-reported physical activity correlates in Swedish adults 
with multiple sclerosis: A cross-sectional study. BMC 
Neurology 17: 204.
Arntzen EC, Braaten T, Fikke HK, Normann B 2024 
Feasibility of a new intervention addressing group-based 
balance and high-intensity training, physical activity, and 
employment in individuals with multiple sclerosis: A pilot 
randomized controlled trial. Frontiers in Rehabilitation 
Sciences 4: 1258737.
Arntzen EC, Øberg GK, Gallagher S, Normann B 2019 Group- 
based, individualized exercises can provide perceived bod­
ily changes and strengthen aspects of self in individuals 
with MS: A qualitative interview study. Physiotherapy 
Theory and Practice 37: 1080-1095.
Arntzen EC, Straume B, Odeh F, Feys P, Normann B 2020 
Group-based, individualized, comprehensive core stability 
and balance intervention provides immediate and 
long-term improvements in walking in individuals with 
multiple sclerosis: A randomized controlled trial. 
Physiotherapy Research International 25: e1798.
Brinkmann S, Kvale S 2015 InterViews: Learning the craft of 
qualitative research interviewing. 3rd London: Sage.
Casey B, Coote S, Galvin R, Donnelly A 2018 Objective phy­
sical activity levels in people with multiple sclerosis: 
Meta-analysis. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & 
Science in Sports 28: 1960-1969.
Casey B, Coote S, Hayes S, Gallagher S 2018 Changing physi­
cal activity behavior in people with multiple sclerosis: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Archives of 
Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 99: 2059-2075.
Caspersen CJ, Powell KE, Christenson GM 1985 Physical activity, 
exercise, and physical fitness: Definitions and distinctions for 
health-related research. Public Health Report 100: 126-131.
Chan CT, Garikipati KK 2023 Factors associated with physical 
activity and exercise participation in people with multiple 
sclerosis: A qualitative systematic review. European Journal 
of Physiotherapy 26: 148-159.
Christensen ME, Brincks J, Schnieber A, Soerensen D 2016 
The intention to exercise and the execution of exercise 
among persons with multiple sclerosis-a qualitative meta­
synthesis. Disability and Rehabilitation 38: 1023-1033.
Cole J, Montero B 2006 Affective proprioception. Janus Head 
9: 299-317.
Colombetti G 2014 The feeling body: Affective science meets 
the enactive mind. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT 
Press.
Colombetti G 2017 The embodied and situated nature of 
moods. Philosophia (Ramat Gan) 45: 1437-1451.
Colombetti G, Krueger J 2014 Scaffoldings of the affective 
mind. Philosophical Psychology 28: 1-20.
Crank H, Carter A, Humphreys L, Snowdon N, Daley A, 
Woodroofe N, Sharrack B, Petty J, Saxton JM 2017 
Qualitative investigation of exercise perceptions and experi­
ences in people with multiple sclerosis before, during, and after 
1018
S. S. H. DAHL ET AL.

participation in a personally tailored exercise program. 
Archives of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation 98: 2520-2525.
Dahl SSH, Arntzen EC, Normann B 2024 The meaningfulness 
of exploring one's own limits through interactions and 
enjoyment in outdoor high-intensity physiotherapy for 
people with multiple sclerosis: A qualitative study. 
Frontiers in Rehabilitation Sciences 5: 1303094.
DiCicco-Bloom B, Crabtree BF 2006 The qualitative research 
interview. Medical Education 40: 314-321.
Dreyfus HL 2013 The myth of the pervasiveness of the mental. 
In: Schear J Ed Mind, reason, and being-in-the-world, pp. 
15-40. London: Routledge
Ekkekakis P, Brand R 2019 Affective responses to and auto­
matic affective valuations of physical activity: Fifty years of 
progress on the seminal question in exercise psychology. 
Psychology of Sport & Exercise 42: 130-137.
Fikke HK, Normann B, Sivertsen M, Dahl SSH, Arntzen EC 
2023 Optimizing sensorimotor function, physical activity 
and employment for people with MS - A feasibility study. 
Fysioterapeuten 90: 32-42.
Florio-Smith J, Ayer M, Colhoun S, Daykin N, Hamill B, Liu X, 
Rogers E, Thomson A, Balzan RP 2023 The importance of 
the patient's perspective in decision-making in multiple 
sclerosis: Results of the OwnMS patient perspectives study. 
Multiple Sclerosis and Related Disorders 75: 104757.
Gallagher S 2017 Enactivist interventions: Rethinking the 
mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gallagher S 2020 Action and interaction. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Gibson JJ 1979 The ecological approach to visual perception. 
Houghton: Mifflin and Company.
Goverover Y, Genova HM, Smith A, Lengenfelder J, 
Chiaravalloti ND 2020 Changes in activity participation 
after multiple sclerosis diagnosis. International Journal of 
MS Care 22: 23-30.
Halak J, Kriz P 2022 Phenomenological physiotherapy: 
Extending the concept of bodily intentionality. Medical 
Humanities 48: e14.
Hoang PD, Lord S, Gandevia S, Menant J 2022 Exercise and 
sports science Australia (ESSA) position statement on exer­
cise for people with mild to moderate multiple sclerosis. 
Journal of Science in Medicine and Sport 25: 146-154.
Jackman PC, Cooke S, George T, Blackwell J, Middleton G 
2023 Physical activity experiences of community-dwelling 
older adults with physical disabilities: A scoping review of 
qualitative research. Disability and Rehabilitation 46: 1-13.
Kalb R, Brown TR, Coote S, Costello K, Dalgas U, Garmon E, 
Giesser B, Halper J, Karpatkin H, Keller J, et al. 2020 
Exercise and lifestyle physical activity recommendations 
for people with multiple sclerosis throughout the disease 
course. Multiple Sclerosis Journal 26: 1459-1469.
Kleim JA, Jones TA 2008 Principles of experience-dependent 
neural plasticity: Implications for rehabilitation after brain 
damage. Journal of Speech, Language, & Hearing Research 
51: 225-239.
Kurtzke JF 1983 Rating neurologic impairment in multiple 
sclerosis: An expanded disability status scale (EDSS). 
Neurology 33: 1444-1444.
Lahelle AF, Øberg GK, Normann B 2020 Physiotherapy assess­
ment of individuals with multiple sclerosis prior to a group 
intervention - A qualitative observational and interview 
study. Physiotherapy Theory and Practice 36: 386-396.
Learmonth YC, Motl RW 2021 Exercise training for multiple 
sclerosis: A narrative review of history, benefits, safety, 
guidelines, and promotion. International Journal of 
Environmental Research & Public Health 18: 13245.
Malterud K 2001 The art and science of clinical knowledge: 
Evidence beyond measures and numbers. Lancet 358: 
397-400.
Malterud K 2012 Systematic text condensation: A strategy for 
qualitative analysis. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 
40: 795-805.
Malterud K 2016 Theory and interpretation in qualitative 
studies 
from 
general 
practice: 
Why 
and 
how? 
Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 44: 120-129.
Malterud K, Siersma VD, Guassora AD 2016 Guassora AD 2016 
sample size in qualitative interview studies: Guided by infor­
mation power. Qualitative Health Research 26: 1753-1760.
Merleau-Ponty M 2002 Phenomenology of perception. 
London: Routledge.
Normann B 2021 Body schema and body image disturbances 
in individuals with multiple sclerosis. In: Ataria Y, Tanaka S 
Gallagher S (Eds) Body schema and body image: New 
directions, pp. 285-300. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Øberg GK, Normann B, Gallagher S 2015 Embodied-enactive 
clinical reasoning in physical therapy. Physiotherapy 
Theory and Practice 31: 244-252.
Riemenschneider M, Hvid LG, Ringgaard S, Nygaard MKE, 
Eskildsen SF, Gaemelke T, Magyari M, Jensen HB, 
Nielsen HH, Kant M, et al. 2022 Investigating the potential 
disease-modifying and neuroprotective efficacy of exercise 
therapy early in the disease course of multiple sclerosis: The 
early multiple sclerosis exercise study (EMSES). Multiple 
Sclerosis Journal 28: 1620-1629.
Saanijoki T, Tuominen L, Tuulari JJ, Nummenmaa L, 
Arponen E, Kalliokoski K, Hirvonen J 2018 Opioid release 
after high-intensity interval training in healthy human 
subjects. Neuropsychopharmacology Reviews 43: 246-254.
Sala M, Rosenfield D, Baldwin AS 2023 Unpacking differences 
in post-exercise affective experiences between physically 
underactive and active individuals. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine 47: 111-122.
Šilić P, Motl RW, Duffecy J 2023 Multiple sclerosis and anxi­
ety: Is there an untapped opportunity for exercise? Multiple 
Sclerosis and Related Disorders 73: 104698.
Sivertsen M, De Jaegher H, Alstadhaug KB, Arntzen EC, 
Normann B 2022 The precarity of patient participation - 
a qualitative interview study of experiences from the acute 
stroke and rehabilitation journey. Physiotherapy Theory 
and Practice 40: 1265-1280.
Teixeira DS, Rodrigues F, Cid L, Monteiro D 2022 Enjoyment 
as a predictor of exercise habit, intention to continue exer­
cising, and exercise frequency: The intensity traits discre­
pancy moderation role. Frontiers in Psychology 13: 780059.
Thompson E 2007 Mind in life: Biology, phenomenology, and 
the sciences of mind. Cambridge: The Belknap Press of 
Harvard University Press.
Thrue C, Riemenschneider M, Hvid LG, Stenager E, Dalgas U 
2021 Time matters: Early-phase multiple sclerosis is 
accompanied by considerable impairments across multiple 
domains. Multiple Sclerosis Journal 27: 1477-1485.
Tindall T, Topcu G, Thomas S, Bale C, Evangelou N, 
Drummond A, Das Nair R 2023 Developing a patient 
care pathway for emotional support around the point 
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1019

of multiple sclerosis diagnosis: A stakeholder engage­
ment study. Health Expectations 26: 858-868.
Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J 2007 Consolidated criteria for 
reporting qualitative research (COREQ): A 32-item check­
list for interviews and focus groups. International Journal 
of Quality in Health Care 19: 349-357.
Topcu G, Mhizha-Murira JR, Griffiths H, Bale C, 
Drummond A, Fitzsimmons D, Potter KJ, Evangelou N, 
Das Nair R 2023 Experiences of receiving a diagnosis of 
multiple sclerosis: A meta-synthesis of qualitative studies. 
Disability and Rehabilitation 45: 772-783.
Walton C, King R, Rechtman L, Kaye W, Leray E, Marrie RA, 
Robertson N, La Rocca N, Uitdehaag B, van der Mei I, et al. 
2020 Rising prevalence of multiple sclerosis worldwide: 
Insights from the atlas of MS, third edition. Multiple 
Sclerosis 26: 1816-1821.
1020
S. S. H. DAHL ET AL.

Appendices
Appendix 1. Overview of the CoreDISTparticipation
Appendix 2. Interview guide
Week 1: 
MS outpatient clinic 
(All participants)
Physiotherapy assessment (60 minutes) to explore the potential for changes in balance and walking aiming to turn focus toward 
possibilities and thus, motivate the patient. The MS nurse and the physiotherapist indicated the aspects of importance on 
a standardized form to inform the municipal physiotherapist. Standardized testing Consultation with the MS nurse for the 
intervention group (20 minutes) to address work-related issues based on a structured guide comprising the following themes: 
knowledge of MS at the workplace, experienced work-related challenges due to MS, potential needs and facilitators.
Week 2-5: Municipality 
(Participants in the 
intervention-group)
Physiotherapy assessment (60-90 minutes) to explore the patient's impairments and potential for improvements in 
sensorimotor function and balance in a clinical examination prior to group-training. 
Indoor group (60-minutes x 2 weekly, for 4 weeks). There were three to five participants in each group and one 
physiotherapist. Trunk control & balance exercises were addressed (GroupCoreDIST). Participants received a link to 
CoreDIST digital exercise-videos and were advised to do them 1 × weekly throughout the intervention.  
(20 minutes) regarding barriers to work participation and needs for adaptations regarding work and physical activity, 
according to a structured meeting-guide.
Week 6 
(All participants)
Standardized testing
Week 7-10: Municipality 
(Participants in the 
intervention-group)
Outdoor group (60-minutes x 2 weekly, for 4 weeks). A maximum of 10 participants and two physiotherapists were 
included in each group. Trunk control and balance (GroupCoreDIST exercises) were addressed, and high-intensity 
walking or running was performed. The intervention was conducted in a city park where both flat and uneven surfaces 
and hilly terrain were available (Table 2). Additionally, participants were encouraged to comply with the exercise-videos 
through two weekly SMS-reminders.
Week 11 
(All participants)
Standardized testing
Week 11-14 
(Participants in the 
intervention-group)
Interviews of experiences from participation in the intervention
Theme
Potential questions
Opening information
Information of the aim and structure of the interviews. Physical activity (PA) was explained as incorporating both everyday 
PA and structured, planned and goal-oriented exercises. The importance of revealing both positive and negative 
experiences to increase the knowledge were emphasized. 
The interviewers' background as a physiotherapist were disclosed and it was informed of that she was not working in 
the clinical field at the time of this study.
Overall perceptions and 
experiences of PA
What is the significance of PA for you? Now and before you were diagnosed. 
Can you describe your physical activity during a normal week? Why do you do what you do?
Facilitators of and barriers to PA Can you describe what you might think works? Can you describe any challenges? 
What is it like for you when your body is working? How does it feel? Can you describe PA where you experience 
mastery? What kind of feelings does it give you? Can you describe what you like to do of physical activities? 
What is it like when the body does not work? Can you describe negative experiences with PA? How does it feel? What 
do you think in such situations? Can you describe whether you have experienced any changes in physical function or 
capacity after diagnosis? How have you possibly adapted? 
What kind of significance does self-training have for you? What kind of expectations do you have for self-training? What 
motivates you? Can you describe a good experience with self-training? Can you describe a bad experience? 
What kind of significance does specificity have for you in your PA? What significance do specific bodily functions have 
for you - for your PA? Can you describe how you relate to technique when exercising? Can you describe your attitudes 
toward high-intensity exercise? What are indicators to stop an activity? 
Can you describe an exercise or type of exercise you have completed as self-training? What is it important that the 
training gives you - in the moment and afterwards? 
What is the significance of being active with others? Can you describe any experiences with group training? Along with 
others who have MS? Or others without MS? Can you describe any pros and cons for you of exercise in a group?
Long-term self-management of 
PA
What will it take for you to be physically active in the future? What does PA have to be for you for you to be physically 
active in the long-term? What kind of expectations do you have for your own physical activity level? What is the 
significance of goals for you?
Follow-up of PA from health care Please describe your experience with follow-up from the health service in relation PA. Can you describe what has been 
good? What could possibly have been done differently? Can you describe if there is anything you have missed?
Closing questions
Are there any experiences that you would like to elaborate on? Is there anything related to PA that we have not talked 
about that you would like to say? How did you experience this interview?
PHYSIOTHERAPY THEORY AND PRACTICE
1021

