Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology
ISSN: 2079-7222 (Print) 1445-7377 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ripj20
Some Reﬂections in Phenomenology and
Psychoanalysis
Hsiang Hsu
To cite this article: Hsiang Hsu (2008) Some Reﬂections in Phenomenology
and Psychoanalysis, Indo-Paciﬁc Journal of Phenomenology, 8:1, 1-9, DOI:
10.1080/20797222.2008.11433958
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/20797222.2008.11433958
Published online: 01 May 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 392
View related articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ripj20

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 1 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
 
 
 
Some Reflections in Phenomenology and Psychoanalysis 
 
by Hsiang Hsu 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper examines the origin of phenomenology, and delineates several of its significant 
developments and refractions, in order to arrive at a renewed conception of phenomenological 
theory and practice: a future phenomenology that can, it is argued, articulate productively with 
certain grounds opened up by psychoanalysis. 
 
 
 
It is possible for the process in the Ucs [Unconscious] to come to an end, either after the 
fury has spent itself, or after the object has been abandoned as worthless. (Freud, 
1915/1957, p. 257) 
 
The history of psychoanalysis is not finished - although it is possible that it may finish 
sooner than we think. (Castoriadis, 1978/1984, p. 103) 
 
Socrates: Does not what you have been saying, if true, amount to this: that there must be 
a single science which is wholly a science of itself and of other sciences, and that the 
same is also the science of the absence of science? 
Charmides: Yes. 
Socrates: But consider how monstrous this proposition is, my friend! 
        
 
 
 
  (Plato, 380 BC/1871 (trans.), Charmides, 167c) 
 
 
 
 
In 1964, just thirteen years before Serge Valdinoci's 
"Décomposition et Recomposition Phénoménolo-
giques" was published in Les Etudes Philosophiques, 
Octave Mannoni (1969) wrote his now renowned 
essay "Je Sais Bien" for Les Temps Modernes, which 
contained, at the very end, a remarkable phrase, "une 
phénoménologie freudienne" (p. 33). Leaving aside 
that subtle humour for a moment, as if to think 
through it in all its seriousness, what does such a 
project toward, say, the phenomenology "from the 
other side" entail or require, and how might its 
articulation be contingent and, perhaps even more 
arbitrarily, pertinent? 
 
Here, I hope, by way of first examining the origin of 
phenomenology, and delineating in some detail, and 
to some speculative extent, several of its significant 
developments and refractions, that we may arrive at a 
renewed conception of a theory and practice - a 
future phenomenology that can, I posit, articulate 
productively with certain grounds opened up by 
psychoanalysis. My thesis, as I have shown and will 
elaborate further below, is not novel (considering, for 
example, Binswanger's, Abraham's and a few others' 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 2 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
attempts in the past in the same vein to "synthesize" 
these two fields); with it, however, and in view of 
greater import than any commitment per se to 
reconcile or to polarize the two fields, I wish to draw 
a new relation between the notions of actuality and 
freedom that, I believe, a speculative retooling of 
some key concepts of these two Western traditions is 
able to open for and offer to us. 
 
While we know that the word "phenomenology", 
Phänomenologie, was introduced by the 18th-century 
German mathematician and physicist Johann Heinrich 
Lambert, who used it in the title of the last part of his 
summa philosophiae, Neues Organon, "Phänome-
nologie oder Lehre von dem Schein", Kant (with 
whom 
Lambert 
corresponded 
for 
five 
years, 
concerning 
the 
publication 
of 
his 
inaugural 
dissertation), in fact, in a letter to Lambert, proposed 
"[a] quite special, though purely negative science, 
general 
phenomenology 
(phaenomologia 
[sic] 
generalis) ... presupposed by metaphysics" (1770/ 
1999, p. 108). The phenomenology in general 
addresses "a science of appearances", in which 
Lambert (1764) - almost four decades before his 
compatriot Herschel unintentionally discovered infra-
red radiation, "the invisible light", in Berkshire - 
distinguished an emerging class of "true (or 
objective) appearances" within the Argian survey of a 
"transzendente Optik", as, literally, a likelihood or 
"probability", a Wahrscheinlichkeit (pp. 184-186, 
218-220). He ended his last missive, seven years 
before his death, to Kant with the statement that "an 
appearance that absolutely never deceives us could 
well be something more than mere appearance" 
(Lambert, 1770/1999, p. 119). It is this excessive 
quality of appearance, which circumscribes a 
transcendental irrationality in detention, that refracts, 
in varying rates and every which bearing of 
axiological spin, via the inclinations from Hegel, 
Husserl, Scheler, Merleau-Ponty, Michel Henry, JL 
Marion, et cetera, et cetera. (Kant himself, of course, 
would later eject this phenomenology from his corpus 
as an "empty waste".) 
 
As if "phenomenology" watches itself through a 
shattered mirror, in a certain mode, and presumes an 
eminent facet (symptom), composition (constitution) 
and characterization (classification), "consciousness" 
needs not to correspond with or be restricted to 
empirical reality ipso sensu, but to an absolute reality 
which nonetheless remains "material" (dinglich) 
under 
every 
phenomenal 
disposition. 
"Lived 
experience", then, is itself but a precise stratification 
of the infrastructure of "real life" - or, as Lyotard 
(1986/1991) succinctly notes in his nice little book on 
phenomenology, "the economic already belongs to 
the existential", constituting a dual arc of "regression" 
extending one end of a particular ontological horizon 
to another (p. 129). However, it is in effect the global 
reduction that parses this as an ontological problem at 
all, redressed by Husserl (Husserl & Fink, 1988/1995) 
himself in the Sixth Meditation and Paris lecture ("a 
critique 
of 
phenomenological 
experience 
and 
cognition", according to Eugen Fink, p. xvi): "The 
universality of the reduction is a total act, one that 
however must be constantly exercised as here and 
now [actuell] participating and actual [wirklich] in 
every particular act. That belongs therefore to the 
phenomenology of the reduction itself" (p. 97, n. 
336). 1  The analytic precisely does not end in an 
overtaking of being's experience by a hallucinatory 
subject (and the consequent rebeckoning for the 
predication to its object), but in its possibility from 
not pre-tending to an articulation of an "actually real 
life", and the deep and delicate silence subdued at the 
core of the phenomenological reserve. 
 
Following this thesis, I propose that a science of the 
real is the production of a theology. Phenomenology 
seems to have contended with this primacy of the real 
over the true (but in the name of the true, as in the 
"phenomenology of phenomenology") in two main 
ways - ratifying the revelatory primacy of reality as 
reality itself (pseudo-science in the most general 
sense), or adducing the revelatory power of truth 
(theology - cf. Janicaud, 1991). More specifically, 
this dissolving of the object into its "setting" is what 
renders the (passive) synthesis of phenomenological 
composition a trans-ascendental process within all 
internal homologies - that is, in the actualization of 
the internal limit of the object-as-such with respect to 
a "scientific" procedure. (Inversely, as we noted, the 
co-dependence of the concept-as-object, "reality" a 
fortiori, and the setting-of-object, "truth", as the 
philosophico-analytic imaginary, has been cut off by 
Kant.) "Phainein" is framed internally - which is 
what in no way negates the apposite reality of its 
object, but finds and founds it as the intensive catalyst 
of its appearance. In an analogous manner, Trân Duc 
Thao (1973/1984) correctly identifies the linguistic 
function of this formative procedure as an economical 
"index-sign" that resolves, relatively, "the modelling 
of the sign based on the collective work procedures of 
the ensemble of workers" into what he calls 
"syncretic" 
versus 
"distinctive" 
languages, 
constituted by a series of representative regimes or 
                                                 
1 The "marginal comment" is Husserl's. See also Eugen 
Fink's revisions: "We are simply sticking to the basic 
problem, the question of the intrinsic sense of the relation 
of 'constructive' phenomenologizing, which is given the 
distinction of the privileged status in being of actual-
moment (given) transcendental existence [Existenz], to its 
object, which does not partake in this same privileged status 
in being" (1988/1995, p. 66).  

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 3 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
thresholds which make possible the resolution of "the 
object and the motion in its most elementary form, 
namely the disappearance of the object outside of the 
actual field of perception", thereby "realizing the 
freedom of the mind" (pp. 132-137).2 It is precisely 
the freeing of this migrant nucleus or kernel of the 
theory of thought that I wish to pursue a bit further 
first.   
 
Phenomenology is a phenomenology "of the margins" 
quite literally: it is a making and making-out of 
distinctions, a parastable encoding and exaction of 
laws of form - a gathering and "collection" of 
"figures" (which Husserl (2001, p. 291) described 
beautifully on introducing the "phenomenological 
science" in the Investigations as "straightforward 
perceptions of sensuously unified manifolds, series, 
flights" that are distinct from conjunction) that belie 
and shift our implicit sense of reality, the entire living 
present in its "preconscious" commutation of the 
given and not-given. I do not believe it was a matter 
of mere contingency that phenomenology received 
the embrace it did in Chinese (and, more precisely, 
Taiwanese) circles in the 1920s, '30s and '40s (and 
until even as late as the '70s) from Xiong Wei, Cheng 
Chung-ying, Hsiao Shih-yi, Chang Chung-yuan, and 
others.3 The "xiang", particularly, of xian xiang xue, 
                                                 
2 This is a collection of Trân's revised papers originally 
published in La Pensée from 1966-1970, with the addition 
of a "Third Investigation: Marxism and Psychoanalysis - 
The Origins of the Oedipal Crisis", where he states: "The 
unconscious is generally the sedimented residue of the 
language of the transcended stages of human development 
... . But the unconscious in its Oedipal content, namely, the 
Freudian unconscious, cannot play that role, for it is only 
the residue of a language distorted from the beginning ... . 
It is alienated language" (pp. 195-197, original emphases). 
On the contrary, "syncretic language" (closer to signals) 
can appear on "the objective plane of the language of real 
life, under the pressure of the exigencies of the situation", 
as well as "in the unity of his own lived experience" from 
"possess[ing one's] own image in the still present gesture of 
the other" ("The Birth of Language", p. 77). This is a 
further development of Trân's ideas (1951/1986) and is 
discussed in Lyotard's Phenomenology. 
3  Phenomenology (Husserl's and Heidegger's) gained 
considerable interest among academics and literati in East 
Asia, when it itself was giving way to oriental structuralism 
in mainland Europe. The logician Shen You-ding 
mentioned Husserl in relation to his own research in an 
English article in 1935; Yang Ren-pian (a student of 
Whitehead) published "A Summary of Phenomenology" 
("Xian xiang xue gai lun") in the famed Ming duo magazine 
in 1929; Chang Chun-mai, in the foreword to his 1924 
translation of Driesch's Relativitätstheorie und Philosophie, 
also wrote on Husserl and Driesch. Later, Paul Shi-yi 
Hsiao, of course, was known for translating parts of the Tao 
Te Ching with Heidegger in 1946 (a project which broke off 
that summer) in the Black Forest, right after the war. At the 
phenomenology ("xue" of "xian xiang", the study of 
phenomenon/na), with its fecund idiomatic and 
textual history (up to the I-Ching and I-Chuan), is 
instructive: more than xing, "shape" or "form", it 
denotes a particular reality, that is, of form, as it 
appears 
in 
some 
manner 
of 
"direction" 
or 
"orientation" (which is its sense in the I-Ching) in the 
world. Chinese "logogenesis" is, literally, zao xiang, 
the making of xiang, which naturally contains that to 
which it refers, thus becoming like its eternal form (or 
"ben xing", or even "ben ti"). Code and message are 
coextensive. (It is interesting to note, however, as 
sharply 
remarked 
by 
Jullien 
(1995), 
that 
psychoanalysis, on the other hand, has never really 
taken root, nor will possibly ever take root, in China.) 
 
Brentano (1874/1973) asserts: 
 
[T]here is a special connection between the 
object of inner presentation and the 
presentation itself, and ... both belong to 
one and the same mental act. ... [I]t is only 
by considering it in its relation to two 
different objects, one of which is a physical 
phenomenon and the other a mental 
phenomenon, 
that 
we 
divide 
it 
conceptually into two presentations. ... 
[Furthermore] if the strength of a conscious 
presentation increases and decreases, the 
strength of the accompanying presentation 
which refers to it increases and decreases 
to the same degree, and both phenomena 
always have the same level of intensity. 
(pp. 127-136) 
 
This in fact leads him to reject "unconscious 
determining factors" altogether, upon locating the 
"missing steps" in "analogy" in the case of "other 
mental phenomena besides presentations" such as 
judgment and desire/"love". This does not mean 
Brentano, the "master" to Husserl (and also to Freud), 
is a "Platonist" nevertheless, in the attenuated sense 
that he makes a distinction and then claims the "other 
side" does not exist; in fact the smallest gradient and 
shade is maintained here in the figure of a "duty", a 
"name" or an "association" or "context" (pp. 134-
136). Distinction is, in effect, being-not-being: in 
other words, illusion, or Schein, which is perhaps in a 
sense closer to what Gestalt psychologists call 
"metastable". 
Distinction 
would 
be 
the 
momentariness of the "metastability" of appearance. 
Intention and intensity are inextricably binding in the 
most "peculiarly intimate way". 
                                                                          
end of the Cultural Revolution, interest was rekindled, and 
Chang Chung-yuan (in Hawaii) continued the project in 
1975. 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 4 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
Every intention has a direction and a magnitude, to be 
conceived of more specifically in St Augustine's 
sense of the intentio animi - not "intent", of course, 
but "tending", or "attending" - as "the orientation of 
all the attention of which the soul is capable" (Weil, 
1951/2001, p. 57).
4  It implies the reticular 
concentration 
or 
compression 
of 
affectio 
("impression") into distentio ("expression"), which 
can be diagrammatically represented as follows: 
 
 
 
 
It is the minimal identification of a transversal qua an 
inward projection or fold, the "inroads", which serves 
as the cogitating factor or transducer in the capacity 
for, in this case, a responsibility. For instance, as I 
drive my car through a familiar cross-path of lanes, 
expressways and streets in the course of reaching the 
destination of my home, via a route which may be 
very complex for someone who has never, or rather 
infrequently, been to my home, I am able to take my 
mind off the driving itself, and devote my "attention" 
to some matter, of whatever content, which suits my 
imagination; nonetheless, should an "anomaly" (of 
relative intensity) register with my recognition, such 
as an animal running into my path or a new 
construction being raised, suddenly my perception 
shifts, and, for the most part, without anticipation, the 
distinction is made for my assumption of a 
compensatory or alternate course of action (such as 
veering into a different lane, or taking a different 
route) in order to reach my set destination. Intention 
should be taken in precisely this holistic sense of the 
unity of objective projection (from affect to effect) 
and, borrowing one of Freud's terms, "freely 
suspending attention" (gleichschwebende Aufmerk-
samkeit), and herein it redoubles and intensifies 
instinct. It is the transcription of the correspondence 
of a determinating tensile "group" or aggregate (for 
example, Augustine's "secundum intentionem") in 
                                                 
4 See also St Augustine's Confessions (trans. 1998) and On 
Christian Doctrine (trans. 1958). 
ratio to a code (from genetic to cultural) which 
extends that schema to an actualization (for example, 
as predator or fleeing prey, the subject of an economy 
or a sacrificial object, or a "flight-transformation" as 
Elias Canetti would say), even in a fraction of a 
pattern, in the reflexive arc of transmissive intensities. 
Above all, it - the spider's stratagem - is the instinct 
tending to, for, freedom. 
 
Even psychoanalysis securely accords a forgetting of 
instinct (Instinkt, as, for example, noted by 
Laplanche, 
1996). 
Likewise, 
physicians 
of 
a 
Daseinanalysis and "anti-psychiatry" orientation 
attribute intention to the sole sponsorship of a 
hermeneutic concurrence.5 If this is the case, then we 
ought to stipulate a true "anti-phenomenology", 
which 
would 
entail 
"not 
the 
reduction 
to 
consciousness, but the reduction of consciousness" 
(Merleau-Ponty, 1960, p. 8), and which, at the same 
time, again, furnishes the extra-material core to 
dialectic and psychical materialism. While "The 
accord of phenomenology and psychoanalysis should 
not be understood to consist in phenomenology's 
saying clearly what psychoanalysis has said poorly" 
(p. 8) (or vice versa), nonetheless the latter cannot be 
said to reject or supplant entirely "the quotation 
marks of the phenomenologist", even within the 
exigent admittance of an actual modality of existence 
(Abraham, 1968/1994, p. 83).6 Psychoanalysis forgets 
its intention as the identification of instinct: intention 
and instinct are coextensive, where message and code 
coincide. They are two irreducible aspects of the 
same mythology, an assonance of parallels. It is the 
actualization of the encoding of this absolute nature - 
this, for psychoanalysis, taking the form of a tensile 
dispersion - that transverses this distinction to which 
I am dedicating the last topic of this paper. 
 
Phenomenology is the science of intention, as choice 
a fortiori between distinctions. Psychoanalysis is the 
science of instinct, as reasoning a fortiori without 
cognitions. They compose the bounds of the primacy 
of a direct inference. First, it seems to me that 
Castoriadis (1968, p. 21), of all people, came near to 
something like this point when he wrote: 
                                                 
5 In particular, I depart from the investigations of Boss, 
Binswanger, and Maldiney here (and, to an extent, N 
Abraham, who carries this experiment, in a sense, to its 
limit), for a "unity of psychology" - if it is a point indeed 
where all this takes us - cannot be sufficiently found in 
methods and assumed horismoi (or hermeneutic premises), 
but only in actual concepts and their usage. The logic of the 
analytic must be addressed in actuality. 
6 Abraham and Torok also organized a series of seminars 
titled "Phenomenological Psychology" (later changed to 
"Genetic Phenomenology") at their Paris residence from 
1959-1961. 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 5 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
 
To isolate signification in order to 
formalize it is possible only if one literally 
plays with words - if, that is to say, one 
takes the materiality of the signifier for the 
entirety of the signification ... . In psycho-
analysis, this impossibility is raised, if one 
may so put it, to a higher power, for we are 
dealing here with incarnate significations; 
that is, with representations whose bearers 
are intentions and which are inextricably 
bound up with effects. 
 
Then, in a quite moving insight, Castoriadis says, 
 
No intention, indeed, is isolatable; reflex 
movements apart, any identifiable intention 
rises within the intentional horizon of the 
subject, and has existence and meaning 
within and by means of that horizon (which 
is, of course, largely unconscious). And 
this horizon is, in an essential respect, 
hanging above the void of that which is to 
come. (p. 21) [my emphasis] 
 
Paul 
Ricoeur 
(1961-1962/1970), 
for 
his 
"archeological" course on "Freudianism" - which, he 
reiterates, 
"deals 
with 
Freud 
and 
not 
with 
psychoanalysis" and "is strictly philosophical and in 
no way binding on the psychoanalyst as such" - also 
distinguishes four linchpins that hold (Freudian) 
analysis in place in the activity or exercise as a 
constituting segment of an unremitting Diakritik - 
that is to say, in discourse - expressed as the 
reduction, intentionality (of alterity), the language of 
"mastery" (in the precise act of speaking), and 
intersubjectivity, 
which, 
in 
turn, 
orient 
that 
"unconscious 
of 
phenomenology" 
toward 
the 
"preconscious of psychoanalysis" (pp. xi, 375-418).7 
Psychoanalysis, then, completes the arc in supplying 
its view of the epiphenomena within an objectivist 
("energetic"), entirely classical systematic - with the 
simultaneous 
metabolism 
of 
appearance 
into 
assimilable transparency. Michel Henry (1985/1993), 
twenty years later, concisely points out, in a footnote, 
the potential problem herein: 
 
[T]he rights of intentional consciousness 
are saved. Affect itself has meaning only 
insofar as it is bound to a representation: is 
it not itself a representative of the drives? 
The concept of "representative," whose 
                                                 
7  This book is the culmination of a series of lectures 
Ricoeur gave at Yale and Louvain in 1961-1962. For 
axiomatic critiques of this position (as well as, essentially, 
Abraham and Torok's), see Lyotard (1971) and Jean 
Laplanche (1995/1996). 
importance, 
particularly 
in 
the 
"Metaphysics," 
has 
been 
shown 
by 
Ricoeur, appears to be the means to 
reintroduce Freudian energetics back into a 
psychology 
essentially 
defined 
by 
representation ... . But then isn't the 
originality of a thought of life lost? (p. 349, 
n. 62; see also p. 300) 
 
Lust against Eros, life turning and re-turning on itself 
in the cascades of emergent, "Caesarian", typological 
sexuality, the elective transcendence of desire ... . 
Here we answer: it is with a notation of instincts 
(which are not simply genes) that is persistently 
beyond the account of life and death, any genealogy 
or archeology, and is, foremost, distinguished as the 
instinct to be free, to "intend" otherwise, to will itself. 
In other words, it is precisely the pulse between the 
real and the actual.  
 
Two corollaries: I propose, thus, that psychoanalysis 
is patently the science of live, but non-extant things. 
Sex, investment, et cetera, on the other hand, are not 
conditional for life, but for existence - of a species, 
phylum, continuation, repetition. Here, man is as 
asexual as he is asocial. The singular problem of 
psychoanalysis is presented as a modulation of 
repetition par excellence - be it in the articulations of 
functional regression (Ferenczi), narcissism (Klein, 
Leclaire), 
symptom/sinthome 
(Lacan), 
even 
synchronicity (Jung), and so forth - and, more 
specifically, of how to bind it, within the therapeutic 
of the concept.8 (However, the most literal adaptation 
is perhaps, ironically, in Rogerian psychology, as well 
as in the fields of "artificial intelligence" testing9.) If 
sexuality is a "Lebensform", then the "site and 
object" of the analytic experience is life-as-such - to 
lift the veil of nudity. In this respect, psychoanalysis 
proffers a unique view of language and linguisticity: 
within the bracketing of fantasy ("I know very well, 
but all the same..."), it accedes to not the materiality 
(which is sacrificed under the dispositif of the text), 
but the actuality, of language. (The language of 
psychoanalysis itself is very beautiful - that is, 
ironically, until it is said the unconscious is structured 
like a language; instead, psychoanalysis is "the 
language of the madman, codified" [Dubrovsky, 
1974]). What is hence common actually to 
(Derridean) deconstruction and psychoanalysis is not 
some 
hermeneutic 
subversion, 
or 
even 
a 
"fundamental 
actualization" 
of 
epistemological 
categories (Granel, 1972), but, analogically, a work of 
confusion of positive, working distinctions (the social 
                                                 
8 For a take on repetition as a theme in the unconscious, see 
Gilles Deleuze (1968/1994, pp. 16-19, 96-115). 
9 cf. Turing, A. M. (1950). Computing machinery and 
intelligence. Mind, 59(236), 433-460. 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 6 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
against society, for instance) within coordinates of the 
actual. It aligns the drifting movement which 
ultimately I shall term "Western" into a singular 
prescriptive, a pure agency which flows in eminence 
within a heuristic of cycles of transfer. That particular 
ethics can be expressed as: you can see something for 
what it is and not accept it; you can even reject 
something for what it is. You can not want what is 
good for you.   
 
The second corollary concerns an absolute transitivity 
of all surface, within, and most effectively so in 
regard to the dialectic of repetition, what Abraham 
(1985/1995) 
called 
"fascinated 
consciousness": 
subject to an "inevitable, horizonless future ... [to] as 
far as the total abdication of freedom, to the point of 
the abolition of consciousness itself, to catalepsy or 
ecstasy ... [which] express and realize in the essential 
mode a temporal experience of passivity"; he goes on: 
"Although this essentializing retreat evinces, in fact, a 
certain freedom, the absence of a revalorization of the 
past as a constitutive process clearly reflects the total 
axiological passivity of the individual before the 
imperatives of the group" (p. 84) (my emphasis).10 
Obviously, this "before" is taken in the spatial as well 
as the temporal sense. The individual stratum here is 
ambivalent with the collective stratum, which would 
consist in, on the one hand, sublimative ego-drives, 
and, on the other, the nirvana principle (which 
"expresses" the trend of the death drive) - or what 
Bion (1961) calls "alpha" and "beta functions". 
Esther Bick, in a 1968 paper in the International 
Journal of Psychoanalysis titled "The Experience of 
the Skin in Early Object-Relations", further develops 
this therapeutic as a procedure of "passive" 
assimilation of "the parts of the personality [in its 
most primitive form, which] are felt to have no 
binding force amongst themselves", to a selective 
identification of a "second-skin", which "manifests 
itself as an either partial or total type of muscular 
shell or a corresponding verbal muscularity". 11 
Projection is thus a mapping of literal emergence. 
Psychoanalysis can cut across this determination (as a 
sort of "anti-repetition" of consciousness) to make the 
individual 
that 
is 
the 
"decomposition 
and 
recomposition" (Valdinoci, 1977) of the "blocs" of a 
system (which are informed only intersubjectively) of 
                                                 
10 Ricoeur (1968) remarked to Abraham in 1962: "Taking 
as your point of departure elements completely devoid of 
content ... you have tried to make us rediscover what an 
affect is. ... By the same token, the question of the birth of 
temporality is raised ... in a Kantian fashion, as when he 
states that we create time by drawing a line. You have 
shown us how we create time by drawing a rhythm ... 
[T]his particular time is ... the respiration of a rhythm ... its 
very repetition is an element of tension" (p. 68). 
11 See also Bick (1986) and Didier Anzieu (1985/1989). 
constitutive realities, as the following diagram 
represents in propositional form: 
 
 
 
Surface is then taken in the sense of something like 
the "after-image" of an absolute externalization of 
identificatory processes to isomorphically autono-
mous realities enacted on their infinitely voluminous 
"material". Horror, per speciem, is not the cavernous 
fundament beneath its veneer with the horrible thing 
hidden in an absolute recess behind shadows, 
threatening to unleash itself. Horror itself is that skin, 
that unfathomable, depthless, absolute threshold 
itself; there is nothing more familiar and terrifying 
than the proximity of skin. (To offer another 
illustration - Klein's formulation of "primary 
narcissism" invokes the two "sides" of the ego12: that, 
on the one hand, of the proto-image-effect resulting 
from the affective "ricocheting" off of the reality of 
another, and, on the other, of an express encoding of 
the "stuff" or material which constitutes the latter. It 
is formally distinct from autoerotism and "critical 
pleasure" (for example, Schau-Lust) in that it 
structures and signifies the phenomenon of the ego, 
which anchors itself like a skin onto a determination 
of a simultaneous unfolding and displacing of a 
"narcissism proper" to become that precise ego of the 
phenomenon which, on one side, controls the libidinal 
cycles of conduction, degradation, flux and fusion; on 
the other, the "not-yet" and the "always-already" 
traverses the presence of the law of codes - that is, 
aggression and transgression. It is in this manner that 
the equivocation of reality - Ananke - which denies 
itself anaphorically, is attested to: reality carries or 
effects 
its 
own 
element 
of 
annihilation.) 
Psychoanalysis subsists in the irony of the surface. 
 
I have sketched how, I consider, in general 
phenomenology 
and 
psychoanalysis 
come 
to 
enlighten and to elaborate each other, with the 
fundamental equation of intention and instinct, in the 
form of a phenomenon of distinction (toward a core 
of reserve) transversing an analytic of repetition 
                                                 
12 The "ambivalence" of the ego in narcissism in relation to 
the libido was already addressed by Lou Salomé to Freud in 
1915 (Pfeiffer, 1985, pp. 23-24). 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 7 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
(toward the surface of language). Phenomenology 
represses the basis of intention in instinct, and 
psychoanalysis, while supplying this ground, forgets 
its Arbeit and expression. It is for the actuality of a 
plenary freedom - of each's respective practice and 
force - as  well as for their own inchoate freedom for 
full actualization, that such a project, in incorporating 
the two fields, strives. 
 
 
 
About the Author 
 
 
Hsiang Hsu is a doctoral candidate in philosophy at the Europäische Universität für 
Interdisziplinäre Studien (EGS) in Switzerland, and has published essays on Gilles 
Deleuze, Jean Baudrillard and Pierre Klossowski, among others, in journals such as 
Symposium: Canadian Journal of Continental Philosophy, Angelaki: Journal of the 
Theoretical Humanities, The International Journal for Baudrillard Studies, and New 
York Studies in Media Philosophy. He has written a chapter for a book, in tribute to 
Jean Baudrillard, on Baudrillard and Eastern philosophy (Atropos Press, in press). 
Hsu is also a writer of fiction and translator of Chinese literature, and his works 
have appeared in PRISM International, Words Without Borders, and Turntable + 
Blue Light. Based in Taipei, his main interests are in comparative Western and 
Eastern philosophy and literature.  
 
 
 
 
References 
 
Abraham, N. (1994). The shell and the kernel: The scope and originality of Freudian psychoanalysis. In N. Abraham 
& M Torok, The shell and the kernel: Renewals of psychoanalysis (N. T. Rand, Ed. & Trans.) (pp. 79-98). 
Chicago: Chicago University Press. (Original work published 1967) 
 
Abraham, N. (1995). Rhythms: On the work, translation, and psychoanalysis (B. Thigpen & N. T. Rand, Trans.). 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. (Original work published 1985) 
 
Anzieu, D. (1989). The skin ego (C. Turner, Trans.). New Haven: Yale University Press. (Original work published 
1985) 
 
Augustine (St.) (1958). On Christian doctrine (D. W. Robertson, Trans.). New York/London: Macmillan. (First three 
books of original work written A.D. 397 and the fourth added A.D. 426) 
 
Augustine (St.) (1998). Confessions (Susan B. Varenne, Ed., & James J. O'Donnell, Trans.). New York: Vintage. 
(Original work written c. A.D. 397-401)  
 
Bick, E. (1968). The experience of the skin in early object-relations. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 49, 
484-486. 
 
Bick, E. (1986). Further considerations on the functioning of skin in early object relations: Findings from infant 
observation integrated into child and adult analysis. British Journal of Psychotherapy, 2, 292-299. 
 
Binswanger, L (1967). Being-in-the-world: Selected papers of Ludwig Binswanger (J. Needleman, Trans.). New 
York: Harper. (Original work published 1922) 
 
Bion, W (1961). Experiences in groups. London: Tavistock. 
 
Brentano, F. (1973). Psychology from an empirical standpoint (A. C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, & L. L. McAlister, 
Trans.). London: Routledge. (Original work published 1874) 
 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 8 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
Canetti, E (1962). Crowds and power (C. Stewart, Trans.). London: Victor Gollancz. (Original work published 1960) 
 
Castoriadis, C. (1984). Crossroads in the labyrinth (M. H. Ryle & K. Soper, Trans.). Cambridge: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press. (Original work published 1978) 
 
Deleuze, G. (1994). Difference and repetition (P. Patton, Trans.). New York: Columbia University Press. (Original 
work published 1968) 
 
Driesch, H. (1924). Aiyinsitan shi xiangduilun jiqi piping [Einstein's theory of relativity and its critique] (Chang 
Chun-mai, Trans.). Shanghai: Commercial Press. (Original work published 1924 as Relativitätstheorie und 
philosophie) 
 
Dubrovsky, S (1974). La Place de la madeleine: Ecriture et fantasme chez Proust. Paris: Mercure de France. 
 
Fink, E. (1995). Sixth Cartesian meditation: The idea of a transcendental theory of method with textual annotations 
by Edmund Husserl (R. Bruzina, Trans.). Bloomington: Indiana University Press. (Original work of 1932-1934 
edited by Hans Ebeling, Jann Holl & Guy van Kerckhoven and published 1988) 
 
Freud, S. (1957). Mourning and melancholia. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of the complete 
psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 14, pp. 237-260). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work, written 
1915, published 1917) 
 
Granel, G (1972). Traditionis traditio. Paris: Gallimard.  
 
Henry, M. (1993). The genealogy of psychoanalysis (D. Brick, Trans.). Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
(Original work published 1985) 
 
Husserl, E. (2001). Logical investigations (J. N. Findlay, Trans.). London: Routledge. (Original work published 
1900/1) 
 
Janicaud, D (1991). Le Tournant théologique de la phénoménologie française. Combas: Edition de l'Eclat. 
 
Jullien, F (1995). Le Détour et l'accès. Stratégies du sens en Chine, en Grèce. Paris: Grasset. 
 
Kant, I. (1999). Letter to Johann Heinrich Lambert. Sep 2, 1770. In A. Zweig (Ed. & Trans.), Correspondence (pp. 
107-109). Cambridge University Press. (Original work written 1770) 
 
Lambert, J. H. (1764). Neues Organon [New organon]. Leipzig, Germany: Johann Wendler. 
 
Lambert, J. H. (1999). Letter from Johann Heinrich Lambert. Oct 13, 1770. In A. Zweig (Ed. & Trans.), 
Correspondence (pp. 113-120). Cambridge University Press. (Original work written 1770)  
 
Laplanche, J. (1996). Psychoanalysis as anti-hermeneutics. Radical Philosophy, 79, 7-12. 
 
Lyotard, J. (1971). Discours, figure [Discourse, figure]. Paris: Klincksiek. 
 
Lyotard, J. (1991). Phenomenology  (B. Beakley, Trans.). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 
(Original work published 1986) 
 
Mannoni, O (1964). Je sais bien ... mais quand meme. Les Temps Modernes, 212, 1262-1286. 
 
Mannoni, O. (1969). Clefs pour l'imaginaire [Keys to the imaginary]. Paris: Éditions du Seuil. 
 
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1960). Preface. In A. Hesnard, L'oeuvre de Freud [The works of Freud] (pp. 5-10). Paris: Payot. 
 
Pfeiffer, E. (Ed.). (1985). Sigmund Freud and Lou Andreas-Salomé: Letters (W. Robson-Scott, Trans.). New York: 
Norton. 

Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology, Volume 8, Edition 1   
May 2008 
 
Page 9 of 9 
 
 
The IPJP is a joint project of the Humanities Faculty of the University of Johannesburg in South Africa and Edith Cowan University's Faculty 
of Regional Professional Studies in Australia. This document is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced in whole or in part via any 
medium without the express permission of the publishers. 
 
The Indo-Pacific Journal of Phenomenology (IPJP) can be found at www.ipjp.org. 
 
 
 
Plato (1871). The dialogues of Plato (Benjamin Jowett, Trans.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Original work written 
B.C. 380) 
 
Ricoeur, P. (1968). Entretiens sur l'art et la psychanalyse [Conversations in art and psychoanalysis]. Paris: Mouton. 
(Interview took place Sept. 6-11, 1962). 
 
Ricoeur, P. (1970). Freud and philosophy (D. Savage, Trans.). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. (Original 
work comprised unpublished lectures presented 1961-1962) 
 
Trân, D. T. (1984). Investigations into the origin of language and consciousness (D. J. Herman & R. L. Armstrong, 
Trans.). Boston: Reidel. (Original work published 1973) 
 
Trân, D. T. (1986). Phenomenology and dialectical materialism (D. J. Herman & D. V. Morano, Trans.). Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Reidel. (Original work published 1951) 
 
Valdinoci, S (1977). Décomposition et recomposition phénoménologiques. Les Etudes Philosophiques, 32, 95-110.   
 
Weil, S. (2001). Reflections on the right use of school studies with a view to the love of god. In Waiting for God (E. 
Crawford, Trans.) (pp. 57-66). New York: Harper. (Original work published 1951) 
 
Yang, R. G. [sic] (1929). Xian xiang xue gai lun [Introduction to phenomenology]. Min Duo, 1, 10. 
 
 
 
_____________________ 

