Inquiry
ISSN: 0020-174X (Print) 1502-3923 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/sinq20
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
Walter Hopp
To cite this article: Walter Hopp (2008) Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism,
Inquiry, 51:2, 194-216, DOI: 10.1080/00201740801956937
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00201740801956937
Published online: 15 Apr 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1026
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=sinq20

Husserl, Phenomenology, and
Foundationalism
WALTER HOPP
Boston University, USA
(Received 22 June 2007)
ABSTRACT
Husserl is often taken, and not without reason, to endorse the view that
phenomenology's task is to provide the ''absolute foundation'' of human knowledge. In
this paper, I will argue that the most natural interpretation of this view, namely that all
human knowledge depends for its justification, at least in part, on phenomenological
knowledge, is philosophically untenable. I will also present evidence that Husserl
himself held no such view, and will argue that Dan Zahavi and John Drummond, though
reaching the same conclusion, reach it for the wrong reasons. In the process, I will also
defend a brand of epistemological externalism according to which knowledge does not
depend upon knowing the epistemic principles under which one's knowledge falls, and
argue that Husserl himself held such a view. I conclude with a discussion of a few of the
ways in which phenomenology positively contributes to human knowledge.
The most basic task of phenomenology is to acquire a certain body of
knowledge - knowledge about the essential characteristics of consciousness,
intentionality, and, perhaps principally, knowledge itself. Acquiring knowl-
edge is also one of the central tasks of the positive, naı¨ve, non-
phenomenological sciences. It is also something that seems to happen from
time to time in ordinary, naı¨ve, pre-scientific thought and experience. The
purpose of this essay is to shed some light on the question: what bearing
does phenomenological knowledge have on non-phenomenological knowl-
edge (or putative knowledge), both scientific and pre-scientific? More
specifically, is phenomenology supposed to provide the epistemological
foundations for non-phenomenological knowledge?
In what follows, I will (a) argue that such a view is philosophically
indefensible, and (b) present some evidence that Husserl himself did not
Correspondence Address: Walter Hopp, Department of Philosophy, Boston University, 745
Commonwealth Avenue, Room 516, Boston, MA 02215. Email: hopp@bu.edu
Inquiry,
Vol. 51, No. 2, 194-216, April 2008
0020-174X Print/1502-3923 Online/08/020194-23 # 2008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/00201740801956937

hold any such view. Though there are several Husserl commentators who
have come to the same conclusions, I will argue that, for the most part, their
reasons for thinking so are the wrong ones. I will also defend a brand of
epistemological externalism according to which knowledge does not depend
upon knowing the epistemic principles under which one's knowledge falls,
and argue that Husserl himself held such a view.
I.
That Husserl held that part of phenomenology's task consists in providing
the foundations of knowledge has a ring of orthodoxy to it, especially in
light of Husserl's deep sympathies with the purpose, if not the execution, of
Descartes's philosophical project, and many of Husserl's commentators,
both sympathizers and critics alike, attribute, or seem to attribute, such a
view to him. ''Husserlian phenomenology,'' says J.N. Mohanty, ''aims at an
absolute, i.e. non-relative, grounding of human knowledge.''1 Smith and
McIntyre write,
The basic task of philosophy, he [Husserl] believes, is to discover the
ultimate foundations of our beliefs about the world and our place in it,
and to justify - or at least effect an understanding of - the framework
within which all our thinking about the world takes place, both our
everyday, common-sense thinking and our theoretical, scientific
reasoning. Like Descartes, Husserl thinks these foundations lie with
an understanding of the nature of the experiencing subject and his
consciousness.2
Such interpretations are not without direct support. As early as his Logical
Investigations, Husserl claims that the sciences stand in need of ''theoretical
completion'' by metaphysics and the theory of science (Wissenschaftslehre),
or ''logic'' in Husserl's sense of the term, and that logic and metaphysics
themselves require lengthy and difficult preliminary phenomenological
investigations, which the subsequent six investigations were to partially
provide.3 In Ideas I, Husserl claims that all non-phenomenological sciences
are ''dogmatic'' and stand in need of ''criticism,'' and that this criticism must
come from phenomenology.4 In the Cartesian Meditations, phenomenology
is summoned to provide an ''absolute grounding'' of human knowledge.5
And in Formal and Transcendental Logic, Husserl writes approvingly of the
Cartesian and ''old Platonic'' idea of a ''genuine science... grounded on
absolute foundations.''6 He adds that the transcendental phenomenologist,
in her attempt to ''justify'' the existing positive sciences, is to regard them as
''clues to guide transcendental researches, the aim of which is to create
sciences for the very first time as genuine'' (FTL, p. 14).
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
195

What could Husserl have in mind? The most natural reading, perhaps, is
that Husserl endorses what I will call Epistemological-Phenomenological
Foundationalism, according to which:
EPF-1: Every piece of knowledge in a proper noetic structure is either:
(i)
epistemically basic or immediately warranted, or
(ii)
warranted, directly or indirectly, on the basis of epistemically
basic pieces of knowledge.
EPF-2: Every piece of knowledge that is not itself phenomenological
knowledge is epistemically founded, at least in part, on the basis of
phenomenological knowledge.
EPF-1 is simply Epistemological Foundationalism, which is a thesis
concerning all properly formed noetic structures.7 It is not, in the first
instance, a psychological thesis; it does not maintain that any actual noetic
structures do in fact satisfy the conditions it sets forth as constitutive of a
proper
noetic
structure.8
And
although
most
classical
versions
of
Epistemological Foundationalism have historically been wielded against
the
specter of skepticism, and have therefore maintained
that the
epistemically basic beliefs must be certain, incorrigible, or infallible, this is
not an essential component of Epistemological Foundationalism. The
Epistemological Foundationalist is not, qua foundationalist, committed to
any claims concerning (a) the content of the foundational mental states, (b)
the precise epistemic status of those states, or (c) the nature of the relations
in virtue of which the foundational mental states confer warrant on the non-
foundational ones. And while EPF-2 does specify the contents of the
foundational mental states, it remains silent on (b) and (c).
Several commentators, however, have questioned whether Husserl is
committed to any sort of foundationalism, as well as the philosophical
viability
of such a position generally.9 Dan Zahavi presents three
considerations in support of his claim that ''there is... something very
misleading about calling Husserl a foundationalist, at least if the term is
used in its traditional epistemological sense.''10 First, Husserl explicitly
remarks that any attempt to ''establish a science which is based exclusively
on absolutely certain truths'' involves a misunderstanding of science.11
Secondly, Husserl regards the ''transcendental analysis'' carried out by
phenomenology to be necessarily incomplete, capable of further refinement
and improvement ad infinitum. Third, Husserl rejects the idea, associated
with ''rationalistic Foundationalism,'' that the propositions of phenomen-
ology serve as axioms from which all other knowledge is to be deduced.12
This is all very good evidence that Husserl rejects some varieties of
foundationalism, including, perhaps, most traditional versions of it.
Zahavi's arguments do not, however, entail that Husserl rejects all versions
196
Walter Hopp

of foundationalism, nor the one explicitly under consideration here. With
respect to Zahavi's first point, EPF does not require that the foundational
pieces of knowledge be ''absolutely certain.'' For all we know, Husserl might
have held a more modest form of foundationalism, allowing epistemically
basic pieces of knowledge to have a degree of warrant that falls short of
certainty. With respect to the second point, EPF does not require that the
science
of
phenomenology
be
completed
in
order
to
serve
as
an
epistemological foundation for other, non-phenomenological bodies of
knowledge; it does not say that all of the propositions of phenomenology
are epistemically prior to scientific propositions. It says, rather, that every
piece of non-phenomenological knowledge depends, for its warrant, on at
least some phenomenological propositions, perhaps only a select subset.
With respect to Zahavi's third point, EPF is silent on the issue of whether
foundational beliefs logically entail the non-foundational ones, or bear some
other warrant-conferring relation to them.
II.
John Drummond provides by far the most thorough discussions of both
Husserl's commitment to foundationalism, and the philosophical merits of
such
a
view
from
a
phenomenological
perspective.13
According
to
Drummond, Husserl does not endorse the empiricist brand of foundation-
alism, according to which our knowledge of physical objects is ''reducible''
to incorrigible immediate sense experiences, since Husserl consistently
maintains that empirical sense perception is never incorrigible (Drummond,
1990, 239). This is surely right. However, the empiricist brand of
foundationalism is not what's under consideration here: it plainly is not
entailed by EPF.
Drummond also argues that Husserl does not endorse a rationalist brand
of foundationalism, according to which ''some non-empirical, certain
knowledge is said to be prior to our knowledge of worldly realities.''
(Drummond, 1990, p. 240). As evidence for this, Drummond points out that
despite his strong affinities with Descartes, Husserl rejects the view that the
discovery of the transcendental ego should serve as a ''little tag end of the
world'' from which the rest should be deduced (see Drummond, 1990, p. 241
and CM, sec. 10, p. 24). This does, I agree, provide some evidence that
Husserl did not endorse EPF, but it is not conclusive. The reason has
already been pointed out: EPF does not specify that the relation between
foundational and non-foundational pieces of knowledge must be deductive,
or even inferential.
Of greater interest are Drummond's own reasons, proceeding from a
broadly Husserlian framework, for rejecting Epistemological Founda-
tionalism generally. While Drummond's arguments do not constitute any
direct evidence that Husserl himself rejected such a view, they might at least
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
197

indicate that Husserl's considered views on knowledge are incompatible
with it, and such a fact, if it is a fact, would be of considerable philosophical
interest.
Drummond distinguishes between (a) strong and moderate and (b)
internalist and externalist varieties of epistemological or justificatory
foundationalism. Strong foundationalism holds that the basic cognitions
making up a noetic structure must be certain or infallible. Since the version
of Epistemological Foundationalism under consideration here has no such
commitment, I will focus on Drummond's argument against moderate
foundationalism.
If
it
is
sound,
all
varieties
of
Epistemological
Foundationalism, whether strong or moderate, are false.
Drummond's argument against Epistemological Foundationalism, which
he defines as the view that ''there exist some foundational cognitions or
beliefs (1) which are either self-evident or self-justifying or, at the least, not
evident or justified by reference to any other cognitions or beliefs and (2)
upon which all other cognitions or beliefs are founded insofar as they can be
derived therefrom by an acceptable method,''14 begins with a famous
argument due to Laurence Bonjour:
(1)
Suppose that there are basic empirical beliefs, that is, empirical beliefs
(a) which are epistemically justified, and (b) whose justification does
not depend on that of any further empirical beliefs.
(2)
For a belief to be epistemically justified requires that there be a reason
why it is likely to be true.
(3)
For a belief to be epistemically justified for a particular person
requires that this person be himself in cognitive possession of such a
reason.
(4)
The only way to be in cognitive possession of such a reason is to
believe with justification the premises from which it follows that the
belief is likely to be true.
(5)
The premises of such a justifying argument for an empirical belief
cannot be entirely a priori; at least one such premise must be empirical.
Therefore, the justification of a supposed basic empirical belief must
depend on the justification of at least one other empirical belief,
contradicting (1); it follows that there can be no basic empirical
beliefs.15
To get a better handle on the argument we turn to Drummond's discussion
of the possible responses to it. One, the ''internalist'' option, is to reject
premise (4). The most promising option for the internalist is to maintain
that there are cognitive states, such as experiences, whose contents are
non-propositional, and so cannot serve as premises, but do immediately
justify beliefs. To this Drummond responds that ''it is difficult to see how
non-propositional content would logically justify a propositional content.''
(Drummond 1991, p. 57). Indeed it is. And Drummond appears to believe
198
Walter Hopp

that, if Epistemological Foundationalism is true, then the justificatory
relations between basic and non-basic mental states must be logical.
Drummond is surely right that, historically, most foundationalists, and the
majority of coherentists, have construed epistemic justification as parasitical
upon logical relations among the contents of the mental states involved. But
that is not something to which the Epistemological Foundationalist must be
committed, nor does it follow from Drummond's own definition.
Drummond, unlike many advocates and critics of Epistemological
Foundationalism, including Bonjour, is perfectly willing to admit ''eviden-
tial presentations'' into his account of empirical knowledge (Drummond
1991, p. 64). He holds that perceptual states stand in ''founding'' relations
with judgments, (Drummond 1991, p. 62) and also says, quite rightly in my
opinion, that most discussions of foundationalism ''misconceive evidence as
applying exclusively to the content and its logical justification. Evidence is
instead the evidencing of objects; the experiencing of objects in their actual,
sensuously based presence. But this presence is the presence of the
objectivity itself and not merely the presence of a psychic or logical
content.''
(Drummond
1991,
p. 63).
Drummond
here
is
in
perfect
agreement, and self-consciously so, with Husserl, whose account of
fulfillment describes just how the intuitive contents of experiences contribute
to knowledge. In fulfillment, an object is not merely thought of or meant,
but is intuitively given to one, and present as (more or less) one means it.
Adequate fulfillment, in which an object is given precisely as it's meant, is
just what knowing, at its best, is.16 And what distinguishes a case of
fulfillment, whether adequate or partial, from a case of merely or emptily
thinking about something is the intuitive content of the act. But this content
is not just another proposition, even in the case of categorial intuitions. Any
proposition can be the content of acts which differ from one another in their
intuitive fullness, and therefore differ in their ''epistemic essence.''17 Since
intuition is not another proposition, and yet plays an extremely important
role in the justification of some beliefs, it follows that something besides
propositions can serve as justifiers of belief, and, therefore, that logical
justification is not the only species of justification.
This, one would think, is exactly the sort of response the Epistemological
Foundationalist ought to make to premise (4) of Bonjour's argument.
Drummond argues, however, that this does not commit Husserl (or himself)
to Epistemological Foundationalism, not only because Drummond thinks
the foundationalist is committed to the existence of a logical connection
between epistemically basic and non-basic mental states, but also because
our perceptions are ''associationally informed'' by previous judgments and
knowledge (Drummond 1991, p. 62). Perceptions stand in founding
relations with judgments, but those same judgments stand in founding
relations with perceptions. ''Hence,'' he writes, ''foundations present
themselves in the form of a hermeneutic circle.'' (Drummond 1991, p. 62).
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
199

This is Drummond's strongest argument against foundationalism, but is not
quite convincing. The reason is that Drummond does not adequately
distinguish between epistemic and ontological founding relations.18 A
mental state might depend on another for either its justification or its
existence. And it is perfectly consistent to hold that a given mental state is
both ontologically founded on other pieces of knowledge, but that it does
not depend upon them for its justification. For instance, it requires a great
deal of knowledge to perceive a computer as a computer, or even to see a red
thing as red. In Husserlian terms, someone who lacks the concept
''computer'' might be able to see something that happens to be a computer,
but cannot have meaning-intentions about computers fulfilled - he cannot
verify the thought ''this is a computer'' on a perceptual basis, for instance,
since he cannot think that thought. But the knowledge that such experiences
are ontologically founded upon need not serve as premises or justifying
reasons for believing what is presented in experience, and so need not serve
as epistemic grounds for belief.19 What Drummond would need to establish
to refute Epistemological Foundationalism is that every candidate for
epistemic basicality is not only ''associationally informed'' by a wider body
of beliefs, and in that (ontological) sense founded on them, but that each
depends for its justification on other beliefs.
In light of these considerations, I find Drummond's argument against the
internalist response to Bonjour's
argument strong
but inconclusive.
Drummond's evaluation of the externalist response to the argument is
inconclusive as well, and examining why this is so will shed light on
Husserl's
own
views
about
knowledge.
Internalism,
according
to
Drummond, requires that ''the justifying reasons be known by'' the person
whose beliefs they justify, (Drummond 1991, p. 55) and underlies premise
(3) of Bonjour's argument. In order to block Bonjour's argument, the
externalist will deny this, holding instead that:
a justifying reason for a non-inferential belief is present (a) whenever a
nomological relation exists between the believer and the world such
that the satisfaction of that relation yields a true belief that p and
justifies S in believing that p, even though S has no awareness of this
(nomological) reason or (b) whenever S follows a reliable process in
coming to believe that p, even though S might be unaware of the
reliability of this process. (Drummond 1991, p. 56)
Drummond rejects externalism about epistemic justification on the ground
that, if true, one could be justified in believing something without being
aware that one is justified, and rejects externalism about knowledge - a form
of externalism that dispenses with the requirement that knowledge be
justified - on the grounds that it cannot distinguish between the subjective
state of ''merely believing'' something and knowing ''without awareness of''
200
Walter Hopp

the reason one knows (Drummond 1991, p. 56). Whatever picture of
epistemic justification we adopt, it must be internalist.
In order to assess this argument, let us distinguish (a) the justifying
reasons supporting what I believe and (b) the reasons why my belief - which,
as a psychological state belonging exclusively to me, arising and passing
away in time, and only capable of being made thematic to me in reflective
acts, differs from what I believe - is warranted or likely to be true. My
justifying reasons are those things I would appeal to as evidence supporting
what I believe or know. For instance, my justifying reasons for believing it
has recently rained might be (a) that the pavement is wet and (b) that rain is
the only feasible thing that could have made it wet. Drummond's defense of
internalism rests on the solid insight that in order for my belief to be
justified, I must be aware of my own justifying reasons (if any) that support
what I believe, and his criticism of externalism concerning one's justifying
reasons strikes me as right on.
But while, for any mental state whatsoever, there is a reason why it
possesses whatever epistemic status it does - as premise (2) says - it does not
follow that every such reason must be among the justifying reasons
supporting its content. For instance, among the reasons my belief is likely to
be true or is warranted are that it exists, that it is the consciousness of
something, that it has the precise content it has, that it is brought about by
the consciousness of other things whose contents bear broadly reason-giving
relations to its content, and so forth. More generally, my belief is likely to be
true or is warranted, in part, in virtue of satisfying the antecedent of some
true epistemic principle that specifies sufficient conditions for a belief to be
warranted. But not all such reasons are among those that I would need to
use as evidence in support of what I believe. Take, for instance, my belief
that I am in pain. My evidence for believing that I am in pain is not that my
belief satisfies the antecedent of some true epistemic principle. Rather, my
evidence is - or at least seems to be - that I am in pain, which manifests itself
to me in an evidential presentation.
That statements about one's beliefs are not always among the justifying
reasons supporting what one believes is especially obvious in the case of
necessary truths, as Husserl realizes as clearly as anybody.20 I know that the
law of noncontradiction is necessarily true. But I could not possibly know
this if I had to include patently contingent premises about my own
psychological condition among the justifying reasons for it. If some
proposition p constitutes an essential part of my evidence for another
proposition q, then I also have a reason (whether I actually believe it or not)
to believe the following conditional: If p were false, then q might be false as
well; not-q would then be consistent with everything I know. So, if my
evidence for the law of noncontradiction depended essentially upon some
proposition p concerning myself, such that I have a certain belief B with
such-and-such properties, then I would now have a reason to believe that if I
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
201

had no such belief with such-and-such properties, then the law of
noncontradiction might be false. But this is absurd. There is no proposition
known by me or anyone else, least of all one about my psychological states,
which is such that were it false, the negation of the law of noncontradiction
would be consistent with everything I or anyone else would then know.
Having distinguished between the justifying reasons supporting what one
believes and the reasons why one's beliefs are likely to be true, we can
formulate a distinction between two kinds of internalism. One, Weak
Internalism, states that if S's belief B is justified, then S must justifiably
believe whatever reasons S uses in support of B's content (what S believes).
Strong Internalism shares this requirement, and adds that in order for S's
belief B to be warranted, S must justifiably believe whatever other reasons
there are, if any, in virtue of which B (S's belief) is warranted. And with this
distinction in mind, we can formulate the following dilemma: if all that
Bonjour's argument requires is Weak Internalism, then premise (2) of the
argument begs the question against foundationalism. And if Bonjour's
argument requires Strong Internalism, then, while premise (2) becomes
trivially true, premise (3) becomes extremely implausible. Finally, if one fails
to make the distinction between justifying reasons and non-justifying
reasons - and it's not at all clear that either Bonjour or Drummond do make
the distinction - then one will either be subject to one of the horns of the
dilemma, probably the second, or guilty of equivocation.
To begin with the second horn of the dilemma, suppose that Bonjour and
Drummond endorse Strong Internalism. In that case, premise (2) is trivially
true: of course there is a reason why any given mental state has whatever
epistemic status it has. In particular, any mental state that is warranted is so,
in part, because it satisfies the antecedent of some true epistemic principle.
But on this reading, premise (3) becomes simply incredible. For it entails,
among other things, that one must justifiably believe that one's belief that
one is in pain satisfies the antecedent of some epistemic principle in order to
justifiably believe that one is in pain. Moreover, insofar as a great number of
creatures, including animals, children, and many non-epistemologists, do
not and cannot form justified beliefs about their own beliefs and the
epistemic principles under which they fall, this view entails that they lack
justified beliefs and, therefore, lack knowledge.
That one must form beliefs about one's beliefs and epistemic principles in
order to know also rings false phenomenologically. Consider what actually
happens when one wishes to acquire knowledge of some subject matter. If I
wish to know where my keys are, I will look around the house, searching
and attending to my immediate domestic environment. If I wish to know
what the latest discoveries of astronomy are, I will consult a recent and
reputable source of information. In such cases, what I am conscious of, what
my relevant acts of looking, thinking, trying to make sense of, and so forth
are about, do not include my own acts of thinking or any principles of
202
Walter Hopp

epistemology. Suppose I find my keys, and subsequently reflect on my belief
about their whereabouts. In this case, my reflection discovers the epistemic
properties of my belief, but does not help create or constitute them. I find,
upon reflection, that I formed my belief that the keys are on the table on the
basis of attentive and sober experience. But I do not know anything more
about the location of my keys in virtue of such reflections. I don't now come
to know where my keys are; I already knew where they were, and I now
know that I know where they are. My belief possessed its warrant - perhaps
even non-inferential warrant - prior to and independently of any reflection
upon it. And the same goes for many other cases of warranted belief and
knowledge, which perhaps explains why one does not, in all cases, have
better warrant for one's previous beliefs about biology, astronomy, or the
familiar objects making up the Lebenswelt just in virtue of having learned
something about the nature of knowledge or one's own acts of knowing.
One does not, after one's first epistemology class, have a stronger reason for
believing dinosaurs died out 65 million years ago or that PV5k. Indeed, one
may be considerably more certain of some things than of any epistemic
principles one learns in the course of studying epistemology. As Alvin
Goldman points out, ''Even many career-long epistemologists have failed to
articulate and appreciate correct epistemic principles,''21 which is evidenced
by the fact that epistemologists articulate and appreciate incompatible
epistemic principles.
It seems to me that both Bonjour and Drummond adhere to Strong
Internalism. According to Bonjour, a theory of justification is internalist ''if
and only if it requires that all of the factors needed for a belief to be
epistemically justified for a given person be cognitively accessible to that
person, internal to his cognitive perspective; and externalist, if it allows that
at least some of the justifying factors need not be thus accesible.''22 And
satisfying the antecedent of a true epistemic principle is, trivially, one of the
factors involved in any given belief's being epistemically justified. Bonjour
himself insists that in order for any empirical belief B to be justified, one
must justifiably believe that (i) B has feature w and (ii) beliefs having feature
w are highly likely to be true (Bonjour 1985, p. 31). In order to believe (i),
one must be capable of forming beliefs about one's own belief. And (ii) just
is the form an epistemic principle would take.
It's
not
entirely
clear
whether
Drummond
also
endorses
Strong
Internalism, but it appears that he might. He writes:
We would, then, in order to claim that a particular belief or cognition
is foundational have to assert at least (i) that beliefs or cognitions of
the relevant class are true or likely to be true, (ii) that a particular
belief or cognition is a member of that class, and (iii) that we presently
hold that particular belief or cognition. But these claims constitute a
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
203

logical justification of the belief thought to be foundational.
(Drummond 1991, p. 57)
And he presents this as an argument that the mental state in question could
not be foundational. But this would not follow unless Drummond also
endorsed Strong Internalism. What Drummond says is that one must
justifiably believe (i)-(iii) in order to assert or know that a belief is
foundational, which is of course correct. But this doesn't entail that in order
for a belief to be foundational, the subject of that belief must be able to
assert or know that it is. It is perfectly consistent to maintain that (a) the
belief B, whose content is ''I am in pain,'' is non-inferentially warranted for
S, and (b) the belief B*, whose content is ''B is non-inferentially warranted,''
is not non-inferentially warranted for S, provided one does not hold that (c)
B would not be justified for S unless B* were justified for S. In order for
Drummond's argument to work, however, (c) must be the case, and this
suggests that he, like Bonjour, endorses Strong Internalism.
The foregoing considerations, I think, strongly support a sort of
externalism about epistemic principles and one's own acts of believing of
the sort endorsed by, for instance, James Van Cleve.23 Given some epistemic
principle of the form ''If S believes that p on the basis of method M, then S's
belief that p is warranted,'' it is enough that S form his belief on the basis of
M in order to be warranted. S need not also know the epistemic principle in
question, nor know that its antecedent is the case, despite the fact that these
are among the reasons why his belief is warranted. An externalism of this
sort can, moreover, comfortably coexist with Weak Internalism.
Suppose, then, that Drummond endorses only Weak Internalism, and is
an externalist about epistemic principles. In that case, we must read premise
(3) as asserting that in order for S's belief B to be justified, S must be in
''cognitive possession'' of the justifying reasons in virtue of which it is
warranted (or ''likely to be true''). That is extremely plausible. However, in
that case, we would have to read premise (2) as asserting that for any
empirical belief, there is a justifying reason in virtue of which it is warranted,
since the phrase ''a reason'' in premise (3) refers to the same thing that it
does in (2). But on that reading, premise (2) simply asserts the falsity of
foundationalism. No foundationalist, on pain of inconsistency, would admit
that every empirical belief is justified on the basis of justifying reasons. This
reading of premise (2) renders the rest of the argument otiose; what it
purports to establish at the end has already been asserted at the beginning.
Drummond provides a very good argument against externalism about
one's justifying reasons, but does not provide any argument against the sort
of externalism advocated here. Such a position, moreover, is consistent with
Drummond's own definition of Epistemological Foundationalism. And
while Drummond's argument that every putatively foundational mental
state is founded upon others constitutes a serious challenge to even the most
204
Walter Hopp

plausible versions of Epistemological Foundationalism, it is not entirely
conclusive. In any case, what the previous considerations show is that, while
EPF-1 might be problematic, what makes EPF highly implausible is EPF-2.
For, like Strong Internalism, EPF-2 requires of every knower that he possess
a body of concepts and knowledge that not all knowers possess. For
example, EPF-2 entails, incredibly, that in the absence of possessing some
phenomenological knowledge, scientists, mathematicians, logicians, and
ordinary non-specialists would not possess knowledge of the subject matters
with which they effectively deal. After all, what EPF-2 claims is that
phenomenological claims are essential justifying reasons for everything else,
and it is flatly inconsistent to hold that phenomenology provides the
epistemological foundations of all other sciences, and that those sciences can
produce knowledge independently of phenomenology. But this is, if not
quite absurd, incredible: knowing is as natural for us as speaking and
thinking, arguably coeval with and necessary for them, not something that
can only occur once one has become as sophisticated as Husserl (or
Drummond or Bonjour). We do not, in a great many instances, even have to
try to be knowers; we're fated, by the very nature of intentional
consciousness, to be so. Not only does a statistically normal person know
that she has hands, but she can't help but know it.24
III.
Now we turn to the question whether Husserl himself endorsed something
like EPF. Some of Husserl's commentators expressly point out that Husserl
held that bodies of knowledge exist independently of the results of
phenomenology. Thus Dallas Willard writes:
Although [Husserl] held the sciences to be incomplete in various
important respects, and in need of philosophical supplementation and
clarification, that did not mean, for him, that they fail to provide us
with genuine knowledge. In them we truly do understand the relevant
subject matters; only, we often do not understand our understanding
itself.25
And Elizabeth Stro¨ker writes, ''...[H]e started, and expressly so, from the
pregiven systems of knowledge, and he appreciated well that they provide
knowledge of the real world.''26 If Willard and Stro¨ker are correct, then
EPF must be false. I think they are correct, but before turning to the
evidence in support of their claims, let us examine some evidence that
Husserl did endorse EPF.
Certainly there are passages that suggest that he did. In the Logical
Investigations, for instance, he claims that each science, including formal
logic itself, is incomplete in virtue of what Husserl calls its ''lack of inner
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
205

clarity and rationality.''27 He characterizes the working scientist as a sort of
''ingenious technician'' concerned mainly with ''practical results and
mastery'' rather than ''essential insight.'' (LI Prolegomena, sec. 71,
pp. 244-5). In Ideas I, he claims that ''it can be seen... that they and they
alone [the dogmatic sciences] are the sciences which require 'criticism' - and
indeed, a criticism, which they themselves are essentially incapable of
effecting; and, on the other hand, that the science having the unique
function of effecting the criticism of all others and, at the same time, of itself
is none other than phenomenology.'' (Ideas I, sec. 62, pp. 141-2). In Formal
and Transcendental Logic, he even claims that ''only a science clarified and
justified transcendentally (in the phenomenological sense) can be an
ultimate science; only a transcendentally-phenomenologically clarified
world can be an ultimately understood world.'' (FTL, p. 16). And in the
Crisis, he claims that all of the ''great systems of German Idealism,'' with
which he clearly agrees on this matter, ''share the basic conviction that the
objective sciences... are not seriously sciences at all, not cognitions
ultimately grounded, i.e., not ultimately, theoretically responsible for
themselves - and that they are not, then, cognitions of what exists in
ultimate truth.'' (Cr, sec. 27, p. 99).
Despite appearances, none of these passages provides conclusive evidence
that Husserl held anything like EPF. For the claims that the positive or
naı¨ve sciences are not genuine, are incomplete, require criticism, or lack self-
understanding and self-justification are each compatible with the claim that
each such science produces knowledge and warranted belief about the
subject matters with which it thematically deals. Husserl does, it is true,
routinely characterizes naı¨ve thought as one-sided (see FTL, sec. 9), and
inevitably so: in naı¨ve thinking we are concerned straightforwardly and
thematically with the objects of cognition rather than the subjective
processes by whose means those objects are, to use a troublesome term,
''constituted'' for consciousness.28 But the fact that any complete, self-
understanding and self-justifying species of theoretical or cognitive activity
would have to be two-sided does not by any means entail that a one-sided
cognitive activity does not produce knowledge. A type of thinking that
produces no knowledge or warranted belief would perhaps be better
characterized as no-sided than one-sided. Moreover, Husserl's claim that
only a transcendentally clarified science can be ultimate, and can give us an
ultimate understanding of the world, by no means entails that a science that
falls short of this ideal does not produce partial understanding. Plainly one
need not know everything in order to know something. And one need not
know how one knows, say, that 2+254, what the noetic and noematic
components of such an act of knowing are and how they fit together, in
order to know that 2+254. There is, rather, plenty of reason to think that
we no more need a theory of knowledge to know than we need a theory of
perception to perceive or a theory of thought to think.
206
Walter Hopp

There is considerable evidence, on the other hand, that Husserl did not
adhere to EPF. First, there is direct textual evidence. In ''Philosophy as a
Rigorous Science,'' Husserl writes, ''No reasonable person will doubt the
objective truth or the objectively grounded probability of the wonderful
theories of mathematics and the natural sciences.'' (PRS, 74). Of course he
does not say explicitly that such sciences produce knowledge, but the fact
that no reasonable person would doubt their objective truth clearly suggests
that they at least possess warrant of some sort or another. In both the
Logical Investigations and Ideas I, Husserl argues that it is not the business
of philosophers to interfere with or impede the positive sciences:
The right position to take in the dogmatic, in a good sense,
prephilosophical sphere of inquiry, to which all empirical sciences (but
not just these) belong, is that position which pushes aside all skepticism,
together with all ''natural philosophy'' and ''theory of knowledge,'' and
takes the kinds of objects of knowledge [Erkenntnisgegensta¨ndli-
chkeiten] where one actually finds them - whatever difficulties an
epistemological reflection on the possibility of such kinds of objects
may always point out afterwards. (Ideas I, sec. 26, p. 47, translation
modified.)
This passage clearly implies, among other things, that even in the
''dogmatic'' or prephilosophical sphere, there are ''kinds of objects of
knowledge'' to be found. In the Crisis, Husserl writes:
It is naturally a ludicrous, though unfortunately common misunder-
standing, to seek to attack transcendental phenomenology as
''Cartesianism,'' as if its ego cogito were a premise or set of premises
from which the rest of knowledge... was to be deduced, absolutely
''secured.'' The point is not to secure objectivity but to understand it.
(Cr, section 55, p. 189)
This strongly suggests that for Husserl, the task of transcendental
phenomenology is to come to an understanding of how ''objectivity'' or
objective knowledge, which already exists, or at least might already exist, is
possible. Here Drummond is quite helpful: a transcendental phenomen-
ological critique of knowledge ''clarifies the nature of our everyday
experience of objects and the world, and thereby clarifies both (1) the
nature of those objects and that world precisely as objects of experience and
(2) the nature of ourselves and of other subjects in and of the world.''
(Drummond 1990, p. 243). And this is an altogether different enterprise than
the Cartesian one, on at least one historically prominent understanding of it,
which consists not in explaining the how of knowledge, but in transforming
true belief into objective knowledge by supplying justificatory premises to
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
207

beliefs which, prior to such an investigation, hang in the air. Of course the
task of phenomenology is to produce knowledge - knowledge, however, of
intentional processes. But its task is not to produce non-phenomenological
knowledge, even in part, but to understand the how of such knowledge. And
an investigation into how some body of knowledge is possible is in fact
incompatible with an investigation the point of which is to justify that body
of knowledge, that is, partially to produce that body of knowledge. A
precondition of a successful investigation of the first sort is that the body of
knowledge in question is in fact known, or at least has its evidential status,
independently of the investigation into its how, while a precondition of a
successful, or at least non-redundant, investigation of the second sort is that
it is or does not. The point of phenomenological investigations is not to
provide, but to discover, the foundations (if any) of non-phenomenological
knowledge.
Indirect evidence that Husserl held no such view is even stronger. Husserl
devotes considerable energy to describing what knowledge, at its best, is.
Briefly, it is the condition of adequate fulfillment, in which the object one
means is intuitively presented, and presented precisely as one means it. But
when one examines Husserl's phenomenological descriptions of knowing,
which populate at least a portion of virtually every one of his major works,
one finds that the hypothetical subjects described are not doing phenom-
enology; what is thematic in the vast majority of the acts of knowing Husserl
describes is the intuited object or state of affairs, not the subjective processes
in virtue of which it is intuited, nor any epistemic principles under which
those subjective processes fall. What Husserl describes, when he discusses
cases of fulfillment, is knowledge, not something that, together with the
knowledge of Husserl's theory of fulfillment and/or psychological-phenom-
enological reflection on one's own acts, would only then amount to
knowledge.
We can reach the same conclusion by examining Husserl's most basic
epistemic principle, the famous ''Principle of All Principles,'' which reads:
''every originary presentive intuition is a legitimizing source of cognition...
everything originarily... offered us in 'intuition' is to be accepted simply as
what it is presented as being...'' (Ideas I, sec. 24, p. 44). This epistemic
principle amounts to the following: if an object is exhibited intuitively to a
subject S as S means it, then S is warranted in taking that object to exist and
possess those properties which are exhibited intuitively. If this is right, then
having something exhibited intuitively is a sufficient condition for warrant
and, together with truth, knowledge. In particular, there is no further
necessary condition which must hold, such as knowing the Principle of All
Principles itself. The Principle is ''not a principle I have to apply to in order
to gain knowledge; I need only fall under it.'' (Van Cleve 1979, p. 70).
A final reason for not attributing a view like EPF to Husserl is that it is at
odds with his basic conception of intentionality and thinking. For Husserl,
208
Walter Hopp

all objectifying acts, acts which posit the existence of some object, event,
relation, or state of affairs, are teleologically oriented towards a certain goal.
This goal is, in the first instance, truth, and to grasp the meaning of a
thought is, minimally, to know its truth conditions. But the goal of thinking
is not just truth, but rather the consciousness of truth of the sort that occurs,
preeminently, in acts of fulfillment. Meanings are authentically grasped, not
by grasping their truth conditions alone, but by grasping how, if at all, those
truth conditions (or their contradictories) would present themselves to
consciousness in the flesh. Any meaningful objectifying act is such that its
content or sense can, at least ideally, be evidently fulfilled or frustrated in
corresponding intuitions (though of course the character of this evidence
will depend upon the nature of the entities under consideration).29 Because
of this, knowing is not something that must be added to thinking as a
surplus or addition supplied by reflection upon it. Rather, knowing is just
what thinking, at its best, is; it belongs to the nature of a thought that it
could, under suitable circumstances, be transformed into knowledge of
either what it asserts or its negation. Just as failures in the sphere of action
ought to be treated as deficient modes of achieving, so non-evidential
thinking ought to be treated as a deficient mode of knowing.30 Thus Husserl
writes that ''The concept of any intentionality whatsoever... and the concept
of evidence, that intentionality that is the giving of something-itself, are
essentially correlative.'' (FTL, sec. 60, p. 160). Now insofar as acts of
thinking, or intentional processes generally, do not depend for their
existence or their whatness on reflective intentional acts directed upon them,
but are, rather, presupposed by the latter, so knowing, which is just what all
thinking potentially is and what good thinking actually is, does not depend
upon such reflection either. Evidence or knowledge is a possibility intrinsic
to all thinking, not something bestowed upon it by reflective acts.
Do the foregoing considerations show that Husserl was not an
epistemological foundationalist, or that he endorsed some non-traditional
sort of foundationalism? Some, including Zahavi, Smith and McIntyre
(1982, p. 97), think so - they conclude, on the basis of their own discovery
that Husserl did not endorse such a view, that Husserl was not a
foundationalist or, if he was, that he was a fundamentally different sort
of foundationalist than the traditional sort. They are, however, mistaken.
For in order to conclude that, we would require either some evidence that
Husserl believes the only tenable version of foundationalism is something
along the lines of EPF, or some reason for thinking that a phenomenologist
of Husserl's stripe is logically committed to EPF if he is committed to
foundationalism at all. I am unaware of any evidence supporting the first
claim,
and
Husserl
is
surely
not
logically
committed
to
rejecting
foundationalism just in virtue of rejecting EPF. It is perfectly consistent
to hold that (i) the task of phenomenology is to discover the foundations of
all (branches of) knowledge and (ii) phenomenology does not form part of
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
209

the foundation of all (branches of) knowledge. Perhaps Husserl was not an
Epistemological Foundationalist, but if he was not, it is not because a
repudiation of EPF logically commits him to rejecting it.
IV.
It would be wrong-headed to suggest that Husserl was an externalist, or that
his philosophy is consistent with externalism, if by that one means that the
justifying reasons for what one believes might be reasons of which one is not
conscious. But it is correct, I maintain, to claim that Husserl's philosophy is
consistent with an externalism about epistemic principles and the mental
acts that fall under them: one need not know epistemic principles, or know
that one's own mental acts fall under them, in order to know. It is no part of
the task of phenomenology to provide the justifying reasons for what we
know, unless of course what we know is something pertaining to acts of
consciousness.
Phenomenology does justify our non-phenomenological beliefs and
knowledge, but only in the sense that it exhibits the properties of our
conscious acts in virtue of which they have the evidential status they have.
As Husserl puts it, ''the critique of knowledge seeks to clarify, to bring to
light, the essence of knowledge and the legitimacy of its claim to validity, a
claim that belongs to its essence.''31 The phenomenologist's task, as this
makes plain, is to ''bring to light'' the legitimacy of knowledge's claim to
validity, which is a quite different enterprise than producing or making that
legitimacy. In that sense, phenomenology provides a justification of the sort
the skeptic challenges us to produce: a justification that consists, not (just) in
producing propositions supporting what we know, but in producing
propositions about those acts of knowing and the epistemic principles
under which they fall. But one need not know such things in order for one's
beliefs and acts of knowing to be acts of knowing, which is why when (or if)
one defends one's knowledge against a skeptical attack, one does not only
then become a knower, but displays the nature of what was, all along, a case
of knowing. Just as the reflective moral justification of a prior action does
not
make
or
contribute
to
its
moral
status,
so
the
reflective
or
phenomenological justification of a belief does not make it into a piece of
knowledge or contribute to its epistemic status but presupposes, as a
condition of its very sense, that it has that status already.
Despite all of this, phenomenological investigations make, or at least can
make, an important contribution to human knowledge. Recall Husserl's
claim that the sciences lack ''inner clarity and rationality,'' which, he says,
''is a need independently of the expansion of science.'' (LI Prolegomena, sec.
4, p. 58). What they lack is knowledge of knowledge. The special sciences
produce knowledge, without having anything to say about knowledge itself.
And the need for such knowledge is a specifically philosophical one that has
210
Walter Hopp

dominated Western philosophy since its inception. This need is the need not
only to be justified in our beliefs, but to be able to understand why we are
justified. It is the need not only to fall under epistemic principles, but to
grasp those principles and determine whether or not we fall under them. It
is, in short, the desire to know not only the world around us, but also our
cognitive relationship to it. ''The philosopher,'' writes Husserl, ''is not
content with the fact that we find our way about in the world... He wants to
clarify the essence of a thing... as well as that wonderful affinity which this
essence has with the essence of thought, which enables it to be thought, with
the essence of knowledge, which makes it knowable, with meanings which
make it capable of being meant etc.'' (LI Prolegomena, sec. 71, p. 245). And
knowing such things as that requires a reflective attitude that is extra-
scientific, since the essences of the objects, properties, relations, and states of
affairs that such reflection bears upon are not among those investigated by
any other science - including empirical psychology, which does not
investigate essences. Phenomenology, then, is not only a discipline with its
own subject matter, but its subject matter is one that is of intrinsic and
special philosophical concern.
Phenomenological investigations also serve to make explicit and preserve
the sense of thoughts and assertions conducted in the natural attitude.
According to Husserl, as soon as we engage in ordinary reflection on
knowledge, we ''fall into error and confusion. We get involved in patently
untenable positions, even in contradictions. We are in constant danger of
falling into skepticism...'' (IdPh, p. 18). And in light of these philosophical
interpretations of knowledge, we sometimes generate ''fundamentally
misleading... interpretations of being.'' (ibid.). He continues: ''Thus one
and the same natural science is interpreted in materialistic, spiritualistic,
dualistic, psychomonistic, positivistic, and many other ways, depending
upon what interpretation is thought to be the necessary conclusion of such
reflections.''
We can see that Husserl is on to something when we compare and
contrast his phenomenological analysis of perception with the familiar
theories that confine perceptual awareness to appearances or mental
representations. In phenomenological reflection we examine a thought
and ''ask it what it was aiming at and what it acquired.'' (FTL, sec. 69,
p. 177). What my perception of a house aims at is a house which, unlike any
mental act or experience, is something I can live in, buy, or burn down. And
what it acquires is a house, even though the acquisition is invariably
imperfect, incomplete, and remains at the mercy of future experience. Other
familiar and historically prominent theories of perception, on the other
hand, start from the assumption that perceptual acts must be infallible -
they must have existing objects, and present those objects precisely as they
are. Their advocates have decided in advance what such acts can acquire -
infallibility - and have determined what they must be and could not be
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
211

aiming at accordingly. They couldn't have been aiming at physical objects,
because then they wouldn't be infallible; so, they must have been aiming
elsewhere, at ideas or experiences or appearances. Here two different
interpretations of being result from reflections upon knowledge. And these
different interpretations, carried through to their consequences, will result in
differing interpretations of the propositions of natural science.
Here the value of phenomenology consists in protecting the sense of
ordinary
and
scientific
assertions
against
philosophically
motivated
falsifications of them. And insofar as philosophical reflection on the
possibility of knowledge is deeply rooted in our cultural tradition, this is
plausibly a standing obligation on the part of philosophers. That the
phenomenological method is uniquely suited to perform this role seems
implausible to me. But that it is one way, in a wide range of cases, seems
clear.
Phenomenology's ability to ascertain and preserve the sense of scientific
thoughts
and
assertions
not
only
protects
scientific
theories
from
philosophically motivated falsifications, but protects them from a sort of
meaning depletion that is intrinsic to advanced scientific investigation as
such. The propositions making up the most theoretically advanced sciences
are especially susceptible to sense depletion, as Husserl's discussions in the
Crisis make especially clear. This stems from the fact that those sciences are
the ones that have extended the furthest beyond the sphere of intuition. One
can advance quite a distance in a scientific discipline having consulted,
almost exclusively, the written and spoken words of others rather than the
things that those words are about. And in many cases, the things in question
have not ever been, and perhaps could not be, given to human intuition,
given its natural limitations. The majority of statements that comprise the
known
sciences,
Husserl
claims,
''behave
meaningfully
without
any
elucidation from intuition, and... only a vanishing section, even of the true
and the proven, are and remain open to complete intuitive illustration.'' (LI
VI, sec. 41, p. 777). And yet we know such propositions to be true.
Knowledge, then, often does extend beyond the sphere of intuition, and the
methods of science are those that enable us to extend our knowledge as far
beyond intuition as possible.
But while this enables us to know facts that lie far beyond our power to
perceive, it brings with it the danger of inauthenticity. Inauthentic thinking
is thinking that has lost sight of its relation to the things that it is about. And
signitive or symbolic thinking constantly runs the danger of being
inauthentic because it can proceed so well without corresponding intuitions,
which bring us into contact with the things that signitive thinking is
supposed to bear upon. At its worst, inauthentic thinking degenerates into
mere calculation, the manipulation of a syntax according to formal rules,
which is precisely what the bulk of mathematics and logic courses train us to
do. If you are adept at the basic rules of arithmetic or formal logic, you can
212
Walter Hopp

perform arithmetical and logical operations while thinking about what you
had for dinner last night or who will win tonight's game.32 This is no longer
even thinking, according to Husserl; the value of a formal calculus consists,
not in aiding thought, but in making genuine thinking dispensable. (Some
might claim that because machines can do this, they can think. Husserl's
response would be: because machines can do this, we are not thinking when
we do it.) But this value becomes a danger when we neglect to inquire into
the sense of the propositions expressed in a formal calculus, which means
grounding them directly or indirectly in the intuitions that provide their
fulfilling sense.
So there are at least three contributions that phenomenology has to make
to scientific knowledge and its ''inner clarity'': (1) providing us with
knowledge about knowledge, a need that we feel, or ought to feel, just in
virtue of being rational beings, (2) protecting the sense of assertions made in
the natural attitude from philosophical falsifications of them, and (3)
recovering and preserving senses that have been lost, or run the risk of being
lost, through inauthentic thinking. Whether phenomenology can fulfill other
ambitions Husserl set for it is another question, but doing that, it seems to
me, is plenty.
Notes
1.
Mohanty, J.N. (1988) ''Husserlian Transcendental Phenomenology'', in: Robert
Sokolowski (Ed.), Edmund Husserl and the Phenomenological Tradition, p. 177
(Washington: The Catholic University of America Press).
2.
Woodruff Smith, D. & McIntyre R. (1982) Husserl and Intentionality (Boston: D. Reidel
Publishing Company), p. 93.
3.
Husserl, E. [1900, 1913] (2000) Logical Investigations, two volumes, trans. J.N. Findlay
(Amherst, New York: Humanity Books), Prolegomena, section 5 and Introduction to
Volume Two, section 1. Henceforth referred to as 'LI'.
4.
Husserl, E. [1913] (1983) Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book, trans. F. Kersten (Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers), section 62, p. 141. Henceforth referred to as Ideas I.
5.
Husserl, E. [1929] (1977) Cartesian Meditations, trans. D. Cairns (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff), section 3. Also see section 12, 27. Henceforth referred to as 'CM'.
6.
Husserl, E. [1929] (1969) Formal and Transcendental Logic, trans. D. Cairns (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff), pp. 6-7. Henceforth referred to as 'FTL'.
7.
Such a justificatory conception of foundationalism remains prevalent in the recent
epistemological literature, by both its advocates and opponents:
Fumerton: ''Foundationalism is a view about the structure of justification or knowledge.
The foundationalist's thesis in short is that all knowledge and justified belief rest
ultimately on a foundation of noninferential knowledge or justified belief.'' (Richard
Fumerton, ''Foundationalist Theories of Epistemic Justification'', The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2006 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (Ed.). Available
from: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2006/entries/justep-foundational
Alston: The ''most sober and most neutral epistemological sense'' of the term
'foundationalism' ''consists of viewing the overall epistemic structure of a particular
subject's beliefs in the following way. Some of the beliefs enjoy a PES [positive epistemic
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
213

status] without being based on other beliefs, and hence without owing that status to their
relation to other beliefs.'' (Alston, W.P. (2005) Beyond ''Justification'': Dimensions of
Epistemic Evaluation (Cornell: Cornell University Press), pp. 230-1)
Steup: ''According to foundationalists, knowledge is structured like a building. They
hold that, without foundational knowledge on which non-foundational knowledge rests,
there couldn't be any knowledge at all.'' (Steup, M. (2005) ''Foundational Knowledge,''
in: M. Steup & E. Sosa, (Eds), Contemporary Debates in Epistemology, p. 123 (Malden:
Blackwell Publishing).)
Klein: ''...[A]ll foundationalists think of warrant as arising autonomously in so-called
basic propositions and being transferred to other propositions through permissible
forms of inference.'' (Klein, P. (2005) ''Is Infinitism the Solution to the Regress
Problem?'', in: M. Steup & E. Sosa, (Eds), Contemporary Debates in Epistemology,
p. 132 (Malden: Blackwell Publishing).)
Audi: Epistemological Foundationalism is the view that ''if... one has any justified
beliefs at all, then one has at least one non-inferentially justified beliefs; any other
justified belief one has is adequately justified by, and would not be justified apart from
its (positive) dependence on, at least one non-inferentially justified belief.'' (Audi, R.
(2001) The Architecture of Reason (Oxford: Oxford University Press), p. 30)
Howard-Snyder: ''A particular belief of a person is basic just in case it is epistemically
justified and it owes its justification to something other than her other justified beliefs or
their interrelations; a person's belief is nonbasic just in case it is epistemically justified but
not basic. Foundationalists agree that if one has a nonbasic belief, then - at rock bottom -
it owes its justification to at least one basic belief.'' (Howard-Snyder, D. (2005)
''Foundationalism and arbitrariness,'' Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 86, pp. 18-24, p. 18)
8.
Audi defines psychological foundationalism as ''the view that the structure of a person's
body of beliefs is foundational in the strong sense that some of his beliefs are not based
on others, and any other beliefs he has are based on the former.'' (Audi, R. (1993) The
Structure of Justification (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), p. 49) For more on
the relation between epistemological and psychological foundationalism, see Audi, 1993,
chapter 1.
9.
Including Føllesdal, D. (1988) ''Husserl on Evidence and Justification'', in: Robert
Sokolowski (Ed.), Edmund Husserl and the Phenomenological Tradition (Washington:
The Catholic University of America Press). I don't discuss his arguments here because he
defines foundationalism as the view that ''one can reach absolute certainty, at least
concerning some matters, and also that... it [is] a main task of philosophy to attain such
certainty.'' (p. 107) Though Føllesdal presents a strong case that Husserl did not endorse
such a position, infallibilism of this sort is not necessary for foundationalism.
10.
Zahavi, D. (2003) Husserl's Phenomenology (Stanford: Stanford University Press), p. 67.
11.
To ''reduce evidence to an insight that is apodictic,'' Husserl says, ''is to bar oneself from
an understanding of any scientific production.'' (FTL sec. 60, p. 161.)
12.
''It is naturally a ludicrous, though unfortunately common misunderstanding, to seek to
attack transcendental phenomenology as ''Cartesianism,'' as if its ego cogito were a
premise or set of premises from which the rest of knowledge... was to be deduced,
absolutely ''secured.'' The point is not to secure objectivity but to understand it.''
(Husserl, E. [1936] (1970) The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental
Phenomenology, trans. Carr, D. (Evanston: Northwestern University Press), section
55, p. 189. Henceforth referred to as 'Cr'.)
13.
See Drummond, J.J. (1990) Husserlian Intentionality and Non-Foundational Realism
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers), esp. Chapter 9, and (1991) ''Phenomenology
and the foundationalism debate,'' Reason Papers, 16 (Fall), pp. 45-71.
14.
Drummond, 1991, p. 52. This corresponds exactly to my conception of Epistemological
Foundationalism, and remains prominent in the contemporary literature (see n. 7). He
214
Walter Hopp

also defines a view that he calls ''transcendental foundationalism'' as follows:
''Philosophical knowledge... is the knowledge of (a) those criteria in terms of which
we determine the legitimacy of various experiences or candidates for knowledge and (b)
those principles in terms of which we specify the proper relations between different kinds
of experiences and different kinds of knowledge. For this sort of foundationalism I shall
use the expression 'transcendental foundationalism'.'' (Drummond, 1991, p. 48). This
position, as interesting as it is, is not recognizably foundationalist at all.
15.
Bonjour, L. (1985) The Structure of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press), p. 32. See also Drummond, 1991, pp. 57-8. Bonjour has, of course,
since abandoned his coherentist ways. See his (1999) ''Foundationalism and the external
world'', Philosophical Perspectives 13, pp. 229-249.
16.
For two of the best of Husserl's discussions of fulfillment, see LI, Investigation VI and
(2001) Analyses Concerning Passive and Active Synthesis, trans. A.J. Steinbock (Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers), esp. Division 2. Also check out Willard, D. (1995)
''Knowledge,'' in The Cambridge Companion to Husserl, Barry Smith & David Woodruff
Smith (Eds) (Cambridge University Press), pp. 138-167 and Bernet, R. (2003) ''Desiring
to know through intuition'', Husserl Studies, 19, pp. 153-166.
17.
''However the fullness of a presentation may vary within its possible gradients of
fulfilment, its intentional object, intended as it is intended, remains the same: its 'matter',
in other words, stays the same.'' (LI VI, sec. 25, p. 738) What Husserl calls the
''epistemic essence'' of an act includes its intentional matter or sense, its quality, and its
intuitive fullness. See LI VI, sec. 28, p. 745.
18.
The ontological founding relation is a formal one. See LI III, sec. 21, p. 475: ''A content of
the species A is founded upon a content of the species B, if an A can by its essence... not
exist, unless a B also exists.'' The ontological founding relation may be either one-sided
or reciprocal.
19.
See, for instance, Alston, W. (1989) ''What's Wrong with Immediate Knowledge'', in:
Epistemic Justification: Essays in the Theory of Knowledge (Ithaca: Cornell University
Press).
20.
Bonjour's coherentist picture presented in The Structure of Empirical Knowledge pertains
to empirical knowledge only. A priori knowledge, according to him, consists in ''the
intuitive grasp or apprehension of necessity,'' (207), a view he develops at greater length
in (1998) In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). The
following argument, nevertheless, is worth considering, since it undermines the idea that
facts about oneself must always figure among one's justifying reasons for believing
something.
21.
Goldman, A. (2001) ''Internalism Exposed'', in: Epistemology: Internalism and
Externalism, Kornblith, H. (Ed.) (Malden: Blackwell Publishers), p. 221.
22.
Bonjour,L. (1992) ''Externalism/Intemalism'', in: J. Dancy & E. Sosa, (Eds), A
Companion to Epistemology, pp. 132-36 (Oxford: Blackwell).
23.
See his (1979) ''Foundationalism, epistemic principles, and the cartesian circle,'' The
Philosophical Review, 88, pp. 55-91.
24.
Though perhaps she can help believing it. I would argue that this suggests that belief is
not essential for knowledge. One cannot, it seems to me, cease to know that, say,
consciousness exists just by believing that it does not.
25.
Willard, D. (1984) Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge (Athens, Ohio: Ohio
University Press), p. 135.
26.
Stro¨ker, E. (1988) ''Phenomenology as First Philosophy: Reflections on Husserl'', in:
Robert Sokolowski (Ed.), Edmund Husserl and the Phenomenological Tradition
(Washington: The Catholic University of America Press), p. 255.
27.
LI Prolegomena 4, 58.
Husserl, Phenomenology, and Foundationalism
215

28.
See, for instance, FTL, section 8, p. 34, where Husserl claims that an intentionality that
makes something thematic is ''for that very reason and as a matter of essential necessity,
non-thematic.''
29.
As Jocelyn Benoist puts it, ''...to the extent that these types of acts [meaning-conferring
acts] are defined as a kind of intending of objects, they nevertheless have an essential
relation to the second type of act [meaning-fulfilling acts]... In this way, one can say that
acts of the first kind (meaning acts) presuppose and anticipate the possibility of acts of
the second kind (fulfillment acts) - even in the case where the latter prove eventually to
be impossible or even absurd.'' (2003) ''Husserl's Theory of Meaning in the First Logical
Investigation'', in: Dahlstrom, D.O. (Ed.), Husserl's Logical Investigations, (Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers), p. 22.
30.
For a view that is similar in this respect see Williamson, T. (2002) Knowledge and Its
Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press).
31.
Husserl, E. [1907] (1999) The Idea of Phenomenology, trans. Hardy, L. (Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers,), p. 25. Henceforth referred to as 'IdPh'.
32.
See Willard, 1984, pp. 138-140.
216
Walter Hopp

