Journal of Occupational Science
ISSN: 1442-7591 (Print) 2158-1576 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rocc20
Phenomenology and the Study of Human
Occupation
AnnaPark LalaPhD, MScOT & Elizabeth AnneKinsellaPhD, MAdEd, BSc(OT),
OTReg(Ont.)
To cite this article: AnnaPark LalaPhD, MScOT & Elizabeth AnneKinsellaPhD, MAdEd,
BSc(OT), OTReg(Ont.) (2011) Phenomenology and the Study of Human Occupation, Journal of
Occupational Science, 18:3, 195-209, DOI: 10.1080/14427591.2011.581629
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2011.581629
Published online: 12 Jul 2011.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3351
View related articles 
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rocc20

Phenomenology and the Study of Human
Occupation
Anna Park Lala &
Elizabeth Anne
Kinsella
Human occupation is the central construct of concern for occupational
scientists, yet questions of how it should best be studied are only beginning to
be debated in the literature. This article suggests that phenomenology holds
promise as a methodological approach for the study of human occupation, and
that further discussions about phenomenology in the field of occupational
science are warranted. An examination of phenomenology as a methodology
for the study of human occupation is undertaken, drawing primarily on the
contributions of three major phenomenological philosophers: Edmund
Husserl, Martin Heidegger, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty. Five key dimensions
of phenomenology, and its generative possibilities as a research methodology
for the study of human occupation, are examined. These include: (a) a
re-conceptualization of knowledge generation, (b) intentionality and the
lifeworld, (c) the notion of Being, (d) the lived body, and (e) the potential of
phenomenology to reveal critical insights. This last dimension suggests that
modern variants of the phenomenological tradition may have lost sight of the
critical origins of the philosophy. This examination considers a complex
methodology that has potential to contribute to scholarly conversations
concerning the study of human occupation, and to illuminate the centrality of
occupation in everyday life.
Keywords: Human Occupation, Phenomenology, Methodology
Occupational
scientists
concern
themselves with the study of human
occupation. Yet, the question of how
best to study human occupation is
one that is only beginning to be
debated in the literature. In 1991,
Carlson and Clark suggested that
many
naturalistic
approaches
to
occupational science research, such
as ethnography, participant observa-
tion, case study and phenomenology,
might
face
difficulties
producing
findings that offer in-depth under-
standings and practical applications
for the discipline. We propose that
one such methodology, phenomen-
ology,
offers
a
fruitful
approach
through which to engage in the
study of human occupation and
that further discussions about phe-
nomenology in the field of occupa-
tional science are warranted.
The occupational science literature
indicates that there is a growing
interest
in
phenomenology
as
a
methodological
approach
(Barber,
2004; Beagan & Saunders, 2005;
Devine & Nolan,
2007; Downs,
2008; Gallew & Mu, 2004; Lin,
Kirsh,
Polatajko,
&
Suto,
2009;
Mahoney & Roberts, 2009; Matuska
j Anna Park Lala, PhD,
MScOT, Health and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Field
of Occupational Science, The
University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada
j Elizabeth Anne Kinsella,
PhD, MAdEd, BSc(OT),
OTReg(Ont.), Associate
Professor, Faculty of Health
Sciences, School of
Occupational Therapy, Field of
Occupational Science, The
University of Western
Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada
j Correspondence to:
akinsell@uwo.ca
apark27@uwo.ca
- 2011 The Journal of
Occupational Science
Incorporated
Journal of Occupational Science
2011, 18(3), pp 195209.
ISSN 1442-7591 print/
ISSN 2158-1576 online
DOI: 10.1080/
14427591.2011.581629
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
195

& Erickson, 2008; McLaughlin Gray, 1997; Pear-
son, 1996; Reed, Hocking, & Smythe, 2010;
Scheerer, Cahill, Kirby, & Lane, 2004; Wright,
Sadlo, & Stew, 2007). In the Journal of Occupa-
tional Science, two theoretical articles by Barber
(2004) and McLaughlin Gray (1997) have speci-
fically focused on phenomenology as a methodol-
ogy and its implications for occupational science.
The former discussed human activity, narrative,
and ethical responsibility as phenomenological
dimensions that reveal deeper insights into the
motives and meanings that underlie everyday
occupations. The latter article examined the suit-
ability of phenomenological research as an ap-
proach to study the essence of occupation (what is
and is not occupation?), and drew heavily on the
seven-step phenomenological method of philoso-
pher Herbert Spiegelberg. In terms of how phe-
nomenology is utilized
as a methodological
approach in occupational science research, there
is a range of approaches represented, and the
depth of the theoretical grounding in phenomen-
ology varies significantly. Several studies offer
broad and generic descriptions of what the meth-
odology entails, drawing on generic qualitative
resources to support their phenomenological
standpoints (such as Creswell, 1998; DePoy &
Gitlin, 1994; Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Patton,
2002). In addition, a number of studies do not
appear to consider phenomenological philoso-
phers (such as Husserl, Heidegger, Merleau-
Ponty) in their work, and the epistemological
assumptions about knowledge that these different
philosophical perspectives entail.
The use of generic qualitative resources is not
surprising given that: in-depth engagement with
phenomenological texts requires extensive time
and guidance, scholars often do not receive in
depth training in phenomenology during their
preparatory studies, and even if more phenom-
enological sources are used, researchers face
challenges in fully presenting their methodologi-
cal approaches given limited word allocations for
scholarly writing. Yet the result may be that
readers conflate the tradition of phenomenology-
which has a rich history, and is based on
particular philosophical and theoretical assump-
tions about knowledge-with generic statements
about qualitative research approaches such as
their value in seeking 'in-depth information,'
learning about 'the participant's experience,' 'un-
derstanding meaning,' and 'first person accounts.'
While these are important, we suggest that
understanding the assumptions about knowledge,
which a phenomenological approach brings to the
study of human occupation, is important for
advancing phenomenological work in the field.
This article is therefore directed to occupational
science researchers who seek to explore the
assumptions about knowledge that the methodol-
ogy entails, and those interested in phenomenol-
ogy as a methodological approach for the study of
human occupation. Our purpose is not to provide
a method for phenomenological inquiry, but
rather to discuss five generative dimensions that
we propose have remained central to the philoso-
phy over time, and the implications for the study
of human occupation. The dimensions considered
include: (a) knowledge generation, (b) intention-
ality and the lifeworld, (c) Being, (d) the lived
body, and (e) first critique. These five dimensions
reveal some of the philosophical and theoretical
assumptions about knowledge that are embedded
in the tradition, and reveal what phenomenology
can offer beyond generic understandings. The
discussion draws primarily on the contributions
of three major phenomenological philosophers:
Edmund Husserl, Martin Heidegger, and Maurice
Merleau-Ponty. While it is acknowledged that
there
are
important
points
of
disagreement
amongst phenomenological thinkers, these have
been well articulated by Dowling (2007) and are
beyond the scope of this article. Rather, the focus
here is on an analysis of key assumptions about
the nature of knowledge within the phenomen-
ological tradition as a whole, and the consequent
possibilities of phenomenology as a research
methodology for the study of human occupation.
For the purposes of this discussion, occupation is
defined broadly as ''all that people need, want, and
are obliged to do'' (Wilcock, 2006, p. 9). Phenom-
enological research is important for occupat-
ional scientists because it aims to elicit how
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
196
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

taken-for-granted phenomena, such as everyday
occupations, are lived and experienced (Has-
selkus, 2006; Wilcock, 2005; Wilding & White-
ford, 2005). A phenomenological approach can be
used to examine the way occupation presents itself
through 'small experiences,' and such an approach
may be seen to allow everyday, 'in the world'
experiences to speak (Hasselkus, 2006). Phenom-
enology offers an approach for researchers to
investigate the ''delicate layerings'' (Hasselkus,
2006, p. 627) of occupation in the world.
What is Phenomenology?
Phenomenology is both a philosophy and a
methodological approach with significant poten-
tial for the study of human occupation (Wilding
& Whiteford, 2005). The battle cry of phenom-
enology extends back to the early work of
German
philosopher
Edmund
Husserl,
who
called for investigations that return 'Back to the
things
themselves!'
Phenomenology
seeks
to
examine phenomena from the perspective of first
hand accounts and through the lifeworld of
people. Phenomenology calls for researchers to
put aside culturally ascribed assumptions, judg-
ments and beliefs in order to consider phenom-
ena from a stance of naivete´, critique and wonder
(Carman, 2008; Crotty, 1998; Heidegger, 1927/
2008; Merleau-Ponty, 1945/2006).
Phenomenology has a rich history, and theoretical
depth. What phenomenology meant when it was
founded by Husserl in the early 20th century differs
from the understandings and use of it today
(Sokolowski, 2000; Spiegelberg, 1960), and even
among current interpretations, there is a great
degree of variation. As the field of phenomenology
continues to develop, it is difficult to demarcate the
lines between its many branches and to articulate a
single definition that encompasses its entirety
(Spiegelberg, 1960). Indeed, Finlay (2009) has
indicated that the question of what counts as
phenomenology is still being debated today.
Nonetheless, there are some common themes in
the philosophy that can be identified. As identi-
fied above, we highlight five dimensions of
phenomenology that offer generative possibilities
for occupational scientists interested in engaging
in phenomenological inquiry. These five dimen-
sions are: (a) a re-conceptualization of knowledge
generation (b) intentionality and the lifeworld,
(c) the notion of Being, (d) the lived body, and (e)
the potential of phenomenology to reveal critical
insights. These dimensions elucidate a complex
methodology that has potential to contribute to
scholarly conversations concerning approaches to
the study of human occupation.
Knowledge generation
Edmund Husserl (18591938) was a German
philosopher who is frequently depicted as the
'father'
of
phenomenology.
Husserl's
unique
philosophical contributions were instrumental
as a foundation to the phenomenological move-
ment; unlike later phenomenologists, he did not
have any ''overshadowing predecessors'' and as
such, he was ''truly an original philosopher''
(Sokolowski, 2000, p. 211).
For Husserl, the phenomenological movement
began as a necessary step to address what has
been referred to as a 'crisis of science' or a scientific
'turning point' in the early 20th century in Europe.
Husserl asserted that modern science had been
confronted by two challenges: first, that it had
degenerated into ''an unphilosophical study of
mere facts'' which meant the loss of ''its signifi-
cance for man's life as a whole,'' and second, that
science was ''incapable of coping with the pro-
blems of ultimate truth and validity'' (Spiegelberg,
1960, p. 79). Husserl deemed that traditional
modes of human inquiry were unable to suffi-
ciently address the nature of human consciousness
in everyday life (Nakhnikian, 1990). In response,
he sought to reorient the scientific world 'back to
the things themselves' by means of a rigorous
philosophical method that examined phenomena
as lived and directly experienced. His method
sought to describe, versus explain, phenomena in
the lived human experience (Sokolowski, 2000;
Spiegelberg, 1960). Two important features of
Husserl's phenomenological method that contrib-
uted to a new perspective on how knowledge
could be generated were: the phenomenological or
transcendental reduction, and eidetic intuition/
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
197

abstraction.
While
later
phenomenologists
expressed alternative perspectives, and some
identified what they considered flaws in Husserl's
original philosophy, others defend the significance
of Husserl's ideas for contemporary research
(Giorgi & Giorgi, 2003; Moustakas, 1994). From
either perspective, the aims of phenomenology are
more deeply understood through comprehension
of these beginnings.
First,
the
phenomenological
or
transcendental
reduction involves a shift from the natural attitude
to a transcendental state (Husserl, 1907/1990).
The former is a ''characteristic of our being in the
life-world'' (Schwandt, 2001, p. 147), and refers to
the day-to-day, taken-for-granted and unreflective
position in which individuals go about their daily
lives. In contrast, a transcendental attitude con-
sists of reflection upon the natural attitude, to
examine intentional threads and worldly ties
(Sokolowski, 2000; Spiegelberg, 1960). In this
state, the researcher engages in epoche´, that is, a
suspension or 'bracketing' of prior understand-
ings, assumptions, and beliefs that belong to the
natural context of his or her life-world (Husserl,
1907/1990). Through epoche´, researchers ap-
proach phenomena with a fresh perspective. It is
in this state that researchers ''look at what we
normally look through'' (Sokolowski, 2000, p. 50).
The phenomenon, now stripped from its everyday,
taken-for-granted understandings, is described in
its naked form, in terms of its qualities and
attributes as well as in terms of the individual's
descriptive and reflective accounts. Therefore, in a
phenomenological reduction, the researcher seeks
to elicit clarity and dispel the darkness of pre-
conceived assumptions (Husserl, 1907/1990).
A number of phenomenologists following Husserl
have suggested that his epoche´ is impossible to
ever fully achieve.
They argue that human
existence is intimately tied to what Martin
Heidegger (1927)/2008) described as a state of
Being-in-the-world. Merleau-Ponty (1945)/2006)
elaborated on this notion:
The most important lesson, which the
reduction teaches us, is the impossibility
of a complete reduction. This is why
Husserl is constantly re-examining the
possibility of the reduction. If we were
absolute mind, the reduction would pre-
sent no problem. But since, on the con-
trary, we are in the world, since indeed
our reflections are carried out in the
temporal flux on to which we are trying
to seize . . . there is no thought which
embraces all our thought. (p. xv)
What these later phenomenologists suggest is that
if you consider how people actually are in their
everyday lives, people are not preoccupied with
single and consecutive thoughts within their
consciousness; instead, people are already in-
the-world, and much day-to-day activity is con-
ducted without direct attention or consciousness
about them (Magee & Dreyfus, 1987). Therefore,
some researchers believe in the possibility of the
transcendental reduction, that people's everyday
ways of responding can be bracketed out in the
research processes (Moustakas, 1994), whereas
others suggest that the nature of being-in-the-
world means that everyday ways of seeing cannot
be reduced by 'bracketing' these from the external
world (Finlay, 2009). In the more descriptively
oriented approaches of the transcendental reduc-
tion researchers attempt to bracket out and put
aside what they bring to the research process.
Other more hermeneutic and interpretively or-
iented perspectives question the extent to which a
researcher can truly bracket his or her subjectivity
out of the interpretive process. Finlay (2009)
suggested that this dichotomy might more fruit-
fully be viewed as a continuum, in which specific
research may be viewed as more or less descrip-
tively or interpretively oriented.
A second feature of Husserl's phenomenological
method is eidetic intuition or abstraction. Accord-
ing to Sokolowski (2000), this notion can be
described as ''identity synthesis'' (p. 177), in that
the researcher attempts to identify empirical
universals or essences-attributes of the phenom-
enon that are experienced and understood as
true. The researcher begins by considering simi-
larities among the same phenomenon (i.e. What
makes a chair a chair? What are features that all
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
198
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

chairs share?). Eidetic intuition seeks to grasp
''the objectivity of essences'' (Husserl, 1907/
1990); the researcher is attempting to understand
the
phenomenon's
structural
eidos
or
form
(Sokolowski, 2000), in other words, to ''give
shape to the shapeless'' (van Manen, 1997, p.
88). Eidetic intuition also involves imaginative
variation, described as questioning and confirm-
ing the phenomenon's necessities, the qualities
which make it essentially so (i.e. Is a chair still a
chair if it is painted red? Is a chair still a chair if it
has no back? If it has five legs?). Sokolowski
(2000) described imaginative variation as follows:
Weletourimaginationrunfree,andseewhat
elements we could remove from the thing
before it 'shatters' or 'explodes' as the kind
of thing that it is . . . if we run into features
that we cannot remove without destroying
the thing, we realize that these features
are eidetically necessary to it. (p. 179)
Essentially, the dimensions of the phenomenon
that do not cause it to 'collapse' under such
eidetic intuition or abstraction are deemed essen-
tial to its essence (Giorgi & Giorgi, 2003).
What Husserl proposed was a new methodology
for generating knowledge, based not on the
preordained theories of the time, but rather on a
way of investigating phenomena through how
they appear directly in day-to-day life. For
Husserl, it did not make sense to conduct
research that did not reflect lived experience.
This has relevance for the study of human
occupation in that occupation-based researchers
are attentive to the myriad of contextual factors
that impact how people engage in everyday
occupations
(Dickie,
Cutchin
&
Humphry,
2006; Townsend & Polatakjo, 2007). The trans-
cendental reduction and eidetic abstraction re-
mind researchers to return 'back to the things
themselves,' to begin inquiry with fresh eyes, and
to reconsider the taken-for-granted and learned
assumptions that they and others may have
adopted with respect to the nature of occupation.
Although many subsequent variations of phenom-
enology have emerged, Husserl's work shows that
phenomenology begins with a return to the things
themselves as a means of investigation. While
researchers may adopt the phenomenological
perspectives of later philosophers, one cannot
deny the important contribution Husserl made to
the phenomenological movement.
An example of how the study of human occupa-
tion might be enriched through a conception of
knowledge that recognizes the phenomenological
perspective of returning to the things themselves
is found in a study by Finlay and Molano-Fisher
(2008). Molano-Fisher is a post-lingually pro-
foundly deaf person; together these researchers
conducted a phenomenological study of her lived
experience
following
a
cochlear
implant.
Through phenomenological investigation, an in-
teresting finding emerged: Molano-Fisher came to
the realization that while most people ''simply
hear without thinking about it'' (p. 260), she had
always understood hearing to be a concerted
effort. This finding allowed her to reconceptua-
lize her experience with evening fatigue, and
attribute this lack of energy not to laziness, but to
the work of hearing. This phenomenological
insight revealed that hearing, when experienced
as work may sap one's energy, impact one's self-
perception, and compromise one's capacity to do.
While the impact of fatigue on occupational
engagement is not a new concept, the phenom-
enological understanding of the work of hearing
brings new insights into how this particular kind
of fatigue might be managed for people with
hearing loss. Such findings have important im-
plications for people who live with, care for and
research people with hearing loss, as well as
people who live with hearing loss themselves, and
are illustrative of the contributions to knowledge
that phenomenological studies invoke.
A second example is a consideration of what
occupation reveals in everyday life, through both
visible and invisible manifestations. Beagan and
Saunders (2005) conducted a phenomenological
study investigating how gender (masculinity) is
constructed through what 11 young Canadian
men do. The findings suggested that participants'
experience
of
masculinity
was
constituted
by occupations they actively engaged in (i.e.
working out, eating right), but also by invisible
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
199

doing. Examples of invisible doing included
monitoring speech (avoiding words like 'dieting'),
and avoiding activities that would appear effemi-
nate (i.e. never openly admitting they compared
or ranked their bodies against other men, never
making it appear as if they were actively trying to
obtain a masculine physique). This study illumi-
nated that what people refrain from doing might
hold symbolic significance, and raises questions
about understandings of occupation bound by
definitions such as 'observable activity.' This
phenomenological
research
shows
how
such
perspectives have the potential to elicit new
knowledge about human occupation, by provid-
ing deeper insights into seemingly mundane and
'normal' day-to-day experiences.
Intentionality & lifeworld
Phenomenological perspectives ask two impor-
tant questions: What is our human relationship to
an external world, and what does our world
consist of? These questions are addressed by two
tenets: human consciousness as intentional and
human existence as situated within a lifeworld
already rich with meaning.
Intentionality, or more specifically, intentionality
of consciousness, is a key component of Husserl's
philosophy. Intentionality describes the mind as
an entity that is always 'conscious of' something,
and thereby directed towards that something.
Intentionality means that ''every act of conscious-
ness, every experience, is correlated with an
object'' (Sokolowski, 2000, p. 8); everyday ex-
periences, thoughts, memories, and actions are all
oriented towards objects in the world. Although
this notion may seem obvious (of course we're
always thinking of something!), many renowned
philosophers before Husserl's time proposed the
very opposite. Several philosophers, including
Descartes, Kant, and Locke, contended that all
human understanding is an internalized affair and
that our minds are enclosed chambers separate
from our bodies and the world (Carman, 2008).
Intentionality suggests that how people know
what they know is not limited to the confines of
their minds, rather it highlights the inseparability
of the knower and the known: ''Consciousness is
always consciousness of something. An object is
always an object for someone. The object, in other
words, cannot be adequately described apart from
the subject, nor can the subject be adequately
described apart from the object'' (Crotty, 1998,
p. 79).
This notion that human consciousness is always
directed toward a world brings us to a related
important construct, the lifeworld, which Husserl
(1907)/1990) described as follows:
I find myself at all times, and without my
ever being able to change this, set in
relation to a world which, through its
constant changes, remains one and ever
the same. It is continually 'present' for me,
and I myself am a member of it. Therefore
this world is not there for me as a mere
world of facts and affairs, but, with the
same immediacy, as a world of values, a
world of goods, a practical world. (p. 103)
The lifeworld is a world experienced, not merely
observed (Finlay, 2008). Human lives are bound
by time, space, social relations and bodily capa-
cities in both objective (i.e. time measured by
seconds, minutes, hours etc.) and subjective (i.e.
the slowing down of time when one is bored
versus the speeding up of time when one is
engaged) senses (van Manen, 1997). From a
phenomenological perspective, lived engagement
does not occur in a vacuum, but in a lifeworld
filled with world-stuff, objects whose meanings
could not exist without human interaction and
consciousness (Crotty, 1998).
Intentionality and the lifeworld have implications
for research that examines human occupation. An
example is revealed in Doyle's (2001a) study
'Bodies Inside/Out: A Phenomenology of the
Terrorized Body in Prison,' which examined the
experiences of political prisoners. Doyle de-
scribed the lifeworld of a prisoner and revealed
how intentionality is directed toward objects and
their meanings. The prisoner was stripped of
worldly
possessions,
and gained a habit of
hoarding
and
stashing
random
objects
that
crossed her path:
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
200
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

First, from bits of bone in her food, broom
straw from her mattress, wire from her
mattress frame, and teeth broken off her
comb, she fashions a small sewing kit . . .
with these handmade tools she makes a
set of miniature dolls from soap and bits
of her own clothing reshaped into tiny
outfits, and she mends her years'-old
clothing. (p. 83)
This woman's intentionality toward these objects
is revealed in her words; there is ''this 'promise' in
things'' (p. 86). Even within a restricted environ-
ment, her lifeworld was engaged through the
occupation of making dolls. What might typically
be considered meaning-less objects took on
powerful occupational significance as her con-
sciousness was directed toward and interacted
with them.
Another example that illuminates the potential of
research that attends to intentionality and the
lifeworld is a study by Reed et al. (2010). This
study found that the meaning of occupation can
often be revealed through what they referred to as
'the call.' The call includes intentionality and
lifeworld meanings (i.e. of care and concern)
ascribed to others and things that 'call' people to
engage in meaningful occupations. These authors
described how one participant found meaning
and passion in the occupation of gardening, ''from
what she notices needs to be done, which plant
needs to be trimmed or which weed needs to be
pulled out'' (p. 144), and the enjoyment she
experiences when her garden 'looks nice'. This
example reveals that social meanings (i.e. what
counts as a 'nice looking' garden) can emerge
from how the intentionality of people, and their
lifeworlds
are
engaged
through
occupation.
Wright-St Clair (2008) also drew on the notion
of 'the call' in a study that examined the meaning
of being aged. She described one participant's
experience of being aged as deeply ingrained with
cultural meanings. For May, a Maori woman,
being an elder involved the call to care for her
mokopuna (grandchildren), including the plea-
sure and pride she described in preparing a meal
for them during an unexpected visit. May stated,
''on the marae (community meeting place), for
the whanau (family) that comes in, the old people
always make sure that the family has kai (food).
This is how we were taught'' (p. 154). In this
example, preparing a meal is not simply an
'individual' occupation, but a call to exemplify
one's cultural being, and a call to pass on this
knowledge to other generations through example.
As such, attention to intentionality and the life-
world may contribute to knowledge about occu-
pations and their (social, cultural, political)
meanings beyond the individual, while drawing
on first person perspectives as a medium to do so.
Intentionality and the lifeworld also have rele-
vance for a current debate in occupational
science concerning the utility of individualistic
and
transactional
perspectives
about
human
occupation (Barber, 2006; Cutchin, Dickie, &
Humphry, 2006; Dickie et al., 2006). Dickie,
Cutchin and Humphry have proposed that first
person
perspectives,
commonly
drawn
upon
in phenomenological inquiry, may not have the
power or potential to elicit social and political
knowledge in the study of human occupation. As
such, phenomenology has been criticized as a
contributing force in the over-reliance on indivi-
dualistic perspectives in the discipline. Yet, we
contend that phenomenology may be seen to
command attention to overlooked human injus-
tices, including the historical, contextual and
worldly ties of phenomena, precisely because it
attends to intentionality and lifeworld in its
investigations. This is exemplified in Doyle's
(2001a) writing on Bodies of resistance: New
phenomenologies of politics, agency and culture, in
which she studies the lifeworld and intentionality
of prisoners. Her work sheds light on existential
issues, but also on ethical, social, and political
issues. For example, Doyle (2001a) found that
''for a prisoner living in the 'death-world' of a
fascist
prison,
the
confiscation
of
things
is
actually a theft of the prisoner's spatial and
temporal holding structures'' (p. 85). Her work
offers a deeper understanding of the violation
inflicted when belongings of significance to one's
lifeworld are stripped away, and raises systemic
issues of significance in thinking about these
'subtle' forms of violence and how they are
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
201

routinized in prison systems. Such study has the
potential to contribute to knowledge in occupa-
tional science, for instance by informing under-
standing of constructs such as occupational
deprivation (Whiteford, 2000), constructs which
may be enriched by exploring the link between
the lifeworld and intentionality of the individual
and broader ethical, social and political issues.
Attention to intentionality and the lifeworld bring
to light unique vantage points in the study of
human
occupation.
These
phenomenological
constructs have potential to contribute to under-
standing about what people want to do, are able
to do, and how they do it, within the everyday
social, cultural, political world in which daily
occupations are embedded.
Being
The third phenomenological dimension is a
concept with significant philosophical depth:
the notion of Being. While Being is not unfamiliar
to the occupation-based literature, the notion of
Being from a phenomenological perspective has
not been deeply considered in the occupational
science literature.
Being was of central interest to German philoso-
pher Martin Heidegger, who defined Being as that
which is most close to us, in the sense that our
existence is intertwined with a sense of being,
but is also simultaneously ''veiled in darkness''
(Heidegger, 1927/2008, p. 25), unnoticed and
underlying our everyday affairs. In this sense,
the construct of Being has commonalities with
human occupation, which has also been depicted
as taken-for-granted, all encompassing and mun-
dane in nature (Hasselkus, 2006; Wilcock, 2006).
Being is tied to the understanding that 'something
is' and becomes manifest through ''everything we
talk about, everything we have in view, everything
towards which we comport ourselves in any way''
(Heidegger, 1927/2008, p. 26). To seek the mean-
ing of Being is to search for its fundamental or
essential structure, buried beneath its everyday
manifestations. Heidegger suggested that scholars
have lost sight of the 'correct mode of access' to
understand Being. He proposed what he called
Dasein, which refers to individual human exis-
tence (Dreyfus, 1991), as the best and only course
to understanding Being. Dasein is a mode of being
which is always self-interpreting, always in a state
of trying to make sense of being: ''Dasein always
understands itself in terms of its existence-in
terms of a possibility of itself: to be itself or not
itself'' (Heidegger, 1927/2008, p. 33). Dasein
manifests itself in everyday life, through implicit
and explicit practices, through observing, learn-
ing, mimicking, and doing in the world. Dasein
highlights that Being is Being-in-the-world. Being
is not solely rooted in one's consciousness, but is
interwoven with other people, shared languages,
cultures, and ways of doing things, that is, in-the-
world (Heidegger, 1927/2008). For Heidegger,
''human existence is involved in the working out
of the possibilities that exist for us by virtue of our
being 'thrown' into a particular cultural, historical,
and familial world'' (Leonard, 1994, p. 47). This
notion of Being-in-the-world may be seen to have
important implications for the study of human
occupation.
In thinking about being, doing, becoming, and
belonging (Rebeiro, Day, Semeniuk, O'Brien, &
Wilson, 2001; Whalley Hammell, 2004; Wilcock,
1998, 2006) in the study of human occupation,
being is a particularly difficult dimension to under-
stand due to its elusive nature. Whereas elements of
doing (occupational engagement, participation),
belonging (social environment, social relations)
and becoming (occupational development, occupa-
tional transition, temporality) are more readily
grasped and attended to in research and practice,
Being resists categorization. Yet, Heidegger (1927)/
2008) suggested that Being is the core of what it is to
be human. In the study of occupation, emphasis on
Being is frequently overshadowed by emphasis on
one's ability to do. This may be the result of various
influences such as the value Western societies place
on independence, autonomy, and productivity
(Iwama, 2005; Watson, 2006).
Being however encompasses more than simply
doing; a point that is sometimes emphasized
through the study of occupation in different
cultures. Watson (2006), for example, argued
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
202
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

that an Afrocentric worldview tends to value
collectivism and interdependence  notions that
have
implications
for
ways
of
being-in-the-
world  as significant components in occupational
engagement. Being may also come to the fore
in the face of crisis, illness, or disability, or
in different life stages. Thibeault (1997), for
instance, wrote about her experience of her
relationship with her father as his Parkinson's
disease progressed. She noted that the importance
of 'presence' replaced what she had inferred as
significant activities they shared in the past, such
as intellectual debates and keeping up with the
news. Thibeault observed that, ''simplicity, tran-
quility and presence now delimit significant
'activity.' Even when there is not the slightest
movement'' (p. 112).
The phenomenological notion of Being has much
to
offer
the
study
of
occupation.
Such
an
approach
directs
attention
to
understanding
how human occupations are experienced through
being-in-the-world, and the implications for un-
derstanding doing. The question of how Being
shapes, motivates and informs occupational ex-
periences is an important one for advancing
knowledge in occupational science.
The lived body
A fourth area of attention in recent phenomen-
ological thought is the lived body. According to
French
philosopher
and
phenomenologist,
Merleau-Ponty (19081961), lived experiences
cannot be understood solely through intention-
ality-the notion that human beings are always
'conscious of something'. Our bodies also play an
essential role in our day-to-day experiences. His
work centered on the philosophy of perception
and the lived body. Merleau-Ponty critiqued
Descartes' (1641/1996) famous portrayal of the
body as a 'machine-like appendage,' a passive
conduit for the mind's work (Leder, 1984).
According to Merleau-Ponty, the body is not to
be viewed as a passive machine ruled by the
mind, but rather as dynamic, intelligent and
inseparable
from
human
perception
of
the
world-perception in this view is literally embo-
died. As such, he argued that the body is the
'absolute source' through which human beings
'simply are' or exist. He proposed that our
experience of the world is made possible because
humans are embodied agents. Merleau-Ponty's
work brings the body's place in people's percep-
tual understandings of their everyday lived ex-
perience to the forefront. From this perspective,
we do not have bodies, we are our bodies
(Merleau-Ponty, 1945/2006). Therefore, ''[bodily]
perception is not some exotic object or process
somewhere out there in the world, it is us [italics
added]''
(Carman,
2008,
p.
95).
Sociologist
Arthur Frank (2002) summed it up well; reflect-
ing on his experience of two serious illnesses, a
heart attack and cancer, he wrote: ''What happens
to my body happens to my life'' (p. 13). Thinking
about the body as the nexus of lived meanings
may contribute to a deeper appreciation of the
way occupations are experienced through the
body.
In the study of human occupation, a phenomen-
ological perspective attentive to the body can
reveal rich insights. For example, Kielhofner
(1995) wrote a paper in which he drew on
phenomenological perspectives to examine the
centrality of the body in occupational engage-
ment. His phenomenological insights revealed
five dimensions of the body in relation to
occupation*as living, intelligent, intentional,
adaptive, and experienced. In describing the
intelligence of the body during the occupation
of typing, he wrote:
These same hands have learned where to
reach for the word 'occupation' on the
keyboard of my computer; they know it as
a neat and compact set of movements
organized in time and they spell out the
word without directive . . . indeed, we are
so reliant on our body's ready knowledge
of how to go about our daily routines that
when we find the body disrupted by
injury or disability we are at a loss for
what to do. (p. 156)
Through examples focused primarily on hands,
his phenomenological reflections revealed how
the body is implicated in everyday occupations.
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
203

The study raised important implications for
considering the body in therapy-calling for care
that attends not only to the client's anatomical
and functional body, but also to subjective bodily
experiences. Kielhofner observed that ''our bodies
link [us] to this physical world in a ceaseless
communion that sustains life'' (p. 164).
Merleau-Ponty (1945)/2006) has suggested that
the body is a knowing body, often adjusting and
accommodating to the world without conscious
thought or effort (i.e. shifting in our seats when
uncomfortable) (Carman, 2008). In the occupa-
tion of mining, a study by Somerville (1996)
offers a rich description of the 'knowing body'
and reveals the 'body's skillful intelligence':
Miners initially learned safety from ex-
perienced workers in the mine, but over
time they learnt from their own experi-
ence. They described the most important
aspect of their embodied learning of safety
as 'pit sense,' learned by the experiencing
body in interaction with the physical and
social environments of the mining work/
place. In pit sense all the senses are
employed in a complex interconnected
way to provide information about whether
the body-in-place is safe. This includes
sound, smell, touch, and kinesthetic sense
as well as other senses that have no name
such as a sense of the heaviness of the air,
the particular feeling of the air on the
hairs of the legs or the backs of the ears, as
well as an uncanny sense of just being
uncomfortable. (p. 43)
Research that is attentive to the lived body can
reveal understandings about the way people
engage in everyday occupation in embodied
ways. While the primacy of the body is often
revealed in times of transition, illness and crisis
(Kielhofner, Tham, Baz, & Hutson, 2008; Leder,
1990), this example points to the centrality of the
body in the experience of everyday occupations.
Phenomenological investigations that attend to
the lived body may help occupational scientists
gain deeper insights into the complexity and
nature of human occupation.
First critique
A number of scholars (Crotty, 1996, 1998; Doyle,
2001b) have recently argued that the critical
features of the phenomenological tradition have
been lost in newer streams of phenomenology.
They have suggested that the critical origins of the
tradition have not been adequately attended to in
current conceptualizations, interpretations and
applications. For instance, Doyle (2001b) has
suggested that ''phenomenology has always posi-
tioned itself as the philosophy on the edge, the
philosophy which will name the 'as yet unname-
able' or the 'unthought''' (p. xvi). And Crotty
(1998) has pointed out that phenomenology is
concerned with a 'first critique' of preconceived
interpretations of meanings and is suspicious of the
meanings bequeathed by culture.
Phenomenology has the potential to offer a
critique of normative perspectives, of master
narratives, or of dominant discourses. For exam-
ple, Greatrex-White (2007) conducted a phe-
nomenological study asking the question 'How is
study abroad manifest in the experience of
nursing students?' She examined the unstruc-
tured diaries of 26 nursing students studying
abroad. One finding was that the students'
experience of 'Leaving Behind' was not consistent
with a prevalent theory (Oberg, 1960) that
predicted cross-cultural adaptation in the form
of a U-curve of elation-depression-elation. The
experiences depicted in the students' diaries
were, instead, extremely diverse. Greatrex-White
(2007) pointed out that this is an important
finding because ''it confronts those who would
believe students who study abroad are a homo-
genous group and that study abroad follows a
precise, predictable pattern that can then be
planned for, managed, measured and researched''
(p. 139). Through in depth study of the first hand
accounts of students, dominant ideas and norma-
tive theories about cross-cultural adaptation in
international
fieldwork
were
questioned
and
challenged.
In her call for attention to the political possibilities
of phenomenological investigation, Doyle (2001b)
highlighted that phenomenologies often assume
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
204
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

''critical orientations toward master narratives and
use phenomenological approaches to destabilize
those narratives'' (p. xiv). A recent phenomenolo-
gical study of ethical tensions experienced by
occupational therapy students illuminates this
point
(Kinsella,
Park,
Appiagyei,
Chang,
&
Chow, 2008). The first hand accounts of students
revealed systemic issues in the practice of occupa-
tional therapy that created ethical issues in
students' practice. While the dominant narratives
of ethics frequently focus on individually oriented
ethical tensions, the narratives of students re-
vealed broader systemic issues that were impli-
cated in their capacities to act in ways they deemed
'ethical'. The study found that issues such as
systemic constraints, value conflicts, questionable
behaviours by others, and power relations that
invoked fear were revealed through the individual
narratives of participants. This contributed to the
critical insight that while practitioners are ''in-
dividually accountable for their practices, many
ethical tensions appear to be of an extra-individual
nature'' (Kemmis et al., 2008, p. 180, emphasis
added), generated by factors not readily within the
control of the therapist; features such as social,
cultural, material-economic, and political and
policy dimensions can shape ethical tensions in
practice'' (Kinsella et al., 2008, p. 180). This
reveals the critical potential of phenomenology,
in the sense that critical insights of a systemic
nature can be discerned through attention to the
ways in which social phenomena live through each
of us and are revealed in everyday experience
(Brookfield, 2000; Kinsella et al., 2008).
In addition, phenomenological researchers en-
gage in radical reflection to question taken-for-
granted interpretations of phenomena. According
to Doyle (2001b), phenomenologists attempt to
bracket assumptions about a phenomenon as a
means to critically reflect on culturally ascribed
assumptions embedded in everyday ways of
knowing. Merleau-Ponty (1945)/2006) described
phenomenological reduction as taking a step
''back to watch the forms of transcendence fly
up like sparks from a fire; it slackens the
intentional threads which attach us to the world
and thus brings them to our notice'' (p. xv). In
other words, phenomenologists do not simply
examine the phenomenon at hand. They also
examine the 'intentional threads' (the taken-for-
granted understandings that are typically ac-
cepted as unproblematic) that people, including
researchers,
inscribe
upon
the
phenomenon.
Merleau-Ponty (1945)/2006) wrote:
I posit the stuff of knowledge when,
breaking away from the primary faith
inspired by perception, I adopt a critical
attitude towards it and ask 'what I am
really seeing'. The task of a radical reflec-
tion, the kind that aims at self-compre-
hension, consists, paradoxically enough,
in recovering the unreflective experience
of the world. (p. 280)
In returning to the question of 'what I am seeing,'
Merleau-Ponty redirected attention away from
culturally ascribed assumptions about the phe-
nomenon to the phenomenon itself, and how it
manifests in one's day-to-day experiences. Phe-
nomenology does not take widely understood
cultural interpretations at face value; rather it
treats culture with a good measure of caution and
suspicion (Crotty, 1998). It recognizes that cul-
ture has the potential to both enable and limit
lived possibilities. In short, phenomenology in-
volves ''reflection with a vengeance; it is a
wholesale reflection. Nothing is left out'' (Soko-
lowski, 2000, p. 189).
In summary, the critical dimension of the phe-
nomenological perspectives reveals that engaging
with first hand accounts can reveal critical in-
sights about cultural assumptions, master narra-
tives, and dominant discourses, in a way that
highlights important social issues and questions
taken-for-granted interpretations. In addition, the
phenomenological approach invites critical re-
flexive interrogation by researchers of their own
situatedness in the research process, and the
assumptions (individual and cultural) that inform
their interpretations. It would be useful for
occupational science scholars to reconsider the
critical potentiality of phenomenological inquiry.
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
205

Conclusion
Kinsella and Whiteford (2009) have argued that
those who study human occupation and uncriti-
cally adopt dominant approaches to knowledge
generation may not recognize the validity and
importance of other methodologies for generating
knowledge. It is suggested that pluralistic ap-
proaches to understanding what counts as knowl-
edge in occupational science is required (Kinsella,
in press), and that there is a need to recognize
lifeworld perspectives as contributing to legiti-
mate forms of knowledge.
Phenomenology offers a unique perspective for
the study of human occupation in occupational
science. A phenomenological
perspective (a)
offers a unique vision of what knowledge genera-
tion entails; (b) reveals human intentionality and
the lifeworld perspectives as significant; (c) views
Being as of central concern; (d) attends to the
lived body as a means of experiencing and
knowing the world; and (e) brings the potential
for critique of taken-for-granted interpretations of
meaning to the study of human occupation. It is
suggested that these five dimensions are not
distinct but are interwoven and overlap. This
discussion offers insights into phenomenology
and reveals that there are important theoretical
assumptions about knowledge that phenomeno-
logical perspectives offer to the study of human
occupation.
This article reveals that phenomenology may be
seen as much more than a broad aim to capture
the meaning of phenomena through first hand
accounts; it involves a refined and attentive
perspective that can inform current understand-
ings of occupation. Such a perspective attends to:
occupational engagement as situated in the world
of human perception, considerations of occupa-
tion beyond physical engagement to include the
dimension of Being, a reorientation towards the
primacy of the body as a medium through which
humans are occupationally engaged, and the ways
in which first hand accounts of occupation may
reveal significant insights of a critical nature
about social, cultural and political issues. As
Hasselkus (2006) suggested, everyday human
occupation is too often ''seen but unnoticed''
(p. 627). Phenomenology offers a rigorous meth-
odology, capable of 'noticing' and of generating
unique contributions and significant insights to
the study of human occupation.
REFERENCES
Barber, M. D. (2004). Occupational science and
phenomenology: Human activity, narrative and
ethical responsibility. Journal of Occupational
Science, 11(3), 105114.
Barber, M. D. (2006). Occupational science and
the ﬁrst-person perspective. Journal of Occupa-
tional Science, 13(1), 9496.
Beagan, B., & Saunders, S. (2005). Occupations
of masculinity: Producing gender through what
men do and don't do. Journal of Occupational
Science, 12(3), 161169.
Brookﬁeld, S. (2000). The concept of critically
reﬂective practice. In A. Wilson & E. Hayes
(Eds.),
Handbook
of
adult
and
continuing
education (pp. 3349). San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
Carlson, M. D., & Clark, F. A. (1991). The search
for
useful
methodologies
in
occupational
science.
American
Journal
of
Occupational
Therapy, 45(3), 235241.
Carman, T. (2008). Merleau-Ponty. New York, NY:
Routledge.
Creswell, J. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and re-
search design: Choosing among ﬁve traditions.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Crotty, M. (1996). Phenomenology and nursing
research. South Melbourne, Australia: Churchill
Livingstone.
Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social
research: Meaning and perspective in the research
process. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cutchin, M., Dickie, V., & Humphry, R. (2006).
Transaction versus interpretation, or transaction
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
206
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

and interpretation? A response to Michael
Barber. Journal of Occupational Science, 13, 97
99.
DePoy, E., & Gitlin, L. N. (1994). Introduction to
research. Multiple strategies for health and human
services. St. Louis: Mosby.
Descartes,
R.
(1996).
Meditations
on
ﬁrst
philosophy (J. Cottingham, Trans.). New York,
NY:
Cambridge
University
Press.
(Original
work published 1641)
Devine, R., & Nolan, C. (2007). Sexual identity
& human occupation: A qualitative exploration.
Journal of Occupational Science, 14(3), 154161.
Dickie, V., Cutchin, M. P., & Humphry, R. (2006).
Occupation as transactional experience: A cri-
tique of individualism in occupational science.
Journal of Occupational Science, 13, 8393.
Dowling, M. (2007). From Husserl to van Manen.
A review of different phenomenological ap-
proaches.
International
Journal
of
Nursing
Studies, 44, 131142.
Downs, M. L. (2008). Leisure routines: Parents
and children with disability sharing occupation.
Journal of Occupational Science, 15(2), 105110.
Doyle, L. (2001a). Bodies inside/out: A phenom-
enology of the terrorized body in prison. In
L. Doyle (Ed.), Bodies of resistance: New phe-
nomenologies of politics, agency and culture
(pp. 7899). Evanston, IL: Northwestern Uni-
versity Press.
Doyle, L. (2001b). Introduction: The resistant
material. In L. Doyle (Ed.), Bodies of resistance:
New phenomenologies of politics, agency and
culture. (pp. xixxxiv). Evanston, IL: North-
western University Press.
Dreyfus, H. L. (1991). Being-in-the-world: A
commentary on Heidegger's Being and Time,
Division 1. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology.
Finlay, L., & Molano-Fisher, P. (2008). 'Trans-
forming' self and world: A phenomenological
study of a changing lifeworld following a
cochlear
implant.
Medicine
Healthcare
and
Philosophy, 11, 255267.
Finlay, L. (2009). Debating phenomenological
research methods. Phenomenology & Practice,
3(1), 625.
Frank, A. W. (2002). At the will of the body:
Reﬂections on illness. New York, NY: Houghton
Mifﬂin Company.
Gallew, H. A., & Mu, K. (2004). An occupational
look at temporal adaptation: Night shift nurses.
Journal of Occupational Science, 11(1), 2330.
Giorgi, A. P., & Giorgi, B. M. (2003). The
descriptive
phenomenological
psychological
method. In P. M. Camic, J. E. Rhodes, & L.
Yardley (Eds.), Qualitative research in psychol-
ogy: Expanding perspectives in methodology and
design (pp. 243273). Washington, DC: Amer-
ican Psychological Association.
Greatrex-White, S. (2007). A way of seeing study
abroad:
Narratives
from
nurse
education.
Learning in Health and Social Care, 6(3), 134
144.
Hasselkus, B. R. (2006). The world of everyday
occupation: Real people, real lives. American
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 60, 627640.
Heidegger, M. (2008). Being and time. New York,
NY: Harper & Row Publishers. (Original work
published 1927)
Husserl, E. (1990). The idea of phenomenology
(W.P. Alston & G. Nakhnikian, Trans.). Nor-
well, MA: Kluwer Academic Publications. (Ori-
ginal lectures presented 1907)
Iwama, M. K. (2005). Situated meaning: An issue
of culture, inclusion, and occupational therapy.
In F. Kronenberg, S. Simo´ Algado, & N. Pollard
(Eds.), Occupational therapy without borders:
Learning from the spirit of survivors (pp. 127
139).
Philadelphia,
PA:
Elsevier
Churchill
Livingstone.
Kemmis, S. (2005). Knowing practice: Searching
for saliences. Pedagogy Culture and Society, 13,
391426.
Kemmis, E. A., Park, A. J.-S., Appiagyei, J.,
Chang, E., & Chow, G. (2008). Through the
eyes of students: Ethical tensions in occupa-
tional therapy practice. Canadian Journal of
Occupational Therapy, 75(3), 176183.
Kielhofner, G. (1995). A meditation on the use of
hands. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 2, 153166.
Kielhofner, G., Tham, K., Baz, T., & Hutson, J.
(2008). Performance capacity and the lived
body. In G. Kielhofner (Ed.), Model of human
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
207

occupation: Theory and application (4th ed,
pp. 6884). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins.
Kinsella, E. A. (in press). Knowledge paradigms
in occupational science: Pluralistic perspectives.
In G. Whiteford & C. Hocking (Eds.) Occupa-
tional science: Society, inclusion, participation.
Wiley.
Kinsella, E. A., Park, A., Appiagyei, J., Chang, E.,
& Chow, D. (2008). Through the eyes of
students: Ethical tensions in occupational ther-
apy practice. Canadian Journal of Occupational
Therapy, 75(3), 176183.
Kinsella, E. A., & Whiteford, G. E. (2009).
Knowledge generation and utilization in occu-
pational therapy: Towards epistemic reﬂexivity.
Australian Occupational Therapy Journal, 56(4),
249258.
Leder, D. (1984). Medicine and paradigms of
embodiment. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy,
9, 2943.
Leder, D. (1990). The absent body. Chicago, IL:
The University of Chicago Press.
Leonard, V. W. (1994). A Heideggerian phenom-
enological perspective on the concept of person.
In P. Benner (Ed.), Interpretive phenomenology:
Embodiment, caring and ethics in health and
illness (pp. 4363). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lin, N., Kirsh, B., Polatajko, H., & Suto, M.
(2009). The nature and meaning of occupa-
tional engagement for forensic clients living in
the community. Journal of Occupational Science,
16(2), 110119.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic
inquiry. London: Sage.
Magee, B., & Dreyfus, H. L. (Speakers). (1987).
Bryan Magee talks to Hubert Dreyfus about
Husserl, Heidegger and modern existentialism
[Video recording]. Princeton, NJ: British Broad-
casting Corporation, Education & Training.
Mahoney, W., & Roberts, E. (2009). Co-occupa-
tion in a day program for adults with develop-
mental
disabilities.
Journal
of
Occupational
Science, 16(3), 170179.
Matuska, K. M., & Erickson, B. (2008). Lifestyle
balance: How is it described and experienced by
women with multiple sclerosis. Journal of Occu-
pational Science, 15(1), 2026.
McLaughlin Gray, J. (1997). Application of the
phenomenological method to the concept of
occupation. Journal of Occupational Science:
Australia, 4(1), 517.
Merleau-Ponty,
M.
(2006).
Phenomenology
of
perception. New York, NY: Routledge. (Original
work published 1945).
Moustakas, C. (1994). Phenomenological research
methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nakhnikian, G. (1990). Introduction. In W.P.
Alston & G. Nakhnikian (Trans.), The idea of
phenomenology (pp. ixxxii). Dordrecht, The
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Oberg, K. (1960). Cultural shock: Adjustment to
new cultural environments. Practical Anthro-
pology, 7, 177182.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and
evaluation methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pearson, S. (1996). An exploration of the effect of
right homonymous hemianopia on engagement
in occupation. Journal of Occupational Science:
Australia, 3(1), 1825.
Rebeiro, K. L., Day, D. G., Semeniuk, B., O'Brien,
M. C., & Wilson, B. (2001). Northern initiative
for social action: An occupation-based mental
health program. American Journal of Occupa-
tional Therapy, 55(5), 493500.
Reed, K., Hocking, C., & Smythe, L. (2010). The
interconnected meanings of occupation: The
call, being-with, possibilities. Journal of Occupa-
tional Science, 17(3), 140149.
Scheerer, C. R., Cahill, L. G., Kirby, K., & Lane, J.
(2004). Cake decorating as occupation: Mean-
ing and motivation. Journal of Occupational
Science, 11(2), 6874.
Schwandt, T. A. (2001). Dictionary of qualitative
inquiry (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sokolowski,
R.
(2000).
Introduction
to
phenomenology.
Cambridge,
UK:
Cambridge
University Press.
Somerville, M. (2006). Subjected bodies, or
embodied subjects: Subjectivity and learning
safety at work. In S. Billett, T. Fenwick, & M.
Somerville (Eds.), Work, subjectivity and learn-
ing: Understanding learning through working life
(pp. 3752). AA Dordrecht, The Netherlands:
Springer Netherlands.
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
208
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011

Spiegelberg, H. (1960). Husserl's phenomenology
and existentialism. Journal of Philosophy, 57(2),
6274.
Thibeault, R. (1997). A funeral for my father's
mind:
A
therapist's
attempt
at
grieving.
Canadian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 64,
107114.
Townsend, E. A., & Polatajko, H. J. (2007).
Enabling occupation II: Advancing an occupa-
tional therapy vision for health, well-being &
justice through occupation. Ottawa, ON: CAOT
Publications ACE.
van Manen, M. (1997). Researching lived experi-
ence: Human science for an action sensitive
pedagogy. London, ON: Althouse Press.
Watson, R. (2006). Being before doing: The
cultural identity (essence) of occupational ther-
apy. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal,
53, 151158.
Whalley Hammell, W. K. (2004). Dimensions of
meaning
in
the
occupations
of
daily
life.
Canadian
Journal
of
Occupational
Therapy,
71(5), 296305.
Whiteford, G. (2000). Occupational deprivation:
Global challenge in the new millennium. British
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 63(5), 200
204.
Wilcock, A. A. (1998). Reﬂections on doing,
being and becoming. Canadian Journal of Occu-
pational Therapy, 65(5), 350353.
Wilcock, A. A. (2005). Occupational science:
Bridging occupation and health. Canadian Jour-
nal of Occupational Therapy, 72(1), 512.
Wilcock, A. A. (2006). An occupational perspective
of health (2nd ed.). Thorofare, NJ: Slack.
Wilding, C., & Whiteford, G. (2005). Theoretical
and philosophical underpinnings of phenomen-
ological research. Occupational Therapy Journal
of Research, 25(3), 98104.
Wright, J. J., Sadlo, G., & Stew, G. (2007).
Further explorations into the conundrum of
ﬂow process. Journal of Occupational Science,
14(3), 136144.
Wright-St. Clair, V. A. (2008). 'Being aged' in the
everyday: Uncovering the meaning through elders'
stories (Doctoral dissertation,
University of
Auckland, 1990). Retrieved from http://hdl.
handle.net/2292/3080
ANNA PARK LALA & ELIZABETH ANNE KINSELLA
JOURNAL OF OCCUPATIONAL SCIENCE VOL 18(3), AUGUST 2011
209

