Philosophical Explorations
An International Journal for the Philosophy of Mind and Action
ISSN: 1386-9795 (Print) 1741-5918 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpex20
The phenomenology of attitudes and the salience
of rational role and determination
Fabian Dorsch
To cite this article: Fabian Dorsch (2016) The phenomenology of attitudes and the
salience of rational role and determination, Philosophical Explorations, 19:2, 114-137, DOI:
10.1080/13869795.2016.1176231
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176231
Published online: 11 Aug 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 365
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpex20

This paper is part of the special issue "Conscious Thinking and Cognitive Phenomenology"
guest edited by Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran
The phenomenology of attitudes and the salience of rational role and
determination
Fabian Dorsch∗
Department of Philosophy, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland
(Received 5 April 2016; ﬁnal version received 5 April 2016)
The recent debate on cognitive phenomenology has largely focused on phenomenal
aspects connected to the content of thoughts. By contrasts, aspects pertaining to their
attitude have often been neglected, despite the fact that they are distinctive of the
mental kind of thought concerned and, moreover, also present in experiences and thus
less contentious than purely cognitive aspects. My main goal is to identify two
central and closely related aspects of attitude that are phenomenologically salient and
shared by thoughts with experiences, namely the rational role that they play in our
mental lives and their determination by factors external to them, such as external
objects or reasons. In particular, I aim to defend Phenomenal Rationalism about
judgemental thoughts and perceptual experiences: the view that their phenomenal
character reﬂects their rational role, that is, their capacity to provide and/or respond to
reasons. I conclude with some remarks about how this view may be extended to other
kinds of thought and experience; and about how the phenomenological salience of
the speciﬁc rational role of individual judgemental thoughts may in fact be used to
formulate also an argument for the phenomenological salience of their particular
propositional contents.
Keywords: judgement; perception; thought; experience; belief; attitude; cognitive
phenomenology; phenomenal character; determination; rational role; reasons
1.
Introduction
The focus of the recent debate on cognitive phenomenology has been primarily on the ques-
tion of whether the content of thoughts (i.e. how they present things as being) is phenom-
enologically salient. In particular, it has been asked whether it makes a phenomenal
difference which propositions are thought, and which concepts employed.1 By contrasts,
the issue of whether the attitude of thoughts (i.e. which stance or standpoint they adopt
towards their content) is phenomenologically salient is often neglected.2 This is surprising
for at least two reasons.
One is that the attitudinal aspects of thoughts are more signiﬁcant and fundamental than
the presentational ones. For while attitudinal aspects pertain to the general kind of thought
or mental episode at issue (e.g. whether it is a judgemental or an imaginative thought, say),
the presentational aspects concern only speciﬁc differences among instances of one kind of
thought or episode (e.g. whether a given judgement is about a green tree or about a red
planet).
The other reason arises from the fact that attitudinal aspects are not only involved in
intellectual thoughts, but also in sensory experiences.3 For instance, while perceptual
# 2016 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
∗Email: fabian.dorsch@unifr.ch
Philosophical Explorations, 2016
Vol. 19, No. 2, 114-137, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13869795.2016.1176231

experiences present their objects as being part of our actual environment and also purport to
present them as they really are, imaginative experiences do neither.4 If perceptual experi-
ences fail to be veridical, there is something wrong with them. The same is typically not
true of imaginative experiences.5 This shows that thoughts and experiences may share
exactly the same attitudinal aspects. In particular, both may be concerned with reality (in
the case of perception, episodic memory or judgement), or not (in the case of imagining);
and both may provide us with reasons for belief, or not (with the same division of cases).
The main attitudinal difference between thoughts and experiences is that only thoughts can
be responsive to epistemic reasons - and, for that matter, only thoughts with a judgemental
attitude, which include occurrent (or conscious) beliefs and semantic memories - but not
experiences.6
But that thoughts and experiences may share the same attitudinal aspects indicates that
the related part of cognitive phenomenology cannot be discussed independently of experi-
ential phenomenology. More speciﬁcally, any arguments that support scepticism solely with
respect to the existence of cognitive phenomenology, but not with respect to experiential
phenomenology, are not applicable to attitudinal aspects. This is the second reason for
studying attitudinal aspects - at least for defenders of cognitive phenomenology - since
it renders many objections to cognitive phenomenology ineffective.7
The same strategy cannot be applied to presentational aspects because thoughts and
experiences involve distinct forms of presentation. For example, while solely experiences
are perspectival and connected to a sense modality, only thoughts allow for negation and
similar logical operations (e.g. Crane 2009). There is an ongoing debate about how best
to describe this difference in presentation.8 But its mere existence is already enough to
ensure that it is possible to question the phenomenological salience of presentational
aspects in the case of thoughts, while accepting their phenomenological salience in the
case of experiences.
In this article, I aim to defend the phenomenological salience of two particular
attitudinal aspects of thoughts (as well as of experiences): their rational role and their deter-
mination. My main focus is thereby on the presentation and motivation of Phenomenal
Rationalism - or, as I called it in Dorsch 2011, Experiential Rationalism - concerning
thoughts. What this view claims is that their rational role is phenomenologically salient:
Phenomenal Rationalism about Thoughts. The rational role of thoughts is constitutive of, or
otherwise reﬂected in, their phenomenal character.
The phenomenal character of mental episodes - such as conscious thoughts or experi-
ences - is identical with what they are like from the inside for the subject who has
them.9 It thus comprises all those aspects or features of the mental episodes that are
accessible to the subject through introspection.10 If two mental episodes differ in
which properties they introspectively seem to have, then they differ in phenomenal
character.
The rational role of mental episodes, on the other hand, consists in their capacity to
respond to reasons provided by other mental episodes or states, as well as in their capacity
to provide - or at least contribute to the provision of - reasons for other mental episodes or
states (or, indeed, actions).11 The rational role of mental episodes can be rather complex.
For example, the rational role of (not self-justifying) judgemental thoughts - or judge-
ments, for short - exhibits at least three elements, each of them linking judgemental
thoughts to epistemic reasons (or evidence) in a distinct way:12
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
115

(SENS) Judgemental thoughts are sensitive to, or responsive to, certain epistemic reasons.
(BASE) Judgemental thoughts are based on, or responses to, certain epistemic reasons.
(PROV) Judgemental thoughts provide us with certain epistemic reasons, whether on their own
or in conjunction with other mental episodes or states.
Phenomenal Rationalism about judgemental thoughts is thus the claim that their phenom-
enal character reﬂects them as possessing a rational role that can be characterised by means
of (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV); while the rational role of other thoughts or mental epi-
sodes needs to be spelled out in different ways. One speciﬁc motivation behind the endor-
sement of Phenomenal Rationalism - which I do not aim to defend here any further - is
that, if the rational role of mental episodes were not phenomenologically salient, then the
reasons concerned might not count as our reasons. They become reasons for us (i.e.
reasons that speak with normative authority to our rational faculties) only in so far as
their presence and rational impact is accessible to us from the inside, that is, from our
ﬁrst-person perspective.13 The considerations in this article are thus centred around the
idea of consciousness being shot through and through with rationality.
Of course, not all judgemental thoughts actually show each, or even any, of the three
elements (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV). If one of our judgemental thoughts is causally
induced by an intense emotional feeling (e.g. when an eruption of jealousy lets us falsely
judge that our rival, who is otherwise unknown to us, is a mean person), it is not based
on reasons and perhaps also not responsive to them (e.g. open to counterevidence). And
because of its merely causal origin, our judgemental thought is also deprived of any justi-
ﬁcatory power with respect to further judgements and beliefs. But, if everything works nor-
mally, judgemental thoughts are both responses to - and, hence, also responsive to - and
providers of epistemic reasons. Our judgement that the streets are wet, for instance, may be
grounded in our perception of the wet streets, may be open to new evidence (e.g. if we come
to learn that the streets are just painted with a special kind of pigment that makes them look
wet) and provides support for the further judgement that it has rained, as well as many other
judgements.
What examples like these also illustrate is that rational role is closely linked to determi-
nation. Which content and attitude our mental episodes involve is determined by factors
external to them, as well as at which moment in time they occur and how long they stay
in existence. In the ﬁrst example, the determinant of our judgemental thought is an
emotion, and its inﬂuence on our judgement is merely causal. As a result, our judgemental
thought lacks justiﬁcatory power and perhaps also any sensitivity to counterevidence. By
contrast, our second judgemental thought is rationally determined by perceptual evidence
and, as such, responsive to epistemic reasons and able to ground further beliefs. This con-
nection between rational role and determination is crucial for my argument in support of
Phenomenal Rationalism. More speciﬁcally, I intend to argue that the rational role of
thoughts (and experiences) is phenomenologically salient in virtue of the phenomenological
salience of how they are normally determined. That is, judgemental thoughts are phenom-
enally marked as being responsive to, and providing us with, epistemic reasons because
they are phenomenally marked as being determined by such reasons (even if they
happen to be merely causally determined).
In addition to this introduction, the article comprises three more sections. In the ﬁrst, I
present a long argument in favour of the view that judgemental thoughts are phenomenally
marked as reasonable (even if they are in fact unreasonable), and that this involves the phe-
nomenological salience of (SENS) and (BASE). The second section then defends the view
that the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts also reﬂects them as conforming to
116
Fabian Dorsch

(PROV). My defense is thereby introduced by an extended discussion of the parallel case of
perceptual experiences, which also seem from the inside to be providing us with epistemic
reasons. In the third and ﬁnal section, I brieﬂy discuss how speciﬁc the introspectively
accessible rational role of judgemental thoughts is (e.g. whether two judgements may
differ phenomenally with respect to their rational role), and how this might bear on the
issue of whether the content of thoughts is phenomenologically salient in addition to
their attitude. In addition, I suggest how to extend my case for Phenomenal Rationalism
to imaginative thoughts and experiences (i.e. by understanding them as responses to
special practical reasons), as well as to episodic memories, pictorial experiences and
other mental episodes.
2.
The responsiveness to reasons
In this section, I aim to present a complex argument for the claim that judgemental thoughts
are phenomenally marked as having a rational role that includes (SENS) and (BASE). The
parallel claim with respect to (PROV) is then to be defended in the following section. But
before I engage with the argument in support of the claim that (SENS) and (BASE) are phe-
nomenologically salient, it is worthwhile to point out that self-justifying judgements (e.g. "I
am here now" or "I am thinking that it rains") might be an exception to this speciﬁc claim -
although not to Phenomenal Rationalism in general.
Examples of self-justifying judgements are judgements that are conceptually true
(e.g. "I am here now") or self-verifying (e.g. "I am thinking that it rains"), but perhaps
also (self-)evident or certain judgements (e.g. "I experience redness" or "I exist"). The
reasonableness of such judgements is the result of one of their other salient features
which is independent of their origin or mental context - for instance, their necessity, infall-
ibility or obviousness. Because of their possession of such a special feature, they end up jus-
tifying themselves, without the need for, or involvement of, any external support. But this
means also that they enter into a reﬂexive rational relation, the two relata of which are
one and the same judgemental thought (i.e. the self-justifying judgements themselves).
Whether (SENS) and (BASE) are true of self-justifying judgements thus depends on
whether, by entering into these self-reﬂexive rational relations, these judgements count as
reasons for themselves. I do not see why not.14 But even if it should turn out that (SENS)
and (BASE) do not apply to self-justifying judgements, the following argument for the phe-
nomenological salience of the rational role and, in particular, the reasonableness of judge-
ments is still valid for all kinds of judgemental thought, independently of whether their
reasonableness is due to their self-justifying power or to epistemic reasons external to them.
The argument that I have in mind - an earlier version of which I already presented in
Dorsch (2009a) - argues that the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts reﬂects
their reasonableness and, as a consequence, also the aspects (SENS) and (BASE) of their
rational role (or their self-justifying power, if applicable). In other words, it is my contention
that it makes a phenomenal difference to judgemental thoughts (e.g. in contrast to imagina-
tive thoughts) that they have the rational role to be based on, and to be responsive to, epis-
temic reasons. Horgan and Timmons (2007) agree that (BASE) is phenomenologically
salient in the case of judgemental thoughts (or occurrent beliefs); and Kriegel (2015,
chap. 1) puts forward the same claim with respect to (BASE) and (PROV). But they do
not provide any argument for this view, apart from some anecdotal introspective reﬂections.
My aim in this section is to remedy this situation.
The argument starts with the assumption that we normally take our judgements to be
reasonable (or, if one prefers, formed in a reasonable manner). Indeed, we typically
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
117

assume them to be occurrent instances of knowledge, which includes that we take them not
only to be reasonable, but also to be non-accidentally true. If this were not the case, we
would not have any tendency to rely on our judgements in belief and agency, nor any ten-
dency to revise them once we come to suspect that they might be unreasonable or false (e.g.
when encountering counterevidence). But we do have these and similar tendencies, at least
if we are fairly rational - which means that we do take our judgements to be reasonable (as
well as non-accidentally true and instances of knowledge).
That we normally take our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable becomes manifest in
the fact that we form a respective higher-order judgement when considering the issue. That
is, when we ask ourselves (or are asked by someone else) whether one of our judgements is
reasonable, we typically end up judging that it is. This raises the issue of how to account for
the occurrence of this higher-order judgement and, in particular, of the ascription of the
property of being reasonable.15 There are basically three options of how we can get from
questioning whether a given lower-order judgement is reasonable to forming the higher-
order judgement that this lower-order judgement is reasonable:
The Inference Model. The higher-order judgement is the conclusion of a conscious inference
that we engage with in response to asking the question.
The Prompting Model. Considering the question prompts the higher-order judgement in a phe-
nomenologically spontaneous and immediate manner.
The Awareness Model. The higher-order judgement is the result of the conscious abstraction
from, and conceptualisation of, a non-conceptual awareness of the reasonableness of the
lower-order judgemental thought - an awareness that we pay special attention to in response
to asking the question.
The Inference Model maintains that we judge that our lower-level judgemental thought is
reasonable in conscious response to introspectively recognising that it is a judgement, and
to believing that judgements generally are reasonable (at least if they are based on standard
kind of evidence, and unless we are aware of defeating circumstances). But this account
overintellectualises the formation of the higher-order judgement. Usually, we need not
engage in any form of conscious inference in order to judge that one of our judgemental
thoughts is reasonable. We arrive at our higher-order insight in a phenomenologically
more immediate way. Furthermore, small children, too, rely on their judgements when
forming beliefs and intentions and thus should count as taking their judgements to be
reasonable, even though many of them lack the conceptual apparatus required for engaging
in the kind of inference posited by the Inference Model.
A proponent of the Inference Model might reply that the inferences in question need not
be conscious. However, this move does not help with the case of small children, given that
they would still lack the required conceptual capacities. In addition, the proposal faces a
dilemma with respect to the objection concerning phenomenological immediacy. On the
one hand, the non-conscious inferences might be such that we are still able to render
them conscious. But this would not cover all possible cases, given that we certainly can
form higher-order judgements about the reasonableness of our judgemental thoughts
even when we are unable to produce any conscious inferences that conclude in those
higher-order judgements. On the other hand, the non-conscious inferences might instead
be such that they are incapable of becoming manifest in consciousness. But, then, we
should treat them as purely causal rather than as rational inferences, given that responding
to reasons (whether they are inferential or not) is a deliberative or personal, and not a sub-
personal, phenomenon (see endnote 13 for references). Accordingly, the Inference Model
would simply reduce to the Prompting Model.
118
Fabian Dorsch

The Prompting Model faces its own difﬁculties, however. It suggests that our higher-
order judgement occurs in direct and automatic response to wondering whether our
lower-order judgemental thought is reasonable. In some cases, the higher-order judgement
might simply manifest an already existing higher-order belief about the reasonableness of
the lower-order judgemental thought. But not only are there many cases in which there is no
such prior higher-order belief. We also need an explanation of how we have acquired this
higher-order belief - presumably by means of some initial higher-order judgement that is
no manifestation of any prior belief. Hence, the spontaneous and immediate formation of
higher-order judgements postulated by the Prompting Model cannot be accounted for
simply in terms of belief manifestation.
Similarly, it cannot be understood as the result of some constitutive link between the
lower-order judgemental thought and the higher-level judgement. Some philosophers
have argued that, if we are rational and possess the required concepts, having the (occur-
rent) belief that p is sufﬁcient for inclining us to judge that we believe that p. Indeed,
they maintain that this is part of what it means to be rational and have beliefs (Shoemaker
1994; Burge 1996, 1998), or to be rational and possess the concept of "believing" (Pea-
cocke 1996, 1999). Irrespective of whether their argument is successful with respect to
higher-order ascriptions of the property of being a belief, it cannot be extended to
higher-order ascriptions of the property of being reasonable. Having a judgemental
thought - plus being rational and possessing the relevant concepts - is simply not sufﬁcient
for having the higher-order belief that this judgemental thought is reasonable. In particular,
it is not a condition on our possession of the concept "reasonable" (or "reasonable judge-
ment") that rational agents are disposed to judge that one of their judgemental thoughts is
reasonable whenever that judgemental thought is indeed reasonable. In other words, while
there might indeed be a constitutive link between believing that p and being inclined to
judge that one is believing that p, there is no such link between judging that p and being
disposed to judge that (this instance of) judging that p is reasonable. Alternatively, propo-
nents of the Prompting Model may assume that a merely causal process is the source of the
higher-order judgements. According to this proposal, having a judgemental thought and
wondering whether it is reasonable normally causes us to judge that it is reasonable. The
problem for this view is, however, to explain why this kind of causation occurs. That jud-
gemental thoughts are more likely to be reasonable than not can at best account for the
content of the resulting higher-order judgement (as well as for the content of the triggering
question), but not for its occurrence. There is nothing to the property of being formed in a
reasonable manner that could explain why its instantiation by a judgemental thought
inclines us to form the respective higher-order judgement. So, the account should generalise
from the case at issue and assume that introspection is a causal process across the board,
independently of whether the ascribed property is reasonableness or another property.
Moreover, in order to ensure that introspection can still lead to knowledge, the causal
process said to be at its heart is presumably best taken to be reliable (O'Brien 2003).16
But there are good reasons to resist such a causal-reliabilist model of introspection.
Since many of these reasons are well known, I merely list two of them here. First, the
view faces the general problems of reliabilist accounts of knowledge, such as the generality
problem or the new evil-demon problem (Goldman and Beddor 2015). Indeed, in the case
of introspection, these problems might be even more pressing since we have no clear under-
standing of the causal processes involved in the formation of higher-order judgements and
thus cannot specify any normal conditions under which the causation of such judgements
ensures them to be true.17 Second, assuming merely a causal link between the lower- and
higher-order states does not connect them intimately enough in order to account for some
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
119

central features of their relationship. One such feature is that the higher-order judgements
have an immediate rational impact on the lower-order thoughts. For instance, assuming that
we are rational, our conclusion that one of our judgemental thoughts (or beliefs) is unrea-
sonable will always move us to change the latter accordingly. But the mere causation of the
higher-order state by the lower-order one could not ensure the inevitability of this rational
impact, not only because the causal inﬂuence operates in the wrong direction, but also
because causal connections can break down even under conditions of rationality. Indeed,
while perception and other causal processes allow for brute error (i.e. error that is not
due to the irrationality or malfunctioning of the subject), introspection does not (Shoemaker
1994; Burge 1996, 2003; Siewert 1998). This feature is closely linked to the fact that we
cannot specify normal conditions for the causal processes said to be central to introspection,
given that brute error can occur only under non-normal conditions.
Partly because of difﬁculties like these, Peacocke (1998) assumes that the link between
the lower- and the higher-order states is not merely causal, but also rational in nature (see
also Martin 2000a). However, he accounts for this rational connection in terms of the mental
concepts involved (e.g. "judging" or "believing"): the lower-order state is a reason for
forming the higher-order state because it is part of our possession of the relevant concepts
that we normally apply exactly that concept to the lower-order state that correctly picks out
its kind (e.g. judgemental thought or belief). Hence, despite not assuming the link between
the lower- and higher-order states to be constitutive, Peacocke believes that, if we are
rational and possess the required concepts, having a lower-order state of a certain kind
(e.g. a belief) is sufﬁcient for being inclined to form the higher-order judgement that the
lower-order state is of that kind. As a result, he face the same problem as those who take
the link to be constitutive, namely to motivate the extension of their view to higher-order
judgements about the reasonableness of the lower-order states.18
Because both the Inference Model and the Prompting Model fail to provide a satisfac-
tory account of why we normally judge our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable, we
should look for a better alternative. The only remaining plausible option is to endorse
the Awareness Model, according to which our higher-order judgements are conceptual
endorsements of a corresponding non-conceptual awareness of reasonableness. In other
words, we judge our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable because we are non-concep-
tually aware of them as reasonable (and have no reason not to take this awareness at
face value).
The awareness in question is not perceptual or even perception-like, for the same
reasons that introspection is not a matter of inner observation (Shoemaker 1994; Martin
1997; Dorsch 2013). Rather, it is a kind of phenomenal awareness.19 It is part of what jud-
gemental thoughts are like for us from the inside that they seem to us to be reasonable. And
this phenomenological salience of their reasonableness is, of course, partly the result of the
fact that judgemental thoughts are normally reasonable.20 In this respect, judgemental
thoughts differ introspectively from imaginative thoughts. We do not take imaginative
thoughts to be based on sufﬁcient evidence (nor to be true or to constitute knowledge) pre-
cisely because their phenomenal character does not involve an aspect that marks them as
reasonable.
That the reasonableness of standard judgemental thoughts is reﬂected in their phenom-
enal character entails that both (SENS) and (BASE) are phenomenologically salient. That
judgemental thoughts are reasonable just means - at least if they are not self-justifying -
that they are actually based on sufﬁcient epistemic reasons (whichever they are). Hence,
taking them to be reasonable involves taking them to be actual responses to some epistemic
reasons, which again entails taking them to be generally responsive to (a certain kind of)
120
Fabian Dorsch

epistemic reasons. So, the kind of awareness that grounds our higher-order judgements
about reasonableness needs to be rich enough to be able to permit and support higher-
order judgements about actual and potential responsiveness to epistemic reasons, too.
But this implies that it is an awareness of responsiveness to epistemic reasons. In other
words, that judgemental thoughts are normally based on, and sensitive to, epistemic
reasons is part of their phenomenal character, that is, of what they are like from the
inside.21 Depending on whether (SENS) and (BASE) apply to self-justifying judgements,
they either involve exactly the same kind of awareness of reasonableness as standard jud-
gemental thoughts, or this awareness consists just in the phenomenal awareness of their
self-justifying power.
It is important to note that the phenomenal awareness of responsiveness to epistemic
reasons does not by itself put us into a position of being able to identify the reasons con-
cerned (unless, perhaps, the judgemental thoughts justify themselves).22 Indeed, we are
often unable to remember on the basis of which reasons we have formed our beliefs; and
this ignorance extends to the judgemental thoughts that manifest those beliefs in conscious-
ness. But even if we still know in response to which reasons we have formed a given judge-
mental thought (e.g. we may still enjoy the perceptual experience on which it is based), our
recognition of the identity of these reasons has to go beyond our phenomenal awareness of
our judgemental thought (e.g. it has to include our phenomenal awareness of our perceptual
experience as well).
Similarly, that the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts marks them as
reasonable or reﬂects them as having a certain rational role neither involves, nor requires
concepts - especially not normative concepts like "reasonable", "reasons" or "rational
role". In short, phenomenal awareness is non-conceptual, despite the fact that it certainly
allows for a process of abstraction and conceptualisation that leads to corresponding
thoughts - for instance, when we employ the concept "reasonable" in response to our
phenomenal awareness of reasonableness of a given judgemental thought and come to
judge that thought to be reasonable.23 All that is implied by saying that we are phenomen-
ally aware of some mental episode as having a certain property is that having this property
makes a phenomenal difference for the subject concerned - that is, it inﬂuences what the
episode is like for the subject from the inside and thus distinguishes it phenomenally from
episodes that lack the property in question (Dorsch 2013, 2017a).
3.
The provision of reasons
With respect to the defense of Phenomenal Rationalism concerning judgemental thoughts,
this leaves the task of supporting the claim that their phenomenal character reﬂects aspect
(PROV) of their rational role. To see why judgemental thoughts are phenomenally marked
as contributing to the provision of epistemic reasons (and not only as being responsive to
them), it is helpful to compare judgemental thoughts with perceptual experiences. In both
cases, we get clearer about the phenomenal character of the experiences or thoughts con-
cerned, once we reﬂect on the introspective indistinguishability of non-veridical instances
from veridical ones, as well as on their phenomenal contrast with imaginative experiences
or thoughts. But since the introspective indistinguishability of hallucinations (and illusions)
from veridical perceptions is better understood and easier to characterise than its cognitive
counterpart, it is helpful to develop the line of argument ﬁrst with respect to perceptual
experiences, before adopting more or less the same argumentative strategy to judgemental
thoughts.
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
121

Let me begin with the epistemology of perception. Conscious veridical perceptual
experiences make us aware of perceivable features of external (i.e. experience-independent)
objects in our actual surroundings. More speciﬁcally, how they present their objects as
being is fully determined by how those objects really are. For instance, a veridical percep-
tion makes us aware of a book as blue and rectangular just in case, and because, the book
concerned is indeed blue and rectangular.24 This relation of determination is epistemologi-
cally signiﬁcant in so far as we could not be in any better epistemic position with respect to
the perceivable properties of external objects. Having a conscious experience of which it is
true that how it presents things as being is contingent solely on how they really are provides
us with the best - that is, the most conclusive or truth-conducive - access to the external
world possible.25 Hence, if perceptual experiences do not provide us with reasons for
beliefs about the perceivable aspects of the external world, nothing will do (which, of
course, is why perception has always been at the centre of scepticism concerning the exter-
nal world).
Now, I argue elsewhere (Dorsch 2017a) that the determination of veridical perceptual
experiences by their objects is phenomenologically salient and, in fact, introspectively
seems to pertain to all perceptual experience, not only veridical ones. Perceptual experi-
ences are characterised by the fact that they are introspectively indistinguishable from ver-
idical perceptions.26 This is trivially true of veridical perceptions, but also applies to
(perfect) illusions and hallucinations. For even when we have a non-veridical perceptual
experience, we still take it to be veridical - unless, of course, we have evidence to the con-
trary from the outside (e.g. evidence delivered by testimony or further perceptual obser-
vation). In other words, from the inside, the non-veridicality of our illusions and
hallucinations is not apparent to us. If it were, we would not - as we actually do - rely
on our perceptual experiences by default when forming beliefs and perfoming actions,
even if they happen to be non-veridical. Only when our experiences are contradicted by
further observations or by what others say do we start to question their veridicality and
possibly cease to take them at face value. What this asymmetric introspective indistinguish-
ability of non-veridical perceptual experiences from veridical ones reveals is that the
phenomenal character of perceptual experiences marks them as veridical - even if they
are not.27
It is here that the previous considerations about the epistemologically signiﬁcant deter-
mination of veridical perceptual experiences by their external objects become important.
For veridical and non-veridical perceptual experiences differ precisely in whether their
presentation of our surroundings is fully determined by the actual nature of our surround-
ings. When we misperceive a white book to be blue or even hallucinate a blue book, which
colour we experience to be instantiated before our eyes is not a function of which colour is
in fact instantiated before our eyes. Hence, that the phenomenal character of both veridical
and non-veridical perceptual experiences reﬂects them as being veridical means, at least in
part, that it reﬂects them as presenting how things are contingent on how they actually are.
In other words, it is part of what perceptual experiences are like for us from the inside that
their presentation of perceivable properties seems to be fully determined by perceivable
properties instantiated in our environment.
There are two central aspects to the phenomenological salience of the (apparent) deter-
mination by external objects: that the objects experienced seem to be external (i.e. experi-
ence-independent); and that they seem to be determinants of how the experience in question
presents things as being. It has often been observed or mentioned that perceptual experi-
ences are transparent in the sense that, whenever we are attending to them from the
inside, we end up noticing the objects and features that they make us aware of, and
122
Fabian Dorsch

which seem to be part of our surroundings.28 But we do not merely notice the (apparent)
presence of those objects and their features. We also notice their (apparent) externality or
experience-independence (McDowell 1998; Siegel 2006; Dorsch 2017a). This means
that, from the inside, the objects of our perceptual experiences seem to exist and to instanti-
ate their perceivable properties independently of being experienced by us. As Tye, for
example, notes: "In turning one's mind inward to attend to [an] experience, one seems to
end up concentrating on what is outside again, on external features or properties" (Tye
1995, 30).29
More speciﬁcally, we have the impression that the objects of our perceptual experiences
did already enjoy their existence and their perceivable properties before the occurrence of
our experiences, and will continue to do so after we stop experiencing them. And this
impression is accompanied by a sense of their being public objects and features that are
accessible through perception to others, too. In this respect, perceptual experiences differ
phenomenologically from experiences of after-images. When we are experiencing a
yellow after-image, say, the experienced yellow spot does not seem to be part of our
actual environment (e.g. it "moves around" in accordance with our eye movements, and
completely disconnected from the objects in our surroundings); and it also does not
appear to exist independently of our experience of it, nor as a public entity open to
further observation by others.
What matters, when we turn to the aspect of determination, is not our impression of
what will happen to the objects experienced if our perceptual experiences change, but
rather our impression of what will happen to our perceptual experiences if their objects
change. When we attend from the inside to our perceptual experiences, their transparency
ensures that we come to notice the various perceivable properties that the objects of our
experiences seem to instantiate. But, crucially, we do not distinguish from the inside
between how the experiences present their objects as being and how those objects really
are. Of course, we are aware that our perceptual experiences might be non-veridical.
But, as already mentioned, unless we have reason to doubt their veridicality, we take
them to be veridical. As a result, we expect our perceptual experiences to change if the per-
ceivable properties of their objects should change. For instance, when we are perceiving a
white and rectangular canvas, we anticipate that, if the canvas is painted green or cut to a
square shape, our experience will stop presenting it as blue and rectangular and start pre-
senting it as green and square.30 The preceding considerations reveal that both the extern-
ality and the determining role of the objects of our perceptual experiences are
phenomenologically salient: it is part of what our perceptual experiences are like that
their objects appear to be external and to determine how the experiences present them as
being. But, as argued at the beginning of this section, being determined by aspects of the
external world just amounts to providing us with the best possible access to that world.
Hence, our introspective impression that our perceptual experiences are determined by
their objects renders that feature of the experiences phenomenologically salient, in virtue
of which the experiences provide us with epistemic reasons. It is in this sense that their
role as reason-providers (PROV) is accessible to us from the inside. This rational aspect
of their phenomenal character distinguishes perceptual experiences from their imaginative
counterparts. How we visualise objects as being, say, is not determined by the visible prop-
erties of the objects in our surroundings.31 Correspondingly, it is not part of what our ima-
ginative experiences are like to us from the inside that they seem to be determined by
external objects. Instead, they typically are - and appear to be - determined by the relevant
practical reasons or goals that we are aware of by way of our conscious intentions or desires
to imagine certain things.32 We visualise a very tall person, for instance, because this is what
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
123

a certain novel or thought experiment, with which we intend to engage, requires us to do. In
other words, we are usually aware of our imaginative experiences as being part of, or the
result of, actions of imagining. The phenomenologically salient difference in how percep-
tual and imaginative experiences are determined thus concerns also their link to mental
agency. For while imaginative experiences normally seem to us to be determined in an
active manner, their perceptual counterparts appear to be determined in a passive manner
- at least, with respect to how they present things as being.
The main point of introducing this complex argument to the effect that the phenomenal
character of perceptual experiences reﬂects their capacity (PROV) to provide us with
reasons is that we can develop a very similar line of reasoning with respect to judgemental
thoughts. Let me again begin with some epistemological considerations. Judgemental
thoughts usually give rise to beliefs if certain conditions are met (e.g. if their subject
matter is important enough and they remain undefeated). Moreover, if the judgemental
thoughts concerned are reasonable and non-accidentally true, they typically lead to
beliefs that constitute knowledge (or, if one assumes that knowledge cannot be further ana-
lysed, are implied by a corresponding state of knowledge). For want of a better term, we
may call judgemental thoughts that put us into a position to acquire knowledge knowledge-
able. Typically, judgemental thoughts cannot ground knowledge on their own, but require
the help of additional judgements or beliefs. The reason for this is that judgemental thoughts
provide primarily inferential reasons, and that most inferences involve more than one
premiss.33 For instance, once we come to knowledgeably judge that the streets are wet,
we can infer that it has raised only conditional on the ancillary belief that rain is the best
explanation for the wetness of the street.
Now, knowledgeable judgemental thoughts are reasonable because they are formed on
the basis of sufﬁciently good or strong epistemic reasons - reasons which may be provided
by perception, inference or any of the other sources of knowledge. The epistemic reasons
concerned thereby play a triple role.34 First, they determine that the thoughts concerned
involve a judgemental attitude towards their propositional contents (i.e. the attitude of
taking the respective propositions to be true for the sake of truth), rather than some other
attitude. That we judge (rather than imagine or desire, say) something to be the case is
due to the fact that our relevant reasons are reasons for belief, that is, epistemic reasons.
Second, they determine which propositions are judged to be true as part of the judgements.
That is, the epistemic reasons determine how the knowledgeable judgemental thoughts
present things as being. For instance, that we judge - and come to know - that a book
is red (rather than yellow) is due to the fact that our judgement is suitably based on a ver-
idical perception of the book's redness; or, alternatively, on a sound inference starting from
the known premisses that the book's surface reﬂects light of a wavelength of about 650
nanometres, and that surfaces with this reﬂectance property are red. Second, the epistemic
reasons ensure that the judgemental thoughts turn out to be non-accidentally true. Of
course, not all reasonable judgements are true, let alone non-accidentally. But if they are
non-accidentally true and knowledgeable, their truth is due to the determination of their
propositional content by the epistemic reasons in questions. Our judgement that the book
is red is non-accidentally true because its content is determined solely by how the under-
lying veridical perception presents the book as being; or solely by how the true premisses
of the underlying sound inference entail the book as being.35
Parallel to the argument concerning perceptual experiences, the main claim is now that
the rational determination of knowledgeable judgemental thoughts is phenomenologically
salient and, furthermore, that this aspect of phenomenal character is also present in the case
of non-knowledgeable (i.e. unreasonable or at best accidentally true) judgemental thoughts.
124
Fabian Dorsch

It is distinctive of judgemental thoughts (or occurrent beliefs) that they are introspectively
indistinguishable from knowledgeable judgemental thoughts (or occurrent propositional
knowledge). As already noted in Section 2, we take all our judgemental thoughts to be
knowledgeable - which includes taking them to be reasonable and non-accidentally true
- unless we have evidence to the contrary (in which case we tend to revise or give up
our judgements if we are sufﬁciently rational). Moreover, as also argued earlier, our aware-
ness of the reasonableness of our judgements forms part of what they are like for us from the
inside. Exactly the same argument applies to our awareness of them as non-accidentally true
and, hence, as knowledgeable. We take our judgemental thoughts to be non-accidentally
true and knowledgeable neither as the result of some inference about them, nor due to
some causal-reliable or constitutive link between having a judgemental thought and
being inclined to judge it to be non-accidentally true and knowledgeable. Instead, all judge-
mental thoughts are introspectively indistinguishable from knowledgeable judgemental
thoughts because their phenomenal character marks them as knowledgeable - even if
they are not.36
If we combine this phenomenological observation with the epistemological one that the
knowledgeability of judgemental thoughts is due to their determination by sufﬁcient epis-
temic reasons, we can get a clearer idea of what it means for judgemental thoughts to seem
to be knowledgeable from the inside. Whether a judgemental thought counts as knowledge-
able depends essentially on whether it is determined by sufﬁcient epistemic reasons. Hence,
that judgemental thoughts are phenomenally marked as knowledgeable means minimally
that they are phenomenally marked as being determined by sufﬁcient epistemic reasons.
More speciﬁcally, it is part of what judgemental thoughts are like for us from the inside
that both their attitude and their content seem to be determined by sufﬁcient epistemic
reasons - again with the proviso that this does not require that we are also aware of the
speciﬁc identity of the reasons that the judgemental thoughts are based on (if any).
It is here that the analogy with perceptual experiences breaks down to some extent. For
our awareness of the reasons that (seem to) determine our judgemental thoughts differs
greatly from our awareness of the objects that (seem to) determine our perceptual experi-
ences. While the impression of the rational determination of judgemental thoughts is as
such devoid of any speciﬁcity with respect to the nature of the reasons concerned, the
impression of the external determination of perceptual experiences is always accompanied
by a presentation of some of the perceivable features of the objects in question (indeed, it is
determined how those objects are presented as being). As a result, judgemental thoughts -
unlike perceptual experiences - are not transparent to those entities that determine them. If
at all, judgemental thoughts are transparent to the propositions that they are attitudes
towards.37
But this phenomenological difference does not prevent the property of being deter-
mined by (otherwise unidentiﬁed) sufﬁcient epistemic reasons to be as phenomenologically
salient as the property of being determined by external objects (with certain perceivable
properties). For, in both case, we expect our experiences or thoughts to change in relevant
ways in response to changes in their determinants; and we have this expectation primarily
because, from the inside, we do not distinguish between how those determinants are and
how they seem to be according to our experiences or thoughts. In the case of judgemental
thoughts, this means that we do not differentiate between having (had) sufﬁcient epistemic
reasons for forming the judgement and having a reasonable judgement, that is, a judgement
based on sufﬁcient epistemic reasons. In other words, by being phenomenally marked as
reasonable (or, indeed, knowledgeable), judgemental thoughts "present" the relevant
reasons as sufﬁcient for grounding knowledgeable judgements; and we do not distinguish
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
125

between how the reasons are "presented" and how they really are. We certainly know that
we are not infallible with respect to our stance concerning the sufﬁciency (and existence) of
the epistemic reasons that our judgemental thoughts seem to be based on. But, by default,
we take our judgemental thoughts to be reasonable, that is, grounded in and determined by
sufﬁcient epistemic reasons.
Indeed, if this were not the case, it could not be explained why we anticipate that our
judgemental thoughts will change if our reasons change - for instance, if they cease to
be sufﬁcient for judgement, or if they start to support a different judgement than before.
This expectation is furthermore heightened by our recognition that epistemic reasons
usually obtain independently of the judgements that they support. For the fact that we
take our judgemental thoughts to be essentially connected to epistemic reasons, but also
know them not to be determined by our judgements (or some third factor which simul-
taneously inﬂuences our judgements), already entails that we take our judgements to be
determined by the relevant reasons (whichever they are). That is, given the judgement-inde-
pendence of epistemic reasons, the assumed relation of dependence has to run in the oppo-
site direction. But our phenomenal awareness of the (apparent) sufﬁcient rational
determination of our judgemental thoughts renders that feature phenomenologically
salient that is responsible for the status of our judgemental thoughts as (seeming) providers
of epistemic reasons. Judgemental thoughts provide us with reasons for further beliefs pre-
cisely because they are rationally determined by sufﬁcient epistemic reasons. And this con-
nection, together with our phenomenal awareness of rational determination, provides us
with access from the inside to the aspect (PROV) of the rational role of judgemental
thoughts.
Like in the case of perceptual experiences, the rational dimension of their nature and
phenomenal character differentiates judgemental thoughts from their imaginative counter-
parts. The attitude and content of imaginative thoughts are not determined by epistemic
reasons, but by practical reasons (or perhaps also by non-rational factors - see endnote
32). We imagine that the Earth is ﬂat because we want to engage in a thought experiment
of how life might be on a ﬂat disk, say; or we imagine that Sherlock Holmes lives in Baker
Street 221b because we aim to properly engage with Conan Doyle's stories, and this
requires imagining what is ﬁctional in those stories (Walton 1990). That imaginative
thoughts are not formed in response to epistemic reasons implies that they cannot lead to
knowledge and contribute to the provision of reasons for belief, as revealed by the fact
that imagined premisses can solely provide support for imagined conclusions (Dorsch
2016a). Moreover, their lack of the capacity to respond to and provide us with epistemic
reasons is phenomenologically salient: it is part of what imaginative thoughts are like for
us that they are outside of the net of epistemic rationality.
4.
Extending the scope of Phenomenal Rationalism
The preceding considerations have made the case for the claim that the phenomenal char-
acter of judgemental thoughts (or occurrent beliefs) reﬂects the three aspects of their
rational role described by (SENS), (BASE) and (PROV). In addition, I have argued
that perceptual experiences are phenomenally marked as sharing the last aspect
(PROV) with judgemental thoughts. Before concluding this article, I would like to
brieﬂy consider two further issues: how speciﬁc the salient attitude and, especially,
rational role of judgemental thoughts is and what this means for the salience of their
content; and how Phenomenal Rationalism may be applied to many, if not all, other
kinds of mental episode.
126
Fabian Dorsch

The ﬁrst issue concerns the question of whether there are phenomenologically salient
aspects of the rational role of judgemental thoughts that - unlike (SENS), (BASE) and
(PROV) - may differ between distinct judgemental thoughts. The three elements of rational
role discussed so far specify that judgemental thoughts provide us with, and are responsive
to, certain epistemic reasons - that is, epistemic reasons that are variable (i.e. may differ
between distinct judgemental thoughts) and particular (i.e. accessed by us in virtue of par-
ticular mental episodes or states, such as individual beliefs or perceptual experiences). But
(SENS), (BASE) and (PROV) remain silent on the different identities, or more determinate
natures, of the reasons that ﬁgure in the distinct rational roles of speciﬁc judgemental
thoughts. For example, the judgement that the sky is cloudless - but not the judgement
that today is Sunday - is sensitive to the perceptual or inferential recognition that it has
started to rain. Similarly, the two judgements make it reasonable to infer that there will
be many people at the zoo, say, only in conjunction with very different ancillary beliefs
about when people normally like to visit the zoo (namely, respectively, on sunny days or
on Sundays).
Such differences in rational role are intimately connected to the fact that both the
reasonableness and the justiﬁcatory power of judgemental thoughts are relative to their
propositional contents. It is never just reasonable to judge, but to judge that p (where
"p" denotes the speciﬁc propositional content of the judgement concerned); and knowl-
edgeable judgemental thoughts - together with other mental episodes or states - never
just provide us with a reason to infer, but to infer that q (where "q" picks out the speciﬁc
inferentially supported conclusion). The question is now whether judgemental thoughts, in
being phenomenally marked as reasonable and as contributing to inferential reasons, are
also phenomenally marked as responsive to reasons for judging that p or as providing
rational support for judging that q. If so, it seems possible to formulate an argument for
the phenomenological salience of the varying propositional contents of judgemental
thoughts on the basis of the phenomenological salience of their attitudes and, in particular,
their distinct speciﬁc rational roles.38
In parallel to the argument presented in Section 2, the crucial observation is that our jud-
gemental thoughts incline us to judge not only "our judgement is reasonable", but also "our
judgement that p is reasonable" (or, alternatively, "it is reasonable for us to judge that p").
For example, when we entertain the judgemental thought that it rains, say, and ask ourselves
whether this judgemental thought is reasonable, we normally end up forming the higher-
order judgement that our judgement that it rains is reasonable - and not merely that this
judgement is reasonable, irrespective of which propositional content it has. In short,
taking our judgemental thought to be reasonable involves taking it to be reasonable for
us to judge that it rains (and not, say, that the sun is shining).
Moreover, this higher-order judgement is not inferentially derived from the simpler
higher-order judgement that our judgemental thought is reasonable and the additional
belief that the judgemental thought concerned has the propositional content that it rains.
We need not engage in inferences of this kind in order to conclude that, as part of
judging that p, we take it to be reasonable for us to judge that p. Nor is the higher-order
judgement simply the phenomenologically spontaneous result of some constitutive link
or reliable causal process, for the reasons already rehearsed in Section 2. This leaves,
again, the Awareness Model as the best option, according to which we are inclined to
take our judgemental thoughts reasonable relative to their particular propositional contents
because we enjoy some non-conceptual - and, presumably, phenomenal - awareness of
this relativised reasonableness.
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
127

As a consequence, we should extend Phenomenal Rationalism from the general rational
role common to all judgemental thoughts to some of the more speciﬁc differences between
the distinct rational roles of the individual judgemental thoughts. In other words, what is
phenomenologically salient is not just the determinable rational role shared by all judge-
mental thoughts, but also the various content-speciﬁc determinations of this role by particu-
lar judgements. For taking the judgement that p to be reasonable means taking it to be based
on - and, hence, also sensitive to - sufﬁcient reasons for judging that p. And this certainly
implies the phenomenological salience of the propositional content p of the judgemental
thought itself. The salience of attitude is thus, in this way, intimately linked to the salience
of content.
Moreover, once it is established that our judgement that p introspectively seems to be
well-supported by reasons for judging that p, it is not difﬁcult to show that the judgemental
thought may also be phenomenally marked as contributing to the provision of a reason for
judging that q (rather than just some unspeciﬁed epistemic reason) - for instance, when the
judgement that p is considered in conjunction with the judgement that, if p, then q. Of
course, the resulting impression of having a reason for judging that p pertains to the
phenomenal character of the mental complex that comprises both the judgement that p
and the judgement that, if p, then q. But this just suggests that there is a contextual or hol-
istic dimension to the phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts: namely that which
speciﬁc aspects of its reason-giving power happen to be phenomenologically salient may
partly depend on which other mental episodes occur concurrently, notably in the context
of conscious reasoning.
The second issue still to be addressed concerns the applicability of Phenomenal Ration-
alism to other kinds of mental episode. Let us consider imaginative experiences and
thoughts ﬁrst. That they introspectively seem to lack the same rational role as their cognitive
counterparts does not mean that they possess no phenomenologically salient rational role at
all. Given that imagining is typically a conscious mental action, it comes with the phenom-
enal awareness of agency which, as I have argued elsewhere (Dorsch 2009a), is best under-
stood as the phenomenal awareness of their response - and responsiveness - to some
practical reasons (e.g. those presented or embodied by intentions, desires, normative judge-
ments, and the like). Moreover, acts of imagining differ from other instances of mental
agency in at least three phenomenologically salient ways.
First, while episodes of imagining are themselves presentational, other mental actions
are not and, at best, merely operate on presentational - and usually non-imaginative -
experiences or thoughts (e.g. when we actively try to recall something, to calculate a
sum in our head, or to change our mood by meditating). Given that many presentational
differences give rise to phenomenal differences (e.g. with respect to how things are pre-
sented as being, or in which sensory modality), this should also be true of the basic presense
or absence of presentationality.
Second, imagining differs from other forms of mental agency in that it is rationally
responsive only to a certain subset of practical reasons, namely those reasons that speak
in favour of actively and directly forming experiences of, or thoughts about, speciﬁc
objects and features (Dorsch 2009a, 2012, chap. 13). Although probably not all differences
in practical rationality are open to introspection, this particular difference is very likely to be
phenomenologically salient because it concerns the fundamental distinction between what
is under our active control and what is not. For while it is not up to us what we are perceiv-
ing, judging, remembering, feeling, and so on (but at best when we do so), we have active
and direct control over how imaginative experiences and thoughts present things as being.
128
Fabian Dorsch

Third, imaginative (and other) mental actions differ phenomenally from conscious
motivational episodes - such as occurrent intentions, desires or normative judgements -
in that they introspectively seem to be active, but mediated responses to practical
reasons, while the motivational episodes appear to respond to practical reasons in a
passive, but immediate way (Dorsch 2009a). In particular, while reasons directly compel
us to form motivational episodes, their impact on actions is merely indirect in so far as it
is mediated by the relevant motivational episodes. We come to intend to visualise some-
thing in response to recognising that we have reason to do so; and our resulting episodic
act of imagining is determined by, and remains sensitive to a change in, our practical
reasons in so far as it is motivated and guided by our relevant intention (or intention-in-
action), which itself continues to be rationally inﬂuenced by our practical reasons,
whether they are changing or not. Next are veridical episodic memories which differ
from veridical perceptual experiences in that they are not determined by objects in our
present surroundings, but rather by objects in our past surroundings (or, if one prefers,
by our past veridical perceptions of those objects, which were again determined by those
objects). This difference in object determination is clearly phenomenologically salient,
giving rise to what have been often called impressions of the "presence" or of the
"absence" from our environment of the objects concerned.39 More important, it also estab-
lishes a comparable difference in rational role, meaning that while perceptual experiences
provide us with reasons for beliefs about the present, episodic memories provide us with
reasons for beliefs about the past. And a similar line of reasoning as the one employed
above in Section 3 should sufﬁce to motivate the conclusion that this rational difference
contributes to what the respective experiences are like from the inside.
Another interesting kind of experience are pictorial experiences, not the least because
they seem to combine elements of seeing with elements of visualising.40 Pictorial experi-
ences make us visually aware of two things: the canvas and its visible properties; and
the depicted object or scene and its visible properties. Our visual awareness of the
canvas is certainly perceptual in nature and, as such, phenomenally marked as being deter-
mined by the visible properties of the canvas, and as providing us with reasons for percep-
tual beliefs about those properties (as well as for introspective beliefs about this perceptual
aspect of the pictorial experience concerned). Interestingly, how our pictorial experience
presents the depicted object as being is also determined by an external object in our
current environment (which lets this aspect of pictorial experience resemble perception).
But the determining object is of course not identical to the depicted object, given that the
latter is normally not part of our external surroundings. Rather, the determinant of our
visual awareness of the depicted is again the canvas. In particular, any changes in how
we experience the depicted object as being can be traced to back changes in the visible
properties of the canvas (e.g. in the shape, colour, location and texture of the marks of
paint on it). And we may become aware of this fact once we reﬂect on our pictorial experi-
ences from the inside. Pictorial experience is thus special in that it involves the phenomen-
ologically salient determination of two presentations - one perceptual, the other not - by
one and the same object.
Finally, even mental episodes that do not play any role in epistemic or practical reason-
ing and in same-order attitude formation - for instance, because they are non-presentational
(e.g. moods) or causally originate in the brain in a completely passive and non-rational
manner (e.g. after-images) - may still possess at least one particular rational role,
namely to provide rational support for their own self-ascription in the shape of introspective
higher-order judgements. Assuming that it is right to say that all mental episodes are open to
introspection, and that our knowledgeable introspective judgements about our mental
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
129

episode are rationally grounded in those episodes (see, again, the discussion of Peacocke's
view in Section 2), it follows that all mental episodes turn out to provide epistemic reasons
for introspective judgements. And if it is accepted that the reason-giving power of percep-
tual experiences and judgemental thoughts is phenomenologically salient, it seems difﬁcult
to deny the same with respect to other mental episodes.
What all these cases illustrate is that the phenomenological salience of rational role is
inseparably linked to the phenomenological salience of determination, just as rational role
is inseparably linked to determination. There are several basic differences in how distinct
kinds of mental episodes are determined, notably with respect to whether the determinants
are reasons or external objects and their features, and with respect to whether what is
determined concerns primarily how the episodes present things as being or also which
commitment or attitude they adopt towards what they present as being the case. For
instance, reasons determine both content and attitude, while the impact of objects and
their features seems to be largely limited to content (and possibly also time and duration
of occurrence).
Moreover, these differences in determination affect which rational role the respective
mental episodes possess and, hence, also what they are like from the inside. Veridical per-
ceptual experiences, for instance, are not sensitive - and thus not phenomenally marked as
being sensitive - to epistemic reasons because how they present things as being is deter-
mined by external objects and their perceivable features. Similarly, imaginative experiences
and thoughts play no role in the motivation and justiﬁcation of judgements and beliefs
(other than introspective ones) precisely because they are determined by practical
reasons (or perhaps also some non-rational causes).41
To sum up, both rational role and determination are prominent attitudinal aspects of the
phenomenal character of judgemental thoughts and other mental episodes. This shows that
what mental episodes are like from the inside is not exhausted by their presentation of
objects as being a certain way. In other words, some aspects of phenomenal character
pertain to attitude or commitment, rather than to content. The debate about whether
thoughts possess a phenomenal character should therefore address not only the issue of
whether it makes a phenomenal difference which concepts or propositions are involved
in thinking, but also the issue of whether it makes a phenomenal difference whether the
thoughts concerned are judgemental, imaginative and so on.
Central to the discussion of the last issue is whether differences in rational role and
determination are part of what thoughts are like from the inside. The arguments that I
presented in Sections 2 and 3 indicate that we should endorse Phenomenal Rational-
ism, which afﬁrms the phenomenological salience of rational role. In particular, judge-
mental thoughts are phenomenally marked as having the rational role described by
(SENS), (BASE) and (PROV) (at least if they are not self-justifying). But it is arguably
also phenomenologically salient which particular proposition(s) the rational role of a
given judgemental thought is concerned with - and, hence, which particular content
the thought possesses. A crucial step in my line of reasoning to this conclusion has
been the defense of the additional claim that the phenomenal character of mental epi-
sodes - including that of judgemental thoughts - reﬂects the way how the episodes
concerned are determined in cases where everything goes well. Indeed, this phenom-
enal impression of determination is essential to our related phenomenal awareness of
rational role, irrespective of whether the mental episodes concerned are experiences or
thoughts.
130
Fabian Dorsch

Acknowledgements
For comments on earlier drafts and related discussions, I am very grateful to Davor Bodrozic, Berit
Brogaard, Elijah Chudnoff, Julien Dutant, Lucy O'Brien, Adrian Haddock, Anders Nes, Declan
Smithies, Gianfranco Soldati, Matthew Soteriou, Gian-Andri Toendury and two anonymous referees.
I would also like to thank the editors, Marta Jorba and Dermot Moran, for giving me the opportunity to
be part of this special issue.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
My research on this chapter was generously funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation [grant
number PP00P1_139004] and the Fundacio´n Se´neca [grant number 18958/JLI/13].
Notes
1.
See, for instance, Siewert (1998) and Pitt (2004) for optimism and Carruthers (2000) for pessi-
mism about the existence of content-related cognitive phenomenology. Most of the contri-
butions to Bayne and Montague (2011) continue this debate.
2.
Some notable exceptions are Horgan and Tienson (2002), Horgan and Timmons (2007), Shields
(2011) and Kriegel (2015, chap. 1). Note also that, in what follows, I use "content" and "atti-
tude" in very wide senses. In particular, saying that a mental episode has a content is not
meant to imply that it has correctness conditions (see Martin (2002, 382) for discussion). As
a result, instances of perceptual acquaintance count as having a content in my sense since
they present things as being a certain way - and despite the fact that their relationality deprives
them from the possibility of being non-veridical. See Siegel (2015) for a narrower deﬁnition of
"content" in terms of correctness conditions, and Travis (2004), among others, for the claim that
perceptual acquaintance does not involve content in this narrower sense. Similarly, talk of the
attitude of a mental episode is not intended to entail that the episode in question has a prop-
ositional content or is a propositional attitude. According to my usage, even non-propositional
and non-conceptual experiences may involve attitudes, such as the attitude of perceiving or the
attitude of imagining. For example, perceptual experiences need not be identiﬁed with judge-
ment-like propositional attitudes in order to claim that they purport to present parts of our
actual surroundings (rather than merely possible or ﬁctional situations) - as Husserl's idea of
"leibhaftiger Gegenwart" (manifest presence; Husserl [1901] 1984, B 441f.) and Sartre's idea
of perceptions as "[positing their] object as existing" illustrate (Sartre [1940] 2004, 12).
3.
By which I mean experiences linked to one of the ﬁve outer senses, such as episodes of visual
(auditory, tactile, etc.) perceiving, hallucinating, recalling or imagining. Whether similar con-
siderations apply to bodily sensations, emotional feelings, moods or other kinds of non-intellec-
tual episodes or "experiences' is a further issue that needs to be addressed separately, as pointed
out by one of the referees.
4.
At least not intrinsically or by themselves (Dorsch 2012, chap. 2).
5.
See Dorsch (2012, chap. 4) and Dorsch (2016a) for discussions of a notable exception, namely
instances of visualising meant, and able, to ground knowledge.
6.
I assume here that beliefs and semantic memories become occurrent, or manifest in conscious-
ness, in the shape of thoughts with a judgemental attitude, that is, an attitude of taking the
respective proposition to be true for the sake of, or with the aim of, getting it right (Velleman
2000, chaps. 5 and 11). But, of course, not all judgemental thoughts are manifestations of
already existing beliefs or semantic memories.
7.
A good example among very many is the critical discussion of cognitive phenomenology in
Carruthers and Veillet (2011).
8.
Among the possible distinctions are: the sensory vs. the intellectual; the objectual vs. the prop-
ositional; the unstructured vs. the structured; the non-conceptual vs. the conceptual; the merely
causal vs. the rational; or the non-cognitive vs. the cognitive.
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
131

9.
The locus classicus is Nagel (1974). But see also the very helpful discussions in Williamson
(1990) and Martin (2004a, chap. 2).
10.
Introspection is understood here simply as the special form of access that we - and only we -
enjoy to our own conscious mental episodes from our ﬁrst-person (or subjective) perspective,
and by means of which we are capable of forming higher-order judgements and beliefs about
those episodes. Introspection is thus contrasted with third-person ways of acquiring knowledge
about the conscious mind, such as observing the behaviour, speech and bodily expression of
people, or studying their brains with the help of experiments and machines. But it is left
open what the concrete nature of introspection is - for instance, whether it is a "reﬂective
act of consciousness' revealing what is certain about the conscious mind (Sartre [1940]
2004, 4), say, or just "a self-scanning process in the brain" that may go wrong (Armstrong
1993, 324). Similar considerations apply to phenomenal character. By characterising it episte-
mologically as being identical with those aspects of mental episodes, that are accessible to us
from our ﬁrst-person perspective, I do not intend to presuppose any particular view about the
nature of those aspects (e.g. how they are related to features of the brain) or of our phenomenal
awareness of them (e.g. whether it is reﬂexive, objectual, higher-order and so on).
11.
The discussion here is meant to stay neutral on whether the reasons provided are identical with
the mental episodes themselves, or rather with the (seeming) facts that they make us aware of.
12.
Note that the term "judgement" is ambiguous (Soteriou 2009). It may refer either to the instan-
taneous act of judging (or of triggering the occurrence in consciousness of an already existing
belief or semantic memory), which constitutes the onset of an episode of entertaining a prop-
osition with a judgemental attitude; or to the resulting judgemental episode of entertaining,
namely a temporally extended judgemental thought (or occurrent belief or semantic
memory). If not otherwise noted, when I speak of "judgements', I have episodic judgemental
thoughts in mind.
13.
See Dorsch (2009a, 2017a) for further discussion of what it means for the rational role of mental
episodes to be phenomenologically salient; and Owens (2000), Scanlon (2008) and Kolodny
(2005, 2007) for detailed descriptions of the nature and ﬁrst-person character of reasons and
our responses to them.
14.
Note that conformity to (SENS) does not require that judgements are responsive to reasons other
than those provided by themselves. In particular, self-justifying judgements can count as
responsive to reasons even though their justiﬁcation cannot be defeated by any external or
new evidence. Being based on self-provided reasons is already sufﬁcient for being responsive
to (some) reasons.
15.
In what follows, I ignore how the warranted application of the concepts "I" and "judgemental
thought" should be explained. But I suggest elsewhere (Dorsch 2011, Introduction) that they are
also grounded in phenomenal awareness.
16.
Armstrong (1993) and Lycan (1996) are among the proponents of the causal-reliabilist model of
introspection.
17.
See Martin (2000a, 2006) and Dorsch (2013). By contrast, our knowledge of how perceptual
experiences - and thus also perceptual judgements - are caused enables us to formulate
normal conditions for them (Dorsch 2009b, chap. 3.3).
18.
It is unclear whether Peacocke (at least in his earlier writings) endorses the Prompting Model. In
Dorsch (2009a), I read his view as such. But McHugh (2012) argues that Peacocke's - as well
as his own - view goes beyond the Prompting Model, and Peacocke (2012, footnote 1) seems to
acknowledge that this is the correct interpretation of what he believes. In any case, it is possible
that a proponent of the Prompting Model follows Peacocke in taking the link between the lower-
and the higher-order states to be neither constitutive, nor merely causal, but instead rational.
19.
McHugh (2012) puts forward an alternative version of the Awareness Model, which maintains
that the non-conceptual awareness in question is not phenomenal, but practical in nature. It is,
however, unclear what this practical awareness is meant to amount to, or how it can underwrite
and lead - via abstraction and conceptualisation - to theoretical higher-order judgements. In
addition, it is unclear why McHugh resists taking the awareness of the reasonableness of judge-
mental thoughts (or perceptions) to be part of their phenomenal character, especially since it is
difﬁcult to see how he could otherwise account for the phenomenal difference between judge-
mental and imaginative thoughts (as well as perceptual and imaginative experiences). See also
Dorsch (2009a) and Dorsch (2012, 13) for discussions of these phenomenal differences.
132
Fabian Dorsch

20.
See Williamson (1990, chap. 4), Martin (2000b, 2004b, 2006) and Dorsch (2010b, 2013) for
discussions of why it is not only unproblematic, but in fact very plausible to assume that
phenomenal awareness can be misleading.
21.
In Dorsch (2009a), I discuss how the phenomenal awareness of responsiveness to epistemic
reasons differs from the phenomenal awareness of responsiveness to practical reasons, which
pertains, for instance, to conscious (mental) agency.
22.
See Dorsch (2009a, 50f.) and Dorsch (2011, Introduction) for further discussions. There, I also
discuss that the phenomenal awareness in question is fallible and does not presuppose the pos-
session of concepts like "I", "reason" or "judgement", allowing that small children and perhaps
even higher animals can enjoy it, too.
23.
The underlying idea is that the possession conditions of concepts like "reasonable" include a
clause stating that rational subjects feel rationally compelled to employ the concept if they
are phenomenally aware of the reasonableness of one of their thoughts and consider the issue
of whether their thought is reasonable. See Peacocke (1992) for a general theory of concept pos-
session along these lines, and McHugh (2012) for a discussion of the non-conceptuality of the
awareness concerned (although he takes it to be practical rather than phenomenal).
24.
This statement - as well as the corresponding one further below about the phenomenological
salience of this determination relation - needs perhaps to be qualiﬁed. For other factors -
such as the subject's attention, interests, past experiences or training - might, too, inﬂuence
how veridical perceptions present things as being (I am grateful to one of the referees for
raising this point). But it should be clear that the impact of such additional factors can at best
be limited. First of all, they can inﬂuence only which of those properties, that the object in ques-
tion in fact has, it is experienced as having (e.g. which of them the subject attends to or is sen-
sitive towards). Otherwise, the resulting experiences would not be veridical anymore. Then, at
least some of these factors may enjoy only some indirect impact on how we experience things,
namely by determining which perceivable response-dependent properties the objects possess,
and thus can be seen, in the ﬁrst place. This may be the case, for instance, with attention-depen-
dent Gestalt properties, or with certain "artiﬁcial" functional properties (e.g. something may
become a table because we start to see it as a table in response to our need for a table).
Finally, even if our interests or past experiences let us focus on some perceivable properties
of the objects rather than others, this does not amount to a case of practical (i.e. non-epistemic)
determination, where how we experience things as being is a matter of what we want, or of
which practical reasons are available to us (as, say, in the case of imagining).
Independently of this, it is worthwhile pointing out that the determination of veridical percep-
tions by their objects might extend beyond the qualities that we experience the objects as
having. For perhaps the numerical identity of the veridical experiences depends on the numeri-
cal identity of the objects experienced, so that veridical perceptions of distinct blue books, say,
differ even if we are not aware of any qualitatively differences between the books or, in fact, the
experiences themselves (see, for instance, Martin 2002; Dorsch 2016b). But nothing in what
follows depends on whether veridical perceptual experiences are indeed relational in this
strong sense.
25.
It is important to note that what matters is that the experience concerned is conscious (Smithies
2011). We might also have subpersonal mental representations, the content of which is deter-
mined by how the world is like. But these would not put us into an equally good epistemic pos-
ition as our conscious experience (if they would put us in a position to acquire knowledge, or
form justiﬁed beliefs, about the external world at all) precisely because they are non-conscious
and thus do not have any bearing on our rational, personal deliberations about what to believe.
One referee has pointed out to me that we are in an even better epistemic position if, in addition
to our conscious veridical perception, we also know that it is a veridical perception (rather than
an indistinguishable hallucination). This is true and captured by my view since it assumes that
veridical perceptions (as well as hallucinations) are phenomenally marked as being veridical,
meaning that enjoying a conscious veridical perception implies being in a position to come
to know that it is veridical (see the next paragraph). That is, under normal conditions, we
acquire knowledge when we endorse in belief the phenomenal impression of veridicality that
comes with undergoing a veridical perception.
26.
See Martin (2004b, 2006), Siegel (2008) and Dorsch (2010a, 2013) for more detailed discus-
sions. Dorsch (2010a) locates the observation about the phenomenological salience of the
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
133

determination of perceptual experiences by their objects in the broader context of providing a
comprehensive description of their phenomenal character.
27.
Some relationalists about perception deny that non-veridical perceptual experiences possess the
same phenomenal character as veridical ones (e.g. Martin 2002, 2004b, 2006). But they agree
that the two kinds of experience still resemble each other in what they are like for the subject.
More speciﬁcally, non-veridical experiences possess a phenomenal character that is introspec-
tively indistinguishable from the phenomenal character of veridical experiences. See Dorsch
(2016b) for discussion.
28.
This is a fairly minimal characterisation of the transparency of experience, which is compatible
with the idea that introspective reﬂection also reveals certain features of the experiences them-
selves, such as their rational role or determination (Martin 2002). Some philosophers add the
claim that we do not come to notice anything but the objects of experience and their features.
This implies, in particular, that we cannot become attentively aware of aspects of our experi-
ences other than what they present us with.
29.
See also Harman (1990) and Speaks (2009), among many others. One of the few dissenting
voices is Hume (2007, sec. 1.4.2) who - as discussed in Martin (2000b) - believed that the
phenomenal character of our perceptual experiences is neutral on whether they make us
aware of external or internal objects. But there is, of course, the doubt that his belief was
more inﬂuenced by this theoretical convictions concerning sense-data than by his introspective
reﬂections about his own perceptual experiences.
30.
This expectation is especially pronounced because (though does not necessarily require that) the
objects of our perceptual experiences seem to us to be external. Assuming that the objects are
not dependent on our experiences, the two kinds of entity would be completely unrelated to each
other if our experiences were also not dependent on their objects (or, at least, on their perceiva-
ble properties). Hence, the fact that we do take our perceptual experiences to be intimately
linked to their experience-independent objects reveals that these objects seem, from the
inside, to be determinants of our experiences.
31.
Or at least not in a direct manner. We may of course act on our intention to visualise something
as having exactly the same colour and shape as the book that we see in front of us. But, in this
case, the direct determinant of our imaginative experience is our intention, and not (our percep-
tion of) the external book. See Dorsch (2009a) and Dorsch (2017b, pt. 2) for discussion.
32.
The formulation chosen in the main text leaves open the possibility that imaginative experiences
might also sometimes appear to occur in a spontaneous and seemingly arbitrary way, or as the
causal effects of some non-rational factors. But, in Dorsch (2012, chap. 13f.), I argue at length
that imagining is always an instance of mental agency, and that spontaneously or otherwise cau-
sally occurring imaginative experiences or thoughts belong to a third category of mental epi-
sodes. I discuss the various option of how imaginative experiences and thoughts might be
said to be determined in Dorsch (2017b, pt. 2).
33.
The main exception are trivial inferences of the form "if p and q, then p". Besides, I ignore here
that judgemental thoughts may perhaps also provide reasons for introspective judgements (see
the discussion of Peacocke's position in Section 2).
34.
See Dorsch (2016a) for more on the two aspects of rational determination and, especially, their
relative independence.
35.
I ignore here that the underlying perceptions or beliefs might have to be veridical or true in a
non-accidental manner as well in order for the resulting judgements to count as knowledgeable.
36.
Again, if someone endorses a form of disjunctivism (or non-conjunctivism) which denies that
knowledgeable and non-knowledgeable judgemental thoughts possess the same phenomenal
character, the claim will rather be that non-knowledgeable judgemental thoughts possess a char-
acter that is introspectively indistinguishable from (though not identical with) the character of
knowledgeable judgemental thoughts.
37.
See Hopkins (2011) and Dorsch (2017b, chap. 4). The considerations that follow in the next
paragraph might still be read as suggesting that judgemental thoughts are transparent to the suf-
ﬁciency of the epistemic reasons on which they are based, even though they are not transparent
to the identity of those reasons.
38.
This line of reasoning was suggested to me by one of the anonymous referees.
39.
See, for instance, the references to Husserl's and Sartre's writings in endnote 2, as well as
Martin's idea of the "immediacy" of perception (Martin 2002) and the discussion of Husserl's
134
Fabian Dorsch

view in Soldati (2009). I provide a detailed description of the phenomenology of perceptual,
mnemonic and imaginative experiences in Dorsch (2010a).
40.
Although it should be kept in mind that they do not involve an instance of visualising, nor are a
fusion of seeing and visualising (Budd 1992; Hopkins 1998, chap. 1).
41.
This is not completely true. With respect to the rational determination of propositional content,
certain episodes of visualising can ground knowledge in the same way as perceptual experi-
ences. But the imaginative experiences concerned need the help of higher-order judgements
about their non-accidental veridicality in order to give rise to an attitude of belief rather than
an attitude of imagining. See Dorsch (2012, chap. 4) and Dorsch (2016a) for detailed
discussions.
Notes on contributor
Fabian Dorsch is SNSF Research Professor at the University of Fribourg (Switzerland). He is author
of The Nature of Colours (de Gruyter 2009), The Unity of Imagining (de Gruyter 2012) and the forth-
coming Imagination (Routledge 2017) and has published articles on various topics in the philosophy
of mind, epistemology, metaphysics, aesthetics and the philosophy of normativity. He founded the
European Society for Aesthetics and is editor of the journal Estetika - The Central European
Journal of Aesthetics.
ORCID
Fabian Dorsch
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2329-8906
References
Armstrong, D. M. 1993. A Materialist Theory of the Mind, Rev. ed. London: Routledge.
Bayne, Tim, and Michelle Montague, eds. 2011. Cognitive Phenomenology. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Budd, Malcolm. 1992. "Review of "Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of the
Representational Arts" by Kendall L. Walton." Mind 101: 195-198.
Burge, Tyler. 1996. "Our Entitlement to Self-Knowledge." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 96:
91-116.
Burge, Tyler. 1998. "Reason and the First Person." In Knowing Our Own Minds, edited by Crispin
Wright, Barry C. Smith, and Cynthia Macdonald, 243-270. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Burge, Tyler. 2003. "Perceptual Entitlement." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 67 (3):
503-48.
Carruthers, Peter. 2000. Phenomenal Consciousness. A Naturalistic Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Carruthers, Peter, and Benedicte Veillet. 2011. "The Case Against Cognitive Phenomenology." In
Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by Timothy Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 35-56. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Crane, Tim. 2009. "Is Perception a Propositional Attitude?" The Philosophical Quarterly 59 (236):
452-69.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2009a. "Judging and the Scope of Mental Agency." In Mental Actions, edited by
Lucy O'Brien, and Matthew Soteriou, 38-71. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2009b. Die Natur Der Farben. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2010a. "The Unity of Hallucinations." Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 9
(2): 171-191.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2010b. "Transparency and Imagining Seeing." Philosophical Explorations 13 (3):
173-200.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2011. Experience and Reason. Lausanne: Rero Doc.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2012. The Unity of Imagining. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2013. "Experience and Introspection." In Hallucination, edited by Fiona Macpherson
and Dimitris Platchias, 175-220. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2016a. "Knowledge by Visualisation - How Imaginative Experiences Can Ground
Factual Knowledge." Teorema. Advance online publication.
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
135

Dorsch, Fabian. 2016b. "Perceptual Acquaintance and the Seeming Relationality of Hallucinations."
Journal of Consciousness Studies. Advance online publication.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2017a. "The Phenomenal Presence of Reasons." In Phenomenal Presence, edited by
Fiona Macpherson, Martine Nida-Ruemelin, and Fabian Dorsch. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dorsch, Fabian. 2017b. Imagination. London: Routledge.
Goldman, Alvin, and Bob Beddor. 2015. "Reliabilist Epistemology." In Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (2015 Winter Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/spr2011/entries/reliabilism/.
Harman, Gilbert. 1990. "The Intrinsic Quality of Experience." Collection 4: 31-52.
Hopkins, Robert. 1998. Picture, Image and Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hopkins, Robert. 2011. "Imagination and Observation." Unpublished manuscript.
Horgan, Terry, and John Tienson. 2002. "The Intentionality of Phenomenology and the
Phenomenology of Intentionality." In Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary
Readings, edited by D. Chalmers, 520-533. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Horgan, Terry, and Mark Timmons. 2007. "Moorean Moral Phenomenology." In Themes from
G. E. Moore, edited by Susana Nuccetelli, and Gary Seay, 203-226. Oxford: Oxford Univ Press.
Hume, David. 2007. A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition. Edited by David Fate Norton
and Mary J Norton. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Husserl, Edmund. [1901] 1984. Logische Untersuchungen. Den Haag: Nijhoff.
Kolodny, Niko. 2005. "Why Be Rational?" Mind 114: 509-63.
Kolodny, Niko. 2007. "How Does Coherence Matter?" Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 107
(1): 229-63.
Kriegel, Uriah. 2015. The Varieties of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lycan, William G. 1996. Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Martin, M. G. F. 1997. "Self-Observation." European Journal of Philosophy 5 (2): 119-40.
Martin, M. G. F. 2000a. "An Eye Directed Outward." In Knowing Our Own Minds, edited by Cynthia
Macdonald, Barry C. Smith, and Crispin Wright, 99-123. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, M. G. F. 2000b. "Beyond Dispute: Sense-Data, Intentionality, and the Mind-Body Problem."
In History of the Mind-Body Problem, edited by Tim Crane and Sarah Patterson, 195-231.
London: Routledge.
Martin, M. G. F. 2002. "The Transparency of Experience." Mind and Language 17 (4): 376-425.
Martin, M. G. F. 2004a. Uncovering Appearances. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martin, M. G. F. 2004b. "The Limits of Self-Awareness." Philosophical Studies 120: 37-89.
Martin, M. G. F. 2006. "On Being Alienated." In Perceptual Experience, edited by Tamar Gendler,
and John Hawthorne, 354-410. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McDowell, John. 1998. "Values and Secondary Qualities." In Mind, Value, and Reality, 110-129.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
McHugh, Conor. 2012. "Reasons and Self-Knowledge." In The Self and Self-Knowledge, edited by
Annalisa Coliva, 139-163. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, Thomas. 1974. "What is it Like to Be a Bat?" The Philosophical Review 83: 435-450.
O'Brien, Lucy. 2003. "On Knowing One's Own Actions." In Agency and Self-Awareness: Issues in
Philosophy and Psychology, edited by Johannes Roessler, and Naomi Eilan, 358-382. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Owens, David. 2000. Reason Without Freedom: The Problem of Epistemic Normativity. London:
Routledge.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1992. A Study of Concepts. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1996. "Entitlement, Self-Knowledge and Conceptual Redeployment."
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 96: 117-158.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1998. "Conscious Attitudes, Attention and Self-Knowledge." In Knowing Our
Own Minds, edited by Crispin Wright, Barry C. Smith, and Cynthia Macdonald, 63-98. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1999. Being Known. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Peacocke, Christopher. 2012. "Conscious Events and Self-Ascriptions: Comments on Heal and
O'Brien." In The Self and Self-Knowledge, edited by Annalisa Coliva, 180-186. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pitt, David. 2004. "The Phenomenology of Cognition or What is it Like to Think That P?" Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 69 (1): 1-36.
136
Fabian Dorsch

Sartre, Jean P. [1940] 2004. The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination.
London: Routledge.
Scanlon, Thomas. 2008. Moral Dimensions: Permissibility, Meaning, Blame. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Shields, Christopher. 2011. "On Behalf of Cognitive Qualia." In Cognitive Phenomenology, edited by
Tim Bayne, and Michelle Montague, 215-35. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shoemaker, Sidney. 1994. "Self-Knowledge and "Inner Sense": Lecture I: The Object Perception
Model." Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (2): 249-314.
Siegel, Susanna. 2006. "Subject and Object in the Contents of Visual Experience." Philosophical
Review 115 (3): 355-88.
Siegel, Susanna. 2008. "The Epistemic Conception of Hallucination." In Disjunctivism: Perception,
Action, Knowledge, edited by Adrian Haddock, and Fiona Macpherson, 205-224. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Siegel, Susanna. 2015. "The Contents of Perception." In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2015 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/
entries/perception-contents/.
Siewert, Charles P. 1998. The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Smithies, Declan. 2011. "What Is the Role of Consciousness in Demonstrative Thought?" Journal of
Philosophy 108 (1): 5-34.
Soldati, Gianfranco. 2009. "Transparenz der Gefu¨hle." In Emotionen Interdisziplina¨r, edited by
Barbara Merker, 257-280. Paderborn: Mentis.
Soteriou, Matthew. 2009. "Mental Agency, Conscious Thinking, and Phenomenal Character." In
Mental Actions, edited by Lucy O'Brien, and Matthew Soteriou, 231-252. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Speaks, Jeff. 2009. "Transparency, Intentionalism, and the Nature of Perceptual Content." Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 79 (3): 539-573.
Travis, Charles. 2004. "The Silence of the Senses." Mind 113: 59-94.
Tye, Michael. 1995. Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Velleman, David. 2000. The Possibility of Practical Reason. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Walton, Kendall. 1990. Mimesis as Make-Believe. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Williamson, Timothy. 1990. Identity and Discrimination. Oxford: Blackwell.
The Phenomenology of Attitudes
137

