International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN: 0967-2559 (Print) 1466-4542 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/riph20
Are Minimal Representations Still
Representations?
Shaun Gallagher
To cite this article: Shaun Gallagher (2008) Are Minimal Representations Still
Representations? , International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 16:3, 351-369, DOI:
10.1080/09672550802113243
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09672550802113243
Published online: 25 Jun 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 763
View related articles 
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=riph20

International Journal of Philosophical Studies Vol. 16(3), 351-369
International Journal of Philosophical Studies
ISSN 0967-2559 print 1466-4542 online © 2008 Taylor & Francis
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals
DOI: 10.1080/09672550802113243
Are Minimal Representations Still 
Representations?1
Shaun Gallagher
Taylor and Francis Ltd
RIPH_A_311490.sgm
10.1080/09672550802113243
International Journal of Philosophical Studies
0967-2559 (print)/1466-4542 (online)
Original Article
2008
Taylor & Francis
16
30000002008
ShaunGallagher
gallaghr@mail.ucf.edu
Abstract
I examine the following question: Do actions require representations that
are intrinsic to the action itself? Recent work by Mark Rowlands, Michael
Wheeler, and Andy Clark suggests that actions may require a minimal
form of representation. I argue that the various concepts of minimal repre-
sentation on offer do not apply to action per se and that a non-representa-
tionalist account that focuses on dynamic systems of self-organizing
continuous reciprocal causation at the sub-personal level is superior. I
further recommend a scientific pragmatism regarding the concept of
representation.
Keywords: action; action oriented representation; decoupleability; 
pre-intentional act; dynamic systems
Representation in Action
Is the concept of representation required for an account of action? In this
paper I want to take the anti-representationalist argument as far as I can.
My focus is on action, however, and I don't want to make any claims about
the more general question of representational accounts of cognition. I also
want to set aside the question of whether representation plays a role in
deliberation about action, or the planning of action, or the working out of
prior intentions, and so forth. The question I address is whether representa-
tion is necessary in action, as part of action itself.
Consider the classical concept of representation. The following list of
characteristics is based on (but not identical to) one provided by Mark
Rowlands (2006: pp. 5ff.), who understands the classical concept to be
modelled on language, on how words work: 
1
Representation is internal (image, symbol, neural configuration).
2
Representation has duration (it's a discrete identifiable thing).
3
Representation bears content that is external to itself (it refers to or is
about something other than itself).

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
352
4
Representation requires interpretation - its meaning derives from a
certain processing that takes place in the subject; like a word or an image,
its meaning gets fixed in context.
5
Representation is passive (it is produced, enacted, called forth by some
particular situation; or we do something with it).
6
Representation is decoupleable from its current context.2
The idea of decoupleability, for example, is that one can take the represen-
tation 'off-line' and, for example, imagine or remember an action or
context. Representation in such cases involves a form of decoupling away
from action, away from the target of action, or from the current context. The
question is whether this kind of off-line or decoupled activity may still be
involved in aspects of action (I'll come back to this point).
Taking up an anti-representationalist view, Dreyfus (2002) argues that for
practised or skilful intentional action one does not require representation: 
A phenomenology of skill acquisition confirms that, as one acquires
expertise, the acquired know-how is experienced as finer and finer
discriminations of situations paired with the appropriate response to
each. Maximal grip [Merleau-Ponty] names the body's tendency to
refine its responses so as to bring the current situation closer to an
optimal gestalt. Thus, successful learning and action do not require
propositional mental representations. They do not require semanti-
cally interpretable brain representations either.
(Dreyfus, 2002: p. 367)
Dreyfus associates the idea of representation with a failed Cartesian philos-
ophy - the concept of representation (as used in AI, for example) remains
context-independent and bound up with epistemic states of knowing-that
(propositional knowledge), when everything about intelligent action and
knowing-how depends on being-in-the-world (rather than standing back
and representing the world) and on context - both background and
immediate context. The limitations of representationalism can be seen in
the commonsense knowledge problem and the frame problem in AI.
Representational approaches to the problem of commonsense
knowledge (pictured as an interconnected system of representations) leads
to 'a vicious combinatorial explosion' (Wheeler, 2005), as propositional
(representational) knowledge of one aspect of the world presupposes prop-
ositional knowledge of other aspects, etc. etc. The frame problem - roughly,
how does a system adjust itself to recognize relevant features in a changing
environment? - remains unsolved in a representationalist model. To claim
that the system uses appropriate representations is just to push the problem
back and leads to an infinite regress - how does the system know what
representations are appropriate/relevant to the particular context?

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
353
It's important to note that what is involved here is not simply the imme-
diate context of a well-ordered task. One might think that a connectionist
model, where a system is trained in a rich environment, could generate
distributed representations that are context-sensitive. But the problem is also
the 
 
background
 
 context that informs the particular system's abilities and
decisions. Whereas a background context is not required for a robot that does
one pre-defined task (my household robot does a great job at vacuuming, but
it can't do the dishes), the human context is not defined by narrowly circum-
scribed actualities; it is also defined by finite but extensive possibilities.
A similar anti-representationalist stance is explicated by Berthoz and
Petit (2006). They argue that the brain is an organ for action rather than an
organ for representation. They want to move away from a philosophy that
puts language in first place and that models action on language-like repre-
sentation, where action is equivalent to movement plus representation: 
By applying this representational filter, everything in the external as
well as in the internal world appears frozen, fixed and stabilized by the
projection of the propositional form, which implicitly structures
representation.
(Berthoz and Petit, 2006: p. 23)
Representations, on the propositional model, are discrete static structures,
states of affairs that lack the kind of dynamics found in action. For Berthoz
and Petit, action involves anticipation. As we'll see, however, on one model,
anticipation itself might be considered representational.
What takes the place of representations in non-representationalist
accounts of action is a form of perceptually based on-line intelligence which
generates action 'through complex causal interactions in an extended-body-
environment system' (Wheeler, 2005: p. 193). But can this sort of system do
everything it needs to do without representation?
 
Minimal Representations
 
Michael Wheeler (2005) is a friend of Dreyfus' anti-representationalist
view, but following Andy Clark (1997: pp. 47ff., 149ff.), and inspired by
Brooksian robotics, he suggests that certain actions require 'action-oriented
representations' (AORs). AORs are temporary egocentric motor maps of
the environment that are fully determined by the situation-specific action
required of the agent (organism or robot).3 On this model, it is not that the
AORs re-present the pre-existing world in an internal image, or that they
map it out in a neuronal pattern: rather, 'how the world is is itself encoded
in terms of possibilities for action' (p. 197). What is represented in AORs is
not knowledge that the environment is x, but knowledge of how to negotiate

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
354
the environment. AORs are action-specific, egocentric relative to the agent,
and context-dependent.
But what sort of thing can count as an AOR? Is it a neural firing pattern,
a motor schema, or something like a bodily movement? Before we consider
Wheeler's answer to this, let's consider something that he rules out, namely
bodily movement itself (2005: p. 209). According to Wheeler, bodily move-
ments do not have representational status because in the relevant contexts
of action, they play a role that can be given a fully causal and specifically
non-representational explanation. Rowlands (2006), in contrast, defends
the idea that certain bodily movements that are elements of action can be
representational. He argues that the classical concept of representation,
modelled on the word - internal but with content externality, in need
of interpretation, and passive - is not adequate to capture the concept of
representation in action. To get to a more adequate action concept of
representation (or AOR) he gives up some of these aspects (2006: p. 11).
For Rowlands (2006: pp. 113-14), representation in action includes the
following characteristics: 
●Representation carries information about something other than itself
(x).4
●Representation is teleological - it tracks or has a specific function
towards x.
●Representation can misrepresent x.
●Representation can be combined into a more general representational
framework.
●Representation is decoupleable from x (x may be absent from the imme-
diate environment).
In order to see how this concept of representation applies to action,
Rowlands distinguishes between intentional actions, sub-intentional acts,
and pre-intentional acts. Sub-intentional acts (O'Shaughnessy, 1980) are
non-intentional movements, e.g., of tongue or fingers, of which we are not
aware, for which there is no reason, and which serve no purpose connected
with action. Pre-intentional acts, or 'deeds' in Rowlands' terminology,
include such things as the positioning of fingers in catching a ball that is
flying towards you at a high rate of speed, or the movement of your fingers
while playing Chopin's Fantaisie Impromptu in C# Minor on the piano. Pre-
intentional acts include an array of 'on-line, feedback-modulated adjust-
ments that take place below the level of intention, but collectively promote
the satisfaction of [an] antecedent intention' (p. 103).
Rowlands provides a detailed example: Yarbus' (1967) experiments on
saccadic eye movements. Yarbus presents subjects with a painting that
shows six women and the arrival of a male visitor; subjects are then asked to
do certain tasks: 

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
355
1
view the picture at will
2
estimate the family's wealth
3
judge the age of the people in the painting
4
guess what the people had been doing prior to the arrival of the visitor
5
remember the clothing worn
6
remember the position of the objects in the room
7
estimate how long it had been since the visitor was last seen by the
people in the painting.
Figure 1.
Seven records of eye movements by one subject (from Yarbus, 1967). Used with
kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
356
Yarbus found that the scan paths varied systematically with the nature of
the task (Figure 1). Thus, the saccades are in some way governed by the
intention/task, but they are not intentional in the sense that we do not
decide to use this visual tactic, and we are not conscious that we are doing
the saccades: they are pre-intentional acts.
Rowlands argues that such 'deeds' or pre-intentional acts are representa-
tional. Although he hesitates to call them representations per se, to call
them representational suggests that they involve representations at some
level, and in any case they do fit his definition of representation. Pre-
intentional acts 
●carry information about x (the trajectory, shape, size of ball, the
keyboard, a specific aspect of people in the painting)
●track x or function in a way that allows the subject to accomplish some-
thing in virtue of tracking x
●can misrepresent (get it wrong)
●can be combined into a more general representational structure (I catch
the ball in a way that allows me to throw it back efficiently; I continue to
play the music; I continue to scan a painting systematically)
●are decoupleable from x (x may be absent from the immediate environ-
ment - e.g., I can later remember and demonstrate how I caught the ball
replicating the same act; I can imagine looking at the painting and in
doing so follow the same scan paths).
On some interpretations (e.g., Anscombe, 1957; Merleau-Ponty, 1962),
'deeds' are intentional in so far as they subserve intentional action. For
example, in regard to playing the piano or catching the ball, if you ask me
did I intend to posture my fingers in just such a position, I could say yes in
so far as I intended to play this piece, or catch the ball. On this view, inten-
tionality reaches down into the motor elements that serve the intentional
action. In regard to the Yarbus example, one might ask: 'Did you mean to
focus on the faces when you were answering that question?' I might respond
that I wasn't conscious of doing so, or of controlling my eyes in any explicit
way (and in that sense I might claim that it was unintentional). Or I might
say 'Yes, since I was trying to answer a question about the picture, I was
certainly scanning it.' The issue of whether deeds are pre-intentional or in
some sense share in the intentional nature of the action can be set aside for
our purposes. For simplicity, I'll follow Rowlands and continue to refer to
them as pre-intentional.
Decoupleability and Causal Spread
According to both the standard definition and Rowlands' definition of
representation, representation is decoupleable from x (I can represent x

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
357
even if x is absent from the immediate environment). But once we do decou-
ple a pre-intentional act from x (the ball, the piano keys, the painting), I
suggest that we are no longer talking about action in the same sense. Indeed,
it is difficult to see how pre-intentional acts can be decoupled from x (the
ball, the piano keys, the painting) or the context without becoming some-
thing entirely different from an element of the action at stake, or an AOR.
Off-line cognition, imagining, remembering, or even re-enacting an action
decoupled from its original context and absent x may (or may not) require
representation - but this says nothing about representation 
 
in
 
 
 
action
 
.
An advocate of representation in action, however, could appeal to a
model developed by Andy Clark and Rick Grush (1999). They offer a model
of representation that puts decoupleability directly into action at a sub-
personal level. They propose that anticipation in motor control, specifically
the 'internal' neural circuitry used for predictive/anticipatory purposes in a
forward emulator, involves a decoupled representation, which they call a
Minimal Robust Representation (MRR). The circuitry is a model, a 'decou-
pleable surrogate' that 
 
stands in
 
 for a future state of some extra-neural
aspect of the movement - a body position (or proprioceptive feedback
connected with a body position) just about to be accomplished, e.g, in the
action of catching a ball. Since the emulator anticipates (represents) an x
that is not there - a future x - or a predicted motor state, it is in some sense
off-line, 'disengaged', or certainly decoupleable from the current x or the
current movement.
For Clark and Grush, this MRR is an 'inner state' that does not depend
'on a constant physical linkage' between it and the extra-neural states which
it is about. Thus, 'emulators seem to be a nice, biologically detailed example
of the sort of disengagement that Brian Cantwell Smith (1996) has recently
argued to be crucial for understanding representation' (Clark and Grush,
1999: p. 7). But it is difficult to see how an aspect of motor control that is a
constitutive part of the action can be considered decoupled from x, which it
may be tracking, or the context, or the action itself. Isn't this kind of antici-
pation fully situated in the action context? Doesn't the anticipation of a
future state or location of x (e.g., anticipating where the ball will be in the
next second), or of the predicted motor state (anticipating where to strike
the keyboard in the next measure), require reference to the present state or
location of x and to my hand, or to the current motor command (via effer-
ence copy) and current state of the system? Moreover, if it is going to play
a part in the control of movement, doesn't this have to be a physical connec-
tion? To think that the anticipatory emulator involves a decoupled process
is to think that such anticipations can be detached from perceptual and
proprioceptive input, which they clearly cannot be. It is true that they are
one step ahead of real-world proprioceptive feedback - but they are also at
the same time one step behind the previous feedback, and they depend on
the continuing perception of relevant objects in the world. They are part of

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
358
the on-line process of action; as such they register not simply some future
state, but the trajectory of the action.
If one does decouple the emulation process - if one disengages it from the
action itself - it ceases to be part of a forward motor control mechanism,
although it may turn into part of a truly off-line representation-process, that
is, we may use a decoupled emulation process in memory or imagination
(see, e.g., Grush and Mandik, 2002 for the example of moving on an
imaginary chessboard).
Of course the argument may not be that the representation in action is
decoupled from action; rather, the argument may be that the representation
is decoupleable. So one might admit that once it is decoupled it no longer has
any direct function in action itself, although it may assist action planning.
But it remains an open question whether in action it functions in a represen-
tational manner, or whether it takes on a representational role once it is
decoupled. Clark and Grush acknowledge this issue: 'full-blooded internal
representations' are fully decoupleable inner surrogates for extra-neural
states of affairs. But the 'case of basic motor emulation does indeed fall
short of meeting this stricter criterion ... the surrogate states are not fully
decoupleable from ongoing environmental input' (1999: p. 10). So the
neural circuitry correlating to the anticipatory aspect in the emulator turns
out not to be a full-blooded representation; it is at best, as Clark and Grush
suggest, the most minimal entity that we might consider a representation.
The claim that representations are decoupleable begs the question about
how representation is supposed to function. Or to put it a different way, the
traditional definition of representation understands representations to be
decoupleable only because representations are always portrayed as
functioning in a decoupled manner. Representations are said to be needed
because we are not directly coupled to the world or the thing that we
experience. It is not clear why something that may (or may not) operate as
a representation in a non-action context necessarily operates as a represen-
tation in the action context. Even if an emulation process or pre-intentional
act can take on representational duties outside of action, this does not
require that they be representational in action.
Wheeler, for one,5 gives up the criterion of decoupleability as part of the
concept of a minimal (or weak) representation (2005: p. 219); and both
Wheeler and Rowlands suggest that minimal representations involve
aspects of a system that is brain, body ... but also environment. 'The vehicles
of representation do not stop at the skin; they extend all the way out into the
world' (Rowlands, 2006: p. 224). Here Rowlands joins Clark and Wheeler,
and some version of the extended mind hypothesis, where actions are char-
acterized by complex causal interactions that involve a dynamic coupling of
body and environment, and where the causality is spread around.
Wheeler here calls our attention to the 'threat [to representationalism]
from [non-trivial] causal spread' (2005: p. 200). Indeed, the commitment

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
359
to some version of this idea of extended or situated cognition is what
motivated anti-representationalism in the first place. On this view, the
environment itself does some of the causal work, and in a way that
eliminates the need for representations. Consider, for example, driving
from London to Durham (see Haugeland, 1985). It involves following
some kind of strategy: 
Strategy 1:
I have a stored inner representation of the directions.
Strategy 2:
I follow a map and road signs, which are external repre-
sentations.
Strategy 3:
Having decided to go to Durham, I jump in the car and
start off, and having done it many times before, I go on
automatic pilot and allow the landscape and roads to
guide me (no representations required since the actual
road and landscape do the work).
This third situation depends on neither internal nor external representa-
tions and involves non-trivial causal spread. But, according to Wheeler, this
does not rule out AORs. He argues that to go fully anti-representationalist
in an extended cognition paradigm one needs to understand representation
as involving (1) strong instructionalism (i.e., the idea that representations
provide a full and detailed description of how to achieve the outcome); and
(2) the neural assumption (i.e., the idea that neuronal processes play a
central and close to exclusive role in cognition). There are good reasons to
give up strong instructionalism (see below). Furthermore, the neural
assumption, on the extended cognition hypothesis, is weakened. For
Wheeler, if we maintain a sufficiently weakened neural assumption (which
he specifies as the claim that 'if intelligent action is to be explained in
representational terms, then whatever criteria are proposed as sufficient
conditions for representation-hood, they should not be satisfied by any
extra-neural elements for which it would be unreasonable, extravagant, or
explanatorily inefficacious to claim that the contribution to intelligent
action made by those elements is representational in character' (2005:
p. 209)), then we don't need to rule out a minimal form of representation.
AORs may still have a role to play as functioning neural representations.
 
Where's the Representation?
 
The idea of strong instructionalism was already given up by Dreyfus in his
discussion of background knowledge: a representation, no matter how
strongly instructional, can never be adequate to meet the background-
knowledge problem or the frame problem - it can never specify everything
necessary to determine an unruly contextualized action; indeed, it would
lead to a paralysed system and inaction if the system attempted to specify

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
360
everything required. The context and background-knowledge problems are
not solvable by appeal to representations. Dreyfus (2007) thus appeals to
Merleau-Ponty's work, which offers a non-representational account of the
way the body and the world are coupled and suggests a way of avoiding the
frame problem. According to Merleau-Ponty, as an agent acquires skills,
those skills are 'stored', not as representations in the agent's mind, but as
dispositional embodied responses to the solicitations of situations in the
world. What the learner acquires through experience is not by way of repre-
sentations at all but by way of more finely discriminated situations. If the
situation does not clearly solicit a single response or if the response does not
produce a satisfactory result, the learner is led to further refine his discrim-
inations, which, in turn, solicit ever more refined responses.
Wheeler too appeals to a non-representational solution to the frame
problem. Evolutionary and cultural contributions to the already situated
subject inform a perception-based account of action (which also involves a
crucial appeal to continuous reciprocal causation to explain fast and fluid
context-switching). Lions, and tigers, and bears as well as other people,
and specific objects in the environment, e.g., bombs, have either an evolu-
tionary or a culturally based valence that solicits a particular response.
Intentional life is keyed into relevant aspects of the environment in a way
that shapes our sub-personal processes, and the latter come to serve the
intentional aspects of action. In this sense, the frame problem is solved not
by a network of representations, but by intuitive and emotionally informed
reactions. This is why it is still a problem for AI and top-down robotics. We
try to get the robot to recognize the bomb as a threat by providing it with a
cold propositional algorithm to that effect. The robot thus has to represent
the bomb as a threat and then has to represent what action to take and
then has to represent what parts of its own mechanisms to activate. In
contrast, we non-robots 
 
see
 
 that the bomb is a threat and we run for our
lives.
On a non-representational model we can indeed get things wrong, but not
because our representation of the world 
 
mis
 
represents the world. Rather,
the world itself is ambiguous in the light of our particular abilities and
projects. From a particular distance and perspective, or in a certain light, the
mountain appears to be climbable. Once I get closer, or begin to climb,
however, I can discover that the mountain is not climbable. On the repre-
sentationalist view this is explained by saying that my original representa-
tion of the mountain was wrong. On the embodied, non-representationalist
view, at a certain distance, in a certain light, from a certain perspective the
mountain affords a certain climbing possibility relative to my embodied
skills. Change the distance, the light, and/or the perspective and the
affordance may disappear - that is, the dynamic coupling of body and envi-
ronment changes. These things are physically determined factors that
involve a real mountain, light conditions, and my bodily position, strength,

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
361
and capabilities; they are not representational. The affordance doesn't
disappear because I change the representation of my distance from the
mountain - I actually have to change my distance, and when I do so, the
body-mountain relation, which defines the affordance, changes.
I don't deny that a representationalist could provide a representational
description of this same situation.6 E.g., from a particular distance and
perspective I 'represent' (or misrepresent) the mountain as climbable. Clark
(following Millikan) suggests that affordances are in fact AORs (1997:
p. 50). For Millikan, the perceived layout of the environment is a represen-
tation of this sort (a pushme-pullyou representation or PPR), because it
describes 'how things out there are arranged', and at the same time a repre-
sentation of 'possible ways of moving within that environment' (Millikan,
1996: p. 151). But this is simply to redefine affordances in representational
terms and to presume that the perceived layout of the environment is some-
thing different from the layout of the environment that I perceive, and that
a 'percept', which is something over and above the perceiving, is located in
the perceiving subject. But the idea that perception involves an inner repre-
sentation goes precisely against Gibson's concept of affordances. Millikan
further suggests that the newborn infant might use such PPRs to 'picture
what the other is doing' when it imitates the other's facial gesture. But the
infant imitates the other's facial gesture just after seeing the gesture (and if
the neuroscience of mirror neurons and shared representations is correct,
the action/imitation itself is already underway as the infant perceives), and
it is not clear why the infant would require something more (an inner
picture) than the perceived gesture itself.7 If the landscape is right there in
front of me, affording me the opportunity to act, if I have just seen the
other's gesture and am shaping my own face accordingly, then the relevant
layout is already in the brain-body-environment system, and there seems
no reason to reduplicate it representationally.
Within an embodied-situated approach, then, what role can a minimal
representation play? Wheeler defends representation (AOR) as a percep-
tion-based, short-lived, egocentric (spatial) mapping of the environment
calibrated strictly in terms of possible actions. Clark and Grush suggest that
the anticipation that is built into a forward emulator for on-line motor
control is representational. Rowlands argues that pre-intentional move-
ments governed by the intentional action are representational. When we
consider these aspects of action together, we should notice that they reflect
nothing more or less than the dynamic temporal structure of action experi-
ence itself. On a phenomenological, non-representational model of this
temporal structure, action involves (1) an on-line pragmatic retentional
maintenance of the relevant aspects of the environment as it is being expe-
rienced (a holding in perceptual presence of those factors that have just
defined my possible actions); (2) an anticipatory or protentional aspect that
is an implicit characteristic of my immediate project-determined coupling

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
362
with the environment and (3) the continuing movements that constitute the
current dynamical state of the system.8
This retentional-protentional structure, which is characteristic of action as
well as consciousness, is fully on-line in what Husserl calls the 'living
present'. The retention of the just-past action-oriented experience of the
environment in the present moment is neither a recollection (memory) nor
a representation of that experience which one would somehow add to
the present experience; it is rather part of what constitutes the action in its
continuing directionality. The protentional anticipation of action experience
points to where the action is heading, not in the sense that it represents
where it is heading, but in the sense that the continuing action has a heading
- that the action is already going in a certain direction, heading towards a
completion (that it may or may not attain). This dynamic structure of action
as being-in-process is reflected in action experience. An action is not a
momentary or frozen snapshot supplemented by representations of past and
future movements; it has a unity over time that is accounted for in the inten-
tional structure of the action itself. Nothing in this dynamically dissipating
process amounts to a representation, if we take representation to involve 
●an internal image or symbol or sign
●a discrete duration
●decoupleability.
A representationalist might reply that even if this describes the absence
of mental representations in the experience of action, there are certainly
sub-personal representations that underlie this retentional-protentional
structure. The action itself depends on certain neural representations or
body schemata that operate at a sub-personal level, outside of or below the
threshold of experience. There is no doubt that there are neural processes
involved in body-schematic motor control, but these sub-personal body-
schematic processes operate on the same dynamic model reflected in
experience. The ubiquity of anticipatory mechanisms in the sensory-motor
system (sometimes specified in terms of efferent 'anticipation for the
consequences of the action' (Georgieff and Jeannerod, 1998)) are well
known (Berthoz, 2000; Berthoz and Petit, 2006). The notion of body schema
has been characterized not as a static representation, but as a process that
includes a retentional component that dynamically organizes sensory-motor
feedback in such a way that the current motor state is 'charged with a rela-
tion to something that has happened before' (Head, 1920: p. 606). Neither
the relations nor the relata, however, are discrete or decoupleable. Neither
body schemata nor neuronal patterns are discrete (or have discrete
durations). Neurons, of course, are part of the highly connected complex
system of the brain in which connections are effected, not by representation
but causally. If body schemas were reducible to neuronal firing patterns,

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
363
they would be characterized in the same way. Alternatively, if body schemas
are complex processes that extend over brain and body, and are in all cases
specified by environmental contexts (see Gallagher, 2005), they are not
constituted by one part representing another part, or by one part interpret-
ing the other as a representation. In such neuronal or body-schematic
systems what could count as representation would be purely a matter of
representationalist interpretation, not by the subject or the system, but by
the scientist abstracting (drawing discrete lines between one schema and the
next; claiming decoupleability, etc.) from the system.9
Wheeler, as we noted, gives up the criterion of decoupleablity in his
characterization of a minimal (or weak) representation (2005: p. 219). On
his account, a minimal representation (1) is richly adaptive, (2) is 'arbitrary'
(which means that the equivalence class of different inner elements that
could perform a particular systemic function is fixed by their capacity, when
organized and exploited in the right ways, to carry specific behaviour-
guiding information about the world, rather than by any non-informational
physical properties of those elements, such as their shape or weight
(Wheeler, private correspondence)), and (3) employs a homuncular
mechanism, i.e., a mechanism that is hierarchically compartmentalized but
contributes to a collective achievement. With the idea of the homuncular
mechanism Wheeler attempts to preserve the criterion of interpretability
within the system itself. Representational interpretation can be conceived
of as involving modularity - processing in one module independent of
processing in another, but each communicating results to (and mutually
interpreting) another module. The homuncular mechanism thus takes some
information off-line (but, according to Wheeler, without decoupling it from
the action itself) and manipulates it to anticipate possible actions. This
seems to be something similar to Clark and Grush's emulator sans decou-
pleability. At the same time it is not clear what off-line but not decoupled
means, or, as I indicated above, how an anticipation of possible action can
be formed without reference or integral connections to the current
situation. In fact, in the case of action, modularity can be given up for the
dynamic systems concept of a self-organizing continuous reciprocal
causation which Wheeler himself favours in most instances. On-line
sensory-motor processes that are serving intentional action and are tempo-
rally structured in dynamic relation to the environment are in fact richly
adaptive and arbitrary in the relevant sense, but are not homuncular, which
means that they involve no interpretational element. The dynamical process
(more causal than communicative) does not require the idea that one
discrete part of the mechanism interprets in isolation (or off-line) the
information presented by another part. Rather, action itself, on the dynamic
model, is characterized by an anticipatory, protentional aspect that
functions only in relation to the continuous, on-line, project-determined
coupling with the environment.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
364
What's Left of the Idea of Representation in Action?
At this point, however, we can surely ask, what's the point in retaining the
term 'representation' in the case of action? What work does the concept of
representation really do since nothing is being re-presented to the subject;
since it is not consistent with the classical notion of representation; and since
in working out the justification one is already explaining action in non-
representational terms of perception-based complex causal interactions in
an embodied-situated system? A facetious economic argument against
representationalism would suggest that the explanatory work that the
concept of representation does is less than the work it takes to justify the use
of the term 'representation'.
Here is a detailed negative characterization of minimal representation: 
1
Minimal representation is not internal - it extends to include embodied-
environmental aspects and is only 'weakly' neuronal.
2
Minimal representation is not a discrete identifiable enduring thing - it's
more like a temporal, dynamic, and distributed process.
3
Minimal representation is not passive - it's pragmatically enactive -
proactively contributing to the adaptability of the system.
4
Minimal representation is not decoupleable - indeed, if it is to remain
teleological, it has to continue tracking x or it has to involve a continuing
and on-line anticipation or protention of a predicted motor state.
5
Minimal representation is not strongly instructional - even if it can be
combined into a more general representational framework, it is never
strong enough to solve the commonsense knowledge or the frame
problem.
6
Minimal representation is not homuncular and does not involve
interpretation.
In effect, the idea of a minimal representation no longer conforms to the
criteria that would make it a representation. Actions do involve processes
that are intentional, certainly at the personal level, and in a way that contrib-
utes to the organization of the sub-personal processes that support the
intentional action (motor control processes and pre-intentional acts that
contribute to the accomplishment of actions). But if representation is one
form of intentionality, not all intentionality is representational. The kind of
'motor intentionality' described in terms of body schematic processes by
Merleau-Ponty (1962), for example, is a non-representational dynamic
process. Actions also involve teleological functions in so far as they require
tracking something in the world. This is an enactive perceptual tracking - I
see the ball that I want to catch, I see the ball-at-A-moving-towards-B, and
my bodily posture and movements go into dynamic relation to the changing
conditions of its trajectory. Actions are also fallible - action can fail, not

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
365
because of a misrepresentation, but because perception is finite: things look
climbable but turn out not to be; things look catchable, but often turn out
not to be, etc.
There is thus an intentionality of the body-in-action that is not character-
ized in terms of representations that are internal, decoupleable, or instruc-
tional; that does not involve interpretation in the relevant sense; and that is
accordingly non-representational. This kind of intentionality is dynamically
linked with the environment in a way that reflects a specific temporal
structure at the sub-personal level. As Wheeler puts it: 
as the brain becomes ever more bound up in complex distributed [and
extended, non-neural] causal interchanges with the non-neural body
and the wider physical environment, it seems likely that the temporal
character of those interchanges will become increasingly rich.
(Wheeler, 2005: p. 244)
Action involves temporal processes that can be better explained in terms of
dynamic systems of self-organizing continuous reciprocal causation.
Scientific Pragmatism about Representations
Do representational accounts provide a helpful short-cut for explaining
action? Does the concept of representation offer a 'very real explanatory
leverage' (Clark, 1997: p. 145; see Chemero, 2000)? Or does it explain
anything about action at all? Clark and Grush (1999: p. 8) put the question
in precisely the right way. 'It is, of course, true that the emulator circuitry
can also and simultaneously be viewed simply as a smaller dynamical system
linked to the one that hooks directly into the real-world. But that is just as
it should be. ... The question is, which of these descriptions is most useful
for Cognitive Science?'
I suggest that, at best, representationalism is just one way - a scientifically
abstract way - of explaining the action process. But a representation is not
an explanans that does any work itself. It's a concept under which one still
needs all the explanation to be made. Furthermore, the risk is that represen-
tational accounts lead to temptations of bestowing ontological status, i.e., that
there really are discrete representations in the system and that they are some-
thing more than what a motor control system does as part of the action itself.
One important problem is that a majority of cognitive scientists continue
to use the R-word and do so in ways that are not often clear. In the case of
action it is nothing more than a handy but often confused and misleading
term, a bad piece of heuristics, an awkward place-holder for an explanation
that needs to be cast in dynamical terms of an embodied, environmentally
embedded, and enactive model.10

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
366
In this regard, however, even if one thinks that the concept of represen-
tation does do some explanatory work, what I identified as the facetious
economic argument against representationalism also counts as a very
pragmatic argument. It may take more energy to define and distinguish any
legitimate sense of representation from amongst the plethora of uses of that
term, and to justify its use, than it would take to explain the phenomenon in
non-representationalist terms. And if one can explain the phenomenon in
non-representationalist terms, then the concept of representation is at best
redundant.
Let me finish by offering an important clarification. Arguing against a
representationalist account of action in favour of a dynamical account does
not entail a mechanistic view of action, or a view that would make conscious-
ness epiphenomenal. One could be led in that direction, however, on certain
representationalist models of the mind. The intentionality of intentional
action and the role of the conscious agent are topics that go beyond the ques-
tion of minimal representations in action (see, e.g., Gallagher, 2006).
University of Central Florida, USA and University of Hertfordshire, UK
Notes
1 Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Universities of Copenhagen,
Hull, and Sussex, and I thank colloquium and conference participants for helpful
questions. Thanks also to Matthew Ratcliffe, Mark Rowlands, and Michael
Wheeler for their helpful comments. Research for this paper was supported in
part by a National Science Foundation grant (# 0639037) and the European
Science Foundation project Consciousness in a Natural and Cultural Context
(BASIC).
2 Rowlands does not include decoupleability as part of the classic conception, but
others certainly do. As he notes: 'It is often thought that for an item to be
regarded as genuinely representational it must be decouplable from its wider
environment and, in particular, from the state of affairs that it purports to
represent' (2006: p. 157). Rowlands, however, does include this characteristic in
his more enactive definition of representation.
3 Clark (1997) first explicates the concept of the AOR in the example of Mataric's
robot rat (p. 47) and a robot crab (pp. 153ff.). I don't plan to address the issue
of whether robots require AORs for certain purposes. In this paper my focus
is on human action. Clark suggests that AORs are some version of Millikan's
'pushme-pullyou' representations.
4 Although Rowlands suggests that on some alternative account of representation,
content may be internal to representation (2006: p. 11), when it comes to explain-
ing the idea that representation carries information (pp. 115ff.) in Rowlands'
account it is difficult to distinguish it from the traditional concept that represen-
tation bears content that is external to itself (it refers to or is about something
other than itself).
5 Clark (1997) also states, in reference to Haugeland's definition of representa-
tion, that 'the role of decouplability (the capacity to use the inner states to guide
behavior in the absence of the environmental feature) is, I think, somewhat
overplayed' (p. 144).

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
367
6 It seems that if one is committed to representationalism, then any action can be
described in terms of representation. Thus Chemero (2000) is able to offer a
representational description of the Watt governor, which van Gelder considers
to be purely a dynamical mechanism. Chemero argues that the angle of a control
arm designed to modulate engine speed is to be considered a valve's AOR.
Indeed, he does so on a relatively restrictive three-point definition of represen-
tation, which differs, as he notes, from van Gelder's (1995) and from Wheeler's
(1996), and we note that it differs from Rowlands' (2006) and Clark's (1997),
which Clark differentiates from Haugeland's (1985) three-point definition,
which is also different from Chemero's. But even if there were some consensus
on a definition of representation, what Chemero shows at best is the possibility
of taking a 'representational stance' (a version of Dennett's intentional stance)
- we can treat any mechanism 'as if' it were representational. But as Chemero
goes on to suggest, this might seem superfluous since the non-representational
dynamical account tells us everything important about the system. Just as
Chemero warns those who take a 'dynamical stance' to avoid making ontological
claims that cognitive systems are really not representational, a similar caution
should be recommended for those taking a representationalist stance.
7 I leave aside the fact that the infant can remember the gesture and imitate it later
(Meltzoff and Moore, 1994). As I indicated, for the purposes of this paper, I am
setting aside questions about whether memory or imagination depends on repre-
sentation.
8 For the interpretation of Husserl's analysis of the retentional-protentional
temporal structure of experience in terms of non-representationalist dynamic
systems theory, and its application to motor control, see Thompson, 2007; van
Gelder, 1999; Varela, 1999; and Gallagher and Varela, 2003.
9 To borrow from Menary's (2007) reading of Peirce's semiotics, one simple way
to put this is that one of the triadic elements of the representational process is
missing in the case of neuronal events or sub-personal processes more generally.
For Peirce, 'representation necessarily involves a genuine triad' (1931: 1.480). It
involves a vehicle (sign) mediating between an object and an interpreter. A
neuronal pattern or event might be considered a representational vehicle, but
only in connection with an object (some event in the environment, perhaps) and
a consumer or interpreter (to produce an interpretant or meaning). The missing
element is the consumer (interpreter). The experiencing subject is not an
interpreter of its own brain events, but neither is the brain itself, unless one is
willing to substitute for causal vocabulary the idea that one process in the brain
interprets another process in the brain as a sign of something happening in the
environment (see the next paragraph). On the Peircean model, if one of the
elements is missing, there is no representation.
10 This is the opposite to what Chemero (2000) identifies as a version of Dennett's
intentional stance. Chemero suggests that one could imagine that humans really
are complex dynamical systems, but that such systems are so complex it is more
practical to explain them by ascribing mental representations.
References
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1957) Intention, Oxford: Blackwell.
Berthoz, A. (2000) The Brain's Sense of Movement, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Berthoz, A. and J.-L. Petit (2006) Phénoménologie et physiologie de l'action, Paris:
Odile Jacob.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES
368
Chemero, A. (2000) 'Anti-representationalism and the Dynamical Stance', Philoso-
phy of Science 67(4): 625-47.
Clark, A. (1997) Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and World Together Again,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. and R. Grush (1999) 'Towards a Cognitive Robotics', Adaptive Behavior
7(1): 5-16.
Dreyfus, H. (2002) 'Intelligence Without Representation: Merleau-Ponty's
Critique of Mental Representation', Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
1(4): 367-83.
—— (2007) 'Why Heideggerian AI Failed and How Fixing it Would Require
Making it More Heideggerian', Philosophical Psychology 20(2): 247-68.
Gallagher, S. (2005) How the Body Shapes the Mind, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
—— (2006) 'Where's the Action? Epiphenomenalism and the Problem of Free Will',
in W. Banks, S. Pockett, and S. Gallagher, Does Consciousness Cause Behavior?
An Investigation of the Nature of Volition, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 109-24.
Gallagher, S. and Francisco Varela (2003) 'Redrawing the Map and Resetting the
Time: Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences', Canadian Journal of Philoso-
phy Supplementary Volume 29: 93-132.
Georgieff, N. and M. Jeannerod (1998) 'Beyond Consciousness of External Events:
A "Who" System for Consciousness of Action and Self-consciousness',
Consciousness and Cognition 7: 465-77.
Grush, R. and P. Mandik (2002) 'Representational Parts', Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences 1(4): 389-94.
Haugeland, John (1985) Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Head, H. (1920) Studies in Neurology, Vol. 2, London: Oxford University Press.
Meltzoff, A. and M. K. Moore (1994) 'Imitation, Memory, and the Representation
of Persons', Infant Behavior and Development 17: 83-99.
Menary, R. (2007) Cognitive Integration: Mind and Cognition Unbounded, London:
Palgrave-Macmillan.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962) Phenomenology of Perception, trans. C. Smith, London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Millikan, R. G. (1996) Pushme-pullyou Representations', in L. May, M. Friedman,
and A. Clark (eds) Mind and Morals: Essays on Ethics and Cognitive Science,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 145-61.
O'Shaughnessy, B. (1980) The Will, 2 vols, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1931) Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Vol. 1, ed. C.
Hartshorne and P. Weiss, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rowlands, M. (2006) Body Language, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thompson, E. (2007) Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology and the Sciences of
Mind, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
van Gelder, T. (1995) 'What might Cognition be if not Computation?', Journal of
Philosophy 91: 345-81.
—— (1999) 'Wooden Iron? Husserlian Phenomenology Meets Cognitive Science',
in J. Petitot, F. J. Varela, B. Pachoud, and J.-M. Roy (eds) Naturalizing
Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science,
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Varela, F. J. (1999) 'The Specious Present: A Neurophenomenology of Time
Consciousness', in J. Petitot, F. J. Varela, B. Pachoud, and J.-M. Roy (eds)
Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and
Cognitive Science, Stanford: Stanford University Press, pp. 226-314.

ARE MINIMAL REPRESENTATIONS STILL REPRESENTATIONS?
369
Wheeler, M. (1996) 'From Robots to Rothko', in M. Boden (ed.) The Philosophy of
Artificial Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 209-36.
—— (2005). Reconstructing the Cognitive World: The Next Step, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Yarbus, A. (1967) Eye Movements and Vision, New York: Plenum Press.

