The Oral History Review
ISSN: 0094-0798 (Print) 1533-8592 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uohr20
Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History
R. Kenneth Kirby
To cite this article: R. Kenneth Kirby (2008) Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History,
The Oral History Review, 35:1, 22-28, DOI: 10.1093/ohr/ohm001
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1093/ohr/ohm001
Published online: 01 Dec 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 735
View related articles 
Citing articles: 8 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uohr20

doi: 10.1093/ohr/ohm001.
The Oral History Review 2008, Vol. 35, No. 1, pp. 22-38
© The Author 2008. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Oral History Association. 
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org.
 Phenomenology and the Problems 
of Oral History  
    R.     Kenneth Kirby           
 Abstract:  In this article, the author argues that many of the best practices of oral 
history reﬂ ect phenomenological thinking even though practitioners may not 
describe themselves as using phenomenological methods. The author suggests that 
knowledge and application of phenomenology can clarify or minimize such potential 
problems as interviewer bias and informant unreliability and can refute accusations 
that oral history is less reliable than history taken from documents. 
 Keywords:     Cultural history  ,   historical truth  ,   Husserl  ,   phenomenology  ,   subjectivity        
 R. Kenneth Kirby teaches American literature, British and Irish literature, and 
interdisciplinary core courses at Core Curriculum, Samford University, Birmingham, AL. 
He is active in environmental issues on campus and volunteers with the Nature 
Conservancy to help maintain preserves in central Alabama. He is the editor of  Southern 
Research Institute: An Oral History by Gillian Goodrich. E-mail:  rkkirby@samford.edu  
 Several years ago, while a colleague and I were preparing a conference paper on a 
joint service learning project we had done in an interdisciplinary communications 
course we both teach, she asked me what my communication theory was. When I 
said I did not really know (my primary background is literature), she asked me to 
describe it, and at the end of my brief explanation, she replied,  " Oh, okay, that ' s 
phenomenology. " At that point I was not much better off than before. But once I 
started reading phenomenology, I discovered that she was right — I was a 
phenomenologist without being aware of it. I began studying the philosophy and 
applying it, in a more deliberate and disciplined fashion, to my various courses and 
projects in communications, literature, and oral history. 1 
 Deﬁ nition and description of phenomenology 
 Phenomenology resists a brief, layman-friendly deﬁ nition, but it addresses the 
structures of consciousness, both of what we perceive and how we perceive it, and 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 23 
advocates a  " bracketing "  or suspension of taken-for-granted attitudes about reality 
in order to reconstruct a more accurate view of self and world. It explores the 
subjectivity and ﬂ ux of human knowledge in ways that can be brought to bear on the 
dynamics of oral history projects. Phenomenology assumes that we all have a 
prescientiﬁ c, natural attitude toward the world around us, to the events we experience, 
and to the culture we have inherited, as these things appear to our consciousness; 
this natural attitude gives us a framework for interpreting our experience. But this 
natural attitude does not really look at the essence of things and experiences. In 
order to truly see and know, we must bracket or suspend belief in the normal 
assumptions we have had. Maurice Natanson describes it as  " placing in methodological 
suspension the basic believing-in the world. "  We must  " get beneath the fundamental 
assumptions of daily life, to see our taken-for-granted attitudes toward experience as 
well as ourselves from a vantage point which did not presuppose the very object of 
our concern. " 2 Once we advance in this direction — and granted, no one can fully 
achieve such a vantage point — we can look afresh, past many prejudices and false 
assumptions. Then we are able to rebuild a  " life-world "  that sees more clearly. In the 
words of Max Van Manen,  " phenomenological research consists of reﬂ ectively 
bringing into nearness that which tends to be obscure, that which tends to evade the 
intelligibility of our natural attitude of everyday life. " 3  Phenomenology, while not a 
philosophy of idealism, assumes that we cannot know the world objectively; all we 
can know for sure are the phenomena that appear to us in consciousness. But these 
phenomena, despite their subjectivity, are all we know, and all we need to know, of 
the world beyond us. Our perceptions of things and events, experienced, interpreted, 
and then communicated to others, form our history, our culture, our world. 
 Many scholars who conduct oral histories intuitively use phenomenological methods 
and concepts even if they do not describe themselves as operating from a 
phenomenological standpoint. Consider this passage by Valerie Raleigh Yow: 
And yet, is it not the meaning attributed to the facts that makes them 
signiﬁ cant or not? After all, history — or society — does not exist outside 
human consciousness. History is what the people who lived it make of it and 
what the others who observe the participants or listen to them or study their 
records make of it. And present society is what we make of it. 4 
 There is much phenomenological thinking here, though Yow makes no direct 
reference to phenomenology or to any of its key ﬁ gures anywhere in her text. My 
purpose, therefore, goes little beyond merely articulating, from a phenomenological 
perspective, what I perceive to be some of the  " best practices " from existing oral 
history methods, and I hope to provide only a general introduction to a subject that 
would require a thick volume to do it justice. 5 My plan is to brieﬂ y outline the 
problems associated with oral history, then to discuss some key principles of 
phenomenology that help clarify and minimize those problems, and to conclude 
with a few examples from the history of Five Mile Creek. 
 Problems of oral history 
 There seems to be a fairly broad consensus about the problems involved in gathering 
reliable data from oral history interviews. How can the interviewer ask relevant, 

24 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
informed questions yet still provide an atmosphere that will not improperly inﬂ uence 
the informant ' s responses? How can the historian evaluate the responses of the 
informant, which can be tainted in a variety of ways? And related to both of these 
is the larger issue of the objectivity or subjectivity of all historical data, indeed of 
all human knowledge. Glenn Whitman sums it up well when he tells his students, as 
they embark on their oral history projects, that  " all historical sources should be 
treated with equal skepticism. Such skepticism should also be turned on themselves 
as interviewers. " 6 
 Problems associated with the interviewer 
 Concerning problems associated with the interviewer, Paul Thompson ' s statement 
of almost thirty years ago is even more relevant today:  " There is an abundance of 
sociological discussion on the interview method, the sources of bias in it, and how 
these may be estimated and minimized. " 7 Historians are aware that the location of 
the interview can affect the kind of responses but that informants do not necessarily 
respond better to interviewers of the same class, gender, and race. An ill-prepared 
interviewer with less-than-relevant questions can encourage a broad range of 
unreliable responses from the informant. Yet the interviewer needs to balance the 
goals of the project, which may require certain kinds of opening and leading 
questions, with the need to develop a neutral, nonthreatening atmosphere for the 
interview so the informant will feel free to answer as candidly as possible. 
 Donald A. Ritchie observes that the potential for bias in the interviewer ' s questions 
is frequently based on the research agenda. Ritchie points out that  " an individual 
researcher usually approaches an interview with a thesis to prove and may assume 
that anything contradicting that thesis is wrong, " though he warns against this 
approach.  " Interviewees may see things entirely differently from the researcher, " he 
remarks,  " and although interviewees might be biased or just plain wrong, so might 
the researcher ' s thesis. The best information to emerge from an oral history is often 
completely unexpected  ... " 8 When historians "bracket" at least some of their 
assumptions, they are practicing a principle that reﬂ ects phenomenological method. 
Oral history literature is full of accounts of interviewer agendas that were abandoned 
for a more fruitful set of assumptions, though of course there may be just as many 
studies in which the interviewer ' s initial assumptions proved to be fairly correct. 
Ritchie acknowledges that sometimes the interviewer should guide the interviewee ' s 
thinking. When statements of fact and other observations accompany the 
interviewer ' s question, the informant ' s memory can be stimulated, but Ritchie 
cautions that the interviewer must be careful not to allow such statements to distort 
or improperly inﬂ uence the responses. 9 
 Problems associated with the informant 
 Another set of problems in oral history methodology is associated with the 
informant. These deal with such matters as the selection of informants — whether 
the group of people available to interview is representative of the general 
population — with the location of the interview, the degree of trust in the interviewer, 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 25 
the reliability of memory, the willingness of the informant to be candid, and the 
informant ' s tendency to be nostalgic. With some issues, such as the issue of 
memory, there are of course disagreements about how much of a problem actually 
exists, especially as it applies to older informants. Thompson provides evidence that 
the memories elderly people have of their youth and life are about as reliable as any 
form of historical evidence, asserting that  " the problem of memory power is not 
much more serious for interviews with old people in normal health than it is with 
younger adults. " In fact, for some older adults, when retirement or loss of spouse 
triggers a  " life review " and the informant comes to believe  " that active life is over, 
achievement is completed, " long-term memory may become even more reliable. 10 
Yet the question remains as to how reliable any memory really is. How can historians 
be sure that events are being reported accurately, even honestly? Since most oral 
historians are aware that  " the perfectly frank interview, of course, is only a myth, " 11 
how can they be sure they are recognizing biased statements and are correctly 
identifying the source of bias? 
 To be sure, as Thompson points out, often such questions are less troubling than 
they seem.  " The key point is to be aware of the potential sources of bias, and the 
means for countering them  ... . One of the deepest lessons of oral history is the 
uniqueness, as well as representativeness, of every life story. " 12 The historian must 
actually consider whether bias is part of the lesson to be learned, for as Thompson 
observes,    
... neither contemporary nor historical evidence is a direct reﬂ ection of 
physical facts or behaviour. Facts and events are reported in a way which 
gives them social meaning. The information provided by interview evidence 
of relatively recent events, or current situations, can be assumed to lie 
somewhere between the actual social behaviour and the social expectations 
or norms of the time. With interviews which go back further, there is the 
added possibility of distortions inﬂ uenced by subsequent changes in values 
and norms, which may perhaps quite unconsciously alter perceptions. With 
time we would expect this danger to grow. 13 
 Thompson's statement that  " facts and events are reported in a way which gives 
them social meaning " reﬂ ects phenomenological thinking about the subjectivity of 
both individual experience and history. It is at least partly in the  " social expectations 
and norms " that historical meaning and values lie, and phenomenological method 
attempts to provide the frame of reference with which to identify the truth that can 
be found in bias. This could happen either by identifying the nature of the bias or 
showing that it is the very bias that provides the meaning, because the word  " bias " 
sometimes carries an unfairly loaded implication. Informants may not always agree 
upon what events occurred, or in what order, or for what reason, but something in 
the recording or telling of the events just might reveal the important  " expectations 
and norms " that are the most valuable part of the story. 
 This may be especially true of cultural history such as the present study of Five Mile 
Creek, where the primary goal was to examine the informants ' childhood experiences 
growing up amid adverse economic and environmental conditions. Now granted, 
there was a need for historical facts: to create interpretive signage for locations 
along the greenway, the Five Mile Creek Greenway Partnership wanted to identify 
sites on the creek where churches baptized and children played, where improvised 

26 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
ball ﬁ elds and other recreational facilities were located, and where industrial ruins 
could be found in areas long since reforested. But there was also a desire to 
understand the informants ' attitudes about growing up in an area characterized 
primarily by brown ﬁ elds, abandoned stores, and a horribly polluted creek. As 
Natanson has commented,
 ... the  ' what ' rather than the  ' why ' of experience is the ﬁ rst concern. In the 
end, it may be that the  ' why ' of events can be understood through a 
reconstruction of the  ' what ' of experience. But that demands a searching 
out of the meaning of sources, a rebuilding of forgotten or apparently 
inaccessible origins, and a tracing out of the routes we traverse in becoming 
 " men of the world. " 14 
 For the present study, my goal was to move from the  " what " to the  " why " of the 
experiences of those who grew up along Five Mile Creek and then to provide a 
framework for thinking about how we should value the creek and its environs today 
based on the way it has been experienced and valued in the past.  
 Problems associated with the subjectivity of 
knowledge 
 Oral history raises the question raised by all history and indeed all pursuits of 
knowledge: how sure can the researcher be of the validity of his or her results? If 
the goal of history is to uncover what really happened and why, when can historians 
say their job is complete? In today ' s scientiﬁ c era, there hangs a sort of atmosphere 
of certainty over the natural sciences, a belief or assumption, whether from 
scientists or lay people, it is hard to say, that some day science just might be able 
to explain  everything . The most abstract phenomena — religious faith, altruism, 
guilt, laughter — may ultimately be explainable by chemistry and physics, by the 
quantiﬁ able behavior of brain cells, organic molecules, and subatomic particles. Yet 
Valerie Yow speaks for me and I believe for many in the humanities and social 
sciences, when she says,  " All of us who study humans — whether with quantitative 
or qualitative methods — know that we cannot hold our conclusions with absolute 
certainty. " 15 Given the unavoidable subjectivity of all human perception, all 
conclusions have to be considered tentative, all disciplines open to further 
understanding. 
 Historians themselves, for the most part, feel that the thoroughness of their 
methods enables them to come to some degree of certainty about the truth of the 
past. Debates persist, of course, and new approaches arise, but when a sufﬁ cient 
number of scholars who share an interest in a certain place and time in history 
begin to draw similar conclusions about the "what" and "why" of events, and if new 
evidence continues to support these conclusions, historians may assert that these 
conclusions are likely true. Criticism of the truth of history comes largely from 
outside the discipline, mostly from postmodern thought in linguistics and cultural 
studies, where relativism rules and truth is scoffed at. But it is often historians 
themselves who criticize oral history, claiming that while interviewer bias can 
perhaps be identiﬁ ed and dealt with, it is harder to peel back the layers of bias that 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 27 
can affect the informant. Thus, the same claims of cultural bias that, according to 
their critics, historians are unable to overcome in interpreting the documents from 
the past — these same criticisms are leveled by historians at oral history informants. 
Are the criticisms justiﬁ ed in either case? Let me try to show they are not. 
 Christopher Behan McCullagh argues that any cultural bias historians possess need 
not be a hindrance to arriving at historical truth, provided one has the correct 
conception of what historical truth is: 
 Some writers, like Paul Roth, think that because our knowledge of the world 
is constructed from the concepts and beliefs of our culture to account for 
evidence available to us, we are not warranted in calling such descriptions 
true or false. There are two reasons they have for this conclusion. One is that 
to call a description of the world true suggests to most people that it 
represents some objective, God-like view of the world, undistorted by 
cultural presuppositions, and Roth points out that such a culturally neutral 
view of the world is not available. So truth of this kind is not possible. This 
is a true, important point, which is now widely accepted. If historical 
descriptions can be true, it must be in some other sense than this. The 
second reason for denying that historical descriptions can be true is the 
assumption that if such descriptions are constructed from culturally 
conditioned concepts, they cannot truly represent the world. This is also 
widely believed, but it is not true, and needs to be examined. 16 
 McCullagh ' s explanation of why this is not true differs somewhat from mine, but his 
argument is subtle and cannot be treated in depth here. The point is that humans 
cannot have that God-like objectivity and must deﬁ ne truth in some other way. The 
transcendental phenomenology of Edmund Husserl and the later hermeneutic 
phenomenology of philosophers such as Martin Heidegger and Hans-Georg 
Gadamer offer such a way of deﬁ ning truth.  
 Principles of phenomenology that address the 
problems of oral history 
 What, then, are the principles from phenomenology that can help address these 
problems associated with oral history? The next few sections offer a brief introduction 
to the phenomenological topics of subjectivity and intersubjectivity, time conscious-
ness, memory, and the value of openness to experience. 17    
Subjectivity of knowledge 
 Phenomenology began, at least in part, as Husserl ' s response to a trend in his day 
to apply the so-called objectivity of the natural sciences to the humanities. Since 
Husserl believed the natural sciences, as practiced since Galileo and Bacon, were 
not as objective as they claimed in their effort to uncover the principles of the 
natural world, he felt that these methods were especially inappropriate for work in 
the humanities, disciplines that attempt to make sense of the human spirit. 18 

28 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
Husserl sought a theory of knowledge that avoided both the pretended objectivity 
of natural science and also the idealism and potential for solipsism of philosophies 
at the other end of the spectrum. What he developed is an epistemology which says 
that the phenomena given to consciousness, when reﬂ ected upon intentionally by 
the conscious subject, can give knowledge that is appropriately described as 
 " absolute, " even though it remains subjective and even imprecise. 
 Phenomenology ' s potential contribution to oral history lies ﬁ rst and foremost in 
this broad, overarching view of the subjectivity of knowledge; within this larger 
issue lie the ways in which it can address the problems associated with interviewer, 
informant, and interpretation of data. Husserl makes a comment near the end of 
 Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy  that helps deﬁ ne historical truth and 
sums up much of what I want to say about how we should deﬁ ne the truth of 
history and, in my case, the truth of Five Mile Creek as a presence in people ' s lives. 
His theme throughout the work has been the subjectivity and intersubjectivity of all 
knowledge, especially knowledge of the human spirit, though he insists that 
knowledge of physical nature must be brought to bear on this topic. He gives the 
example that to understand Greek culture and civilization, we cannot address only 
Greek philosophy and literature but also agriculture, transportation, building 
materials, and other presumably unspiritual matters. Then he makes this comment: 
 The historian, the investigator of spirit, of culture, constantly has of course 
physical nature too among the phenomena with which he is concerned; in 
our example, nature in ancient Greece. But this is not nature in the sense 
understood by natural science; rather it is nature as it was for the ancient 
Greeks, natural reality present to their eyes in the world that surrounded 
them. To state it more fully; the historical environing world of the Greeks is 
not the objective historical world in our sense; rather it is their  ' representation 
of the world, ' i.e., their own subjective evaluation, with all the realities 
therein that were valid for them, for example the gods, the daemons, etc. 
 Environing world is a concept that has its place exclusively in the spiritual 
sphere. That we live in our own particular environing world, to which all our 
concerns and efforts are directed, points to an event that takes place purely 
in the spiritual order. Our environing world is a spiritual structure in us and 
in our historical life. Here, then, there is no reason for one who makes his 
theme the spirit as spirit to demand for it any but a purely spiritual 
explanation. And this has general validity; to look upon environing nature as 
in itself alien to spirit, and consequently to support humanistic science with 
natural science and thus presumably to make the former exact, is 
nonsense. 19 
 By  " spiritual, " Husserl is not, of course, thinking theologically but rather 
philosophically, deﬁ ning knowledge and being in terms of consciousness and the 
process of perception. I believe that many people would ﬁ nd it possible to consider 
a stream like Five Mile Creek, or any aspect of our environing world, as having the 
potential for a spiritual impact in this sense. And the truth about Five Mile Creek 
and its environs — the tributaries and woods where people ﬁ shed and hunted, the 
active railroad yards and the abandoned mines and coke ovens that people played 
in as children — that truth is historical and spiritual in a way that does not require 
the objectivity demanded by descriptions of processes in the natural sciences. 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 29 
 Of course, knowledge with at least some degree of objectivity is not out of place in 
the humanities and social sciences. The difference between the aims and methods 
of subjective versus objective research is often spoken of in terms of qualitative 
versus quantitative research. Yow again speaks in language common to 
phenomenology when she says,  " Qualitative researchers question positivistic 
approaches, that is, quantiﬁ cation of data with objectivity and certainty about 
results as the goal. " 20 Concerning qualitative research, she states that  " by 
accumulating sources of information and comparing them, we can arrive at an 
approximate understanding of what happened or is happening and hold this 
information with some certainty. But there is never absolute certainty about any 
event, about any fact, no matter what sources are used. No single source or 
combination of them can ever give a picture of the total complexity of the reality. 
We cannot reconstruct a past event, no matter how recent, in its entirety. " 21 And as 
Thompson points out many times, even the statistical data of the social and natural 
sciences are not as factual as researchers sometimes are tempted to assume: 
 Social statistics, in short, no more represent absolute facts than newspaper 
reports, private letters, or published biographies. Like recorded interview 
material, they all represent, either from individual standpoints or aggregated, 
the social perception of facts; and are all in addition subject to social 
pressures from the context in which they are obtained. With these forms of 
evidence, what we receive is social meaning, and it is this which must be 
evaluated. 22 
 Phenomenology, then, gives a framework for identifying the subjectivity that exists 
even in the natural sciences, so it is especially needed in the more spiritually focused 
humanities. Gerhard Funke describes Husserl ' s view this way: all knowledge is 
scientiﬁ cally relevant  " when the  ' subjective '  origins of all  ' objectivities '  have been 
successively disclosed through a radical reﬂ ection. " 23 This radical reﬂ ection is the 
phenomenological process of moving beyond the natural attitude, via the bracketing 
spoken of above, to arrive at a  " life-world " of true consciousness. 
 Time consciousness 
 One of Husserl ' s main contributions to modern philosophy, and one which has been 
applied by scholars to the philosophy of history, is the issue of how consciousness 
perceives time. Donald M. Lowe gives a clear and persuasive explanation of 
Husserl ' s ideas about internal time consciousness and how these in turn provide a 
key to historical knowledge. According to Lowe, the historian needs to understand 
what historical subjects did and how they viewed their era and their actions. The 
historian, however, knows what happened later, knows what the results of these 
actions and motives were; therefore, the historian interprets the historical events in 
light of present culture and perspectives. Lowe describes Husserl ' s view of how 
individuals perceive time, anticipating the future as the present ﬂ ows into the past; 
then he demonstrates how this consciousness of time can show how the historian, 
looking back from a future that was only projected by the historical subject, can 
both interpret the historical subject ' s limited view of the effectiveness of his or her 
actions and offer a more thorough view of those actions. 24 Hans-Georg Gadamer 
points out that this process continues. The historian  " belongs to the text that he is 

30 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
reading. The line of meaning that the text manifests to him as he reads it always 
and necessarily breaks off in an open indeterminacy. He can, indeed he must, 
accept the fact that future generations will understand differently what he has read 
in the text. " 25 
 These remarks about time consciousness probably have in mind history done from 
documents about subjects most of whom have died. But the principles also apply 
to oral history data, with the difference being that the informants themselves have 
experienced a change in historical perspective. As people grow and have more 
experiences, their interpretation of the value of certain past actions changes. Just 
as succeeding generations of historians reevaluate the past, individuals reevaluate 
the various stages in their personal development. These perceptions may change 
slowly and subtly, for Husserl believes that  " memory is in a continuous ﬂ ux because 
conscious life is in constant ﬂ ux and is not merely ﬁ tted member by member into 
the chain. " 26 Nevertheless, with the passage of time or with reﬂ ection, a person ' s 
view of his or her experience will change. Phenomenology, then, actually predicts 
that oral history informants should change their story with successive retellings; the 
very telling of the story could cause a reevaluation, so that a retelling the very next 
day could be different. Phenomenology also tells the historian to look for different 
perspectives in the view of the informant; in one sentence the informant could be 
trying to reconstruct his or her perspective at the time of the historical event, and 
the next sentence could be a present-day evaluation. 
 Openness to new experience 
 A common theme in phenomenology, growing out of the perceived need, 
discussed above, to see more deeply and truly into the  " life-world "  of our 
experience, is the idea of openness to new experience. Husserl, in the second of 
his  Cartesian Meditations , describes it as  " an absolute universal criticism, which, 
for its part, by abstention from all positions that already give anything existent, 
must ﬁ rst create for itself a  universe of absolute freedom from prejudice " (italics 
in original). 27  This principle addresses, among other things, the subject of the 
interviewer ' s agenda. Researchers can sometimes be too driven by their 
preconceptions; agenda-driven interviewing even appears, wrongly I believe, in 
works that openly apply phenomenological method to at least some aspects of 
the study. Peter Friedlander says his approach to labor history is  " a Hegelian 
Marxism greatly inﬂ uenced by phenomenology, linguistic philosophy, and 
structuralism. " 28 Yet he acknowledges that he had  " prefabricated categories "  of 
responses that he expected to get from his informant, Edmund Kord, who was 
president of UAW Local 229 during its ﬁ rst eighteen years. Here is a brief 
description from Friedlander ' s methodology section:  " I was convinced that there 
were signiﬁ cant ethical or moral differences between the Appalachian migrants, 
the ﬁ rst-generation Slavs, and the wildcatters among the second generation. 
Twice in the course of our second series of discussions (July 1973) I raised these 
questions. Twice Kord replied negatively. The third time, however, something 
clicked " and Kord gave the desired answer. 29 My understanding of phenomenology, 
and of interview technique in general, suggests that there is no way to tell if 
the repeated question uncovered the answer, or if it put the answer there. To be 
fair, Friedlander does not seem particularly guilty of trying to conduct the 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 31 
interviews in such a way as to get the answers he wanted.  " I sought to bring to 
bear on Kord ' s experience, "  he remarks,  " a number of theoretical and historical 
conceptions that I thought critical to an understanding of the CIO — conceptions 
that I found myself forced to alter as my increasingly concrete information 
obstinately refused to fall into some of my prefabricated categories. " 30 Interviewers 
must be careful not to suggest or  " plant "  a response and should not let the 
informant know what sort of answer is desired, even if other evidence has the 
interviewer  " convinced, " as in the Friedlander example, that only a certain kind of 
response could be correct. 
 Some historians are, of course, unashamed of their agenda and rightly so. Katherine 
Borland admits that as a feminist she has  " an explicitly political vision of the 
structural conditions that lead to particular social behaviors " and that her role in 
conducting the interview and interpreting the informant ' s responses is to show 
these conditions at work, regardless of whether the informant has recognized them. 
She says that she and researchers who share her perspective attempt to describe 
these conditions, as they appear in the remarks of the informant,  " in a way that 
grants the speaking woman interpretive respect without relinquishing our 
responsibility to provide our own interpretation of her experience. " 31 Feminists 
would not be the only group unashamed to examine most evidence in terms of their 
 " explicitly political vision " of the world; environmentalists, of whom I am one, might 
also be suspected of such an approach. Interviewers practicing phenomenological 
method, however, make every effort to balance their current vision against the 
possibility of new understandings.  
 Intersubjectivity 
 Phenomenology reminds the historian that all human perspectives are both 
subjective and intersubjective, with one human being subjectively reacting to the 
subjectivity of others. Lowe offers an application to the work of historians 
themselves that helps clarify this subject. He adopts a phrase from Alfred Schutz, 
who points out that the historian ' s interpretations of the views of historical subjects 
are  " constructs of the second degree. " 32 They are  " constructs of constructs, " 
subjective evaluations by the historian of the historical subject ' s subjective 
evaluation of his or her life. 
 This does not, of course, mean that the researcher ' s evaluation takes as much for 
granted as the subject ' s evaluation does. On the contrary, the researcher has usually 
gone much farther than the subject in looking past the appearance of events and 
getting at their essence. As an example, John D. Brewer, in his sociological oral 
history of the British Union of Fascists (BUF), makes use of Schutz ' s phenomenology 
and acknowledges that his conclusion is a  " construct of the second order. "  Brewer 
concludes that former BUF members justiﬁ ed their membership by rationalizing 
that Britain was in crisis in the 1930s and that fascism at that time seemed to be a 
rational way out, despite current perceptions of fascism. He arrives at this conclusion 
by making use of Schutz ' s notions of  " shared  ' typiﬁ cations, '  ' idealizations ' and 
 ' recipes ' " that transform subjective individual consciousness into the intersubjective 
world of public consciousness. 33 Brewer ' s position is that, because sociologists 
study and can identify these typiﬁ cations with perhaps more honesty and clarity 

32 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
than the subjects themselves, they are in a position to empirically evaluate the bias 
in the subjects ' responses. But Brewer acknowledges that his work is  " to construct 
a typiﬁ cation of the typiﬁ cations of [BUF] members themselves. " 34 
 Awareness of the intersubjectivity of all human understanding, then, should keep 
the historian honest. In addition, Husserl ' s view was that as long as the historian 
keeps intersubjectivity in mind, the historical subject ' s perspective can be known, 
not with scientiﬁ c objectivity, but in a manner that is actually more in line with the 
way human knowledge is formed and transmitted. In cultural history such as the 
history of Five Mile Creek,  " any claim to universality, " to borrow a phrase from 
Daniel Frank Chamberlain,  " any claim to absolute truth, is dismissed in favour of a 
deeper level of understanding, a level in which communication between different 
perspectives becomes the rule. " 35 
 Memory 
 Many of the issues concerning human subjectivity, intersubjectivity, and time 
consciousness come together in considering the reliability of memory. Edward 
Casey describes memory as having a  " thick autonomy, "  where  " thick "  refers to the 
multiplicity of overlapping or interacting factors that affect memory and  " autonomy " 
relates to Schutz ' s ideas about typiﬁ cations that lead to social understanding while 
being unique to each individual. Ultimately Casey asserts that the truth of memory 
is memory as it appears to us in consciousness. On different occasions, our own 
memories of the same event, place, or person may vary in the speciﬁ c details, the 
precise feelings or impressions that come to mind, or other things. Each memory 
may be prompted by different things, resulting in these variations. But in every case 
it is autonomous — it is our memory — and it is  " thick " in the sense that it is the 
result of a combination of factors that we could never quite sort out.  " Implicit in all 
remembering is a commitment to truth concerning the past, a truth that reﬂ ects the 
speciﬁ city of this past even if it need not offer an exact likeness of it. " 36 Casey ' s 
study supports the general trend in phenomenological thinking, which is that our 
access to the past through memory is subjective, variable, and yet as true as any 
form of human consciousness. 
 Summary — implications for oral history 
 These issues — the subjectivity of all knowledge, time consciousness, openness to 
experience, intersubjectivity, and memory, as well as other issues not discussed 
here — permeate phenomenological writing, and the implications for oral history are 
clear. Because any knowledge of a historical subject is limited by human subjectivity, 
the historian should search for the perspectives that result from that very 
subjectivity. A historian who plans the interview and interprets the data with the 
goal of constructing the life-world of this place and time might be able to separate 
fact from fable, but more importantly he or she might be more likely to identify the 
meaning in fable. And the historian should search for and then present the  " what " 
and  " why " of the past in such a way that leaves the topic or era open for further 
discussion and evaluation by future generations. According to Gadamer, 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 33 
knowledge — " the truth of experience " — " always contains an orientation towards 
new experience, " and experienced persons are characterized as much by an 
awareness of what they do not know, as what they do know. Such a person, 
according to Gadamer, is  " also open to new experiences " and  " is radically 
undogmatic " about truth.  " The dialectic of experience has its own fulﬁ llment not 
in deﬁ nitive knowledge, but in that openness to experience that is encouraged by 
experience itself. " 37 
 Concerning the problems of interviewer bias and informant reliability, a 
phenomenological perspective on history offers some guidelines, many of which 
are already practiced by those who conduct oral histories. The interviewer, 
keeping in mind the subjective nature of all preconceptions she might have about 
the events the informant will narrate, keeps an open mind within the framework 
of the general topic of the historical study. The interviewer designs her questions 
so as to allow the informant to set his own agenda and not think in terms of 
meeting interviewer expectations. When the informant ' s memory seems vague or 
unreliable, the interviewer keeps in mind that all the  " real facts " cannot be known 
under even the best circumstances and looks rather for truths of understanding, 
of spirit, of cultural values, that tell the real story of the historical event or era, 
or, in my case, the geologic feature known as Five Mile Creek. And everything 
relates back to the subjective and intersubjective way that individuals perceive 
their own experience.  
 Application of phenomenological principles to 
oral history interviews 
 Let me sum up the discussion of a phenomenological perspective on oral history 
with two examples from interviews about Five Mile Creek. First, two female 
informants spoke of government programs that gave out sacks of ﬂ our. 
 (Informant E.C.B., 1907 - 2005) 
 KIRBY: So you moved near the creek after you got married. 
 E.C.B.: Yes. After I got married I was still working. We moved out to 
Lewisburg and built a house out there  ... . We married right in that 
Depression, and I guess if we had known it was coming we would have put 
it off. We never dreamed it was coming. This was Aug. 30, 1930, when we 
got married. And Robert got laid off over there at the power house; Mr. 
Williams had to keep it by himself. So he had to walk and go any way he 
could to look for a job. Everybody was in the same way. It was a terrible 
time, I tell you. [Speaks further of hard times and coupons, handouts of 
shoes, work for coupons or receipts.] And down at the school, they give the 
men a little bit of work and then would give them this little slip to get 
groceries — a 24-pound sack of ﬂ ower — and then we could buy enough 
stuff until the next time they could work.
 (Informant R.G.F., b. 1915)
 KIRBY: What do you remember about your mother?

34 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
 R.G.F.: Her family all had TB. It ran in the family, and she died with TB. And 
it was during the war, World War I, and people didn ' t have food to eat, and 
the Red Cross gave a 24-pound sack of ﬂ our once a month, and in a family 
with kids that didn ' t go a long way. I know my daddy said he and my momma 
ate cornbread because us kids wouldn ' t eat it.  
 A striking aspect of this second response is the way in which the informant ' s mention 
of her mother ' s death triggered the association with the Red Cross relief in the form 
of ﬂ our. Her parents were willing to sacriﬁ ce so that the children could have what 
Huck Finn called  "  ' baker ' s bread '  — what the quality eat — none of your low-down 
corn pone. " But I had to question the date that she gave. Red Cross aid during the 
World War I era usually went only to families with men who served in the war, whereas 
the informant ' s father did not serve, and her brother was an infant. Informants ' 
chronology is sometimes vague; as Thompson points out,  " Historians too easily forget 
that most people are less interested in calendar years than themselves, and do not 
arrange their memories with dates as markers. Awareness of this might reduce some 
of the suspicions of unreliability commonly aroused by oral evidence. " 38 Casey, too, 
remarks that in memory the  " temporal matrix is more discontinuous and disjunctive, "  39 
which may explain why memories come out jumbled and why the interviewer must 
repeatedly ask  " what year would this have been? " Yet when I inquired of R.G.F. 
several months later about the date of the free ﬂ our, she reafﬁ rmed that it was from 
her early childhood, reported to her by her parents. Flour packaged in 24-pound 
sacks, with the sacks made of material that could be made into clothing, was common 
during this period and on through the Great Depression, so perhaps both informants 
are reporting accurately. But clearly both are remembering government relief during 
eras of hard times — in one case being poor and having a sick mother and the other 
case marriage during the depths of the Depression — and their appreciation of the 
relief, rather than shame at needing it, seems to be the  " why " of the experience. 
 Another example — a story related separately by women who had known each other 
as children — also suggests that the underlying values come through even if the 
details do not agree. Informant R.C.N., born in 1923, reports being about six years 
old at the time; informant A.B.M., born 1919, reports being somewhere between 
eight and ten, so the chronology is close, and the informants seem to be relating 
the same unusual incident. 
 (Informant R.C.N., b. 1923) 
 R.C.N.: One summer in Jefferson they found a human skeleton lodged on a 
tree. They were burning the ﬁ eld, and the tree caught ﬁ re. When the 
branches burned, it exposed the skeleton. Everybody went down there to 
see it. My brother and I went, and I got punished for it, because I had to tell 
my mother everywhere I went. And we were all so excited, and everybody 
was running down there, so we just went on down to see, and I was punished 
when I got back. I guess I was about six.
  (Informant A.B.M., b. 1919)  
A.B.M.: My daddy was a farmer and a miner  ... . And he ' d also plant 
pumpkins. And the time, it was in the fall and it come a ﬂ ood; it ﬂ ooded our 
ﬁ elds. And pumpkins were just ﬂ oating everywhere! Everybody got all the 
pumpkins they wanted. 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 35 
 KIRBY: So they just all waded out into the ﬁ elds and got a pumpkin before 
they washed away.
  A.B.M.: That washed a lot of timbers and logs and stuff down the creek, and 
it just piled up along the bank. My brother was pushing the logs off and 
letting them ﬂ ow on down and uncovered a man. When he saw him, he had 
to get my daddy. And my daddy sent us girls all home. I never saw the body.
 KIRBY: How old were you?  
A.B.M.: I was 11 when my daddy died, so I must have been 10, 9, 8, 
somewhere down in there, a child. And of course that ' s the reason we didn ' t 
see any of that and why he sent us home.  
 Their memories of the circumstances are somewhat different. One describes a skeleton, 
seemingly up in the tree; the other speaks of a body covered with  " logs, " which 
suggests being near the ground. One informant remembers this as occurring during a 
time when the ﬁ elds would have been rather dry for burning; the other remembers 
a time after a ﬂ ood when the ground was littered with ﬂ otsam. But their stories share 
a meaning, which is that both girls ' parents were trying to protect them. 
 Thompson sums up the general principles historians must use in examining their 
evidence:  " to look for internal consistency, to seek conﬁ rmation in other sources, 
and to be aware of potential bias. " 40 Concerning the gift of ﬂ our, in seeking 
conﬁ rmation from other sources, I was unable to prove that either memory was 
incorrect. I see the key issue, however, as being what the relief meant to the 
informants. After all, a factually wrong answer can sometimes tell as much or more 
about the meaning and values than a technically correct answer. And ultimately the 
goal of cultural history is not necessarily to arrive at  " what really happened " but at 
what the experience or event, though perhaps misremembered or imprecisely 
related, means to the informant. As Yow asserts,  " After all, history — or society —
 does not exist outside human consciousness. " 41 
 Conclusion 
 The perspective phenomenology offers to oral history is that during the process 
of both conducting the interviews and assembling a text, the historian ' s existing 
assumptions about the place or topic of investigation should be bracketed as 
much as possible. During the interviews, the historian should consider avoiding any 
leading questions until the informant broached a speciﬁ c topic, though at that 
point it might be appropriate and even obligatory to pursue this topic and explore 
one informant ' s impressions and stories as they might relate to data collected from 
other informants. As the author of the written portion of the history, the historian 
obviously has to have some reason to include one particular part of an interview 
and not another, but often the goal should be to suggest possibilities rather than 
draw conclusions. 
 To conclude with a ﬁ nal example concerning Five Mile Creek, one of the ﬁ rst 
problems I tried to address was the mystery of how the creek, which is twenty-eight 
miles long from its headwaters to its conﬂ uence with the Black Warrior River, got its 

36 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
name. In the initial interviews, most informants said they had no idea. Then another 
source, not one of the actual informants in the study, told me that she had heard 
an explanation from a local collector of Native American artifacts, at that time 
recently deceased. Her source said that the creek got its name from a pioneer era 
crossing on a major route people used to bring their children to a boarding school, 
located in what is now the East Lake section of Birmingham. When they crossed the 
creek, they knew that they were only ﬁ ve miles from the school and that their 
journey was almost complete. When this account was published in  The Birmingham 
News in a story on the Five Mile Creek Greenway Project, predictably I received 
several letters to the effect that  " Your information is wrong — the creek was named 
for such-and-such, " though the other explanations also referred to a distance of 
ﬁ ve miles from some point on the creek to another landmark or destination. I was 
left to conclude that, though only one account was likely to be true in fact, they all 
were true in their essence — the creek was named not so much for itself as for its 
value as a landmark on a journey that was almost ﬁ nished. This, by the way, 
indicates that a signiﬁ cant change in attitudes has taken place: in the past, when 
the creek was so horribly polluted, it was little more than a landmark for most 
Alabamians; now that environmental regulations are being enforced and the creek 
is clean, more people value it for itself. There is pride that the ﬁ sh, frogs, kingﬁ shers, 
and herons have returned, that property values are increasing, and that recreational 
use of the creek is on the rise. 
 I have spoken a lot about subjectivity and limits to knowledge and the value that 
comes from acknowledging these limits in recording and producing oral histories. I 
associate these limits with Wolfgang Iser ' s notion of  " blanks "  or  " gaps "  in a text 
that permit, that in fact require the reader to participate in the creation of 
meaning. 42 But I am also aware that, in assembling material from interviews and 
published sources and in providing commentary to produce narratives about cultural 
history from oral history data, there is much, of course, that can be presented with 
conﬁ dence. As phenomenologist Paul Ricoeur says,  " We expect history to have a 
certain objectivity which is proper to it. " 43 But for some things the historian ' s job 
might be to provide the gaps Iser speaks of or, given the fact that gaps always exist 
in the available material, to present those gaps in a way that encourages the reader 
to draw meaningful conclusions, though within limits, and that will open the door 
to other meaningful conclusions in the next generations. Phenomenology offers, to 
some degree, a  " less is more " approach to history: by restricting the precision with 
which we can say, for example,  " Five Mile Creek got its name this way and no 
other, " we may actually expand our understanding of the way the creek and its 
environs played an important part in people ' s lives. 
 NOTES  
 1  This article describes the methodology that I used in conducting an oral history of 
communities along Five Mile Creek in northern Jefferson County, Alabama, in 2005. For 
over seventy years, from about 1920 until the early 1990s, Five Mile Creek was heavily 
polluted by industrial efﬂ uent, acid mine drainage, and other sources; the history had as 
its goal an understanding of how environmental factors affected the daily lives of people 
who grew up along the creek during the period 1920 - 60. The thirty-one interviews were 
conducted as a service to the Five Mile Creek Greenway Partnership, a consortium of local 
governments, environmental groups, and economic development organizations working 

  Phenomenology and the Problems of Oral History | 37 
together to manage growth, preserve industrial and cultural history, and create a system 
of parks and greenways along the entire length of the creek.  
  2  Maurice Natanson,  The Journeying Self: A Study in Philosophy and Social Role (Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1970), 88. 
  3  Max Van Manen,  Researching Lived Experience: Human Science for an Action Sensitive 
Pedagogy (Albany, NY: SUNY Press, 1990), 32.  
 4  Valerie Raleigh Yow,  Recording Oral History: A Guide for the Humanities and Social 
Sciences , 2nd ed. (Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira Press, 2005), 21. 
 5  There are few studies that claim to apply phenomenological principles to the practice of 
oral history, and even these say little about methodology. One of the exceptions is James 
G. Blight and Janet M. Lang,  " Burden of Nuclear Responsibility: Reﬂ ections on the Critical 
Oral History of the Cuban Missile Crisis, "  Peace and Conﬂ ict: Journal of Peace Psychology 
1 (1995): 225 - 64. Blight and Lang based their approach on the phenomenological 
psychology of William James, who stresses subjectivity and intentionality. Most use of 
phenomenology in interviewing in fact comes from disciplines such as family studies, 
psychology, or nursing, where the interviewer ' s goals are very personal; sociological and 
anthropological uses of phenomenology, however, are sometimes more closely akin to the 
goals of history and to the method described in this study. A more purely historical study 
that makes use of phenomenological method is Michael Harkin,  " History, Narrative, and 
Temporality: Examples from the Northwest Coast, "  Ethnohistory 35 (Spring 1988): 
99 - 131. However, it analyzes Native American tales rather than actual oral history. 
  6  Glenn Whitman,  Dialogue with the Past: Engaging Students and Meeting Standards through 
Oral History  (Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2004), 23. At the time I was preparing this 
article for submission, one of the most recent studies available to me was by Charles Hardy 
III, who spoke persuasively of the  " impermanence and ﬂ uidity of all human experience and 
of all history " in  " A People ' s History of Philadelphia: Reﬂ ections on Community Oral History 
Projects and the Uses of the Past, "  Oral History Review 33, no. 1 (Winter - Spring 2006), 30. 
  7  Paul Thompson,  The Voice of the Past: Oral History (London: Oxford University Press, 
1978), 92. 
  8  Donald A. Ritchie,  Doing Oral History ,  Twayne ' s Oral History Series No. 15 (New York: 
Twayne Publishers, 1995), 96. 
  9  Ibid., 67. 
 10  Thompson,  The Voice of the Past , 113. 
 11  Alessandro Portelli,  " Conversations with the Panther: The Italian Student Movement of 
1990, " in  International Annual of Oral History, 1990: Subjectivity and Multiculturalism in 
Oral History , ed. Ronald J. Grele, 162 (New York: Greenwood Press, 1992). 
 12  Thompson,  The Voice of the Past , 129. 
 13  Ibid., 100. 
 14  Natanson,  The Journeying Self , 4. 
 15  Yow,  Recording Oral History , 6. 
 16  Christopher Behan McCullagh,  The Truth of History (London: Routledge, 1988), 25. 
 17  Perhaps this is an appropriate time in this introductory study to point out the impossibility 
of even brieﬂ y discussing all the ideas raised by phenomenology that could apply to the 
practice of oral history. I will limit my discussion to a few key elements. Readers interested in 
pursuing other issues might examine Natanson ' s discussion of microcosmic and macrocosmic 
history in  The Journeying Self , 88 - 107, a seminal discussion of how universal history and 
individual lives reﬂ ect each other. Jeffrey Andrew Barash ' s  Martin Heidegger and the 
Problem of Historical Meaning (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 
1988) illustrates the development of phenomenological thought from Edmund Husserl ' s 
transcendental approach to the more hermeneutic approach of Heidegger and others.  
 18  The most thorough discussion of this topic is found in Edmund Husserl ' s  The Crisis of 
European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology , trans. David Carr (Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press, 1970).  

38 | ORAL HISTORY REVIEW
 19  Edmund Husserl,  Phenomenology and the Crisis of Philosophy , trans. Quentin Lauer 
(New York: Harper and Row, 1965), 153 - 4. 
 20  Yow,  Recording Oral History , 15. 
  21   Ibid., 21.  
 22  Thompson,  The Voice of the Past , 96. 
 23  Gerhard Funke,  " Phenomenology and History, " in  Phenomenology and the Social 
Sciences , vol. 2, ed. Maurice Natanson, 36 (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 
1973). Funke ' s monograph is an excellent introduction to phenomenology as a method 
for historical study. 
 24  Donald M. Lowe,  " Intentionality and the Method of History, " in  Phenomenology and the 
Social Sciences , vol. 2, ed. Maurice Natanson, 114 - 22 (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1973).  
 25  Hans-Georg Gadamer,  Truth and Method , 2nd rev. ed., trans. Joel Weinsheimer and 
Donald G. Marshall (New York: Continuum, 2003), 340. 
 26   Edmund Husserl,  The Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness , trans. James S. 
Churchill (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1964), 77. Another valuable 
phenomenological study on time consciousness is Peter K. McInerney,  Time and 
Experience (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1991).  
 27  Edmund Husserl,  Cartesian Meditations: An Introduction to Phenomenology , trans. Dorion 
Cairns (Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1995), 35.  
 28  Peter Friedlander,  The Emergence of a UAW Local, 1936 - 1939: A Study in Class and 
Culture (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1975), xxi.  
  29   Ibid., xxix.  
  30   Ibid., xii.  
 31  Katherine Borland,  " ' That ' s Not What I Said ' : Interpretive Conﬂ ict in Oral Narrative 
Research, " in  Women ' s Words: The Feminist Practice of Oral History , ed. Sherna Berger 
Gluck and Daphne Patai, 64 (New York: Routledge, 1991). 
 32  Lowe,  " Intentionality, " 125. Lowe makes reference to Alfred Schutz,  The Phenomenology 
of the Social World , trans. George Walsh and Frederick Lehnert (Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press, 1967).  
 33  John D. Brewer,  " Looking Back at Fascism: A Phenomenological Analysis of BUF 
Membership, "  Sociological Review 32 (November 1984): 745. 
  34   Ibid., 755.  
 35  Daniel Frank Chamberlain,  Narrative Perspective in Fiction: A Phenomenological Mediation 
of Reader, Text, and World (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1990), 5.  
 36  Edward S Casey,  Remembering: A Phenomenological Study (Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 1987), 283.  
 37  Gadamer,  Truth and Method , 355. 
 38  Thompson,  The Voice of the Past , 131. 
 39  Casey,  Remembering , 75. 
 40  Thompson,  The Voice of the Past , 92. 
 41  Yow,  Recording Oral History , 21. 
 42 Wolfgang Iser,  The Act of Reading: A Theory of Aesthetic Response (Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1980), 163 - 79. 
 43 Paul Ricoeur,  History and Truth (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1965), 22.  

